

ACTS AND REGULATIONS
RELATING TO THE
WASTE LANDS
OE THE
COLONY OF QUEENSLAND,
BRISBANE :
RY AUTHORITY : JT. C. BEAL, government printer, william street.
1881.


■


ACTS AND REGULATIONS
RELATING TO THE
WASTE LANDS
OP THE
COLONY OF QUEENSLAND
BRISBANE :
6T AUTHORITY: J. C. BEAL, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WILLIAM STREET.
1881.




PREFACE.
It has been deemed desirable to republish the Acts and Regula-
tions relating to the sale and occupation of the Public Lands of
the Colony in a collected form, so that the whole series may be
accessible to the public in a shape that will enable any persons
who may require information on special points to obtain it with-
out being obliged to search the Government Gazette or the
Statute Book for what is required.
A very copious Index, arranged alphabetically, is appended
to this pamphlet, which, under the headings of the several Acts
of Parliament, will furnish particulars of the procedure in
almost every transaction under their provisions in which the
public are interested.
of IPpbljc Lands,
Brisbane, 9th June, 1881.




PAGE#
...
1
49
81
85
96
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
CONTENTS.
“The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876 ”
Regulations
Instructions to Commissioners
Land Agents’ Districts ...
Notices
“ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876 Amendment Act ”
“ The Settled Districts Pastoral Leases Act of 1876 ” ...
“ The Pastoral Leases Act op 1869 ”
Regulations
“ The Mineral Lands Act of 1872 ”
Regulations ...
“ The Western Railway Agt ”
“ The Railway Reserves Act ”
“The Western Railway Act” and “The Railway Reserves
Act Amendment Act of 1879”
“ The .Victoria Rridgk Lands Sales Act of 1879 ”
“ The Selectors Rklief Act op 1878 ”


.aTvi&.TVLO'o uo aaaat
" o\Bi io T-)i, YMTim 'JA. sax /JL nwo .' > s ! f
■•! . , . . ... ... sr.Cii uunosH &
Ig Rs»* :o z itaeoO o l *soirrmxavJ r.
... t<vaa 1 1-
*aono / c
■/.q 'xoAiXSi/aafi!'/.BT8I«o .oAvoi A*aiai 'i- a.i /wosOhhT ‘ «•
101 ... "O'*!. ao i-oA Ba«f.HU' Rt aaaaiCt M»jtxaB :ihT •*
00.1 ... “ ?B?>I «o roA aaSA'-s.l .lAkotsa*! a cl •
SSJ BHOiTAatr;^
" Jitbl so-:oA «r.A.i cAaaziMaiii'"
gil ... BsoiiA.l aiH i
gOl "aoA rA'fio-uil AflriraW s»X w -I
<;?.£ " >A *a7«aeaH TAv/au'JJ cm’l" <• '
/.?£ ?M73';> ,/£ ya/a.tia }f sruT** a//. "toA taw.uaH zaamaW am- -
v 6“8l ;ro roA 'r/-'. n'’ iX >A
"6iBl ;ro nA. T/'-t. n'• ii >A
(]“f ... *’■ RtBf ;o ,oA ?m.ii?i ("TTr/v't >!ocnaJ'! . morotV, »hT “ ■ *
*! ... ... "E?I oxo/. ill' -.T- ;■


CROWN LANDS ALIENATION ACT OF 1876.
40 VICTORIA, No, 15.
40 Victoria, No. 15. An Act to Consolidate and Amend the Laws
relating to the Alienation of Croton Lands. [Assented to 29th.
November, 1876.]
Preamble.
WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend
tlie laws relating to the alienation of Crown lands
Be it enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by
and with the advice and consent of the Legislative
Council and Legislative Assembly of Queensland in
Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same
as follows —
Introductory.
Interpretation.
1. The following terms shall for the purposes of this
Act unless the context otherwise indicate have the
several meanings set against them respectively that is
to say—
“Crown Lands.”
“ Crown Lands”—All lands vested in Her Majesty
which are not dedicated to any public purpose
and which are not for the time being subject to
any deed of grant lease contract promise or
engagement made by or on behalf of Her Majesty
and all lands comprised in any pastoral lease
which are by law subject for the time being to
reservation selection or alienation
“ Minister.”
" Minister”—The Secretary for Public Lands or
other Minister who for the time being performs
the duties of Secretary for Public Lands


“ Commissioner.”
“ Commissioner” —The Land Commissioner ap-
pointed under the provisions of this Act for the
district wherein the land in question is situated
“ Conditional Purchase.”
“ Conditional Purchase ” —The mode of acquiring
land by purchase upon condition defined by this
Act not being by way of homestead selection
“ Conditional Purchaser.”
“ Conditional Purchaser” —The lessee for the time
being of land held under conditional purchase
“ Selection.”
“ Selection”—The making of an application to select
or the land selected as the context may require
“Conditional Selection.”
“ Conditional Selection ” —Land held under condi-
tional purchase
“ Selector.”
“ Selector ” —-The person entitled for the time being
to any laud selected whether by conditional pur-
chase or as a homestead
“Improvements.” 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 2.
“ Improvements”-—Any head-station house store
stable hut woolshcd sheep-pen drafting-yard barn
stockyard fence well dam reservoir tank trough
artificial watercourse or watering-place garden
clearing ring-barking of trees cultivation or
plantation of trees shrubs or artificial grasses or
any building erection construction or appliance
being a fixture for the working or management
of a run farm grazing-farm or plantation or of
any sheep cattle or horses depastured thereon or
for maintaining or increasing the pastoral or
agricultural capabilities thereof
“ Proscribed.”
“Prescribed”—Prescribed by regulations made
under this Act.


Repeal of existing Acts and regulations saving existing rights.
2. From and after the commencement of this Act
the several Acts specified in the first schedule hereto and
all rules and regulations made thereunder respectively
shall he and are hereby repealed saving always all rights
claims penalties and liabilities already accrued or° in-
curred and in existence.
Provided that for the purpose of dealing with lands
heretofore applied for selected or leased under any of the
said repealed Acts the Governor in Council may continue
to appoint commissioners and other officers and do or
cause to he done all such things as may be necessary
for carrying out and completing all contracts agreements
or forfeitures which have been made under or arise from
such applications in the same manner as if the said Acts
had not been repealed.
And provided further that all lands now held subject
to the provisions of the said repealed Acts or any of them
shall continue to be subject to the provisions thereof
until the same shall have been granted in fee-simple or
the leases thereof or other existing title shall become
determined.
Section 9 of 39 Vic. No, 7 to be construed as if passed after this Act.
3. The ninth section of “ The Western Hallway Act"
shall hereafter be read and construed as if that Act had
been passed immediately after the commencement of
this Act
And as if the fourth subsection of the said ninth
section had been as follows that is to say—“ Under the
“provisions of the laws in force for the time
“relating to the selection of land in Homestead
“ Areas”
And as if the words “ A Homestead Area under the
“provisions of ‘ The Homestead Areas Act of 1872’”
in the seventh subsection of the said ninth section con-
tained had been “ A Homestead Area under the provisions
“ of c The Grown Lands Alienation Act of 1876’”


And except as by the said nintli section of tlie said
Act and this section is provided this Act shall not extend
or apply to the Western Railway Reserve created by the
said Act.
Application of Act to whole colony.
Except as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall
so far as the same are respectively applicable extend and
apply to the whole Colony of Queensland.
Governor may grant in fee-simple or for any less estate.
4. The Governor in Council may in the name of Her
Majesty and under and subject to the provisions of this
Act grant and alienate in fee-simple or for any less estate
any waste lands of the Crown within the Colony of
Queensland.
Every such grant or alienation shall be made in such
form as shall from time to time be deemed expedient
by the Governor in Council and being so made shall be
valid and effectual to convey to and vest in the person
therein named the lands described in the deed or instru-
ment of alienation for such estate or interest as shall
be set forth in such deed or instrument.
Every such grant or alienation shall be made subject
to such reservations and conditions as are authorised by
the laws under which the right thereto shall have been
acquired and subjectto no other reservations or conditions.
Governor may proclaim counties parishes towns villages or township reserves.
31 Vic. c. 46 ss. 20, 18, 2.
5. The Governor in Council may divide into counties
any Crown lands not already included in any county
and divide any county already existing or so to he created
into parishes where such parishes are not already defined
and may distinguish such counties and parishes
respectively by names and proclaim the same and the
boundaries thereof respectively and after such proclama-
tion the lands comprised within such counties and
parishes respectively shall thenceforward be recognised
by such names as counties and parishes respectively.


The Governor in Council may also from time
to time by proclamation set apart any Crown lands
as sites for towns or villages and may in like manner
set apart or reserve any Crown lands as township
reserves.
Power to reserve lands from sale for public purposes. Ih. s. 21.
6. The Governor in Council may from time to time
grant in trust or by proclamation reserve either tem-
porarily or permanently any Crown lands which in
his opinion are or may be required for quays landing
places tramways railways railway stations roads bridges
ferries canals or other internal communications or for
the approaches or other purposes necessarily appertain-
ing to any such works or for reservoirs aqueducts or
watercourses or for the use or benefit of the aboriginal
inhabitants of the colony or for the sites of markets
abattoirs public baths or washhouses mechanics’ institutes
schools of arts libraries museums or other institutions
for public non-scholastic instruction public gardens or
experimental farms and parks agricultural and horti-
cultural societies grammar schools State schools hospitals
asylums infirmaries establishments for the relief of
indigent persons lock-ups police stations or police
paddocks gaols places for the interment of the dead
or for the recreation convenience health or amusement
of the people or for any other purpose of public defence
safety utility convenience or enjoyment or for other-
wise facilitating the improvement and settlement of
the colony or for any special purpose which may be
approved by resolution of the Legislative Council and
Legislative Assembly.
Trustees of public lands. 36 Vic. c. 20, s. 15. Trustees may make bye-laws. lb. s. 16.
7. The Governor in Council may by proclamation
and without issuing any deed of grant place any lands
reserved either temporarily or permanently for any such
purpose under the control of trustees and may by like


proclamation declare the style or title of such trustees
and the trusts of any land placed under their control and
may empower them to make bye-laws for carrying out
the objects of the trust.
Trustees shall be deemed to be owners in law or equity. Ib. s. 17.
8. Tor the purposes of any suit action or proceed-
ing in any court of law or equity it shall be suffi-
cient to describe such trustees by such style or title
without naming any of them and in any indictment
or information it shall be sufficient to describe them by
such style or title as owners of any property real or
personal and they may by such style or title sue and be
sued and they shall for the purposes of any such suit
action or proceeding be deemed to be the absolute
owners of the land placed under their control and no
such suit action or proceeding shall abate by reason of
the death removal or retirement of any such trustee.
Classification of Crown Lands.
Crown land to be classed as town suburban and country lands. 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 2.
9. All Crown lands shall for the purposes of this Act
be divided as follows—
Town lands—which shall comprise all lands which
have been heretofore or hereafter may be pro-
claimed as town lands
Suburban lands—which shall comprise all lands
within a distance of two miles in a straight line
from any town lands and
Country lands—which shall comprise all lands not
being town lands or suburban lands.
Land Commissioners and Land Agents.
Commissioners and land agents to be appointed. Ib. ss. 3, 32.
10. The Governor in Council may appoint land
commissioners and land agents and define the districts
within which they are to perform such duties as may be
necessary for carrying the provisions of this Act into effect.


Land Commissioner to liold a court once in eacli month. Ih. s. 4.
11. The Minister shall by notice in the Gazette fix
a day in each month on which the commissioner shall
hold an open court at which all applications shall he
considered and approved or rejected or otherwise dealt
with and at which all such other matters as are hy this
Act declared to he within the cognizance of the com-
missioner and required to he dealt with in open court shall
be dealt with.
Commissioner’s decision.
12. The commissioner shall have power to hear and
determine any question relating to the granting or refusal
of any application to select raised at any such court and
to enquire into any objection thereto either on public or
private grounds and to examine witnesses on oath in
relation thereto and from time to time to postpone any
application or the hearing or decision of any question or
objection
The commissioner shall also have power for the
purposes of any inquiry held under the provisions of this
Act to summon any persons as witnesses and to examine
them upon oath and for such purposes shall have the
same powers and authorities as any two justices of the
peace in petty sessions have in respect of offences punish-
able on summary conviction Any party to any such
inquiry may be represented by his counsel attorney or
agent.
Ih. s. 5.
The decision on every such enquiry shall be pro
nounced in open court.
Ih. ss. 5, 51.
Provided that no decision of a commissioner shall
except in the case of certificates of performance of con-
ditions be final until confirmed bv the Minister.


General Conditions applicable to Selections by Conditional
Purchase and Homesteads.
What lands open to selection under this Act.
13. All Crown lands wliicli immediately before the
commencement of this Act were open to selection by
conditional purchase under the provisions of “ The
Grown Lands Alienation Act of 1808” shall unless and
until the Governor in Council shall otherwise declare by
proclamation be open to selection by conditional purchase
under this Act.
All Crown lands which shall at the commencement
of this Act have been proclaimed as homestead areas
under the provisions of “ The Homestead Areas Act of
1872 ” shall unless and until the Governor in Council
shall otherwise declare by proclamation be set apart as
homestead areas under the provisions of this Act and
be open to selection in accordance with such provisions.
Governor may proclaim lands open to selection.
11. The Governor in Council may by proclamation
declare any country lands open to selection under the
provisions of this Act and may by like proclamation
withdraw any such lands from being so open.
Every such first-mentioned proclamation shall name
a day (not being less than four weeks after the date of
the proclamation) on and after which the land will be
so open And on and after the day so notified the land
shall be open to selection accordingly.
Except as by the last preceding section is provided
no Crown lands shall be open to selection until they
shall have been proclaimed By the Governor in Council
to be so open.
Price of land by conditional purchase.
15. The Governor in Council shall by proclamation
specify the upset price per acre at which any lands shall
be open to selection by conditional purchase Provided
that such upset price shall not be less than five shillings
per acre.


Land agent to keep application book. Ib. ss. 6, 7.
16. Every land agent shall keep a register in which
he shall enter all applications to select land by con-
ditional purchase or as homesteads in the consecutive
order of their receipt and the day and hour on which
they were lodged and each applicant shall himself or by
his duly constituted attorney sign his name to such
entry And when any such application is approved or
rejected or otherwise dealt with the commissioner shall
make a memorandum of such approval or rejection
opposite the entry of the application in the register and
such register shall he open to public inspection during
office hours.
Selections to be lodged by the applicant personally who shall pay first annual
payment and cost of survey. Ib. ss. 6, 46.
17. Every person desirous of selecting Crown lands
by conditional purchase or as a homestead shall lodge
with the land agent for the district an application in
the prescribed form and shall himself or by his duly
constituted attorney sign the entry of his application in
the register of applications.
Every such application shall give a clear description
of the locality and boundaries of the land applied for
and shall state whether it is already surveyed or is
unsurveyed.
Every such application shall be accompanied by the
full amount in cash of one-tenth part of the upset price
together with the survey fee.
Such applications shall take priority according to the
order of their being lodged with the land agent.
Provided that if two or more applicants shall be
present at the time of opening the land agent’s office the
applications lodged by them shall be deemed to be lodged
at the same time And provided further that any appli-
cation for any land as a homestead shall have priority
over any application lor the same land by conditional
purchase lodged at the same time.


If more than one application land to be offered at auction amongst applicants.
When two or more applications for the same land
are lodged at the same time the commissioner shall at
the time appointed for considering them cause ther land
to he offered hy auction at an annual rent to the several
applicants and to no other persons and that one of the
applicants who shall make the highest hid for the land
and shall forthwith pay the amount of the first year’s
rent to the land agent shall be declared the successful
applicant And the annual rent payable by him in
respect of the land shall lie the amount so bid by him
instead of the sum which would otherwise be payable as
hereinafter provided.
Proportion of frontage in respect to such boundaries. Ih. s. 50.
18. Subject to such general regulations concerning
surveys roads or the prevention of a monopoly of per-
manent water or otherwise as may be made under this
Act Crown land selected before survey and having
frontage to any watercourse or main road shall not have
a greater breadth of frontage thereto than—
Where the area does not exceed one hundred and
sixty acres half the depth of such land—
Where the area exceeds one hundred and sixty acres
but is not greater than three hundred and twenty
acres two-thirds of the depth—
Where the area exceeds three hundred and twenty
acres the whole depth.
The boundaries not having frontage to roads or
natural features shall be rectangular and be directed to
the cardinal points unless any other general bearings shall
be adopted for that portion of country.
Selector may employ a licensed surveyor if survey is not made within three months.
11. a. 49.
19. If any selection of unsurveyed lands shall not
be surveyed by the Minister within three months from
the date of the selection being approved by the com-


missioner the selector may apply to tlie land agent for
a refundment of the survey fee and if the survey he not
made Avithin fourteen days from the date of such appli-
cation may employ a iicensed surveyor to effect the
sur\'ey at the cost of such selector and on such survey
being made and approved by the Surveyor-General the
survey fee shall he refunded to the selector.
Notice of confirmation bj Secretary for Lands to be given to selector.
20. When any land selected as aforesaid shall have
been surveyed the Minister shall if all the conditions
and provisions of this Act have been complied Avith con-
firm the approval of the commissioner and notice of
such confirmation shall be giA r en to the selector AAdiich
notice shall specify the conditions of rent occupation
and improvement to be fulfilled by him and the conse-
quences of non-fulfilment thereof.
No minor or married woman to be lessee. Ib. s. 54.
21. No person shall except by operation of IaAV
become the holder of any land under conditional pur-
chase or as a homestead avlio is under the age of eighteen
years or who is a married woman not ha\fing obtained a
decree for judicial separation or an order binding in
Queensland protecting her separate property or AA r ho is
not a natural horn or naturalized subject of Her Majesty
or Avho does not reside in Queensland or who is m
respect of such land or any part thereof an agent or
a servant of or a trustee for any other person or Avho
has entered into any agreement express or implied to
permit any other person to acquire such land by pur-
chase or otherwise.
And all land applied for by Avay of conditional pur-
chase or as a homestead shall he for the bona jlde use
occupation and benefit of the applicant in his own
proper person and not as the agent servant or trustee
of any other person.


Proviso in case of breach of conditions.
If any person shall in violation of any of the pro-
visions of this section become the holder of any land
under this Act the Governor in Council may declare
such land to he forfeited and on proclamation of such
forfeiture all the right title and interest of the selector
and of every transferee in and to such land and all
moneys paid in respect thereof with all improvements
thereon shall be absolutely forfeited and shall revert to
the Crown.
And all contracts agreements and securities made
entered into or given with the intent or which (if the
same were valid) would have the effect of violating any
of the provisions of this Act and all contracts and
agreements relating to land selected under the pro-
visions of this Act made and entered into before or
during conditional occupation to take effect on the
fulfilment of conditions or on the issue of a grant in fee-
simple shall he and are hereby declared to he illegal and
absolutely void both at law and in equity.
Payment for improvement?.
22. If there shall he upon any land selected under
this Act by conditional purchase or as a homestead any
improvements the value of which shall not he payable
by law to the former occupier of the land the selector
shall pay the value of such improvements to the land
agent within sixty days from the date when the value
thereof shall have been determined
Such value shall he determined by agreement between
the selector and the commissioner and in case of their not
agreeing the value shall be determined by arbitration.
In the event of any such improvements not being
improvements in respect of which any right of pre-
emption has been exercised under “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1868” or compensation has been paid
under “The Homestead Areas Act of 1872 ” having


been made by a former pastoral lessee or selector of tbe
same land the value thereof when paid by the selector
shall be paid over to such former pastoral lessee or
selector.
Conditional Purchase.
Area for conditional selections.
23. The total area which may be selected or held by
any one person at the same time under conditional pur-
chase shall not he more than five thousand one hundred
and twenty acres nor shall the area of any land so
selected be less than forty acres Provided that the
Governor in Council may hy proclamation limit the
area which may be selected or held under conditional
purchase hy any one person at the same time within
any district specified in the proclamation to any area
less than five thousand one hundred and twenty but not
less than six hundred and forty acres.
Limits to conditional purchases by conditional purchasers under previous Acts.
If any conditional purchaser under this Act shall
also be the holder of lands under conditional purchase
under “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” the
total area he may hold at any one time as a conditional
selection under this Act shall not together with the area
he so holds under “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of
1868” exceed the maximum area allowed under this Act
to be held as a conditional selection.
Holder of less area than maximum allowed may make additional selection of
adjoining land. 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 55.
24. Subject to the provisions of the last preceding
section any person who is the holder under conditional
purchase of land under the provisions of “ The Crown
Lands Alienation Act of 1868” or this Act the area
whereof is less than five thousand one hundred and
twenty acres may become the conditional purchaser of
any adjoining vacant Crown land the area whereof


together with that of the previous selection does not
exceed five thousand one hundred and twenty acres
Provided that the external boundaries of the two
selections taken together he such as are allowed in the
case of ordinary selections.
Selector need occupy on one only.
In the case last aforesaid the two several selections
so held by the same person shall so long as they are
both held by him under conditional purchase he deemed
for the purpose ol the condition of occupation herein-
after mentioned to he the same selection.
Additional selections allowed.
25. Any person who is the holder under the said
“ Croton Lands Alienation Act of 1868” or this Act of a
homestead or of a conditional selection and who shall
have personally resided thereon for one year may make
one other selection by conditional purchase of any Crown
lands open to conditional purchase Provided that the
maximum area of land allowed to he held under condi-
tional purchase he not exceeded..
Otherwise one selection only allowed.
26. Except as aforesaid or as hereinafter expressly
provided no person shall at the same time hold more
than one parcel of land under conditional purchase.
Conditional selector to make declaration before a magistrate.
27. Every person applying to select land by con-
ditional purchase shall make a declaration before a
justice of the peace that he is of the full age of eighteen
years and resides in Queensland and that he selects the
land for his own use and not as the agent or trustee for
any other person and that such land conjointly with any
other land then held by him as a conditional selection
under this Act does not exceed the maximum area allowed
under this Act for a conditional selection and if he be


also a holder of lands under conditional purchase under
“The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868” that the
total of the land so held in addition to that for which he
applies under this Act does not exceed such maximum
area.
Lease to be issued to applicant. Vide 31 Yic. c. 46 s. 51.
28. When any application to select land by way of
conditional purchase shall have been approved and con-
firmed by the Minister the selector shall he entitled to a
lease thereof under and subject to the conditions and
provisions following and to all other the conditions and
provisions of this Act that is to say—
Term of lease to be fen years.
(1.) The term of the lease shall he for ten years
computed from the first day of January or first
day of July nearest to the date of the application
Rent.
(2.) The annual rent reserved under the lease shall
be one-tenth part of the upset price for every acre
or fraction of an acre comprised therein or such
larger sum as may have been hid at auction
under the provisions hereinbefore contained in
that behalf
Time for payment.
(3.) The second and all subsequent years’ rents shall
he paid to the land agent on or before the thirty-
first day of March in each year of the term of
the lease for which the rent is due and in default
of such payment the lease shall he forfeited and
the land selected and all improvements thereon
shall revert to Her Majesty
Forfeiture may be defeated by payment of rent and fine within ninety days of
original rent day.
Provided that the lessee may defeat such for-
feiture for non-payment of rent by paying to the
land agent in cash on or before the thirtieth day


of June next ensuing a sum equal to tlie annual
rent together with an additional sum equal to
one-tenth part thereof by way of penalty hut in
default of such payment of rent and penalty on or
before the thirtieth day of June the lease shall he
absolutely forfeited and the said lessee and any
person claiming under him shall he deemed a
trespasser upon Crown land and liable to he
removed therefrom as such under the provisions
of this Act hut the title of the said lessee may
nevertheless he reinstated hy the Governor in
Council on such terms in addition to the penalty
as he may see fit to impose
Occupation necessary.
(4.) The lessee shall occupy the land continuously
and bona fide during the term of the lease
Quality of occupation.
Such occupation shall he hy the continuous
and bona fide residence on the land of the lessee
himself or some other person who would himself
he competent to become a conditional purchaser
under this Act and who is in the actual and bona
fide employment of the lessee and is not in the
employment of any other person for any purpose
connected with the use or occupation of the land
Agreement for occupation by servant must be registered.
Every agreement for the employment of a person
hy the lessee to reside on the land shall he in
writing signed hy the parties or their agents and
shall he in duplicate And one copy thereof shall
he registered in the office of the commissioner
The residence of any person so employed
under an unregistered agreement shall he deemed
null and void


Forfeiture for non-occupation.
(5.) If at any time during the currency of the lease
it shall he proved to the satisfaction of the
commissioner that the lessee has failed in regard
to the performance of the condition of occupation
during a period of six months it shall he lawful
for the Governor in Council to declare the lease
absolutely forfeited and vacated and thereupon
the land comprised therein and all improvements
thereon shall revert to Her Majesty
Conditions of improvement.
(6.) The lessee shall during the term of the lease
expend in substantial and permanent improve-
ments on the land a sum equal to the amount
of the whole of the purchase money thereof hut
so that in no case shall such sum exceed the
rate of ten shillings per acre of such land
On proof of fulfilment of conditions lessee may obtain certificate thereof.
(7.) If at any time after the expiration of three
years from the commencement of the term the
lessee shall prove to the satisfaction of the
commissioner in open court that he has up to
that time fulfilled the condition of occupation and
has fulfilled the condition of improvement here-
inbefore specified with respect to such land the
commissioner shall issue to the lessee a certificate
that the conditions aforesaid have been duly
fulfilled
After certificate lessee may acquire fee-simple on payment of balance of rents.
(8.) If at any time after the lessee has obtained
such certificate from the commissioner he shall
pay to the land agent a sum equal to the aggregate
amount of the annual rents which would become
due during the unexpired portion of the term of
the lease together with the amount of the deed


fee and shall prove to the satisfaction of the
commissioner in open court that he has con-
tinued up to the time of such payment to fulfil
the condition of occupation hereinbefore specified
such lessee shall thereupon be entitled to a deed
of grant of the land in fee-simple
In the meanwhile continued occupation necessary.
Intil such payment shall be made the lessee
shall continue to perform the aforesaid condition
of occupation.
Conditions under which transfer may be effected.
(9.) IS T o lease shall be transferred or assigned until
the original lessee has obtained such certificate
from the commissioner
Put after the issue of such certificate the lessee
may upon payment of a lee of ten shillings
transfer the land to any other person who would
be competent to select the same land by way of
conditional purchase under tbe provisions of this
Act and such transferee shall continue to fulfil
all and every condition in regard to the land in
the same manner as the original selector Pro-
vided that no such transfer shall take effect
until it has been approved by the Minister and
registered
E-ight to grant at expiral ion of term.
(10.) If the lessee not having previously obtained
such certificate shall after he has made payment
of the tenth year’s rent prove to the satisfaction
of the commissioner in open court that he has
fulfilled tne conditions of occupation and improve-
ment hereinbefore specified the commissioner
shall issue to the lessee a certificate that such
conditions have been fulfilled and the lessee shall
thereupon be entitled to a deed of grant of the
land in fee-simple on payment of the deed fee


If conditions not fulfilled during term land to revert to the Crown.
(11.) If the lessee shall not within six months after
the expiration of the term of the lease or such
further time as may he allowed by the com-
missioner have made proof to the satisfaction of
the commissioner in open court that he has duly
fulfilled during the term of the lease the con-
ditions of occupation and improvement herein-
before specified then the right and title of the
lessee to the land shall absolutely cease and
determine and the lessee shall not have any claim
whatsoever to any renewed lease or any priority
of claim to purchase the land and all improve-
ments thereon shall revert to Her Majesty.
Condition of occupation dispensed with in certain cases. 39 Vic. c. 10 s. 3.
29. Whenever any selector of any land under the
provisions of the said “ Crown Lands Alienation Act of
186 i ” or this Act who resides personally and hona fide
thereon or any owner in fee of any land which if it had
not been alienated from the Crown would be country
land who resides personally and hona fide thereon shall
have selected by way of conditional purchase any other
country lands within a distance of filteen miles from his
said residence he shall in such case hut for so long only
as he shall continuously and hona floe reside on either
portion of land he exempt from the condition of occu-
pation in respect of the other.
Provided that such exemption shall not extend
to any selections of greater area in the aggregate than
one thousand two hundred and eighty acres inclusive
in the case of a lessee of the selection whereon he so
resides.
Not to extend to homestead areas.
30. The provisions of the last preceding section shall
not extend to homestead areas.


In case of death selection may be transferred.
31. Notwithstanding anything in this Act contained
any person to whom any land held under conditional
purchase shall pass hy will or by operation of lair shall
be entitled to deal with the same in the same manner and
to the same extent as any other land passing to him by
will or by operation of law Provided that the trans-
feree of any such person must be a person who would
be competent to select the same land under the pro-
visions of this Act And such transferee shall continue
to fulfil the conditions of occupation and improvement
as prescribed by this Act.
After issue of certificate land may he mortgaged or settled in trust.
32. Notwithstanding anything in this Act contained
any lessee who has obtained a certificate of fulfilment of
conditions may with the approval of the Minister transfer
the lease by way of mortgage to secure the repayment
of advances hema fide made by the transferee to the
lessee after the issue of the certificate or may with the
like approval transfer the lease to any person or persons
as a trustee or trustees of a marriage or other family
settlement.
When a lease is transferred by way of mortgage
or family settlement as aforesaid the conditions of occu-
pation prescribed by this Act may be performed by the
mortgagor or the persons beneficially interested in the
land under the settlement or any of them as the case
may be.
Land to be deemed personal property in case of death.
33. Any land held under conditional purchase under
this Act and the right to a grant on fulfilment of con-
ditions shall in the event-of the death of the conditional
purchaser intestate be deemed to be personal property
and shall pass to his personal representative.
Provision in case of future insolvency. 39 Vic. c. 10 s. 2.
3t. Whenever the estate or interest of any lessee of
lands held under conditional purchase under the pro-
visions of this Act shall pass by operation of law to any


trustee under the provisions of any laivs for the time
being* in force relating to insolvency such trustee shall
upon proof being made to the satisfaction of the Gover-
nor in Council within two years from the date of adjudi-
cation that the several conditions required by this Act
have been performed in respect of such land by the lessee
or such trustee or partly performed by the lessee and
completed by such trustee and upon payment of the
balance of fhe ten years’ rent and deed fee he entitled
to a deed of grant of such land in fee-simple.
Conditional purchases not liable for debt. 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 60.
35. No lands held under this Act under conditional
purchase shall in any event except the insolvency of the
selector he liable to he taken in execution or otherwise
made liable to the satisfaction of any debt or debts until
the issue of a deed of grant thereof in fee-simple.
Homestead Areas.
Certain lands to be set apart as Homestead Areas.
36. Whenever the term of the lease of any run
within that part of the colony described in the second
schedule to this Act shall have expired by effluxion of
time or shall have become determined by forfeiture or
otherwise and whenever the whole or any part of the
land comprised in any such run shall have been resumed
from lease under the provisions of the tenth section
of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868” the
lands comprised in such run or so resumed as the case
may be shall be and the same are hereby set apart as
Homestead Areas.
The Governor in Council may by proclamation define
and set apart any other country lands as homestead
areas.
37. Lands within homestead areas may be selected
by members of the Volunteer Eorce of Queensland to
the extent authorised by the certificates issued to them


under the provisions of the ninety eighth section of
4t The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868” and the land
so selected shall not he subject to any conditions of
residence or improvement.
Conditions as to selection o£ lands within homestead areas.
38. Country lands within homestead areas shall not
he open to selection by conditional purchase except
under and subject to the restrictions and provisions next
hereinafter contained that is to say —
(1.) The maximum area of land that may be
acquired by any person by conditional purchase
in a homestead area shall be one thousand two
hundred and eighty acres or such lesser area not
being less than one hundred and twenty acres as
may be declared by the Governor in Council by
proclamation.
(2.) The condition of occupation shall be performed
toy the continuous and hona fide residence on the
land of the lessee himself.
Except as aforesaid all the provisions of this Act
relating to the selection of land by conditional purchase
and to land so selected shall extend and be applicable to
land so selected in homestead areas.
Homesteads.
Land open for conditional purchase also open to selection as homesteads.
“89. All lands which may be open to selection by
conditional purchase whether in a homestead area or
elsewhere shall also be open to selection as homesteads.
Area allowed for homesteads. 31 Vic. c. 16 ss. 71, 75.
40. The total area which may be selected or acquired
by the same person as a homestead in a homestead area
shall be eighty acres and in any other place shall be one
hundred and sixty acres And no person shall except as
hereinafter provided make more than one selection of
land as a homestead.
Note.—B y Section 9 of “ Cro'im Lands Alienation Act of 1876 Amendment
Act ” the area allowed to be selected as a homestead is increased to 160 acres.


Applicant to make declaration. 39 Yic. c. 10 s. 5.
41. Every person applying to select a homestead
shall make a declaration before a justice of the peace
that he is the head of a family or is of the full age of
eighteen years and that he selects the land for his own
use and occupation and not as the agent or trustee for
any other person and that such intended selection is
the only homestead selection which he holds or has held
under this Act or any of the Acts hereby repealed or
that it adjoins his previous homestead selection either
under this Act or “ The Croton Lands Alienation Act of
1868” or “ The Homestead Areas Act of 1872” in which
case he shall also declare that such intended selection
conjointly with his previous selection does not exceed a
total area of eighty acres or one hundred and sixty acres
as the case may be.
Annual payments in respect of Homesteads. 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 73.
42. Every homestead selector shall for the term of
live years make an annual payment at the rate of six-
pence per acre or fraction of an acre or such larger sum
as may have been bid at auction under the provisions
hereinbefore contained.
The first payment shall be made to the land agent at
the time of making the application and the subsequent
annual payments shall be made to the land agent on the
thirty-first day of March in each ensuing year and in
default of such payment the land selected together with
all improvements thereon shall be forfeited and revert
to the Crown Provided that such forfeiture may be
defeated if on or before the thirtieth day of June next
ensuing there shall be paid to the land agent a sum
equal to the payment due on the thirty-first day of March
together with an additional sum equal to one-tenth part
thereof by way of penalty but in default of such payment
on or before the thirtieth day of J une the land shall be
absolutely forfeited and the selector and any person
claiming under him shall be deemed a trespasser upon


Crown land and liable to be removed therefrom as snch
under the provisions of this Act but the title of the said
selector may nevertheless be reinstated by the Governor
in Council on such terms in addition to the penalty as
he may see fit to impose.
Selector to reside continuously for five years. Ihid.
43. Every homestead selector shall continuously and
bona fide reside on the land during the whole of the said
term of five years and shall during the said term expend
a sum at the rate of ten shillings per acre in substantial
and permanent improvements on the land.
On proof of fulfilment of conditions selector to be entitled to grant.
44. If after the expiration of the said term of five
years the homestead selector shall prove in open court
to the satisfaction of the commissioner that he has
fulfilled the conditions in the last preceding section
mentioned the commissioner shall issue to such selector
a certificate that the conditions aforesaid have been duly
fulfilled and thereupon the selector shall be entitled to
a deed of grant of the said land in fee simple on payment
of the deed fee.
Provision in ease of death of selector. Ihid.
45. In the case of the death of a homestead selector
after his application and before the expiration of tne
time limited for making proof of the performance of
conditions all his right title and interest in the said land
shall pass to the persons following that is to say—
(l.) If the selector have made a will to the persons
to whom the same shall thereby be given
(2.) If the selector die intestate to his widow (if any)
for her own use and if he leave no widow then to
his personal represent:dives for the benefit of all
his* children (if any) in equal shares and if be
leave no children then for the benefit of his next
of kin according to the statutes for the distribution
of personal estate


And the person to whom such right title or interest shall
pass under the provisions of this section may at any
time within two years after the death of the selector and
without being liable in the meantime to the performance
of any conditions other than the payment of the annual
instalments sell the said land for the benefit of the
persons beneficially entitled thereto
Upon any such sale the purchaser shall upon payment
of the annual instalments then remaining unpaid and
the deed fee be entitled to a deed of grant of the land in
fee-simple.
Provision in case land not sold after selector’s death.
46. If at the expiration of the said period of two
years the land shall not have been sold the conditions of
residence and improvement hereinbefore contained shall
apply to the same as if the selector were alive save that
in such case the residence upon the land of any one of the
persons beneficially interested therein shall be sufficient.
Forfeiture for non-residence. Ih. s. 70.
47. If at any time during the currency of the said term
of five years it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the
commisioner that the selector has failed in regard to the
performance of the condition of residence during the
period of six months it shall be lawful for the Governor
in Council to declare the land forfeited and thereupon
the land and all improvements thereon shall revert to
Her Majesty.
If conditions not fulfilled during term land to revert to tlie Crown.
48. If the selector shall not within six months after
the expiration of the said term of five years or sucli
further time as may be allowed by the commissioner
have made proof to the satisfaction of the commissioner
in open court that he has duly fulfilled during the said
term the conditions of residence and improvement here-
inbefore specified then the right and title of the selector


to the land shall absolutely cease and determine and he
shall not have any claim whatsoever to purchase the
land and all improvements thereon shall revert to Her
Majesty.
Homestead not liable to debt. 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 74.
19. No homestead selection shall during the said
period of live years either in the case of the insolvency
of the selector or in any other event whatsoever pass to
the trustee of his estate or he liable to be taken in
execution or otherwise made liable to the satisfaction
of any debt of the selector.
Homestead selectors under previous Acts may select conterminous lands only.
50. Where any person shall have selected a home-
stead under “ The Grown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ”
or “ The Homestead Areas Act of 1872 ” or this Act
the area of which shall be less than one hundred and
sixty acres he may select so much of any vacant Grown
land adjoining his selection as shall not together with such
previous selection exceed an area of eighty acres or one
hundred and sixty acres according as the selection shall
be within or not within a homestead area but so that the
external boundaries of the combined selections shall not
be other than would be allowed for one original home-
stead selection under this Act and it shall be sufficient
that the condition of continuous residence be performed
on any part of the combined homestead selections
Provided that in no case shall any person hold two
separate homesteads.
Certificates and Forfeitures.
Applications for certificates of performance of conditions to be made in open court.
51. Applications for certificates of performance of
conditions shall be made to the commissioner who shall
in open court hear the same and any evidence adduced
on oath in support thereof or in opposition thereto and
shall in open court give his decision as to tiie granting
or withholding of the issue of the certificate.
O
Note.—By Section 9 of u The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876 Amend-
ment Act” the area allowed to be selected as a homestead in a homestead area is
increased to 160 acres,— Vide page 99.


Notice of every sucli application sliall be given to
sucli commissioner at least ten clear days before the
court sitting at which the application is to be made and
notification of every such intended application shall be
posted conspicuously in the land agent’s office at least a
week prior to such court sitting.
Notice of intended forfeiture of conditional or homestead selection to be given.
52. No forfeiture of any conditional or homestead
selection for any cause other than the non-payment of
rent shall be declared until after a notice in writing shall
have been served upon the conditional purchaser or
homestead selector either personally or by posting the
same addressed to him at the selection.
Every such notice shall specify the alleged cause of
forfeiture and shall call upon the conditional purchaser
or homestead selector to show cause against it at the
next court sitting held after the expiration of thirty days
from the service of the notice A copy of such notice
shall be published in the Government Gazette and the
nearest local newspaper three weeks at the least before
the sitting of the court at which cause is to be shown.
The commissioner shall at such court sitting hear in
open court such evidence as shall be adduced by the
conditional purchaser or homestead selector or his agent
by way of showing cause against the forfeiture and shall
report thereon in writing to the Minister.
Sales hy Auction,
Governor may cause lands to be surveyed. 81 Vic. c. 46 s. 83.
53. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to
cause any town suburban or country lands, to be offered
for unconditional sale by public auction and to cause
maps of such lands to be prepared which maps shall show
and specify the counties parishes or towns in which the
lands are situated and all reserves intended to be made
in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the


boundaries and areas of the lands intended to be sold and
shall also show the lengths and bearings of all boundary
lines comprised therein and such maps shall be deposited
as public maps in the office of the Surveyor-General*
Classes of land to be stated. Ib. ss. 81, 85.
51. All such lands shall be distinguished as town
suburban or country lots according to their respective
positions and shall be offered as nearly as may be in
areas according to the following scale—
Town lands in allotments of from one rood to one acre
Suburban lands within one mile from town lands in
lots of from one acre to eighty acres
Suburban lands over one mile from town lands in lots
of from forty acres to one hundred and sixty acres
Country lands in lots of from forty acres to six
hundred and forty acres.
Proclamation of land for sale. ib. ss. 86, 90.
55. The place and time of sale shall be notified by
proclamation published in the Gazette not less than four
weeks or more than three months prior to the day of sale
and such proclamation shall specify the numbers of the
lots and the area and upset price of each lot Provided
that any or all of the lots may be withdrawn from sale
by the Minister at any time prior to the same being
actually offered for sale and bid for
Special conditions may be imposed.
The proclamation may impose any special conditions
with respect to the sale- of any specified lot or lots and
may add the value of improvements on the land to the
upset price.
Upset price. Ib. s. 87.
56. The upset price shall not be less than —
Eight pounds per acre for town lands
One pound per acre for suburban lands and
Ten shillings per acre for country lands
Provided that the upset price may be fixed at any larger
sum.


Conditions to be read. Ih, s. 92,
57. The land agent or auctioneer shall before the
commencement of the sale read the terms and conditions
of sale and all persons bidding at the sale shall he hound
by the terms and conditions so read.
Deposit to be made. Ih. s. 93.
58. The highest bidding for each lot together with
the name of the purchaser shall he announced by the
auctioneer or land agent before proceeding to offer the
next lot and the purchaser shall thereupon pay a deposit
of one-fifth of the purchase money.
Payment of residue. Ih. s. 94.
69. The balance of the purchase money and the value
of the improvements (if any has been added to the upset
price) together with the deed fee and survey fee as fixed
by this Act shall be paid to the land agent at his office
within one calendar month from the date of the sale and
upon such payment being duly made the purchaser shall
be entitled to a deed of grant of the land in fee-simple.
Forfeiture of deposit upon failure to pay balance. Ih. s. 95.
60. If the balance of the purchase money with the
value of the improvements deed fee and survey fee be
not paid to the land agent within one calendar month
from the day of the sale the deposit shall be absolutely
forfeited and the depositor shall have no further claim
to the land on account thereof.
Value of improvements may be paid to oumer or occupant.
61. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council by
the proclamation to direct that the value of any improve-
ments on any lot shall be paid to the owner or occupant
of such improvements at the time of the sale and in
such case it shall be sufficient that the purchaser instead
of paying the value of the improvements to the land
agent produce to the land agent a receipt in full for such
value signed by such owner or occupant.


Country lots offered at auction and not sold may be pui’cbased by selection.
11. s. 96.
62. Any country lands which shall have been offered
for sale at auction and not bid for and not withdrawn
from sale either before or after offer at auction shall from
and after the day following such offering for sale be
open to purchase by selection by the first applicant on
payment to the land agent of the full upset price together
with the deed fee and survey fee and any further sum
which may have been fixed as the value of improvements
on the land.
Proclamation of sale may notify town and suburban land open to selection and not
bid for. 36 Vic. c. 20 s. 18.
63. In any proclamation of lands for sale by auction
the Governor in Council may specially declare that any
town or suburban lands mentioned in the proclamation
which shall not he bid for or withdrawn from sale either
before or after offer at auction shall he open to purchase
by selection by the first applicant at the upset price
And in every such case all such lands shall be open to
purchase accordingly subject to the same conditions as
hereinbefore set forth in the case of country lands.
Special Grants.
Powers to grant in case of escheat &c. 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 26,
61. In any case in which Her Majesty has become
or may hereafter become entitled to any land either by
escheat for want of heirs or by reason of any forfeiture
for treason felony or otherwise or by reason that the
same has upon inquisition been found to have been
granted or otherwise vested unto the use of or in trust
for any alien or aliens it shall be lawful for the Governor
on behalf of Her Majesty to grant such land in fee-
simple or for any less estate to any person for the purpose
of restoring the same to any of the family of the person
in whom or for whose benefit the same had been vested
or of carrying into effect any intended grant conveyance


or devise of such last-mentioned person in relation to
such land or of rewarding any person making discovery
of such escheat or forfeiture or of Her Majesty’s right
and title thereto Provided that before any land under
escheat is granted as aforesaid notice of the intended
grant shall be advertised for two consecutive months in
the Gazette.
.Application for closing unnecessary roads. Ih. ss. 27, 28.
65. It shall be lawful for the owner or owners of any
purchased lands adjoining a road which is required for
access to such lands only and is not otherwise required
for public use or convenience to make application in
writing to the Minister that such road may he closed
either permanently or temporarily.
On the receipt of such application the Minister shall
cause notice thereof to he inserted ill the Gazette and
in such local newspapers if any as he may think advi-
sable and also conspicuously posted on the road to he
closed and at the nearest land office police office and post
office for a period of not less than two nor more than
six calendar months consecutively.
Consequent alienation. Ih. s. 29.
66. At the expiration of such period the Governor in
Council may approve of such application with or without
modification.
If the application is for the permanent closure of
the road and is approved without modification the
Governor in Council may order the closure of the road
upon payment of such price as he may think reasonable
(not being less than the original upset price of such
adjoining lands) in which case upon payment of such
price together with the deed fee a deed of grant in fee-
simple of the soil of such road shall be issued to the
owner or rateably to the several owners of such adjoin-
ing lands or as they may request in the same manner as
if such road had been purchased by him or them at
auction under the provisions hereinbefore contained.


Or temporary enclosure only may be authorised.
If the application is for the temporary closure of the
road and is approved or if the application being for the
permanent closure of the road the Governor in Council
shall approve of a temporary closure thereof only the
Minister shall issue to the applicant a license in the
prescribed form authorising him and his successors in
the occupation of such adjoining lands to enclose the
road and keep it enclosed for so long as he or they shall
pay the yearly rent of one shilling per annum for every
acre or part of an acre of the land comprised therein
which rent shall he payable in advance at the Treasury
on the first day of January in every year.
Property vested in license.
During the currency of the license the holder thereof
shall he deemed the lessee of the land comprised therein.
Forfeiture for non payment of license fee.
If the annual license fee shall not he paid when due
the license shall he forfeited hut the licensee may at any
time within ninety days thereafter defeat such forfeiture
by payment of the rent together with an additional sum
equal to one-fourth part thereof by way of penalty hut
in default of such payment of rent and penalty within
such period of ninety days the license shall he absolutely
forfeited.
Power to cancel license.
If at any time it shall appear to the Governor in
Council expedient to re-open any road in respect of
which any such license shall have been issued it shall
he lawful for the Governor in Council to cancel such
license upon giving six months’ clear notice to the
holder thereof and upon such cancellation the road so
enclosed shall again become open as a public highway.
Sale in consideration of improvements, lb. s. 30.
67. Upon application made within twelve months
after the proclamation in the Gazette of the first sale of
any town land situated within any new city town village


or reserve within which improvements are situated it
shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to sell and
grant the allotment or allotments containing such im-
provements to the owner of such improvements without
competition at its fair value in an unimproved state not
being less than the minimum upset price of such lands
as defined by this Act.
Sales without competition in special cases. Ib. s. 31.
68. In cases in which there may be no convenient
way of access to any portion of Crown land or in which
any portion may be insufficient in area for public sale or
in which a portion of Crown land may lie between land
already granted and a street or road which forms or
should form the way of approach to such granted land
or in which buildings erected on lands already granted
may have extended over Crown lands or in any other
cases of a like kind the Governor in Council may sell
and grant such lands to the holder or holders of the ad-
joining lands without competition and at a price to he
determined by the Minister or other officer duly au-
thorised in that behalf.
Power to purchase or exchange.
69. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council
to acquire any land of any tenure which may be required
for any purpose either by way of purchase or by granting
any Crown land in fee-simple or for any less estate in
lieu of such land And in any such case the value of
the land so acquired or granted and of any improvements
thereon respectively shall be determined by arbitration.
Governor may grant leases for special purposes, Ib. s. 69.
70. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council
to grant leases of any portion of land not exceeding five
acres to any person for the erection of wharves store-
houses slips for building or repairing vessels baths works
for supplying water or gas to any town or any special
purpose of a like kind


Provided that the term of lease shall not in any case
exceed twenty-one years and that it shall he a condition
that such lease may at any time he cancelled on giving
six months’ notice and payment of the value of the
improvements and that the annual rent shall in no case
he less than one pound per acre.
Licenses to mine for eoal.
71. The Governor in Council may grant licenses to
mine for coal on temporary or permanent reserves on
such terms as to securing the surface license fees
royalties or otherwise as he shall see fit.
Commons.
Conditions upon which commons may be proclaimed. 31 Vic. c. 46 ». 78.
72. It shall he laivful for the Governor in Council to
proclaim any unsold land as a common upon the follow-
ing conditions —
(1.) That a petition signed by not less than thirty
freeholders resident within any township or
agricultural district praying for the proclamation
of a common adjoining thereto shall have been
presented to the Governor in Council
(2.) That after the said petition shall have been
notified in the Gazette for a period of sixty days
no counter petition shall have been presented
signed by a larger number of freeholders resident
within the said township or district.
Extent of common. Ib. s. 79.
73. Every such common shall be proportioned to the
number and wants of the freeholders resident in the said
township or district hut shall in no case exceed twenty
square miles.
Crown to retain commonages, lb. s. 80. —Commonages may be extended.
74. Notwithstanding the proclamation the fee-simple
of all common lands shall be deemed to be vested in the
Crown and unalienated and nothing herein contained


shall prevent the sale of any land comprised in any com-
mon Provided that it shall he lawful for the Governor
in Council to extend any common to an extent equal to
the area of the land which may he so sold therein.
Governor in Council may make regulations for management of commons. Ib. s. 81.
75. The Governor in Council may make regulations
for the management of any common or commons and for
giving effect to commonage rights subject however to the
following conditions—
That commonage rights shall appertain solely to
residents in such townships or districts
That the depasturing of sheep and entire male
animals exceeding six months old except under
special conditions shall be prohibited
That payment be made for the depasturing of cattle
at a rate not less than two shillings per head per
annum and that in no case shall any one person
be allowed to run more than twenty head on the
same common.
But nothing herein contained shall prevent hona fide
travellers from depasturing their bullocks horses or other
stock on any common Provided that no person travelling
with stock shall be deemed a hona fide traveller who
shall not proceed four miles in one direction during
every twenty-four hours unless delayed by floods.
Commons may bo placed under municipal councils. 34 Vic. c. 13 s. 3.
76. In the case of any common proclaimed for the
use of the inhabitants of a municipality the Governor in
Council may place such common under the control of
the council of such municipality and may authorize the
council to make regulations subject to the conditions
aforesaid for the management thereof and the giving
effect to commonage rights therein.


Licenses to Cut Timber.
Licenses to cut timber &c. may be granted. Reasonable objection may be entertained.
lb. s. 100.
77. The Governor in Council may authorise the
commissioner or any court of petty sessions to issue
licenses for any term not exceeding one year to enter any
Crown lands whether under pastoral lease or not and to
cut and take therefrom any timber and to dig for and
remove any gravel stone brick earth shells or other
material hut not within two miles of any head station
unless by the consent of the lessee The fee fixed for such
license shall he paid in advance.
Any pastoral lessee may make any reasonable objec-
tion to the granting of any such license and the granting
or withholding of such license after any objection shall
have been made to the commissioner or court of petty
sessions shall he determined by the Governor in
Council. , ,
Any pastoral lessee may by notice in writing to that
effect given to any such licensee restrict him from exer-
cising his rights as such licensee in any specified area
on the run to he mentioned in such notice and not
exceeding one thousand acres and such licensee may
within the period of one month thereafter appeal to
the commissioner or nearest court of petty sessions who
shall determine whether the restriction shall continue
in force and for how long a time and if such licensee
shall during such period of one month or at any time
thereafter during the continuance of such restriction
exercise the right of a licensee within the area affected
thereby he shall for every such offence he liable to a
penalty not exceeding twenty pounds.
Persons authorised by Government not to be obstructed by pastoral lessees in
cutting timbier &c. lb, s. 101.
78. Except as providcil in the last preceding section
pastoral lessees under this Act shall not have the power


to restrict other persons duly authorised by the Governor
in Council either from cutting or removing timber or
material for building or other purposes or from searching
tor or removing any metal or mineral within the run.
Surveys and Deed Dees.
Licensed surveyors.
79. Per the purpose of effecting surveys under the
provisions of this Act the Surveyor-General may issue
licenses to such surveyors as may on examination prove
to be duly qualified Provided that if any such sur-
veyor shall wilfully neglect the proper execution of the
surveys on which lie may he employed or shall make
any false statement or misrepresentation in regard to
any land surveyed or the measurement thereof his license
may he suspended or cancelled.
Cost of survey. Ih. soiled. H.
80. Every person acquiring Crown lands under the
provisions of this Act ly purchase selection or lease not
being a lease for pastoral purposes shall pay the cost of
survey according to the following scale—
£ s, d.
Tinder 60 acres ... ... ...3 8 0
IST) acres and under TA) acres ... 3 16 0
80 „ „ 120 „ ... 4 12 0
120 „ „ 160 „ ... 5 4 0
160 „ „ 240 „ ... 5 10 0
240 „ „ 320 „ ... 6 4 0
320 „ „ 480 „ ...700
480 „ „ 640 „ ... 718 0
640 „ 8 0 0
and, for every six hundred ami forty acres or part of six
hundred and forty acres after the first six hundred and
forty acres four pounds.
Kim;. —The above scale of survey fees was amended by Eegnlaiion of Bth December, 1879,
proclaimed under section 12 of “ Croton Lands Alienation Act of 1870 Amendment Act."


Fees charged on deed of grant, lb. sehcd. I.
81. Upon the issue of any Deed of Grant in fee-simple
the following fees shall he paid which shall include the
contribution to the assurance fund under the provisions of
“ The Ileal Property Act of 1861 ”
£ s. d.
Not exceeding 50 acres.,. ... 1 2 6
„ 100 „ 1 10 0
„ 500 „ 1 15 0
„ 1,000 „ 2 10 0
and for every two hundred and forty acres or part of two
hundred and forty acres above one thousand acres one
pound.
Appraisement and Arbitration.
Mode of appraisement or arbitration. lb. s. 102.
82. Whenever it shall become necessary under the
provisions of this Act to fix or ascertain any price value
or sum of money or to settle any question or other
matter not otherwise provided for by this Act the Minis-
ter and the claimant in matters concerning the rights of
the Crown and each of the respective parties interested
in any other case may concur in the appointment of a
single appraiser or arbitrator as the case may require and
failing such concurrence it shall be lawful for either
party of his own accord or at the request of the other to
appoint an appraiser or arbitrator as the case may require
and upon such appointment to give notice thereof to the
other party or parties And if the other party or parties
or any of them shall not within thirty days after such
notice appoint an appraiser or arbitrator the appraiser or
arbitrator first appointed together with such other ap-
praisers or arbitrators (if any) as shall have been duly
appointed within that time shall have power to determine
the matter alone And in any of the cases aforesaid the
matter in question shall be inquired into and determined
by such single appraiser or arbitrator or such appraisers
or arbitrators or their umpire.
; Noth.—'The above scale of deed fees was repealed bj 1 section 13 of “ Croton Lands Alienation
Act &/1876 Amendment Act.”


General Provisions ,
Power to rescind proclamation of town or suburban lands. 33 Vic.'No. 8, ss. 1,12,3,4.
83. The Governor in Council may by proclamation
rescind either in whole or in part any reservation of any
Crown lands as town lands or suburban lands ’or as re-
serves for public purposes.
Prom the date of any such rescinding proclamation
the unalienated town lands and suburban lands respec-
tively affected thereby shall be deemed country lands as
if the original reservation had not been made.
Wafer reserves and streets to be preserved in certain cases.
If any lands have been sold as town lands under any
proclamation so rescinded all reserves for water within
the township shall be still reserved and the streets and
roads within the township shall be kept as roads but may
be closed and sold to the adjoining owners in like manner
as other roads may be closed and sold.
Resumption of roads. 31 Viet. c. 46 s. 51 subs. 10.
84. If within the ten years next succeeding the date
of any application to select any land either hy condi-
tional purchase or as a homestead it shall be deemed
necessary to open any public road through the same it
shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to proclaim
a public road not more than two chains wide through
such land.
In such case the holder of the land shall be entitled
to compensation for the land taken for such road at the
rate of twice the sum which shall have been paid to
Her Majesty in respect of the area so proclaimed
together with the value of the improvements thereon
such value to be determined by arbitration.
Provided that where any such road shall be pro-
claimed through enclosed lands the Minister shall fence
off the road from the adjacent enclosed lands with a


fence equally serviceable with the fence within which
the land is otherwise enclosed but such fence shall after
its erection be maintained at the cost of the owner or
occupant of the adjacent land
Provided further that no such road shall be finally
proclaimed open for public use until the foregoing con-
dition of fencing has been complied with and notice
shall have been given in the Gazette that the amount
of compensation aforesaid lias been duly paid or that
the person entitled thereto can receive the amount at
the Treasury.
“ Fencing Act ”to apply to conditional or homestead selections. Ih. s. 17.
85. The provisions of “ The Act of 1861 ”
shall apply to all lands held under conditional purchase
or as homesteads and for the purposes of that Act land
selected under this Act shall be considered as alienated
when the application to select shall have been confirmed
by the Minister and the selector thereof shall for such
purposes be considered the owner from the time of such
confirmation.
Slock not to be impounded from unfenced selections.
86. No stock shall be impounded from any selection
held under this Act or under “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1868 ” unless the same shall be
securely fenced.
Right of entry to work minerals. Ih. s. 51 subs. 4.
87. Any person authorised in that behalf by the
Governor in Council may enter on any part of the lands
included in any conditional selection or homestead and
dig and remove therefrom any gold or other metal or
metallic ore Provided that any person so entering the
land and removing any such minerals shall pay to the
lawful occupant a sum equal to the amount of the
actual damage which he shall sustain therefrom and the
amount of such damage shall be determined by arbitra-
tion as provided by this Act.


Forfeitures to be proclaimed by Governor.
88. Every forfeiture of land for breach of any of the
provisions of this Act or for non-payment of any moneys
required to be paid by this Act or breach of any con-
dition imposed by this Act shall be proclaimed in the
Gazette and the Governor in Council may cause such
land to be notified as open for selection or direct it to be
sold by auction in fee-simple.
Power to appoint Crown bailiffs.—Their duties. 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 116.
89. The Governor in Council may from time to time
appoint a sufficient number of persons to be rangers or
bailiffs of Crown lands and every such ranger or bailiff
may and shall during his continuance in office do on
behalf of Her Majesty or on behalf of the Governor or
the Minister in respect of any Crown lands all necessary
acts for preventing intrusion encroachment or trespass
thereon and may enter upon any Crown land or lands
held under conditional purchase or as homesteads and
view the same and observe the manner of the per-
formance of conditions thereon and may do all such acts
as may be necessary for recovering any rent or other
sums payable in respect thereof or for taking and
recovering possession of any lands in case of forfeiture
or for such other purpose as any bailiff lawfully
appointed may by law do in respect of any lands of his
employer.
Proceeding against trespassers. Ih. s. 117.
90. Whenever any person is in unauthorised occu-
pation of any Crown lands or is in possession thereof
under color of any lease issued under the provisions of
this Act which shall have become forfeited it shall be
lawful for any commissioner land agent ranger or bailiff
of Crown lands or police constable to prefer to any
justice an information in writing setting forth such
occupation and such justice shall thereupon issue his
summons tor the appearance before any two justices at a
place and time to be therein specified of the person


against whom any such complaint is made and the
justices if on hearing the case they are satisfied of the
truth of the complaint shall issue under their hands a
warrant to dispossess and remove such person from such
Crown lands and to take possession of the same on behalf
of Her Majesty and any constable to whom any such
warrant shall he directed shall forthwith execute the
same according to the tenor and exigency thereof.
Pemilties for trespassing.
91. Any person unless lawfully claiming under a
subsisting lease or license or otherwise under this Act
who shall he found occupying any Crown lands or land
granted reserved or dedicated for public purposes either
by residing or by erecting any hut or building thereon
or by clearing digging up enclosing or cultivating any
part thereof or cutting or removing timber otherwise than
firewood not for sale thereon shall he liable on conviction
to a penalty not exceeding five pounds for the first
offence and not exceeding ten pounds for the second
offence and not exceeding twenty pounds for the third or
any subsequent offence Provided that no information
shall be laid for any second or subsequent offence until
thirty clear days shall have elapsed from the date of the
previous conviction.
No land commissioner land agent or licensed surveyor may purchase land in respect
of which ho may be employed. Ih. s. 110.
92, If any commissioner land agent or licensed
surveyor or any district surveyor directly or indirectly
purchase any land declared open for selection in any
proclamation in which he is named or being land respect-
ing which he acts as commissioner or land agent or in
the survey of which lands he may have been concerned
he shall thereby forfeit his office or license as the case
may be and shall also forfeit the sum of one hundred
pounds with full costs of suit which may be recovered
by any person who may sue for the same in the Supreme
Court or in the nearest district court.


Removal of boundary mark to be a misdemeanor. Ih. s. 118.
93. If any person shall wilfully obliterate remove or
deface any boundary mark which shall have been law-
fully made or erected by or under the direction of any
commissioner licensed surveyor land agent ranger or
bailiff of Crown lands arbitrator valuer or other person
such person so offending shall he guilty of a misde-
meanor.
Limitation of actions. Ih. s. 120.
94. All actions or other proceedings unless under-
taken on behalf of the Crown against any commissioner
land agent ranger or bailiff of Crown lands or other
officer acting under the provisions of this Act for any-
thing wrongfully done under or against the provisions
of this Act shall he commenced within twelve months
after the matter complained of was committed and not
otherwise And notice in writing of any such action or
proceeding and of the cause thereof shall he given to the
defendant one month at least before the commencement
of such action or proceeding And the plaintiff in any
such action shall not recover if tender of sufficient
amends shall have been made before the commencement
of such action or if a sufficient sum of money shall have
been paid into court after such commencement by or on
behalf of the defendant together with costs incurred up
to that time And if a verdict shall pass for the defendant
or the plaintiff shall become nonsuit or discontinue Ids
action or proceeding or if upon demurrer or otherwise
judgment shall be given against the plaintiff the defen-
dant shall recover from the plaintiff Ins full costs as
between attorney and client and have the like remedy
for the same as any defendant has by law against his
plaintiff in similar cases.
Appeal from justices to the nearest district court. Ih. s. 121.
95. It shall be lawful for any person who shall feel
himself aggrieved by the conviction or decision of any
justice or justices under any of the provisions of this
Act to appeal therefrom to the district court nearest to


the place where such conviction or decision shall have
been given and the execution consequent upon the
conviction or decision so appealed from shall be
suspended on the appellant with two or more sufficient
sureties entering before such justice or justices into a
bond or recognizance to Her Majesty in the sum of fifty
pounds which bond or recognizance the said justice or
justices are hereby authorised to take and the obligee by
such bond or recognizance shall be bound to prosecute
such appeal to conclusion and to be forthcoming to abide
the determination of the said court and to pay such
costs if any as the said court shall award against him
and such court is hereby authorised and required to hear
and determine the matter of the said appeal and in any
such matter the decision of such court shall be final and
conclusive to all intents and purposes whatsoever.
No proceedings under this Act to be removable by certiorari. Ib. s. 122.
96. No order or other proceeding made or taken by
any justices or any district court touching or concerning
the conviction of any offenders or touching or concerning
any other matter or thing arising out of the provisions of
this Act shall be liable to be quashed or vacated for want
of form only or be removed or removable by certiorari or
any writ or process whatsoever into the Supreme Court.
Governor in Council may establish regulations.
97. The Governor in Council may from time to time
make alter or rescind all such regulations and establish
such forms as may be required for the due carrying out
of the provisions of this Act.
Regulations to be proclaimed, lb. s. 124.
98. All such regulations shall be proclaimed and
every person who shall knowingly and wilfully offend
against any such regulations shall on conviction thereof
forfeit and pay a penalty not exceeding five pounds for
each such offence.


And every person who shall offend against any such
regulation relating to any public park or reserve and
after being warned by any ranger or bailiff of Crown
lands park-keeper or police constable shall not desist
from so offending may be thereupon apprehended by
such ranger bailiff park-keeper or constable and taken
before some justice of the peace and shall be liable on
conviction to forfeit and pay a penalty not exceeding
ten pounds.
False declarations under this Act to be deemed perjury. Ib. s. 12G,
99. Any person who shall wilfully make a false
statement in any declaration made in pursuance of this
Act or the regulations to be made thereunder shall be
guilty of perjury.
Punishment for fraud or evasion &c. Ib. s. 127.
100. Any person who shall fraudulently evade or
attempt to evade any of the provisions of this Act or
otherwise commit any fraud thereon for the acquisition
of land shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on convic-
tion thereof shall be liable to be imprisoned and kept to
hard labor for a period of not more than two years.
Land so acquired to be forfeited to the Crown, lb. s. 128.
101. Lands acquired by any evasion of or fraud
upon the provisions of this Act shall be forfeited to the
Crown.
Punishment of person dealing with land fraudulently acquired. Ib. s. 129.
102. Any person who shall convey transfer demise
assign or become assignee of any land acquired or held
by any fraud upon the provisions of this Act knowing
the same to have been so acquired or held shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof shall
be adjudged to be imprisoned with or without hard labor


for not more than twelve calendar months and to forfeit
all his interest if any in the land so acquired to Her
Majesty.
Additional privileges to selectors under 31 Vic. c. 46.
103. With respect to conditional selections under
“ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” the follow-
ing provisions shall have effect —
(i.) if at any time after the expiration of three
years from the date of selection the lessee shall
prove to the satisfaction of the commissioner that
lie has up to that time fulfilled the condition of
residence prescribed hy the said Act and has also
fulfilled the conditions of improvement applicable
to the land as prescribed hy the said Act then the
commissioner shall issue a certificate that the con-
ditions aforesaid have been duly fulfilled and the
said lessee shall he entitled to a deed of grant in
fee-simple on payment of the balance of the
ten years’ rent
(2.) Notwithstanding anything in the said Act
contained any person to whom any land held
under conditional purchase shall pass or shall
heretofore have passed hy will or hy operation of
law shall he entitled to deal with the same in
the same manner and to the same extent as any
other land passing to him by will or hy operation
of law Provided that the transferree of any such
person must he a person who would he competent
to select the same land under the provisions of
this Act And such transferree shall continue to
fulfil the conditions of residence and improve-
ment as prescribed hy the said Act
(3.) Whenever the estate or interest of any lessee
of lands held under conditional purchase shall
pass or shall heretofore have passed hy operation
of law to any trustee under the provisions of any
laws for the time being in force relating to


insolvency such trustee shall upon proof being
made to the satisfaction of the Governor in Council
within four years from the date of adjudication
that the several conditions required hy the said
Act have been performed in respect of such land,
by the lessee or such trustee or partly performed
hy the lessee and completed hy such trustee
and upon payment of the balance of the ten years’
rent and deed fee bo entitled to a deed of errant of
such land in fee-simple
(4.) Whenever any selection lias become absolutely
forfeited for non-payment of rent within ninety
days of the day on which the rent shall have fallen
due and it has been ordered by the Governor in
Council that such forfeiture be rescinded such
rescission is hereby declared to have the effect of
defeating such forfeiture
(5.) Whenever any selection shall before the passing
of this Act have become or shall hereafter become
forfeited for non-payment of rent the Governor in
Council may if he see fit on payment of the
penalty and on such other terms as shall appear
to be just rescind such forfeiture.
Commencement of Act.
104. This Act shall commence and take effect on the
first day of March one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-seven.
Short title.
105. This Act shall be styled and may be cited as
“ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1870.”


THE EIRST SCHEDULE.
Year and Number
Title of Act.
An Act to Consolidate and Amend the Laws relating
to the Alienation of Crown Lands
An Act to Amend the Laws relating to Town and
Suburban Lands
An Act to Authorise and Regulate the Subdivision
of Pastoral Leases in the Settled Districts of the
Colony
An Act to Amend “ The Crown Lands Alienation
Act of 1868 ”
An Act for the Establishment of Areas for Home-
stead and Immigrants’ Selections and to Amend
£< The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868”
An Act to Amend the Law relating to the Aliena-
tion of Crown Lands
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
Settled District oe Darling Downs.
Commencing on the Main Dividing Range at Maryland and
bounded thence by Kerries’ Range and the ranee separating the
Condamine from the Macintyre Weir and Moonie Rivers to the head
of Wilkie’s Creek thence by the watershed separating the Condamine
River from Wilkie’s Creek to their junction thence by the Condamine
River to the junction of Gooranga Creek thence by that creek to its
head in the Main Dividing Range thence by that range south-easterly
and south-westerly to Maryland the point of commencement.


Queensland, ) Proclamation by His Excellency William Wellington
to wit. 5 Caiens, Esquire, Companion of the Most Distinguished
(1.5.) Order of St. Michael and St. George, Governor and
W. W. Caiens, Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of Queensland and its
Governor. Dependencies.
IN pursuance of the power in me vested, I, William Wellington
Caiens, Esquire, the Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the Execu-
tive Council, do, by this my Proclamation, notify and proclaim that the
following Regulations have been established under the provisions of “ The
Crown Lands Alienation Act o/1870” and all other Acts enabling in that
behalf.
REGULATIONS.
Second payment on selections.
1. The second payment on conditional purchase and homestead selec-
tions shall be made on or before the 31st day of March following the date of
application ; and the said payment, together with the first year’s rent, shall
cover the period between the date of application and the 31st clay of March
next after the expiration of one year from the date of the application. The
second payment on each selection will, therefore, be proportionate to the
number of clear months intervening between the expiration of the twelve
months from date of application and the following 31st day of March.
Land Commissioner to declare the acceptance or rejection of applications
in open court.
2. The land commissioner shall declare in open court his acceptance
or rejection of each application for a conditional purchase or homestead,
in the order in which the applications were made. In the case of rejected
applications, he will return the deposit of first year’s rent and survey fee to
the applicant, by giving him a cheque for the amount initialled by the land
agent.
Applicants to attend at land court.
3. Applicants for conditional purchases or homesteads, or their duly
authorised agents, will be required to appear at the land court when their
applications are dealt with by the land commissioner.
Non-appearance at land court.
4. In the case of an applicant failing to appear at the land court as
prescribed in the preceding clause, his application will be rejected, and a
penalty of twenty shillings will be exacted for such non-appearance.
This amount will be deducted from the moneys lodged with the land agent
on account of rent and survey fee, when refundment of the same is made to
the applicant.
Commissioner may examine witnesses.
5. If the commissioner thinks it necessary, he shall require the applicant
or any other person to be examined on oath, before dealing with the appli-
cation.


Survey fees payable on surveyed portions.
G. In cases where surveyed lands are open to selection by lease, after
having been first submitted to auction, and not sold or withdrawn, and two
or more conterminous portions shall be selected by one person, the survey
fee payable on such selection shall be computed at the rate of one-half of
the amount of the aggregate fees chargeable on each single portion included
in the selection as aforesaid : provided that in no case shall a lesser amount
be charged than the rate specified in the 80th section of the Act.
Lands applied for simultaneously to be offered at auction.
7. In the case of simultaneous applications for the same land, the land
commissioner, when the applications are dealt with at the land court, shall
declare who are the simultaneous applicants, and thereupon he will submit
the land to be competed for at auction amongst the said applicants then
present, at one-tenth of the upset price per acre at which the land may be
proclaimed open to selection; and. the applicant bidding the highest
amount per acre shall be declared the successful applicant, and shall forth-
with pay to the land agent the balance due on account of the higher rent.
In the event of there being any dispute in regard to the bidding, the land
commissioner may re-su,bmit the land to competition; if the highest bidder
decline or fail to pay the balance on account of higher rent on demand, the
land commissioner shall cause the land to be re-submitted to competition
amongst the other applicants.
Proceedings when applications are partially for the same land.
8. When two or more, simultaneous applications are only partially for
the same land, the commissioner shall offer the area which is comprised in
the greatest number of such applications at auction amongst the several
applicants therefor, and then the area comprised in the next greatest num-
ber, and so on, as often as may be necessary to determine the rights of the
several^ applicants. Except as aforesaid the provisions of the last preceding
regulation shall apply to such cases.
Advance at each bid not less than one halfpenny per acre per annum.
9. When simultaneous applications are submitted to competition, the
advance at each bid shall not be less than one halfpenny per acre per annum.
Permission to withdraw selections in certain cases.
10. In cases where applicants for conditional purchases or homesteads are
desirous of withdrawing their applications in consequence of the land des-
cribed therein not being that intended to be selected, they may make an
application to the land commissioner to be allowed to withdraw as aforesaid;
and the commissioner, on receipt of such application, shall forward the
same, with his report, for the consideration of the Minister. In the event
of the application being approved, a refundment of the deposit of the first
year s rent, less twenty per cent, and the survey fee (if no expense has
been incurred by the Government), will be made to the applicant.


Agreement for occupation hy servant must he registered withiri one month.
11. One copy of every agreement for the employment of a person hy a
conditional purchaser to reside On his selection, as prescribed in sub-section
4 of section 28 of the Act, must be registered in the office of the commissioner
of the district in which the selection is l situated, within one month from date
of the signing of the agreement; failing which, and until the agreement is
registered, the residence on the selection of any person than the selector
shall be deemed null and void.
Selection of improved land.
12. Where improvements are included in land, applied for, either as a
conditional purchase or as a homestead, such lands not being held under the
provisions of “ The Settled Districts Pastoral Leases Act of 1876,” the
applicant must specify in his application the nature of such improvements,
and his estimate of their value, the amount of which he will be required to
pay to the land agent at the time of application ; and any further sum which
may be finally determined upon by appraisement must be paid within sixty
days from the date of the award, or the selection will not be confirmed.
Applications for certificates of fulfilment of conditions to he notified in local
papers prior to sitting of commissioner s court.
13. Notice of every application for a certificate of fulfilment of conditions
shall be published twice in each local paper (if there be any), : in the land
agent’s district in which the selection for which the certificate, is sought is
situated, in addition to the publicity prescribed in section 51 of the Aet,
such publication to be at least ten days prior to the date of the sitting of the
commissioner’s court.
Lands comprised in selections tvithdrawn or cancelled before confirmation,
not available for re-selection until notice is given.
14. When any application for a conditional purchase, or homestead
selection, is withdrawn under the 10th clause of these regulations, or other-
wise cancelled, before confirmation by the Minister, notice will be given by
the land commissioner of the district, fixing a day on which the land will be
open to re-selection, not being less than a month from the date of the notice;
and such notice shall be posted in the office of the land agent for the district
in which the land is situated, and shall also be inserted in the local papers
three times before the date on which the land will be open. No application
to select the land before the day appointed will be entertained or approved.
Selection in 'virtue of volunteer land orders.
15. When applications to select land by virtue of volunteer land orders
issued under the 98th section of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of
1868 ” are made simultaneously with applications for the same land as con-
ditional purchases or homesteads, the applications in virtue of such land
orders shall be postponed to such other applications.
Fees to he paid before preparation of (feeds of grant.
16. Before the preparation of any deed of grant of land is authorised, all
charges and fees due thereon must be paid, together with the contribution
to the assurance fund, under the provisions of “ The Peal Property Act of
1861,” as prescribed in section 81* of the Act.
* Now repealed. (See note on page 89.)


Notice of withdrawal of lands from lease to he forwarded to pastoral lessee.
17, Upon confirmation by the Minister of a selection comprising land
held under the provisions of “ The Settled Districts Pastoral Leases Act of
1876,” being notified to the land commissioner, that officer shall cause the
land agent to forward a notice in the form M in the schedule annexed, to the
pastoral lessee.
A fee of one pound to he paid with applications to close roads.
18. The sum of one pound sterling must be forwarded with all appli-
cations to close roads, either permanently or temporarily, for the purpose of
defraying the expense of inquiry and advertising.
Temporary closure of roads.
Is. Six months’ rent only shall be demanded in advance in cases where
the temporary closure of roads is approved during the six months ending the
31st of December. In all cases a full year’s rent must be paid on the follow-
ing Ist day of January.
Gold fields.
90. Application to select lands comprised within any portion of a pro-
claimed gold field will not be entertained or approved unless the land on the
gold field has been specially declared open to selection.
Receipts to he given hy land agents.
21. On receipt of any moneys payable under the provisions of the Act,
the land agent shall give the depositor a receipt for the same, and shall,
wflbhin seven days thereafter, forward a duplicate thereof to the Auditor-
General, and every such receipt shall be in such form as the Auditor-General
shall direct.
Appointment of Arbitrator for the Government.
"AL In all oases ©f arbitration under the Act, the arbitrator on the part
of the Government shall be appointed by the Minister for Lands,
Form to he used in appraisements or arbitrations.
23. The forms H, I, K, L, M shall be the forms used in conducting
appraisements or arbitrations under the Act.
Payment of survey fees.
24. All survey fees chargeable on selections under the Act must be paid
to the land agent in cash.
Form of deed of grant.
25. The form contained in schedule P of these regulations shall be the
form of deed of grant issued under the provisions of the Act.


Forms to he used.
26. The following forms shall be those used for the purposes of the Act
and these regulations.
FORMS.
“ Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
Application by to Lease Lands before Survey.
Received this day of , at o’clock.
, Land Agent,
, 187 .
I,* , do hereby sfate my desire to become the lessee of the Crown
lands described in the Schedule annexed, which arc now open to selection under the
provisions of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876 j” and I hereby tender the
sum of pounds shillings and pence as the first
year’s rent, together with the survey fee.f I declare that I am of the full of
eighteen years, that I reside in Queensland, and that I select the land for my own
use and not as the agent or trustee for any other person. And I further declare
that the said land, conjointly with all other land now held by me as a conditional
selection, under the said Act, or under “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ”
does not exceed five thousand one hundred and twenty (5,120) acres. And I further
declare that I apply for the said portion in order that I may use the same, and that
I have not entered into any agreement to sell, demise, or mortgage the said portion.
Signature.
Declared before me, at , this day of , 187
J.P.
Area of Land Applied for.
Deposit of
first year’s
rent.
Highest
Bid
per Acre
per Annum.
Annual
Rent.
Acres.
Roods.
Perches.
Value of Improvements
Land Agent.
Received from the sum of pounds
pence as the rent of the above land and survey fee.
shillings
* Insert the Christian and Surname at full length.
f When there are improvements, insert the estimated value, except in cases of lands resumed
from runs held under “ The Settled Districts Pastoral Leases Act of 1870.”
Schedule to Application.
Date of Proclamation ...
County or district
Area
Description.


“ Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
Application by
to Lease Lands aftee Suetet.
Received this day of , 187 ,at o’clock.
, Land Agent,
I 5 * , do hereby state toy desire to become the lessee of the Crown
lands described in the Schedule annexed, which are now open to selection under the
provisions of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876 and I hereby tender the
sum of pounds shillings and pence as the first
year’s rent, together with the survey fee.f I declare that lam of the full age of
eighteen years, that I reside in Queensland; and that I select the land for my own
use and npt as the agent or trustee for any other person. And I further declare
that the said land, conjointly with all other land now held by me as a conditional
selection under the said Act, or under “ The Grown Lands Alienation Act of 1868,”
does not exceed five thousand one hundred and twenty (5,120) acres. Audi further
declare that I apply for the said portion in order that I may use the same, and that
I have not entered into any agreement to sell, demise, or mortgage the said portion.
' ’ i ■ ■. ■ Signature.
■ ' • :i! . .J 'J ' . U: ! ,
Declared before me at , this day of ,187 .
J.P.
(02J Xi) v-li:oV/ 1 I;;;;; mi ■ U:r. e:,un !ov 'iv.my.o ion e-xiu
no jii j/oIJm
Deposit of
first year’s
i Highest
I 1 Bid 1 J
j per Acre
;* Area of land Applied for.
'Animal
Kent.
per Annum,
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
Eoods.
Perches.
Value of Improvements
Received from the sum of pounds
and pence as the rent of the above land and survey fee.
shillings
Land Agent,
* Insert the Christian and Surname at full length.
, ;■(• lyhen there are; improvements, insert the estimated value, except in cases, of lands resumed
fforn runs held under “ the Settled Districts Pastoral Leases Act of 1876-.”
nodi uoilVl
feitir • I
Schedule to Application.
No. of lot or lots
Date of Proclamation •... ...
Date when offered for sale by auction
No. of acres’in each lot ..; •
County ... ... ...
Parish or place ...*" ..."' ... ■
No. of portion
Total number of acres in selection ... ... ... ” ..., Mh j


County
Parish or place
...
No. of portion,..
...
Upset price
'•:**** '• ’l* ni‘ • ■ :■
(Applicant’s Signature)
p to/ aaci'/iy BXOIT ■ • - i■> a;-
GENERAL REGULATIONS UNDER ACT OE 1876. 55
J < : I i ■ ■ ' C.
“ Croicn Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
ii J
Application by to Select Csown Lands.
Land Agent,
0;i I'l :!l ■ h.: : ; Til ,0 m liiii ;!::([ -ill ) '(u'i i 'li i ' I
Received this day of 187 ,at o’clock.
District
,187 .
I,* off am desirous of purchasing the portion of Crown
lands liereinunder described, wbicb is now open to selection without competition,
having been previously! offered for sale and not bid for, and I hereby tender the
sum of pounds shillings and pence as the
price thereof, including the fee on the deed.
No. of lot at previous sale ... ... .... ...
Date of Proclamation...
Date when offered for sale
No. of acres in the lot
Land ...
Survey fee ... ... ... ... 1
Deed fee ... ... ...
Assurance fee ... ... A v.. ''.V.
The Agent for the sale of Crown lands.
Received from the sum of pounds
pence, as the price of the land above described.
lime')
Agent for the sale, of Crown lands at
shillings
» Insert the Christian and Surname at full length,
f Nearest Post Town.
t Offered for sale and not hid for (or sold and the deposit forfeited, as the cate may be).
i !
“ Crown Zands Alienation Act of 1876.”
■
Conditional Puechase.
Application by to Lease adjoining Lands.
Ecbeited this day of 187 .
JL . b 1 Jamiwoipr; un ohd lo'iuhn tea oyi«J 1 iMI /ndooh r>dh . ■ I. bun ; aul.s
(.OTirJtmgifl)
, Land Agent,
at
, 187 .
L , do hereby state my desire to become the lessee of the Crown
lands (adjoining my selection No. ) as described in the Schedule annexed,
which are now open to selection under the provisions of “ The Croicn Lands
Alienation Act of 1876 and I hereby tender the sum of pounds


J.p.
r '• *■
Area of Land Applied for .
Deposit of
first Year’s
Rent.
Highest Bid
per acre
per annum.
Annual
Rent.
Acres. Roods. Perches.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.\
£ s. d.
: /
Received from the sum of
pence as the rent of the above land and
pounds
survey fee.
shillings and
. Land Agent.
. Schedule to Application.
Date of Proclamation
County or district
Area
Description
fp. 1 h a Al
:' ■r MVz.r . _
I ills a
E.
“ Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
shillings and pence as the first year’s rent, together with the survey fee.
I declare that I am of the full age of eighteen years, that I reside in Queensland,
and that I select the land for my own use and not as the agent or trustee for any
other person, and that the said land conjointly with all other land held by me as a
conditional selection under the said Act or “ The Croton Lands Alienation Act of
1868” does not exceed five thousand one hundred and twenty (5,120) acres. And
I farther declare that I apply for the said portion in order that I may use the same,
and that I have not entered into any agreement to sell, demise, or mortgage the said
land.
(Signature.)
Declared before me, at , this day of
Application to Select a Homestead.
Received this day of 18 ,at o’clock.
Land Agent, District of
, do hereby state my desire to become the lessee of the Crown
lands described in the schedule annexed, which are now open to selection without
competition, as a homestead under the provisions of “ The Crown Lands Alienation
Act of 1876,” and I hereby tender the sum of pounds shillings
anc l pence, as the first year’s rent, together with the suiwey fee,
; and I do solemnly declare that I am* and that I apply
for such lands for my own use and occupation, and not as the agent or trustee for
any other person, and that the selection I now apply for is the only homestead
selection X have made under this or any other Act in force in the Colony of Queens-
land, and that I apply for the land for the purpose of actual settlement and culti-
vation ; and I further declare that I have not entered into any agreement t 6 sell,
demise, or mortgage the said lands.
(Signature.)
Declared before me, at , this day of 18
J.P.
* Of the full age of 18 years, or the heal of a family as the case may be.


Area of Land Applied for.
Deposit of
first year’s
Kent.
Highest Bid
per acre
per annum.
Annual
Kent.
Acres.
Roods.
Perches.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
Received from the sum of pounds shillings and
pence, as rent of the land above described, and survey fee.
Land Agent,
Schedule to Application.
Date of Proclamation.
County or district
Area
Description
Croton Lands Alienation Act of 1876.
Application to Select Land adjoining a Homestead.
Received this day of ,18 ,at o’clock.
, Land Agent, District of
I, , do hereby state my desire to become the lessee of the Crown lands
(adjoining my previous Homestead selection No. ) as described in the
Schedule annexed, which are now open to selection without competition as a
Homestead under the provisions of “ The Croton Lands Alienation Act of 1876
and I hereby tender the sum of pounds shillings and
pence ns the first year’s rent, together with the survey fee. And I do solemnly
declare that I am* and that I apply for such lands for my own use and
occupation, and not as the agent or trustee of any other person, and that the selection
I now apply for conjointly with my previous selection hereinbefore specified does
not exceed a total area of f acres ; and I further declare that I have not
entered into any agreement to sell, demise, or mortgage the said lands
(Signature.)
Declared before me, at , this day of ,18 .
J.P.
Area of Land Applied for.
Deposit of
first year’s
Rent.
Highest Bid
per acre per
annum.
Acres.
Perches.
£ s. d.
£ >. d.
Received from
pence, as rent of
the sum of pounds shillings and
the land above described, and survey fee.
Land Agent.
• Of the full age of 18 years, or the head of a family, as the case man be.
f Jn a Homestead area , 80 acres ; outside a Homestead area, 160 acres.
Note. —The area that can he selected in a Homestead Area as a homestead is increased by
-Sec. 8 of “ Croicn Lands Alienation Act of 1876 Amendment Act ” to 160 acres.—See page 99.


Schedule to Application.
Date of Proclamation
County or district
Area ... ;.i
Description
Form of declaration to accompany applications for Conditional Purchases made in
pursuance of section 25 of “ The Crown Lands\Alienation Act of 1876.”
I, tlie holder and occupant of. the land comprised in selection No.
District, do hereby solemnly declare that I have resided continuously on the
above-mentioned selection for a period of one year, viz. : —From day of
18 ,to day of inclusive ; and I make this
solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true, and by virtue of
the provisions of an Act made and passed in the thirty-first year of the reign of
Her present Majesty, intituled “ The Oaths Act of 1867.”
Declared before me, at ... .., this
day of 187 .
J.P. brli
H.
Appointment of Appraiser or Arbitrator on behalf of the Crown'under the ' Act
40 Victoria, No. 15.
Whereas by the 102nd clause of f ‘ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876,”
it is provided that in all cases of appraisement or arbitration under the said Act,
the arbitrator on behalf of thp Crown shall be appointed by the Minister: Now,
therefore, !,; being the Secretary for Public Lands, do hereby appoint to
act as; arbitrator! on behalf of the Crown in the matter of " . :
Given under my hand, at , this day of ,IS .
(Signature) ,( -n , v T 1
feecretarj for Public Lands.
Appointment of Appraiser or Arbitrator under the Act 40 Victoria, No. 15.'
I, ; ' . in accordance with the provisions of “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1876,” do hereby appoint '• ■ ' “to act as arbitrator on
my behalf, in the matter of b>l
Given under mv hand, at this day of
(/unh-;, I.) 18 .
(Signature)
Signed by the said this day of 18 ,
in the presence of
(Signature)
\,h"i ■ J.P.
Appointment of Umpire under the Act 40 Victoria, No. 15.
We, the undersigned, acting on behalf of
and on behalf of* under the provisions of “ The Croton Lands
Alienation Act of 1876,” do hereby certify that we have appointed,
to act as Umpire in the matter of
Given under our hands, at . this day'of
. A bn:-.! 18 •
(Signature)
(Signature)
♦ The Crown or one of the parties in the arbitration,


Concurrence in the Appointment of a single Appraiser or Arbitrator.
In pursuance of the provisions of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876,’;’
we, the undersigned, do hereby concur in the appointment of to act
as a single* in the matter of ; and we agree to accept
his award as final, and to he bound hy his decision.
Given under out hands, this , day of 19 ,
(Signature.)
(Signature.)
♦Appraiser or Arbitrator.
Declaration to be made by Arbitrator or Umpire.
In the matter of
I, do solemnly and sincerely declare, that
I am not, directly or indirectly, interested in the matter referred to me ; and that I
will faithfully, honestly, and to the best of my skill and ability, hear and determine
the matter referred to me, under the provisions of “ The Croton Lands Alienation
Act of 1876.”
(Signature)
Made and subscribed, this day of ,18 ,in the presence
Of . <l7/ 1 i i ■
J.P.
Transfer of Lease under “ Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876/’
Know all men hy these presents, That 1 , ~ m < i
, Lessee of the Crown lands hereunder described i-pr ; ■ d
Land Agent’s District
Selection No. ...
County of
Parish of ,r \ : ~ ' ,1A
Portion No.
Number of acres.
And now held by under the provisions of “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1876 ” (-40 Yic. No. 15), do hereby transfer and assign all
right, title, and interest in the said land, and in the lease thereof, to a
and heirs, executors, and administrators, and
hereby request that this transfer may be registered in the office of the Secretary
for Public Lands accordingly.
In witness whereof have hereunto set
hand and seal, this day of IB
Signature of )
Transferror )
Signed, sealed, and delivered by the
said ?■ ■ ' ;
in my presence. ) J P
A fee of ten shillings must be paid on every transfer of a lease.
Separate forms of application must be filled up and duly signed tor each lease to be transferred.
The lease must be sent in with the ‘ application to transfer, that, such transfer may be noted
thereon.


GO GENERAL REGULATIONS UNDER ACT OE 1876
Land Court,
District. )
To of
in the Colony of Queensland.
Whereas it iMh been made to appear to me, the Land Commissioner for the
District of , that you are likely to give material evidence
upon an inquiry to be held under “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876,”
in respect of
These are, therefore, to require you and each of you to be and appear before
me, on the day of , at o’clock
in the noon, at in the said colony, to testify what you
shall know concerning the matter of the said inquiry. Herein fail not.
Given under my hand and seal, at this day of
in the year of our Lord, 187
(i.s.)
Queensland.
No.
County
Parish
Date of Purchase
Area
Victoria, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, and so forth ;
To all to whom these presents shall come, greeting:—
Whereas, in conformity with the laws and regulations in force for the alienation
of Crown lands in our territory of Queensland,*
and in further consideration of the quit-rent hereinafter reserved, we, with the
advice of our Executive Council of Queensland, have granted, and for us, our
heirs and successors, do hereby grant unto the said
h heirs and assigns, subject to the several and respective reservations hereinafter
mentioned, all that piece or parcel of land in our said territory, containing by
admeasurement be the same more or less, situated in the county of
and parish of with all the rights and appurtenances
whatsoever thereto belonging ; To hold unto the said h
heirs aud assigns for ever, yielding and paying therefor yearly unto us, our heirs and
successors, the quit-rent of one peppercorn for ever, if demanded ; but subject,
nevertheless, to the several conditions and reservations contained and declared in
the laws of our said Territory in that behalf. In testimony whereof we have
caused this Our grant to be sealed with the Seal of Our said Territory.
Witness, &c.
* A. 8., of on the day of 18 , made application to select the
land hereinafter described by conditional purchase, and, his application having been duly approved
and confirmed, a lease of the said land for the term of ten years was afterwards issued to him,
reserving an annual rent of . And whereas the said A.B, has since become entitled to a
deed of grant in fee simple of the said land : Now know' ye that in consideration of the premises,
Or, A. 8., of on the day of 18 , made application to select the
land hereinafter described as a Homestead, and his application was duly approved and confirmed.
And whereas the said A.B. has since become entitled to a deed of grsyrt in fee simple of the said
land: Now know ye that in consideration of the premises,
Or, A. 8,, of , has become the purchaser, at auction, of the land hereinafter described,
for the sum. of sterling; Now know ye that in consideration of the said sum for us and
on our behalf well aud truly paid into the Treasury of our said Territory before these presents are
Issued,
Or. A. 8,, of has become the purchaser, by unconditional selection, of the land
hereinafter described, for the sum of sterling : Now know ye that in consideration
of the said sum for us and on our behalf well and truly paid into the Treasury of our said
Territory before these presents are issued,


Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
first day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and seventy-seven, and in the fortieth year o|
Majesty’s reign.
By Command,
JOHN DOUGHS:
God Save the Queen !
Queensland, 7 Proclamation by His Excellency William Wellington
to wit. j Caibns, Esquire, Companion of the Most Distinguished
(1.5.) Order of St. Michael and St. George, Governor and
W. W. Cairns, Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of Queensland and
Governor. its Dependencies.
IN pursuance of section seventy-five of “ The Crown Lands Alienation
Act of 1876,” I, William Wellington Cairns, Esquire, the Governor
aforesaid, with the advice of the Executive Council, do, by this my
Proclamation, notify and proclaim that the following Regulations with
respect to Commons, which have been, or may hereafter be proclaimed for
the use of any Township or Agricultural District, have been established
under the provisions of the said Act.
REGULATIONS.
Commissioners to enforce Regulations.
1. The Land Commissioners shall, under the direction of the Minister
for Lands, have full power to enforce these Regulations within fffieir
respective districts.
Map shoiving boundaries of Common to he exhibited.
2. Every Land Commissioner shall, when directed by the Minister for
Lands, mark out, or cause to be marked out, any lands which shall be
petitioned for or proclaimed as a common within his district, and shall
prepare, or cause to be prepared, a plan of such lands showing the boundaries
thereof; and a copy of such plan shall be deposited in the office of the said
commissioner as well as in the office of each land agent fbr such district,
and also in the office of the Surveyor-General, and such plan shall be acces-
sible for reference by any person, within such hours as the offices of the
said Land Commissioner, land agent, or Surveyor-General are usually open :
In the case of commons proclaimed before the date of the publication of
these Regulations, these Regulations shall apply in like manner as if they
had been made and published before such commons were so proclaimed-
Appointment of Inspector of Cattle.
3. Every Land Commissioner shall, whenever the Minister for Lands
shall so instruct him, appoint some person to be an inspector of the cattle or
stock depastured within or upon any common within his district, at such
rate of remuneration as the Minister may direct.
Duties of Inspector.
4. The duties of such inspector shall be as follows ;
(1.) The said inspector shall require the owner of cattle to enter in a
book kept by the said inspector for the purpose the fulj par-
ticulars of—


(a.) The name, residence, and occupation of the owner or owners
thereof.
(b.) The description and brands of all cattle proposed to he depastured
on the common.
And until such particulars have been fully complied with, he may
refuse to allow such cattle to he depastured.
(2.) Such registry being completed, the said inspector may, and is
hereby empowered to permit the depasturage of cattle, subject
to the following conditions ;
(a.) No owner shall be allowed to run more than twenty (20) head of
cattle on any single common proclaimed under the Act.
(h.) By the term “cattle” is meant mares, geldings, colts, fillies,
asses, mules, cows, oxen, heifers, steers, and calves; but such
term shall not apply to entire male animals more than six months
old.
(c.) Payment must be made for cattle at the rate of two shillings per
head per annum, and all payments must be made half-yearly in
advance.
(d.) In case of default in payment as aforesaid, all cattle in respect
ai which such default shall be made shall be dealt with as if
trespassing on the said common, or, at the option of the inspector,
may be removed at once therefrotn.
Residents entitled to depasture.
S. Every resident in any township or agricultural district for which a
common shall be proclaimed under the Act shall, on compliance with these
Regulations, and on payment of the fees prescribed, be entitled to depasture
such cattle or stock as are permitted by these Regulations.
Payment of Fees to Commissioner.
6. The inspector shall, within one week of the receipt of any of the
fees or payments herein prescribed, pay the same over to the Land Com-
missioner, and the receipt of' the commissioner shall be a full and sufficient
discharge for any such payment ; and the commissioner shall account for
the receipt of all such moneys as public moneys under the provisions of
“ The Audit Act of 1874.” u. ■
Returns to he furnished by the Inspector.
7. The inspector shall prepare and furnish to the commissioner of the
district, twice in every year, that is to say, on the 30th day of June and
the 31st day of December in each year, a detailed return of all moneys
received by him under these regulations, and of all cattle, stock, or sheep
depastured, together with the names, residences, and occupations of the
persons owning or claiming to own any such cattle, stock, or sheep.
Unregistered cattle may be impounded.
8. Any cattle, stock, or sheep found on any common which shall
not have been registered shall be deemed to be trespassing, and shall be
liable to be impounded and dealt with in all respects as prescribed by “The
Impounding Act of 1863,” or any other Act to regulate the impounding
of cattle which may during the existence of these Regulations be in force
in the colony.
Bond fide Travellers may depasture Stock.
9. These Regulations shall not affect sheep or cattle or stock, within
the following provisions of the Act, viz. ;—“ Nothing herein contained
shall prevent bond fide travellers from depasturing their bullocks, horses*


or other stock on any common : Provided also that no person travelling
with stock shall be deemed a bond fide traveller who shall not proceed four
miles in one direction during every twenty-four hours unless delayed by
floods.
No mustering allowed without notice to the Inspector.
10. No person shall be allowed to muster cattle or stock which shall
he on any common, saving milking cows and their calves, or to driveany
such cattle or stock, unless he first give two clear days’ notice in writing
to the inspector of his intention so to do.. Nor shall any notice he valid to
that effect, unless signed by the owner or duly authorised agent of the
owner of such cattle or stock, and delivered at the office of the inspector
during office hours, by or on behalf of such owner or agent.
Penalty for illegally depasturing.
11. Any person depasturing or attempting to depasture cattle, stock, or
sheep upon any common without having conformed to these Regulations, or
who shall commit any breach of the last preceding clause, shall he subject
to a penalty not exceeding £5 for every such oflenpe.
Depasturing of Sheep may he allowed hy Minister oj lands.
12. On application by any owner or driver of sheep for leave to
depasture the same on a common, the Land Commissioner tor the district
shall forthwith report to the Minister for Lands the nature and particulars
of such application; and until the Minister for Lands shall have decided
thereon, as well as upon the rates to be charged for such depasturage, no such
sheep shall be allowed to depasture on any commoh: Provided that all
applications to depasture sheep must be made to the Commissioner for the
district, and not to any Municipal Council or trustees uAder whose control
the common may have been placed. Provided further that no such applica-
tion shall be decided upon by the Minister for Lands until after fourteen
days’ notice thereof shall have been published in the Gazette, and in at
least one local newspaper nearest to the common in which such sheep are
intended to be depastured; and all such advertisements shall be made by
and at the cost of the applicant, who shall,, if required, furnish proof thereof
to the Minister. ; ,
Trustees may he appointed in certain cases,
13. In cases where commons are proclaimed under the Act for the
benefit of towns not possessing Municipal Institutions, or for agricultural
districts, the management of such commons may, subject to the approval
of the Minister of Lands, be vested in trustees, not less than five in number,
who shall be appointed in manner hereinafter provided, and such trustees
shall have ami perform all the powers and duties which, under and_ by
virtue of these Regulations, the Land Commissioners have or are required
to perform : Provided always that such trustees shall be liable in all respects
to account to the Minister for all acts and proceedings done by them in
respect of such management in the same manner as such commissioners are
now or may hereafter be liable so to account.
j Election of Trustees.
14. Trustees for the management of commons shall be elected annually
at such times as the Minister may appoint for the first election; but each
subsequent election of trustees shall be held on some day to be appointed
by the retiring trustees during the month preceding the expiration of the
twelve months during which such retiring trustees hold office.


Election of first Trustees.
15. The first trustees shall he elected by the resident freeholders in the
town or agricultural district, at a meeting convened for the purpose by a
person acting under the instructions of the Minister, who will also act as
chairman and returning officer, and every subsequent election shall be
convened by the retiring trustees. The election to be conducted by ballot or
open voting, as may be determined by resolution of the meeting, which will
also decide as to the number of trustees to be elected.
Declaration to be made by Trustees.
16. After such election, each of the trustees elected shall mate a decla-
ration in the form in Schedule C, undertaking to act in accordance with the
provisions of these Regulations, and binding himself to obey all lawful
instructions issued by the Minister consistent therewith; and the returning
officer shall forward such declarations, togelher with a return stating the
names, occupations, and residences of the trustees so elected, to the Minister,
whose confirmation shall have the effect of vesting in such trustees the
management of the common in respect of which they shall have been
elected.
Appointments to be notified in Government Gazette.
17. The appointment of trustees will be notified in the Government
Gazette under the hand of the Minister.
Trustees may be discharged from their office for neglect of duty.
18. In case any such trustee or trustees shall, in the opinion of the
Minister, fail to act in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations,
or to obey any lawful instructions issued by the Minister consistent there-
with. he or they shall be liable to be discharged from the office and duties
of such trusteeship by the Governor in Council, who shall have the power
to appoint successors to any trustees so discharged.
Vacancies may be filled.
19. In the event of any vacancy occurring by death or resignation, the
remaining trustees shall be empowered to nominate a person to fill the
vacancy: Provided that, if more than one vacancy occurs at the same time,
trustees shall be elected to fill such vacancies by the resident freeholders,
in meeting to he convened as hereinbefore provided.
Trustees to apply fees for commonage purposes.
20. When the management of a common is vested in trustees, the fees
received for the depasturage of cattle or sheep thereon shall be applied by
the trustees towards the expenses of management and the general improve-
ment of the common.
Dower to make rules or bye-laws.
ML. The trustees shall have power to make rules or bye-laws not incon-
sistent with these Regulations, with respect to their own proceedings,
of a chairman, and the arrangements necessary to carry the
Regulations into effect: Provided that such rules or bye-laws shall be in all
cases confirmed by the Minister and published in the Gazette before they
shall have any force.
Forms.
22. The forms to be employed in the different notices and registries
under these Regulations shall be in accordance with those set out in the
Schedules hereto.


SCHEDULE A.
Form of Inspector’s
Registry .
Form of Application to depasture Sheep
The Land Commissioner for the district of
187.
I beg to apply to you for permission to depasture on the common of the
of subject to the the following sheep :
Rams
Ewes
Wethers
Lambs
Store Sheep
The circumstances under which I make the application are as follows :
(Here' stale the circumstances.)
I am, Sir,
Eepoet,
Your obedient Servant,
I recommend that the application be {not) complied with, on the following
conditions {for the following reasons) : {state conditions or reasons).
G. H.
Land Commissioner for the District of
The Minister for Lands, Brisbane.
SCHEDULE C.
I, , do sincerely and solemnly declare that I will, to the best of my
ability, act as a trustee of the common proclaimed under the 72nd


clause of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876,” in accordance with the
provisions of the Commonage Regulations of , and that I
will hind myself to obey all lawful instructions issued by the Minister for Lands*
consistent with the said Act and Regulations.
(Signature) J.P-
Declared before me, this day of 18 .
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane,
this first day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand,
eight hundred and seventy-seven, and in the fortieth year of Her
Majesty’s reign.
By Command,
JOHN DOUGLAS.
God Save the Queen i
Queensland, \ Proclamation by His Excellency William Wellington
to wit. ) Caiens, Esquire, Companion of the Most Distinguished.
(1.5.) Order of St. Michael and St. George, Governor and,
W. W. Caiens, Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of Queensland and its
Governor. Dependencies.
IN pursuance of the power in me vested, I, William Wellingtgn
Caiens, Esquire, the Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the
Executive Council, do, by this my Proclamation, notify and proclaim that
the following Regulations, relative to the cutting and removal of timber,
and to the removal of stone, gravel, brick-earth, shells or other materials
from Crown lands, have been established under the provisions of “ The
Croivn Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
REGULATIONS.
TIMBER LICENSES.
Applications for licenses to he made to Land Commissioners.
1. Applications for licenses to cut timber on Crown lands must be
addressed in Form A to the Land Commissioner for the district, and
lodged with the land agent, together with the fees, as hereinafter provided.
On receipt of each application, the Land Commissioner will exercise a full
discretion as to the granting or refusal of the license applied for, according
to the merits of each case.
The commissioner or other officer to attend at convenient points of his
district if repaired.
2. The commissioner will, if necessary, attend periodically at convenient
points in his district, within an easy accessible distance of all persons who
are engaged in cutting timber on Crown lands, for the purpose of receiving
applications and issuing licenses; and such arrangements will be duly
notified in the Gazette and nearest local paper.


Licenses when issued not to he transferable.
3. On application for a timber license as aforesaid, if there be no
objection, the commissioner is empowered to grant a license to the applicant
in the Form C, which will not entitle any person but the actual holder
4o"any privilege whatever; the license is not transferable.
Separate licenses for each person.
4. A separate license must be taken out by each person actually
employed in felling, cutting, sawing, splitting, or removing timber from
Crown lands, whether live or dead timber, underwood, or roots cut for
sale as fuel.
Lessees may cut timber for certain purposes without license.
5. The lessee, or licensed occupant of Crown lands, is permitted to
eut any timber growing thereon for domestic uses, as firewood, fencing, &c.,
Inxt not for sale or barter.
Licenses.
6. Licenses shall be of two kinds—one empowering the holder to cut
cedar, pine, and hardwood ; the other for hardwood alone.
Fee charged on licenses.
7. The fee chargeable on a cedar and pine license, which must be paid to
the land agent previously to the issue of the license, shall be £5 ; the fee for
hardwood license, £3, to be paid in like manner.
Terms of licenses.
8. The licenses will ordinarily be in force from the date of issue to the
31st day of December then next ensuing; but licenses may be granted at
any time, available to the end of the current quarter or half-year, for which
one-quarter or one-half only of the above-mentioned fee will be charged
respectively.
Land Agents to account.
9. The sums so paid to the land agents are to be accounted for and paid
over in the same manner as other public moneys passing through their hands.
Operation of licenses.
10. Licenses will only be operative within the land agent’s district for
which they are issued.
A quarterly return of applications to he forwarded to Lands Department.
11. A return (in the form B) of all applications granted or refused is to
be forwarded quarterly by the land agents to the Department of Public
Lands. A return will be published in the Gazette from time to time of all
timber licenses issued.
Licenses to extend to land lender pastoral lease in certain cases.
12. Licenses will extend not only to vacant Crown lands, but also to lands
under pastoral lease, subject to the restrictions contained in “ The Crown
Lands Alienation Act of 1876 ” and “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869.”
Lands held under special timber license are excepted from the operation of
©rdinary timber licenses.
No timber to be cut within two miles of a head station.
13. No timber shall be cut within two miles of any head station, or
within an enclosure of less extent than one thousand acres, except with the
special consent of the lessee or superintendent of the run.


Lessees may make objections to licenses being granted.
14. The lessee of a run may notify in writing to the commissioner any
reasonable* objection to any timber license being granted ; and the commis-
sioner shall furnish a report upon every such objection to the'Minister for
Lands, for the determination of the Governor in Council.
Timber licenses not to extend to toicn, timber, and other reserves, dfc., except
in special cases.
15. Timber licenses will not extend to town, timber, or other reserves,
or to lands surveyed for sale, except under special authority in each case.
License to be exhibited when demanded.
16. Every person holding a license to cut timber must exhibit such
license whenever ho is called upon to do so, to the commissioner or any
officer of the Government authorised in that behalf, or any bailiff or ranger
of Crown lands, or police constable, as well as to the occupier of any run
upon which he is cutting timber, or to the agent of such occupier. Any
person refusing to produce his license when called upon to do so, in
pursuance of this regulation, will be considered as unlicensed, and will be
prosecuted accordingly.
Timber to be removed.
17. All timber must be removed within twelve months from the time
when cut; otherwise it will be liable to be seized, forfeited, and sold on
behalf of the Crown, notwithstanding that it was cut under the authority of
a license ; pine timber must be removed within three months after it has
been cut, else it may be seized and sold as aforesaid.
Timber to be branded.
18. All timber which has been cut under any license issued by virtue of
these Regulations must be branded by the licensee with the initial letter of
his surname ; else it will be liable to be seized, forfeited, and sold on behalf
of the Crown.
Timber cut without license may be seized.
19. The Land Commissioner of the district, or other officer duly
appointed to act in that behalf, may seize any timber cut by unlicensed
persons, and any cut timber lying on Crown lands which he may have cause
to believe has been cut by a person not duly authorised to cut the same;
but in case a right to such timber shall be asserted within fourteen days
after the notice to be presently mentioned, and shall bo established to the
satisfaction of the commissioner or officer seizing the same, it shall be
restored to the claimant.
Sale thereof after due notice.
20. All such timber when seized shall be marked with the broad-arrow,
and after due notice of the seizure thereof, by a writing to be posted up at
the principal place of petty sessions in the district, shall, in case no claimant
shall appear and establish his claim within fourteen days therefrom, be there
sold; such timber having been previously removed thither, or sold for
delivery on the spot, as may bo most expedient, and subject to such
conditions of removal as may be specified at the time of such sale.
Proceeds of seizure, how dealt with.
31. In the event of any timber being seized and sold as aforesaid, the
Minister may direct that a proportion of the proceeds of the sale of timber
so seized, not exceeding one-half thereof, be paid to the commissioner,


ranger, or other officer through whose agency or information the seizure was
made ; the balance of the proceeds being accounted for and paid over in the
same manner as other public moneys.
Withdrawal of lands from operation of timber licenses.
22. The Minister for Lands may at any time, by notification in the
Gazette, exclude any specified portion of land from t,he_ operation of timber
licenses, or may prohibit, by notification as aforesaid, the_ cutting and
removing of any particular kind of timber from any such specific portion of
land.
The cutting of certain hinds of timber prohibited.
23. The cutting or removal of timber consisting of the undermentioned
trees is strictly prohibited, that is to say:—
Bunya Bunya —Araucaria Bidwillii.
Queensland Nut —Macadamia Ternifolia.
Turpentine —Eucalyptus Microcorys.
Pea Bean —Synocarpa Laurifolia.
But this prohibition does not extend to Bunya Bunya trees when standing
or growing on Crown lands within the limits of a proclaimed gold field.
The Land Commissioner of the district may also except timber reserved
for shade or ornament from the operation of timber licenses.
Cedar of less diameter than two feet not to be cut.
24. Cedar trees of a diameter less than two feet shall not be cut down
under any circumstances, either by licensees or any other persons.*'
LICENSES TO REMOTE STONE, GRAYEL, BRICK-EARTH, SHELLS,
OR OTHER MATERIAL FROM CROWN LANDS.
Licenses to dig and remove stone, gravel, <Sfc., restricted to particular
localities.
25. Licenses to dig and remove stone, gravel, brick-earth, shells, or
other similar material, will be issued in the form D, in the same manner as
timber licenses, but will be restricted to the particular locality described in
the license.
Form■ of application.
26. Applications for such licenses must bo in the form E, and must
contain a description of the locality in which the license is to be used.
Fees charged for licenses.
27. The fee chargeable for a license to dig for and remove any gravel,
stone, brick-earth, shells, or other material from off Crown lands shall be
£8 per annum, and the license fee to be paid by persons engaged in making
bricks shall he £4 per annum, chargeable on each mould f
License to be subject to the same general regulations as timber licenses.
28. In all other particulars, these licenses will be subject to the regula-
tions applicable to timber licenses.
* Note.— By Regulation of sth December, 1879, Cedar trees of a less girth than 7 feet 6 inches at
6 feet from the ground are not to be cut,— Vide page 79.
t By Regulation of 36th July, 1877, the fee payable for a license to dig and remove stone, *e.,
is £o per annum.— Vide page 76.


Employees’ Licenses,
Form of application
29. Applications for employers’ licenses to cut timber on Cfown lands
are to be addressed, in the form F, to the Land Commissioner for the district
where the license is to be used.
Conditions of employer s license.
30. The conditions of an employer’s license are as follows : —That the
licensee shall endorse on the license the name of such person as he may
desire to employ ; and the person whose name is so endorsed thereon will be
authorised to cut timber from Crown lands in the same manner as the holder
of a personal license under these Regulations.
Employer may change the persons employed by him.
31. Whenever the licensee desires to change the person employed by
him, he shall erase the former name, and enter the new name, and counter-
sign the entry.
Licenses to he subject to the same general regulations as timber licenses.
32. In all other respects, employers’ licenses will be subject to the
regulations applicable to timber licenses.
Special Timbee Licenses.
Application for licenses to be made to District Land Commissioner.
33. Application for special licenses to cut and remove timber from
Crown lands must be made to the Land Commissioner for the district, in
the form H. The application shall contain a clear and sufficient description
of the boundaries of the land over which the applicant desires to exercise
the exclusive right of cutting limber, and shall also be accompanied by a
diagram from actual survey, showing the boundaries of the land applied for,
as marked on the ground by a licensed surveyor.
License to be paid at time of application.
34. A license fee of f£l5J fifteen pounds for each square mile must be
paid by the applicant for a special timber license, at the time of lodging
his application; and if it shall appear that the issue of a license is unobjec-
tionable, the Land Commissioner, after having submitted the application,
with his report, for the approval of the Minister for Lands, will, on receiving
such approval, grant the license.*
Land Commissioner may amend boundaries.
35. It shall be competent for the Laud Commissioner to amend the
description of boundaries, or the area to be inserted in the license, or to
exclude any land which it may appear expedient to withhold from license.
Rights of holders of special licenses.
36. A special timber license will entitle the holder thereof lo the exclu*
sive right to cut and remove timber from the lands comprised in such license:
Provided that the rights of lessees for pastoral purposes shall not be inter-
fered with, and that timber required for public works may be removed by
any person duly authorised.
* Note.—Clause 34 vras rescinded by regulation of 29tb October, IS7B. —Vide page 78.


Personal authorities for employ of labour.
37. The holder of a special license will receive personal authorities for
(3) three men for each square mile comprised in the special license ; and if
he shall desire to employ a larger number of men, he must obtain additional
authorities, and shall pay a further sum of five pounds (£5) for each ad-
ditional man.
Penalties for refusal to produce authority.
38. The holder of a special license shall endorse on each personal autho-
rity the name of the person employed by him thereunder in cutting or
removing timber from the land comprised in his license; and such authority
shall be produced by the person so authorised to the Land Commissioner or
other person authorised in that behalf, or ranger or bailiff of Crown lands,
or any police constable, whenever it may be required; and any person
refusing to produce sucb .authority to cut timber shall be deemed to be
unlicensed and unauthorised, and liable to the penalties prescribed by law.
Duration of license.
39. Special licenses will be in force during the current year ending on
the 31st day of December; but if issued after the 30th day of June, only
one-half the fees shall be charged.
Renewal of license.
40. Special licenses may be renewed for each succeeding year, on appli-
cation, accompanied by the full amount of license fee, being lodged with the
Land Commissioner, not less than one month prior to the expiration of the
current year of the license; but a renewal of a special license may be
refused, if it shall appear expedient that the land should be withheld from
special license, or that any objection exists as to the character of the licensee.
Transfer of license.
41. Special licenses may be transferred on application to the Minister,
through the Land Commissioner, and payment of a fee of one pound (£1).
Lands held under special timber licenses not available for selection.
42. Lands comprised within a special timber license shall not be avail-
able for conditional purchase or homestead selection under “ The Crown
Lands Alienation Act of 187 G.”
Timber cross-cut by ordinary timber licensees before issue of special licenses
may be removed.
43. When any portion of land is included in a special timber license
under these Regulations, all timber which has been fallen thei'eon, and cross-
cut into lengths ready for removal by the holder of an ordinary license,
may he removed by such person within three months, if pine timber, and
within twelve months if hardwood or cedar timber, provided that he continues
to hold a license; but all timber which has only been fallen and not cross-cut
into proper lengths prior to the issue of the special license, will be deemed to
be the property of the holder of the special timber license.
Lands may be excluded from operation of special licenses.
44. The Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council, may
exclude any district or portion of country from the operation of special
licenses to cut and remove timber.
Note. —Clause 43 was'rescindccl by regulation of 29tli October, 1878. Vide page 78.


GrENEBAL.
Existing licenses to continue in force.
45. All existing licenses sliall continue to be in force, subject to tlxe
conditions imposed by these Regulations.
SCHEDULES.
Application for a License to cut Timber* including cedar and pine wood, on
Crown lands.
I hereby make application to cut timber*
including cedar and pine wood, on the vacant Crown lands in the district of
for the ending 187 .
We, the undersigned, beg leave to recommend the above-named
as a fit and proper person to hold the license applied for.
To the Land Commissioner at
Return of all
Aqent at
the
Applications for
Timber
, from the
other Licenses lodged with the Land
dag of 18 ,to
, both inclusive.
day of
Applicant’s Name.
Description of License
whether general, or for
hardwood only, or for stone,
brick-earth, &c.
Signature of Land Commissioner |
and Land Agent }
Queensland.
Tee received in
each. case.
License to cut Timber,* including cedar and pine toood , on Crown lands.
Whereas , of , appears to me, the Land
Commissioner for the District of , to be a fit and proper person
to hold a license to cut timber,* including cedar and pine wood, growing on
the waste lands of the Crown, situated in the district of in the
Colony of Queensland ; and whereas the stipulated fee of pounds has
been duly paid for such license for the period of months, into the hands
of the Land Agent, as hereunder acknowledged by him : Now I, the Land Commis-
sioner aforesaid, do hereby, in pursuance of the Regulations in that behalf made,
bearing date the Ist day of March, 1877, authorise the said to fell,
cut, saw, split, and remove any timber,* including cedar and pine wood, growing
on waste lands of the Crown in the said district of . This license
to be in force for the space of calendar months from the
* The word “not” to be inserted, as the case may require.


18 , and no longer. Excepting always from the operation of this license the trees
known as the Bunya Bunya, Queensland Nut, Turpentine, and Pea Bean, and all
timber growing or standing upon Crown lands within a distance of two miles of a
surveyed railway line, or from any Timber or other Government Reserve. Provided
always that this exception shall not apply to the Bunya Bunya tree when growing
or standing upon Crown lands included within the boundaries of a proclaimed gold
field.
Given under my hand, this day of one thousand
eight hundred and
Land Commissioner.
£ :
Received the sum of as the fee of the above license.
Land Agent.
Endorsement.
Clauses 13 and 15 of the Regulations for Timber Licenses, established on the
Ist March, 1877 :
Clause 13. —No timber shall be cut within two miles of any head station, or
withli an enclosure of less extent than one thousand acres, except with the special
consent of the lessee or superintendent of the run.
Clause 15.—Timber licenses will not extend to towm, timber, or other reserves,
or to lands surveyed for sale, except under special authority in each case.
Queensland.
License to dig and remove* from Crown Lands.
Whereas _ ,of , appears tojme,
the Land Commissioner for the District of , to be a fit and
proper person to hold a license to dig and remove* from Crowm lands
in the district of , in the Colony of Queensland ; and whereas the
stipulated fee of pounds has been duly paid for such license for the
period of months, into the hands of the Land Agent, as hereunder
acknowledged by him : Now I, the Land Commissioner as aforesaid, do hereby, in
pursuance of the Regulations in that behalf made, bearing date the Ist day of March,
1877, authorise the said to dig and remove any*
from the Crown lands particularly described in the annexed .schedule. This license
is to be in force for the space of calendar months from the
day of ,18 , and no longer.
Given under my hand, this day of one thousand
eight hundred and
£ ; :
Land Commissioner.
Received the sum of pounds, as the fee of the above
license.
Land Agent.
Schedule,
Licensee:
Nature of material to be dug and removed under this license :
Districts :
Description of the locality in which this license is to be used :
• State whether stone, brick-earth, gravel, shells, or other material, as the case may be.


Application for a License to dig and remove* from Crown Lands in
the district of
I, of , hereby apply for a license to dig
and remove* from the under described Crown landsf
for the ending the 188 .
[Signature of Applicant f
The Land Commissioner at
Application for Employer's License to cut Timber on Crown Lands.
I, , of , do hereby apply
that an Employer’s License to cut and remove timber J including
cedar and pine wood, from the vacant Crown lands in the district of
for the ending ,18 , may be issued to me, in accordance with the
Regulations.
Given under may hand, this day of 18
To the Land Commissioner at
Queensland.
Employer's License to cut Timber on Crown Lands,
Whereas , of , appears to me, the Land
Commissioner of the district of to be a fit and proper person to hold
an Employer’s License to cut and remove timberj including cedar and
pine wood, from the vacant Crown Lands in the district of ; and
whereas the stipulated fee of pounds has been duly paid for such
license into the hands of the Land Agent, as hereunder acknowledged by him;
Now I, the Land Commissioner aforesaid, do hereby authorise the said
to employ the person wdiose name may be endorsed hereunder by the said licensee,
to cut and remove any including cedar and pine wood, growing on
the vacant Crown lands in the said district of , from the date hereof, until
the , and no longer. Excepting always from the operation
of this license the trees known as the Bunya Bunya, the Queensland Nut, the
Turpentine, and the Pea Bean, and all timber growing or standing upon Crowm
lands within a distance of two miles of a surveyed railway line or from any Timber
or other Government Reserve. Provided always that this exception shall not apply
to the Bunya Bunya tree when growing or standing upon Crown lands included
within the boundaries of a proclaimed gold field.
Given under my hand, this day of , one
thousand eight hundred and
Land Commissioner.
Received the sum of pounds as the fee of the above license.
Land Agent.
Name of Person Employed :
* State whether stone, brick-earth, gravel, shells, or other material, as the case may ee.
t Describe the locality within which the license is to be used.
} Th e word " not ” to be inserted, as the case may require.


District of
No.
Special License lo cut and remove Timber from Crown Lands.
This is to certify that , of is duly licensed to cut
and remove timber from the lands described in the schedule hereto annexed, from
thb (o the 31st day of December, 18 , in accordance with
Regulations gpverning special timber licenses.
Given under my hand, this day of 18 .
Land Commissioner.
Schedule.
District of
rrrrjnp 1 v r.u “
Area in square miles :
■jn; ' : i:\ .ni i ■ ■ » . o ;■! •
Description of Boundaries.
Endorsement.
Clauses 13 and 15 of the Regulations for Timber Licenses established on
the Ist March, 1877 :
Clause 13. —No timber shall be cut within two miles of any head station, or
within an enclosure of less extent than one thousand acres, except with the special
consent of the lessee or superintendent of the run.
Clause 15.—Timber licenses will not extend to town, timber, or other reserves,
or to lands surveyed for sale, except under special authority in each case.
Application for Special License to cut timber on Crown Lands.
I, of , do hereby apply for a Special
License to cut and remove timber from the lands described in the schedule hereto
annexed, and do 1 also request that personal authorities to employ
men thereon may be issund to me, in accordance with the existing Regulations.
Given under my hand, this day of 18 .
The Land Commissioner.
Schedule.
District of
8 a o£)
Area in square miles:
Description of Boundaries.
■' i ' f il■ ■. I! 11; • '
■ ‘r r.'< >' ) . ,:j
j:
? f rA | .... • ~, ,jr ri i! ■ \ [if| % ■, \ ;J)
District of
Fersonal authority to cut Timber under a Special Timber License.
This Is to certify that , of > being the holder of
Special Timber License No. , is authorised to employ the person whose name
is endorsed hereon, to eiit and remove timber from the lands comprised in the said


license, from the
day of 18
Given under my hand, this
day of
to the
day of
Land Commissioner.
Description of land included in License.
The name of the person employed by the holder of the special license is to be written below; and
if the person employed be changed, the new name is to be written under the previous one, as
the last name will only be recognised.
Name of Beeson Employed :
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
first day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and seventy-seven, and in the fortieth year of Her
Majesty's reign.
By Command,
JOHN DOUGLAS.
God Sate the Queen !
PROCLAMATION.
By His Excellency Sir Aethue Edward Kennedy, Knight Commander
of the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and
[l.s.] St. George, Companion of the Most Honourable
A. E. Kennedy, Order of the Bath, Governor and Commander-in-
Govet'nor. Chief of the Colony of Queensland and its
Dependencies.
IN pursuance of the power in me vested, I, Sir Arthur Edward
Kennedy, the Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the Executive
Council, do, by this my Proclamation, notify and proclaim that clause
twenty-seven of the Regulations, proclaimed on the Ist day of March, 1877,
relative to the cutting and removal of timber, and to the removal of stone,
gravel, brick-earth, shells,, or other materials from Crown lands, is hereby
cancelled, and that the following Regulation has been established, under the
provisions of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876,” in lieu thereof.
Regulation.
The fee chargeable for a license to dig for and remove any gravel,
stone, brick-cartji, shells, or other material from off Crown lands shall be
£5 per annum, and the license fee to be paid by persons engaged in making
bricks shall be £4 per annum, chargeable on each mould.
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
twenty-sixth day of July, in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-seven, and in the forty-first year of
Her Majesty’s reign.
By Command,
JOHN DOUGLAS.
God Save the Queen !


PROCLAMATION
By His Excellency Sir Aethue Edwaed Kennedy, Knight Commander
of the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and
[l.s.] St. George, Companion of the Most Honourable
A. E. Kennedy, Order of the Bath, Governor and Gommander-in-
Governor. Chief of the Colony of Queensland and its
Dependencies.
IN pursuance of the power in me rested, I, Sir xlethub Edwaed Kennedy,
the Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the Executive Council,
do, by this my Proclamation, notify and proclaim that the following
Regulations prohibiting the cutting of certain Timber have been estab-
lished under the provisions of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
Regulations.
Pine of less diameter than eighteen inches not to he cut.
1. Pine trees of a diameter less than eighteen inches shall not be cut
down under any circumstances, either by licensees or any other persons.
Standing timber on reserves not to he cut for frewood.
2. No standing timber shall be cut down for firewood under any
circumstances upon any land reserved, set apart, or dedicated for public
purposes.
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
twenty-second day of June, in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-eight, and in the forty-second year of
Her Majesty’s reign.
By Command,
JAMES F. GARRICK.
God Save the Queen !
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 20th September, 1878.
CYPRESS PINE TIMBER.
It is hereby notified for public information, that the Regulation
prohibiting the cutting of certain Timber, established by Proclamation
dated 22nd June, 1878, under the provisions of “ The Croton Lands
Alienation Act of 1876,” shall not apply to Cypress Pine Timber, which has
been excepted from its operation.
JAMES F. GARRICK.


PROCLAMATION.
By His Excellency Sir Aethue Edwaed Kennedy, Knight Commander
of the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and
fl.s.] St. George, Companion of the Most Honourable
A. E. Kennedy, Order of the Bath, Governor and Commander-in-
Governor. Chief of the Colony of Queensland and its
Dependencies.
IN pursuance of the power in me vested, I, Sir Aethtje Edwaed
Kennedy, the Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the Executive
Council, do, by this my Proclamation, notify and proclaim that the 34th and
43rd clauses of “ The Timber Regulations,” proclaimed on the Ist March,
1877, relating to applications for special Timber Licenses, are hereby
rescinded, and the following Regulations have been established in lieu
thereof, under the provisions of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of
1876.”
Regulations.
License fee to he paid at time of application.
43a, A license fee of fifteen pounds (£l5) for each square mile must be
paid by the_ applicant for a special Timber License at the time of lodging
his .application, and the Land Commissioner shall thereupon (unless the
issue of such license appears for some special reason to be objectionable)
grant to the applicant a provisional license in the form K appended to these
Regulations, and shall submit the application with his report thereon for the
approval of the Minister for Lands. Upon such approval being given, the
Commissioner shall grant a special license accordingly, but if such approval
is refused the provisional license shall have no further effect.
Notice of the issue of every provisional license shall be published in the
Gazette and in a newspaper circulating in the neighbourhood.
A provisional license shall not confer on the applicant any right to cut
timber on the land comprised in the application, nor shall it operate t®
prohibit any holder of an ordinary license from cross-cutting any timber
previously felled by him thereon and branded in accordance with the
Regulations, but in all other respects it shall during its continuance have
the same operation as a special timber license.
Timber lawfully felled and branded may he removed .
43a. Any timber which has been lawfully felled and branded by the
holder of a timber license upon any land berore the is§jie of a provisional
license for such land, may be removed by him within three months after the
issue of the provisional license in the case of pine timber, and within twelve
months after such issue in the case of hardwood or cedar timber, provided
that he still continues to hold a license. But all timber not removed within
these periods respectively shall become the property of the holder of the
special license.
K.
Provisional License to occupy Crown Lands for which an application for Special
License to cut timber has been made.
This is to certify that has applied for a special license to cut and
remove timber from the land described in the schedule annexed hereto, and that he


is entitled to occupy said land, and to stop the cutting down of all timber on same,
landing the approval of the Minister for Lands of the application for the special
license as aforesaid.
Given under my hand, at this day of 18
Land Commissioner.
INote. —All timber cut down previous to the issue of this license may be
Temoved or cross-cut, subject to the provisions of the Regulations proclaimed on the
29th October, 1878.
Schedule.
District of
Area in square miles
Description of Boundaries.
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
twenty-ninth day of October, in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-eight, and in the forty-second year of
Her Majesty’s reign.
By Command,
JOHN DOUGLAS.
God Save the Queen !
PROCLAMATION.
By His Excellency Sir Arthur Edward Kennedy, Knight Commander
of the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and
[l.s.] St. George, Companion of the Most Honourable
A. E. Kennedy, Order of the Bath, Governor and Commander-in-
Governor. Chief of the Colony of Queensland and its
Dependencies.
IN pursuance of the power in me vested, I, Sir Arthur Edward Kennedy,
the Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the Executive Council,
Jo, by this my Proclamation, notify and proclaim that the 24th clause of
“The Timber Regulations,” proclaimed on the Ist March, 1877, relating to
rutting of Cedar, is hereby rescinded, and the following Regulation has been
established in lieu thereof under the provisions of “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1876.”
Regulation.
Cedar of less girth than seven feet six inches not to he cut.
24a. Cedar trees of a less girth than seven feet six inches in circum-
ference, at six feet from the ground, shall not be cut down under any
sjrcnmstances, either by licensees or any other persons.
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Toowoomba,
this fifth day of December, in the year of our. Lord one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-nine, and in the forty-third year of Her
Majesty’s reign.
By Command,
P. PERKINS.
God Save the Queen!


PROCLAMATION.
By His Excellency tlie Honourable Joshua Peter Bell, President of
[l.s.] tlie Legislative Council of the Colony of Queens-
Joshua P. Belt, land, and Administrator of the Government
Administrator. thereof.
IN pursuance of the power in me vested, I, the Honourable Joshua Peter
Bell, the Administrator aforesaid, with the advice of the Executive
Council, do, by this my Proclamation, notify and proclaim that the Regula-
tion proclaimed on the 23rd January, 1880, prohibiting the cutting of certain
Timber, is hereby rescinded, and the following Regulation has been estab-
lished in lieu thereof, under the provisions of “ The Crown Lands Alienation
Act of 1876.”
Regulation.
Kauri Pine of less diameter than two feet, and Hoop Pine of less diameter
than one foot and nine inches, not to he cut.
Kaurie Pine-trees (Dammar a robusta and Dammara HUH) of a diameter
less than two feet at five feet from the ground, and Hoop Pine-trees
(Araucaria Cunninqhamii) of a diameter less than one foot and nine inches
at five feet from the ground, shall not be cut down under any circumstances,
either by licensees or any other persons.
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
thirtieth day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and eighty, and in the forty-third year of Her
Majesty’s reign.
By Command,
P. PERRINS.
Gdd Save the Queen!


INSTRUCTIONS TO COMMISSIONERS.
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 24th February, 1877.
Sib,
As “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876 ” will come into
operation on the Ist proximo, it is desirable that the Land Commissioners
and Land Agents should be made acquainted -with the particular points in
which its provisions differ from those of the Act of 1868 ; I have therefore
subjoined, under the several headings which it is desirable to advert to, the
necessary instructions for your guidance, which I trust will supply all that
is required for working the Act.
Registration of Applications.
1. The procedure in regard to the lodgment and acceptance of appli-
cations will mainly continue the same as heretofore. There will be an
Application Book, called in the Act “ The Eegister of Applications,” in
which the applicant or his duly constituted attorney will require to sign his
name, for the purpose of establishing his right of priority over any subse-
quent application. The book used as a Register of Selections under the Act
of 1868 (and supplied by the Audit Office), in which all payments are
entered, is to be used for the entries under the new Act, —a strong line being
drawn below the last entry under the Act of 1868, and the words “The
Ceown Lands Alienation Act of 1876” being written immediately above
the first entry under the last-mentioned Act. The numbers of the selections
under the Act of 1876 will follow the last number under the Act of 1868, in
consecutive order ; as, I believe, it will be found more convenient to have a
continuous series of numbers in each district, than to commence a new series
under each Act. A Register of the Bailiffs on each selection, which can be
posted up from the agreements required to be lodged under the provisions of
sub-secdon 4 of section 28, will also require to be kept for the purpose of
reference when the selectors apply for their certificates.
Lands open to Selection.
2. The only lands open to selection under the Act on the Ist March,
when the Act of 1876 comes into operation, are —Ist. The unselectcd country
lands in the Settled Districts; 2nd. The unselected lands within Homestead
Areas; and 3rd. The unselected country lands within Town Reserves open
respect!voly to selection under the Act of 1868 at the time of i's repeal. The
upset prices and maximum areas allowed to be selected of these several
classes of land will be proclaimed on the Ist March, and the information
contained therein will be communicated to you by wire before that date, so
that you may be able to receive applications on the day the new Act comes
into operation. _ .
Portions of the lands resumed from runs during the last session of
Parliament will also be declared open to selection at dates which will be
specified in the proclamations. Further information in regard to these
lands will be conveyed to you from time to time.


Selections under Act of 1876.
3. Persons who hold selections under the Act of 1868 may make applica-
tions for adjoining land subject to the restriction as regards boundaries
contained in the Act, and provided also that the maximum area of 5,120
acres is not exceeded. Selectors, however, who have resided personally on
their selections, whether under the Acts of 1868 or 1876, for a year, may
make another selection subject to the maximum area as above not being
exceeded. In such cases the declaration in accordance with Form Gin the
regulations must be made by the applicant and be attached to the applica-
tion. With these exceptions, no person can hold more than one selection
under the Act of 1876.
Date of Proclamation must Toe affixed to each Application to select.
4. As the upset price and maximum area allowed to be selected of all
land open to selection under the Act requires to be proclaimed, it will be
necessary to give the date of proclamation on all applications to select, in
order that a proper check may be established on the work of the Land
Agents. This will only apply to conditional purchases, as the upset price
of Homesteads is fixed by the Act and will not be affected by any procla-
mation of upset prices, whether within or outside Homestead areas.
Simultaneous Applications.
5. When there are simultaneous applications to select the same land, it
will be necessary to offer the land at auction amongst the applicants, when
the applications are dealt with at the Land Court. In the 7th and Bth
sections of the general regulations under the Act you will find the procedure
defined. When the applications comprise the same land there will be no
difficulty in dealing with them ; but in cases where numerous applications
overlap, it will require great care on your part to ascertain the particular
areas which will require to be competed for, —the principle of the Act being
that only that land which is applied for simultaneously should be submitted
to auction. This is manifestly fair, as there may be instances in which a
small selection overlaps a very large one, an'd under such circumstances it
would not be equitable to require the applicant for the larger area to compete
for the remainder of the land included in his selection, for which he is the
only applicant.
In dealing with applications which overlap each other to a small extent,
you will endeavour to adjust, if possible, the boundaries, without prejudice
to the interests of any of the selectors, with the view of securing to each a
definite area, and so get rid of the necessity of submitting the land to com-
petition; but this will not authorise you to ignore the rights of any of the
selectors, nor to take such action as will prove detrimental to the revenue.
When an applicant acquires the title to the land included in an overlap
by competition, the rent ,of the selection will be raised proportionately to
the area competed for, the balance of the land being leased at the upset
price fixed by the proclamation.
You will perceive that Homestead Selectors are entitled to priority
over Conditional Purchase Selectors when they are simultaneous applicants.
When Homestead Selectors are themselves simultaneous applicants, the
land will require to be submitted to auction in the same way as in the case
of Conditional Purchases.


Notice of Withdrawal to he forwarded to Pastoral Lessee.-
6. In the case of lands resumed from runs, subject to the provisions of
“ The Settled Districts Pastoral Leases Act of 1876,” you will cause the
Land Agent to forward a notification of withdrawal (a supply of which will
be sent to you) to the Lessee of the Run, as prescribed in sections 6 and 7
of that Act.
Lmprovements on Lands selected.
7. When improvements are upon lands open to selection, you will
proceed according to the usage adopted under the Act of 1868, unless the
lands have been resumed subject to “ The Settled Districts Pastoral Leases
Act of 1876,” as in the case of the resumptions to be proclaimed on the Ist
March, or the runs hitherto resumed, as per margin, when you will adopt
the course prescribed in sub-sections 8,9, and 10 of section 4 of that Act,
to which I beg to draw your attention.
In the case of arbitrations for the purpose of determining the value of
improvements or otherwise, under “ Lite Settled Districts Pastoral Leases
Act of 1876,” the forms to be used are similar to the forms 11, K, L, M in
the General Regulations, with the substitution of the title of the above Act
instead of “ The Croton Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
Business in connection with Selections under Act of 1868.
8. Any business requiring to be transacted in connection with selections
under the Act of 1868, in the case of applications for certificates or other-
wise, may be dealt with at your monthly courts, gazetted under the new
Act. A notification to that effect will appear in the Gazette.
Timber Licenses,
9. The timber regulations established under the Act of 18/6 provide
for the issue of licenses by the Land Commissioner instead of by the
Benches of Magistrates. The regulations sufficiently define the duties
which devolve upon you in regard thereto, and I would suggest that you
should lose no time in acquainting yourself with the nature of the work
placed in your hands, so that no inconvenience will be experienced by the
public, and also, that by giving a careful attention to this branch of your
duties, the land revenue may be increased. In a separate letter I have
drawn attention to this subject, and have solicited suggestions winch your
local knowledge may enable you to suppl} 7 .
Bailiff of Crown Lands.
10. It is proposed to place the Bailiffs of Crown lands more under your
control and supervision than they have hitherto been. These officers will
therefore in all cases receive their instructions and forward their reports
through you. This will be understood as referring to the general conduct
of business, and will not preclude the Minister from directing the bailitt,
should occasion arise, from executing any order he may give him.
Powers of two Justices.
11. You will observe that by the Act you are empowered to exercise the
some powers and authority as any two Justices of the Peace. Tins will not
entitle you to deal with any cases out of your jurisdiction as Land Commis-
sioner, but is for the purpose of placing you in the position of being able to
enforce the attendance of witnesses, and to uphold order in your Court. A
form of summons is supplied in the Regulations which is to be used when
the attendance of witnesses is required.


12. In conclusion, I have to request that you will read the Act and the
Regulations attentively, and also examine the several forms, so that you may
he able to supply all necessary information respecting the Act to any person
making inquiries on the subject. Supplies of these forms will be forwarded
as soon as they are printed, as well as maps showing the resumed lands which
it is proposed to declare open to selection in April. _ (
I also forward copies of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876
and “ Settled Districts Pastoral Lands AH of 1870,” together with drafts of
the Regulations which will be proclaimed on the Ist of March.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
W. ALCOCK TULLY,
Under Secretary.


LAND AGENTS’ DISTRICTS.
BRISBANE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the mouth of the Logan River, and bounded thence by
that river westerly and southerly to the south-west corner of portion ISO,
parish of Moffatt; then by the south boundary of that portion bearing east
thirty-four chains seventy-five links ; then by the west boundary of portion
191 bearing south fourteen chains ; then by a line bearing east to the water-
shed separating the Logan River from the Albert River; then by said
watershed southerly about sixty chains ; then by a line bearing cast crossing
the Albert River at the north boundary of portion 4a, parish of Wickham t
to the watershed separating the Albert River from Rimpama Creek and
other waters; then by said watershed southerly to the range separating
the Logan River from the Tweed, Richmond, and Clarence Rivers ; then by
said range westerly; then by the watershed separating Teviot Brook from
the Logan River, and the watershed separating Teviot Brook from Crow’s
Creek, to the junction of said creeks ; then by Teviot Brook to the junction
of Moolooman Creek, and by that creek upwards to Mount Flinders; then
by the Mount Flinders Range to the head of Woogaroo Creek, and by that
creek to its confluence with the Brisbane River; then by a spur range to
D’Aguilar’s Range, and by that range to the northern watershed of the
Maroochydore River, and by that watershed north-easterly to the north-west
corner of G. P. Goodchap’a selection 1057 on the Gympie register ; then by
the north and east boundaries of that selection east and south to the north-
east comer of selection 1132, also on the Gympie register ; then by the east
boundary of that selection south to its south-east corner; then south to
selection 1130, Gympie register; then by the north and east boundaries of
that selection east and south to its south-east corner ; then by a line south-
easterly to the north-west corner of portion 71, parish of Maroochy ; then by
the north boundaries of that portion and portion 20 cast to the north-east
corner of the last-named portion ; then by the eastern boundary of that
portion southerly to a point west from the north-west corner of portion 73 ;
then by a line and the north boundary of portion 73 east to its north-east
corner ; then by part of the east boundary of that portion south to portion
81; and then by the north boundary of that portion and a line east to the
sea-coast; and thence by the sea-coast and the’shore of Morcton Bay
southerly to the Logan River, being the point of commencement.
BEENLEIGH LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the mouth of the Logan River, and bounded thence by
that river westerly and southerly to the south-west corner of portion No.
186, parish of Moffatt; then by the south boundary of that portion bearing
east thirty-four chains seventy-five links ; then by the west boundary or
portion 191 bearing south fourteen chains ; then by a line bearing cast to tha
watershed separating the Logan River from the Albert River; then by said
watershed southerly about sixty chains ; then by a line bearing east cross-
ing the Albert River at the north boundary of portion 4a, parish of Wick-
ham, and terminating at the watershed separating the Albert River from


Rimpama Creek and other M aters ; then by said watershed southerly to the
south boundary of Queensland; then by said boundary easterly to Point
Danger ; and thence by the sea-coast and' shore of Moreton Bay northerly
to the point of commencement.
IPSWICH LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the junction of Woogaroo Creek with the Brisbane
River, and bounded thence by that creek upwards to its head in Mount
Flinders Range, and by that range to Mount Flinders ; then by Moolooman
Creek downwards to its junction with Teviot Brook, and by that brook to
the junction of Crow’s Creek; then by the watershed separating Teviot
Brook.from Crow’s Creek and the Logan River southerly to the range sepa-
rating Teviot Brook and the Bremer River from the Clarence River; then
by the said range westerly; then by the Great Dividing Range northerly to
where it junctions -w ith the Mistake Mountains; then by those mountains
and the watershed between Laidley and Blackfellows’ Creeks northerly to
the head of Sandy Creek; then by that creek downwards to the Southern
and Western Railway; then by that railway north-westerly to the south-east
corner of portion 79, parish of Gatton; then by the eastern boundaries of
portions 79, 77, and 76, in said parish, to Lockyer’s Creek; then by that
creek upwards to the boundary between the parishes of Lockyer and
Clarendon; then by that boundary, being the western boundaries of por-
tions 211, 196, 194, 193, 184, 183, 177, 176, 174, 171, and 170, parish of
Clarendon, and by a line north crossing Buaraba Creek to the range sepa-
rating Buaraba Creek from Lsk or Sandy Creek; then by that range
westerly and the range forming the boundary between Eskdale or heads of
Cressbrook and Mount Esk, Cressbrook and Colinton Runs, northerly to
Hukinenda Creek ; then by that creek downwards to its junction with Emu
Creek, and by that creek upwards to the j unction of Googa Googa Creek ;
then by a spur range to Blackbutt Range, and by that range northerly to
Cooyar Creek, between the confluence of Paradise and Taromeo Creeks;
then by Cooyar Creek upwards to the junction of Taromeo Creek; then by
the watershed separating Paradise from Oakey Creek north-westerly to the
Main Dividing Range; then by that range and the range separating the
waters flowing into the Mary River from those of the Brisbane River
northerly and easterly to D’Aguilar’s Range, and by that range southerly
and a spur range to the confluence of Woogaroo Creek with the Brisbane
River, the point of commencement.
HE LID ON LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on Lockyer’s Creek where the boundary between the
parishes of Clarendon and Lockyer intersects the creek,'then by that
boundary, being the western boundaries of portions 211, 196, 194, 193, 184,,
183, 177, 176, 174, 171, 170, parish of Clarendon, and by a line north
crossing Buaraba Creek to the range separating Buaraba Creek from Esk or
Sandy Creek ; then by that range westerly, and by the range forming the
boundary between Eskdale or heads of Cressbrook and Mount Esk,
Cressbrook and Colinton Runs, northerly to Nukinenda Creek; then by
that creek downwards to its junction with Emu Creek, and by that creel
upwards to its junction with Googa Googa Creek ; then by a spur range to
Blackbutt Range, and by that range and the range forming the south-east
watershed of Cooyar Creek, south-westerly to the Main Dividing Range;


then by that range southerly to the northern boundary of the Toowoomba
Agricultural Reserve; then by the northern, eastern, and southern boun-
daries of that reserve, and the eastern boundary of Drayton Town Reserve
southerly to the Main Range, and by the Main Dividing Range south-
easterly to where it junctions with the Mistake Mountains ; then by those
mountains and the watershed between Laidley and Blackfellows’ Greeks
northerly to the head of Sandy Creek; then by that creek downwards to
the Southern and Western Railway; then by that railway north-westerly
to the south-east corner of portion 79, parish of Gatton; then by the
eastern boundaries of portions 79, 77, and 70 in said parish to Lockyer’s
Creek ; then by that creek upwards to the boundary between the parishes of
Lockyer and Clarendon, the point of commencement.
TOOWOOMBA LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the Main Range, and bounded on the north-west and
west by the north-western and western boundaries of Rosalie Plains Run ;
thence by part of the southern boundary of same run easterly, by the
eastern boundary of Jondaryan Run, the northern boundary of Prairie East
Run, the eastern boundary of Prairie West Run southerly, by part of the
south-west boundary of same north-westerly, by the south boundary of
Cecil Plains Run westerly to the Condamine River, by the Condamine
River upwards to the south-east corner of selection 115 D.R.; by the
southern boundary of that selection and a line in continuation westerly
to the range separating Condamine River waters from those of the
Macintyrc River; by that range southerly to the south corner of Tumma-
ville ten years’ lease; thence by the south-east boundary of that lease
north-easterly to the south boundary of P.P. IY; by part of the south and
west boundaries of that portion west and north to Condamine River; by that
river upwards to the west corner of W.R. 96; by the north-west boundary
of that selection north-easterly to the north branch of Condamine River;
thence by the north branch and by the Condamine River upwards to the
confluence of King’s Creek ; by King’s Creek upwards to north-east corner
of portion 1, parish of King’s Creek; thence by part of the east boundary of
tbat portion south and by the northern and eastern boundaries of P.P. LXXX,
XLI 111, XLIX; by the southern boundaries of 90, 91,92,101,102,103, parish
of Stephens; by the east boundary of 103; by the south boundaries of 75, 72,
71, 68, 188, 122, 123, 131, 132, parish of Elphinstone, easterly to Warwick
Railway ; by that railway northerly to the north-west corner of portion
186, parish of Allora; by the northern boundaries of 186, 201, 200, 199,
198, 197, 196, 195, and by a line east to the south-east corner of portion 545,
parish of Clifton; thence by the south-east bouudaries of selections 307, 86,
290, 305, W.R. to the east corner of 305 ; thence by the watershed between
King’s and Dalrymple Creeks easterly to the Main Range; on the east by
the Main Range northerly, by the eastern boundary of the Drayton Town
Reserve, the southern, eastern, and northern boundaries of the Toowoomba
Agricultural easterly, northerly, and westerly to the Main Range;
and thence by the Main Range northerly to the point of commencement.
DALBY LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the head of Goorangah Creek, and bounded thence on
the north-east and north by the Main Range northerly and westerly to the
range dividing Charley’s Creek from Dogwood Creek; on the west by that
range southerly to the junction of Charley’s Creek with the Condamine


River; thence by a lino south-easterly to the head of Kogan Creek ; thence-
by the range dividing the Conclatnine waters from the Moonie and Weir
Rivers waters southerly to the southern boundary of Cecil Plains Run ; by
that boundary easterly, being a line along the southern boundaries of selec-
tions 120, 110 D.R., to the Condamine River; by the Condamino River
downwards and by the south boundary of Cecil Plains ten years’ lease
east to the south-west boundary of Prairie West Run; by part of the
west boundary of that run south-easterly, by the east boundary of same run
north, by the north-cast boundary of Prairie East Run, by the east boun-
dary of Jondaryan Run north to the soutli boundary of Rosalie Plains
Run; by the south boundary of that run westerly, and by the west and
north-west boundaries of same run northerly and north-easterly to the Main
Range; and by the Main Range north-westerly to point of commencement.
WARWICK LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the Main Range at Maryland, and bounded on the south
by Hemes’ Range and the range separating the Condamine River waters
from those falling into the Maclntyre River westerly and northerly to the
south corner of Turamaville ten years’ lease; thence by the south-east
boundary of that lease north-easterly to the south boundary of P.P. IY ; by
part of the south and west boundaries of that portion west and north to the
Gondamine River; by that river upwards to the west corner of W.R. 96;
by the north-west boundary of that selection north-easterly to the north
branch of Condamine River; thence by the north branch and by the Con-
damine River upwards to the confluence of King’s Creek; by that creek
upwards to the north-east corner of portion 1, parish of King’s Creek;
thence by part of the cast boundary of that portion south, and by the
northern and eastern boundaries of P.P. LXXX, XLYIII, XLTX, by the
southern boundaries of portions 90, 91, 92, 101, 102, 103, parish of Stephens ;
by tTie east boundary of 103, by the south boundaries ot 75, 72, 71, 68, 118,
122, 123, 131, 132, pasish of Elphinstone, easterly to the Warwick Railway ;
b}' that railway northerly to the north-west corner of portion 186, parish
of Allora; by the northern boundaries of portions 186, 201, 200,199,198,
197, 196, 195, and by a line east to the south-east comer of portion 545,
parish of Clifton ; thence by the south-east boundaries of selections 307, 86,
290, 305, W.R., to the east corner of 305 ; thence by the watershed between
King’s and Dalrymple Creeks easterly to the Main Range ; and on the east
and south-east by the Main Range southerly and south-westerly to Maryland,
the point of commencement.
GYMPIE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the shore of Wide Bay, and bounded on the north by a
I in: bearing west to the south boundary of Tiaro Town Reserve; thence
l«j a ine bearing west to the Mary River; by that river upwards to
Manna Creek ; by that creek upwards to a point where the spur range
forming the north-east boundary of Teebar ten years’ lease meets that
crock near the south-west corner of mineral selection 1310; thence by that
(Spur range north-westerly to the range separating the Mary River from the
Burnett River ; on the west by that range southerly; on the south by the
range separating the Mary River from Brisbane River easterly and northerly
to the head of the Maroochy River; thence by the range north-easterly to
the north-west corner of G. E. Goodchap’s selection No. 1057 on the Gympie
register; then by the north and east boundaries of that selection east and


south to the north-east corner of selection No. 1132, also on the Gympie
register; then by the east boundary of that selection south to its south-east
corner; then south to selection No. 1130 on the Gympie register; then by
the north and east boundaries of that selection east and south to its south-
east corner; then by a line south-easterly to the north-west corner of por-
tion 71, parish of Maroochy; thence by the north boundaries of that portion
and portion 20 east to the north-east corner of the last-named portion;
thence by the eastern boundary of that portion southerly to a point west
from the north-west corner of portion 73; then by a line and the north
boundary of portion 73 east to its north-east corner; thence by part of the
eastern boundary of that portion south to portion 81; and thence by the
north boundary of that portion and a line east to the sea-coast; and on the
east by the sea-coast northerly to the point of commencement.
GAYNDAH LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the Great Dividing Range at the head of Boondooma
Creek, and bounded thence by the northern boundary of Boondooma Run
easterly to the Boyne River; thence by that river to the confluence of
Stuart’s River; thence by the spur range forming the northern boundary of
Proston Run easterly to the watershed between Stuart’s River and Barambah
Creek, by that watershed and a spur ridge to the confluence of Barambah and
Bonara Creeks ; thence by a spur range forming the northern boundaries of
Boouimba and Boombyjan Runs easterly to the watershed separating the
Mary River waters from those of the Burnett River; then by said Avatershed
and the eastern watershed of Degilbo Creek to a point AA’here a line from the
north-east corner of the Town Reserve at the confluence of Degilbo and
Mungore Creeks to Agnes Vale Creek at the crossing of the Maryborough
and Gladstone road crosses said watershed ; thence by a line south-west to
said north-east corner ; thence by the north boundary of same Town Reservo
west to Degilbo Creek ; thence by Degilbo Creek downwards to the Burnett
River ; thence by the Burnett River upwards to a point bearing west from
the intersection of the Gayndah and Marjdbororrgh road by the Avest boun-
dary of Degilbo Run ; then by a line west to the western watershed of Reid's
Creek ; then by said watershed and a spur ridge to the confluence of RaAV-
belle Creek and the Burnett River; then by the eastern watershed of that
creek northerly; then by the watershed separating Rawbelle Creek from
Kroombit Creek ; then by the Avatershed separating the Burnett River from
the Dawson River southerly to the Great Dividing Range, acd by said range
southerly and easterly to the point of commencement.
MARYBOROUGH LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the shore of Wide Bay, and bounded on the south by a
line bearing Avest to the south boundary of Tiaro Town Reserve ; thence by
a line west to the Mary River; by that river upwards to Manna Creek ; by
that creek upwards to a point where the spur range forming the north-east
boundary ot Teebar ten years’ lease meets that creek near the south-west
corner of mineral selection 1310; thence by that spur range north-westerly
to the range separating the Mary River from the Burnett River j on the
west by that range and by a spur range forming the eastern AA'atershed of
Degilbo Creek to a point where a line from the north-east corner of the
Town Reserve at the confluence of Degilbo and Mungore Creeks to Agnes
Yale Creek at the crossing of the Maryborough and Gladstone road crosses
said watershed ; thence by a line north-easterly to Agnes Yale or Broom’s


Creek at the said crossing; thence by that creek downwards to the Isis
Hirer; by the Isis Hirer downwards to the Bamim Hirer ; by the Burrum
Hirer downwards to the sea-coast; and by the sea-coast southerly to the
point of commencement.
BHNDABERG LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the confluence of Degilbo Creek and the Burnett Hirer,
and bounded thence by a line north-west to the range separating the waters
of the Burnett Hirer from those falling into the Kolan Hirer; thence
westerly, northerly, and easterly by the range forming the northern water-
shed of the Kolan Hirer to Double Sloping Hummock; thence by the north-
western watershed of Littabella Creek north-easterly about 800 chains in a
straight line to the Coast Heserre ; thence by the Coast Heserre northerly
to Bailie Creek ; thence by Baffle Creek downwards to the sea-coast; thence
by the sea-coast south-easterly to the Burrum River; thence by the Burrum
Hirer upwards to the Isis Hirer ; by the Isis Hirer upwards to Agnes Yale
or Broom’s Creek ; by Agnes Yale Creek upwards to the road from Mary-
borough to Gladstone ; thence by a line south-westerly to the north-east
corner of the Town Reserve at the confluence of Degilbo and Mungore
Creeks; thence by the north boundary of that reserve west to Degilbo
Creek ; and by Degilbo Creek downwards to the point of commencement.
ROCKHAMPTON LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at a tree marked bro id-arrow JP. situate at the edge of
the mangroves on the bank of a small tributary of Raglan Creek, and
bounded thence by said creek southerly to its head in the Mount Larcom
Range; then by said range and the range separating Raglan Creek from the
Calliope and Don Rivers westerlv ; then by a line bearing south-west crossing
the Don River at a tree marked X in circle and situate about one hundred
and five chains below the junction of Manton’s Creek and terminating at
the range separating the Don River from Gerrard’s Creek; then by the said
range easterly about one hundred and forty chains ; then by a line bearing
south three and a-half degrees west about thirteen and a-half miles crossing
Gerrard’s, Smoky, and Bell’s Creeks; then by a lino bearing west-south-west
crossing the Callide and Kroombit Creeks and the Lillies TVaterliole to the
range separating Kroombit Creek from the Dawson River; then by said
range northerly and by a lino west crossing the Don River at a point about
three-quarters of a mile below selection 463 R.R., being the boundary of
Calliungal Run, to Mount Spencer Range; by that range northerly to Mount
Spencer; then by the western waterhole of Gogango Creek to its junction
with the Fitzroy River; thence by a line bearing north-west to the range
separating the Mackenzie River from tributaries of the Fitzroy River below
Gogango Creek; thence by said range and the range separating the Mac-
kenzie and Isaac Rivers from waters flowing easterly to the sea, northerly
to the head of Granite Creek; thence by that creek downwards to its junction
with the River Styx; thence by the left bank of that river downwards to the
sea-coast.
GLADSTONE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at a tree marked broad-arrow JP, situate at the edge of
the mangroves on the bank of a small creek tributary to Raglan Creek, and
bounded thence by said creek southerly to its head in the Mount Larcom
Range; then by said range and the range separating Raglan Creek from
the Calliope and Don Rivers westerly; then by a line bearing south-west,


crossing die Don River at a tree marked X in circle about one hundred and
five chains below the junction of Manton’s Creek, and terminating at the
range separating the Don River from Gerrard’s Creek; then by said range
easterly about one hundred and forty chains ; then by a lino bearing south
three and a-half degrees west about thirteen and a-half miles ; then by aline
bearing west-south-west crossing the Caliide and Kroombit Creeks and the
Lillies Waferhole to the range separating Kroombit Creek from the Dawson
River; thence by said range southerly; then by the range separating
Kroombit Creek, the Boyne River, and Baffle Creek from the Barnett River
and Kolan Creek easterly to Double Sloping Hummock; thence by the
north-western watershed of Littabella Creek north-easterly about eight hun-
dred chains in a straight line to the Coast Reserve; thence by the Coast
Reserve northerly to Baffle Creek; thence by that creek to the sea-coast;
thence by fhe sea-coast north-westerly to the point of commencement,-
including the islands adjacent thereto.
ST. LAWRENCE LAND AGENT'S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the junction of Granite Creek with the Styx River, and
bounded on the south by Granite Creek westerly to the range separating the
waters of the Isaac River from those flowing direct to the coast; thence by
said range northerly to Long Hill; thence by a spur range to Cape Palmer-
ston ; thence by the sea-coast southerly to the mouth of the River Styx;
and thence by the left bank of that river upwards to the point of commence-
ment.
MACKAY LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at Cape Palmerston, and bounded thence on the south
by a spur range westerly to Long Hill; thence by a line bearing north-
west to a point thirty miles in a direct line to the sea-coast; thence by a
line parallel to the sea-coast, at a distance of thirty miles ; on the north by
a line bearing north-east to Mount Hector, and thence again on the north
by a line bearing north-east to the Andromache River near its source, and
by that river downwards to its confluence with O’Connell River, and by
that river downwards to the north-west extreme of Repulse Bay ; and on
the east by the sea-coast southerly to point of commencement.
EOAYEN LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the sea-coast, between Cape Bowling Green and Capo
Cleveland, at the mouth of the Houghton River, and bounded thence on the
north-west by the Houghton River upwards; on the south-west by a line
parallel to and distant from the sea-coast thirty miles south-easterly; on the
south-east by a line bearing north-east to Mount Hector, and thence again
on the south-east by a line bearing north-east to the Andromache River
near its source, and by that river downwards to its confluence with the
O’Connell River, and by that river downwards to the north-west extreme
of Repulse Bay ; and thence on the east and north-east by the sea-coast
northerly and north-westerly to the point of commencement.
TOWNSVILLE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the sea-coast, between Cape Bowling Green and Cape
Cleveland, at the mouth of the Houghton River, and bounded thence on the
south-east by the Houghton River upwards ; on the west and north-west by
a line parallel to the sea-coast at a distance of thirty miles therefrom, atd


bearing north-westerly ; on the north by the nineteenth parallel of south
latitude, bearing true east to the shore of Halifax Bay ; and on the east and
north-east by the sea-coast south-easterly to the point of commencement.
CARDWELL LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the shore of Halifax Bay, and bounded on the south
by the nineteenth parallel of south latitude bearing true west; on the west
by a line bearing northerly parallel to the sea-coast, and distant thirty miles
therefrom; on the north by the northern watershed of the Mackay River
easterly to Tam O’Shanter Point; and on the east by the sea-coast to the
point of commencement.
NOEMANTON LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT,
Commencing on the shore of the Gulf of Carpentaria at Point Eitz-
maurice, and bounded thence on the north by a line cast to the south-western
watershed of the Gilbert River, and by that watershed to a point thirty
miles in. a direct line from the nearest part of the said shore ; on the east
and south by a line parallel to the shore, and distant thirty miles therefrom,
to the 138th parallel of east longitude, which is also the boundary of the
Colony of Queensland, and by that parallel to the shore of the Gulf of
Carpentaria; thence by the shore to the point of commencement.
CAIRNS LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the sea-coast at Double Point about fifteen miles
northerly in a direct line from Cairns, and bounded thence by a line bearing
south-westerly to the northern watershed of the Barron River; thence by
.that watershed westerly to a point thirty miles distant from the sea-coast ;
thence by a line parallel to and distant thirty miles from the sea-coast
southerly to the northern watershed of the Mackay River; thence by that
northern watershed easterly to Tam O’Shanfcr Point; and thence by the
sea-coast northerly to Double Point, the point of commencement.
PORT DOUGLAS LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the sea-coast at Double Point, about fifteen miles-
northerly in a direct line from Cairns, and bounded thence by a line bearing
south-west to the northern watershed of the Barron River; thence by that
watershed westerly to a point thirty miles distant from the sea-coast; thence
by n line parallel to and distant thirty miles from the sea-coast northerly,
and by a line east to Cape Tribulation ; and on the east by the sea-coast
southerly to the point of commencement.
TENNINGERING LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the left bank of Sunday Creek at a point about twenty-
five chains south and twenty chains west of a tree marked 8 on the survey of
that creek, and bounded thence on the south by a west line crossing Sunday
Creek and passing through a spot five miles south of the south corner of
section No. 10 of the town of Tenningering eight miles ; thence on the west
by a north line to the watershed forming the southern boundary of the Settled
District of Wide Bay and Burnett; thence on the north by that boundary
easterly to a point north of a tree marked broad-arrow over P over XIII on
the Perry River; thence on the east by a south line passing through the
last-mentioned marked tree to a point east of starting point; and thence
again on the south by a w'est line seven miles to Sunday Creek, the point of


commencement, —inclusive of two thousand five hundred and sixty acres,
reserved by Notice dated 24th November, 1871 {vide Government Gazette of
1871, page 1756), and thirty square miles reserved by proclamation dated
2nd November, 1874 (vide Government Gazette of 1874, page 2132).
CLERMONT LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at a point about two miles above the confluence of Douglas
and Sandy Creeks, and bounded thence by Douglas Creek downwards to
Sandy Creek, and by Sandy Creek downwards, in all about seven and three-
quarter miles, bearing south 59 degrees east from starting point; thence on
south-east by a line bearing south 43 degrees west, about three miles forty
chains, being part of the north-west boundary of Slateford Run and same
line continued to Theresa Creek; by that creek downwards to the junction
of Tomahawk Creek; by the last creek upwards to a point on left bank,
about half-a-mile above a hill called Lang ton Edge; thence on the south-
west by a line bearing north-west crossing Theresa Creek to a point distant
four hundred and twenty-five chains from Theresa Creek ; thence by a line
north-east to the southern watershed of Douglas Creek; by that watershed
westerly; on the west by the watershed separating Douglas and Sandy
Creeks from Logan Creek and other waters northerly; on the north by the
northern watershed of Sandy Creek easterly and southerly; and by a line
east crossing Bath Creek to the junction of Apsley and Wolfang Creeks;
then by a line east five miles ; on the east by a line southerly to the north-
west corner of Langton Station paddock No. 1, then by the western fence
of said paddock southerly, then by the northern fence of Langton Station
paddock, No. 2, bearing west, crossing Sandy Creek to the eastern boundary
of Clermont and Copperfield Municipality; by said boundary south to
Douglas Creek, and thence by Douglas Creek to point of commencement.
SPRINGSURE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the confluence of Theresa Creek with the Nogoa River,
and bounded thence on the north by a line bearing west to the western
watershed of the Nogoa River; on the west by that watershed southerly to
the Great Dividing Range; on the south by that range easterly to Expe-
dition Range ; on the east by Expedition Range northerly to a point bearing
east from the confluence of the Comet and Mackenzie Rivers; thenoe by a
line west to that confluence, and by the Mackenzie River upwards to the
point of commencement.
ROMA LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the Main Dividing Range at the junction of a spur
range dividing Charley’s Creek from Dogwood Creek, and bounded thence
by that spur range southerly to the confluence of Charley’s Creek with the
Condamine River; thence by a line south-easterly to the head of Kogan
Creek ; thence by the range dividing the Condamine River waters from those
of the Moonie and Weir Rivers southerly to where it is intersected by the
east boundary of the Western Railway Reserve; thence by that eastern
boundary southerly to the south-east corner of that reserve; thenoe by the
southern boundary of same westerly, by the western boundary of same
northerly, by the northern boundary of same easterly to the Main Dividing
Range near the head of Dogwood Creek ; and thence by the Main Dividing
Range easterly to the point of commencement, —excluding the Land Agents’
Districts of Surat and Condamine.


ST. GEORGE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at a point on tlie summit of the range forming the water-
shed between the Moonie and Balonne Rivers, and bounded thence on the
east by a south line to the north-east corner of Black’s Camp Run, and by
the eastern boundaries of said run and of Ungabilla and Pooloon Runs ;
then by the north boundary of Wagganba Run East to the north-east
corner; thence by the east boundaries of Wagganba, Lower Teelba, East
Teelba, and Brigalow Scrub Runs to the Moonie River at a tree marked
broad-arrow over DDM, and by a continuation of said line south following
the east boundaries of Brigalow Scrub, Ula Ula, and North Guradla Runs
to the north boundary of Gurardera Run ; thence by that boundary east one
mile to east corner of said run, and by a south line to Barwan River at a
tree marked broad-arrow over DDWM ; on the south by the Barwan or
Macintyre River downwards to the 29th parallel of south latitude, and by that
parallel true west to the watershed between the Warrego River and Mun-
gellala Creek ; thence on the west by that watershed northerly to a point
west from Drysdale Ponds, in the Maranoa River; thence on the north
by an east line crossing the Mungellala and Wallam Creeks to the Maranoa
River ; thence easterly crossing Balonne River at the Douay Station to the
dividing range between the Balonne and Moonie Rivers, and by that range
to the point of commencement.
SURAT LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the left bank of Balonne River at the confluence of a
small creek bearing north 80 degrees west, and distant about seventy-two
chains from the late commissioner’s residence, and bounded thence on the
west by a line bearing south one hundred and forty chains; on the south by a
line bearing east one hundred and thirty chains ; thence by a line bearing
soeith-east about three miles thirty chains; thence by a line bearing north-
east five miles ; thence by a line bearing north-west four miles sixty chains to
the Balonne River, opposite the south-east corner of Yambugle Run ; and
thence by the Balonne River downwards to the north-east corner of the
original Surat Town Reserve ; thence on the north-east by a line north-west
one mile seventy-five chains ; on the north-west by a line south-west two
miles seventeen chains to the south-west boundary of Yambugle Run ; and
on the south-west by a line south-east along that boundary to the Balonne
River at the point of commencement.
GOONDIWINDI LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the confluence of Macintyre Brook with Dumaresq
River, and bounded thence on the east by a line bearing north to the range
dividing the waters of Macintyre Brook from those of the Weir River;
thence by that range northerly to the head of Commoron Creek ; thence by a
spur range forming the southern watershed of Western Creek to the con-
fluence ot said creek with Weir River; thence by a line bearing north to the
range dividing the waters of the Weir River from those of the Moonie
River; on the north-west by said watershed in a south-west direction to the
twenty-ninth parallel of south latitude; on the south by said parallel of
latitude east to the Barwan River; and thence by the Barwan or Dumaresq
River upwards to the point of commencement.


STANTHORPE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the confluence of Macintyre Brook with Dumaresq
River, and bounded thence on the west by a line north to the range separating
Macintyre Brook from Commoron Creek, by that range north-easterly ;
thence by the range separating the Condamine River from Macintyre Brook
south-easterly to the Great Dividing Range at Maryland; by the Great
Dividing Range southerly, and by a spur range forming the northern water-
shed of Tenterfield Creek to the confluence of that creek with the Severn
River ; thence by the Severn or Dumaresq River downwards to the point of
commencement.
CONDAMINE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the junction of the Caliguel Lagoons Creek with the
Condamine River, and bounded on the south by an east line seven hundred
and twenty-six chains sixty-nine links, crossing the above-named creek ; on
the east by a north line five hundred and sixty-five chains sixty-nine links
crossing Gooloomallee and Rocky Creeks ; on the north by a west line five
hundred and forty-two chains sixty-nine links crossing the Condamine River;
on the west by a south line to the left bank of that river; and then by the
said left bank of the Condamine River to the point of commencement.
COOETOTVN LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at Cape Tribulation, and bounded on the south by a line
west to the boundary of the settled districts ; thence by that boundary,
which is a line parallel to the sea-coast, and distant thirty miles therefrom,
northerly to a point west from Cape Sidmouth ; thence by a line east to the
sea-coast, and thence by the sea-coast to the point of commencement.
NANANGO LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the Main Dividing Range at the head of Boondooma
Creek, and bounded thence by the northern boundary of Boondooma Run
easterly to the Boyne River; thence by that river to the confluence of
Stuart’s River; thence by the spur range forming the northern boundary of
Proston Run easterly to the watershed between Stuart’s River and Barambah
Creek, by that watershed and by a spur range to the confluence of Barambah
and Boonara Creeks ; thence by a spur range forming the northern boundaries
of Boonimba and Boombyjan Runs easterly to the dividing the Mary
River waters from those of the Burnett River ; thence by that range
southerly to the range dividing the Brisbane River waters from those of the
Burnett River; thence by that range south-westerly to the spur range
separating Paradise and Oakey Creeks south-easterly to Cooyar Creek,
opposite the confluence of Taromeo Creek ; thence by Cooyar Creek down-
wards about one mile in a direct line to the termination of Blackbutt Range,
being the north-east boundary of Taromeo Run ; thence b} T that range
southerly, and by the range forming the south-east watershed of Cooyar
Creek south-westerly to the Main Range, and by the Main Range northerly
to the point of commencement.
ARAMAC LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the north-east corner of the Aramac Town Reserve, and
bounded thence on the east by a line bearing north three miles forty-four
chains ; on the north by a line bearing west ten miles seventy-six chains ; on


the west by a line bearing south ten miles seventy-six chains ; on the south
by a line bearing east ten miles seventy-six chains ; and again on the east by
a line bearing north to the point of commencement.
TAMBO LAND AGENT’S DISTEICT.
Commencing on the right bank of the Barcoo Eiver at its intersection by
the eastern boundary of the Tambo Town Reserve, and bounded thence on
the east by a line bearing north five miles sixty-four chains ; on the north by
a line bearing west eleven miles twenty chains ; on the west by a line
bearing south twelve miles twenty chains ; on the south by a line bearing
east eleven miles twenty chains; and again on the east by a line bearing
north to the point of commencement.
BLACKALL LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the right bank of the Barcoo River at the south-west
corner of a pre-emptive of four square miles, being a point three miles and
fifty chains in a straight line down the river from the south-west corner of
the Blackall Town Reserve, and bounded thence on the west by a line bearing
north four miles fifiy-six chains; on the north hyaline bearing east tea
miles ; on the east by a line bearing south ten miles ; on the south by a line
bearing west ten miles ; and again on the west by a line bearing north to the
point of commencement.
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 2nd May, 1877.
NOTICE.
With the view of facilitating the transaction of business at the Land Offices
throughout the colony, it is hereby notified that instructions have been
issued to the officers in charge, to the effect that every possible assistance is
to be given freely and gratuitously to persons applying for land, or seeking
information on matters connected with the working of the Land Acts —even
to the extent of filling up forms of application, transfers, and other docu-
ments, for illiterate persons, if there is time at the officer’s disposal; and
that any Land Agent, or other officer, refusing to supply information, or
receiving and appropriating fees for clerical assistance to his own use, on the
matter being reported will be severely dealt with.
Por the convenience, however, of persons requiring copies of plans,
arrangements have been made by which, on application to the District Land
Commissioner, and on payment of a fee to be estimated by that officer, a
tracing or copy of the plan required will be prepared and furnished to the
individual requiring the same.
JOHN DOUGLAS.


PROCLAMATION.
Ry His Excellency Sir Arthur Edward Kennedy, Knight Commander of
P the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and St.
. L^; s -J George, Companion of the Most Honorable Order of
A. Ji. iAENNED}, Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the
Lroverror. Colony of Queensland and its Dependencies.
IN pursuance of the power in me vested, I, Sir Arthur Edward Kennedy,
the Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the Executive Council, do,
by this my Proclamation, notify and proclaim that clause twenty-seven of
the Regulations proclaimed on the Ist day of March, 1877, relative to the
cutting and removal of timber, and to the removal of stone, gravel, brick-
earth, shells, or other materials, from Crown Lands, is hereby cancelled, and
that the following Regulation has been established, under the provisions of
“ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876,” in lieu thereof.
Regulation.
The fee chargeable for a license to dig for and remove any gravel, stone,
brick-earth, shells, or other material, from off Crown lands, shall be £5 per
annum, and the license fee to be paid by persons engaged in making bricks
shall be £4 per annum, chargeable on each mould.
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
twenty-sixth day of July, in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-seven, and in the forty-first year of
Her Majesty’s reign.
By Command,
JOHN DOUGLAS.
God Save the Queen!


CROWN LANDS ALIENATION ACT OF 1876 AMENDMENT
ACT.
43 VICTORIA, No. 12.
43 Victoria, No. 13. An Ad, to Amend the Law relating to the Alienation
of Crown Lands. [Assented to 25th September, 1879 ]
Preamble.
WHEREAS it is expedient to amend the law relating to the acquisition
for public purposes of land by the Crown and to the Alienation of
Crown lands Be it enacted by the Queen s Most Excellent Mhjesty by and
with, the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and Legislative
Assembly of Queensland in Parliament assembled and by the authority of
the same as follows —
Interpretation.
1. The term “Exchanged Lands” whenever used in this Act shall
mean all lands acquired by the Crown by way of exchange under the
provisions of the sixty-ninth section of “The Crown Lands Alienation Act
of 1876 ” or of any other Act and the title to which is vested in Her
Majesty.
“ Crown T,ands Alienation Ad 1876 to apply except Sfc.
2. Except as hereinafter provided the provisions of “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Ad 1»76 ” shall extend and apply to exchanged lands.
39 th section of above Ad not to apply.
3. The thirty-ninth section of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of
1876 ” shall not apply to exchanged lands.
Exchanged lands in Darling Downs district to he homestead areas.
4. All Exchanged Lands within the district or part of the colony
described in the second schedule to “ The Croton Lands Alienation Act of
1876” shall be and the same are hereby set apart as Homestead Areas.
Maximum area to he selected.
5. The maximum area that may be acquired by any person in a
Homestead Area consisting of Exchanged Lands shall be two hundred acres
or such lesser area not being less than eighty acres as may be declared by
the Governor in Council by proclamation.
Amount to he expended in improvements.
6. The amount required to be expended by conditional purchasers on
Exchanged Lands in substantial and permanent improvements shall be at
the rate of twenty shillings per acre of such land anything contained in the
the sixth sub-section of section twenty-eight of “ The Crown Lands Aliena-
tion Act 1876” to the contrary notwithstanding.
Land orders Sfc. not available.
7. Exchanged Lands shall not be deemed to be available for selection by
virtue of land orders or of certificates issued to members of the A olunteer
Force of Queensland under the provisions of the ninety-eighth section of
“ The Crown Lands Alienation Ad 1868 ” any Act of the Legislature to the
contrary notwithstanding.


Scale of survey fees to he declared hy proclamation.
12. It shall be lawful for the Governor
in Council by proclamation to
declare the .scale of survey fees which shall be payable on any land selected
or purchased under the provisions of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of
1876 ” or of this Act and the survey fees to be paid on any laud so selected
or purchased under the said Acts shall be in accordance with such scale as
aforesaid.
Fees charged on deeds of grant.
13. Prior to the issue of any deed of grant in fee simple the following
fees shall be paid—
£ s. d.
Not exceeding 50 acres
... 10 0
Not exceeding 100 acres
15 0
Not exceeding 300 acres
1 10 0
Not exceeding 1,000 acres
.. ... 2 0 0
Not exceeding 2,000 acres
3 0 0
Not exceeding 5,000 acres
4 0 0
Not exceeding 10,000 acres
5 0 0
Homesteads in Homestead Areas.
Extension of Homestead Area.
8. The total area which may he selected hy any one person as a
homestead in a homestead area under the provisions of The Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1876 ” shall be extended to one hundred and sixty acres.
Extension of privilege to previous homestead selectors.
9. When any person shall have selected a homestead under “ The
Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868” or “ The Homestead Areas Act of
1872 ” or “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876 ” in any Homestead
Area set apart under the last-mentioned Act the extent of which homestead
is less than one hundred and sixty acres such selector may also select as a
homestead so much of any vacant Crown lands adjoining his first selection
as shall not together with such first selection exceed the quantity of one
hundred and sixty acres but so that the external boundaries of the combined
selections shall not be other than would be allowed for one original Home-
stead Selection And it shall be sufficient that the condition of continuous
residence be performed on any part of the combined Homestead Selections
Provided that in no case shall any person except as aforesaid hold tw
separate homesteads.
Repeal of part of 40 th section “ Crown Lands Alienation Act 1876.”
10. So much of the fortieth section of such last-mentioned Act as
relates to the limitation of the area of homesteads in homestead areas to
eighty acres is hereby repealed.
General Provisions.
Repeal of sections of “ Crown Lands Alienation Act 1876.”
11. From and after the commencement of this Act sections eighty and
eighty-one of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act 1876” shall be and the
same are hereby repealed.
And in addition thereto the contribution to the insurance fund under the
provisions of “ The Real Property Act of 1861.”
This Act to he deemed an amendment of “ The Crotcn Lands Alienation Act
of 1876.”
14. This Act shall be read and construed with and be deemed to be an
amendment of “ The Crcncn Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”


Short title.
15. This Act shall be styled and may be cited as “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1876 Amendment Act.”
PROCLAMATION.
By His Excellency Sir Arthur Edward Kennedy, Knight Commander
.. of the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and St.
LD e j George, Companion of the Most Honourable Order of the
A. K. Kennedy, Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of
Coventor. Queensland and its Dependencies.
IN pursuance of section twelve of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of
1876 Amendment Act,” I, Sir Arthur Edward Kennedy, the
Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the Executive Council, by this
my Proclamation, notify and proclaim that the Fees payable to cover the
cost of survey of any land selected or purchased under the provisions of
“The Crown Lands Alienation Act o/* 1876,” or “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1876 Amendment Act,” shall be according to the following
scale ;
£ s, d.
0 14 0
110
1 17 0
2 4 0
2 11 0
3 0 0
3 7 0
3 19 0
4 8 0
5 6 0
6 0 0
6 14 0
7 3 0
8 10
9 3 0
9 4 0
4 12 0
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Toowoomba, this eighth day of
December, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-nine, and in the forty-third year of Her Majesty’s reign.
By Command.
P. PERKINS.
God Save the Queen I


SETTLED DISTRICTS PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 18/6.
r— —■
40 VICTORIA, No. 16.
40 Victoria, No. 16. An Act to provide for the Least,ig of Runs in the
Settled Districts of the Colony. [Assented to 20th. November, 1876.]
Preamble.
WHEREAS the terms of the leases of the runs in those parts of the
colony described in “The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868” as
“ The Settled Districts” will shortly expire and the said leases are liable to
be determined in the meantime by resumption And whereas it is desirable
that provision should bo made for dealing with the lands comprised in the
said leases at the expiration ©r sooner determination thereof Be it therefore
enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Maje-ty by and with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly of Queensland
in Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same as follows—
In terp relation,
1. Eor the purposes of this Act the term “improvements” shall mean
and include any head station house store stable hut woolshed sheep-pen
drafting-yard barn stockyard fence well dam reservoir tank trough artificial
watercourse or watering-place garden clearing cultivation or plantation of
trees shrubs or artificial grasses or any building erection construction or
appliance being a fixture for the working or management of a run or of any
sheep cattle or horses depastured thereon or for maintaining or increasing the
pastoral or agricultural capabilities thereof And the term “Minister” shall
mean the Secretary for Public Lands or other Minister who for the time
being performs the duties of the Secretary for Public Lands.
Runs in settled districts may be leased at the expiration of existing or future
leases.
2. Whenever the term of the lease of any run in those parts of the
colony described in “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868” as “The
Settled Districts ” shall have expired bv effluxion of time or shall have
become determined by forfeiture and whenever the term of any lease of any
run issued under the provisions next hereinafter contained shall have expired
by effluxion of time forfeiture or otherwise the Governor in Council may
from time to time cause any such run or any part thereof to be offered for
lease for pastoral purposes by public auction for a term not exceeding five
years.
Upset price.
3. In any such case the sale shall be held at the land agent’s office
nearest to the run and the upset price shall not bo less than two pounds per
square mile per annum and the highest amount bid at auction shall be the
annual rent of the run for the said terra.


Conditions of lease.
4. The Governor in Council shall issue to the purchaser a lease o£ the
ran for the said term subject to the conditions following that is to say—
Commencement.
(I.) The term of the lease shall be from the first day of January or first
day of July next following the date of sale
Liability to reservation and sale.
(2.) During the term of the lease the lands demised shall be subject to
alienation under the provisions of the laws in force for the time being
relating to the alienation of Crown lands and shall be liable to be
withdrawn from the lease by such alienation or by reservation for any
public purpose
In which case rent to be reduced.
(3.) If during any year any part of the land shall be withdrawn from the
lease in manner hereinbefore provided the lessee shall in the ensuing
years be entitled to a remission of rent equal to twice the proportion
of rent due for the area withdrawn from the lease Provided that in
no ease shall the rent of the remainder of the land be thereby reduced
to less than one pound per square mile
Date for payment of rent — Forfeiture.
The amount of the first year’s rent shall be paid to the land agent
at the time of sale and the subsequent years’ rent shall be payable at
the Treasury in Brisbane on the thirtieth day of September in each
year and in default of such payment the lease shall be forfeited and
the land and all improvements thereon shall revert to the Crown
Provided that the lessee may defeat such forfeiture for non-payment
of rent by paying at the Treasury in cash on or before the thirty-first
day of December following a sum equal to the annual rent together
with an additional sum equal to one-tenth part thereof by way of
penalty but in default of such payment of rent and penalty on or
before such thirty-first day of December the lease shall be absolutely
forfeited and the lessee and any person claiming under him shall be
deemed a trespasser upon Crown land and be liable to be removed
therefrom as such
Time of withdrawal by sale or selection.
"W hen any land comprised in any such lease shall be proclaimed for
sale by auction or as open to selection such proclamation or the offer
for sale by auction shall not withdraw the land from the lease but the
withdrawal from the lease shall take effect on the actual sale or
selection which may be made from time to time pursuant to such
proclamation
Notice of ivithdrawal to be given.
When any part of the land is withdrawn from the lease by sale
selection or reservation as aforesaid the boundaries of the land so
withdrawn except where defined by natural features or the external
limits of the lease shall be defined and marked on the ground by


survey and notice of such withdrawal having been so made shall be
sent by the land agent to the lessee or person in charge of the land on
his behalf at the principal place of residence on the land comprised in
the lease or in case neither the lessee nor any person in charge of the
land can be found such notice of withdrawal shall be published twice
in the nearest convenient newspaper Provided that all notices of
reservation for any public purpose shall be issued by the Minister and
the substance thereof shall be published in the Gazette
Form of notice.
(7.) Every such notice of withdrawal shall set forth the area of the land
resumed and a description thereof
Claims for improvements.
(8.) Any lessee or his agent may within sixty days after the notice of
withdrawal remove from the land comprised therein any part of his
improvements in respect of which no pre-emptive right has been
exercised under “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 18G8 ” or may
within the like time lodge with the land agent for the district a
written statement of his claim for compensation for the value of such
improvements not so removed accompanied by a schedule of the items
of improvement and the value claimed for each but in default of such
notice of his claim being given to the land agent within sixty days
from the notice of withdrawal the lessee shall be deemed to have
abandoned all right to compensation for the value of such improve-
ments
Time of payment.
(9.) When a lessee being entitled so to do shall claim compensation as
hereinbefore provided for the value of improvements on land with-
drawn from his lease by being selected either by conditional purchase
or as a homestead or sold by auction or subsequent selection the
selector or purchaser shall within sixty days after notification of such
claim to him pay the value of the improvements to the lessee or
require that the value be determined by arbitration and such selector
or purchaser shall pay the lessee the amount awarded by the arbitra-
tors or umpire within sixty days from the date of the award and in
default of such payment he shall forfeit all right to occupy the land
and the selection or purchase shall have no effect
Case of claim against the Crown.
(10.) When any such lessee being so entitled shall claim compensation for
the value of improvements situate on land withdrawn from his lease
for any public purpose the Minister may within sixty days after
receipt of the claim agree to the same or offer a less sum and if the
lessee fail to notify his acceptance of such lessor sum within thirty
days the Minister shall cause the claim to be determined by arbitra-
tion Provided that if the amount of compensation as agreed to by the
Minister and the lessee or determined b} r arbitration be not paid or
tendered to the lessee within six months from the date of the agreement
or award the withdrawal shall cease to have any effect.
Transfer of leases.
(11.) Any such lease may be transferred on application to the Minister and
payment of a transfer fee of twenty-one shillings.


I Vo claim for improvements after term.
(12.) Upon tlie expiration of the term of the lease the lessee shall have no
right or claim to any renewal thereof or to any compensation for the
value of improvements on the land Provided that if the value of any
improvements made by any lessee not being improvements in respect
of which any right of pre-emption has been exercised or compensation
paid shall at any time thereafter be paid by any purchaser or selector
such value shall when received be paid over to the lessee by whom the
same were made.
Sale at auction of leases of forfeited and vacated runs. 33 Vic. c. 10 s. 27.
5. All runs leased under the foregoing provisions of this Act which may
be forfeited or vacated during the currency of the lease thereof may be
•offered for sale by public auction for the residue of the term of the lease
computed from the nearest first day of January or first day of July The
upset price shall be not less than twenty shillings per square mile according
to the estimated area and the highest amount bid shall be the annual rent to
be paid for the remainder of the term of the lease.
Provisions in case of resumption of the whole of a run in the Settled Districts.
6. Whenever the whole of the land comprised in any existing lease of
any run in the said “ Settled Districts” shall have been heretofore or shall
be hereafter resumed from lease under the provisions of the tenth section of
the said “ Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” the following consequences
■shall ensue that is to say—
(1.) The land comprised in the lease and so resumed shall be subject to
alienation under the provisions of the laws in force for the time being
relating to the alienation of Crown lands and shall be liable to be
withdrawn from the lease by such alienation or by reservation for any
public purpose
(2.) All the provisions of the fourth section of this Act relating to the
withdrawal of land from the leases therein mentioned shall extend and
apply to the land so resumed and the lessees thereof
(3.) Except as aforesaid the lease of the run shall be deemed to be still
subsisting and unaffected by such resumption.
Lessee to he entitled to six months to remove his stoch.
7. At the expiration of any lease by effluxion of time the lessee shall
be entitled to remain in possession of the run for the period of six months
for the purpose of removing his stock therefrom.
Mode of appraisement or arbitration. 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 102.
8. Whenever it shall become necessary under the provisions of this Act
to fix or ascertain any price value or sum of money by arbitration the
Minister and the claimant in matters concerning the rights of the Crown and
each of the respective parties interested in any other case may concur in the
appointment of a single appraiser or arbitrator as the case may require and
failing such concurrence it shall be lawful for either party of his own accord
or at the request of the other to appoint an appraiser or arbitrator as the
case may require and upon such appointment to give notice thereof to the
other party or parties And if the other party or parties or any of them


shall not within thirty days after such notice appoint an appraiser or arbi-
trator the appraiser or arbitrator first appointed together with such other
appraisers or arbitrators (if any) as shall have been duly appointed within
that time shall have power to determine the matter alone And in any of
the cases aforesaid the matter in question shall be inquired into and deter-
mined by such single appraiser or arbitrator or such appraisers or arbitrators
or their umpire.
Short title.
9. This Act shall be styled and may be cited as “ The Settled Districts
Pastoral Leases Act of 1876.”


PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 1869.
33 VICTORIA, No. 10.
33 Victoria, No. 10. An Act to Consolidate and Amend the Laws relating
to the Pastoral Occupation of Crov.m Lands in the Unsettled Districts.
[Assented to 14th September, 1869.]
Preamble.
BE it enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and with the
advice and consent of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly
of Queensland in this present Parliament assembled and by the authority of
the same as follows—
Preliminary.
Repeal of existing Acts Sfc.
1. The several Orders in Council and Acts specified in the schedule A
annexed hereto and all other Acts (if any) inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act shall be and the same are hereby repealed saving always all rights
claims and liabilities already accrued or incurred and in existence Provided
always that no action suit or proceeding civil or criminal in any court of
law or equity already commenced shall abate or be prejudiced or hindered
by anything herein contained but that all such actions suits and proceedings
shall continue to their lawful termination as if this Act had not been
passed.
Application of Act.
2. The provisions of this Act shall apply to the unsettled districts only.
Laterpretation clause.
3. The following terms within inverted commas shall for the purposes
of this Act except where the context otherwise indicate bear the meanings
set against them separately—
“ Crown lands ” —All lands vested in Her Majesty which have not been
dedicated to any public purpose or which have not been granted or
lawfully contracted to be granted to any person in fee simple or for
any less estate and all lands which at the time of the passing of this
Act shall not be subject to any contract promise or engagement made
by or on behalf of Her Majesty and all lands which at the time of
the passing of this Act may have become or which after the passing
of this Act may have become forfeited by reason of any breach in
the conditions on which the same have been granted or contracted to
be granted
“ Pun”—Any portion of Crown lands comprised in any license to depas-
ture or lease for pastoral purposes granted or applied for under the
provisions of the Acts Orders in Council and Regulations referred to
in schedule A to this Act or any of them or under the provisions of
this Act


“ Unsettled Districts ” —All Crown lauds whicli at tlie time of the passing
of this Act or at any time hereafter shall not have been brought
within the settled districts as defined by “ The Crown Lands Aliena-
tion Act of 1868 ”
“ Governor ” and “ Governor in Council ” shall be held indifferently to
mean the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council
“ Lease and License ” shall respectively include every lease or license of
Crown lands for pastoral purposes whether issued under the provisions
of the Acts Orders or Regulations referred to in section one of this
Act or any of them or issued under the provisions of this Act
“ Lessee and licensee ” shall respectively mean the lawful holder of any
such lease or promise of lease or license whether as original lessee or
licensee or the lawful assignee of any such lease or license
“ Commissioner ” shall mean and include any commissioner of Crown lands
or acting-commissioner or other officer duly appointed under the
provisions of this Act for the performance of similar duties
“ Improvements”—Permanent buildings reservoirs wells dams and fencing.
Commissioners to he appointed.
4. The Governor may from time to time appoint fit and proper persons
to be commissioners of Crown lands and such commissioners shall execute
the provisions of this Act in such districts as may be assigned to them
respectively Provided that the Governor shall define and declare the duties
of such commissioners in regulations to be made for that purpose pursuant
to the provisions of the seventy-sixth section of this Act Provided also
that the Governor may appoint Irom time to time suitable persons as acting-
commissioners of Crown lands for any particular districts and similarly
define and limit their duties either subject to the approval of the Secretary
for Lands or not so as may be necessary.
New leases to he issued on surrender of existing leases.
5. Lessees of runs in the unsettled districts holding under the Order in
Council dated the ninth day of March one thousand eight hundred and
forty-seven or “ The Unoccupied Crown Occupation Act of 1860 ’
“The Tenders fur Crown Lands Act of 1860 ” or “ The Pastoral Leases
Act of 1863” or any' other Act may on application to the Secretary for
Lands in the form contained in schedule I surrender their existing leases or
promises of lease and obtain new leases under the provisions of this Act
Provided that such application shall be made before the Ist day of
January one thousand eight hundred and seventy-one.
Term of lease.
6. Such new leases shall be for a term of twenty-one years from the
first day of July one thousand eight hundred and sixty-nine.
The annual rent chargeable on such new leases shall be as follows —
Leases under Order in Council.
(1) Where the surrendered lease was held under the Order in Council
aforesaid the rent for the first seven years of the term of lease
shall be equal to the rent payable under said Order in Council
together with the assessment chargeable under “ The Lncreased
Lent and Assessment Act of 1858 ” on the thirtieth. September one
thousand eight hundred apd sixty-nine.


Leases under 24 Viet. 12 24 Viet. 15 27 Viet. 17 and 28 Viet, 20.
(2) Where the surrendered lease has been held under “ The Tender's for
Crown Lands Act of I 860” “ The Unoccupied Crown Lands
Occupation Act of i 860” “ The Pastoral Leases Act o/’1863” or
“ The Pastoral Assessment Act of 1864” the rent for the first
seven years of the term of the new lease shall bo equal to the rent
payable under the surrendered lease on the thirtieth September
one thousand eight hundred and sixty-nine Provided that the
said rent shall .in no ease exceed the amount payable under the
second period of the surrendered lease.
Pent from eighth to fourteenth year.
(3) During the seven years from the eighth to the fourteenth year
inclusive of the term ol lease the annual rent shall bo equal to the
annual rent for the first seven years with the addition of one-
tenth part thereof.
Pent from fifteenth to twenty-first,year.
(4) During the seven years from the fifteenth to the twenty-first year
inclusive the annual rent shall be equal to the annual rent
chargeable on the preceding seven years of the term of lease with
the addition of one-tenth part thereof.
New Leases.
Pleases for twenty-one years,
7. It shall be lawful for the Governor to grant leases for pastoral
purposes of Crown lands within the unsettled districts for any term not
exceeding twenty-one years subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth.
JSLode of obtaining run.
8. If any person be desirous of obtaining a run he shall make application
in writing to the commissioner of the district in which such run is situated
for a license to occupy the same foj one year from the granting of such
license and shall at the same time of making such application pay to the
commissioner a sum of five shillings per square mile on the estimated area
of the run and shall accompany his application with a declaration to the
effect that he has occupied the said run wi h stock to an extent equal to one-
fourth of the number of sheep or equivalent number of cattle which such
run shall by this Act be deemed to be capable of carrying and if the said
commissionesr shall be satisfied that the provisions of this Act have been
complied with and that the land is open for license he shall grant to the
applicant a license in the form mentioned in schedule Cof this Act But if
the commissioner be aware that the land applied for is wholly or in part
already under authorised occupation or reserved for any special purpose he
may refuse a license and such issue or refusal shall be recorded in the
register of applications for licenses.
Additional fee to he pail if co?nmissioner estimates area to exceed that
stated in the application.
9. Provided that if the said commissioner shall estimate the area of the
lands applied for to be greater than that on which the foe shall have been
paid then a further sum of five shillings for every square mile estimated by
him to be in excess of the area paid for shall bo paid into the hands of the


said commissioner within ninety days from the date of notice by the said
commissioner that the said further sum is due and in default of such
payment the license together with the fee paid thereon shall be forfeited
Provided that such further sum shall not exceed the amount of five years’
rent or license Provided that if the area on survey shall be found to be less
than that estimated by the commissioner then the Government shall refund
to the lessee all rents paid by him for country not contained in his lease
Provided that such refundment shall be limited to the amount paid during
the preceding five years Provided also that if it shall subsequently be
ascertained that such license included lands previously granted or was
obtained by means of any false representation the same shall be cancelled.
Description of runs to he given on application for license.
10. All applications for licenses shall be in the form contained in
schedule B of this Act and shall contain clear descriptions of the runs
applied for and the boundaries thereof and the marks or natural features
by which such boundaries are indicated so as nearly as may be to describe
the run accoording to the provisions of section eleven of this Act Provided
that it shall be lawful for the commissioner or other officer duly authorised
to amend any such description and to insert such amended description either
in the license or in the lease to be applied for and granted as hereinafter
provided as well as in the book to be kept by the commissioner as hereinafter
mentioned.
Area of rum.
11. Each run shall consist of not less than twenty-five square miles nor
more than one hundred square miles and shall be of rectangular form in
which the external lines shall run east and west and north and south and
the length of each run shall bo as nearly as may be equal to the width
subject however to such deviations as the general features of the country
and the adoption of natural boundaries may require but in no case shall the
extreme length of any run exceed three times the mean width thereof and
subject also to the exclusion of water necessary to the beneficial occupation
of adjoining lands Provided that in computing the area of any run it shall
be competent for the local commissioner to exclude any portion which may
be unavailable for pastoral purposes Provided that the portion so excluded
shall in no case exceed half the area comprehended within the external
boundaries.
Applications to be entered in a book to he kept hy the commissioner.
12. Every such application shall be entered in a book to be kept by the
commissioner of the district for that purpose every such entry shall contain
a description of the run applied for and shall be then and there signed by
the applicant or his authorised agent and such book shall be open for
inspection by all persons on demand and on payment of a fee of two shillings
and sixpence Provided always that it shall not be lawful for any commis-
sioner or assistant commissioner to sign the said book as agent for any
applicant.
T Vhen applications may be made.
13. Applications for runs as aforesaid may be made and shall be received
at the usual office of the district commissioner on all days except Sundays
and such other days as the Governor with the advice aforesaid shall declare
in any regulation to be issued under this Act between the hours of ten


o’clock in the forenoon and four o’clock in the afternoon and at no other
time or place and all applications made on the same day between those hours
shall be considered as having been made at the same time.
If applications made at same time licenses to he regulated by occupation.
14. If two or more persons occupy the same country and shall apply
for it at the same time preference shall be given and a license issued to each
applicant for such blocks of the said country as he shall by actual survey be
found to be entitled to by virtue of having been the first to occupy the same
with stock.
Area to he divided ratahly between persons occupying at the same time.
15. If two or more such persons applying at the same time shall be
found to have stocked at the same time the country for which they apply
and that the runs applied for are identical or partly so or should their
boundaries be found to clash the commissioner shall when necessary adjust
the boundaries and divide the country fairly between the applicants if the
same be sufficient for all but should the number of blocks so applied for be
insufficient for all the parties and none be willing to withdraw their appli-
cation each block shall then be submitted separately to competition among
the said applicants only and the license to occupy issued in all cases to the
highest bidder.
Upset price of license.
16. The upset price at which a license shall be offered to competition
under the last preceding section shall be five shillings per square mile on the
estimated area and the highest amount bid shall be the license fee for the
term of one year from the day of sale but such amount shall in no way affect
the amount of rent to be charged on any lease of the said run which may be
subsequently granted to the licensee.
Occupation fee to he refunded if license refused or cancelled.
17. In all cases where a license is refused or cancelled the Government
shall on demand refund the occupation fee.
Return of licenses to he published.
18. A return of all licenses granted under this Act shall not less than
once in six months be published in the Government Gazette together with the-
descriptions given in such licenses.
Leases may he granted on application.
19. Any holder of a license may at any time prior to the expiration of
the year for which his license has been granted apply in the form given in
schedule D of this Act to the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands through
the district commissioner for a lease of the run comprised in such license
and a lease of the same at the rent hereinafter specified shall be granted to
such holder for a period of twenty-one years subject to the following con-
ditions.
Rent to he paid—Amount of rent during first seven years — Amount of rent
during residue of term.
20. The lessee of every run shall during the continuance of his lease pay
a yearly rent for the same as hereinafter mentioned and such yearly rent
shall be payable at the Treasury in Brisbane on the thirtieth day of Septem-
ber in each year and at the rate,? following—First the rent to be paid for each


run during the first seven years of any lease of the same shall he a sum of
five shillings per square mile according to an estimate of the area of such run
to be made by the commissioner and by the party applying and in the event
of their not agreeing by an umpire to be appointed as hereinafter provided
Secondly the rent payable in respect of such lease for the succeeding period
of seven years from the eighth to the fourteenth year inclusive shall be at
the annual rate of ten shillings per square mile and for the seven years from
the fifteenth to the twenty-first year inclusive at the rate of fifteen shillings
per square mile Provided that the Governor or lessee may during the
currency of the seventh or fourteenth years of the term of lease require that
the annual rent for the ensuing seven years shall be determined by appraise-
ment as hereinafter provided and when such appraisement shall be required
by the Governor it shall be by notice in the Government Gazette under the
hand of the Secretary for Lands and when the lessee shall require such
appraisement it shall be by notice to the Secretary for Lands in the form in
the schedule F to this Act and such lessee shall at the same time pay into
the Treasury in Brisbane a sum of five pounds to cover the cost of such
appraisement on the part of the Government Provided also that in no case
shall the rent for the seven years from the eighth to the fourteenth year
inclusive be less than seven shillings or more than fifteen shillings per square
mile and during the seven years from the fifteenth to the twenty-first year the
rent shall not be less than twelve shillings or more than twenty-five shillings
per square mile of the available area but such available area shall in no case
be computed at less than one-half the gross area of the run.
Date of lease.
21. The term of every such lease shall be computed from the first day of
July next after the expiration of the license in virtue of which the lease
is granted.
If lease not applied for runs to he dealt with as forfeited or vacant runs.
22. If any licensee of a run shall omit or neglect to apply for a lease of
the same within the time specified in this Act and according to the provisions
thereof or shall fail to lawfully obtain a lease of the same or shall fail to keep
up the amount of stock required to be on the run at the time of obtaining the
license such run shall be dealt with as a forfeited or vacated run.
Defined capability of runs.
23. Every run shall be deemed to be capable of carrying at least one
hundred sheep or twenty head of cattle per square mile.
Lease may register contiguous runs not exceeding 200 square miles as a
consolidated run and place the stock on any part thereof
24. Where a licensee or lessee shall have two or more runs adjoining
each other not exceeding in the aggregate two hundred square miles he may
apply to the commissioner to register the same as a consolidated run and
after such registration it shall be sufficient that the amount of stock required
to be maintained on the several runs be depastured on any part of the con-
solidated run.
Power to subdivide runs.
20. Any person holding by license or lease a run of not less than fifty
square miles may apply to the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands to have


such run divided into two or more runs and to have the rent payable for
such original run allotted in due portions to the new runs respectively and
such application shall be granted with consent of the Governor in Council if no
good reason appear to the contrary Provided always that no subdivision of
an original run shall be of less extent than twenty-five square miles and that
the aggregate of the new rents shall not be less than the entire amount of
the original rent Provided also that a fee of ten pounds shall be paid into
the Treasury at Brisbane and a receipt for the amount of such fee shall be
lodged with every such application.
Lease will he forfeited if stock he not maintained thereon.
26. If the lessee of a run shall fail to keep the same stocked to at least
one-fourth part of the grazing capabilities thereof as defined by the twenty-
third section of this Act unless prevented by unavoidable natural causes the
lease shall bo thereby forfeited.
Sale at auction of leases of forfeited and vacated runs.
27. All runs whether leased under this Act or any of the hereinbefore
repealed Acts or Orders in Council which maybe forfeited or vacated during
the currency of the lease thereof shall be offered for sale by public auction
for the residue of the term of the lease computed from the nearest first day
of July The upset price shall not be less than five shillings per square mile
according to the estimated area and the highest amount bid shall be the
annual rent to be paid for the remainder of the term of lease.
If not sold may he offered at a lower upset pidce.
28. Any such lease if unsold may be once again put up for sale in like
manner and if not then sold the Governor with the advice aforesaid may
reduce the minimum upset rent to such sum as may be deemed just and
reasonable and the same shall be again submitted for sale as aforesaid at
such reduced upset price.
Time and place of payment of rent.
29. The amount of the first year’s rent shall be paid to the land agent
at the time of sale and in each succeeding year the rent shall be paid into
the Treasuary in Brisbane on or before the thirtieth day of September.
Runs purchased at auction to he stocked within six months.
30. If the purchaser of the remainder of a lease shall fail to stock the
run within six months from the day of sale to the extent of one-fourth part
of its grazing capabilities as defined in the twenty-third section of this Act or
shall not thereafter maintain that amount of stock thereon unless prevented
by unavoidable natural causes the lease may be cancelled.
Unwateeed Buns.
Power to apply for special license for unwatered run.
31. If any person be desirous of obtaining a run no part of which shall
be at the date of application within five miles in a straight line from any per-
manent water he shall make a special application for a license to occupy the
same for one year as an unwatered run without any condition of compulsory
slocking the same.


Mode of application.
32. Such application shall be in the form in the schedule G to this Act
addressed to the commissioner of the district in which such run is situated
and such application shall contain a description of the run and the boundaries
and other particulars concerning the same and the area and general directions
of the external lines shall be governed by the same rules and regulations as
if the run were of the ordinary character.
Occupation fee.
33. In lieu of the license fee payable upon ordinary applications for runs
there shall be payable an occupation fee on every application for a license for
an unwatered run as also on every application for a renewal of such license
under the provisions hereinafter contained after the rate of three shillings
per square mile.
Particulars to accompany application.
34. Every application for any such original license shall be accompanied
by a statutory declaration verifying the truth of the statements contained in
such application to be made by the applicant or his authorized agent and also
by the occupation fee as specified in the last preceding sections but it shall
not be necessary to make any declaration as to the occupation of any such
unwatered run with cattle or sheep prior to the issue of a license to occupy
the same.
Application to he entered.
35. Every such application shall be entered by the commissioner in an
application book to be kept for the purpose in the same manner as an ordi-
nary application with such alterations in the entry as may be necessary.
Proceedings of commissioner thereon.
36. On the receipt of any such application the commissioner or some
other person duly authorized in that behalf shall when necessary personally
examine the run and satisfy himself as to the absence of permanent water
and if there be only one applicant for the run in question and if there is no
good ground for withholding a license the commissioner shall proceed to issue
the same accordingly in such form as shall be provided by regulations as
aforesaid.
Provisions in case of applications clashing.
37. If two or more persons shall apply under these provisions for the
same run or for runs comprising the same country preference shall be given
and a license issued to the one who first lodged his application with all
necessary accompaniments But if no difference in point of time exist having
reference to the provisions of section fourteen of this Act the commissioner
shall endeavour to divide the country applied for and adjust the boundaries
to the satisfaction of both or all the applicants failing in such endeavour the
blocks shall be submitted to competition amongst the applicants alone and
the one who on the spot offers and pays down the highest premium in cash
independently of the occupation fee as hereinbefore provided shall be the
successful applicant.
Power to renew licenses.
38. The licensee of any unwatered run may prior to the expiration of his
license apply to the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands through the district
commissioner for a renewal of such license for another year and in case such


licensee shall prove to the satisfaction of the said chief commissioner that he
has made reasonable efforts to establish permanent water on the run for
which he holds such license and has failed from the inclemency of the weather
or other sufficient cause without any default on his part such licensee shall be
entitled to the renewal applied for on his paying into the Treasury a sum
equivalent to the occupation fee originally paid by him for such run and upon
such payment it shall be lawful for the said chief commissioner to renew such
license accordingly Provided always that such renewal shall not in any
ease be repeated more than twice in respect of the same run and that the
renewal fee be paid prior to the expiration of the current license during which
the application for renewal was made.
Unwatered runs to he generally subject to same rule as others.
39. Except as herein specially provided or as may be hereafter provided
by any regulations as aforesaid unwatered runs shall be governed and dealt
with and be subject to the same regulations as other runs and on the appli-
cation for any lease of an unwatered run prior to the expiration of the license
or renewed license as the case may be the same requirements shall be
demanded and insisted on both as to stocking and otherwise as if the license
had been one of the ordinary character instead of a special one under these
provisions.
Renewal of Leases within the Unsettled Disteicts.
Power to grant renewal of leases.
40. It shall be lawful for the Governor on the expiration of any existing
lease or promise of lease to grant to the holder thereof a renewed lease for
fourteen years of the land held by him or such portion thereof as shall not
be required to be resumed for sale or otherwise lawfully withdrawn for
merely pastoral occupation.
Power to lessee to apply for renewal.
41. It shall be lawful for the lessee of any run at any time not less than
three months prior to the expiration of his lease to apply to the Chief Com-
missioner of Crown Lands for a renewed lease of the run or runs comprised
in such lease and such renewed lease shall be granted to him for the term of
fourteen years from the first day of July nearest the expiration of his former
lease of such run or runs or of such portion thereof as it may not seem to be
expedient to resume subject to the following conditions.
Lessee to pay annual rent.
42. The lessee of every run under such renewed lease shall during the
continuance of such lease pay a yearly rent for the same as hereinafter pro-
vided such rent to be payable at the Treasury in Brisbane on the thirtieth
day of September in each year.
Mode of ' estimating rent under renewed leases —Governor or lessee may
require the rent to be fixed by arbitration—Lessee requiring appraise-
ment to pay £o costs—Limitation of the amount of rent.
43. For the first four years of such renewed lease the annual rent shall
be equal to rent for the last year of the expired term with the addition of
one-tenth part thereof Provided that in the case of expired leases or runs
which have been held under the Order in Council the rent shall be computed
as including both the annual rent charged under the Order in Council and


the annual assessment under “ The Increased Rent and Assessment Act of
1858 ” and for the five years from the fifth to the ninth year of such renewed
lease the annual rent shall he equal to the amount of annual rent for the first
four years with the addition of one-tenth part thereof and for the five years
from the tenth to the fourteenth year the annual rent shall he equal to the
amount of the annual rent for the preceding five years together with the
addition of one-tenth part thereof Provided that the Governor or the lessee
may during the last year of the expired lease or the currency of the fourth
or ninth years of the renewed lease demand that the rent for the succeeding
term of four years or five years and five years respectively shall he deter-
mined by arbitration and where such arbitration shall be required by the
Governor it shall be by notice published in the Government Gazette under
the hand of the Secretary for Lands and when the lessee demands such
arbitration it shall be by notice in the form contained in the schedule F to
this Act delivered at the office of the Secretary for Lands in Brisbane and
such notification shall be accompanied by a sum of five pounds to cover the
costs of such appraisement on the part of the Government Provided that
in no case shall the annual rent be appraised at less than one pound per
square mile or more than four pounds per square mile on the available area
not being less than one-half of the gross area of the run.
Rent in special cases.
44. When neither the Governor or the lessee shall require the rent of a
run to be appraised in the fourth or ninth year of the term of lease the
increased rent for the ensuing period of five years shall be computed in
reference to the actual rent for the last year of the previous period whether
such previous rent has been determined by appraisement or otherwise.
Renewed leases subject to same conditions as original.
45. In all other respects than hereinbefore specified or to be specified in
any regulations to be lawfully made for the working of this Act all renewed
leases shall be liable to the same general conditions as original leases.
Aebitsation.
Commissioner to act as arbitrator for the Crown.
46. All arbitrations and appraisements under this Act shall be con-
ducted as follows—
Commissioner to be arbitrator unless another appointed.
(1.) The Commissioner of Crown Lands for the district shall act as arbi-
trator for the Crown unless the Governor shall appoint a special
arbitrator.
Lessee to appoint arbitrator on his behalf.
(2.) The lessee or licensee shall nominate an arbitrator to act on his behalf
and in the case of disputed boundaries where the matter at issue is
between the lessees of adjacent runs such lessee shall nominate his
arbitrator and such nomination shall be in writing in such form as
may be required by regulations issued under this Act.
Appointment of umpire.
(3.) Before proceeding to determine any matter the arbitrators shall pro-
ceed to the appointment of an umpire to decide in case the arbitrators
fail to agree to an award.


Lessee failing to appoint arbitrator commissioner to make appointment.
(4.) If a lessee or licensee shall fail to appoint an arbitrator to act on his
behalf within two months from the time of being required by the
commissioner to make such appointment such commissioner may
appoint an arbitrator to act on behalf of such lessee or licensee and
the award of such arbitrator shall be valid and effectual as though he
had been appointed by the lessee or licensee for whom he acts.
Arbitrators failing to appoint umpire Governor may nominate.
(5.) If the arbitrators fail to agree in the appointment of an umpire
within two months from the date of their appointment then the Gov-
ernor may nominate and appoint the umpire Provided that no paid
servant of the Government shall be such umpire.
Proceedings not to slop on failure to agree on umpire.
(6.) Notwithstanding that arbitrators may fail in the agreement to appoint
an umpire they may on formal record of such disagreement proceed
to consider the matter at issue and make an award without waiting the
appointment of an umpire by the Governor.
Umpire to decide if award delayed for six months.
(7.) If the arbitrators shall fail to make an award within sis months from
the date of their appointment the Secretary for Lands may require
that the matter at issue shall be referred to the umpire for his decision.
Reference to umpire may be on special points.
(8.) Arbitrators failing to agree to an award may refer either the whole
matter to the umpire or only such points as they cannot agree upon or
the amounts offered on the one part and demanded on the other part
and the award of the umpire shall be limited to the points submitted
or the amount of rent to be determined and shall not in any case
exceed the limits offered by the one arbitrator or demanded by the
other.
Awards to be published.
47. The material substance of every award by arbitrators or an umpire
shall be published in the Government Gazette within three months Provided
that if within three months from such publication it shall appear that there
are valid objections thereto the Governor may by notice published in the
Government Gazette declare such award to be void and of no effect and shall
require that the matter be again referred to arbitration.
Certain persons disqualified to act as arbitrators or umpire.
48. No lessee or licensee shall appoint as an arbitrator on his behalf
any person who has any pecuninary interest in the award sought nor any
person in the paid employ of such lessee or licensee nor shall the Chief
Commissioner of Crown Lands in any case be appointed as an umpire.
Costs.
49. Each party to an arbitration shall pay his own costs in regard to the
arbitrator acting on his behalf and the costs incurred by the umpire shall be
borne equally.


General Conditions.
Penalty for non-payment of rent.
50. If default be made by any lessee in tbe payment of any rent the
lease shall be forfeited but the lessee shall be permitted to defeat the forfeiture
and prevent its becoming absolute by payment within ninety days from the
date of the original rent day of the full annual rent with the addition of a
sum equal to one-fourth part thereof by way of penalty but unless the whole
of the said yearly rent together with such penalty as aforesaid shall be paid
within the term of ninety days counting fi'om the original rent day inclusive
the lease shall be absolutely forfeited.
Rates to he paid pending assessment hy arbitration.
61. When the rent of a run has been required to be determined by
appraisement the lessee shall until the appraisement has been completed
continue to pay into the Treasury in Brisbane on the thirtieth day of
September in each year the amount of annual rent which would have been
due under the provisions of this Act if no such appraisement had been
demanded or required and when the amount of rent has been determined by
appraisement the lessee shall on the next thirtieth day of September pay into
the Treasury any arrears of rent or be allowed a remission of rent to adjust
the balance due to the Treasury or lessee as the case may be.
Transfer of leases.
52. Licenses and leases of runs may be transferred on application to the
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands Provided that before the transfer is
registered the lessee or licensee shall pay into the hands of the said chief
commissioner or other officer duly appointed to receive the same a transfer
fee of one pound and one shilling for every such run and returns of such
transfers shall be published from time to time.
Accepted tender Spc. equivalent to lease in certain proceedings.
53. As against all parties but Her Majesty and Her successors or those
lav fully claiming under her or them in any action suit or other proceeding
civil or criminal for the recovery of possession or damages for trespass or the
infliction of any fine or penalty in relation to any run of which a lease from
the Crown shall not be in force it shall be lawful for any person claiming such
run under any accepted tender license or promise or contract for a” lease
made or issued by the Crown or any of its agents lawfully authorised to
plead and put in evidence such accepted tender license or promise or contract
for lease which for the purpose of any such action suit or proceeding shall
be received as equivalent to an actual and then present lease from the Crowe.
Pre-emptive right over improved lands.
54. For the purpose of securing permanent improvements it shall be
lawful for the Governor to sell to the lessee of a run without competition at
the price of ten shillings per acre any portion of such run in one block not
being more nor less than two thousand five hundred and sixty acres and the
boundaries of any such block shall as nearly as the natural features of the
country and adjacent boundaries will admit be equilateral and rectangular.
Resumption of run in whole or in part.
55. The Governor in Council may by notification in the Government
Gazette resume from lease any portion of a run not exceeding in the whole two
thousand five hundred and sixty acres Provided that if it shall be deemed


expedient to resume any further portion or the -whole of a run the Secretary
for Lands shall give six months’ notice of such intention in writing to the
lessee and after the expiration of said term shall lay before both Houses of
Parliament a schedule of the lands to be resumed from lease and if the said
schedule shall not have been dissented from by resolution passed by both
Houses of Parliament within sixty days during a session of Parliament the
said reservations shall take effect and the lessee of all land so reserved may
require that lands alienated or selected for sale in virtue of such reservations
shall be computed in deduction of the rent paid by such lessee and the
amount of rent to be remitted shall be determined by arbitration in reference
to the grazing capabilities of the said leasehold.
Grazing right over resumed portions and compensation for improvements.
56. Notwithstanding any notice of resumption the lessee shall have a
right to depasture on the resumed portion until the same shall be actually
alienated or otherwise disposed of by the Crown when the lessee shall be
entitled to claim and be paid by the Crown the value of his improvements
erected or made on the lands so alienated or disposed of such value to be
ascertained by arbitration under the provisions of this Act.
Compensation for fencing to he allowed in certain cases.
57. In respect to fencing payment shall be made by the Crown to the
lessee according to such valuation subject to a reduction of one-fourteenth
part of the value of the fence at its original cost for each and every clear
year that has elapsed from the date of the erection of the fence up to the
fourteenth year therefrom Provided further that no claim for compensation
shall be entertained or allowed for any fence which has been erected for a
period exceeding fourteen years on land alienated or disposed of as men-
tioned in the preceding clause.
Description of leases to he published in the “ Gazette .”
58. Three months before the issue of any lease for pastoral purposes
the Secretary for Public Lands shall publish in the Government Gazette the
description of the country proposed to be inserted in such lease and if any
person shall deem his interests prejudiced by the issue of such lease he shall
within three months from the publication of such description lodge a written
statement of his objections w'ith the Secretary for Public Lands and shall at
the same time deposit a sum of five pounds in liquidation of the cost of
inquiring into the said objections and on the receipt of any such objection
the Secretary for Public Lands shall cause the matter at issue to be sub-
mitted to arbitration as provided by this Act and the description of the
boundaries to be inserted in the lease shall be the boundaries awarded by the
arbitrators or umpires as the case may be unless the said award shall be
declared void and of no effect as provided by the forty-seventh section of the
Act in which case the matter shall be again dealt with as required by the
said section and a lease shall be issued in pursuance of the final award.
Description of leased lands.
59. In any license or lease it shall be sufficient if the land thereby
granted or demised be defined according to the best description of such land
and of the boundaries thereof which may have been procurable notwith-
standing that such description may not have been prepared after actual


survey and no license or lease shall be liable to be set aside by reason only
of the imperfection of any such description so long as the land shall thereby
be defined with reasonable certainty.
Proviso for amendment of defective descriptions.
60. Provided that if after the issue of any such lease it shall be found
on survey or by mutual consent of the parties interested that the description
of the boundaries of the run therein contained does not describe with* suf-
ficient certainty the lands thereby intended to be demised it shall be com-
petent for the Governor to cancel such lease by proclamation to that effect
and thereupon issue a fresh lease for the remainder of the term and. embody
therein an amended description of the run.
Cost of survey to be paid by lessee but not exceeding six shillings per
square mile.
61. If any runs which have been licensed or leased shall have been or
shall be surveyed by the Government the cost of such survey not in any case
exceeding six shillings per square mile on the area comprised in the run shall
be defrayed by the licensee or lessee (as the case may be) and in default of
payment within six months from the date on which such payment shall have
been required by notice published in the Government Gazette the Governor
may cancel the licenses or leases of the runs for which the cost of survey
has not been paid Provided always that the cost of all surveys between
adjoining runs required to be defrayed by the licensees or lessees of such
runs respectively shall be divided and apportioned according to the propor-
tion the dividing lines shall respectively bear to the areas of such runs
respectively and any licensee or lessee having paid any such cost of survey
shall be entitled to recover from the licensee or lessee of the adjoining run a
fair proportion of such cost accordingly.
Passage of stock.
62. Any person driving horses cattle or sheep along any road used for
the purpose of travelling may depasture the same on any unenclosed Crown
lands within the distance of one-half mile of such road notwithstanding any
lease of any such land for pastoral purposes Provided that unless pre-
vented by rain or flood such horses or cattle shall be moved at least eight
miles and such sheep at least six miles in one and the same direction within
every successive period of twenty-four hours and any person or persons
driving horses cattle or sheep and depasturing the same contrary to the
provisions of this clause shall forfeit and pay a sum not exceeding twenty
pounds to be recovered before any two justices of the peace at any court of
petty sessions and for every subsequent offence shall forfeit a like sum
Provided that no information for any subsequent offence shall be laid until
the expiration of one week succeeding the filing of any preceding infor-
mation.
Fencing Act to apply.
63. All Crown lands leased for pastoral pmrposes under this Act shall
be deemed land within the meaning of “ The Fencing Act of 1861 ” and any
lessee from the Crown for the time being of any such lands shall be deemed
the owner or occupier thereof within the meaning of the said Act The said
“ Fencing Act of 1861 ” shall apply to all such lands as aforesaid in the same
way as if the said Act had been passed concurrently with this Act Provided
that the lessee of Crown lands adjoining a run on ydiich a boundary fence


may be erected shall be exempt from payment of his share of the cost
thereof so long as he does not in any way avail himself of the advantage of
such fence as part of the fencing of his own run.
Proclamation of a gold field shall not withdraw from lease.
64. If the whole or any part of a run be proclaimed as a gold field it
shall not thereby be withdrawn from pastoral lease but the lessee may
continue to occupy the same and to depasture his stock thereon in common
with the holders of miners’ rights or business licenses who may be resident
on such gold field subject to such regulations as may fiom time to time be
made by the Governor in Council respecting such common occupation
Provided that a reduction of rent be made in proportion to the decreased
carrying capacity of the run to the lessee to be assessed by aibitration.
Licenses to cut timber Sfc. may he granted TProvided that any reasonable
objection may be entertained by Government.
65. The Governor may (subject to any regulations to be made as
hereinafter enacted) authorise the commissioners or bench of magistrates to
issue licenses for any term not exceeding one year to enter any Crown lands
whether under lease or license or not and to cut and take therefrom any
timber and to dig for and remove any gravel stone brick-earth shells or other
material but not within two miles of any head station unless by consent of
the lessee Provided that the fee fixed for such license shall be paid in
advance Provided also that any lessee may make any reasonable objection
to the granting of such license and the granting or withholding of such
license after any objection shall have been made to the commissioner or
bench of magistrates shall be determined by the Governor Provided that
any lessee may by notice in writing to that effect given to any such licensee
restrict him or her from exercising his or her rights as such licensee in any
given spot to be mentioned in such notice for a period not exceeding one
month and such licensee may within such period appeal to the commissioner
or nearest bench of magistrates who shall have power respectively to decide
the matter in issue between the parties and such licensee shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding twenty pounds if after such notice given as aforesaid
or in the event of the matter in issue being decided against him he or she
shall exercise the right of a licensee and such penalty maybe recovered
before any two justices of the peace in petty sessions.
Use of timber or material by lessees.
66. Lessees of runs shall be permitted to cut and use such timber and
material for building and other purposes as may be required by them as
tenants of their several lands.
Removal of timber and material by other than lessees.
67. Except as provided in this Act lessees of runs shall not have power
to restrict other persons duly authorised by the Government either from
cutting or removing timber or material for building or other purposes or
from searching for any metal or mineral within the run leased.
Right to enter on lands.
68. Nothing in this Act or in any license or lease granted thereunder
shall be held to prejudice or interrupt the right of the Governor or of any
officer duly authorised in that behalf by the Governor to go upon any lands
included in any license or lease or to make any survey inspection or
examination of the same.


In case of dispute Governor may refer.
69. Whenever any dispute shall arise as to the boundaries of any runs
it shall be lawful for the Governor or the officer duly authorised to act in
that behalf to require the same to be settled by arbitration and such
arbitration shall be carried out by arbitrators one to be appointed by each of
the lessees the boundaries of whose runs are in dispute and shall be in all
other respects conducted in the manner provided in this Act with respect to
the determination of the rent of such runs.
Declaration to he made.
70. Before any commissioner of Crown lands arbitrator appraiser or
umpire shall enter into the consideration of any matter referred to him he
shall in the presence of a justice of the peace make and subscribe the
following declaration that is to say —
“I do solemnly and sincerely declare that I have
“ no pecuniary or other interest either directly or indirectly in
“ the matter in question that I will faithfully and honestly and
“to the best of my skill and ability hear and determine the
“ matters referred to me under the provisions of * The Pastoral
“ Teases Act of 1869.’
“ Made and subscribed in the presence of at
“ on the day of in the year
And such declaration shall be annexed to the award when made.
Removal of trespassers.
71. On information in writing preferred by any commissioner of Crown
lauds or other person duly authorised in that behalf to any justice of the
peace setting forth that any person is in the unlawful occupation of any
Crown lands or land reserved or dedicated for any public purpose such
justice shall issue his summons for the appearance before any two justices
of the peace at a place and time therein specified of the persons so informed
against and at such time and place such justices on the appearance of such
person or on due proof of the service of such summons on him or at his usual
or last place of abode or business shall hear and inquire into the subject
matter of such information and on being satisfied of the truth thereof either
by the admission of the person informed against or on other evidence such
justices shall issue their warrant addressed to the sheriff or deputy sheriff or
commissioner of Crown lands or to any chief or district constable requiring
him forthwith to dispossess and remove such person from such land and to
take possession of the same on behalf of Her Majesty and the person to
whom such warrant is addressed shall forthwith carry the same into
execution Provided that the lessee or manager of a run may in like manner
lay an information against any person who shall be in unlawful occupation of
any part of the land included in his license lease or promise of lease.
Penalties for trespassing.
72. Any person unless lawfully claiming under any subsisting lease or
license or otherwise under this Act who shall be found occupying any Crown
lands or land granted reserved or dedicated for public purposes either by
residing or by erecting any hut or building thereon or by clearing digging
up enclosing or cultivating any part thereof or cutting timber otherwise
than firewood not for sale thereon shall be liable on conviction to a penalty
not exceeding five pounds for the first offence and not exceeding ten pounds


for the second offence and not exceeding twenty pounds for the third or
any subsequent offence Provided that no information shall be laid for any
second or subsequent offence until thirty clear days shall have elapsed from
the date of the previous conviction.
Limitation of action.
73. All actions or other proceedings against any commissioner of Crown
lands or other officer acting under the provisions of this Act for anything
wrongly done under or against the provisions of this Act shall be com-
menced within twelve months after the matter complained of was committed
and not otherwise And notice in writing of any such action and of the
cause thereof shall be given to the defendant one month at least before the
commencement of the proceeding And in every such proceeding the
defendant may plead the general issue and give this Act and the special
matter in evidence at any trial to be had thereupon and no plaintiff shall
recover in any such proceeding if tender of sufficient amends shall have been
made before the same was commenced or if a sufficient sum of money shall
have been paid into court after such commencement by or on behalf of the
defendant together with costs incurred up to the time And if a verdict
shall pass for the defendant or the plaintiff shall become nonsuit or discon-
tinue such proceeding or if upon demurrer or otherwise judgment shall
be given against the plaintiff the defendant shall recover his full costs as
between attorney and client and have the like remedy for the same as any
defendant has by law in other cases.
No quashing for error nor certiorari.
74. INo order judgment or proceeding made touching or concerning the
matters aforesaid or touching or concerning the conviction of any offender
against this Act shall be quashed or vacated for want of form only or be
removed or removable by certiorari into the Supreme Court.
Instruments under Act to he evidence.
75. Any lease or other instrument issued under this Act may be proved
in all legal proceedings by the production of a certified copy thereof signed
by the officer to he authorised for that purpose under any regulation made
as hereinafter enacted.
Penalty for false declaration.
76. Any person making a false declaration under this Act shall be
deemed guilty of perjury.
Governor may make regulations,
77. It shall be lawful for the Governor from time to time to make vary
and alter regulations respecting the forms of leases and licenses granted
under this Act and respecting all matters and things necessary to give effect
to the same and every such regulation shall he published in the Government
and when so published shall have the force of law Provided such
regulations are in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Regulations to he laid before Parliament.
78. A copy of all regulations made under the authority of this Act shall
be laid before the Parliament within fourteen days from the publication
thereof if the Parliament shall be then sitting and if the Parliament shall
not be then sitting then witbln fourteen days after the commencement of the
next session.


Short title.
79. This Act shall be entitled and maybe cited as “ The Pastoral Leases
Act of 1869.”
SCHEDULES.
The Orders in Council and Regulations issued under the Imperial Act 9 and 10
Victoria chapter 104.
Parliament of Queensland —
Pastoral Leases Act of 1863 ... ... ... 27 \ic. Ho. 17«
And the Regulations issued respectively thereunder.
Application for license to occupy a new run of Crown lands in the Unsettled
Districts.
Received this day of 18 at o’clock.
Commissioner of Crown Lands
District.
No.
In accordance with the provisions of “The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869”
do hereby apply for a license to occupy for one year the
Crown lands known as the run in the district of
which lands are particularly described in the annexed schedule and I herewith
tender the sum of five shillings for each square mile comprised within the area of
the said run and I also agree to pay any further fee at the same rate that may be
demanded for additional area found to exist after sui’vcy or other examination by
the Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Given under hand this day of 18
The Commissioner of Crown Lands,
District of
Received from the sum of pounds shillings
being the amount of occupation fee chargeable on the above application.
Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Schedule to application for license.
Commissioner’s District •
Name of Run:
Estimated area—
Square miles.
Available for pastoral purposes
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within boundaries
Description of the land ly reference to leading geographical features or mar Iced or
determined boundary lines.


Queensland.
License No.
District of
License to occupy Crown lands for pastoral purposes for one year.
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Last oral Leases Act of 1860 ”
I Commissioner of Crown Lands for the district of
do hereby authorize of to occupy for pastoral purposes
for the term of one year from the date hereof the land known as the
run in the district of and which lands are more particularly
described in the schedule annexed such occupation to be subject to the conditions
prescribed in the aforesaid Act.
Given under my hand this day of 18 .
Commissioner of Crown Lands for
the District.
Schedule to license to occupy Croivn lands.
Commissioner’s District:
Name of Rims
Estimated area—
Square miles.
Available for pastoral purposes .
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within the boundaries
Description of the land iy reference to leading geographical features or marked
or determined boundary lines.
Application for a lease of a licensed run of Crown lands in the Unsettled Districts..
Received this day of 186 .
Commissioner of Crown Lands
District.
No.
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Tastoral Leases Act of 1869
of do hereby apply for a lease for twenty
years of the run called in tbe district of which is
particularly described in the annexed schedule and of which
is the licensed occupant in virtue of a license No. dated the
day of 186 and do hereby agree in the event of a lease
being issued and notified in the Government Gazette to pay forthwith into the-
Colonial Treasury in Brisbane the amount of the first year’s rent.
Given under hand this day of 186 .


Schedule referred to in the foregoing application.
Commissioner’s District:
Total comprised within the boundaries
Available for pasturage
Unavailable for pasturage...
Description of the lands referred to and marlced or determined boundary lines.
Application to have run appraised.
In pursuance of the provisions contained in “ The Pastoral Leases Act of
1869 ” I being the lessee of the run in the
district of do hereby require that the annual rent of the said run
chargeable from the year to the year of the lease be
determined by appraisement in the manner prescribed in “ The Pastoral Leases
Act of 1869 ” and I do appoint to act ae valuer on my
behalf to appraise the rent to be annually paid during the above-mentioned period.
Given under my hand at this day of 18
Signed by the said
day of
> [Signature]
J.P. )
The Honourable the Secretary for Lands,
Received from the sum of pounds being the a mount
required by the above recited Act in liquidation of the cost of appraisement.
Colonial Treasurer.
Brisbane 18


“ Pastoral Leases Act oe 1869.”
Application for license to occupy an unwatered run of Crown lands in the
Unsettled Districts.
Received this day of ] 8 at o clock.
Commissioner of Crown Lands District.
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ” and
of the regulations published in pursuance thereof* off
do hereby apply for a license to occupy for one year as an unwatered run the Crown
lands known as in the district of
which lands are particularly described in the annexed schedule. And I hereby
certify that the whole of the said lands are more than five miles distant from any
permanent water.
Given under hand this day of 18 .
The Commissioner of Crown Lands for the District of
Schedule to application for license.
Commissioner’s District:
Name of Run:
Estimated area :
Square miles.
Available for pastoral purposes
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within boundaries
Description of the land hy reference to leading geographical features or marked
or determined boundary lines.
!' 1 ’
SCHEDULE H.
“ Pastoral Leases Act oe 1869.
License to occupy an unwatered run for one year.
License No.
District of
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 and
of the regulations published by the Government in pursuance thereof I the
Commissioner of Crown Lands for the district of
do hereby license of to occupy for pastoral purposes
for the term of one year from the date hereof the lands known as the unwatered
run in the district of and which lands are
particularly described in the schedule annexed such occupation to be subject to all
the conditions prescribed in the aforesaid Act and the regulations published in
pursuance thereof for the occupation of unwatered runs.
Given under my hand this day of 18 .
Commissioner of Crown Lands for the District.
* State Christian and Surname in full, t State place of residence or nearest post office.


Schedule to license to occupy Crown lands as an unwatered run.
Commissioner’s District;
Name of Eun:
Estimated area :
Square miles.
Available for past oral purposes
Unavailable for pastoral purposes i
Total area comprised -within the boundaries
Description of the land ly reference to leading geographical features or marked
or determined boundary lines.
SCHEDULE I.
“ Pastoral Leases Act oe 1869.”
Application to surrender a lease of a run and to obtain a new lease for twenty-
one years.
District of
Name of run
I the undersigned claiming a lease under* the
run known as in the district of do hereby surrender
said lease or promise of lease and apply for a new lease for twenty-one years in
accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869.
Given under my hand at this day of 18 .
(, Signature )
Signed by the said this
day of 18 in the presence >
(Signature) 3Jc.
* State the Order in Council or Act under which the run is held.
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, Ist December, 1869.
“ PASTOEAL LEASES ACT 1869.”
The Regulations hitherto in force under the provisions of the Act 2/
Victoria, No. 17, having been repealed by the Act 33 Victoria, No. 10,
except as regards existing contracts, His Excellency the Governor, with the
advice of the Executive Council, directs it to be notified that the following
Regulations have been established under the provisions of “ The Pastoral
Leases Act of 1869.”
By His Excellency’s Command,
JAMES TAYLOR.


Regulations.
Duties of Commissioners of Crown Danis.
1. The duties of the Commissioners of Crown Lands shall consist in
executing the provisions of this Act in the manner specified in the following
Regulations, and in such other instructions as they may, from time to time,
receive.
Surrender of leases under previous Acts.
2. Applications to surrender leases of runs under the provisions of the
fifth clause of the Act will require to be made on the form A, in the schedule
hereto annexed, and to be forwarded to the Chief Commissioner of Crown
Lands’ Office, Brisbane, before the Ist day of January, 1871. A separate
application must be lodged for each run ; and where a lease has been issued,
the same will have to be returned.
Applications for licenses to he made to district commissioner.
3. Applications for licenses to occupy Crown lands for pastoral purposes,
in the unsettled districts, must be made to the commissioner for the district
in which the land is situate, and shall be in the form B in the schedule
hereto annexed.
Application to he accompanied hy cash, or Treasury receipts, and hy
declaration of stocking.
4. Every such application shall be accompanied by a declaration, in the
form C, that the run has been stocked to the extent of, at least, twenty-five
sheep, or five head of cattle, for every square mile; and also by an amount
in cash, or a Treasury receipt for a sum at the rate of five shillings for each
square mile of area contained in the run.
Receipts for license fees may he obtained at the Treasury.
5. Persons desiring to procure Treasury receipts for the amount of
license fees may obtain the same by paying any sum not less than £6 ss.
into the Treasury in Brisbane, when a receipt for the whole amount, or
receipts for separate portions thereof, not less than £6 55., will be issued to
the applicant as he may desire.
Balance of Treasury receipts available for future applications.
6. In the case of a Treasury receipt being for a larger sum than is
required to meet the license fee of a run, the commissioner or recording
clerk will endorse thereon the amount expended and the balance remaining
available; retaining a copy thereof to be attached to the application, and
returning the original to the holder.
Treasury receipt transferable hy delivery.
7. Treasury receipts for license fees will be transferable by delivery,
and will be received from the holder by the commissioner, without reference
to the name of the person to whom the receipt was issued.
Receipts issued under previous Acts available under these Regulations.
8. Treasury receipts for license fees issued under the Act twenty-sixth
Victoria, number eight, or Act twenty-seventh Victoria, number seventeen,
will be available for licenses under this Act.


Advertising license fee to he paid.
9. Before the issue of a license, the commissioner is empowered to
demand from the applicant the payment of five shillings, to cover the cost of
publishing the description in the Government Gazette, as provided for in
the eighteenth section of the Act, and to withhold the license until such
payment is made.
Applications for leases to he made within nine months.
10. Applications (in the form E, hereto annexed) for leases for twenty-
one years of runs held under annual licenses, must be lodged at the office
of the commissioner for the district within nine months from the date of
the license under which the run has been acquired.
Declaration of stocking required before issue of lease.
11. The licensee will also be required to produce to the commissioner a
declaration, in the form F, that the run has been stocked during the whole
term of the license.
Additional license fee to he paid when the area of run is found to he in excess.
12. If, after the issue of a license, it is ascertained that the run contains
a greater available area than that on which license fee has been paid, the
licensee will be required to pay the license fee of five shillings for each
square mile of additional available area; and unless the same be paid to the
district commissioner within ninety days from the date of the notice that
such further payment is due, the license may be declared forfeited. Should,
however, the excess be found to exist during the currency of the lease, the
arrears of back rent chargeable on such excess within the limit prescribed
in the ninth section of the Act must, in all cases, be paid on demand, if the
lessee desires to retain the country.
When the area of a run is found to exceed 100 square miles, the excess to he
included in a separate lease.
13. Where, after the issue of a license or lease, a run shall be found to
contain a greater available area than one hundred square miles, it will be
optional for the Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council, to
declare in what manner the boundaries of the run shall be altered, so as to
exclude the area which may be in excess of one hundred square miles; and
the area thus excluded from the original run may be leased to the holder
thereof, on condition of paying all arrears of license fee or rent due or to
become due in respect thereof, or may offer the said excessive area to
competition by auction.
Term of lease of excess of area not to exceed original lease.
14. The period for which any such excess of area will be leased, after
separation from the original run, will be the same as the unexpired term of
the lease in which it was previously included.
Special conditions where the area is under 125 square miles.
15. Where the excess of available area over one hundred square miles
is less than twenty-five (25) square miles, such further portion of the one
hundred square miles as may be necessary to make up the said excess to
twenty-five square miles will be deducted from the original run; but if such


deduction reduce the available area thereof to less than that on which rent
has been paid, the lessee shall have the option of taking the lease of the
separated run.
Applications for unwatered runs.
16. Applications for unwatered runs must be made to the district com-
missioner in the form G in the schedule, accompanied by a declaration in
the form H, verifying the truth of the statement contained in the applica-
tion ; and also by an amount in cash, or a Treasury receipt for a sum at the
rate of three shillings per square mile of the area contained in the run.
Commissioner to satisfy himself as to absence of permanent water.
17. Before the issue of a license of an unwatered run, it will be neces-
sary for the commissioner to satisfy himself, by personal inspection or other-
wise, as to the country being destitute of permanent water; and if any doubt
should exist respecting the character of the country applied for, he will be
authorized in withholding the issue of a license until the run is examined
and the true facts of the case ascertained. A fee of five shillings to cover
the cost of advertising the license in the Government Gazette must be paid
to the district commissioner previous to the issue of the license.
Renewal of licenses of unwatered runs.
18. Licensees of unwatered runs may, prior to the expiration of their
licenses, apply to the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands for a renewal of
such license for another year in the form Gin the schedule. The application
will require to bo forwarded through the district commissioner, accompanied
by an amount in cash, or a Treasury receipt equivalent to the occupation
fee originally paid, and also by a statement of the grounds on which the
application is based ; and if the said chief commissioner is satisfied that
sufficient cause is shown, he is authorized to renew such license accordingly,
in the form J in the schedule ; but such renewal shall not in any case be
repeated more than twice in respect of the same run.
Notification of renewals in the “ Gazette .”
19. All renewals of licenses of unwatered runs granted by the Chief
Commissioner of Crown Lands are to be notified in the Government Gazette
from time to time at the cost of the applicant, for which a fee of five
shillings is to be charged.
Application for lease of an unwatered run.
20. Applications in the form E, hereto annexed, for leases for twenty-
one years, of country held under license as an unwatered run, must be
lodged with the district commissioner before the expiration of the license,
or renewal of license, as the case may be, accompanied by a declaration, in
the form F, that the country has been stocked at the time of such applica-
tion.
What shall he deemed available country.
21. In computing the area of a run for the payment of license fees or
rent, no land shall be excluded, as unavailable, except absolutely barren
country or dense scrubs. All grass lands, whether within accessible distance
from permanent water or otherwise, shall be deemed available country.


Registration of contiguous runs as “ consolidated runs.”
22. Where the holder of two or more contiguous runs, not exceeding in
the aggregate two hundred square miles, may desire to register the same as
a consolidated run, he shall make application to the district commissioner,
in the form K annexed hereto ; and the commissioner, unless there he some
objection thereto, shall record the same in the register of the district office,
and such register shall be open to inspection by any person, on the payment
of two shillings and sixpence for each inspection.
Rules applicable to “ consolidated runs.”
23. The following rules will be observed with regard to the registration
of runs as “consolidated runs” :
The aggregate area of the several runs consolidated must not exceed two
hundred square miles in each case.
Ho fractional parts of runs can be included in a consolidated run.
The whole of the separate runs must be under lease or license to the
same lessee or licensee.
Contiguity of consolidated runs affected by transfers.
24. Where a series of runs have been registered as a consolidated run,
as being contiguous, if any one run be transferred, or withdrawn, and thereby
destroy the contiguity of the remainder, the consolidation of the whole of
the runs will thereby terminate and cease to be operative.
Instruments of lease issued on application.
25. Instruments of lease for runs held under this or previous Acts will
be issued, on application to the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands, after
the expiration of the period required by notice in the Government Gazette,
in pursuance of the fifty-eighth section of the Act. On application for a
lease, a fee of ten shillings will require to be paid, to cover the cost of
preparation thereof.
Copy of instruments under Act to be evidence when certified to by proper
officer.
26. In pursuance of the provisions in -the seventy-fifth section of the
Act, the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands is to be deemed the officer
authorized to certify to copies of leases or other instruments issued under
the same that may require to be proved in any legal proceedings. A charge
of half-a-crown will be made for each certificate, independently of the cost
of preparing the copy.
Tkansfees oe Runs.
Mode of application.
27. Holders of runs of which the leases have not been issued may
have their rights of lease transferred by an application addressed to the
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands, and bearing the signature of the
person entitled to the lease, attested by a magistrate, or a commissioner of
the Supreme Court of Queensland, or a notary public. On such application
being recorded, the applicant will be debarred from all further claim to the
lease, the right to which will thenceforth become vested in the transferree.
Runs of insolvents, or of parties absent or deceased.
28. In the event of the licensee, lessee, or the holder of the promise of
lease of any run dying, or being declared insolvent, or being absent from
the colony, the notification of transfer of any such run may be made by his


legal representatives, or the representative of his estate ; but the applica-
tion must be accompanied by a certificate from the Crown solicitor of the
applicant’s power to sign the notification referred to.
Suns, leases of which have been issued.
29. In all cases where the leases of runs have been issued, no notices of
transfer will be recorded unless the same are accompanied by the instruments
of lease, in order that the names of the proposed transferrees may be endorsed
thereon by the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Separate applications.
30. A separate application must be made for the recording of the
transfer of each run, in the form marked N.
Dues in arrear.
31. No notification of transfer of any run will be recorded, on which
any dues of the Crown are in arrear, or in respect to which the requirements
of the Pastoral Acts have not been complied with.
Fees.
32. A fee of one pound and one shilling sterling must in every case be
paid into the office of the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands prior to the
transfer being completed.
Forms.
33. The forms marked A to N are to be used for the purposes of this
Act, as specified in the above regulations.
SCHEDULES.
“PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 1869.”
Applications to surrender a lease of a run, and to obtain a new lease for twenty-
one years.
District of
Name of Run:
• the undersigned claiming a lease underf
the run known as in the district of
do hereby surrender said lease or promise of lease, and apply for a new lease for
twentv-one years, in accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of
1869.”
Given under hand at this day of 18
(Signature )
Signed by the said this
day of 18 in the presence of )
(. Signature )
* I or we as the case may be.
t State the Order in Council or Act under which the run is held.


Application for license to occupy a new run of Crown lands in the Unsettled
Districts.
Received this day of 18 ,at o’clock.
Commissioner of Crown Lands,
No. District.
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,”
(*) of (f) do hereby apply for a license to occupy for one year
the Crown lands known as the run in the district of which lands
are particularly described in the annexed schedule ; and I herewith tender the sum
of five shillings for each square mile comprised within the area of the said run, and
I also agree to pay any further fee at the same rate that may he demanded for
additional area found to exist after survey, or other examination by the commissioner
of Crown lands.
Given under hand this day of 18
The Commissioner of Crown Lands,
District of
Received from the sum of pounds shillings,
being the amount of occupation fee chargeable on the above application.
Commissioner of Crown Lands.
(*) I or we, and state Christian and surname in full,
(t) State place of residence.
Schedule to application for license.
Commissioner’s District:
Name of Run:
Estimated area—
Square miles.
Available for pastoral purposes
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within boundaries
Description of the land by reference to leading geographical features or marked
or determined boundary lines.
I, , being the (*) of the run now applied for, called
in the district of do solemnly declare that the said run
has been stocked by me to the extent of one-fourth of its grazing capabilities, as
defined by the twenty-third section of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,” and
that the run continues to be so stocked to the present time with sheep
and cattle.
(Signature)
Declared before me, at this day of 18 •
J.P.
(*) Occupant or manager for such occupant.


Queensland.
License No.
License Date
District of
License to occupy a new run of Crown lands for pastoral purposes for one year.
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869)”
I, Commissioner of Crown Lands for the district of
do hereby authorise of to occupy for pastoral purposes for the
term of one year from the date hereof, the land known as the run in the
district of and which lands are more particularly described in the
schedule annexed ; such occupation to be subject to the conditions prescribed in the
aforesaid Act.
Given under my hand this day of 18
Commissioner of Crown Lands for the District.
Schedule to license to occupy a new run of Crown lands.
Commissioner’s District:
Name of Run:
Estimated Area—
Square miles.
Available for pastoral purposes...
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within the boundaries
Description of the land by reference to leading geographical features or marked or
determined boundary lines.
Application for a lease of a licensed run of Crown lands in the Unsettled Districts.
Received this day of 18 .
Commissioner of Crown Lands,
District.
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,”
(*) , of (f) , do hereby apply for a lease for twenty-one
years of the run called , in the district of , which is
particularly described in the annexed schedule, and of which (+) the
licensed occupant, in virtue of a license No. , dated the day of
18 , and do hereby agree, in the event of a lease being issued and
notified in the Government Gazette, to pay forthwith into the Colonial Treasury, in
Brisbane, the amount of the first year’s rent.
Given under hand this day of 18 .
• I or we, and state Christian and surname in full,
f State place of residence.
X I am, or we are.


Schedule referred to in the foregoing application.
Commissioner’s District:
No. of License:
Date of License:
Name of Run:
Estimated Area—
Square miles.
Available for pasturage
Unavailable for pasturage
Total comprised within the boundaries
Description of the lands referred to, and marJced or determined hound ary lines.
Declaration to he made hy the licensed occupant or lessee of a run [or his manager']
that such run has been stocked in accordance tvith “ The Pastoral Leases Act
of 1869.”
I ) , being the ( # ) of the run called
, in the district of , do solemnly declare that tbo
said run has been stocked and continues to be stocked to the extent of one-fourth of
its grazing capabilities, according to the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of
1869” (33 Victoria, No. 10), from the day of >IB ,to the
present time.
(Signature.)
Declared before me at ,this day of 18
J.P.
* Licensed occupant, or manager for such licensed occupant or lessee.
Gr.
“ PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 1869.”
Application for license to occupy an unwatered run of Crown lands in the Unsettled
Districts.
Received this day of 18 , at
o’clock.
Commissioner of Crown Lands, District.
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,” and
of the regulations published in pursuance thereof, ( # ) of (f)
* I or we, and state Christian and surname in fall,
f State place of residence.


do hereby apply for a license to occupy for one year, as an unwatered run, the Crown
lands known as , in the district of , which lands
are particularly described in the annexed schedule. And I hereby certify that the
whole of the said lands are more than five miles distant from any permanent water.
Given under hand this day of , 18
The Commissioner of Crown Lands, District of
Received from the sum of pounds
shillings, being the amount of occupation fee chargeable
on the above application.
Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Schedule to application for License.
Commissioner’s district:
Name of Run;
Estimated area —
Square miles.
Available for pastoral purposes
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within boundaries ...
Description of the land by reference to leading geographical features or marked or
determined boundary lines.
I, being the applicant [or agent for such applicant] of
the unwatered run now applied for, called , in the
district of , do solemnly declare that the said run
contains no permanent water, and that no such water is existing on any vacant
‘Crown lands situated within a distance of five miles in a straight line from any
boundary of the said run.
(Signature.)
Declared before me at
this day of 18 .)


“ PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 1869.”
License to occupy an unwatered run for one year.
License date
License No.
District of
In accordance with, the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,
and of the regulations published by the Government in pursuance thereof, I
, the Commissioner of Crown Lands for the
district of , do hereby license
of to occupy for pastoral purposes, for the term of one
year from the date hereof, the lands known as the unwatered run
in the district of , and which lands are particularly
described in the schedule annexed ; such occupation to be subject to all the con-
ditions prescribed in the aforesaid Act, and the regulations published in pursuance
thereof, for the occupation of unwatered runs.
Given under hand this day of ,18 .
Commissioner of Crown Lands for the district.
Schedule to license to occupy Crown lands as an umuatered run.
Commissioner’s District:
Name of Run:
Square miles.
Estimated area—
Available for pastoral purposes
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
TotaTarea comprised within the boundaries
Description of the land by reference to leading geographical features or marTced or
determined boundary lines.
“PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 1869.”
Renewal of license to occupy an unwatered run for one year.
License No.
License Date
District of
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869, ’ and
of the regulations published by the Government in pursuance thereof, L »
the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands for the Colony of Queensland, do hereby
renew the license issued to , of >
license expired on ; and do hereby authorize the said °
occupy for pastoral purposes for the term of one year from the date hereof, the
lands known as the unwatered run , in the district of ,


and which lands arc particularly described in the schedule annexed, such occupation
to he subject to all the conditions prescribed in the aforesaid Act, and the regula-
tions published in pursuance thereof, for the occupation of unwatered runs.
Given under my hand, at , this day of ,18
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Schedule to reneioed license to occupy Crown lands as an unwatered run.
Commissioner’s District:
Name of Run:
Estimated area—
Square miles.
Available for pastoral purposes .
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within the boundaries
Description of the land hy reference to leading geographical features or marked
or determined houndary lines.
Application to register contiguous runs as a consolidated run.
Received this , 18
Commissioner.
I, , being the licensee or lessee of the contiguous runs
hereinafter mentioned, do hereby apply to register the same as a “ consolidated run,”
under the provisions of the Act 33 Victoria, No. 10.
Whether under License
Names of Huns.
Gross Area.
Total aggregate area
Given under my hand, this
day of
The Commissioner of Crown Lands for the district of
,18 .
(Signature)


Application to have run appraised.
In pursuance of the provisions contained in “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,"
I, , being the lessee of the run, in the district
of , do hereby require that the annual rent of the said run charge-
able from the year to the year of the lease be determined
by appraisement in the manner prescribed in “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,”
and I do appoint , of , to act as valuer on my behalf,
to appraise the rent to be annually paid during the abovementioned period.
Given under my hand at , this day of , 18
( Signature )
Signed by the said , this day of ,18
The Honourable the Secretary for Lands.
Received from the sum of pounds, being the amount
required by the above recited Act in liquidation of the cost of appraisement.
Colonial Treasurer.
Brisbane, 18
j Declaration made ly any arbitrator , appraiser , or umpire.
J , do solemnly and sincerely declare that I have no
pecuniary or other interest, either directly or indirectly, in the matter in question ;
that I will faithfully and honestly, and to the best of my skill and ability, hear and
determine the matters referred to me, under the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases
Act of 1869.”
Made and subscribed this day of ,18 ,in the
presence of
Sib, ,
* hereby notify to you that have assigned and transferred
to f of J , all right, title, and interest in and to the run
of Crown lands situate in the district of , and known as ,
now held by under § from the Crown, and hereby
relinquish in favour of the said all and any the rights and privileges
of occupation or of pre-emption which may belong or accrue to as the
holder of a § of said run under the laws and regulations for the time
being.
As witness hand ,at , this day of ,in the
year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
Signed by the said , in the presence of
J.P., or Commissioner of the Supreme Court of
Queensland, or Notary Public.
To the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands, Brisbane.
* I or we.
t State Christian and surname in full.
I State place of residence.
§ Whether under license, lease, or promise of lease.


Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 27tb May, 1870.
REGULATION.
33 Victoria, No. 10.
Sale at auction of leases of forfeited or vacated runs.
In cases where forfeited or vacated runs, the boundaries of which have
not been defined by actual survey, shall be offered for sale by auction, in pur-
suance of the provisions contained in clause twenty-seven of the Act, the
right, title, and interest of the previous lessee in the unexpired term of the
lease will only be sold; and the Government will not hold themselves
responsible for the correctness of the area or boundaries of any unsurveyed
run so offered.
By His Excellency s Command,
J. MALBON THOMPSON.
Crown Lands Office,
Brisbane, 21st July, 1870.
Renewal of Pastoral Leases.
“Pastoral Leases Act of 1869.”
It is hereby notified that applications under the provisions of the forty-
first section of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,” for renewed leases for
fourteen years of the runs in the unsettled districts, the current leases ot
which will expire on and after the 31st December, 1870, may be addressed
to the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands, Brisbane, on forms to be
obtained at his office. These applications will require to be lodged not later
than three months prior to the expiration of the existing leases, as prescribed
“ tlleSaidAct W. ALCOCK TULLY,
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 2nd September, 1870.
His Excellency the Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council,
has been pleased to establish the following Regulations under the provisions
of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,” for regulating the proceedings of
valuers appraising the rent of runs during the terms of renewed leases for
pastoral purposes.
By His Excellency’s Command,
J. MALBON THOMPSON.
Regulations.
1. The appointment of assessors and umpires for the purpose of valuing
runs and appraising the rents to be charged thereon, and also the mode of
procedure in conducting the appraisement so far as prescribed, shall bo
carried out in accordance with the provisions of the 46th, 47th, 48th, and
49th sections of the Act. # . , ..
2. Before entering on any appraisement, the assessors and umpire shall
each'respectively make a declaration in the form set forth in the /oth section


of the Act, and in the schedule annexed, that they have no direct or indirect
pecuniary interest in the matter in question. These declarations will require
to he attached to the award in each appraisement.
3. After the requirements of the preceding clauses have been complied
with, the valuers shall proceed to procure such evidence as may be necessary
for the appraisement of the rent to be paid for the run during the term of
renewed lease, in the following manner :
(a.) The gross area of the run shall be determined as nearly as practicable.
{h.) The proportion of the gross area which may be wholly unavailable
for pastoral purposes at all seasons of the year shall be estimated,
but such amount of unavailable area shall never be computed at more
than one-half the gross area of the run. The gross area, and the area
unavailable for pastoral purposes, shall be entered on the form B.
(e.) The quantity of stock which the run is capable of depasturing in
average years shall be determined, and the number of sheep and cattle
shall be entered separately on the form B.
{d.) The grazing capabilities of the run having been determined, the
annual rent shall be computed at a rate ranging from one pound to
four pounds per square mile of the available area, according to its
capabilities for grazing stock; but as every run, in pursuance of the
23rd section of the Act, is deemed capable of carrying at least one
hundred sheep or twenty, head of cattle per square mile, this estimate
may be adopted as a standard for the guidance of the valuers, who
will thereby be enabled to determine the cases in which the minimum
rent allowed by the Act may be appraised.
( e .) Should the assessors deem that the special advantages of the run are
such that any further amount of rent should be charged, they are to
enter the amount thereof in the form B, and the total sum of such
valuation shall be the rent appraised.
4. The following forms shall be those used for the purposes of these
Regulations :
SCHEDULES.
33 VICTORIA , No. 10.
Application for a renewed lease.
District of
Name of Run
la pursuance of the fortieth and forty-first clauses of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of
1869,”* , the undersigned, f , claiming a lease
under % . ?f the run
known as >* n the distinct
c f , do hereby apply for a renewed
lease thereof, for the term of fourteen years, subject to the provisions of the said
Act.
Q-iven under my hand at , this
day of , 18
(Signature)
Signed by the said , this day
of ,18 ,in the presence of
(Signature) EP.
* I or we, as the case may require,
t State Christian and surname in full,
+ State Act or Order in Council.


follows : —
Area of Run, square miles.
Grazing capabilities— £ Cattle
...
Appraised rental
£
Special advantages of run
...
Total ...
£
And we do accordingly appraise tbe rent at
pounds
shillings and
pence.
Given under our hands, this day of
(Signature)
(Signature)
0.
18
Certificate of valuation.
District of
Name of Run
We, the undersigned, acting as valuers on behalf of the
lessee of the run called > uud
the Commissioner of Crown Lands acting on behalf of
the Crown, under the provisions of the_ Act 33 Victoria, No. 10, do hereby certify
that we assess the area, grazing capabilities, and special advantages of the run as
Claimant of Lease
We, the undersigned,
lessee of the run called
District of
Name of Run :
Appointment of umpire by valuers.
Claimant of Lease:
Wa, the undersigned, acting as valuers on behalf of the
lessee of the run called , and
the Commissioner of Crown Lands, acting on behalf of the Crown, under the pro-
visions of the Act 33 Yictoria, No. 10, do hereby certify that we have appointed
to act as umpire in the appraisement of the annual rent of
the said run.
Given under our hands, at this
day of , 18 .
(Signature)
(Signature)
District of
Name of Run:
Reference to umpire ly valuers
Claimant of Lease:
Wh, the undersigned, acting as valuers on behalf of the
lessee of the run called , and e
Commissioner of Crown Lands, acting on behalf of the Crown, under the provisions
of the Act 33 Victoria, No. 10, do hereby certify that we have appointed
to act ae umpire in the appraisement of the annual rent for the said run.


Appraised rental ...
£
Special advantages of the run
Total -
£
and that having failed to agree to an appraisement of the rent for the reasons
stated in the accompanying documents, numbered respectively , do
accordingly refer the matter at issue for the decision of the said umpire.
The maximum rent agreed to by the valuer for the lessee being £
per annum, and the minimum rent claimed by the valuer on behalf of the Crown
being £ per annum
Given under our hands at , this
day of 18 .
(Signature)
(Signature)
Certificate of valuation by umpire.
District of
Name of Run
Claimant of Lease:
I, the undersigned, , having been appointed umpire to appraise
the rent of the run called , under the provisions of the Act 33
Victoria, No. 10, do hereby certify that I assess the area, grazing capabilities, and
special advantages of the said run as follows :
Area of Run, square miles.
Grazing capabilities — | Cattle " !
day of
Anri I do accordingly appraise the rent at
shillings and
Given under my hand this
pounds
District of
Appointment of valuer by commissioner.
Name of Run;
pence per annum.
,18 .
Claimant of Lease:
Whereas the lessee of the run named has failed to appoint
a valuer to appraise the rent to be paid for a renewed lease thereof, under the pro-
visions of the Act 33 Victoria, No. 10 ; Now, therefore, I,
the Commissioner of Crown Lands for the district of , do
appoint to act as valuer on behalf of the lessee of
the said run.
Given under my hand at > this
day of , 18
Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Appointment of umpire by the Governor.
District of
Name of Run;
Claimant of Lease:
Whereas the lessee of the run called has applied for a
renewed lease thereof, under the provisions •£ the Act 33 Victoria, No. 10, and the


arbitrators appointed to assess tbe rent to be reserved under said lease have failed to
agree in the choice of an umpire : His Excellency the Governor, with the advice of
the Executive Council, has been pleased to appoint to
act as umpire in the appraisement of the rent of said run, in accordance with the
provisions of the said Act,
By His Excellency’s Command,
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, , 18
Declaration of quantity of stock.
District of
Name of Run:
Claimant of Lease:
I, , being the manager for the lessee of the run called
, in the district of , do solemnly
and sincerely declare that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, the average
number of sheep and cattle depastured on the said run, during the period from the
to tiie has been
sheep and cattle.
(Signature)
Declared before me, this )
day of ,18 . ) J-P.
Declaration made by the arbitrator, appraiser, or umpire, in the assessment of
rent for the rim or sections knoivn as
I, , do solemnly and sincerely declare, that I have no
pecuniary or other interest, either directly or indirectly, in the matter in question ;
that I will faithfully and honestly, and to the best of my skill and ability, hear and
determine the matters referred to me, under the provisions of * The Pastoral Leases
Act of 1869.”
Made and subscribed this day b
of ,18 ,in the >
presence of ) J-P.
REGULATION.
Queensland, 7 Proclamation by His Excellency William Wellington
to wit. ) Caiens, Esquire, Companion of the Most Distinguished
(1.5.) Order of St. Michael and St. George, Governor and Com-
W. W. Caiens, mander-in-Chief of the Colony of Queensland and its
Governor. Dependencies.
IN pursuance of the authority in me vested, and in accordance with the
provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,” I, William Wel-
lington Caiens, Esquire, the Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the
Executive Council, do hereby notify and proclaim that the following Regula-
tion, governing the mode of serving notices upon lessees of runs, has been
established under said Act,


Regulation.
Mode of serving notices upon lessees of runs.
« rr.7 A] L n ° ticeS re T uire(l or authorised to be given to lessees of runs, under
Ine Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,” may be served by posting the same in a
registered letter duly stamped, and addressed to the lessee of the run at the
run, or at the principal house on the station of which the run forms part, or
at t.ie lessee s usual place of residence or business within the colonv.
Given under my hand and seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
twenty-fourth day of September, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and seventy-five, and in the thirty-ninth
year of Her Majesty’s reign.
By Command,
WILLIAM FRYAE.
God Save the Queen !
PROCLAMATION.
By His Excellency Sir Abthue Edwaed Kennedy, Knight Commander
r L s -[ of the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and
A E Kennedy St Geor S e ’ Companion of the Most Honourable
'Administrator. ’ °/J er ° f , the Administrator of the Government
oi tiie Colony of Queensland and its Dependencies.
IN pursuance of the power in me vested, I, the Administrator aforesaid,
with the advice of the Executive Council, do, by this my proclamation,
and proclaim that the following Regulation has been established
under the provisions of “The Pastoral Leases Act o/1869.”
Regulation.
The lessee of any run who may apply to make pre-emptive selections,
under the provisions of section 54 of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,”
shall, upon demand, pay a deposit of ten per centum of the purchase money,
and upon further demand, on completion of the survey of the boundaries of
the land selected, shall pay the balance of the purchase money, together
with the Deed, Survey, and Assurance Fees, prescribed by “ The Croton
Lands Alienation Act of 1876.” Provided that in the event of the said
lessee failing to pay the deposit or balance as aforesaid, within a period of
one month from the date of demand, this application to select shall lapse,
and all the expenses incurred in surveying the land applied for, or otherwise,
in consequence of the application, shall be deducted from the deposit made
thereon.
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
fourth day of June, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and seventy-seven, and in the fortieth year of Her
Majesty’s reign.
By Command,
JOHN DOUGLAS.
God Save the Queen !


MINERAL LANDS ACT OF 1872.
36 VICTORIA No. 15.
36 Victoria, No. 15. An Act to provide for the Alienation and Management
of Mineral Lands. [Assented to 22nd August, 1872.]
Preamble.
BE it enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and with the
advice and consent of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly
of Queensland in Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same as
follows —
PART I.
Regulating Sale of Mineral Lands Transfers &c.
Power to sell.
1. The Governor may in the name and on behalf of Her Majesty sell
mineral lands to any applicant desirous of purchasing the same for mining
purposes other than for gold subject to the provisions of this Act and to the
regulations to be made in that behalf in manner hereinafter mentioned.
Mode of application.
2. Persons desirous of purchasing lands for mining purposes other than
for gold may make application to the Secretary for Public Lands or any
person appointed by him for that purpose in the form in the annexed
schedule A.
Application must he accompanied hy deposit.
3. The application must be accompanied by a deposit of five shillings
per acre and survey fee according to the scale contained in schedule II
of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act oj 1868.”
Area allowed.
4. The area of land included in any one purchase shall not exceed three
hundred and twenty acres nor be less than twenty acres except in the case
of surveyed lands where a surveyed portion may be purchased though of
less area than twenty acres.
%
Poundaries of surveyed portions must he adhered to.
5. If any portion of surveyed lands be included in an application the
whole of the surveyed portion must be taken by the applicant if it does not
exceed three hundred and twenty acres.
Pules as to frontage and boundaries.
6. In the case of unsurveyed lands where there are no natural features
to interfere the boundaries of lands applied for must be right lines directed
to the cardinal points and the length must not exceed twice the breadth
When selections front on a creek or watercourse the frontage allowed shall
be as follows viz. each twenty acres of the selection up to one hundred and


sixty acres shall have\five chains frontage and in the case of selections
containing one hundrecrand sixty acres and upwards to three hundred and
twenty the frontage allowed shall not he greater than the depth.
Clear description required.
7. The application must contain a clear description sufficient to enable
the selection to be marked off approximately on the public maps in the
Surveyor-Generals Office.
Price.
8. The price of mineral lands shall be thirty shillings per acre.
Selections must he marked.
9. Every selection applied for must be marked at the centre of the
portion or where it has frontage to a creek at the centre of such frontage by
a marked tree or post at least three feet out of the ground and six inches in
diameter and a notice shall be affixed to such tree or post stating the name
of the selector the area to be applied for and the date when the land was
marked and such notice shall be maintained until the boundaries of the land
shall have been surveyed A statement that the marking has been duly
effected and a copy of such notice must accompany each application.
Lands within town sites not available.
10. No lands comprised within the boundaries of any proclaimed town
site or land reserved for public purposes will be sold for mining purposes.
Poicer to withdraw lands from operation of Act.
11. The Governor shall have power by proclamation to withdraw the
whole or any part of any district or tract of land from the operation of this
Act for the purpose of offering same at auction or for any other public
purpose mentioned in the twenty-first clause of “ The Crown Lands Aliena-
tion Act of 1868 ” and the Secretary for Public Lands may decline to
approve of any application for mineral lands if the public interests render
such a course advisable.
Application may he granted as to part of land applied for.
12. The Secretary for Public Lands shall have power to approve of or
grant any application as to part of the land specified therein if by reason of
prior application or otherwise the same cannot be granted as to the whole of
such land.
Government option surveying or requiring applicant to survey.
13. The Government shall have the option of surveying lands applied
for under this Act not previously surveyed or of requiring the applicant to
make arrangements for the same to be surveyed and on receipt of any
application for unsurveyed lands or as soon after as possible the Secretary
for Public Lands shall signify to the applicant whether the Government will
undertake the survey of the lands applied for or not.
When land surveyed hy applicant survey fee returned.
14. In cases where the Government elects not to undertake the survey
the amount of survey fee paid shall be refunded to the applicant.
Survey conducted according to rules of Surveyor-General's Office.
15. In cases where the Secretary for Public Lands declines to undertake
the survey owing to the remoteness of the selection or for any other cause it
shall be lawful for the applicant to get the land surveyed by a surveyor


licensed under “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” sucli survey
bein'"- conducted according to the rules established in the Surveyor-General’s
Office and on completion thereof a diagram of the measured boundaries
signed by the surveyor shall be lodged at the office of the Surveyor-General.
If applicant employs a licensed surveyor survey must he completed within six
months under pain of forfeiture.
16. In cases where the Secretary for Public Lands declines to undertake
the survey as aforesaid if within a period of six months from the date of
the notification of such election a survey under the last preceding clause is
not completed and the diagram lodged as aforesaid the application shall be
deemed to have lapsed and the deposit paid thereon and all improvements
on the land shall be forfeited to the Crown unless a protection be granted as
prescribed by the next succeeding clause.
Protection granted in certain cases.
17. In cases where it shall be made to appear to the Secretary for Public
Lands that owing to the distance of any proposed selection from known or
surveyed country it is impracticable for the applicant to furnish a satisfactory
description thereof and that a long period must elapse before the same can
be surveyed it shall be lawful for the said secretary on proof that the land
applied for has been distinctly marked by the applicant along the boundaries
thereof at distances of not less than five chains from mark to mark to grant
a protection in the form in the schedule annexed marked B for a period not
exceeding one year.
Where protection is granted survey must be completed before the selection can
be approved.
18. In cases where a protection is granted as in the last preceding dause
if the" applicant desires that the application be approved as hereinafter
provided he must furnish a diagram of the selection from actual survey
within the period for which such protection is granted in default of which
the application will lapse at the expiration of such period and the deposit
and all improvements will be forfeited to the Crown and it shall be lawful
for the Governor or anyone by him authorized in that behalf _ with such
assistance as may be necessary to enter into and upon such selection without
legal process of any kind.
Application approved.
19. On survey of a mineral selection if the Secretary for Public Lands
sees no objection or if the application contains only lands already surveyed
the same may be approved by him but no such approval shall take place
before survey.
Balance of purchase money and deed fee to be paid within tivelve months
from approval.
20. Within twelve months from the date of such approval being signified
to the applicant by writing through the post office to his customary address
the balance of purchase money fixed as hereinbefore provided together with
the deed fee according to scale contained in schedule lof The Crown
Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” must be paid into the Treasury otherwise


the deposit paid shall he forfeited and the land treated and considered as if
no application had been made for the same and it shall be lawful for the
Governor or anyone by him authorized in that behalf to make entry thereon
and to forcibly remove such applicant if necessary without legal process of
any kind.
Deed of grant on proof of fulfilment of conditions if furnished within two
years from approval.
21. After the payment of the balance of purchase money and deed fee
if the applicant shall produce satisfactory evidence to the Secretary for
Public Lands that he has expended a sum equal to one pound per acre in
hand fide working the minerals on the land applied for a deed of grant in
fee simple shall issue for the same but if such evidence of expenditure as
aforesaid be not furnished to the Secretary for Public Lands within two
years from the date of the application being “approved” no grant shall
issue and the land shall thereby be and become forfeited and it shall be
lawful for the Governor or anyone by him authorized to make or cause to be
made entry thereon and to forcibly resume the same without legal process
of any kind.
ITow priority to he determined.
22. Applications for mineral lands shall if otherwise correct take
priority according to the time of their receipt in the office of the Secretary
for Public Lands or such other office as he may appoint in any district to be
notified under his hand in the Government Gazette.
Simultaneous applications how dealt with.
23. In cases where two or more applications for mineral lands are
received at the same time the priority shall be decided by lot at a meeting
of the applicants or their agents summoned by the Secretary for Public
Lands at a time and place to be appointed by him for the purpose.
Transfers of mineral applications.
24. Applications for mineral lands after approval by the Secretary for
Public Lands may be transferred on payment of a fee of one pound and one
shilling together with stamp duty at the rate of fifteen shillings on every
one hundred pounds or fractional part of one hundred pounds paid as pur-
chase or consideration money in the transaction No partial transfer of any
mineral application will be entertained and no transfer will be effectual until
registered in the office of the Secretary for Public Lands.
PART 11.
Provisions as to the Leasing op Mineral Linds.
Leases may he granted.
25. Subject to the provisions of this Act and to any regulations to be
made thereunder the Governor in Council may in the name and on behalf of
Her Majesty grant to any applicant a lease of mineral lands for mining
purposes.
Term and area.
26. The term of any such lease shall not exceed ninety-nine years and
the area of the land thereby demisfed shall not be less than twenty nor more
than three hundred and twenty acres.


Application how made.
27. Every application for a mineral lease must be made in the form and
manner prescribed by the regulations in that behalf and must be accom-
panied by a survey fee according to the scale contained in schedule H of
“ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” and a sum equal to the first
year’s rent.
Rent.
28. The rents reserved for mineral leases shall be five shillings per
acre per annum to be paid at such times from such dates and in such manner
as shall be prescribed by regulations to be made in that behalf.
Forfeiture for non-payment of rent.
29. If default be made by any lessee in payment of any rent the lease
shall be forfeited but the lessee shall be permitted to defeat the forfeiture by
payment within ninety days fron the date of the original rent day of the
full annual rent with the addition of a sum equjl to one-fourth part thereof
by way of penalty but unless the whole of the said yearly rent together
with such penalty as aforesaid shall be paid within the term of ninety days
as aforesaid the lease shall be absolutely forfeited and it shall be lawful for
the Governor or any person by him authorised in that behalf to make
entry thereon and with force if necessary to remove any person therefrom
without legal process of any kind.
Forms of leases.
30. Leases issued under the authority of this Act may be in such form
and shall contain such covenants on the part of the lessee to work the lands
comprised therein and such covenants conditions and provisions generally
and such power of resumption and re-entry on the part of the Government
for non-payment of rent or non-performance of covenants as may be pre-
scribed by regulations.
Sections in Part I. applicable.
31. Sections five six seven nine ten eleven twelve thirteen fourteen
fifteen sixteen seventeen eighteen nineteen twenty-two and twenty-three of
this Act shall be applicable and applied as far as practicable to applications
for leases under this part of this Act.
Transfers of leases.
32. Applications for mineral lease after confirmation and mineral leases
after issue thereof may be transferred on payment of a fee of one pound
one shilling together with stamp duty at the rate of fifteen shillings on
every one hundred pounds or fractional part of one hundred pounds paid as
purchase or consideration money in the transaction No partial transfer will
be entertained and no transfer will be effectual until registered in the office
of the Secretary for Public Lands.
PART 111.
Relating- to Mining undee Licenses.
Areas may he proclaimed.
33. The Governor in Council may by proclamation set apart any area
or areas in such proclamation defined wherein any person holding mining


licenses under this Act may mine for minerals other than gold under such
licenses only And any such proclamation may be altered or revoked at the
discretion of the Governor in Council.
'Mining licenses.
34. It shall be lawful for the Secretary for Public Lands or any person
authorised by him to issue documents each of which shall be called a
“ mining license ” and shall be granted to any person applying for the same
on payment of the sum of ten shillings.
Privileges of mining licenses.
35. Every such “mining license” shall be in force for the period of
twelve months from the date thereof and shall during the said period
authorize the holder to mine upon any area proclaimed under the preceding
section of this Act and to occupy (except as against Her Majesty) so much
of the lands in such proclaimed area as may be prescribed by the regulations
in that behalf and every such holder shall during the continuance of such
raining license be deemed in law to be the owner (except as against Her
Majesty only) of the claim which shall be occupied by virtue of such mining
license and during such continuance as aforesaid all minerals then being in
and upon the said claim shall (except as against Her Majesty) be deemed in
law to be the absolute personal property of such holder.
Regulations to he issued.
36. Such license shall be applied for and such claims shall be occupied
in such manner and subject to such restrictions and limitations and conditions
as shall be prescribed by any regulations in that behalf.
PART IY.
Relating to Licenses to cut constsuct and use Races &c.
Licenses to cut and construct races dams Sgc. may he granted.
37. The Governor in Council may grant to any person for any term noe
exceeding fifteen years subject to the provisions of this Act and to ths
regulations in that behalf a license which shall authorize such person hit
executors administrators and assigns (except as against Her Majesty) to cut
construct and use races drains dams and reservoirs through and upon any
Crown lands whether the same shall or shall not be demised or occupied by
virtue of this or any.other Act and to deepen widen clean repair or otherwise
improve any race drain dam or reservoir cut or constructed through or upon
any Crown lands and to take or divert water from any spring lake pool or
stream situated or flowing upon or through any such Crown lands in such
manner as shall be prescribed by such license and regulations in order to
supply water for the purposes of mining for any metal or mineral other than
gold to such person or any other person who may be engaged in any such
mining and it shall be lawful for the person to whom any such license shall
be granted to take or divert water and the right conferred by such license
and the property and interest in any race dam or reservoir cut or constructed
by virtue thereof shall be deemed to be a chattel interest,


Same may he revoked.
38. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council at any time to revoke
any license granted under the preceding section on payment of such compen-
sation to the person entitled to the benefit thereof as shall be determined by
arbitration in manner directed by such regulations.
PART V.
Relating to Teespassebs and Unautiioeised Mining.
Unauthorised miners may he ejected.
39. Any person found working for minerals other than gold on Crown
lands may be forcibly ejected therefrom by any police officer Crown land
ranger or other person authorized by the Secretary for Public Lands Pro-
vided always that this provision shall not apply to bond fide prospectors.
Proceeding and penalty for mining or removing minerals without authority
from claims.
40. Any person found working for minerals or removing minerals or
mineral ores from the land claim or selection of any other person who is
personally or by his agents occupying the same whether such land claim or
selection be held in fee or on lease or under license or on or from any land
applied for to be purchased or licensed under this Act or under “ The Crotvn
Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” may be forcibly ejected by any police officer
ranger of Crown lands or other person appointed by the Secretary for Public
Lands and on conviction thereof shall forfeit and pay for any such offence
any sum not exceeding fifty pounds to be recovered in a summary way
before two justices.
Stealing minerals from claims larceny.
41. Any person taking or removing mineral ores from the land claim or
selection of any other person shall be deemed to have stolen the same and
any person receiving the same with knowledge of such facts shall be deemed
to have received the same knowing it to have been stolen.
PART VI.
Cf-ENEEAL PeOVISIONS.
Rights of adjoining proprietors over boundary creek Sfc.
42. In cases where selections have been made under “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1868 ” or shall have been made under this Act with
frontage to one side only of any creek lagoon or watercourse it shall be
lawful for the Secretary for Public Lands or some commissioner appointed
by him to grant the selectors on either side the right to work dredge and
mine up to the middle of the main channel of such creek lagoon or water-
course and in the event of the selectors of lands on opposite sides thereof or
otherwise not being able to agree as to such middle any one of the said
selectors may demand that the question shall be decided by the commissioner
or person authorized to act in that behalf on payment of a fee of one pound
and the commissioner or such other person as aforesaid after having made
a personal examination of the channel as aforesaid shall give his decision


subject to appeal to the Secretary for Public Lands sucli decision being
recorded in a book to be hept for the purpose Provided always that where
such creek lagoon or watercourse shall be of such a width as in the opinion
of the Secretary for Public Lands or such commissioner to justify the refusal
to permit the whole of the bed of the channel to be worked it shall be lawful
to refuse such permission Provided also that such permission shall be
subject to such restrictions and conditions as to the mode of working and
otherwise as the Secretary for Public Lands or such commissioner shall
see fit.
Governor may establish regulations.
43. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council from time to time to
make and alter or rescind all necessary regulations and to establish such
forms as may be required for the due carrying out of the provisions of this
Act and whenever in this Act the word regulation is made use of or regula-
tions are referred to the same shall be construed and intended to be the
existing regulations for the time being under the authority of this section.
Secretary for Lands may depute poivers.
44. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council by proclamation or in
any regulations made under this Act to confer on any commissioner or other
person to be appointed in that behalf all or any of the powers and duties by
this Act conferred upon or intended to be performed used or exercised by
the Secretary for Lands.
PART YII.
Repeal Clause and Shoet Title.
j ßepeal clause.
45. From and after the commencement of this Act section thirty-two of
the Act of the thirty-first of Victoria number forty-six shall be repealed
except as to any applications for mineral lands already made or any right
or title acquired or accrued thereunder or any remedy or proceedings in
respect thereof or anything done or commenced to be done thereunder which
may be dealt with and proceed as if this Act had not been passed.
Short title.
46. This Act may be cited for all purposes as “ The Mineral Lands
Act of 1872.”
SCHEDULES.
Application to purchase mineral lands Ho,
Date of Receipt
Pursuant to the provisions of section of “ The Mineral Lands Act of
1872 ” and of the regulations established thereunder*
of do hereby apply to purchase without competition
acres roods and perches of land in thef
of (and which lands are more particularly described in the schedule
annexed) for the purpose of mining forj and hereby tender
*I or we—all names in full. f County or district.
} Description of minerals to be dug for and worked.


the sum of pounds shillings and ponce
as the required deposit upon the purchase of the said land at the rate of fire
shillings per acre together with the survey fee and I hereby declare that I have
marked the selection on the ground as prescribed.
Given under hand this day of . 18
(Signature)
Received from the sum of pounds
shillings and pence being the amount of the deposit on the purchase
as above proposed and survey fee.
Treasurer.
Brisbane 18
Schedule to application to purchase mineral lands.
County or district
Description of Minerals
General Locality and Description of Boundaries
Signature of Applicant.
Note.—ln the description furnish the name of the river creek or road on which the land is
situated also its distance and direction from the nearest portion of private property of which state
the area and the original purchaser or grantee or distance and direction from nearest crossing-
place of creek or confluence of creeks or rivers or other determinate point.
“ Mineral Lands Act oe 1872.”
.Protection Memorandum.
Reg. No. of Selection s
Area :
In pursuance of clause of “ The
Mineral Lands Act of 1872 ” a protection is
hereby granted for the mineral application as
per margin for a period of one year from the
District
Name of Applicant:
Eor Mining; date hereof during which period the land
Boundaries marked as follows : comprised within the marked boundaries shall
not be available for selection as mineral land
by any other person This protection however
will be of no avail if a larger area than that
applied for— (a reasonable allowance being made
for error in the absence of survey)—is included
within the marked boundary lines.
Given under my hand this day of 18
Secretary for Public Lands.


GENERAL REGULATIONS UNDER “MINERAL LANDS ACT OE 1875.”
Queensland, ") Proclamation by the Most Honourable George Augustus
to wit. 5 Constantine, Marquis of Normanby, Earl of Mulgrave,
Viscount Normanby, and Baron Mulgrave of Mulgrave, all
in the County of York, in the Peerage of the United King.
[l.s.] dom ; and Baron Mulgrave of New Boss, in the County of
Noemanby, Wexford, in the Peerage of Ireland ; a of Her
Governor. Majesty’s Most Honourable Privy Council; Governor and
Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of Queensland and its
Dependencies.
IN pursuance of the authority in me vested, and in accordance with the
provisions of “ The Mineral Lands Act of 1872,” I, George Augustus
Constantine, Marquis of Normanby, the Governor aforesaid, with the advice
of the Executive Council, do hereby notify and proclaim that the following
General Eegulations have been established under the said Act;
General Eegulations.
Former regulations repealed.
1. All regulations hitherto in force relating to the alienation of mineral
lands are hereby repealed, and the following are substituted for them .
Applications to Purchase Mineral Lands.
Mode of application.
2. Applications to purchase mineral lands must be made on the form A
in the schedule hereto annexed, and must be lodged at the office of the Min-
ister for Lands, except in districts where otherwise ordered, when the same
must be lodged at such land agents’ or other offices as may be notified in
the Government Gazette, between the hours of ten and three, except on
Saturdays, when the hours will be from ten to twelve. The applications
must be accompanied by a sum of five shillings per acre by way of deposit,
together with the survey fee, as per scale in schedule H of ‘ Ihe Lrotcn
Lands Alienation Act of 1868.
Mineral Leases.
Mode of application.
3. Applications for leases of mineral lands must be made on the form B
in the schedule annexed, and must be lodged at the office of the Secretary for
Lands, except in districts where otherwise ordered, when the same must be
lodged at such land agents’ or other offices as may be notified in tne
Government Gazette, between the hours specified in clause 2 ot ( tnese
regulations. The applications must be accompanied by the first year s rent
at the rate of five shillings per acre, and also the survey fee as per scale in
schedule H of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868.
Lease not to issue until after survey.
4. No lease shall issue until after the boundaries of the selection are
surveyed, and the application is confirmed by the Secretary for Lands.


Date of leases.
5. Leases of mineral lands shall date from the first day of January or
July nearest to the date of application.
Annual payment of rent.
6. The rent chargeable on leases of mineral lands will be five shillings
per acre per annum, payable in advance to the land agent of the district in
which the lands are situated, on or before the second day of January in each
year.
Second payment on leases.
7. The second payment on all leases under the Act shall be made on or
before the 2nd day of January following the date of application; and the
said payment, together with the first, year’s rent, shall cover the period
between the date of application and the end of the following year. The
second payment on each lease will, therefore, be for the number of clear
months intervening between the expiration of the twelve months from date of
application and the following Ist day of January, at the rate of fivepence per
acre for each month of such period.
General Provisions applicable to Purchases and Leases of Mineral
Lands.
Applicant must sign Application Jloolc.
8. Applications to purchase or lease mineral lands must be lodged at the
office appointed to receive them, by the applicant or his authorized agent, who
will be reqtfired to sign an application book to be kept for the purpose, at
the time of such lodgment—so that the order in which each application has
been received maybe determined with certainty. No application forwarded
through the post will be registered until the applicant, or his agent, attends
at the office for the purpose of signing the application book.
Area allowed to he selected.
9. The area of land allowed to be included in any one selection shall not
exceed 320 acres, nor be less than 20 acres, except in the case of a surveyed
portion, which is available for selection though containing less than 20 acres.
Marking and posting of notices.
10. The marking of each selection, and posting of notice on the ground
as prescribed in the 9th section of the Act, will be strictly insisted on, and
any failure in respect thereof will invalidate the application.
The mineral proposed to he xcorked must he stated.
11. The nature of the mineral which it is proposed to work or mine
must be described in the application. In the event of there being an} r
wilful concealment in this respect, or if the applicant fail, on demand, to
prove that the land applied for contains minerals, in a workable form, the
Secretary for Lands shall have the power to cancel the application at any
time after confirmation before the grant in fee simple is issued; the deposit,
or first 3 r ear’s rent, paid thereon —as the case may be—being thereupon
forfeited.


Simultaneous applications.
12. "Where two or more applications for the same land are received at
the same time, priority shall he decided hy lot at a meeting of the applicants
or their agents, summoned hy the Secretary for Lands or the land agent, at
a time and place to ho appointed hy him for the purpose.
Applicant to he informed within two months as to whether he will he called
upon to effect survey.
13. At any time within two months from date of applications to
purchase or lease mineral lands, the Secretary for Lands may signify to the
applicant, in pursuance of section 13 of the Act, that he will require him to
make arrangements for the survey of the application.
Tin lands not available for lease.
14. No applications to lease mineral lands containing alluvial deposits
of tin will he entertained.
Land in toion or other reserves.
15. Lands comprised in town, water, or other reserves, whether pro-
claimed or otherwise, provided that instructions to reserve such lands have
heen issued hy the Secretary for Lands, or any commissioner, or other officer
acting under his authority, shall not he available for application. In the
case of applications for mineral lands within large town reserves, where it is
shown the public interests are not affected thereby, the Secretary for Lands
reserves the right of dealing with each case on its merits ; hut no title will
accrue hy reason of the receipt of the application at any land office.
Forfeited lands not open to selection.
16. Lands comprised in forfeited mineral selections or leases shall not
he available for re-selection hy purchase or lease, until they are proclaimed
to he so hy notification in the Government Gazette.
Applications open to inspection.
17. Applications to purchase or lease mineral lands shall be open to
inspection hy any person during office hours on payment of a fee of two
shillings and sixpence. This fee will entitle the person paying the same to
inspect three applications, which will he considered a “ search.” In the
event of his requiring further information, he must pay an additional fee for
each search.
Transfer of Mineral Applications and Leases.
Mode of transfer.
18. Applications to purchase or lease mineral lands, after confirmation
hy the Minister for Lands, may he transferred, on payment of a fee of one
pound and one shilling, together with stamp duty at the rate of fifteen
shillings on every £lOO or fractional part of £lOO, paid as purchase or
consideration money in the transaction. Duty stamps should he affixed to
the transfer before lodgment in the office of the Minister for Lands. No
partial transfer, or transfer hy way of mortgage, or upon trust, will be
entertained. The form of transfer contained in schedule C may he adopted.


Transfers of mineral leases.
19. In all cases where the leases of mineral lands have been issued, no
transfer will he recorded unless the same is accompanied by the instrument
of lease, in order that the names of the proposed transferrees may be endorsed
thereon.
Transfer to he signed hy the registered holder.
20. Applications to transfer must bear the signature of the person in
whose name the mineral selection or lease is registered in the Secretary for
Lands’ Office, attested by a magistrate of the colony, or a commissioner of
the Supreme Court. On the transfer being registered, the transferror will
be debarred from all further claims to the land.
Mineral lands belonging to an insolvent estate, or to persons absent or
deceased.
21. In the event of a selector or lessee of mineral land dying, or being
declared insolvent, or being absent from the colony, the transfer may be
made by his legal representative, or the representative of his estate ; but the
transfer must be accompanied by a certificate from the Crown Solicitor of
the applicant’s right to transfer.
Separate transfer for each application.
22. A separate transfer must be lodged for each mineral application or
lease.
Dues in arrear.
23. No transfer of any mineral selection or lease will be entertained
before confirmation of such selection or lease by the Secretary for Lands, or
on which any dues of the Crown are in arrear, or in respect to which the
conditions or requirements of the Act have not been complied with.
Statutory declaration of value may be demanded.
24. Before any transfer is recorded, should the Secretary for Lands
require it, a statutory declaration of the value received for the sale of the
trsnsferror’s interest must be furnished, in order that the proper amount of
stamp duty to be paid on the application may be assessed ; and in the event
of there being no consideration, or a nominal consideration only, then the
stamp duty shall be assessed on the marketable value of the selection at the
time, a declaration by the applicant as to such value being required.
SCHEDULES.
Application to purchase mineral lands.
Date of Receipt;
No. of Application:
Pukshant to the provisions of section two of the Act of the Legislature of Queens-
land, 36 Victoria No. 15, and of the Regulations established thereunder*
of do hereby apply to purchase without competition
acres roods and perches of land in the f of
*I or we—all names in full.
t County or district. ,


(and which lands are more particularly described in the schedule annexed), for the
purpose of mining for £ and hereby tender the sum of
pounds shillings and pence, as the required deposit upon
the purchase of the said land, at the rate of five shillings per acre, together with the
survey fee ; and hereby declare that have marked the selection
on the ground, as prescribed in section nine of the said Act.
Given under hand this day of 187
(Signature.)
Received from the sum of pounds shillings
and pence, being the amount of the deposit on the purchase as above
proposed, and survey fee.
Brisbane, 187 . Treasurer.§
Note. —In the description furnish the name of the river, creek, or road on which the land is
situated; also its distance and direction from the nearest portion of private property, ot Ip ,
state the area and the original purchaser or grantee, or distance and direction from nearest
crossing-place of creek or confluence of creeks or rivers, or other determinate point.
+ Description of minerals to he dug for and worked.
§ Commissioner or land agent, as the case may he.
Schedule to application to purchase mineral lands.
County or District;
Area :
Description of minerals :
General locality and description of boundaries;
(Signature of Applicant.)
Application to lease mineral lands under Act 36 Victoria, No. 15.
Date of Receipt:
No. of Application :
Pubsuant to the provisions of section twenty-seven of the Act of the Legislature
of Queensland, 36 Victoria No. 15, and of the Regulations established thereunder,
* of do hereby apply to lease acres
roods and perches of land in the f district of
(and which lands are more particularly described in the schedule annexed), for the
purpose of mining for J and hereby tender the sum of
pounds shillings and pence as the first year s rent ot the
said land, at the rate of five shillings per acre, together with the survey fee ; and
hereby declare that have marked the land applied for, as prescribed
in section nine of the said Act.
Given under hand this day of 18/
*I or we—all names in full. t County or district.
+ Description of minerals to be dug for and worked.


Received from the sum of pounds shillings
and pence, being the amount of the first year’s rent of the land, as above
proposed, and survey fee.
Treasurer.*
Brisbane, 187
Note.—ln the description furnish the name of the river, creek, or road on which the land is
situated; also its distance and direction from the nearest portion of private property, of which'
state the area, and the original purchaser or grantee, or distance and direction from nearest
crossing-place of creek of confluence of creeks or rivers, or other determinate point.
* Commissioner or laud agent, as the case may he.
Schedule to application to lease mineral lands.
County or District:
Area:
Description of Minerals ;
General locality and description of boundaries :
(Signature of Applicant.)
Transfer of mineral applications under Act 36 Victoria, No. 15.
Know all men by these presents, that * of the Crown lands
hereunder described:—
Mineral f No. :
District;
County of
Parish of
Portion No.:
Number of Acres:
and now held by under the provisions of “ The Mineral Lands Act
of 1872,” in consideration of the sum of £ received by do
hereby transfer and assign all right, title, and interest in the said
land to heirs, executors, and administrators; and hereby
request that this transfer may be registered in the office of the 1 ' Minister for Lands
accordingly.
In witness whereof have hereunto set hand and seal , this
day of 187 .
(Signature of Transferror.)
Signed, sealed, and delivered by the said in my presence
J.P. (or Commissioner of the Supreme Court).
A fee of one pound and one shilling must he paid on every transfer, together with stamp duty
at the rate of fifteen shillings on every £lOO, or any fractional part of £lOO, paid as p urchase or
consideration money. Duty stamps must he affixed before lodgment of transfer. Separate forms
of transfer must be filled up and duly signed for each selection to be transferred.
* Conditional purchaser [or lessee, as the case may he]. t Selection [or lease].
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
thirty-first day of October, in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-two, and in the thirty-sixth year of Her
Majesty’s reign.
Bv Command,
J. MALBON THOMPSON.
God Save the Queen !


DESCRIPTION OF MINERAL LAND.
District op Darling Downs South.
Commencing at the junction of Canal Creek with the Broadwater, and
Bounded thence on the north by a line bearing east to the Condamine River ;
thence by the Condamine River upwards to the confluence of Clifton Creek;
thence by the range dividing the waters of Clifton Creek from those of
Dalrymple Creek north-easterly to the Main Range ; on the cast of the Main
Range southerly to the south boundary of the Colony of Queensland; on
the south-east and south-west by that boundary westerly to_ the confluence of
the Maclntyre Brook with the Macintyre or Dumaresq River; on the west
by a line north to the range dividing the waters of Macintyre Brook from
those falling into the Weir River; thence by that range north-easterly to
Mount Domville or Wilmeran ; thence by a spur range to the junction of
Broadwater with Canal Creek, the point of commencement.
There is an office for the transaction of business connected with mineral
lands at Stanthorpe, where there is also a commissioner stationed. The
duties of this officer are defined by the regulations.
All applications for mineral lands within the above district must bo
made at the Stanthorpe office.
The Commissioner’s Court sitting at Stanthorpe, prescribed in section 6
of the regulations, is held on the first Tuesday in every month.
The Tinaroo Mining License District.
Cook District.
Embracing the heads of the Herbert and Barron rivers, and comprising
the area within the watershed of the Herbert River above its junction with
Rudd’s Creek and the area within the watershed of the Barron River above
its junction with Abbot’s Creek.
The Walsh Mining License District.
Cook District.
Commencing at the junction of the Walsh River with the Mitchell
River, and bounded thence by a south line to the northern watershed of the
Einasleigh River; thence by that watershed in a south-easterly direction to
the Coast Range ; thence by that range northerly to the southern watershed
of the Walsh River, being the boundary of the Hodgkinson Gold Field;
thence by that watershed westerly to a_ point due south from Mount Mul-
ligan- thence by a line due north, being part of the western boundary of
the Hodgkinson Gold Field, to the Walsh River ; and thence by the south
bank of that river downwards to the point of commencement.
All applications for Mining Licenses or Mineral Lands, within the
districts of Tinaroo or Walsh, must be made at the Thornborough office.


Queensland, ") Proclamation by The Most Honourable Geoege Augus-
to wit, ) tus Constantine, Marquis of Normanby, Earl of
Mulgrave, Viscount Normanby, and Baron Mulgraye of
Mulgrave, all in the County of York, in the Peerage of the
(1.5.) United Kingdom; and Baron Mulgrave of Hew Boss, in
Noemanby, the County of Wexford, in the Peerage of Ireland; a
Governor. Member of Her Majesty’s Most Honourable Privy Council,
Governor and Commander-in-Chicf of the Colony of
Queensland and its Dependencies,
IN pursuance of the authority in me vested, and in accordance with the
provisions of “ The Mineral Lands Act of 1872,” I, George Augustus
Constantine, Marquis of Normanby, the Governor aforesaid, with the
advice of the Executive Council, do hereby notify and proclaim that the
Regulations with respect to the alienation of, or otherwise dealing with,
Mineral Lands within certain districts, proclaimed under my Hand and Seal
on the thirty-first day of October, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-
two, and twenty-first day of March, one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-three, shall be, and arc hereby rescinded, and that the following
Regulations are established in lieu thereof :
Regulations.
Regulations to apply to such districts as may he notified hy Minister.
1, These regulations are to apply to such districts, from such time and
during such periods as the Minister for Lands may, by notice in the
Government Gazette, from time to time prescribe.
General Regulations applicable.
2. The general Regulations under the Act, proclaimed on 31st October,
1872, shall also apply to any district where these Regulations are in force,
so far as they are not inconsistent therewith.
Commissioner may be appointed.
3. A Commissioner or other officer may be appointed to administer these
Regulations in any district.
Mode of application for mineral lands.
4s. Applications to purchase or lease mineral lands must be made on the
forms in the schedule annexed to the general Regulations established under
the Act, proclaimed on the 31st October, 1872, and must be lodged at the
office of the Commissioner between the hours of ten and three, except on
Saturdays, when the hours will be from ten to twelve. The applications
must be accompanied bj r a payment of five shillings per acre by way of
deposit, or first year’s rent, as the case may be, together with the survey fee,
as per scale in schedule H in “ The Crown Zands Alienation Act of 1868.”
Application must contain a clear description.
5. The application must contain a clear description sufficient to enable
the selection to be marked off on the plan in the Commissioner’s office.
Commissioner s monthly court.
6. The Commissioner will periodically hold an open court for the pur-
pose of giving his decisions as to the acceptance or rejection of applications,


tlie days of holding which will he notified in the Government Gazette and
local papers. Applicants or their agents are required to attend at this court,
failing which, on their names being called, their applications will be rejected,
and the sum of one pound retained as a penalty out of the moneys lodged
with the applications.
At such court the Commissioner - will hear objections and protests, if any,
and provisionally accept or reject any application ; but no title will accrue to
the applicant until confirmation by the Secretary for Lands.
Duties of Commissioner.
7. The commissioner is empowered to receive applications to purchase
or lease mineral lands, and cause them to be entered in the order of their
receipt in an application book kept for that purpose, with the date and hour
of such receipt.
The Commissioner will examine the applications in the order in which
they are entered in the application book, and ascertain, by comparison with
the plans of the district, whether sufficient vacant land exists to satisfy each
application, or if it interferes with any existing claim, and will give his
decision as to the acceptance or rejection of each application at the next
sitting of the Commissioner’s Court.
The Commissioner is empowered (subject to appeal to the Secretary for
Lands) to reject any application, for any of the following reasons :
1. When the land has been already selected or reserved for public
purposes, or where it is desirable for the public good that the
same should be so reserved.
2. When the description contained in any application is insufficient to
indicate the land applied for.
After acceptance is publicly notified as aforesaid each application to purchase
or lease shall be duly entered in registers to be kept for the purpose.
The Commissioner will make arrangements for the survey of all accepted
applications by a licensed surveyor approved by the Surveyor-General, and
on receipt of each plan, which must be in duplicate, he shall forward one
copy to the Surveyor-General, and retain the other for office use.
Commissioner may decide disputes.
8. The Commissioner shall have power (subject to appeal to the Minister
for Lands) to hear and decide upon, and to make any necessary order in any
dispute that may arise in any matter connected with the boundaries of
applications for mineral lands, pending survey.
Permissory occupation license may he issued by the Commissioner in certain
cases.
9. No title to any land applied for shall accrue to any applicant, or any
contract considered as created, until the Minister confirms the application ;
but if it is unobjectionable, and there is no dispute as to boundary, the
Commissioner may issue a permissory occupation license, pending confirma-
tion, which shall be in the form B, which shall be revocable at any time by
demand of possession, to be made by the Commissioner, and any right of
occupancy acquired thereunder shall, immediately on such demand, cease.


Mining Licenses.
Commissioner to issue licenses.
10. The Commissioner is empowered to issue mining licenses under the
34th section of the Act to any persons, on payment of the sum of ten
shillings for each license, but such licenses shall only be available to the
holders withiu the area proclaimed under the 33rd section of the Act.
Mining licenses must be held by all workers in claims.
11. A license issued under the Act will only authorise the person in
whose name it is granted to mine in any claim, and will not empower him to
employ any person in mining in his claim unless he is also the holder of a
mining license.
Size of claim under mining license.
12. The claim allowed to each holder of a mining license shall be a
block of land three chains square, each side being one hundred and ninety-
eight feet, which may include both sides of any river, creek, or watercourse,
provided the same are within the limits of the claim. A space of three feet
to be loft between the boundaries of claims, unless amalgamated under
clause 19.
Claim to he properly pegged.
13. The holders of any claim shall, on pain of forfeiture, mark the
boundaries of such claims by driving in at each corner a substantial peg, to
stand at least two feet above the ground, which shall be kept at all times
clear of rubbish or soil during the occupation thereof; and any person,
unless authorised by the Commissioner to do so, who shall either remove,
injure, or destroy, or cover such peg, shall be liable to the penalty prescribed
in the second section of the Act 16 ATc., No. 15. In the case of claims
having a frontage to any river, creek, or watercourse, pegs must be driven at
each extremity of the frontage on the margin of the watercourse, in addition
to the pegs at the corners.
Marking off more ground than allowed.
14. Any miner marking off more ground than he is entitled to by these
Regulations, shall be liable to have the ground so marked off, pegged off at
either end, at the option of the disputant, upon same being proved to the
satisfaction of the Commissioner.
Claims must be worked.
15. Each claim must be worked within forty-eight hours after the
boundaries arc marked; otherwise such claims shall be deemed to be
abandoned.
Claims to be continuously worked.
16. All claims, except when otherwise provided, shall, within forty-eight
hours after the boundaries are marked, be effectively and continuously
worked, and each claim shall be considered “ effectively and continuously
worked” when six hours bond fide work is performed thereon, or in connec-
tion therewith, on every working day except Saturday.
Unworked claims.
17. Any claim remaining unworked and unregistered, or not being
worked in a bond fide manner for three clear ordinary working days, shall be
deemed to be abandoned.


Registration of claims.
18. Any miner who shall from illness be unable to work, or who shall
be in attendance at any court of justice, or whose absence from his claim is
rendered necessary by some urgent business, shall, on proof being afforded
to the Commissioner, be entitled to a written registry to the effect that such
claim is held in reserve for him, and a copy of such registry shall be posted
on every claim so reserved.
Claims may he amalgamated.
19. Any party holding contiguous claims not exceeding six in number
will be entitled to amalgamate their claims, and to work the same as one
claim ; but the number of men to be maintained in working the ground must
be at least equal to the number of claims amalgamated, otherwise the Com-
missioner shall have power to cancel the amalgamation, or to amend it by
reducing the size of the claim. Provided that in special cases any number of
claims may be amalgamated, subject to the above condition as to number of
men employed, by permission of the Commissioner.
Commissioner may adjust claims.
20. All claims hold undermining licenses shall be subject to adjustment
by the Commissioner, who shall, if he see fit, mark the claims with pegs
bearing the Government broad-arrow brand ; and any person otherwise than
those by the Commissioner to do so, who shall either remove
or destroy any such peg, shall be liable to the penalty prescribed in the
second section of the Act 16 Yic., No. 15.
General Provisions.
Construction of dams and races.
21. Holders of mineral claims under the purchasing, leasing, or licensing
sections of the Act, who may require to construct dams, races, or drains,
extending beyond the limits of their claims, will be required to notify the
same to the Commissioner, in writing, stating the nature and particulars of
such work, and the Commissioner shall thereupon notify the same to all
parties interested or affected by the carrying out and construction of the
works; and if objections be made, the Commissioner shall hear and decide
whether they be admissible or otherwise, and thereupon make such orders as
may be necessary to meet the requirements of the case, the action taken by
the Commissioner in all cases being subject to the approval of the Secretary
for Lands.
Commissioner may issue orders relative to working claims, Sfc.
22. For the purpose of carrying out the foregoing Regulations, the
Commissioner shall have power to make such orders, not inconsistent with
the Act or these Regulations, relative to the proper working of claims,
divisions of river or creek frontages, giving right of access to water, as to him
shall appear expedient, and each such order shall be in writing, signed by
the Commissioner, and shall be duly served on the owner or occupier of any
claim to which it may appty. And any owner or occupier who shall neglect
to comply with such order, shall forfeit or pay for every such offence any
sum not exceeding £lO, to be recovered in a summary way before any two
justices.


Trespassers may he prosecuted.
23. Any person working for minerals upon lands reserved for town or
other purposes, whether proclaimed or otherwise, who may have been forcibly
ejected therefrom, in pursuance of section 39 of the Act, or may have been
warned against working thereon by the Commissioner or other officer, may
be prosecuted for trespass on an information to be laid by the Commissioner,
if found working (unless duly authorised) within the same reserve at any
subsequent time after such forcible ejection or warning as aforesaid, and shall
be liable to the penalties prescribed in the seventy-second section of “ The
Pastoral Leases Act of 1869.”
SCHEDULE A.
Permissive Occupation License —“ Mineral Lands Act of 1872.”
This is to certify that has permission to occupy the land
described below, and to carry on mining operations thereon.
This right is to protect the selection from intrusion or trespass, but gives no
title to the land beyond a permissive occupancy, which the undersigned may deter-
mine at any time by demand of possession.
Any dispute as to boundary will be determined irrespective of the fact of the
issue of this permission, and the power is expressly reserved to the Secretary for
Lands to confirm or reject this application, as he may see fit, and the law allows.
DeSCEIPXION :
Given under my hand, this
day of
Commissioner.
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
thirtieth day of December, in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-three, and in the thirty-seventh year of
Her Majesty’s reign.
By Command,
C. J. GRAHAM.
God Save the Queen !
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 4th June, 1880.
APPLICATIONS FOR MINERAL LANDS.
It is hereby notified for public information, that on and after this date, the
following arrangement for the receipt of applications for Mineral Lands,
under “ The Mineral Lands Act of 1872,” shall be in force.
P. PERKINS.
The Commissioner at Stanthorpe receives applications for mineral lands
within the District of Darling Downs South.
The Land Agents at Beenleigh, Bowen, Bundaberg, Cardwell, Cler-
mont, Cooktown, Cairns (the latter for that part of his district not included
in the Tinaroo Mining License District), Dalby, Gladstone, Gayndah,


G-ympie, Ipswich, Maryborough, Mackay, Nanango, Normanton, Port
Douglas, Rockhampton, Roma, St. Lawrence, Springsure, Tenningering,
Townsville, and Toowoomba, are authorised to receive applications for
mineral lands within their respective districts.
The Land Agent at Ipswich receives applications for mineral lands
within the Helidon District.
Applications for mineral lands within the following Unsettled Pastoral
Districts are received by the officers hereunder mentioned :
Maranoa District—Land Agent, Roma.
Leichhardt District —Land Agent, Rockhampton.
North Kennedy District (exclusive of that part included within the
Tinaroo Mining License District) —Land Agent, Townsville.
South Kennedy District—Land Agent, Bowen.
Warrego District—Commissioner of Crown Lands, Charleville.
Mitchell District—Commissioner of Crown Lands, Blaekall.
Burke Unsettled District —Land Agent, Normanton.
Cook Unsettled (exclusive of that part included within the Tinaroo
Mining License District) —Land Agent, Cooktown.
Applications for mineral lands situated in any district not specified
above must be lodged at the office of the Secretary for Public Lands, at
Brisbane.


THE WESTERN RAILWAY ACT
39 VICTORIA, No. 7.
39 A xcxoßiA, No. 7. An Act to Authorize the making of a Railway from
Rally to Roma and to provide Funds for the Construction of the same
ly the Sale of Crown Lands. [Assented to Blst August, 1875.
Preamble.
WHEREAS the making of a Railway from Dalby to Roma would be of
great public advantage And whereas it is expedient that such
railway should be forthwith constructed and that funds for the construction
of the same should be provided by the sale of Crown Lands Be it therefore
enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly of Queensland
in Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same as follows—
Lstxeoducxoey Pbovisiosts.
Short title — Commencement.
1. This Act may be cited for all purposes as “ The Western Railway
Act ” and shall commence and take effect on and from the passing thereof.
Interpretation of terms.
2. In the interpretation of this Act the following words within inverted
commas shall unless the context otherwise indicate have the meanings set
against them respectively—
“ Crown Lands ” —All lands vested in Her Majesty which have not been
dedicated to any public purpose and which have not been granted or
lawfully contracted to be granted to any person in fee simple or for
any less estate And all lands which at the time of the passing of
this Act may have become or which after the passing of this Act
may become forfeited by reason of any breach of the conditions on
which the same have been granted or contracted to be granted And
also all lands now or hereafter resumed from any lease under the
provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ” or any Act in
force for the time being regulating the resumption of lands from
lease
Run” —Any portion of Crown Lands comprised in any license to
depasture or in any lease or promise of lease for pastoral purposes
“ Lease ” shall mean and include every lease or promise of lease or
license of Crown lands for pastoral purposes
“Lessee” shall mean the lawful holder of any such lease whether as the
original lessee or the lawful assignee of any such lease


Establishment oe Westeen Railway Reseeve and Application of
Act theeeto.
Creation of Western Railway Reserve.
3. All Crown lands situated within the area described in the schedule
hereto are hereby set apart as and declared to be a railway reserve under
the name of “ The Western Railway Reserve” hereinafter called “the said
reserve ” subject to be dealt with as hereinafter provided.
This Act to apply to Western Railway Reserve only.
4. The provisions of this Act shall apply to the said reserve only.
Lands undee Pastoeal Lease.
Effect of resumption of runs in the reserve.
5. Whenever the whole or any part of a run within the said reserve
shall be resumed from lease by virtue of the fifty-fifth section of “ The
Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ” such resumption shall have the effect of
withdrawing from lease the lands so resumed to the extent next hereinafter
provided but not further or otherwise and the lessee shall have and be sub-
ject to the following rights and liabilities that is to say—
(1.) The laud resumed shall be subject to reservation for township
reserves and public purposes under the provisions of the laws in
force for the time being relating to such reservation and shall also
be subject to selection and alienation under the provisions of this
Act
(2.) The lessee shall until such reservation selection or alienation be at
liberty to occupy the whole of the land so resumed and shall con-
tinue to pay rent for so much thereof as shall not from time to
time have been so reserved selected or alienated
(3.) Upon such reservation selection or alienation his right to occupy
the land so reserved selected or alienated as the case may be shall
cease and determine and he shall be entitled to a reduction of rent
proportionate to the area from time to time so reserved selected or
alienated
(4.) The lessee shall have and may exercise the right of pre-emption
conferred on him by the fifty-fourth section of the said Act over
any part of his run that shall not for the time being have been so
reserved or selected or have been proclaimed for sale by auction or
as a homestead area.
Operation of Pastoral Leases Act preserved in other respects.
6. Except as aforesaid nothing herein contained shall be held to abridge
or interfere with any rights that may be conferred on lessees by the said
“ Pastoral Leases Act o/ 1869” or to interfere with the operation of the
said Act within the said reserve except so far as the same shall be expressly
modified by this Act.
Alienation of Land in the Reseeve.
Crown lands in reserve not to he dealt with except under this Act.
7. Crown lands in the said reserve shall not be leased or otherwise
alienated except in accordance with the provisions of this Act.


Section 16 of “‘Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868” not to apply
to reserve.
8. The provisions of the sixteenth section of “ The Crorvn Lands
Alienation Act of 1868 ” shall not apply to lands within the said reserve.
Mode in which land may he alienated.
9. Crown lands in the said reserve may be leased and otherwise alienated
in any one or more of the modes following that is to say—-
(1.) Under the provisions of “ The Mineral Lands Act of 1872 ” or any
other Act in force for the time being relating to mineral lands
(2.) Under the provisions of “ The Cold Fields Act of 1874 ” or any
other Act in force for the time being relating to gold fields
(3.) Under the provisions of the laws in force for the time being relating
to the sale of Crown lands by auction
(4.) Under the provisions of the laws in force for the time being relating
to the selection of homesteads
(5.) Under the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ” or any
other law in force for the time being relating to the leasing of
Crown lands for pastoral purposes
(6.) And in township reserves under the provisions of the laws for the
time being in force relating to the alienation of land in such reserves
But subject nevertheless to the following conditions and modifications that
is to say—
(7.) All lands within two miles of the line of railway within the said
reserve except such part thereof as shall be reserved for township
reserves or public purposes shall be set apart as a Homestead area
under the provisions of “ The Homestead Areas Act of 1872 ”
(8.) The upset price of country lands offered for sale by auction shall
not be less than ten shillings per acre
(9.) The areas of country lots so offered may be increased to not more
than ten thousand acres and each lot so offered shall contain over
and above the advertised area thereof sufficient land for a road
three chains wide through any part of such lot which may be
opened by the Secretary for Public Works in any direction when
required and in no case shall more than twelve thousand acres be
included in any number of adjoining lots unless the same be
surrounded by a reserved road three chains wide.
Lncrease of license fees and rent of runs within reserve.
(10.) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in “ The
Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ”
The license fee payable on every application for a license of a
run within the said reserve shall be at the rate of ten shillings per
square mile of the estimated area of the run
And the rent to be paid in respect of every new lease of a run
within the said reserve acquired after the passing of this Act shall
during the first seven years of such lease be at the rate of ten
shillings per square mile according to the estimated area of the run
and during the second seven years at the rate of twenty shillings
per square mile and during the third seven years at the rate of
thirty shillings per square mile subject to appraisement in the


manner prescribed by the twentieth section of the said Act but so
that in no case shall the rent during the second seven years be less
than fifteen or more than twenty-five shillings per square mile or
during the third seven years be less than twenty-five or more than
forty shillings per square mile of available area which shall not be
computed at less than one-half of the gross area of the run.
New leases to he subject to provisions of section 5.
10. Any leases of runs in the said reserve acquired after the passing of
this Act shall be subject to the provisions of the fifth section hereof.
Reserve not to he deemed a railway reserve under the “ Crown Lands Aliena-
lion Act of 1868. ”
11. The said reserve shall not nor shall any part thereof be deemed
to be a railway reserve within the meaning of “ The Croivn Lands Alienation
Act q/ISGS.”
Provisions roe the Construction of a Railway within the said
Reserve from Daley to Roma.
Governor in Council may cause Railway to he made from Dalhy to Roma.
12. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council at any time after the
passing of this Act and in accordance with the provisions of the Act twenty-
seven Victoria number eight intituled “An Act to make provision for the
Construction of Railways and for the regulation of the same” as amended
by “The Railway Act of 1864” and “ The Railway Amendment Act of
1872 ” to cause a line of railway with all proper works and conveniences
thereto to be made within the said reserve from Dalby to Roma.
Account to he kept in Treasury under name of “ The Western Railway
Account.”
* 13. There shall be kept in the Treasury a distinct and separate head of
The Trust Fund under the name of “ The Western Railway Account.”
Colonial Treasurer may advance two hundred and fifty thousand pounds out
of moneys to credit of Ruhlic Account to Western Railway Account.
* 14. It shall be lawful for the Colonial Treasurer under the warrant of
the Governor to pay and advance from time to time out of the moneys stand-
ing to the credit of the Public Account any sum or sums of money not
exceeding in the aggregate at any one time the sum of two hundred and
fifty thousand pounds to be placed to the credit of “The Western Railway
Account ” and to be repaid in the manner hereinafter provided.
Disposal of moneys received on alienation of lands within reserve.
# 15. The moneys derived from the alienation of Crown lands within the
said reserve except rents of runs shall be applied in the first place in the
repayment of the moneys advanced by the Colonial Treasurer under the
authority of the last preceding section together with interest thereon at the
rate of five pounds per centum per annum and after repayment thereof
together with interest shall be paid into the Treasury to the credit of “ The
Western Railway Account ” under such regulations as the Governor in
Council shall from time to time prescribe.
* Note. —Sections 13,14,15, and 16 are repealed by “ The Western Hallway Act " and “ The
Railway Reserves Act Amendment Act of 1879.”—See page 178.


Moneys to he expended in construction of Western Bailway.
* 16. The moneys from time to lime standing to the credit of “The
Western Railway Account ” shall be applied and expended in the construc-
tion of the said railway works and in the payment of all necessary expenses
incidental thereto.
SCHEDULE.
Definition of the Western Railway Reserve.
For the purpose of defining the limits of The Western Railway Reserve
created under this Act a straight line shall he drawn from Dalby to the town of
Roma and produced thence for a distance of fifty miles and the “ said straight line”
shall be the base line of the said reserve which shall extend for fifty miles on each
side of the said base line.


THE RAILWAY RESERVES ACT.
41 VICTORIA, No. 11.
11 Victoria, No. 11. An Act to set apart certain Lands as 'Railway
Reserves and to provide Funds for the Construction of Railways and to
amend “ The Western Railway Act.”
[Assented to sth September, 1877.
Preamble.
WHEREAS it is expedient that provision should be made for the future
construction of Railways in the Colony and that funds for the con-
struction of the same should be provided by the sale of Crown lands within
the districts to be benefited by such Railways and whereas it is expedient
that the mode of alienation of Crown lands in all railway reserves including
the Western Railway Reserve should be uniform Be it therefore enacted
by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and with the advice and consent
of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly of Queensland in
Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same as follows—
Introductory Provisions.
Short title.
1. This Act may be cited for all purposes as “ The Railway Reserves
Act ” and shall commence and take effect on and from the passing thereof.
Commencement.
2. In the interpretation of this Act the following words within inverted
commas shall unless the context otherwise indicate have the meanings set
ngainst them respectively —
Interpretation of terms.
“ Crown Lands ’’—All lands vested in Her Majesty which are not
dedicated to any public purpose and which are not for the time
being subject to any deed of grant lease contract promise or
engagement made by or on behalf of Her Majesty and all lands
comprised in any pastoral lease which are by law subject for the
time being to reservation selection or alienation
“Run” —Any portion of lands comprised in any license to depasture
or in any lease or promise of lease for pastoral purposes
“Lease” shall mean and include every lease or promise of lease or
license of Crown lands for pastoral purposes
“ Lessee ” shall moan the lawful holder of any such lease whether as
the original lessee or the lawful assignee of any such lease.


Establishment of Railway Eeseeyes and Application of Act theeeto.
Creation of Railway Reserves.
3. All Crown lands situated within the areas described in the schedule
hereto are hereby set apart as and declared to be Railway Reserves under
the names therein respectively stated and subject to be dealt with as
hereinafter provided.
Lands undee Pastoeal Lease.
Effect of resumption of runs in the reserves.
4. Whenever the whole or any part of a run within the said reserves
shall have been heretofore or shall be hereafter resumed from lease by
virtue of the fifty-lifth section of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869”
such resumption shall have the effect of withdrawing from lease the lands
so resumed to the extent next hereinafter provided but not further or
otherwise and the lessee shall have and be subject to the following rights
and liabilities that is to say —
(1.) The land resumed shall be subject to reservation for township
reserves and public purposes under the provisions of the laws in
force for the time being relating to such reservation and shall
also be subject to selection and alienation under the provisions
of this Act
(2.) The lessee shall until such reservation selection or alienation be
at liberty to occupy the whole of the land so resumed and shall
continue to pay rent for so much thereof as shall not from time
to time have been so reserved selected or alienated
(3.) Upon such reservation selection or alienation his right to occupy
the land so reserved selected or alienated as the case may be
shall cease and determine and he shall be entitled to a reduction
of rent proportionate to the area from time to time so reserved
selected or alienated
(4.) The lessee shall have and may exercise the right of pre-emption
conferred on him by the fifty-fourth section of the said Act over
any part of his run that shall not for the time being have been
so reserved or selected or have been proclaimed for sale by
auction or open to selection by conditional purchase or as a
homestead area Provided that it shall be lawful for the lessee
of two or more runs adjoining to each other subject to the
approval of the Governor in Council to consolidate in one block
the pre-emptive selections which he may be entitled to make in
respect of each of the adjoining runs as aforesaid.
(5.) Where a run comprises a larger area than twenty-five square
miles of available country upon which rent has been paid it shall
be lawful for the lessee to exercise his right of pre-emption to
the same extent and in the same manner as if the run had been
subdivided into runs containing not less than twenty-five square
miles each and the area selected may with the approval of the
Governor in Council be consolidated in one block
The boundaries of all pre-emptive selections whether consoli-
dated or otherwise shall be surveyed subject to the provisions
contained in section fifty-four of the said Act.


One-half only of runs under 83 Vic. No. 10 to he taken.
5. Provided that not more than one-half part of any run in the said
reserves held under “ The Pastoral Leases Act o/1869 ” shall he proclaimed
for sale or open for selection except as hereinafter provided.
jßuns may he consolidated.
In cases where one person or firm is the lessee of two or more such runs
adjoining each other he may within three months from the passing of this
Act apply to the Secretary for Public Lands to have such runs consolidated
into one and thereafter they shall be considered for the purposes of this Act
as one run.
Notification of division hy the Secretary for Lands.
Before any lands comprised within any run in the said reserves held
under the said “ Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ” are proclaimed for sale or
open for selection the Secretary for Public Lands shall notify to the lessee
which half of the run is to be liable to be so proclaimed and the division of
the run shall be as nearly as the natural features of the country will permit
by a straight line drawn so as to divide equally the pastoral land and
permanent water.
Half cost survey to he paid hy lessee.
Provided that when the boundaries of a run are unsurveyed or when a
further survey is required to enable the division to be carried out the lessee
of the run shall pay half the cost of such survey or further survey as the
case may be and in default of payment within sis months from the date upon
which demand therefor shall be made in the Gazette the Governor may
declare the run for which the half cost of survey has not been paid forfeited.
Further alienation to he made upon six months' notice subject to dissent of
Parliament.
If it shall be deemed expedient to proclaim for sale or selection any
further portion of a run in the said reserves the Secretary for Public Lands
shall give six months’ notice in writing of the proposed proclamation to the
lessee and after the expiration of such notice a schedule of the lands proposed
to be proclaimed shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and if the
Sosed proclamation shall not be dissented from by resolutions passed by
Houses of Parliament within sixty days during a session of Parliament
the lands comprised in such schedule may be so proclaimed accordingly.
Operation of “ Pastoral Leases Act ” preserved in other respects.
6. Except as aforesaid nothing herein contained shall be held to abridge
or interfere with any rights that may be conferred on lessees by the said
“ Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ” to interfere with the operation of the said
Act within the said reserves except so far as the same is expressly modified
by this Act.
Alienation of Land in the Eeseeves.
Mode in which land may he alienated.
7. Crown lands in the said reserves may be leased and alienated under
the provisions of the laws for the time being in force relating to the leasing
and alienation of Crown lands but subject nevertheless to the following
conditions and modifications that is to say—


(1.) All lands within two miles of any line cf railway within the
said reserves except such part thereof as shall he reserved, for
township reserves or public purposes shall ho set apart as home-
stead areas under “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876”
(2.) The areas of country lots offered for sale hy auction may he
increased to not more than five thousand one hundred and twenty
acres and each lot so offered shall contain over and above the
advertised area thereof sufficient land for a road three chains
wide through any part of such lot which may be opened hy the
Secretary for Public W orks in any direction when required and
in no case shall more than twelve thousand acres he included in
any number of adjoining lots unless the same he surrounded hy
a reserved road three chains wide.
TV ew leases.
8. All lands comprised in any leases of runs in the said reserves acquired
after the passing of this Act shall he subject to reservation selection and
alienation in the same manner as lands resumed from lease and the lessee
shall he subject to the same rights and liabilities as are hereinbefore declared
with respect to lands so resumed.
PeOVISIONS POE THE CoNSTEHCTXON OP RAILWAYS.
Governor in Council may came railways to he made within the Reserved
Districts.
_9. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council at any time after the
passingof this Act and in accordance with the provisions of the Act twenty-
seven Victoria number eight intituled “An Act to mal'c provision for the
Construction of Railways and for the regulation cf the same” as amended by
“ The Railway Act of 1864” and “ The Railway Amendment Act of 1872” to
cause lines of railway with all proper works and conveniences thereto to be
made within the said reserves.
Raihvay Accounts to he kept in Treasury.
'* 10. There shall be kept in the Treasury distinct and separate heads of
The Trust Fund under the names of “The Hailway Account” for such
reserves respectively.
Colonial Treasurer may make advances out of moneys to credit of public
account to Raihvay Accounts.
* 11. It shall be lawful for the Colonial Treasurer under the warrant of
the Governor to pay and advance from time to time out of the moneys
standing to the credit of the Public Account such sum or sums of money as
may be appropriated by Parliament for the construction of railways within
the said reserves respectively to be placed to the credit of the said Accounts
and to be repaid in the manner hereinafter provided.
Disposal of proceeds of lands alienated.
'* 12. All moneys derived from the alienation of Crown lands within the
said several reserves shall be placed to the credit of the said Accounts
respectively and shall be applied in manner following that is to say—
* Note. — Sections 10,11, 12 arc repealed by “ The Western Railway Act ” and “ The Railway
Jleserres Act Amendment Act of 1679.”—See page 178.


Firstly—ln payment of interest at tlie rate of five pounds per centum
per annum upon the moneys advanced by the Colonial Treasurer
under the authority of the last preceding section to such accounts
respectively
Secondly—Tu the construction of railways within the said reserves
respectively in such manner and in such proportions as shall from
time to time be authorised hy Parliament
Thirdly—ln the repayment of the moneys so advanced hy the
Colonial Treasurer to such accounts respectively
And any surplus remaining after such repayment shall remain at the
credit of the said Accounts and shall be appropriated in such manner as shall
from time to time be authorized by Parliament.
Alienation of Land —Western Railway Reserve.
Mode of alienation.
13. Notwithstanding anything in “ The Western 'Railway Act” to the
contrary Crown lands in the Western Railway Reserve may be alienated
under the provisions of the laws in force for the time being relating to the
alienation of lands by conditional selection.
Provisions of Act as to 'pre-emption extended to the Western Railway
Reserve.
14. In cases where one person or firm is the lessee of two or more runs
in the Western Railway Reserve adjoining each other he may within three
months from the passing of this Act apply to the bccrelary for Lands to
have such runs consolidated into one and thereafter they shall be considered
as one run and the lessee may if he has not theretofore exercised the same
exercise his pre-emptive right in the same manner as is provided by this Act.
THE SCHEDULE.
1. SOUTHERN EXTENSION RAILWAY RESERVE.
Commencing on the left bank of the Condamine River at the intersection of
the east boundary of Warwick Town Reserve first proclaimed thence by that river
upwards in a general north-easterly direction to the eastern boundary of Darling
Downs District thence by that boundary southerly to the south boundary of the
colony thence by the south boundary of the colony in a general westerly direction
to the Junction of Macintyre Rrook with the Severn River thence north-easterly in
a direct line to the south-east corner of the 'Western Railway Reserve thence by the
south-eastern boundary of that reserve north-easterly to a point due west of the
junction of North Branch with Condamine River thence east to that junction thence
by the left bank of North Branch and. its continuation being the left bank of
Condamine River upwards to the intersection of the west boundary of V arwick
Town Reserve first proclaimed thence south by that west boundary east by the
south boundary and north by the east boundary to the point of commencement.
2. WIDE BAY AND BURNETT DISTRICTS RAILWAY RESERVE.
Commencing on the sea-coast at tho mouth of the Rolan River and bounded
thence on the north by the northern watershed of the Rolan River westerly by the
northern watershed of the Burnett River and its tributaries westerly to the range
separating the Burnett River waters from the Dawson River waters on the west by


that range southerly to the G-reat Dividing Range thence by the Great Dividing
Range south-easterly to the range separating the Burnett and Mary River waters
from those of the Brisbane River on the south by the last-mentioned range and by
the northern watershed of the Mooroochydore River easterly to the sea-coast and
on the oast by the sea-coast northerly to the point of commencement and exclusive
of all lands comprised within the Western Railway Reserve.
3. CENTRAL DISTRICT RAILWAY RESERVE.
The area included within parallel lines distant fifty miles from and 6n each side
of a base line drawn in a straight line from a point on the Comet River three miles
above its junction with the Mackenzie River north-westerly to Clermont town
reserve and produced thence for a distance of fifty miles.
4. KENNEDY RAILWAY RESERVE.
The area included within parallel lines distant fifty miles from and on each side
of a base line drawn in a straight line from Townsville south-westerly to Charters
Towers and produced thence for a distance of fifty miles.
THE WESTERN RAILWAY ACT AND THE RAILWAY
RESERVES ACT AMENDMENT ACT OF 1879.
43 Victoria No, 13.
43 Victoria No. 13.' —An Act to Amend “ The Western Railway Act ”
and “ The Railway Reserves Act." [Assented to 25tli September, 1879.]
Preamble.
WHEREAS it is expedient to repeal so much of “ The Western Railway
Act ” and “ The Railway Reserves Act” as hereinafter provided
and to make other provision in lieu thereof Be it therefore enacted by the
Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and with the advice and consent of the
Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly of Queensland in Parliament
assembled and by the authority of same as follows—
Repeal of 13 14 15 and 16 of 39 Vic. No. 7 and 10 11 and 12 41 Tic. No. 11.
1, Sections thirteen fourteen fifteen and sixteen of “ The Western Rail-
way Act ” thirty-ninth Victoria number seven and sections ten eleven arid
twelve of “Phe Railway Reserves Act" forty-first Victoria number eleven
shall be and the same are hereby repealed.
Transfer of accounts.
2. All moneys now standing to the credit of the Trust Eund or the
“Western Railway Account” or “The Railway Account” respectively
created by the abovementioned Acts shall be transferred to and all moneys
to be derived from the alienation of lands in the reserves as provided by the
said Acts respectively shall be paid into the Consolidated Revenue of the
Colony.
Short title.
3. This Act shall be styled and maybe cited as “ The Western Railway
Act and the Railway Reserves Act Amendment A.ct of 1879. ;


THE VICTORIA BRIDGE LAND SALES ACT.
43 Victoria No- 11.
43 Victoria No. 11. —An Art to provide for the Sale of the Victoria
Bridge Lands. [Assented to 25th September, 1879.]
Preamble.
WHEREAS the several pieces or parcels of land mentioned in the first
Schedule to “ The Victoria Bridge Act of 1876” have by virtue of
the power and authority of that Act in that behalf enabling been assigned
and transferred by the Municipal Council of the City of Brisbane to Her
Majesty subject to the encumbrances affecting the same And whereas the
said lands are subject to a mortgage to the Bank of Queensland Limited to
secure the payment of the sum of one hundred and twenty thousand nine
hundred and forty-live pounds and interest thereon And whereas by “ The
Victoria Bridge Act of 1877” the aforesaid mortgage debt and interest in
consequence of the assignment and transfer aforesaid have become and are
now charged upon the Consolidated Revenue of the colony And whereas it
is expedient to make provision for the sale of the said lands subject as
aforesaid Be it enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and
with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and Legislative
Assembly of Queensland in Parliament assembled and by the authority of
the same as follows —-
Governor in Council to authorise sale of lands.
1. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to authorise the sale
by public auction and subject to such terms and conditions as may be
determined upon of all or any portion or portions of such lands aforesaid
subject nevertheless to the encumbrances affecting the same.
Colonial Treasurer to indemnify purchaser.
2. The Colonial Treasurer shall indemnify and keep indemnified every
purchaser of such lands or of any portion or portions thereof from and
against all claims and demands that may be made upon any such purchaser
his heirs and assigns for and in respect of any sums of money which may
become payable as principal or interest in respect of the encumbrances
affecting the sumo as aforesaid.
Deed to specify encumbrance and indemnity.
3. Every Deed of Grant of any such land shall state that it is issued
under the provisions of this Act and shall have endorsed thereon a memoran-
dum signed by the Registrar-General in the form following or to the like
effect that is to say—
The land within mentioned is subject to the encumbrances specified in
“ The Victoria Bridge Land Sales Art of 1879 ” against which the pur-
chaser is indemnified by the Government.
Proceeds of sale to be paid into Consolidated Pc venue Fund.
4. All moneys derived from proceeds of the sale of any land under the
provisions of this Act shall be paid into the Consolidated Revenue Fund of
the colony. short title.
5. This Act shall be styled and may be cited as “ The Victoria Bridge
Land Sales Act of 1879.”


SELECTORS RELIEE ACT OF 1878.
42 Victoria No. 6.
42 Victoria No. C. —An Act to Amend, the Law, relating to Selections
under “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1808*'’ and“ The Homestead
Areas Act of 1872.” [Assented to 22nd August, 1878.]
Preamble.
WHEREAS it is desirable to amend the law relating to Selections under
“ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” and Homestead Selec-
tions under “ The Homestead Areas Act of 1872” 13e it therefore enacted
by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and with, the advice and consent
of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly of Queensland in Par-
liament assembled and by the authority of the same as follows —
Period of obtaining grant of land under 36 Vic. No. 20 shortened.
1. From and after the passing of this Act the eighth section of “ The
Homestead Areas Act of 1872 ” shall be read and construed as if the period
of five years therein mentioned were three years and the said recited Act
shall be amended accordingly.
Fine for non-payment of rent on selection under 31 Vic. No. 46 reduced.
2. From and after the passing of this Act the second sub-section of
section 51 of “The Croton Lands Alienation Act q/ ? 1868 ” shall be read and
construed as if the amount one-fourth therein mentioned were one-tenth and
the last-mentioned Act shall be amended accordingly.
Short title.
3. This Act may be cited as “The Selectors Belief Act of 1878.”


INDEX.
“THE CROWN LANDS ALIENATION ACT OF 1876”
Page.
Act :
Preamble 1
Interpretation of terms ... ... ... ... ... 1
Repeal of existing Acts and regulations subject to
certain provisoes ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,27,48
Application of Act to whole colony ... ... ... ... 4
Date of commencement of Act of 1876 ... ... ... 47
Short title ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47
Actions:
Trustees considered as owners, in law or equity suits ... 6
Against commissioner or other officials for trafficking in
land ... ... .... ... ... ... ... 42
Actions against commissioner, etc., how proceeded with ... 43
To be commenced within twelve months ... ... ... 43
Notice in writing to be given to defendant 48
Costs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 48
No proceedings under this Act to be removable by
certiorari ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 44
Alienation. (See “Grants.”)
Appeal :
From bench of magistrates to district court 44
Decision of district court to be final ... ... ... 44
Applications :
Register of applications to be kept by land agent ... 9
Register to be signed by applicant 9
D O , •/ , i
Register open to public inspection 9
To select a conditional purchase.— Vide “ Conditional
Purchase.”
To select a homestead. — Vide “ Homestead Selections.”
Priority of applications ... ... ... ... ... 9
Simultaneous applications for same land ... ... ... 10
To be decided upon by commissioner in open court ... 7
For refundment of survey fees ... .., H
For certificate of performance of conditions, how to be
made
To select unsold country lands 30
To close a road ... ... ... ... ... * ... 31
For closure of road, to bo published ... ... ... 31
Appointments :
Commissioners, land agents 6
Bailiffs, selectors’ 10
Bailiffs and rangers of Crown lands 41


Page.
Arbitration and appraisement:
Respecting value of improvements 12, 33, 38
Respecting value of land exchanged with Government ... 33
Mode of appraisement or arbitration ... ... ... 38
Road opening 39
Damage by miners * 4-0
Assurance Fund :
Contribution under “ Real Property Act of 1861” ... 38
Auction sales ;
At court sitting in the case of simultaneous applications 10
Governor may cause lands to be surveyed and offered ... 27
Maps of auction lands to be made and lodged with Sur-
veyor-General ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
.Areas and classes of lands to be offered ... ... ... 28
Proclamation of lands to be offered ... ... ... 28
Withdrawal of lots from sale ... ... ... ... 28
Power to impose special conditions of sale by procla-
mation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
Upset price 28
Value of improvements added to upset price ... ... 28
Terms and conditions of sale to be read by person con-
ducting same ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
Purchaser to deposit one-fifth of price ... ... ... 29
Balance of purchase money, etc., to be paid within one
month ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
Deposit forfeited upon failure to pay balance ... ... 29
Value of improvements may by direction be paid to
owner or occupant ... ... ... ... ... 29
Receipt for value of improvements to be produced to
land agent 29
Unsold country lands to be open to purchase by selection 30
Unsold town or suburban lands may be proclaimed
similarly available 30
Award :
Arbitrators. — Vide “ Arbitration.”
District court decision, final ... ... ... ... ... 44
Bailiffs:
Selectors’bailiffs on conditional purchases ... ... 16
Agreements of selectors’bailiffs must be registered ... 16
Power to appoint Crown bailiffs or rangers ... ... 41
Duties of Crown bailiffs 41
Actions against 43
Boundaries:
Frontage in respect to boundaries ... ... ... ... 10
Of adjoining selections by same applicant ... ... ... 14, 26
Removal of boundary marts, a misdemeanor 43
14, 26
Cattle:
Number of cattle allowed to depasture on commons ... 35
Fee for depasturage on commons ... ... ... ... 35
Entire animals not allowed on commons 35
CeHificates:
Obtainable on proof of fulfilment of conditions 17, 18, 24
Application for certificates, how to be made 26


Page.
Notice of application to be posted in land agent’s office 27
Granted to selectors under Act of 1868 ... ... ... 46
Classification :
Into town, suburban, and country lands 6
Dpsct prices of above ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
Coal:
Licenses to mine ... 34
Commissioners:
Definition of term ... ... ... ... ... ... 2
Appointment of ... ... ... ... ... 3,6
To hold land courts ... ... ... ... ... .;. 7
May take evidence on oath ... ... ... ... ;;; 7
Decision to be pronounced in open court ... .., 1 ,7,26
Commissioner’s decision to be confirmed by Minister ... 7
To issue certificates if satisfied as to fulfilment of con-
ditions ... 17
May be authorised to issue timber licenses, etc. ... ... 36
Must not traffic in land, etc. ... ... ... ... ... 42
Actions against ... ... ... ... ... ... 43
Commons:
Governor may proclaim commons upon certain condi-
tions ... ... ... ... 34
Petitions for and against ... ... ... ... ... 34
Extent of common ... ... ... ... ... . r 34
Crown to retain fee-simple of common lands with power
to sell ... ::: '' f J- .T: 34
Commonages may be extended to the extent of any land
sold therein ... _ ' 35
Governor may make regulations ... ... ... ... 35
Commonage rights ... ... ... ... ... ... 35
Dcpasturage of sheep and entire male animals prohibited 35
Fees for depasturing ... ... ... ... ... ■ 35
Number of cattle allowed to depasture ... ... ... 35
Travellers’stock to be allowed pasturage ... ... 35
Common may be placed under Municipal Council ... / 35
Municipal Council may be authorised to make regu-
lations 35
■ faerraft ■/- atmeqifvjo lot momooipA
Compensation :
To owners of improvements on land selected ... ... 12
No compensation for improvements in case of forfeiture... 19,25
To selectors, etc., for land resumed for roads ... ... 39
To selectors, etc., for damage done by diggers, etc. ... 40
Conditional purchase:
Definition of term
Lands open to selection
o n /w-P Into rl It r\Tr" ti von ... ...
Price of land, how fixed ... ... ... ...
Area obtainable ... ... ... •••
Hiovimnni onrl mimtnmYl ... ... ...
Alaximum and minimum ... ... ... ••• ••• r’ 5
Who may select ••• 11,14


iv> CROWN LANDS ALIENATION ACT.
Page.
No minor or married woman to be lessee 11
Application to select ... ... ... ... ... 9
Declaration before magistrate to be made by selector ... II
Clear description of boundaries, etc., of selection required 14
Shape of selection 10, 14
Frontage . ... . ...
Applicant to sign register 9
Registry of application by land agent 9
Precedence of applications
Priority of a homestead selection
Price
Deposits 9
Auction between selectors 10
Rent ..; ;.. ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 10, 16
Survey ...' /. ••• ••• 10,37
Notice of confirmation by Secretary for Lands to be
given to selector ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
Improvements existing at time of application ... ... 12
Limits to conditional purchases by holders under pre-
vious Acts ..; ... ... ... ••• ••• 13
Addition to previous selection allowed to holders of less
than maximum area ... 13
In the case of adjoining selections occupation on one only
necessary ... . ••• 11*
One additional 1 selection allowed under certain provisions
to holders under this or previous Acts 14
Except as expressly provided, only one parcel of land to
be held at same time 14
Issue of lease Tor ten years 15
Date ot Icasq V frc lo fhh / -v.; "* *” " io
Transfer of lease ... ... ... ••• ••• •••
Time for payment of rent ... 15
Penalty for non-payment of rent within prescribed time... 15
Forfeiture' , ; 12, 15 17
Reversal of forfeiture under certain conditions 15> io
Written notice of intended forfeiture to be given to lessee 27
Selector’s evidence re forfeiture to be heard in open court
and reported tp the Minister 27
Occupation necessary ... ... ir
Quality of occupation ....
Agreement for occupation by servant must be registered... lb
~ O 1 91
Conditions of improvement ... ... U, 4L
Land commissioner’s certificate of fulfilment of conditions 17, 10,
Notice to be given to commissioner of intended application
for certificate j ••• ••• 27
Notification of above to be posted in land agent s office ...
Land to revert to Crown if conditions not fulfilled during
term
Condition of occupation dispensed with in certain eases ...
Deed of grant ... ... ... ... ... 13
X/WU WJ. ... ... ...
Death of selector - .... •••
Mortgage or settlement in trust permitted after issue ot
certificate ... ... .... yj 20
Land deemed personal property in case or death w


Insolvency of lessee
Conditional purchases not liable for debt * 21
Lands open to conditional purchase, also available for
homestead selection ... ... ... ... ... 22
Exchange with, or repurchase by Government 33
Crown bailiff may enter upon selection 41
Conditional purchaser
Definition of term ... ... ... ... ... ... 2
Conditional selection :
Vide “ Conditional Purchase.”
Definition of term ... ... ... ... ... ... 2
Conditional selection in a homestead area ;
Land available ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
Maximum and minimum 22
Personal residence by selector imperative 19, 22
Other matters. — Vide “ Conditional Purchase.”
Conditional selectors under Act of 1868 .-
Commissioner to grant certificate on proof of fulfilment of
conditions of residence and improvement ... ... 46
Transfers ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4g
Conditions to be fulfilled by transferree ... ... ... 46
Insolvency of selector... ... ... ... ... ... 47
Rescission of forfeiture 47
Governor may defeat forfeiture on payment of penalty, &c. 47
Deed qf grant 46, 47
Counties;
Governor may proclaim ... ... ... ... ... 4
Country lands :
Definition of ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
May be proclaimed open to or withdrawn from selection ... 8
May be set apart as homestead areas 21
Governor may cause lands to be offered at auction ... 27
Areas of land to be offered at auction ... ... ... 28
Upset price 28
Lots unsold at auction to be open to purchase by selection 30
Crown bailiffs :
Vide “ Bailiffs.”
Crown lands:
Definition of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
Classification 0f... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
What lands are open to selection under this Act ... ... 8
Licenses to remove timber, gravel, &c. — Vide “Licenses.”
Unauthorised occupation ... ... ... ... ... 41
Penalties for trespassing on 42
Cultivation:
Reckoned an improvement ... ... ... 2
Declaration:
Required to be made by conditional selector ... ... 14
Required to be made by homestead selector ... ... 23
False declaration to be-deemed perjury 45


Deed of grant;
Vide “Grants.”
Deed fee.— Vide “ Fees.”
Deposits :
First year’s rents on selections ... ... ... ... 9,10,23
Survey fees ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,37
One-fifth of sum hid at auction 29
Forfeited upon failure to pay balances at auction 29
Diggers:
' May enter on selections if authorised 40
Escheat:
Power to grant in case of escheat, &c. ... ... ... 30,31
False declaration :
To he perjury 45
Fees:
For surveys ... ... ... ... ... ... 37, 100
For transfer of lease ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
For deed of grant ... ... ... ... 38,99
For depasturing cattle on commons 35
For licenses to remove timber, gravel, &c 36
Contribution to Assurance Fund 38
Fee-simple of lands:
Vide “ Grants.”
Fencing :
Accepted as an improvement 2
Eoads opened to be fenced by Government in some cases 39
“Fencing Act” to apply to conditional and homestead
selections ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40
Stnblf not to be imnounded off unfenced selections ... 40
Stock not to be impounded off unfenced selections
Fines;
Vide “Penalties.”
Forfeiture:
For non-fulfilment of conditions 12, 19, 25
For fraud or evasion 12, 45
rur iruuu ui cvcimuu ... ... ... ... ... ...
For non-payment of rent ... ... ... ... ... 15,23
Reversal of forfeiture 15,16, 23, 34
For non-occupation or residence 17, 25
Written notice of intended forfeiture to be given to
selector ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
Selector’s evidence in open court against forfeiture ... 27
For non-payment of balances at auction ... ... ... 29
For felony, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
For non-payment of license fee on enclosed roads... ... 32
Forfeitures to be proclaimed by Governor ... ... ... 41
Forfeited lands may be sold or opened to selection .... 41
In the case of officials purchasing land in respect of which
they'may be’emplbyed ... ..' 42
For breach of regulations 41, 45
Interest in lands fraudulently acquired 45
In the case of lands selected under Act 47
Forms,,, ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... 53 to 60


Fraud:
How punishable ... ... ... ... ... ... 12,45
Frontage :
Proportion allowed ... 10
Fulfilment of conditions :
Vide “ Certificates.”
Grants ;
Governor may grant in fee-simple or less estate 4, 30, 33
Grants in trust ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
Fee-simple of lands selected ... ... ... ... ... 18, 25
Obtainable on expiration of term of lease 18
In case of insolvency ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
Volunteers’land orders ... ... ... ... ... 22
Fees payable 18,21, 25, 29,
30, 31, 38
Fee simple of lands purchased at auction 29
Power to grant in case of escheat, &c. 30
Notice of intended grant of land under escheat to be
published in Gazette ... ... ... ... ... 31
Special grants 30
Grant of roads closed 31
Sales without competition in special cases ... ... ... 33
Lands exchanged with or purchased by Government ... 33
Fee-simple of lands selected under Act of 1868 ... ... 46,47
Homestead areas:
Certain lands to be set apart as homestead areas ... ... 21, 48
Settled District of Darling Downs a homestead area ... 48
Volunteers’land orders available in... ... ... ... 21,22
Personal residence on selection imperative ... ... ... 19, 22
Additional separate selection in, not allowed to holders
under this or previous Acts ... ... ... ... 19
Volunteers’ land orders selections not subject to conditions
of residence or improvement ... ... ... ... 22
Available for conditional purchase subject to certain
restrictions... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
Land open for conditional purchase also available for
homestead selection ... ... ... ... ... 22
Homestead selections in homestead areas ... ... ... 22
Area allowed for homesteads ... ,22
Homestead selections :
Lands open to selection 8, 22
Area allowed for homesteads... ... ... ... ... 22
Maximum and minimum ... ... ... ... ... 22
Price ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23
Who may select ... ... ... ... ... ... 11, 23
No minor or married woman to be lessee 11
Application to select 9
Applicant to make declaration as to competency, &c. ... 23
Shape of selection ... ... ... ... ... ... 10, 26
Frontage... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Clear description of boundaries, &c., of selection to be given 9
Applicant to sign register 9


Registry of application by land agent
Deposits 9
Survey 9, 37
Precedence of applications
Priority over conditional selections ... ... ... ... 9
Auction between selectors
Notice of confirmation by Secretary for Lands to be given
to selector _ _
Improvements existing at time of application ... ... 12
Selector may also, under certain provisions, make a con-
ditional purchase ... •••
Except as specially provided, only one selection of land as
a homestead permitted ... ... ... ... ... 22
Eirst year’s rent, how and when payable ... ... ... 23
Annual payments, how and when to be made ... _ ... 23
Penalty for non-payment of rent within prescribed time... 23
Forfeiture ... ... ••• . ••• ••• ••• 23 » 25
Reversal of forfeiture under certain conditions 23
Written notice of intended forfeiture to be given to lessee 27
Selector’s evidence re forfeiture to be heard in open court
and reported to Minister 27
Residence imperative "
Conditions of improvement ... ... ... ... ... 22 > 23
Land commissioner’s certificate of fulfilment oi conditions 24, 27
24, 27
Notice to be given to commissioner of intended application
for certificate 2^
Notification of intended application for certificate to be
posted in land agent’s office 27
Deed of grant
Death of selector, provision in case ot
Transmission of interest in case of death ... 24
Provision in case land not sold after selector’s death ... 2o
rruviaiuu XU.
Homestead not liable for debt
Insolvency of selector _ ••• 26
Selectors under this or previous Acts may make an
additional selection from conterminous lands only ... 26
Condition of residence in the case of combined homestead
selections
Exchange of land with Government.
n Lnlliff mar fvnfpv 11DOT1 Splf>ntlo7l ... ... ...
Crown bailiff may enter upon selection
Impounding: ac\
Not permitted off unfenced selections
Improved lands: 19
Selection of improved lands ...
Value of improvements to be paid ; .
V aiue ui. ... ...
Purchase of improved lands without competition oo
Improvements : 2
Definition of term to oo qq qq
jjenmuuu ux 19 90 qq
Payment for U > 33
Forfeited for non-payment of rent %
Forfeited for non-occupation or residence ia
rorieiieu iui v. ...
Conditions of improvement ... ... ... ••• ••• tt
Forfeited at expiration of term if conditions not fulfilled w,


is.
I age.
Insolvency and debt:
In the case of conditional selections... ...
In the case of homesteads
2l
26
Land agents :
Power to appoint ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
Districts to be defined... ... ... ... ... ... 6
Land agent to keep register of applications ... 9
Must not traffic in lands in respect of which they are
employed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42
cu ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Actions against land agents ... ... ... ... ... 48
Land commissioners :
Vide “ Commissioners
Land courts:
Commissioner to hold ... ... ... ... ... ... 7
Land orders:
Volunteers’ land orders available within homestead areas 21
Leases:
Leases issued to conditional selectors after confirmation ... 15
Special leases for particular purposes . ... ... ... 33
Term of special lease ... ... ... ... ... ... 34
Cancellation of special lease after due notice and payment
for improvements ... ... ... ... ... ... 34
Annual rent in the case of snecial leases ... ... ... 34
Annual rent in the case of special leases
Lessees:
Compensation for improvements on lands selected... ... 12
Pastoral lessees may object to the licenses to remove
timber, &c 36
Pastoral lessees must not obstruct 36, 37
Licensed surveyors :
May be employed by selectors ... ... ... ... 11
Licenses granted to duly qualified surveyors ... ... 37
To be employed to execute surveys ... ... ... ... 37
Wilful neglect or misrepresentation, etc., how punishable 37
Must not traffic in land in respect of which they may be
employed ... ... ... ... ... ... .i. 42
Forfeiture of license, etc. ... ... ... 42
Licenses:
To enclose roads ... ... ... ... ... ... 32
Cancellation of licenses ... ... ... ... ... 32
To mine for coal ... ... ... ... ... ... 34
To remove timber, gravel, etc. ... ... ... ... 36
Restriction of licensees ... ... ... ... ... 36
Timber, etc., license fees payable in advance ... ... 3(5
May be issued to duly qualified surveyors ... 37
Suspension or cancellation of surveyor’s license ... ... 37
Mineral lands :
Right of entry upon selections to work minerals 40
Mining :
For coal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 34
For other metals 40


‘ < Pag*
Minister: • ' •
Definition of. term ...... ... 1
Misdemeanor:
Eemoval of boundary marks ... ... ... ... ... 43
) Fraud, etc..,, ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... 36, 45
Dealing with land fraudulently acquired ... ... ... 45
How punishable 45
Mortgage :
Conditional selection may be mortgaged after issue of
certificate 20
Penalties:
For breach of conditions. —■Vide “ Forfeiture,
For fraud or evasion, etc 12, 45
For non-payment of rent ... ... ... ... ... 15,23
For non-occupation or residence. — Vide “ Forfeiture.”
For non-payment of balances at auction.— Vide “For-
feiture.”
For non-payment of annual license fee on enclosed roads 32
For non-observance of restrictions by holders of timber
licenses ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 36
For wilful neglect, etc., of licensed surveyors ... ... 37
For trespassing on Crown lands ... ... ... ... 42
For the purchase of land by any officer of the Crown in
respect of which he may be employed ... ... ... 42
For removal of boundary marks ... ... ... ... 43.
For breach of regulations ... ... ... ... ... 44,45
For dealing with land fraudulently acquired 45
Perjury:
False declarations deemed perjury ... ... ... ... 45
Prescribed:
Definition of term ... ... ... ... ... ... 2
Price of lands :
Conditional purchases ... ... ... ... ... ... 8, 9
Homesteads ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
Upset price of land offered at auction to be proclaimed ... 2S
Land included in closed roads ... ... ... ... 31
In special cases... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33
Improved lands... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33
Payable for land resumed for roads 39
Proclamations:
Counties, parishes, towns, villages, and township reserves 4
Deserves... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
Opening lands to selection ... ... ... ... ... 8
Withdrawing lands from selection ... ... ... ... 8
Of upset prices for conditional purchase ... ... ... 8
Of forfeiture for breach of conditions ... . ... 12
Limitation of area for conditional purchase ... ... 13
Homestead areas ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
Limitation of conditional selection in homestead area ... 22
Of sales by auction ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
Eespecting value of improvements on lands sold at auction 29
Declaring unsold lands open to purchase by selection ... 30


I*age.
Commons ... .... ... ... ... ... ... 34
Rescinding reservations ... ... ... ... ... 39
Opening roads 39
Forfeiture of lands 41
Regulations to be proclaimed 44
Punishments ;
Vide “Penalties.”
Purchase:
Conditional purchase. —-Vide “Conditional.”
Purchase of land without competition in special cases ... 33
Purchaser:
Conditional purchaser.— Vide “Conditional.”
Hangers of Crown lands :
Power to appoint 41
Their duties ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41
Actions against. ... ... ... ... ... ... 43
Refundments
Of survey fees in case of private survey 11
Regulations;
Vide Index ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 to 20
Governor may make or rescind regulations under this Act 44
Regulations to be proclaimed... ... ... ... ... 44
Penalty for breach of regulations ... ... ... ... 44,45
Rents:
On conditional selections ... ... ... ... ... 9, 10, 15
Of homesteads ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9, 10, 22
Time for payment ... ... ... ... ... ... 15
rtf Urtnl T/ Ifl n TcAI'+AI f fa
Non-payment of rent. — Vide “Forfeiture.”
On enclosed roads ... ,v. ... ... ... ... 32
On special leases ... ... ... ... ... ... 3^?
Repeal of Land Acts ... ... ... ... ... ... 48
Reserves:
Proclamation 0f... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
May be granted in trust’ ... ... ... ... 5
Licenses to mine for coal on reserves ... 34
Rescindment 0f... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 39
Water reserves still continue after rescindment of procla-
mation ... ... .;. ... ... ... ••• 39
Trespassers on reserves ... ... ... ... ... 42
Penalty for breach of regulations relating to reserves, etc. 44, 45
44, 45
Roads :
Closure of unnecessary roads ... ... ... ... 31
Application for closure —to be advertised, etc 31
Alienation or lease of closed roads 31
Price of land included in closed roads ... ... ... 31
Rents on enclosed roads ... ... ... ... • • • 32
Itents on enclosed roads ... ... ... ... • • •
During currency of license, holder thereof deemed lessee 32
Forfeiture for non-payment of annual license fee ... ... 32
Licensee may defeat forfeiture 32
Governor may after due notice cancel license 32


Page,
Eesclndment of proclamations —preservation of roads and
streets ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 39
Eesumption of land for roads through selections ... ... 39
Compensation for land so resumed ... ... ... ... 39
New roads through enclosed lands to be fenced by Gov-
ernment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 39
Huns:
Holders of timber licenses, etc., may enter upon. — Vide
“Lessees” 36
Sales:
By auction. — Vide “Auction.”
Provision for sale of homestead selection in case of
selector’s death ... ... ... ... ... ... 24
Alienation of closed roads ... ... ... ... 31
Without competition in special cases ... ... ... 33
Schedules:
First schedule—repeal of Land Acts . ... ... ... 48
Second schedule —Settled District of Darling Downs ... 48
Selection:
Definition of term 2
Conditional selection. — Vide “Conditional.”
Homestead selection. — Vide “Homestead.”
Stock not to be impounded off unfenced selections ... 40
Lands open to selection 8
Selector:
Definition of term ... ... ... ... ... ... 2
Suburban lands:
Definition of .!. ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
Governor may cause lands to be offered at auction ... 27
Areas of land to be offered at auction 28
Upset price ... .h ... 28
Unsold lots may be notified open to purchase by selection 30
Surveyors.—Vide “Licensed Surveyors
Surveys :
Fees payable ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 9,37,100
Of selections ... 9
By selectors in case of delays ... ... ... ... 10,11
Eefundment of fee if survey not effected within three
months H
Licensed surveyors to be employed ...
Falsification of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37
Falsification of
Temporary reserves. —Vide “Eeserves.”
Timber licenses:
Licenses may be granted to remove timber, gravel, etc. ...
Head stations not to be approached within two miles ... 36
Fees. — Vide “ Licenses.”
Eeasonable objection to granting of license may be enter-
tained
Eestrietion of licensees ... ... ... ... ... 36
Penalty for non-observance of restriction. Vide
“Penalties.”
Pastoral lessees not to obstruct


xiii.
Page.
Titles.—Vide “Grants.”
Towns:
Governor may proclaim 4
Town lands:
Definition of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
Governor may cause lands to be submitted for sale by
auction ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
Areas of land to be offered at auction ... ... ... 28
Upset price ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
Unsold lots may be notified open to purchase by selection 30
Sale of land without competition in consideration of
improvements 33
Township reserves. — Vide “Reserves.”
Transfers „•
Of conditional purchases ... ... ... ... ... 18
By will or inheritance ... ... ... ... ... ... 20,24
By way of mortgage or family settlement ... ... ... 20
In insolvency ... ... .... ... ... ... ... 20,21
Of lands selected under Act of 1868 ... ... .... 46
Trespass:
On Crown lands ... ... ... ... ... ... 42
Penalties for trespassing 42
Trustees ;
Trustees of public lands ... ... ... ... ... 4, 5
Trustees may make bye-laws... ... ... ... ... 6
Trustees considered owners in law or equity suit ... ... 6
Valuation of improvements:
Vide “Arbitration.”
Value of improvements :
Vide “ Improvements.”
Volunteers' land orders:
' Where available ... ... ... ... ... .., 21,22
Land selected not subject to conditions of residence and
improvement ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
“ Western Railway Act
Provisions relative to ninth section of above Act ... ... 3
Witnesses:
Commissioner has power to summon 7
REGULATIONS, NOTICES, AND (INSTRUCTIONS ISSUED UNDER
“ THE CROWN LANDS ALIENATION ACT OF 1876.”
Agreement for occupation hy servant must he registered within
one month ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61
Applicants to attend at land court ... ... ... ••• 19
Application rejected for non-appearance at land court ... 49
Appointment of arbitrator for the Government ... ... ... 52


Appraisement and arbitration :
Appointment of arbitrator 52
Forms to be used ... ... , co
52
Respecting value of improvements ... ... ... 5P
Assurance Fund—Contribution under “ The Real Fr oner tv
Act of 1801’’ ... 51
Auction sales;
Advance at each bid, not less than one halfpenny per acre
per annum ; 5q
Between selectors in the case of simultaneous applications 50
Bailiffs ;
Agreements of selectors’ bailiffs must be registered within
one month ... 51
Certificates :
Applications for, to be advertised 51
Commissioners, instructions to ... ... ... ... §1
commissioner may examine applicant ... ... ... ... 49
Commissioner to declare acceptance or rejection of applications 49
Commissioner may examine applicant
Commonage Regulations ... ... ... ... ... . 17 18
Deed of grant:
Vide “ Grants.”
Deposits: •
Balance of higher rent bid at auction ... ... ... 50
Refundment in case of non-appearance ... ... ... 49
Refundment in case of withdrawn applications ... ... 50
Refundment on rejected applications ... ... ... 94
Value of improvements on land selected 50
District boundaries :
Vide “Land Agents’ Districts.”
Fees :
Payable with application to close roads ... ... ... 52
To be paid before preparation of deed of grant 51
Fines;
Vide “Penalties.”
Forfeiture for non-payment of balances at auction 50
Form of deed of grant ... ... ... ... ... ... 59
Forms... ... ... 53 to 60
Forms to be used in appraisements or arbitrations 52
Gold fields, selection in ... ... ... 52
Grants :
Fees payable ... ... ... ... ... ... 51
Form of deed ... ... ... .. ” zo
Homestead selections :
Vide “Notice to Selectors.
Improved lands ;
Selection of ... ... ... ... ... . ... 51
Value of improvements to be paid ... ". 51


Improvements,'payment for ... ... ... ... . ... 51
Instructions to commissioners ;
Bailiff of Crown lands ... ... ... ... ..i 83
Business in connection with selections under Act of 1868... 83
Concluding instructions ... ... ... ... ... 84
Date of proclamation must be affixed to each application to
select ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 82
Improvements on lands selected ... ... ... ... 83
Lands open to selection ... ... ...' ... ... 81
Notice of withdrawal to be forwarded to pastoral lessee ... 83
Powers of two justices ... ... ... ... ... 83
Registration of applications ... ... ... ... ... 81
Selections under Act of 1876... ... ... ... ... 82
Simultaneous applications ... ... ... ... ... 82
Timber licenses... ... ... ... ... ... ... 83
land agent to give receipts ... ... ... ... ... ... 52
land agents’ districts, description of boundaries :
Aramac ... ... ... ... .;. ... 95, 96
Beenleigh ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 85, 86
Blackall 96
Bowen ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 91
Brisbane... ... ... ... ... .., ... ... 85
Bundaberg ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 90
i)imuauu o ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cairns ... ... ... ... ... ... ... v . 92
Cardwell... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 92
Clermont ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 93
Condamme ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 95
95
Cooktown ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 95
Dalby ... ... ... ... ... ... .... ... 87, 88
Gayndah... ... ... ... ... ... ... j.. 89
Gladstone ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 90, 91
Goondiwindi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 94
Gympie ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 88, 89
Helidon ... ... ... ... ... .., ..V ... 86, 87
Ipswich ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ~v . 86
Mackay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... !.. 91
Maryborough ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 89, 90
Nanango... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 95
Normanton ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 92
Port Douglas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 92
Rockhampton ... ... ... ... ... ... 90
JLVC'C-JV JLItX LU i-l ... ... «•« ... ... ... ...
Roma ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 93
Springsure ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 93
Stantliorpe ... ... ... ... .... ... 95
St. George ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 94
St. Lawrence ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 91
Surat ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 94
Tambo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 96
Tenningering ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 92, 93
Toowoomba ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 87
iUUW WlllUil ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Townsville ... , . ... ... ... ... ... 91, 92
Warwick ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 88


Land commissioner: Page
Vide “ Commissioner.”
Land ordei'S :
Not available for payment of survey fees 52
Volunteers’ selections ... ... ... ’ ' ei
Lands applied for simultaneously to he offered at auction ... 50
Lands comprised in withdrawn or cancelled selections how
dealt with ... ... ... ... ... ...
Non-appearance at land court ... ... ... ... .. 49
Notice of withdrawal of lands from lease to he forwarded to
pastoral lessee ... .... ... ... ... 52
Notice respecting transaction of business at land offices ... 96
Payment of survey fees ... ... ... ... ... 52
Penalty for non-appearance at land court 49
Penalty foo' withdrawal of application ... ... ... ... 50
Permission to withdraw selections in certain cases ... ... 50
Proceedings when applications are partially for the same land 50
Proclamation of general regulations ... ... ... ... 49
Receipts to he given hy land agents ... ... ... 52
Refundments:
In case of non-appearance of applicant ... 49
On rejected applications ... ... ... ... ... 49
On selections withdrawn by permission ... ... ... 50
Rejected applications—Refundment of deposit ... ... ... 49
"Rents :
On enclosed roads ... ... ... ... ... ... 52
Second payments on selections 49
Roads—Temporary closure ... ... ... ... ... 52
Schedule of survey fees ... ... ... ... ... ... 400
Second payment on selections .... ... ... ... 49
Selection in virtue of volunteer land orders ... ... ... 51
Selection of improved land... ... ... ... ... 54
Survey fees ;
On conterminous surveyed portions 50
Payable in cash... ... ... ... ... ... 52
Schedule of fees ........ «k
Temporary closure of roads ... ... ... ... 52
Timber regulations ... .... ... ... ... ... ... 18 to 20
Transaction of business at land offices —Assistance to public ... 96
Valuation of improvements:
Vide “ Appraisement,” etc.
By selector ... ... ... ... 51
Volunteers' land order selections—Precedence of conditionals
and homesteads ... ... ... ... ... ... 54


Withdrawal of applications;
Fine imposed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 50
Permitted in some instances ... ... ... ... ... 50
Withdrawal of lands from lease—Notice to pastoral tenant ... 52
COMMONAGE REGULATIONS UNDER ACT OF 1876
Application for permission to depasture sheep :
Rates for depasturage ... ... ... ... ... ... 62
To be made to land commissioner ... ... ... ... 63
To be published at cost of applicant... ... ... ... 63
To be reported to Minister 63
Appointments:
Inspector of cattle ... ... ... ... ... ... 61
Trustees of commons ... ... ... ... ... ... 63, 64
63, 64
To be notified in Government Gazette ... ... ... 64
Cattle :
Definition of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 62
Number allowed to depasture ... ... ... ... 62
Register to be kept ... ... ... ... ... ... 62
Unregistered—may be impounded off commons ... ... 62
Commissioner :
To appoint inspector of cattle, when directed ... ... 61
To enforce regulations... ... ... ... ... ... 61
To mark out boundaries of commons, prepare plans, etc. ... 61
To receive fees from inspector and issue receipt .. ... 62
To report application for leave to depasture sheep ... 63
Declaration by trustees ... ... ... ... ... ... 64
Duties of inspector ... ... ... ... ... ... 61
Election of trustees ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 63
Fees for depasturing ... ... ... ... ... ... 62
Forms ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 65, 66
Impounding of unregistered cattle ... ... ... ... 62
Inspector of cattle ;
Appointment 0f... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61
Duties ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61
Payment of fees to commissioner 62
Remuneration ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61
Returns to be furnished ... ... ... ... ... 62
land commissioner „•
Vide “Commissioner,”
Maps showing boundaries of commons to be exhibited, etc. ... 61
Mustering, notice required ... ... ... ... ... ... 63
Notice to be published of application for leave to depasture
sheep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 63
Notification in Government Gazette of appointment of trustees 64
Numbei'of cattle allowed to depasture ... ... ... ... 62


Payment of fees to commissioner ... ... ... ... ... 62, 63
Penalty for illegally depasturing ... ... ... ... ... 63
Proclamation of commonage regulations ... ... ... ... 61
Register to be kept of cattle and their owners ... ... ... 62
Residents entitled to depasture ... ... ... ... ... 62
Returns to he furnished by inspector ... ... ... ... 62
Schedules ... ... ... ... ... ... ~. ... 65, 66
Sheep, depasturage of ... ... ... ... ... ... 63
Traveller s stock may depasture ... ... ... ... ... 62
Trespassing cattle, how dealt ivith... ... ... ... ... 62
Trustees:
Election and appointment 0f... ... ... ... ... 63, 64
May be discharged for neglect of duty ” 64
Eesignation or death of ... ...' ... ... 64
May make rules or bye-laws, etc. ... ... ... ... 64
To apply fees for commonage purposes ... ... ... 64
Unregistered cattle may he impounded ... ....... ... 62
Vacancies by death or resignation of trustees ... ... ... 64
TIMBER REGULATIONS UNDER ACT OF 1876-
Applications :
For licenses to remove stone, gravel, etc. ... ... ... 69
For special timber licenses ... ... ... ... ... 70
For timber licenses ... ... ... ... ... . ... 66
i ui iimutr nutusts ... ... ... ... ... ... DO-
For timber licenses (employers’) ... ... ... ... 70
Bean :
Fide “ Pea Bean.”
Runyahnnya, cutting of prohibited in certain localities ... 69
Cedar, restriction as to size ... ... ... ... ... 69,79
Commissioner or other officer to attend for the issue of licenses 66
Cypress pine may he cut ... ... ... ... 77
Employers' licenses :
Application to commissioner ... ... ... 70
Conditions of licenses ... ... ...Cffff... ... ... 70
Employer may change the persons employed by him ... 70
Application to commissioner
General regulations, same as for timber licenses 70
Existing licenses to continue in force ... ... ... ... 72
Fees chargeable ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 67, 70
76, 78, 97
Forfeiture;
Of timber not removed within proper time 68
Of unbranded timber ... ... ... ... ... ... 68
Forms ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 69, 72,
76, 78, 79


Page.
Hardwood and softwood ... ... ... ... ... ... 67
Head stations not to he approached within two miles ... ... 67
Hoop pine not to he cut under 1 ft. 9 in. ... ... ... ... 80
Instructions to commissioners ... ... ... ... ... 81
Kauri pine not to he cut under 2 ft. ... ... ... ... 80
land agent must account for license fees ... ... ... 67
lessees may cut timber for certain purposes without license ... 67
Lessees may mahe reasonable objection to issue of licenses ... 68
Licenses (Employers') :
Vide “Employers.”
Licenses :
Operation of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 67
Restricted to one district ... ... ... ... ... 67
Separate license for each person ... ... ... ... 67
U v j/ul tXi L v 11 LCU ov XU X C dvil j-< vl ovll ••• ••• ••• ••• f
To be exhibited when demanded ... ... .... ... 68
To cut timber—not transferable ... ... ... ... 67
Term of license ... ... ... ... ... 67
To extend to land under pastoral lease in certain cases ... 67
Two classes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 67
Provisional ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 78
Licenses to remove stone, etc.;
Application ... ... ... ... ... ... ... >O9
Fees, as per amended regulation in lieu of clause 27 can-
celled ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 76
General regulations—same as for timber licenses .„. ... '69
No timber to be cut under license within two miles of a head
station ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 67
Nut:
Vide “ Queensland Nut.”
Operation of licenses ... ... ... ... ... ... '67
Pea bean, cutting of—prohibited ... ... ... ... ... 67
Penalties :
For cutting timber without a license ... ... ... 68
For not branding timber ... 68
For not removing timber ... ... ... ... ... 68
For refusal to produce timber license ... ... ... 68,71
Pine, restriction as to size ... ... ... ... ... 77
Proceeds of seizure, how dealt tvith ... ... ... ... 68,69
Proclamation :
Regulation respecting fees for licenses to remove gravel,
stone, brick-earth, etc.—in lieu of clause 27 cancelled 76
Timber regulations 66
Queensland nut, cutting of— prohibited ... ... ... ... 69
Return of applications to be furnished quarterly ... ... 67
Reserves ;
Standing timber not to be cut for firewood 77
Reward for seizure of timber cut without license ... ... 68,69


, . . Page.
Sale of timber, cut without license ... ... ... ... (38
Schedtiles ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 72, 76
Seizure :
Of timber not removed ... ... ... ... ... 68
Reward for seizure ... ... ... ... ... ... 68,69
Timber cut without a license ... 68
Unbranded timber 68
Separate license for each person ... ... ... ... ... 67
Special timber licenses :
Application to commissioner ... ... ... ... ... 70
Boundaries to be described 70
Boundaries may be amended by commissioner 70
Duration of licenses ... ... ... ... ... ... 71
Existing licenses ... ... ... ... ... 72
Employ of labour ... ... 71
Fees payable on application ... ... ... 70
Lands under license not available for selection 71
Lands may be excluded from license 71
[Renewal of licenses ... ... ... ... ... 71
Bights of licensees ... ... ... ... . . 70
Penalties for refusal to produce license 71
Transfer of license ... .... ... 7P
Timber removable ... ... ... ... ... 7P
Stone, gravel, etc.—licenses to remove ... ... ... ... 69,76
Surveyed lands exempt from operation of licenses ... ... 68
Terms of licenses ... ... ... ... ... ... 67'”'
Timber:
Cut without license, subject to seizure 68
Prohibited sorts ... ... ... ... 69
To be branded ......... eo
io be branded ... ... ... ... ..... ... .. t gg
To be removed ... ... ... ... 68
“ Vide Licenses.”
May be removed within certain time after issue of pro-
visional license 7g
Town, timber, and other reserves —exempt from operation of
licenses ... ... ... gg
Turpentine, cutting of—prohibited ... ... ... ... 69
Withdrawal of lands from operation of licenses ... ... 69
“CROWN LARDS ALIENATION ACT OF 1876 AMENDMENT ACF.”
Act:
To be read with “ Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876” 99
Preamble ...... qq
x ream dig ... ... ... #< gg
Short title ... ... .. inn
Area :
Of homesteads in homestead areas extended ... 9c>
To be selected in exchanged lands '. gg
Deed fees ... .... ... ... gg


' sA. ... ... Tage.
Exchanged lands:
Meaning of term 98
Act of 1876 to apply to ... ... ... ... ... 98
39tli section of Act of 1876 not to apply to ... ... 98
Within Settled District of Darling Downs to bo homestead
areas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 98
Maximum area to be selected 98
Amount to be expended in improvements ... ... ... 98
Land orders not available ... ... ... ... ... 98
Extension of privilege to previous homestead selectors ... 99
Fees;
Deed fees ... ...‘ ... ... ... ... ... 99
Survey fees ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 100
j Homestead areas ;
Homesteads in area extended 99
Improvements:
In exchanged lands ... ... ... ... ... ... 98
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 98
land orders :
Not available for exchanged lands 98
Preamble ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 98
Residence on any part of combined homestead sufficient ... 99
Repeal of part of section 40 and sections 80 and 81 of “ Crown
Lands Alienation Act of 1876” ... ... ... ... 99
Short title ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 100
Survey fees ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 100
“SETTLED DISTRICTS PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 1876.”
Act :
Preamble ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 101
Short title ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 105
Appointment of arbitrators ... ... ... ... ... 104,105
Arbitration :
Respecting value of improvements on lands withdrawn
from lease ... ... ... ... ... ... 103
Appointment of arbitrators and umpire 103, 105
Arbitrator in certain cases to act for both parties 105
Notice of appointment 104
Mode of appraisement or arbitration ... ... ... 104,105
Payment of amount awarded 103
Auction ;
Vide “ Sales by Auction.”
Award:
Arbitrators’.— Vide “ Arbitration.”
Roundaries of land withdrawn from lease to be defined ... 102
Claims for improvements:
On lands withdrawn from lease ... ... ... ... 103
Notice to be given to land agent 103


Payable by purchaser ... ... ... ... ... 103
Against the Crown—how dealt with... ... ... ... 103
No claim after term of lease... ... ... ... 104,
Compensation :
To owners of improvements on lands withdrawn from lease 103
No compensation in the absence of notification of claim ... 103
No claim for improvements after term of lease 104
Date of lease :.
Tide “Leases.”
Expired leases:
New lease of five years may be offered at auction ... 101
E'eefor transfer of lease ... ... ... ... ... ... 103
Fines :
Vide “ Penalties.”
Forfeited runs:
Lease may be offered at auction ... ... ... ... 101
Term of lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 101
Unexpired term of lease of forfeited or vacated runs may be
offered for sale 104
Date of lease 104
Upset price 104
Forfeiture :
For non-payment of rent 102
Forfeiture may be defeated 102
For non-payment of value of improvements ... ... 103
Improvements :
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 101
Forfeited for non-payment of rent ... • 102
On lands withdrawn from lease ... ... ... ... 103
Notice of claim to be given to land agent ... ... ... 103
Payment by purchaser 103
Payment in the case of claim against the Crown 103
No claim for improvements after term of lease 104
Leases:
Runs may be leased at expiration of existing leases ... 101
Forfeited runs may be offered for lease 101
Term of lease ... ... ... ... ... ...' ... 101
Conditions of lease ... ... ... ... ... ... 102
Date of lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 102
Liability to reservation and sale 102
In which case rent to be reduced 102
Limitation of remission of rent for runs sold at auction ... 102
Time of withdrawal of land from lease by sale or selection 102
Notice of withdrawal to be given ... ... ... ... 102
Form of notice 103
Claims for improvements ... ... ... ... ... 103
Time of payment for improvements ... ... ■ ... ... 103
Case of claim against the Crown 103
Transfers ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 103
No claim for renewal of lease or for improvements after
term 104


xxiii..
Page.
Unexpired term of lease of forfeited or vacated runs may
be offered for sale ... ... ... ... ... 104
Date of nuexpired term of lease ... ... ...*-• ... 104
Upset price-• ... .... ... • ... ... ■ ... 104
Rent ~v . ... .... ... .... ... . ... ... 104
Resumption of whole runs —provision in case of ...
Except as provided, lease shall be deemed as still subsisting
ms—provision in case of ... ... 104
Lessee entitled to six months to remove stock ... ... ... 104
Minister ;
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 101
Notice :
To be given to lessee of withdrawal of lands from lease ... 102
Notice to be published in Gazette ... ... ... ... 103
Payment for improvements :
Vide “Improvements/’
Payment of rent:
Vide “Rents.”
Penalties :
Eor non-payment of rent within prescribed time ... ... 102
For failure to notify claim for improvements ... ... 103
For failure to pay value of improvements on lands with- 103
drawn from lease... ... ... ... ... ... 103
Renewal of lease:
No claim for renewal after expiration of term ... ... 104
Rents;
Leases of runs offered at auction ... ... ... 101
Reduction of, in case of reservation or sale of lands
included in lease ... ... ... ... ... ... 102
Limitation of the amount of remission ... ... ... 102
Date for payment of rent
Forfeiture for non-payment of rent 102
lO2
' Ti- int>
Reversal of forfeiture under certain conditions ... ... 102
Resumption :
Vide “Withdrawal.”
Sales by auction: _
Leases of runs at expiration of existing leases 101
Forfeited runs ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 101
Upset price ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 101
Conditions of lease ... ... ... ... ••• ••• lO*'
Term of lease ... ... ... ... . - •• • ■• • 102
To be held at land agent’s office nearest to run
Liability of lease to reservation and sale 102
Unexpired terms of leases of forfeited or vacated runs may
be offered 10f
Priop 104
Price
Tlnfp nf Ipnsn ... ... ... ... ... ••• lU4t
Date of lease
Stock;
To be removed by lessee within six months after expiration
of lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 104>


Tenure:
Vide “ Leases.”
Transfer of lease ... ... ... ... ... 103
Transfer fee 103
Trespass on Crown lands ... ... ... ... ... ... 102
Umpire:
Vide “ Arbitration.”
Upset price of leases of runs offered at auction,,, ... ... 101
Value of improvements ;
Vide “ Improvements.”
Withdrawal of lands from lease ;
By sale or selection 102
Land resumed to be surveyed and defined in certain cases 102
Notice of withdrawal to be given to lessee ... ... 103
Notice to set forth area and description of land resumed 103
Claims for improvements ... ... ... ... ... 103
Case of claim against the Crown ... ... ... ... 103
Cancelled if lessee’s claim against the Crown not settled ... 103
Resumption of the whole of a run ... ... ... ... 104
Resumed run subject to alienation or reservation ... ... 104
Provisions respecting withdrawal of land under 4th section
of this Act to apply ... ... ... ... ... 104
Except as provided, lease to be deemed as still subsisting 104
“THE PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 1869” AND REGULATIONS.
Act:
Repeal of existing Acts ... ... ... ... ... 106
Application of Act 106
Short title 123
Actions:
Limitation of action against commissioner or other Govern-
ment official 122
"Written notice to be given to defendant 122
Plaintiff may not recover if tender of sufficient amends,
etc., made by defendant 122
Costs 122
No quashing for error nor certiorari... ... ... ... 122
Instruments under Act to be evidence ... ... ... 122
Applications for renewal of lease for fourteen years :
Power to grant renewal for fourteen years on expiration of
existing lease ... ... ... ... ... ... 114
Application for renewal, when and where to be made ... 114
Date of lease ~ 114
Vide “ Rents and Leases.”
Application to surrender existing lease and renew for twenty-
one years :
Application to surrender and obtain renewal of lease ... 107, 128
Application to be made before 1 January, 1871 ... ... 107
Application to be forwarded to Chief Commissioner of
Crown Lands 128


Page.
Separate application for each run ... ... ... .... 128
Lease, if issued, to be returned ... ... ... ... 128
Forms to be used 127 to 132
Vide “Leases and Rents.”
Appointments :
Vide “ Commissioners.”
Arbitration:
Commissioner to act as arbitrator for the Crown ... ... 115
Commissioner to be arbitrator unless another appointed ... 115
Lessee to appoint arbitrator on his behalf ... ... ... 115
Appointment of umpire ... ... ... ... ... 115
Lessee failing to appoint arbitrator, commissioner to make
appointment ... ... ... ... ... ... 116
Arbitrators failing to appoint umpire, Governor may
nominate ... ... ... ... ... ... 110
Proceedings not to stop on failure to agree on umpire ... 116
Umpire to decide, if award delayed for six months ... 116
Reference to umpire may be on special points 116
Awards to be published 116
Certain persons disqualified to act as arbitrators or umpire 116
Costs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 116
Appraisement of the rent ... 140,141
Declaration to be made ... ... ... ... ... 121
Regulations re proceedings of valuers 140, 141
Rent to be paid pending assessment by arbitration ... 117
In case of disputed boundaries, Governor may refer to
arbitration... ... ... ... ... ... ... 121
Areas of runs:
Limitation of areas ... ... ... ... ... ... 109, 129
Available country;
What shall be deemed available country 130
Boundaries ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 109
Capability of runs ... ... ... ... ... 11l
Certificate ;
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands to certify to copies of
leases and. other instruments under Act ... ... 131
Commissioners :
Power to appoint ... ... ... ... ... ... 107
Duties of commissioners ... ... ... ... ... 128
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... 107
Compensation :
Compensation for resumed improvements ~. ... ... 118
Compensation for fencing, in certain cases ... ... ... 118
Consolidation :
Lessee may register contiguous runs 111, 131
Limitation of area consolidated ... ... ... ... 11l
Rules applicable to consolidated runs ... ... ... 131
Contiguity of consolidated runs affected, by transfer ... 131
Crown lands:
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 106


Date of lease:
Vide “ Leases
Declarations :
False declaration:
Penalty for false declaration ... ... j 22
Fees:
Occupation fee ... ... ... ... 223
Fee for advertising license ... ... ... 229
Transfer fee ... ... ... ... 117,132
Fee to cover cost of preparation of lease ’ 231
Survey fees 219
License fees ... ... me iou
incense tees log, 128
Fencing ;
Compensation for fencing, in certain cases ppg
“The Fencing Act of 1861 ”to apply ... 219
Forfeited runs :
Lease forfeited if stock not maintained on run ... I]2
Sale at auction of forfeited leases ... ... ... ]22
If lease not sold when first offered, may be submitted at
lower upset price ... ... ... ... ... 212
Time and place of payment of rent ... ... ... 222
Euns purchased at auction to be stocked within six months
If lease not applied for, run to be forfeited 211
Lease forfeited for non-payment of rent ... ... 217
( 123 to 127
Forms ] 132 to 139
L 141 to 144
•i-rrazmg rigid :
Grazing right over resumed areas ... ' 218
•Gold fields:
Proclamation of a gold field shall not withdraw from lease 120
Eeduction of rent to be made 220
Improvements :
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... . 207
Compensation for improvements ... ... | 218
Feases :
Surrender of existing leases ’ 207 128
Application to surrender, when to be made " 107 198
m™ i ••• ■ LU< »
Term of new lease ’* ' ’ 207
Date of lease ... ... ... ” irv?
juate 01 lease ... ... ... ### ###
Annual rent on runs which have been held under “ Order
in Council” ... ... ... ... 207
Annual rent for first seven years on runs held under 24 Vie"
Ho. 12; 24 Yic., Ho. 15; 27 Yic., Ho. 17; 28 Vic.,
Ho. 20 208
Pent from eighth to fourteenth year ... 208
Eent from fifteenth to twenty-first year ... ... ... 208
Hew leases for twenty-one years 208
Leases granted to licensees on application ... ... 210
Eent to be paid . 210, 111
A.mount of rent during first seven years ...


Amount of rent during residue of term 11l
Date of lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... m
~ ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Area in excess of 100 square miles to be included in
separate lease ... ... ... ... ... ... 129
Term of lease of excess of area ... ... ... ... 129
Special conditions where area is under 125 square miles ... 129, 130
If lease not applied for, runs to be dealt with as forfeited 111
Lease forfeited if stock not maintained on run 111, 112
Leases of forfeited runs to be sold by auction 112,140
Upset price ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 112
Time and place of payment of rent ... 112, 114
Eenewal of leases in unsettled district 114
Power to grant renewal of leases ... ... ... ... 114
Power to lessee to apply for renewal ... ... ... 114
Term of lease—date of lease 114
Lessee to pay annual rent ... ... ... ... ... 114
Mode of estimating rent under renewed lease 114, 115
Governor or lessee may require the rent fixed by arbitration 115
Lessee requiring appraisement to pay £5 costs 115
Limitation of the amount of rent ... ... ... ... 115
Pent in special cases ... ... ... ... ... ... 115
Eenewed leases subject to same conditions as original ... 115
Description of leases to be published in Gazette ... ... 118
Description of leased lands ... ... ... ... ... 118, 119
Proviso for amendment of defective descriptions ... ... 119
Instrument of lease issued on application ... ... ... 131
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands to certify to copies
of leases 131
Accepted tender, etc., equivalent to lease in certain pro-
ceedings ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 117
Eight to enter on lands ... ... ... ... ... 120
Licenses to occupy :
Commissioner to grant license ... ... ... ... 108, 129
Duration of license ... ... .. 108
Licenses registered • 109
Eeturn of licenses to be published ... ... ... ... 110
Vide “Euns, new.”
Special license for an unwatered run 112
Duration of license ... ... ..; ... .;. 112
Power to renew licenses ... ... ... ... ... 113, 130
Notification of renewal in G-azette ... ... .. ... 130
Vide “ Application for License, of Uuwatered Eun.”
Licenses (Timber);
Vide “ Timber Licenses.”
Notices ;
Mode of serving notices upon lessees of runs ... ... 144, 145
Occupation fee:
License fee payable on application ... ... ... ... 103
Additional fee in certain cases ... ... .., 108,129
Occupation fee refunded if license refused ... ... ... 109
Occupation fee on unwatered run ... ... ... ... 113


Page.
Passage of stock:
Travelling stock may depasture within half-a-mile of road 119
Distance to be travelled daily ... ... ... ... 119
Penalty for neglecting to travel prescribed distance ... 119
"Pre-emptive right:
Pre-emptive right over improved lands 117
Price of land 117
Limitation of area ... ... ... ... ... ... 117
Deposit of 10 per cent, of purchase money to be made ... 145
Balance of purchase money and fees on completion of
survey 145
Application to lapse if balance not paid within one month
from date of demand ... ... ... ... ... 145
Refundment of deposit, less expenses of survey, etc. ... 145
Refundments:
Occupation fee to be refunded if license refused or
cancelled ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 109
Refundment of back rents limited to five years’ payments 109
Regulations ;
Governor may make regulations ... ... ... ... 122
Regulations to be laid before Parliament ... ... ... 122
Regulations 127 to 145
Rents:
Rent payable on renewed lease for twenty-one years ... 107
Rent payable on renewed lease for fourteen years ... 115
Rent payable on new lease for twenty-one years ... ... 11l
Rent payable on lease of an unwatered run ... ... 113
Rents when and where payable 112
Mode of estimating rent under,renewed leases ... ... 114,115
Governor or lessee may require the . rent to be fixed by
arbitration... ... ... ... ... ... ... 115
Limitation of the amount of rent ... ... ... ... 115
Rent in special cases ... ... ... ... ... 115
Penalty for non-payment of rent .... ... ... ... 117
Resumption:
Resumption of a run in whole or in part ... ... ... 117
Runs;
Interpretation 106
Runs, new:
Application for license to be made to district commis-
sioner ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 108, 128
When application may be made ... ... ... ... 109
License fees to be paid 108, 128
Pees for advertising licenses ... ... ... ... ... 110,129
Payment of fees in cash or Treasury receipt ... ... 128
Declaration of stocking ... ... ... ... ... 108, 129
Boundaries of run to be described in application 109
Registry of application 109
Issue of license 108
Advertising license fee to be paid 129
Limitation of area ... ... ... ... ... ... 109
Additional license fee in certain cases 108, 129


xxix.
Page.
If two applications lodged simultaneously, licenses to be
regulated by occupation 110
Area to be divided rateably between persons occupying
at same time ... ... ... ... ... ... HO
Area applied for to be submitted to competition among
opposing applicants in certain cases 110
Upset price of license ... ... ... ... ... ... HO
... ... ... ... ... . . . X-LU
Forms to be used ... 123,124
132, 133
Application for lease by license HO, 129, 134
Application to be made to Chief Commissioner of Crown
Lands HO
Declaration of stocking to be made... ... ... ... 129
Forms to be used 132, 141
Vide “ Rents and Leases.”
Sale by auction :
Forfeited and vacated runs to be submitted to auction ... 112
Upset price ... 112
If not sold when first offered, price may be reduced ... 112
Vide “ Forfeited Runs.”
Subdivision of runs :
Power to subdivide runs ... ... ... ... ... 111,112
Minimum area allowable for one run ... ... ... 111,112
Fee to be paid ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 112
Treasury receipt for fee to be lodged with application to
subdivide ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 112
Surrender of lease:
Vide “ Application to Surrender.”
Survey of runs:
Cost of survey to be paid by licensee or lessee ... ... 119
Cost not to exceed six ’shillings per square mile 119
In default of payment within six months, lease or license
may be cancelled ... ... ... ... ... ... 119
Cost of survey of adjoining boundaries to be defrayed by
respective lessees ... ... ... .... ... ... 119
Timber licenses :
Licenses to cut timber may bo granted ... ... ... 120
Pastoral lessee may object to issue of license ... ... 120
juasi/urai ic&tscu m ay uujcoi iu issue ... ...
Regulations ... ... ... ... ... ... 120, 166 to 180
Use of timber or material by lessees... ... ... ... 120
Removal of timber and material by other than lessees ... 120
Transfer;
Licenses and leases of runs may be transferred 117
Mode of application ... ... ... ... ... ... U 7
Runs of insolvents or of parties absent or deceased ... 131, 132
Runs, leases of which have been issued ... ... 132
ituns, leases or wmen nave ueeu issueq. ... ... ...
Separate,applications ... ... ... ... 0 ... ... 132
Dues in arrear ... ... ... ... ... fC ... ••• 132
11 *7 IQO
Fees ••• IT *** 132
Forms f. ... ... IfC 139
Treasury receipts:
Receipts for license fees may be obtained at the Treasury 128
Balance of receipts available for future application 128


Treasury receipts transferable by delivery... ... ~. 128
Receipts issued under previous Acts available ... ... 128
loval of trespassers in illegal occupation of Crown
lands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 121
Trespass :
Removal of trespassers in illegal
Penalties for trespassing 121, 122
Umpire ••
Vide “Arbitration.”
Unsettled Districts:
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 107
Unwatered runs :
Power to apply for special license, for one year, of un-
watered run, ... ... ... ... ... ... 112
Stocking not compulsory ... ... ... ... ... 113
Mode of application ... ... ... ... ... ... 113
Occupation fee ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 113
Fee for advertising license ... ... ... ... ... 129
Declaration of character of country to be made ... ... 113
Application to be registered ... ... ... ... ... 113
Inspection of country applied for by commissioner ... 113
Issue of license... ... ... ... ... ... ... 113
Provision in case of applications clashing ... ... ... 113
Power to renew licenses ... ... ... ... ... 113,114
Forms to be used 126, 127, 135
136, 137
Unwatered runs to be generally subject to same rules as
others ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 113
Application for lease to be lodged with district commis-
sioner ... ... ~. ... ... ... ... 129
Declaration to be made ... ... ... ... ... 130
Forms to be used ... ... ... ... 124
JL/1 U IiXJL <X LDJjLL tU UC llldUC ... ... ...
Forms to be used
Valuation of improvements:
Vide “Arbitration.”
“THE MINERAL LANDS ACT OF 1872" AND REGULATIONS.
Application must be accompanied by deposit ... ... 146
Area allowed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 146,156
Application may be granted as to part of land applied for 147
Application approved ... ... ... ... ... ... 148
Adjoining proprietors ... ... ... ... ... ... 152,153
Application book to be signed ... ... ... ... 156
Applications open to inspection 157
Applicant informed ■whether he will have to effect survey 157
Applications, at what offices received ... ... ... 106,167
Application must contain clear description 162
Boundaries of surveyed portions must be adhered to ... 146
Balance and deed fee, when payable 148, 149
Claims :
Vide “ Licenses.”
Clear description required 147, 162
Construction of dams, &c 165


xxxi.
Page.
Commissioners :
Appointed ... ... 162
Monthly court ... ... 162
Duties ... ... ... ... 163
Disputes decided 163
Issue o£ licenses ... ... ... ... ... ... 163
Issue of orders relative to working claims ... ... ... 165
Adjustment of claims ... ... ... ... ... ... 165
Deed of grant, when issued ... ... ... ... ... 149
Description of mineral lands ... ... ... ... ... 161
Dams and races, construction of 165
Frontage, rules as to ... ... 146,147
Forms... ... ... ... ... ... ... 153,154, 158
to 160, 166
Forfeited lands not open to selection ... ... ... ... 157
G-overnment option of surveying ... ... ... ... ... 147
How priority determined ... ... ... ... ... ... 149
If applicant employs a surveyor, when must survey be completed 148
Inspection of applications ... ... ... ... ... ... 157
Lands within town sites not available ... ... ... ... 147,157
Leases ;
Application, how made ... ... ... ... ... 150
Area ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 149
Date of lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 150
Forfeiture for non-payment of rent ... ... ... ... 150
Form of lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 150
Leases may be granted ... ... ... ... ... 149
Leases when issued ... ... ... ... .... ... 155
No tin lands available for lease ... ... ... ... 156
Rent ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 150
Second payments ... ... ... ... ... ... 156
Sections 5,6, 7,9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21,
and 23 of Act applicable ... ... ... ... 150
Term ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 149
Transfers ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 150
Licenses :
Areas may be proclaimed ... ... ... ... ... 150
Commissioner to issue licenses ... ... ... ... 151,164
Claims must be marked ... ... ... ... ... 164
Claims may be amalgamated... ... ... ... ... 165
Claims must be worked ... ... ... ... ... 164
Claims to be continuously worked ... ... ... ... 1.64
Commissioner may adjust claims ... ... ... ... 165
Licenses must be held by all workers of claims ... ... 164
Marking off more ground than allowed ... ... ... 164
Privileges of mining licenses... ... ... ... ... 151
Regulations to be issued ... ... ... ... ... 151
Registration of claims... ... ... ... ... ... 165
Size of claims under mining licenses... ... ... ... 164
Unworked claims ... ... ... ... ... ... 164
Mode of application ... ... ... ... ... ... 146,155,162
Marking and posting notices ... ... ... ... ... 156
Marking off more ground than allowed ... ... ... ... 164
Mineral to be worked, must be stated 156


Notices to be posted 156
Power to sell ... ... ... {S . 146
Price ... ... ... ... ... 147
Power to withdraw lands from operation of Act ... ... 147
Protection granted in certain cases ... ... ... ... 148-
Powers deputed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 153
Permissory occupation licenses 163, 166
Rules as to frontage... ... .:. . .. ... ... ... 146
Races, drains, dams, &c., license to cut ... ... ... ... 151
Rights of adjoining proprietors over boundary creeks ... ... 152,153
Regulations may be established ... ... ... ... ... 153
Repeal clause ... 153
Repeal of former regulations ... .155
Regulations (General) applicable ... ... ... ... ... 162
Selection must be marked ... ... ... ... ... ... 147
Survey, how conducted ... ... ... ... ... ... 147,148
Simultaneous applications, how dealt with ... ... ... 148
Special regulations, to what district applicable 162
Survey fee returned when applicant surveys ... ... ... 147
Trespassers and unauthorised mining ... ... ... ... 152,166
Tin lands not available for lease ... ... ... ... ... 157
Transfers :
Fee and stamp duty ... ... ... ... ... ... 141)
Mode of transfer ... ... ... ... ... ... ’ 157
Transfer of lease ... ... ... ... ... ... 157
To be signed by holder ... ... ... 158
Insolvent estate or persons absent ... ... ... ... 158
Separate transfer for each selection ... ... ... ... 158
Dues in arrear ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 158
Consideration to be verified ... ... ... ... ... 158
Unauthorised mining ... ... ... ... ... ... 152
Withdrawal of lands ... ... ... ... ... ... 147
When land surveyed by applicant, survey fee returned ... 147
Where protection granted, survey when must be completed ... 148
Working of claims ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 164,165
THE WESTERN RAILWAY ACT.”
Act :
Preamble ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 168
Short title ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 168
Commencement... ... ... ... ... ... ... 168
Interpretation of terms ... ... ... ... ... 168
Application to Western Railway Reserve 169
Alienation of land in the Reserve : _
Lands resumed from lease subject to alienation under this
Act ■ ... ... ... ... ... ... ... IG9
Crown lands not to be dealt with except under this Act ... 169
Section 16 of Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” not
v 1 to apply ... ... 170
Mode in which land may be alienated 170
Conditions and modifications affecting the alienation of
lands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 170


Sale by auction.— Vide “ Sales.”
l7l
Disposal of proceeds of lands alienated
Auction. —Vide “Sales by Auction.”
Boundaries of Western Railway Reserve 172
— ... ... ... -L / u
Construction of Railway from Rally to Roma :
Governor in Council may cause railway to be constructed 171
Account to be kept in Treasury entitled “ The Western
Railway Account” ... ... ... -j. 171
Colonial Treasurer may advance moneys 171
Disposal of moneys received on alienation of lands within
Reserve 171
Moneys to be expended in construction of Western
Railway ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 172
Country land :
Upset price of land ode red at auction ... ... ... 170
Limitation of areas 170
Reservation of roads ... ... ... ... ... ... 188
188
Crown lands ;
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 108
Alienation. —• Vide “ Alienation.”
“ Croiun Lands Alienation Act of 1868” :
Section 16 not applicable to lands within Western Rail-
way Reserve ... ... ... ... ... ... 170
Reserve not deemed a railway reserve within the meaning
of above Act ... ... ... ... ... ... 171
Effect of resumption of runs in the reserve 169
“ Gold Fields Act of 1871 ” .•
Land may be alienated under provisions of above Act, etc. 170
Homestead selection :
Laws relating to homestead selection applicable to West-
ern Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... ... 170
Area within two miles of railway line set apart for home-
steads ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 170
Lands under pastoral lease :
Vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Lease ;
Interpretation.— Vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Lessee ;
Interpretation. —Vide “Pastoral Leases.”
License fees on runs :
Vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
“ Mineral Lands Act of 1872” ;
Land in the reserve may be alienated under provisions of
above Act ... ... ... 170
Pastoral leases :
Land resumed from lease to be subject to reservation,
selection, and alienation ... ~ ... ... ... 169
Rights of lessee over lands resumed ... ... ... 169
Payment of rent ... ... ... ... ... ... 169
Reduction of rent on account of reservation, etc 169


. . Page.
Pre-emptive right under 54th section of “ Pastoral Leases
Act of 1869 ” ... ... ... ... ... ... 169
Except as provided, operation of “ Pastoral Leases Act ”
not interfered with ... ... ' ... ... 169
Increase of license fees and rent ... ... ... ... 170
Rent subject to appraisement under section 20 of above Act 170, 171
Limitation of available area and rent during second and
third periods of lease ... ... ... ... ... 170
New leases subject to section 5 of this (Western Railway)
Act 171
Pre-emption;
Vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Jtaihcay :
Lands within two miles of railway line set apart as a
homestead area 170
Provisions for construction of Railway from Dalby to
Roma.— Vide “ Construction of Railway.”
Pent;
Vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Peserves :
Vide ‘’Western Railway Reserve,” and “Township
Reserves.”
Resumption of runs :
Vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Poads :
To be reserved through country lots offered for sale ... 170
Secretary for Public Works may open roads ... ... 170
Pun:
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 168
Resumption.— Vide “Pastoral Leases.”
License fees and rent.— Vide “ Pastoral leases.”
Sale by auction :
Laws relating to sale of land applicable to Western Rail-
way Reserve ... ... ... ... ... ... 170
Upset price of country lands ... • 170
Area of lots to be offered ... ... ... ... ... 170
Reservation of roads 170
Schedule :
Definition of Western Railway Reserve ... ... ... 172
Selection :
Land resumed from pastoral lease subject to selection
under this Act.— Vide “ Homestead Selection” ... 169
Township reserves ;
Lands resumed from pastoral lease subject to reservation 169
Laws relating to alienation of land in reserves applicable
to Western Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... 170
Upset price of country lands offered at auction ... ... ... 170
Western Pailway account:
Separate account to bo kept in Treasury ... ... ... 171
Colonial Treasurer may advance £250,000 ... 171


Page.
Disposal of moneys on alienation of lands within Reserve 171
Moneys to be expended in construction of Western Rail-
way ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 172
Western Railway Reserve:
Establishment of ... ... ... ... ... ... 169
“ Western Railway Act ” applicable to this Reserve 0n1y... 169
Effect of resumption of runs in the Reserve ... ... 169
Alienation of land ... ... ... ... ... ... 169
Reserve not deemed a railway reserve under “ Crown
Lands Alienation Act of 1868” ... ... ... 171
Provisions for construction of railway from Dalby to
Roma ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 171
Definition of Western Railway Reserve ... ... ... 172
“THE RAILWAY RESERVES ACT.”
Act:
Preamble ’ 173
Short title ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 173
Commencement... ... ... ... ... ... ... 173
Interpretation of terms ... ... ... 173
Application of Act 174
Alienation of land in the Reserves :
Lands resumed from pastoral lease subject to alienation... 174, 175
Mode in which land may be alienated ... ... ... 175
Conditions and modifications affecting alienation ... ... 175, 176
Sale by auction.— Vide “Sales.”
Disposal of proceeds of lands alienated ... ... ... 176
Alienation of land, Western Railway Reserve :
Mode of alienation ... ... ... ... ... ... 175
Laws relating to alienation by conditional selection,
applicable ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 175
Provisions of this Act as to pre-emption, extended to
Western Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... 177
Auction. —Vide “Sales by Auction.
Roundaries:
Pre-emptive selections. — Vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Railway reserves ... ... ... ... ... ... 177,178
Central District Railway Reserve... ... ... ... ... 178
Consolidation of pre-emptive selections and of runs. —Vide
“Pastoral Leases,”
Construction of railways:
Governor may cause railways to be made within reserved
districts ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 176
Railway accounts to be kept in Treasury ... ... ... 176
Colonial Treasurer may advance moneys 176
Disposal of proceeds of lands alienated ... ... ... 176
Crown lands:
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 173
Certain lands set apart as railway reserves _ 174
Alienation and lease of ... ... ... ;.. ... 175,176
Effect of resumption of runs in the reserves ... ... ... 174
Foi’feiture for non-payment by lessee of half cost smwey ... 175


7 Page.
Homestead areas:
Lands within two miles of railway lines—excepting special
reservations—set apart for homesteads ... ... 176
Kennedy railway reserve ... ... ... ... ... 178
Lands under pastoral lease.— Vide “Pastoral Leases.”
Lease ;
Interpi’etalion 173
Vide “Pastoral Leases.”
Lessee:
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 173
To he notified of division of run ... ... ... ... 175
To receive six months’ notice of intended further alienation 175
Vide “Pastoral Leases.”
Notice:
To be given to lessee re division of runs ... ... ... 175
Six months’ notice of intended further alienation... ... 175
Pastoral Leases •
Resumption of runs in the reserves ... ... ... .. 174
Land resumed subject to reservation, selection, and
alienation ... ... ... ... ... ... 174
Rights of lessees over lands resumed ... ... ... 174
Determination of right of occupation ... ... ... 174
Reduction of rent on account of reservation, selection, etc. 174
Pre-emptive right under 54th section of “Pastoral Leases
Act of 1869” ... 174
Lessee of two or more adjoining runs may consolidate his
pre-emptive selections in one block ... ... ... 174
Pre-emption in the case of runs comprising a larger area
than 25 square miles ... ... ... ... ... 174
Consolidation of pre-emptive selections ... ... ... 174
Boundaries of pre-emptive selections ... ... ... 174
Except as provided, only one-half of runs under 63 Vic.,
No. 10, to be taken ... ... ... ... ... 175
Runs may be consolidated ... ... ... ... ... 175
Notification of division of runs by Secretary for Lands ... 175
Half cost of survey of runs to be paid by lessee ... ... 175
Run liable to forfeiture if half cost survey not paid ... 175
Further alienation upon six months’ notice to lessee ... 175
Operation of “Pastoral Leases Act of 1869” preserved in
other, respects ... ... ... ... ... ... 175
New leases subject to reservation, selection, and alienation 176
Pre-emption.— Vide “Pastoral Leases.”
Proclamation of further alienation from runs ... ... ... 175
Railway:
Lands within two miles of railway lines, set apart as
homestead areas ... ... ... ... ... ... 176
Provisions for the construction of railways.— Vide “Con-
struction, etc.”
Railway account :
Separate account to be kept by Treasury for each reserve 176
Colonial Treasurer may advance moneys on railway
account ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 176
Disposal of proceeds of lauds alienated 176
Railway reserves—establishment of ... ... ... ... 174


Reserves.— Vide “Railway Reserves” and “Townshipßeserves.”
Resumption of runs. —Vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Roads:
To be reserved through country lots offered for sale ... 176
Secretary for Public Works may open roads ... ... 176
Run ;
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 173
Resumption of.— Vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Consolidation of runs. —Vide “Pastoral Leases.”
Sales by auction:
Areas of country lots to be offered 176
Reservation for roads ... ... ... ... ... 176
Schedule;
Southern Extension Railway Reserve 177
Wide Bay and Burnett Districts Railway Reserve ... 177
Central District Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... 178
Kennedy Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... ... 178
Selection ;
Lands resumed from pastoral lease, subject to selection
under provisions of this Act ... ... ... ... 171
hern Extension Railway Reserve 177
Southern Extension Railway Reserve
Survey :
Half cost of survey of runs to be paid by lessee ... ... 175
Penalty for non-payment of half cost ... ... ... 175
Township reserves :
Lands .resumed from pastoral lease, subject to reservation 174
Western Railway Reserve.— Vide “Alienation in, etc.”
Wide Bay and Burnett Districts Railway Reserve ... ... 177
“THE WESTERN RAILWAY ACT” AND “THE RAILWAY
RESERVES ACT AMENDMENT ACT OF 1879.”
Preamble ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 178
Repeal of certain sections :
Western Railway Act ... ... ... ... ... ... 178
Western Railway Reserves Act 178
Short title 178
Transfer of accounts 178
“IHE VICTORIA BRIDGE LANDS SALES ACT ”
Deed to specify encumbrance and indemnity ... ... ... 179
Preamble ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 179
Proceeds of sale to be paid into Consolidated Revenue Fund... 179
Purchaser to be indemnified ... ... ... ... ... 179
Sale of lands 179
Short title 179
“ SELECTORS RELIEF ACT OF 1878.”
Time for non-payment of rent reduced 180
Period of obtaining grant under “ Homestead Areas Act of
1872” shortened 180
Preamble 180
Short title 180
By Authority: James C. Beal, Government Printer, William street Brisbane,




. / !
I yd mini
PROCLAMATION.
By His Excellency Sir Arthur Edward Kennedy, Knight Grand
Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St.
[l.s.] Michael and St. George, Companion of the
A. E. Kennedy, Most Honourable Order of the Bath, Governor
Governor’. and Commander-In-Chief of the Colony of
Queensland and its Dependencies.
IN’ pursuance of the power in me vested, and in accordance with the
provisions of “ The Mineral Lands Act of 1872,” I, Sir Arthur
Edward Kennedy, the Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the
Executive Council, do hereby notify and proclaim that fhe following
additional Regulations, relating to Mining Licenses, have been estab-
lished under the aforesaid Act.
Additional Regulations.
Regulations to apply to such districts as may he notified Ly Minister.
1. These regulations are to apply to such districts, from such time
and during such periods as the Minister for Lands may, by notice in
the Government Gazette, from time to time prescribe.
Definition.
2. The following terms in inverted commas shall, for the purposes
of these Regulations, unless the context otherwise indicate, bear the
meanings set against them respectively :
“ Miners,” “ Miner.” —Any person being the holder of a mining
license, or any number of persons each being the holder of a mining
license. The singular to include the plural and the plural the
singular,'
“Owners,” “Owner.” Any owner,- whether jointly or in
severalty, and the singular shall include the plural and the plural the
singular,
“Lode.” —Any vein, scam, reef, dyke, or blow containing tin
other than alluvial.
Size of claim.
lode claim.
3. The extent of ground allowed for each miner in any lode claim
shall be two chains along the lode by a width of five chains. The
width of all lode claims must be marked at right angles to the lode
or base line, but the whole or any part of such width may be marked
on either side of the lode or base line at the option ot the shared
holders.
ALLUVIAL CLAIM.
The extent of ground allowed for each miner in any alluvial
claim shall not exceed one acre, to be marked off in the form of a
square.


Mode of talcing up a claim.
4. A miner may take up and work any unoccupied Crown land as
a claim by fixing firmly in tbe ground, at each corner thereof, a post
four inches in diameter, standing at least three feet above the surface,
set in L trenches three feet long and six inches deep along each boun-
dary line, such posts to be kept at all times uncovered. Provided
that when registration is required such miner shall, within two days
after such marking, make application in the form D hereto annexed, to
the Commissioner. The Commissioner shall thereupon deliver to the
applicant a certificate in the form E hereto annexed, who shall, within
twenty-four hours from the receipt thereof, cause it to be posted on
some conspicuous part of the ground applied for, and a copy thereof
at the Commissioner’s office, tor a period of six clear days. If no
objection be lodged against such application within such period, the
applicant shall be entitled to be registered for the claim by the Com-
missioner ; should, however, any objection be lodged within the time
specified, he shall defer registration until the matter has been heard
and determined, and thereafter be guided by the evidence submitted
to him.
Marking too much ground.
5. Any miner marking off more ground than he is entitled to
shall be liable to have the surplus ground pegged off at either end of
the claim, at the option of any other miner applying to the Com-
missioner for the surplus.
One mining license sufficient.
6. A miner may himself or by his agent take up and hold any
number of claims, or shares in claims, provided such claims or shares
in claims are worked by miners in accordance with these Regulations.
Boundary posts and marks.
7. Claims, business and machine areas, and all authorised hold-
ings, must be marked at each corner with a post four (4) inches in
diameter, fixed firmly in and standing at least three (3) feet above the
ground ; and the owner or any shareholder thereof shall point out the
corner posts and boundary lines of any such claim or other authorised
holding to any person requiring to know the same, and no person shall
remove, injure, or obliterate any boundary posts or marks of any
claim or other authorised holding, or any posted notice relating
thereto.
Mode of application for an occupied claim or share liable to forfeiture.
8. Whenever under these Regulations an occupied claim or share in
an occupied claim is liable to forfeiture, any miner may apply for
possession of such claim or share therein by posting a notice in writing
in the form G- hereto annexed at, or as near as possible to the then
working shaft of, such claim and at the Commissioner’s office, and
serving a copy thereof on the holder of such claim or share, or his
agent.
If no objection be lodged within six (6) clear days of the posting
and service of such notices, the Commissioner shall, if requested,
register the claim or share for the applicant.


Any person objecting to such i egistration must within the six
clear days hereinbefore mentioned lodge a written notice of objection
with the Commissioner stating the grounds of such objection, upon
receipt of which the Commissioner shall defer registration until the
matter has been heard and determined, and shall thereafter be guided
by the evidence submitted to him.
Taking forcible possession a forfeiture of rights.
9. Any miner taking forcible possession of any claim or share
therein, or commencing to work the same after his right to take
possession thereof has been disputed, shall forfeit all right and title
which he may have acquired to the possession of such claim or share.
Shafts and holes near roads to he secured.
10. Any miner having a shaft within twenty (20) feet of a public
road, in ordinary use, shall securely fence or log the same, and any
miner abandoning any such shaft or hole shall first either fill up or
securely fence or log the same, or in some other way make it safe
in a permanent manner; and no person shall throw down or remove
therefrom any fence or timber, or other material placed for such
purpose, or at any time wilfully injure or destroy any shaft, drive, or
other workings in any mine so as to prevent or impede the further
working of such mine or any adjacent ground.
False representation.
11. Any person who shall by false representation or fraudulent
concealment of facts obtain registration of any mining or other
interest, or who shall by such means obtain a certificate of exemption
from work, or occupation of business area, shall be liable to forfeit his
share of the property in respect of which such registration or certificate
of exemption has been so obtained.
Eules and agreements to he binding.
12. All rules and agreements entered into by a majority of at
least two-thirds in number and interest of the shareholders of any
claim for the management and working thereof shall be binding on the
shareholders of such claim, and on any person becoming a shareholder
therein, provided such rules and agreements are not contrary to these
Eegulations. All such rules and agreements shall be registered by
filing a copy signed by the parties or their agents, at the Commissioner s
office, and payment of the fee required by schedule hereto annexe ,
and such rules or agreements may be abolished or amended at any
time by a like majority of the shareholders in any such claim or
leasehold.
Non-registration, dfc., not to he deemed a breach of Eegulations.
13. All lode claims must be registered, and alluvial claims may
be registered after the boundaries are defined to the satisfaction ot
the Commissioner, and the holders of all claims or other authorised
mining tenements for which registration is required must apply to the
C ommissioner for registration of the same within ten (10) clear wqr
ing days from the date of their being entitled to such registration.
Provided that non-registration within the prescribed tune shall not be
deemed a breach of these Eegulations if good cause be shown tor such
delay to the satisfaction of the Commissioner.


Claims continuously worked — Exceptions.
14. Claims must be continuously worked by the requisite number
of men within two clear working days after they have been marked
off, otherwise the share or shares unworkod shall he liable to forfeiture,
and thereafter any share not effectively worked shall be liable to for-
feiture. Provided that no miner’s interest in any claim shall be
liable to forfeiture under this regulation, if he be employed at any
necessary work in connection with it, or if his absence be caused
through sickness, attendance at a court of justice, a general cessation
from work through floods or rain, or on any public holidays, or on
holidays proclaimed by the Commissioner.
Exemption from work.
15. The owners of any registered claim may apply to the Com-
missioner. after having posted a copy of the application in the form
marked H hereto annexed, at the Commissioner’s office and on the
claim, six clear working days prior to the day of hearing the applica-
tion by the Commissioner, to have the claim registered as exempt from
work for a period not exceeding six months ; and provided it has been
duly registered and continuously worked for the preceding six months,
the Commissioner may grant the exemption applied for upon receipt of
the fee required, and on proof that the claim is not payable through
any cause over which the owners have no control. Provided that the
Commissioner may grant exemption from work on any claim for a
period not exceeding thirty days upon application by the owners
thereof, of which notice must be given by posting a copy of the
application at the Commissioner’s office and on the claim three clear
working days prior to the hearing of the application by the Com-
missioner.
The Commissioner shall hear and determine in open court all
applications for exemption from work, and objections thereto, and
ma y grant the exemption applied for upon terms as to bailing or any
other conditions he may deem necessary. Any failure to comply
with such terms or conditions shall be deemed a forfeiture of the
exemption.
Transfers.
16. The holder of any registered claim, or share therein, any
registered business, machine, or market-garden area, or any other
registered holding under these Pegulations, or any interest therein,
may transfer the same upon production at the Commissioner’s office
of his certificate of registration, transfer certificate (or declaration of
loss thereof), and upon payment of the fee required; and the Com-
missioner shall issue to the transferree a transfer certificate; and the
transferee shall be liable for all incumbrances, agreements, and con-
ditions registered against the property so transferred.
Declaration of loss of mining license, certificate of registration,
or transfer certificate.
17. When any miner has lost his mining license, certificate of
registration, or transfer certificate, he may make a declaration of such
loss in the form marked K hereto annexed before a Commissioner or
Justice of the Peace, and such declaration shall be received at the
Commissioner’s office in lieu thereof for all the purposes required in
making a transfer, on payment of the fee required for filing the same.


Agents to he appointed.
18. Any person holding any share in any mining tenement or
other authorised holding under these Regulations shall, in the event
of being absent for a longer period than fourteen days from the district
in which such share is held, -appoint an agent in the form marked Q,
hereto annexed, whose acts shall be held as those of the principal,
and the name and address of such agent shall he registered at the
Commissioner’s office. In the event of such registration not being so
made, any notice, legal process, or document required by these Regula-
tions to be served shall be deemed to have been sufficiently served
upon such absent person, provided a copy of such notice, process, or
document be posted for the period required by these Regulations at
the Commissioner’s office, and on some conspicuous part of the mining
tenement or other holding to which the same refers.
Claim not to he forfeited through absence of hired men without due
notice to owner.
19. If any miner who is employed to represent a share in a
registered claim absents himself from such claim, or otherwise neglects
to represent such share, unknown to the owner thereof, the same shall
not be forfeited unless it remains unrepresented for seven (7) clear
working days after notice of such absence or peglect has been served
on the owner or his agent.
No injury permitted to claims or roads.
20. .No person shall cause or permit sludge, tailings, or water to
accumulate in, flow from his claim, reservoir, dam, machine area, or
other authorised holding, so as to cause danger, injury, or obstruction
to any public road, or any danger, inconvenience, or damage to any
public or private interest.
Stacking quartz, earth, etc.
21. Any miner having forfeited or abandoned his claim, or share in
a claim, shall be at liberty to retain possession of anv stone, or earth,
or other substance containing tin—the produce of such claim or share
in a claim—that may have been raised at the time of the forfeiture
or abandonment, provided such stone, earth, or other substance, shall
be stacked on ground not interfering with the working of the claim.
And the Commissioner shall, upon application being made to him, and
upon receipt of the fee required, register the same as the property
of such miner for any period not exceeding twelve months. A copy
of such registration, in the form marked M, shall be affixed on the
stack; and no person during the period of such registration shall
remove the said stack of stone, earth, or other substance, or any of it,
without the permission of the owner thereof.
Bailing compulsory.
22. The owners of any claim in which water has accumulated to
the injury of any adjoining claim shall, on receipt of complaint to that
effect from the party injured, or his agent, bail their claim, or in some
other manner effectually remedy the injury; or the party injured
may at once lodge a complaint with the Commissioner, who shall have
power to order the owners of such claim causing the injury to bail
their claim and keep it continuously free from any injurious accumu-
lation of water whilst occupied by them.


And the Commissioner shall further have power to assess and
determine the amount of damage or injury suffered from such ac-
cumulation of water by any person complaining, and to make an order
that the owner of such claim causing the damage or injury shall pay
the amount thereof.
Drainage.
23. When the owner of any claim, by the erection and working of
any appliance for drainage, can prove that a saving of labour has been
effected thereby in the working of adjoining claims, the owners of
such claims in which such saving has been effected shall be liable to
pay in respect thereof such reasonable sum of money, and at such
times as may be ordered by the Commissioner. Provided that the
Commissioner may subsequently, on application being made by either
party and a re-hearing of the case, cancel or vary such order so as to
meet any altered circumstances.
Union of claims.
24. Two or more contiguous claims may, upon application being
made to the Commissioner, with the consent of a two-thirds majority
in number and interest of the shareholders of each such claim,
respectively be united. Provided that the conditions of the separate
claims shall, in the aggregate, apply to the amalgamated claim; and
the Commissioner shall grant a certificate of union, and shall register
the same upon receipt of the fee required.
What considered a sufficient wording.
25. A claim shall be considered as effectively worked when eight
(8) hours’ bond fide work is performed thereon by the complement of
men required by these Regulations, on every working day except
Saturday, when four hours’ work shall be considered sufficient.
Abandonment of shares in claims.
26. Any shareholder in a registered claim wishing to abandon his
share therein may do so by serving on one of the remaining share-
holders, or his agent, a notice to that effect, and posting a copy thereof
at the Commissioner’s office and on the claim ; in such case the Com-
missioner, after satisfying himself that the notices have been served
and posted in manner aforesaid, shall forthwith cancel the registration
by which such share has been held, and the said shareholder shall
thereupon be released from any further liability in respect of such
share thereatter incurred, and any applicant for such abandoned
share may at once be registered for the same without process of any
kind beyond his written application.
Examination of registers by owners and others.
27. Any registered shareholder of a claim or other authorised
lidding may, upon application at the Commissioner’s office, examine
the register, so far as it relates thereto ; and any person may examine
the registers at the Commissioner’s office, of any claims or other
holdings, upon payment of the fee required.
Machine area.
28. Applications for machine areas, with particulars of machinery
proposed to be erected, must be made in writing to the Commissioner
after the ground has been marked, accompanied with a sketch plan
thereof; and a copy of such application must be posted on the ground


on which it is proposed to erect the machinery, as well as the Com-
missioner’s office, for seven (7) clear working days before the hearing
of the application. If no valid objection be lodged, the Commissioner
may grant permission to occupy an area not exceeding five acres and
register the same. Provided the Commissioner may before doing so
demand a plan and description of the ground as actually surveyed and
marked. Any such permission to occupy may be cancelled should the
holder thereof fail to commence the erection of machinery thereon
within four (4) months from the date of permission to occupy, or
should the machinery thereon be entirely removed.
Market gardens area.
29. Any miner requiring land for the purpose of growing fruit,
vegetables, fodder, or other garden produce, may apply to the Com-
missioner for an area not exceeding five acres for such purpose, by
posting an application, with a description of the ground, at the Com-
missioner’s office and on some conspicuous part of the ground, fourteen
days before the hearing by the Commissioner. Should no valid
objection be lodged, and no public interest be likely to suffer thereby,
the Commissioner may grant permission to the applicant to occupy
the land, and register him therefor on receipt of twelve months’ rent
in advance. The Commissioner may, before such registration, demand
from the applicant a proper survey and plan of the ground. Provided
that the applicant, or some other person to whom he may transfer,
shall reside on the area and keep constantly in cultivation at least
one-half thereof, such cultivated portion to be securely fenced, and
any garden area not so cultivated and fenced, and on which the
registered holder does not reside, or for which the rent is not paid
yearly in advance, shall be liable to forfeiture.
Business area.
30. The holder of a business license shall, with the consent of
the Commissioner as to the locality, be entitled to occupy for the
purpose of business an area of land not exceeding one quarter of an
acre, the frontage of which to any main thoroughfare, creek, or
waterhole shall not exceed sixty-six (66) feet, by a depth not exceeding
one hundred and sixty-five (i 65) feet, and every such area must be
registered at the Commissioner’s office. Provided such registration
may be cancelled should the holder cease to occupy such area without
first registering the same as exempt from the condition of occupation.
Unauthorised shafts, tyc. *
31. No person shall sink any shaft, or disturb the surface of the
ground, or erect works, or deposit earth, stone, or other material in
any place so as to interfere with the supply of water used by the
public, or so as to obstruct a public thoroughfare ; and no person shall
undermine any road in such a manner as to endanger the public
safety.
Construction of dams and races.
32. Owners of claims who may require to construct dams, races,
or drains, extending beyond the limits ot their claims, will be required
to notify the same to the Commissioner, in writing, stating the nature
and particulars of such work, and the Commissioner shall thereupon


notify the same te all parties interested or affected by the carrying
All f nn A nl«V • nil nw n C il. 1_ „ J 1 O 1 * I ’ 1 1 • 1
out and construction of the works; and if objections be made, the
Commissioner shall hear and decide whether they be admissible or
otherwise, and thereupon make such orders as may be necessary to
meet the requirements of the case.
Unauthorised occupation of Crown lands.
33. Any person being in unauthorised occupation of Crown lands
may be summarily removed therefrom by order of the Commissioner,
and any person resisting or obstructing the carrying out of any such
order shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding ten (iO) pounds.
Commissioner may issue orders relative to working claims, Sfc.
34. For the purpose of carrying out the foregoing Regulations, the
Commissioner shall have power to make such orders not inconsistent
with the Act or these Regulations, relative to the proper working of
claims, divisions of river or creek frontages, giving right of access to
water, as to him shall appear expedient, and each such order shall
be in writing, signed by the Commissioner, and shall be duly served
on the owner or occupier of any claim to which it may apply. And
any owner or occupier who shall neglect to comply with such order
shall forfeit or pay for every such offence any sum not exceeding
£lO, to be recovered in a summary way before any two justices.
SCHEDULE A.
Scale op Fees and Rents.
The following shall bo the scale of Fees and Rents payable under these
Regulations:—
£ s. d.
Rents —
Market Garden Area, per acre 100
of—
Claim from labour—exceeding one month ... ... 0 10 0
business Area from occupation ... ... ... ... 0 2 6
Renewal of Business Area from occupation ... ... 0 2 H
Race from use ... ... ... ... ... ... 010 6
Transfers of —
Claims or Shares therein ... ! , 0 5 0
Business Areas ... ... ... ... . 0 5 0
Machine Areas ... ... ... ... ... ...0 5 0
Market Garden Areas ... 0 5 0
Water Race ... ... ... ... ... ...0 5 0
Dam or Reservoir ... ... ... 0 5 0
All other authorised holdings ... ...0 5 0
Registration of —
Union of Claims ... ... ... ...0 5 0
Rules and Agreements ... ... ... ... ...050
0 5 0
...050
Stacked Quartz 0 5 0
Declaration of Loss of —
Mining License ... ... ... ... ... ...050
Certificate of Registration ... ... ... ... 0 5 0
Transfer Certificate ... ... ... ... ... 0 5 0
Registers —
Examination of (for each entry) ... 0 2 6


FORMS.
Form of Application for Claims, Areas, S(c.
TV e, the undersigned, hereby give notice to the
the that we did, on the day of
hour of o’clock m., mark off a piece of ground situated
or thereabouts ; and we hereby make application to
and request the said Warden to grant us registration thereof as a
at the
Dated at this day of 18
Certificate of Application.
This is to certify that the undermentioned person did this
day of ,at the hour of o’clock m., make application
for a piece of ground measuring situated at to be
held under the provisions of clause of the Regulations as a y
and should no valid objection be lodged on or before the day
the said person will be granted registration for the said
ground, to be held as a
Given under my hand, at this day
of 18 .
Gold Field.
Noth.—This form to be posted on the ground applied for, and at the
Certificate of Registration.
This is to certify that I have this day registered
holder of subject to
as the
Dated at
this day of
Noth.—This certificate is to be issued to each shareholder, and must specify th &
interest or share held, and must be produced at the office when a transfer ot
the interest is required.
Notice of Application for Abandoned Shares.
I, , of , do hereby make application to
the of the to be registered for share in the
claim the said share being abandoned by who is now
the registered holder thereof.
Dated at this day of 18 .
this day of 18
(Signature.)


Mining Incense.
No.:
Signature:
Date:
Office,
18
I hereby give notice that, in pursuance of the above application, I
intend to register as the first applicant for the share alleged
to have been abandoned by . Provided that no valid objection
be lodged with, me within six clear days from the posting and due service of
this notice.
Note.—This notice must be posted on the claim, and served on the registered holder,
if any.
Application for Exemption from Work.
W e, the undersigned, shareholders in the do hereby give
notice that, after the expiration of six clear days from this date, we intend
to apply for exemption from work of the above for the period
°f calendar months on the grounds following, viz. :
(Signature.)
Dated this day of a.d. 18 .
Objections against the above application must be lodged at the
office on or before the day of 18
Note.—This application must be posted on the ground and the office for six clear days.
Form of Objection.
I, the undersigned, do hereby give notice that I object to the registration
of for the following reasons :
And I hereby require the said to withhold the registration
of the said pending the hearing of any objection by the
(Signature.)
Received at the office, this day of
18 ,at the hour of m.
Mining Registrar.
J.
■^ o * Fee.—Five shillings.
Form of Transfer.
I> of for valuable consideration, do hereby
transfer to of my situated subject
to all and singular the terms and conditions under which the said
has been held by me ; and I of , do hereby
accept the said • subject to the terms and conditions aforesaid.
Dated at this day of 18 .
Signature of Transferror.
Signature of Transferree.


Form of Declaration in lieu of Certificate.
I, , of in the Colony of Queensland, do solemnly
.and sincerely declare that I have lost my No. , by virtue of
■which I hold , and I make this solemn declaration conscientiously
believing the same to be true, and by virtue of the provisions of “ The
Oaths Act of 1867.” I request that for the purposes of transfer of the
said this declaration may be received in lieu of the said
lost
Declared before me at this day of 18 .
(or J.P.)
Transfer Certificate.
This is to certify that I have this day registered a transfer
from to of , and the said is now
the registered holder thereof subject to
Dated at this day of 18
Note.—This Certificate must be produced at the office when this
interest is to be again transferred.
No. Fee —Ten shillings.
Certificate of Registration of Stack of Auriferous Quartz , #c.
Under the provisions of the Regulation No. 22, I have
this day registered as the property of the stack of on the
claim known as situated at , and, provided the
conditions of the said regulation are complied with, no person shall remove
the said or any part thereof, for a period of months
from the date hereof, without the permission in writing of the said
Dated at this day of 18
Note. —This Certificate must be kept posted on the stack.
Application for Union of Claims.
the day of 18 .
We, the undersigned, being the registered holders of two-thirds of the
interests in the claims numbered respectively , and
•situated , hereby request the of the
to unite the claims aforesaid as one claim, under the style of
Mining License.
Name No. Date
Share in United Claim.
Certificate of Union.
This is to certify that I have this day of
at the hour of o’clock .m., united as one claim, under the style
•of the undermentioned claims, that is to say ;
Given under my hand at this day
■of 18 .
Name of shareholder share in United Claim.


Power of Attorney.
I) of , do hereby authorise
of , to act as my agent. And I [hereby declare this authority
to be irrevocable, and] agree that all and whatsoever the
shall lawfully do under this power I will at all times ratify and confirm as
good and valid.
Dated at this day of a.d. 18 .
(Signature.)
Note. —This power of attorney will be considered valid until cancelled at the
office by the principal.
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Toowoomba, this twenty-
third day of December, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and eighty-one, and in the forty-
fifth year of Her Majesty’s reign.
By Command,
(For the Secretary for Public Lands,)
J. M. MACEOSSAN.
God Save the Queen !
By Authority: James C. Bbax,, Government Planter, William street, Brisbane.-




