

■OTVfp
610
9 -o(o
Adam Lindsay Gordon at the age of so.
From a daguerreotype sent by him , at
the time of his marriage , to his uncle.
Reproduced by kind permission of Miss Edith Humphris and Mr. Douglas Sladen
from their book “ Adam Lindsay Gordon and his Friends in England and Australia A


(See pp. 11 and 2d)
A reprint, presented to the Australian Libraries and Gordonians , at the request
of the compiler (Mr. E. St edman), through the Gordon Memorial Committee
Melbourne, December, 1936.


ADAM LINDSAY GORDON
THE LAUREATE OF
CENTAURS
BORN
DIED
OCTOBER 19, 1833
at Fayal in the Azores
JUNE 23, 1870
at Brighton, Victoria
The poetic descendant of him who wrote those well-known lines
of the “ galloping horse ” in the Georgies :
“ Quadrupedante putrem sonitu quatit ungula campum.”
\COFF, man ! — egotistical , proud , unobservant,
Since I with man's grief dare to sympathise thus ;
Why scoff ? — fellow-creature I am, fellow-servant
Of Godcan man fathom God's dealings with us — ?
The wide gulf that parts us may yet be no wider
Than that which parts you from some being more blest
And there may be more links 'twixt the horse and his rider
Than ever your shallow philosophy guess'd.
Did he see ? Could he feel through the faintness, the numbness,
While linger'd the spirit half-loosedfrom the clay
Dumb eyes seeking his in their piteous dumbness,
Dumb quivering nostrils, too stricken to neigh ?
And what then ? The colours reversed, the drums muffled.
The black nodding plumes, the dead march, and the pall.
The stern faces, soldier-like, silent, unruffled —
The slow sacred music that floats over all!
THE ROLL OF THE KETTLEDRUM.


HEY are rhymes rudely strung with intent less
Of sounds than of words,
Jn lands where bright blossoms are scentless,
And songless bright birds ;
Where, with fire and fierce drought on her tresses,
Insatiable Summer oppresses
Sere woodlands and sad wildernesses,
And faint flocks and herds.
Whence gather'd? —The locust's glad chirrup
May furnish a stave ;
The ring of the rowel and stirrup,
The wash of a wave.
The chaunt of the marsh frog in rushes,
That chimes through the pauses and hushes
Of nightfall, the torrent that gushes.
The tempests that rave.
They came in all guises, some vivid
To clasp and to keep ;
Some sudden and swift as the livid
Blue thunder-flame's leap.
This swept-through the first breath of clover
With memories renew'd to the rover —
BUSH BALLADS AND
GALLOPING RHYMES.
A DEDICATION.




General view of Horta, the chief town
of Fayal , with Pico in the distance
SE have a picture of the home into which Adam Lindsay Gordon was born,
and of his childhood, taken by Turner and Sutherland, in “The Develop-
ment of Australian Literature,” from his father’s letters. It was ini 830,
when they rented a “roomy and quaintly-furnished house amid the vine-
yards of Fayal.”
A most lovely spot this must have been wherein to pass a childhood. Fron the
sunny windows of the house, set upon a hill, could be seen the whole of the island—
for nowhere is it six miles long—a mass of verdure, whose undulating vineyards were
marked with clumps of darker green, where myrtles and orange trees half hid and half
revealed the snowy walls of Spanish cottages. . . “In the evening, when, fron the
nunnery in the little white-washed village down below, the Angelus rose amid the still
and perfumed breath of the tropic, the twilight shades must have very gently gatlered
round the bright little boy as he was sung to sleep in an airy nursery, whose winlows
overlooked the broken cliffs and.the splash of ocean.
Guided mainly by these excerpts, Mr. A. E. Fletcher, of the British Vice-Consilate
at Fayal, wrote in a letter dated September 20th, 1933 : “ Personally, I am conviiced,
from extracts of Gordon’s father’s memoirs, that the birthplace was either on the Hack
hill (Monte Queimado) ”... (on the right of our picture), “ or alternatively 01 the
hill” (on the left of our picture), “from both of which he would have had a full vew,
through the morning haze, of sister islets in the Western Pacific.”
This undoubtedly refers to the sister islets of San Jorge and Graciosa, some 28 an! 40
miles away.
Mr. Fletcher was unfortunately unable to trace any tradition which would funish
some clue to the actual birthplace. These islands being volcanic, and therefore kble
to earthquakes, he thinks it very unlikely that the cottage would have survived.




THE SONG OF THE SURF
I" HITE Steeds of the ocean, that leap with a hollow and wearisocne roai
■On the bar of the ironstone steep, not a fathom's length from the shore
Us there never a seer or sophist can interpret jour wild refrain,
When speech the harshest and roughest is seldom studied in vain ?
Mj ears are constantly smitten by that dreary monotone,
In a hieroglyphic Pis written —Pis spoken in a tongue unknown ;
Gathering, , growing, and swelling, and surging, and shivering , say I
What is the tale you are telling ? What is the drift of your lay ?
You come, and your waves are hoary with the foam of your countless year ;
You break, with a rainbow of glory, through the spray of your glittering lars ,
Is your song a song of gladness ? A pecan of joyous might ?
Or a wail of discordant sadness for the wrongs you never can right ?
For the empty seat by the ingle ? For children Peft of their sire ?
For the bride, sitting, sad, and single, and pale, by the flickering fire ?
For your ravenous pools of suction ? For your shattering billow swell ?
For your ceaseless work of destruction ? For your hunger insatiable ?
MORTAL ! that which thou askest, ask not thou of the waves ;
Fool! thou foolishly taskest us —we are only slaves ;
Might, more mighty, impels us —we must our lot fulfil.
He who gathers and swells us, curbs us too at His will ’
Think'st thou the wave that shatters questioneth His decree ?
Little to us it matters, and naught it matters to thee.
Not thus, murmuring idly, we from our duty would swerve.
Over the world spread widely, ever we labour and serve.




THE ROMANCE OF THE ANCESTRY
OF ADAM LINDSAY GORDON.
IS ancestor was one “ Adam,” or “ Edom o’ Gordon,” of Berwicksire ;
and curiously enough, he was born the same year as another famous Goion,
—“General Gordon” the hero of Khartoum. But the General was his soior
by nearly nine months, being born on January 28 th, 1833, —while our
poet did not see light till October 19th of that year. And their lives, like heir
names, seemed at one time to be destined to be linked together as they were not>nly
fellow-students —but also friends —at the Royal Military College, Woolwich. The
General, when later he presented a copy of Gordon’s poems to General Sir Anrew
Clark, R.E.—who was for so long Agent-General for Victoria in London—inscbed
it “ From Charlie to Andrew ” adding that “ He was a kind of cousin of mine.”
But, beyond having a common ancestor, Gordon of Gight, our poet was not liked
with that other famous poet with a Gordon ancestry. Lord Byron ; although the rms
and mottoes of the Gordon of Gight and Hallhead show a closer connection thn is
usual for Gordons.
Gordon was probably christened “Lindsay” after Hugh Lindsay, who marriecthe
daughter of Lord Rockville, brother of Lady Henrietta Gordon, who was grandmcher
of both the father and mother of the poet.
And this Hugh Lindsay gives us another link with poetry, for his sister was ady
Anne, who wrote “ Auld Robin Gray.”
’Twas merry in the glowing morn, among the gleaming grass.
To wander as we’ve wandered many a mile,
And blow the cool tobacco cloud, and watch the white wreathes pass,
Sitting loosely in the saddle all the while.
’ Twas merry ’mid the blackjvoods, when we spied the station roofs,
To wheel the wild scrub cattle at the yard.
With a running fire of stockwhips and a fiery run of hoofs ;
Ob ! the hardest day was never then too hard !
I’ve had my share of pastime, and I’ve done my share of toil.
And life is short —the longest life a span :
I care not now to tarry for the corn or for the oil
Or for the wine that maketh glad the heart of man.
For good undone and gifts misspent and resolutions vain,
’Tis somewhat late to trouble. This I know —
I should live the same life over, if I had to live again ;
And the chances are I go where most men go.
THE SICK STOCKRIDER.


THE CENTENARY OF ADAM LINDSAY GORDON
Then the rays of the sunset glinted
Through the blackwoods 9 emerald hough
On an emerald sward', rose-tinted',
And spangled , and gemm’d ; —and now
The rays of the sunset redden
With a sullen and lurid frown
From the skies that are dark and leaden,
To earth that is dusk and brown.
What might have been !—words of folly ;
What might be !—speech for a fool;
With mistletoe round me, and holly,
Scarlet and green, at Yule,
With the elm in the place of the rvattle
And in lieu of the gum, the oak.
Years back I believed a little.
And as I believed I spoke.
Have I done with these childish fancies ?
They suited the days gone by.
When I pulled the poppies and pansies
When I hunted the butterfly.
FROM MR. & MRS. EUSTACE A. STEDMAN
GREETINGS
Old House ”
Tisbury.
11




THE ROMANCE OF BRITOMARTE.
As related by Sergeant Leigh on the night he got his captaincy at the Restoration.
SE tells how he was sent to St. Hubert’s Chase with despatches, “To warn them against the
bands of Kerr.” How the House was attacked next morning by these Roundheads, and
how he “ broke through the rebel force ” on his mare “ Britomarte,” and brought relief.
Such then is the “ Story.” But Gordon’s inspiration, as always, was the movement,
the metre; in this case the beat of the hoofs of “Britomarte,” as she galloped across
country. Note the rhythm of her jump when she clears the Park fence and the dyke beyond.
So we have here just the four stanzas which give this ride.
And, as one whom the fierce wind storms in the face
With spikes of hail and with splinters of rain,
I, while we fled through St. Hubert’s Chase,
Bent till my head was amongst her mane.
To the north full a league of the deer-park lay.
Smooth, springy turf, and she fairly flew,
And the sound of their hoof-strokes died away.
And their far shots faint in the distance grew.
Loudly I laugh’d, having won the start.
At the folly offollowing Britomarte.
They had posted a guard at the northern gate —
Some of pike men and musketeers.
To the tall park palings I turn’d her straight.
She veer’d in her flight as a swallow veers —
And some blew matches and some drew swords.
And one of them wildly hurl’d his pike.
But she cleared by inches the oaken boards.
And carried me yards beyond the dyke >
Then gaily over the long green down
We gallop’d, heading for Westbrooke town
The green down slopes to the great grey moor.
The grey moor sinks to the gleaming Skelt —
Sudden and sullen, and swift and sure.
The whirling water was round my belt —
She breasted the bank with a savage snort
And a backward glance of her bloodshot eye.
And “ Our Lady of Andover’s ” flash’d like thought.
And flitted St. Agath’s nunnery
And the firs at the Ferngrove fled on the right,
And “ Falconer’s Tower ” on the left tookflight.
And over the Ravenswold we raced —
We rounded the hill by “ The Hermit’s Well ”
We burst on the Westbrooke Bridge —“ What haste ?
What errand ? ” Shouted the sentinel.
“ To Beelzebub with the Brewer’s knave’’
“ Carolus Rex and he of the Rhine’’
Galloping past him, I got and gave
In the gallop password and countersign.
All soaked with water and soil’d with mud
With the sleeve of my jerkin half drench’d in blood.




Bust of Adam Lindsay Gordon in the Poets’ Corner of
Westminster Abbey, unveiled by the Duke and Duchess of
York on the nth of May 1934.
Reproduced by the kind permission of Lady Kennet of
the Dene.




Dingley Dell, near Mount Gambler which was purchased
as a State Gordon Museum, where Gordon wrote “ Visions
in the Smoke ” and also according to Mr. C. R. Long, “Ye
Weary Wayfarer ” ; from part of which “ Finis Exoptatus ”
I quote the following characteristic lines, selected by Mr.
Long.
Hark ! the hells on distant cattle
Waft across the range ,
Through the golden-tufted wattle ,
Music low and strange ;
Tike the marriage peal of fairies
Comes the tinkling sound ,
Or like chimes of sweet St. Mary's
On far English ground.




I am slow in learning, and swift in
Forgetting, and I have grown
So weary with long sand sifting ;
Towards the mist where the breakers moan
The rudderless bark is drifting.
Through the shoals and the quicksands shifting —
In the end shall the night-rack lifting.
Discover the Shores unknown ?
“ QUARE FATIGASTI ”


I look back with much pleasure over a twelve-month spent in compiling this
“ Gordon ” Xmas Card, and once again turn to the pleasant duty of acknow-
ledging with gratitude the generous help freely given me by Gordon author-
ities and rights-holders all over the world, without whose goodwill this card
could not have been produced.
As acknowledged under our portrait on the front page, I am deeply indebted
to Miss Edith Humphris and Mr. Douglas Sladen, for their kind permission
to reproduce this very characteristic portrait of “ Adam Lindsay Gordon at
the age of 30,” this generous permission including the use of any information
afforded by their standard work on Gordon : “ Adam Lindsay Gordon and
his Friends in England and Australia.”
In my dealings with Australia I was fortunate in having the hearty co-opera-
tion of Mr. Charles R. Long, M.A., President of the Gordon Memorial
Committee, who also sent me the picture of Dingley Dell, and the excellent
photograph of the Gordon Memorial at Melbourne. He has also been “ my
guide, philosopher and friend ” in the important matter of current Australian
opinion bearing on their poet.
Our photograph of the Bust in the Poets’ Corner of Westminster Abbey is
reproduced by the kind permission of its creator, Lady Kennet of the Dene,
and our attractive colophon of the Jumping horse, we owe to the famous
sculptor Mr. F. M. Taubman.
Mr. J. M. Bulloch, Literary Editor of the Daily Sketch, very kindly looked
over my “ Romance of the Ancestry of Adam Lindsay Gordon,” a sphere in
which he is a known authority.
Mr. A. E. Fletcher, of the British Vice-Consulate at Fayal, in the Azores,
has been an untiring helper in my endeavours to locate Gordon’s birthplace,
a search unfortunately unsuccessful. Mr. Fletcher has also provided me with
our picture of Horta, Fayal’s chief town.
Among many other helpers, I must not forget Mr. W. Martin-Hurst, of the
Exclusive News Agency, Roehampton; Mr. Humphrey Milford, of the
Oxford University Press; Messrs. Constable & Co., Ltd., or Messrs. Thos.
Cook and Son, all of whom were most kind in their efforts to help me along
my road.




CHISWICK PRESS LTD., N.II
