

&n ISnqutrg
SYDNEY:
TURNER & HENDERSON,
J£iM
AND jljj«Jjff
Into the Labour Question of the Future.
HENRY COPELAND, M.P.
ll *sairas2ia' 4




LSBOUR-SMING MENTIONS,
&n ISnqiuru
Into the Labour Question of the Future.
HENRY COPELAND, M.P.
SYDNEY:
TURNER & HENDERSON,
•AAA'" A* iY
ADAM’S X:URSE




PREFACE.
5 '
In launching this little cock-boat on the troubled waters
of public discussion, I have been actuated solely by the
desire to benefit the poor and distressed among the great
and ever-increasing army of the unemployed. As population
increases and a larger share of labour is devoted to
manufacturing industries, so will poverty, which has become
so rampant in other countries under the fluctuations of
supply and demand, assume a more prominent feature in our
own social conditions unless some such check as I have
advocated be adopted as a counterpoise to the effects of
labour-saving invention and its consequent displacement of
manual labour.
When I commenced this enquiry, it was with the
intention of embodying whatever conclusions I arrived at in
a short series of letters to the Press. The subject, however,
seemed to expand the more it was enquired into, and as it
assumed features I had not anticipated I found it necessary
to the formation of my own opinions on such an important
matter to follow the enquiry to some practical issue, as it
was a subject the issues of which had never previously
engaged my attention, either by thought or reading.
Whether I have followed the wrong track or the right one I
must leave others to judge, but I honestly confess I could
discover no other, find, at least, I have no object to gain in
what may appear as running amok against capital. If others
will point out a better way to the object sought to be
attained they shall have my warmest sympathy.
I am not insensible to the fact that in publishing the
conclusions at which I have arrived, it is at the risk of
earning the contempt of some and the pity of others.
“ Another good man gone wrong,” accompanied by a light
tap of the fingers on the forehead, will, perhaps, be the most


general verdict. But as I have all my life been accustomed
to think for myself and act on my own convictions, I have
not hesitated to give publicity to my views at a time when,
above all others, I should have best consulted my own
interests in leaving such a subject severely alone.
For myself, I have been a considerable employer of
labour for over twenty years, and, wherever my business has
taken me in connection with mining, I have invariably
introduced the eight-hour system though longer hours had
been in vogue. Having done this, at the expense of myself
and the companies I represented, it cannot be said I preach
one doctrine and practise another.
In explanation of what in places may appear a repetition
of argument I must plead, as an excuse, that the subject was
taken up and dropped again a score of times when other
matters required attention. I can only hope, therefore, that
the charity which covers a multitude of sins will be extended
to my little bantling. I claim for it nothing more than
honesty of purpose and a share of the pavement of which
we are told the road to a certain place is formed—good
intentions.
Sydney,
May, ISBS.


ADAM’S CURSE
Labour-Saving Inventions.
An Enquiry into the Labour Question of the Future.
0— > —< "O'—
“ And unto Adam he said, ‘ Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of
thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree which I commanded thee saying : Thou
shalt not eat of it; cursed is the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shalt thou eat of it
all the days of thy life.
“ Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee : and thou shalt eat the
herb of the field.
“In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the
ground—for out of it wast thou taken : for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou
return.”— Genesis.
I suppose there is no subject which has occupied such
a prominent position and received so much attention in
Europe and America, especially during the last twenty or
thirty years, as that of the future relationship between capital
and labour. Indeed, the question may be said to have been
viewed from every standpoint, and to have been critically and
minutely analysed by all sorts and conditions of men. Yet
I am inclined to think there is to-day no subject, religion
excepted, upon which such a diversity of opinion exists, even
amongst those writers and public speakers who might be
termed the giants of the nineteenth century. Statesmen,
social economists, philanthropists, clergymen, authors,
pressmen and lecturers, have each and all, from their
political, religious or social pedestals, given to the world their
individual solutions of this all-important but as yet unsolved
problem. The working classes, who aremost directly interested
in the question, have not, meanwhile, as a rule, attempted
to pierce the veil of the future, but have been satisfied to
deal with difficulties as they arose in the form of strikes and


lock-outs on the simple and yet sensible principle of “get
all you can and look for more,” without, however, having
had any very definite idea of the direction in which they
were “ to look for more.”
In attempting to deal with this question of many
phases, I feel that I am laying myself open to the charge of
presumption; as one who would endeavour to illuminate the
world by the additional light of an ordinary wax-candle, six
to the pound. However, having no personal object to gain,
I shall endeavour to take an honest and impartial view of the
situation, and shall treat the problem to be solved as an
English squire would treat a fox to be hunted, who, after
giving Mr. Reynard a fair start and an open course, follows
the trail wherever it leads. So shall I endeavour to follow
my subject, whether it leads me over the hedges an 1 ditches
of class interests, whether along the narrow lanes of prejudice
or out in the open bracing plains of ‘ the greatest good for
the greatest number ” and as the squire's object is not so
much the fox's tail as the exhilarating pleasure of the chase,
so, in following up what appears to be the trail of this Will o’
the Wisp-like problem, my expectation will not be so much
to enlighten others, but rather to enjoy the more pleasurable
occupation of prospecting for arguments on either side, with
which to build up an independent and unbiased opinion for
myself. The guides I shall depend upon will be whatever
amount of common sense I can command and some
personal experience in my earlier manhood of the lights and
shadows which flit about a life of toil, whether on the ship or
in the forest, on the farm or in the mine. I desire only that,
if possible, there should be less of misery and want in the
world ; that life for the labourer should not be a mere
procession of grinding toil, producing only weariness and
privations, so that, out of sheer charity, men are taught to look
forward to another state of existence for the reasonable
enjoyment of life, which ought to be the natural inheritance
of every man on this side the grave.
In discussing the question of “ labour,” few men in this
busy world of ours would be found to advocate a life of
idleness, nor even more than a reasonable relaxation from
continuous and active occupation of soma kind, whether it
be mental or physical, or better still, a blending of both.


Indeed, the general tendency of the age is towards over-
work, and this is so, not only with respect to those who are
making haste to be rich, but equally so where affluence and
wealth are already secured. Numbers of people, of whom it
might almost be said that refined and elegant indolence was
their birthright, have voluntarily thrown off the habits and
customs of their class, and nobly come forth to take their
share in the civilizing labours of modern times, by devoting
themselves to the arts and sciences, and to the study of dry
questions of social economy and kindred subjects. We now
find wealthy patricians who are actively connected with
almost every branch of manufacturing industry and
commercial enterprise, and on whichever side we turn are to be
found unmistakable signs that this generation is pressing on
under a full head of steam. I honestly believe and reverently
assert that no doctrine taught by the Churches has been
so productive of religious “ indifference” as that which holds
out the prospect of Heaven being a place where the “ spirits
of just men made perfect” would sit before the throne for
ever and ever , playing upon a harp. What doctrine could
be more opposed to the aspirations of an active and intelligent
being, with all the vast possibilities before him of boundless
space to be explored and the hidden secrets of nature waiting
to be discovered, than such a listless and apathetic existence.
All intelligent life, whether human or angelic, must appreciate
an active sphere ; and the higher the intelligence, the greater
will be the scope for activity. Inaction produces rust and
decay ; while absolute rest means annihilation.
In these colonies we are, essentially, a working people ;
the majority possessing a superabundance of energy and an
industry producing wealth which, in most cases, is used as a
means of exploring other channels of commerce or adventure,
so that more wealth means more work, and restless energy
often disperses the wealth which plodding industry has
accumulated. The career of many of our most enterprising
colonists resembles nothing so much as that of a well-corked
“ dead marine” tossed on pic-nicing waters —a little while
they are seen, and a little while they are not seen ; but,
(generally) the end is not yet, for being endowed with inherent
buoyancy, they successfully battle with the chopping waves of
miscalculation and inexperience usually met with on the


boisterous ocean of colonial life, which, however, mostly fail to
swamp them outright; for, though they may be driven under
for the moment, they are scarcely out of sight before they
re-appear, neck and shoulders, in full view, struggling bravely
to keep their heads above water, and so remain “ right side
up with care.”
In discussing the question of “ labour,” I wish to draw
a clear distinction between what may be termed rational
employment and that class of labour which is best described
as toil; toil which exhausts both mental and physical
energies, producing aching bones and weariness of the flesh.
This is the kind of labour alluded to in the penal curse
uttered against Adam, which all men for all time were to be
subject to, on account of Adam’s disobedience. The verses
quoted above mean this, or they mean nothing ; not only
was the labour to be sweat-producing, but the ground was
cursed for his sake, so that “ thorns also and thistles shall it
bring forth,” thus making the labour still more toilsome and
painful.
There are not many men in these colonies who have
not at some time or other had practical experience of this
class of labour, but in spite of all that may be said to the
contrary, there is not one individual among them all who,
even in the most vigorous period of his life, would not at the
time have gladly dispensed with the excessive and long
sustained exertion which converted an otherwise healthful
and pleasant employment into incessant and wearisome toil.
Untoward circumstances, however, and the prevailing custom
of working long hours, were the task-masters which have
impelled men to voluntary slavery for a time, for it was not
an inherent love of hard work which induced them to become
hewers of wood and drawers of water : nor is there one of
them, who, being now in a position to dispense with such
labour, would willingly return to it again. When, therefore,
I hear persons speak of the “ dignity of labour” —this kind
of labour, mind —I involuntary smile and wonder if they, for
their own edification, have ever tried it, and if not, why
not ? seeing they also are sons of Adam and should have no
exemption from the universal curse.


There is no dignity in toilsome labour! It is in itself a
cursed thing: not necessarily because the verses quoted say
so in express terms, but because for millions of human
beings it deprives life of the greater portion of its enjoyment;
because it robs the intelligent brain of that healthy energy
which ought to be the possession of every man ; because it
produces premature old age, and in many cases disease and
death follow in its wake. If Balaam’s ass had been inter-
viewed on the question of “dignity of labour,” he would, no
doubt, have thrown some light on the subject. . Ask the
miner who has delved a long shift underground, with
scarcely sufficient air to breathe; ask the farm-labourer who
has carried a cradle-scythe from sunrise to sunset in a semi-
tropical sun ; or ask the bushman who bursts up your billet
wood in a similar temperature. Ask each of these men what
their private opinion is of the dignity of labour, and they will
tell you it is a myth —a fraud that has been palmed on to the
working classes. Where does the dignity exist in carrying
a hod of bricks up a ladder all day ; in striking with a
hammer in a stone quarry; in picking up metalled roads or
discharging coal out of ships. I say again, there is no such
thing as dignity in this labour. There is dignity in the man
who, rather than see his wife or children want, will undertake
to perform these menial tasks, but the dignity rests in the
man and not in the labour, and the man would be none the
less dignified even if he had less of the labour.
When Gladstone fells a tree, that is pleasurable
exercise; but when a bushman slings a heavy axe or maul
the whole day long till his sides ache, that is labour. When
Squire Gold-top plants a tree, he will tell you he has been
“ working” in the garden, but it was Hodge, who trenched
the ground two feet deep, who did the labour. The
domesticated lady enjoys nothing more than sitting at her
embroidery, or even plain sewing, while she builds “ castles
in the air,” but, alas! for the poor seamstress, who “ with
fingers weary and worn” must sew or starve. A sufficiency of
work for healthy exercise is pleasurable; and employment
at a trade or handicraft so far from a curse is rather a
blessing if the mind can use energy enough to think, and
the day's work ends with neither the muscles nor the brain


sufficiently wearied to suffer injury, but the labour which
becomes a toil tends to embitter existence, and is a pleasure
to no man.
It is said that mental labour exhausts the system in
equal degree with physical toil, and I admit that it may be
so in very exceptional cases; but with exceptional cases I
am not at present concerned. What I am dealing with is
the daily routine of millions of our fellow-beings, who drudge
through life with no break or change, almost from the
cradle to the grave; and I deny the assertion, that under
ordinary circumstances the brain-worker suffers fatigue in an
equal degree with the man who delves and toils all day.
The latter can have little or no intelligent interest in his
occupation, for it is mere brainless work, and a piece of
inanimate machinery would perform the service in many
cases with more accuracy and regularity than the human
machine. Of what interest can it be to the hod-man what
becomes of the load he struggles with to the top of a
building ? His bones and sinews have raised the bricks and
mortar to the required height, and his connection with them
ceases ; but a steam crane, or a horse, with a rope and block,
could have rendered equally good service. Not so, altogether,
with the bricklayer. With his occupation comes the
exercise of intelligence ; he must work to a design provided
by a higher intelligence, who exerts still less physical toil,
but a greater amount of mental labour than the bricklayer,
and who is universally acknowledged to be consequently
higher in the social and intellectual scale. The stone-mason
works with his brain more than the quarryman, and the
sculptor more than the mason, but will any one believe that
the work of the sculptor does more to exhaust the system
than the toil of the quarryman ; one is a fit task for a slave,
the other almost the work of a god.
In the brainworker’s occupation we expect to find the
“dignity of labour,” which of itself buoys up the worker
against the sense of fatigue. Who derives more pleasure
from the creations of his brain than the author? or who
enjoys more the telling effect of a good speech than the
orator ? The editor cannot suffer from “ brain-sweat” unless
he is possessed of brains ; and if he is in possession of this


requisite qualification for the position, he will write articles
which not only edify other people, but will be a source of
pleasure and edification to himself. The necessary research
will bring additional knowledge, which means a nearer
approach to wisdom, but wisdom surely cannot be the effect
of the curse from " hich Adam and all his descendants were
to suffer. If so, it is a pity the curse was not a little more
prolific of results! Moreover, as intellectual work is
generally productive of more remuneration than mere
physical toil, if the brain-worker does feel used up through
overwork, a little recreation and change, which are generally
more or less available to him, soon bring recuperation ; but
the daily labourer must toil on, and toil ever with only
such respite as he is able to win from capital after many
hard-fought battles, in which he has been assisted by nothing
so much as by trade unions.
When slavery was in existence it was supported by
conservatives on the principle of “ whatever is, is right
and the people were told it was the will of God that by the
sweat of their brow they should eat bread. The verses
quoted above must have been very familiar to their ears, but
as the clouds of ignorance rolled away and intelligence
dawned upon the people, men learned to strike off the
chains which a selfish aristocracy had forged around them.
When from daylight to dark was the recognised day’s work,
those men who had the temerity to seek a reduction in the
hours of labour were accused of being idle, good-for-nothing
fellows ; and when the agitation began for nine hours work,
then was the speedy downfall of England’s greatness
predicted. The nine hours work of Englishmen, it was said,
could not possibly compete with the longer day’s work of
other countries, so that our manufacturers were to be forth-
with ruined ; their mills and workshops closed, and instead
of doing nine hours work, the men would have no work to
do, and ruin and starvation would infallably overtake both
capital and labour respectively. But the crisis came and
passed; fipht after fight was fought out bitterly—for the
battles of the poor are always hard to win, and old established
customs are endowed with many lives. The victory of
nine hours was won by those who fought for it, though as


yet a considerable proportion, through lack of organization
and other causes, are working longer hours. The predictions
of the ruin that was to follow have not yet been realised, for
during no period of the history of Great Britain has the
national wealth increased so rapidly as since the nine-hour
system came into operation.
Nor have the evil effects which were to fall upon the
men themselves come to pass. The workman having so
much spare time on his hands would be sure to spend more
money in drink, and thus become dissolute and worthless,
and would cease to maintain the ancient and honourable
character of British workmen. This and much more was
foretold, all of which go to prove that the prophets in this
case, as in the other, were false prophets, for it is on all sides
an acknowledged truism that the British workman of the
present day, is as a class, better clothed, better fed, and
better educated, is more intelligent, and enjoys his tenure of
life in a greater degree than ever before. Nor is the nation
as a whole the loser by this relaxation from labour, for the
exports and imports are increasing even in greater proportion
than population, while the amount of money to the credit of
the people in the various banks of issue, saving banks, and
other monetary institutions, is per head of the population
greater than ever before. Who then can gainsay the fact
that the aggregate sum of happiness has increased, and that
thereby the nation has gained by the change ? I venture to
think that few intelligent persons would now be found to
advocate a return to the system of a longer day’s labour.
In the free sunny lands of Australia our people seem
endowed with the vigour and daring of youth, and like
youths full of confidence and enterprise, they have not
hesitated to lead the way in many social reforms, while our
parent country, with the caution which belongs to greater
age, is with doubt and hesitation following on our tracks.
To New Zealand belongs the credit, as far back as 1847, of
initiating the eight-hour system, and at the same time
solving the problem of how to provide employment for the
unemployed. A number of immigrants having arrived at
Dunedin, sufficiently large to flood the labour market, it was
wisely resolved to reduce the hours of labor to eight, so that


all might receive employment—a fact impossible had the
longer hours been adhered to. As it was, the new comers
were absorbed in the population without leading to an over-
production. The eight hour system is now all but universal
among the various trades in Australia, the tinsmiths in this
colony having obtained the concession during the present
year.
Not only have the actual hours of labour been generally
reduced for most classes of workmen, but the nature of the
work to be done has, in many cases, much improved, having
been converted from mere animal drudgery and toil into
what may be termed intelligent employment. At no period
of the world's history could a similar quantity of any of the
commodities which enter into general consumption have been
produced with so small an expenditure of the “sweat of the
brow ”as at the present time. The civilized world may, to
a certain extent, be said to have passed out of the “ sweating
age,” when it was simply a question of muscular endurance
in the struggle for existence. The typical man of the latter
part of the nineteenth century has advanced a grade in the
scale of creation, and should now be ranked as a demi-god
in comparison to his progenitors. Having learned to yoke
up the elements and make them perform the toil, he now
takes his seat in the chariot as the guiding intelligence, and
the forces of nature cheerfully do his bidding.
The teachers of the people would do well to inculcate
more reverence for the God-given gift of intelligence—which
is year‘by year changing laborious toil into rational employ-
ment, and by slow but sure degrees transforming the earth
into a real paradise —than for the Bible-given curse of Adam,
which, had it borne the stamp of truth, would have doomed
all mankind, lords as well as commoners, clergymen as well
as congregations,editors as well as readers, for all time to come
to an existence both degrading and cruel; for, alas for them !
I can find no “ favoured nation ” clause specially exempting
any particular class. Indeed, if the verses quoted are not
altogether “ figurative !” it must be somewhat problematical as
to whether those who do not toil for their daily bread are really
sons of Adam, or of some other august personage. Fortunately,
however, science is every day, through her grand


discoveries, working out the patent of man’s nobility by
changing the whole current of human energies from a
-stagnant pool of brutish toil into the clear pellucid
stream of intellectual employment, thereby at one and
the same time proving the fallacy of the curse and
the beneficent wisdom of the Creator. It would,
indeed, be but a sorry compliment to assume
that He —the “ All Wise ” —had deliberately doomed His
creatures then unborn to a miserable inheritance of
drudgery ; and yet, notwithstanding this, had, at the same time,
endowed them with the faculty of invention, by which means
they learned to utilise and control the illimitable forces of
nature which, through incalculable ages, had been garnered
in her vast storehouses, and which enabled man at will to
sever the chains which fettered him to penal servitude for
life. Why! even a common policeman would exercise
greater discretion than to lock up a prisoner for breaking
the laws, and then leave the key which opened on liberty in
that prisoner’s possession.
If man had only remained satisfied to live in the
primeval state, all would have gone well with the curse, and
the sons of Adam would have continued to eat bread by the
sweat of their brow; but fortunately, even primitive men
were inspired with an inventive genius, and after a few
generations had dug their garden plot, and planted corn
with a pointed stick, some fellow, more ingenious than
his neighbours, invented a hoe; then, in the course of time,
some other individual, probably a free-thinker, yoked up a
pair of oxen, and irreligiously transferred his share of the
curse to their shoulders. Now, we find the steam-plough,
without much exertion on the part of the driver, turning
over ten acres to the primitive man’s rood. In the early
days man traversed the waters in a rude “dug-out” propelled
by paddles ; then some ancient mariner, with his weather
eye open, discovered how he could saddle the wind with his
Adamic inheritance. Now we have vessels, like the “Austral,”
conveying four or five thousand tons further in one hour
than its original prototype would be labouriously paddled
with a few bunches of bananas in a whole summer’s day.
The archetype of village blacksmiths hammered his spear-


head between two stones just as the natives of Central Africa
do to-day, but civilized man wields the ponderous steam
hammer, and so is it with other industries ; less sweat of the
brow, yet greater results achieved ; less toil, yet more
production.
Truly this is an age of invention such as mankind never
before experienced. If the heavens were opened and gods
had literally walked and talked with men upon earth, the
astounding discoveries of the present century could hardly
have been excelled, nor their application to almost every
requirement of man have been accelerated. The world as a
whole has been enormously benefited by these discoveries, for
every new want that is created is evidence of an expansion
of the intellect, and the civilized parts of the earth have
been, as it were, converted from a cattle pen into an elegant
saloon, so replete with the results of scientific discoveries
that man now journeys through life in comparative ease and
luxury with those wonder working servants, steam and
electricity, installed as chief attendants waiting ready for the
turn of a handle or the touch of a button to do our bidding.
What race or generation of mortals ever had servants equal
to these ! And when we remember that steam is but a youth,
while electricity is the veriest child in years, what may we
expect from these children of science in .he future ?
Will this tidal wave of scientific discovery and invention
exhaust itself, or will it gather strength and force as it goes ?
In olden times when the printing press had not illumined
the horizon, and monasteries were the principal repositories
of learning, knowledge frequently died with its possessor ;
so that in many cases the discoveries of more modern times
were but the re-discoveries of a previous generation. In the
present day knowledge is seldom lost, for every fact in
science, and each invention that is worth recording, is
carefully noted and printed, and forthwith heralded to the
whole civilized world by books and newspapers, so that men
of a scientific or inventive genius are constantly being fed
with the ripened knowledge of their fhllow workers, even
in other countries. The march of intellect thus presses onward
with a steady but rapid advance, for each succeeding
generation takes up the study, not at the A B C of science,


but where its predecessors laid down their finished labours.
I think, then, it may safely be predicted that man has not
yet risen to the full zenith of his intelligence and mental
development. Immense mines of as yet undiscovered know-
ledge and applicability await his exploration even in the veins
already opened ; for when we consider what has been
effected during but two generations of steam, and only one
of electricity, what immense possibilities does the future
hold out in working but these two sources of power to their
ultimate capabilities ! Nor do we know that other forces of
nature equally potent with electr.city will not be discovered,
for who, at the commencement of this century, could have
conceived that an invisible power so subtle and yet so
abundant, lay ready for man to utilize ? a power whose first
fruits were to practically annihilate space, and give to man
the voice of a god, that can encircle the world with a
message of love or war, and outstrip the earth in its diurnal
course.
Let us now call a halt, so that we may view the
situation, and examine the valleys as well as the hill-tops;
for, unfortunately, where there is light we may expect to find
shadow, and poverty like Banquo’s ghost, confronts us at the
feast. It is true the sum of knowledge has increased,
bringing in its train to all who are placed beyond the
necessity of dependance on labour, greater capacity and
more facilities for the enjoyment of life. This equally
applies to those of the working classes who have succeeded
in enfranchising themselves by securing the eight-hour
system, and who still obtain steady employment. All these
are to be congratulated on the wonderful development of
labour-saving machinery, for with them life is now better
worth the living than ever before. But notwithstanding all
that has been or might be said relative to the improved
status of the working classes as a body, we must not
overlook the fact that thousands of willing workers are at
this present time idle and in abject poverty through no fault
of their own, and to whom for want of employment the
necessaries of life are denied. To these people the
discoveries of science and invention, have brought
no relief. Mills and factories of all kinds, both in


Europe and America, are, in many cases, being
closed altogether, or are only working half-time, and
tens of thousands of families can scarcely obtain food
enough to maintain life. That terrible distress prevails in
Great Britain under a free trade regime will not be denied
by the most ardent free-trader, but that this distress is not
dependent on any system of fiscal policy will be seen from
the following statements, clipped only a few days ago from
the newspapers, relative to the state of the labour market in
two of the most protectionist countries we can refer to
—France and America : —“ The misery in France,” says
the Paris correspondent of the Neo Cdledonien (from which
we translate), “ is terrible, and especially at Paris and Lyons.
Each day another factory is closed, and it is estimated that
more than 100,000 workmen in the midst of winter are
without work, and consequently without food. Works of
charity are organized on all sides, but they are not sufficient
to ameliorate this awful misery. These acts of charity only
suffice to relieve for the time being.” While from America
we learn that “The latest reports from New York show that
trade in the United States is still seriously depressed.
Moreover, there are some 23,000 operatives engaged in
strikes, including coal-miners to the number of 6,800;
carpet-weavers, 6,000; shoemakers, 5,000; glass-workers,
3,500 ; and hatters, 1,200. While in New England (America)
the prospects are no better. A recent writer, referring to the
Connecticut village of West Stafford, says:—“All told, the
number of persons of both sexes and all ages, whose only
means of subsistence arises from operative labour in the
factories, amounts to upwards of 3,000 —comprising about
400 families —together with from 500 to 600 young girls,
operatives in the weave rooms, whose parents aie not
residents in the town, and who, therefore, when the mill
closes and their savings are exhausted, are in the situation
of homeless wanderers. I have seen dozens of young girls
tramping on the road from town to town during the last two
months, seeking in vain for work —alone, defenceless,
obliged to ask lodging in barns when denied admission to
the house, thinly clad, hungry—often emaciated by long
starvation and protracted exposure. As to tramps of the
stronger sex —young and old, but ablebodied and capable


in most instances, they swarm in scores on every highway
and byway in this part of the State : some of them sullen,
desperate; others sad, cringing, with the stamp of patient
suffering upon their pallid faces. Poor souls, with the sharp
winds of these sudden weather crises cutting them to the
bone, what is left to them, with the inefficient organisation
for the poor in New England towns, but to be found dead
of a cold morning in the hay-loft of some farmer’s barn, less
cared for than the oxen in the stalls beneath.”
There is nothing new in this feature of the labour market
except that, as the civilized populations increase, the average
proportion of unemployed must, unless some remedy be
found, necessarily run into greater numbers. With the
exception of normally busy times, there has always been
more willing workers than could find profitable employment,
and a residuum of labour has at most times been available,
especially in the centres of population. The ominous cry of
“ over-production ” is sounded from all the centres of manu-
facturing industry, yet the most active and intelligent brains
of the age are busily at work day and night to discover other
inventions which will enable them to produce a still greater
amount with a lesser expenditure of manual labour than at
present. Each labour-saving invention of importance, when
brought into general use, must be the means of dispensing
with the labour of hundreds and it may be thousands of
able-bodied men. If we assume that one man, with the aid
of machinery, can produce as much as five men could at the
commencement of this century, we may pretty safely predict
that in another fifty years this estimate will be doubled.
What, then, is the out-look for the workmen of the future ?
Will the proportion of unemployed remain as at present —
which of itself is a most humiliating reflection on our social
system —or will the ratio increase with the extension of
labour-saving machinery ? This, the chief object of the
enquiry, is still before us.
It is contended for by some writers that new markets
are being opened up in different parts of the world which
will extend our commerce, and that barbarous races are
being brought within the pale of civilization. We are not
likely to make any more discoveries of previously unknown


lands, for with one or two trifling exceptions we may be
said to be acquainted now with every nook and crannie of
the earth, and a very little world it is when we do know it,
and as telegraphy and steam become more developed it
seems to get smaller every day. The world now is not an
unknown quantity. Where, then, shall we find those, new
markets, and which are the barbarous races that, when
brought within the pale of civilization, will very much extend
the commerce of the present civilized world ? The African
races, being a hardy people, will probably withstand the
effects of contact with the white races, and with better
government may increase in numbers, so that they may be
looked upon as offering a new market for a limited quantity
of certain classes of goods. When, however, we think of the
ever-increasing millions of Great Britain, America, France,
Germany, and other European countries, who, with steam-
up, are waiting ready to pour in an unlimited supply of every
description of manufacture, one is apt to exclaim, with
regard to the Africans, “ but what are they among so
many ?” Where else may we look for new markets ? The
Polynesians are already being supplied with such things as
they require, and they are not a people likely to very much
develope trade, neither can those islands be expected to
increase much in native population. There are also the
various families of Malays and Chin-Indians, which form a
large body of people, who, while probably holding their own
as to numbers, are not a race to develope many new wants.
As their father lived before them, so they wish to live, and in
any case their consumption of manufactured articles is not
very extensive, for what we term changes of fashion is a
thing unknown to them. The one style of dress is never
changed. All grades of people, the whole year round and
for centuries, wear the simple but convenient sarong and
baju, or kabaya, and as the climate would not permit of
much clothing being worn, the “belles” are not likely to
adopt “ improvers” or “ Princess bonnets,” nor are the
voung men at all inclined to develope into “ mashers.”
Moreover, these people are at present being supplied with
all they require. Then there are certain aboriginal races,
such as the Dyaks of Borneo and the of New
Guinea, but one European would use up more manufactured


articles than fifty of these, and the same arguments apply to
most other uncivilized people. Lastly, we come to the
favourite markets of the world —India, China, and Japan ;
and though none of these can now be considered new
markets, the question of whether their demand for our
productions will continue to increase, must be considered.
As regards India, any very extensive increase in the demand
does not seem very probable, for at present she is busy
establishing factories with which to supply her own markets,
and is rapidly becoming transformed from an importer to an
exporter. Of course there will always be a large and
probably increasing interchange of commodities, but when
the millions of India get fairly to work with steam as their
ally, they will certainly develope more into producers than
consumers, for their own personal wants are few, and the
same remarks apply equally to Japan. Both countries may
continue to take more than an equivalent to their present
demands, because while they are gradually becoming
manufacturers they are increasing in wealth, and will
develope some new wants, but both countries are learning to
work for themselves, a fact which will tend to check any
greatly increased consumption of European manufacturers.
China at present only sees “ through a glass darkly,”
but every day she is receiving eye-openers from one source
or another, and those who have seen with what facility her
people apply themselves to new industries, when once they
determine on a fresh departure, will readily admit that no
race of men are better adapted for manufacturing with
machinery than the Chinese. They are temperate, industrious,
and intelligent enough for routine work, and once the
“ machinery age ” fairly dawns on China, she will provide
operatives by the thousand, while other nations will probably
for a time supply the machinery and skilled mechanics. Will
another fifty years pass away before we have millions of
Asiatics in India, Japan, and China working as steadily at
the looms as Manchester operatives ? I venture to think not.
I pointed out three or four years ago, in some letters headed
“A Few Weeks with the Malays,” how the Chinese were
steadily absorbing all the trade of the Straits Settlements,
not only as planters and miners, but as merchants and ship-


owners; and I then predicted that before many years were
past, Chinese tin and Chinese tea would be shipped direct to
London in Chinese steamers, which has, I believe, already
become an accomplished fact.
What, then, will be the outcome of all this and its
effect on the working classes a few years hence ? Men must
earn before they can eat; but come what will they must eat
to live, and the working classes are now becoming too much
enlightened and possessed of too much political power to
allow their fellow-workmen to perish for want of the
necessaries of life. Therefore, if iron and steel continue
displacing bone and sinew in an ever-increasing ratio, some
change in our method of working must for a certainty take
place ; and the only question now to be asked is, in which
direction shall we look for the remedy ?—how can
we alter our course so as to avoid shipwreck from the
approaching storm ?—for it is only necessary to read of what
is transpiring in the manufacturing districts of either Europe
or America to see that destitution is driving the people to
desperate courses. If the civilized world would call a
general meeting, and each country bring up a report setting
forth their present capabilities of production based on the
supposition that all their available machinery was at work,
and their workmen fully employed, the document when
published would be somewhat interesting, and would go to
prove that Europe and America have machinery and work-
men much more than enough, even though all were working
on the eight-hour system, to fully supply this little world of
ours. Indeed, no very great effort would be required to
supply the inhabitants of either Mars or the Moon, if we
could only induce our own Government to improve just a
little on their last year’s railway policy, and so provide us
with the means of transit to those at present unapproachable
localities..
No doubt the population will for many generations
enormously increase in all countries throughout the
temperate zones, and in addition to this, large portions of
the earth now occupied by inferior and decaying races, will,
in the course of time, become colonized with people of more
advanced intelligence, and consequently of greater require-


merits than the present races. Although these causes will
have the effect of providing more consumers, will they not
also bring into existence at least an equal proportion of
producers ? And if this be so, then I can see no prospect
of relief from over-production, with consequent poverty and
distress, through any increase in the population of civilized
nations. No countries are suffering more from over-
production than America and England, and yet these are the
very places above all others where the population, and,
consequently, the number of consumers have increased,
though, of course, the producers have increased in an equal
or even greater proportion.
As the race progresses in intelligence and people
generally become better educated and more refined many
new wants will develope themselves which are not now
thought of. All these will open up new avenues of
labour and afford employment for a larger number of the
people. Moreover, the cost of production, being reduced by
new advances in mechanical invention, will enable such of
the working classes as can command a satisfactory price for
their labour to come into the market to a greater extent as
consumers of what might now be considered luxuries and
at present beyond their reach. I admit all this, but has not
the same law of development been- in full operation since the
very dawn of this age of invention. Education and refine-
ment have undoubtedly made great progress among the
upper classes of society, and in the households of the rich
scores of new inventions of a more or less costly nature and
of all conceivable kinds are in every-day use, yet the suppiy
far exceeds the demand. Nor will anyone deny that the
average workmen of to-day purchases more of the products
of other people’s labour than ever before. Notwithstanding
the markets are glutted with mechanically produced goods,
although a large amount of machinery stands idle, or is only
partially employed, and while the warehouses are stored full
of these over-productions, the shameful spectacle continues
of honest and industrious men being compelled to beg for
food, which, by sheer force of circumstances, they have no
opportunity to earn. This happens in the countries of
highest civilization and where labour-saving machinery has


been brought to the greatest state of perfection. What
warrant have we then that these new avenues of labour and
increased consumption by the working classes wall not in
future be covered, as they have been in the past, simply by
new labour-saving devices, enabling a given number of men
to produce a proportionately larger amount of the
commodities required ?
The broad fact then remains, that while labour-saving
machinery has done incalculable good by cheapening the
necessaries as well as the luxuries of life, and so
bringing many things within reach of the masses
which would otherwise not have been available, it
has also brought with it an accompaniment of evil.
The inventive genius has been largely misapplied and has
been used in a purely mercenary spirit to fill the pockets of
the few, instead of conferring a universal benefit on mankind.
A loving Creator never could have intended the blessing of
intellectual endowment to be used by man as a curse to his
fellow-man. Even war must become a thing of the past
when intellect is crowned king !
Let us take a very simple illustration, and suppose a
community of persons which, through manual labour, are
supplying all their wants by working twelve hours per day,
but some member of which discovers an invention enabling
one man to perform as much work in a given time as two
could before. If, then, this invention is adopted throughout
the community and the men continue atwork the same number
of hours as formerly, they will by its aid produce twice as much
as they require, and the superabundance would in a short
time become a nuisance. All the available storage having
been filled, they would soon for lack of space be compelled
to cease work altogether, until the surplusage was used up.
Of course they could export their surplus production in
exchange for something else, but unfortunately for such a
project, all the neighbouring communities having heard of
the new invention and adopted it, also find themselves
overstocked, and consequently will not purchase. As it is
useless to produce what you can neither use nor sell, some
change must be made, and three courses are open to them
—they can all continue to work for say a week and then


remain idle for a week—or they could divide the men into
two lots, employing one lot to produce all that was necessary,
while the other lot, who were equally good men, were
arbitrarily deprived of employment. But to this, those who
were unemployed would naturally object and threaten to smash
both the invention and the inventor, for they would justly
say: “ before this machine put in an appearance we were
all comparatively happy and contented ; it is true we worked
hard and long hours, but our wants were all supplied, and we
enjoyed life after our fashion ; but this machine is now our
greatest enemy, for it has deprived us of employment, which
was our only means of living, and while all our people have their
customary abundance as before, we alone have to starve or be
fed by poisonous charity.” Should, however, the third course
be adopted and wiser councils prevail they would call up
the inventor and crown him with laurels which should never
fade; and instead of half the men being made outcasts they
would adopt the sensible course of giving each man his share
of employment, so that all could enjoy life as before.
Instead of working twelve hours, and producing twice as
much as they could consume, they would say : “ this inven-
tion, which we had began to think was the devil in disguise,
we now find to be an angel of light, for while we had
formerly to work laboriously twelve hours, we can now
more easily produce all we require by six hours’ work and
can devote the other six hours to the acquirement of know-
ledge, to lecreation, and the enjoyment of life generally.”
But it may be urged that the community would be sure to
develop new wants and the surplus labour could have been
diverted into those channels. This is true; but in the first
place it takes time to develop new wants; and, secondly,
no sooner does a demand spring up for anything new than a
current of inventive genius, like a sluice-head, is brought to
bear upon the article, until the bulk of the labour is once
more ousted from its new occupation.
What the result would have been with all these labour-
saving inventions in full swing, if a counter influence had
not been at work, it is difficult to form even a faint conception,
but it must be self-evident that if there is a large amount of
poverty and distress now through lack of employment, there


must have been a still larger amount to record had the day’s
work continued to extend over as many hours as formerly.
If this be so —and it seems almost impossible]to dispute it—
why should there be such inveterate objection to still further
reduce the hours of labour ? In their feverish eagerness to
make money have the employers hearts become seared and
callous to the griping poverty of the unemployed, or does
the objection arise from more generous motives ? Is it
because they fear that by working shorter hours they could
not so well compete with other countries, and might thereby
lose the trade which at present is a mutual advantage to both
employer and employed ? But is this fear warranted by our
experience of the past ? It cannot be controverted that
England, where now most of the manufacturing trades are
carried on under the nine-hour system, continues to do a
large share of the work of the world ; and though Belgium
and other countries are entering more fully into competition
with her, this is owing much more to the natural growth in
mechanical arts which these countries have made in recent
years, than to the fact of their working longer hours. More-
over, their protective tariffs are expressly framed to act as a
block to our exports. This state of things would have come
about just the same if our men had worked twelve hours, for
it could not be expected that neighbouring states would for
ever remain uninfluenced by the remarkable progress of
England through her manufactures. Had we been sur-
rounded by races of an inferior type, we might have been
allowed to gorge ourselves to repletion with trade, but our
intelligent neighbours no doubt thought that as we were
thriving so remarkably well and expanding to such gigantic
proportions on iron and steel, it might be an equally good
thing for them to develope their own mineral resources and
manufacture for themselves, thereby putting money in their
own purse instead of continuing to pour it into ours.
It would appear from all the tendencies of advanced
civilization that man’s destiny is to work out his own social
salvation. Liberty of Conscience, Progress, and Leisure,
will be the three divinities that will form the Social Trinity
of the future, of at least the Anglo-Saxon brood ; and the
intellectual advancement of the race will be measured by our


adherance to this social doctrine. How can men grow in
knowledge if their minds are dwarfed for want of mental food ?
The man who toils and drudges the whole day long has
neither appetite nor opportunity for intellectual development.
Yet when we consider the enormous political power that by
manhood suffrage is placed in the keeping of the working
classes, it is not too much to say that this power may make or
mar a nation. How important it is, then, that the men who,
by their numbers, may be said to hold the destinies of the
race literally in the hollow of their hand, should exercise this
power with that knowledge which can only be acquired with
some degree of leisure. We recognise the wisdom of this
proposition when we insist upon the education of our
children. But there is education and education, and while
one is suitable for the youth, the other is absolutely requisite
for the man whose vote may oust a Government, or what is
of more importance, decide the welfare of a nation when the
issue at stake is that of war or peace. How necessary, then,
that manhood suffrage should be accompanied with
manhood’s education.
The employer who, unless in exceptional cases, insists
upon keeping his employees grinding at the mill, whether they
be artizans, shopmen, or labourers, is for the reasons just
stated an enemy to the Constitution and the welfare of the
State. The shopkeeper has not the excuse of being afraid
of “ foreign” competition, and it must be apparent that as
regards local competitors, it would be a matter of no
pecuniary consequence whether the business day extended
over eight or ten hours, or even whether there were two half-
holidays in the week instead of only one, for if all were
closed their customers would arrange their purchases during
the open hours, just as they do now with respect to Saturday
afternoons and Sunday. If the purchasing public, and
especially those who are themselves enjoying the eight —or
even less—hours system, would endeavour to realise that
they are the enemies to the State in this instance, and that
by late shopping, although it may be only once in the
week, or even the month, they are assisting to impose
upon thousands of shopmen and shopwomen an additional
servitude of one or two hours per day, there would then be


no need to appeal to the shopkeepers, for they would soon
assume the virtue of early closing when they found there
were no late purchasers.
To a disinterested and dispassionate observer it would
appear that the modern invention of “Boycotting” might be
judiciously and honourably resorted to in a case of this
kind. True it is, that every shopkeeper has a perfect right,
within certain limits, to conduct his business in accordance
with his own views, so far as he is only personally concerned.
Yet, although he may have the power it gives him no right,
and, in fact, it is a moral as well as a social wrong to
arbitrarily impose vexatious and unreasonable conditions on
those whom he happens to employ, and who, for the time
being, are simply co-partners in his business and without
whom, or their successors, he would be powerless to carry
on, only that instead of sharing the full profits or losses,
they compound for a fixed and weekly compensation by way
of salary. Otherwise, should labour through some great
depression in trade become super-abundant and employers
have it all their own way, they might by degrees lengthen
out the working day to sixteen hours and practically revert
again to slavery. But that there are well-recognised limits
to the shopkeeper’s power of controlling his own business
affairs is evident, for statute law steps in and forbids his
doing business during any portion of Sunday.
It may be asked by the advocates of early closing why
do not the friends of the movement introduce legislation and
so make it compulsory to close at certain hours on other
days ? The answer is, that it is better such changes should
be brought about by moral force than by hard and fast
restrictive enactments. Moreover, it would be exceedingly
difficult and inconvenient to have one law which would apply
to all parts of the country, and to an innumerable variety of
businesses which peremptorily fixed the hour of closing
throughout the year, and it would be equally difficult in
practical legislation to so differentiate as to include some and
exclude others. So that, however good in its effect the early
closing system may be and is, it is apparently outside of
practical politics to endeavour to enforce it by statute law.
But some good might be done if the Trades and Labour


Councils took care, by advertisement or otherwise, to keep
the public well-informed as to which of the shopkeepers or
business people were so illiberal as to refuse this concession.
And if the large body of Unionists, themselves, with their
wives and families set the example of shopping early, it is
certain that a considerable number of sympathizers amongst
the outside public would assist them by dealing only at those
establishments which dealt fairly by their employees. Every
year we have in these colonies the Eight-hour Celebrations,
with banners flying and great jubilation, of which the cause
is well wmrthy, for history records the achievement of no
victory which has brought more real and permanent benefit
to workmen. The annual reports should each year be able
to recount a good list of victories won by the strong for the
weak, by the organized societies on behalf of those who are
too few in number, or so circumstanced as to be unable to
successfully fight the battle themselves. It is possible that if
an active campaign was entered upon some conservative
sections of the press and public would be loud in their
protests, but probably not one whit louder than the
conservatives of Egypt were against the Children of Israel
when they struggled to be free from the bondage of making
bricks without straw.
Till the millenium comes there will be labourers who
must toil and drudge and do the work which others shrink
from, the scale of remuneration being invariably fixed on
the principle that the less physical toil enters into the
employment the better is the pay, and the more objectionable
the nature of the work the lower the wage for doing it. You
pay a lawyer six and eightpence for writing a letter which
occupies him ten minutes, wdflle the hod-man, who by degrees
carries a brick house up a ladder, receives little more for
toiling the whole day long. The doctor, who looks at your
tongue and feels your pulse, accepts half-a-guinea for his
trouble, but the gravedigger, who next takes you in hand,
is only paid five or six shillings for digging your grave six
feet deep and filling it up again, after comfortably
depositing you therein. Of course the explanation
is simple enough; the one service requires education and
training, while the other does not, but this does not explain


why those who toil the hardest should work the longest
hours. In a semi-tropical climate, with the thermometer
varying in the summer from 90 to no degrees in the shade,
according to the locality, it is inhuman to compel men to
work the long hours which many are forced to submit to, but
it exemplifies the old adage, “ needs must when the devil
drives,” and is simply a case of taking a mean advantage of
the necessitous circumstances of our fellow-men.
Hitherto capital has been master and labour has been
servant to capital; but why should this be so, any more than
capital should be servant to labour, for capital is as much
dependent on labour as labour is on capital ? Capital does
not usually employ labour on philanthropic grounds, nor
other than for its own benefit; nor does labour seek capital
except when necessary in its own interests. It follows, then,
that when capital and labour do come together it is because
each is necessary to the other, and the benefits to be derived
are expected to be mutual. This being the case they should
meet on equal terms, and neither be servant to the other, and
where there are no servants there can be no masters. In the
colonies we have, to some extent, emerged from the “ Master
and Servant Age,” into the more advanced state of employer
and employee —the terms are somewhat anomalous, but quite
as good as any other. But which is the employer, and which the
employee, when each equally employs the other, and is mutually
indebted to each other ? for it follows without argument that
we never employ even an errand boy or a housemaid unless
we have previously arrived at the conclusion that it is to our
advantage to pay for their services rather than do the work
ourselves. The one sells labour and the other buys it; or
the one sells capital and the other buys it by his labour.
However, it is in the great hives of industry where labour and
capital are wedded with indissoluble bonds of mutual interest
that an improvement might be made on the present system
of paying wages by introducing, wherever practicable, the
principles of co-operation.
The system of conducting factories and other industries
on the co-operative principle would, if given general effect
to, be of immense advantage to the whole community, for
while it would protect capital in its legitimate uses, it would
also raise the status of the working classes by giving them a


direct pecuniary interest in their work. The principle is both
logically sound and practical in its application, for the leading
feature of it rests on the proposition that whereas the workman
finds labour, while the capitalist finds money, neither of which
in this respect being of use without the other, each should have
a proportionate personal interest in the results, both as
regards profits and losses, and each should guarantee the
other as far as possible at least a minimum and continuous
return. Let us float an imaginary company on a basis, the
objects or purpose of which we need not go far to seek.
The Government of this Colony (N.S.W.) require 150,000
tons of steel rails to be manufactured for future use. The
necessary capital is in the country, and so also is the labour,
but capital holds aloof, being naturally of a shy and retiring
disposition and mortally deprecating “ strikes,” while the
workmen are apt to indulge in them sometimes at very
inconvenient moments. In the meantime the rails are not
supplied, and the necessary works have not been erected,
though all the material (coal, lime, and ironstone) exist in
several places in close proximity to each other ; and in at
least one place all three are obtainable within a radius of two
miles, with a railway station in the centre. To organise such
a co-operative company as this, where the works were not
already in existence, would be somewhat more difficult than
where the capital had been previously expended, because in
the latter case the workmen would be ready to hand,
and the owners of the works and the men would know each
other. We will, however, assume that say fifty good
workmen would be found ready to enter into the arrange-
ment and abide by it, and that strikes being eliminated from
the enterprise they could arrange with one or more capitalists
on something like the following basis for a working co-partner-
ship. As it is pleasant to have nice round figures to deal
with, we will estimate that to erect modern iron and steel
works here, including rolling mills, &c,, would require a
capital of, sayj the ores, coal, and limestone being
supplied from the adjacent mines at a contract price. Now
we shall find that the self-contained capital of fifty workmen
may also be estimated at but to better understand
the position we will work the figures out. If we assume that
the current average wage at this employment is £2 10s. per


week, or equal to per annum, we may capitalize the
man at the rate of five per cent, interest, and his bone and
sinew would thus be worth ; or in other words each
man who can earn £2 10s. per week is in the same financial
position as another man who can’t or won’t work, but has a
money capital of invested at 5 per cent, per annum.
Now fifty times £2,600, the capital value of a workman, is
just ; therefore if fifty men who were worth £2 10s.
per week each agreed to supply their labour, they would stand
on equal terms with the one or fifty capitalists who did not
want to work, but would together subscribe of
money capital as against the men’s labour capital, and in that
case each party would be entitled to the same rate of interest
on the amount of capital of either kind contributed.
As investments of this kind never give any return for
the money until the works are completed we will suppose this
to have been done solely by the capitalist, as usual, and that
operations are ready for commencement, when the working
co-partnership will begin. It will be necessary that a sinking
fund for maintaining the machinery and plant as good as
new shall be a first charge on the returns, then, the men not
having unlimited credit, it is necessary they should receive
an allowance on which to subsist in lieu of the wages they
have been accustomed to receive and, as the capitalist has
also to live on the fruit of his capital, he too would be glad of
a draw, but to ensure the success of the undertaking it is
judicious to fix the “ subsist ” as low as possible until the
profits are assured. Now, if we decide on the money capital
being paid interest at the rate of say three per cent., then the
labour capital would be entitled to receive at the same rate :
therefore each workman would be enabled to draw 30s. per
week as subsist allowance, which would also be at the rate
of three per cent, per annum on the normal capital value of
his labour, viz., and which sum we have found to
be his value, while it yields him £2 10s. per week as wages;
or if the minimum subsist was fixed at four per cent, then
the men would receive £2 per week; or if at five per cent.,
then, as we have seen, the men would be entitled to £2 10s.
per week for each unit of interest on the of money
capital, viz., ,£1,300 would be equivalent to £26 per annum
or 10s. per week for each of the fifty men.


It is not too much to assert that a company started, on
this basis, would be worked more economically than under
the present system of payment by wages, for every man would
be working for himself, and each workman would in effect
be an overseer, as it would be to everyone’s personal interest
that each completed his full complement of work.
Occasionally the men might have small disputes among
themselves, but there would be no strikes to impede the
success of the company, or to intimidate them from entering
into large contracts, as the men, under such circumstances,
could always be relied upon. This being the case, we might
with safety follow the figures a little higher in the scale,
retaining the same estimates as before. We found that one per
cent, interest on was equivalent to 10s. per week
for each of the fifty men and that if the operations were
sufficiently successful to allow of the workmen drawing
£2 10s. per week, after making full provision for maintaining
the machinery and plant in thorough efficiency, the money
capital would also be receiving five per cent, on the invest-
ment. But if £2 10s. per week represents the current
average earning for fifty men —though probably some would
have higher wages, while others received lower, according to
the nature of their work —then it is evident that by an
agreement on the part of the men to work during unprofitable
times on the minimum subsist allowance of, say 30s. per
per week, or even less if absolutely necessary to pull through
a pinch, they would have rendered material assistance to
the capitalist, and therefore, would be entitled when the
association was prosperous to receive a share of that prosperity
The labour capital would have protected the money capital
from severe and, perhaps, total loss of principal as well as
interest. Their reward would then come with the prosperity
of the association by receiving higher remuneration than the
current rate of wages; otherwise, so far as the men were
concerned, it would be a game of “ heads the capitalists
win, and tails workmen lose,’’ so that when the profits
enabled capital to receive six per cent., labour would be
entitled to £3 per week; or if capital received eight per
cent., labour would take £\; or in very prosperous times
capital might receive ten per cent, and labour per week.
It is evident that to permit of this the profits would have to


be greater than would be required under the present system
to pay capital ten per cent, interest, while the men were
receiving the normal wages of £2 10s. per week. On the
other hand, should a contract prove a losing one, it would
be to the men’s interest that for a while they should
fall back on the minimum subsist allowance. Capital’s
interest would also be proportionately reduced, as by these
means the association would pull through its temporary
difficulties without the usual friction on a reduction of wages,
or perhaps a strike, or a lock-out, and in many cases a total
collapse of the works, bringing disaster alike to both capital
and labor. With ordinary remunerative prices such a
cooperative association as this would be a sure financial
success to both parties.
To further simplify matters we might designate all
payments to the capitalist up to five per cent, as “ interest,”
but any receipts above that rate could be termed “dividends,”
and the same with regard to the men. Up to £2 10s. per
week could be designated “ wages,” but anything received
above that amount would, in like manner, be considered a
dividend ; thus, if the association was in what might be
termed a normal condition the capitalist would be receiving
5 per cent, and the men £2 10s. per week ; but if there still
remained a credit balance of say available for
distribution, instead of the capitalist receiving an additional
1 per cent, interest, he would receive a dividend of only
equal to an extra half per cent., making a total of five
and a half while the men would receive wages at £2 10s.,
and a dividend amongst them of £650, equal to an extra
five shillings per week per man.
The greatest advantage of this system would be its
elasticity, which would assist in weathering many a storm
which under other circumstances would cause total wreck,
for the men would cheerfully struggle through a year of bad
times on 30s. per week, when they knew that a year of good
times would see them earning £3 10s. per week, and though
this would only give them an average of £2 10s., it would
secure them constant employment with a chance of higher
remuneration in very prosperous times. To the capitalist it
would frequently be the means of averting ruin, for even in


good times there is always the danger of a strike, especially
after a large contract is irrevocably entered into with heavy
penalties for non-completion within the contract time.
Irrespective, however, of strikes, it would be a great
advantage in bad times to be able voluntarily to reduce the
wages from £2 10s. to say £1 10s. while the work went on
as briskly as ever.
In bringing the cooperative system into general practice
some small difficulties would be sure to crop up, but they
would be trifling in comparison to the difficulties which
confront us under the wages system, and many of them
would melt in the hand as soon as they were grasped. Of
course the works would never be required to pass out of the
ownership of those who erected them and to whom they
would continue to belong. On the other hand the men
would acquire a working interest in the concern which they
would be entitled to retain subject to such rules as might be
agreed upon. Somewhat similar associations in mining
adventures have been frequently tried, and have, as a rule,
worked well; so that many a mine which did not pay on
the wages system, has given fair returns to both parties
when worked under the “ tribute ” system on a sliding scale,
a system which is well understood and appreciated in
mining districts both here and in England. The cooperative
system also is coming into practice both in England and
America in connection with manufacturing industries, but
whether on similar lines to those advocated here 1 cannot
say.
Where a number of men could form themselves into a
cooperative party, and carry on their occupation without the
aid of outside capital, or by merely subscribing a first small
sum in equal proportions among themselves, the advantages
would be direct and considerable. Suppose we reckon ten
per cent, as the employers profit on the labour of the men,
and as before, take the same average earning of £2 10s. per
week per man, then a small cooperative party of ten men
would save per annum, being an amount equal to an
addition of ss. per week to each member’s income. But
cooperation on some equitable basis, though it would not cure
all the ills that the workman’s flesh is heir to, would be found in


practice to have many recommendations and few drawbacks;
moreover, where there are two parties mutually dependant
on each other why should one contributor continue to
monopolize all the profits and hold the other party entirely
subservient to his interests? The time will come when,
wherever practicable, those who now work for wages will
refuse to hire themselves to servitude any more than they
would sell themselves for a price, but they will insist on
having an intelligent and a pecuniary interest in the result of
their labours.
Under the present relationship of labour and capital the
one side is entirely at the mercy of the other with regard to
some of the most important elements of manufacturing
industry. More particularly is that the case as regards the
selling prices and the limit of production which are the
natural outcome under the present system of capital
maintaining all control, but which a simple and every day
illustration will show works very injuriously on the interests
of the working classes. Capital builds a factory to employ a
number of men, who throw up whatever employment they
may have at the time to accept the new service. Some, with
their families, move from a distance, breaking up their little
homes with the hope of re-establishing them under more
favourable conditions, and thus the work commences. Trade is
brisk and all goes well for a time, in fact too well, for it leaks
out that the new works are paying handsomely, and 12 per
cent, is put down as the profit. This coming to the ear of
capitalist number two, he also decides upon having a “ cut
in’’ believing that by improved machinery, better management,
&c., he also will make a success, and ultimately factory
number two gets up steam. It soon becomes apparent that
prices must decline. However, by a reduction in wages, bot;h
capitalists succeed in making say eight per cent, until it is
evident that the production greatly exceeds the demand, and
the market becomes overstocked. The consequence follows
that the two factories must either work half time, or they must
find another market for their surplus commodities. The
expenses incidental to an export trade, and the open
competition with the world, result in a much greater loss of
profit, and it is only by a further reduction of wages that they
succeed now in making four per cent; and eventually, when


a periodical stagnation of trade sets in, the profits cease
altogether, and the first established factory not having the
latest improved machinery, closes until better prices return.
Under the present system, no blame could attach to either of
these capitalists, or to their workmen; but the latter, with
their families, would have decidedly the worst of it. When
the works commence, the men receive only the current rate
of wages which, in a competitive market, seldom exceeds
the means of a barely comfortable living in recompense for a
life of labour. When the first reduction takes place, some
of the little comforts of the household, such as butter and
perhaps milk, are given up; and if in the old country meat
is now seen but seldom on the table. The new clothes for
the boys and new gowns for the girls which, as usual,
had been promised for Easter Sunday, are dispensed with,
and who but a workman’s thrifty housewife can realise the
honest shame and real sorrow of seeing her young children
shabbily dressed, though clean and tidily patched perhaps,
while the other boys in the neighbourhood are crowing over
their Easter suits ! This and other troubles must be borne
in patience, for instinctively they feel that worse troubles are
in store for them. The time comes when the second
reduction is announced, and the men with sinking hearts
carry the doleful information to their wives, while the good
woman is wondering how, on such a reduced allowance, she
can possibly buy food and coal after paying the weekly rent,
(for come what will —hunger or cold —the rent must be paid
every Monday morning) the husband sits brooding over his
lot in life, and utters suppressed but angry curses at his
hard fate, and against society as at present constituted. No
wonder he should do so, at least I for one don’t blame him,
for though he continues to work equally as hard as before,
and for the same number of hours, yet his wages now are
insufficient for the bare necessaries of life for himself and
family. Is it surprising that workmen who by education
have learned to read and to think should, in many cases,
adopt false socialistic views ? The wonder is rather that,
comparatively, so few have done so, and the fact is only
explainable on the grounds that men in indigent
circumstances can seldom apply their minds to studious
subjects. Of course some very pious persons who were not


in any way personally affected by such calamities would, under
the circumstances, clasp their hands, and with thumbs crossed,
cast up a self-righteous and complacent glance at the corner
of the ceiling, and with bated breath exclaim that it is the
will of God that the poor should be always with us.
However, very soon even worse troubles overtake them, for
at last steam is shut off, the fires raked out, and the factory
doors closed behind them and—, but we need not follow
the unfortunate woman and children in their visits to the
poor-house to receive the miserable out-door pittance doled
out to them, which, with the assistance of the pawnshop,
for a while generally prevents absolute death by starvation,
while the husband, hungry, footsore, and in helpless misery,
tramps from town to town in search of work. What wonder
if in his utter despair he should become desperate ? Those
who have seen the effects of a lock-out in the manufacturing
districts can realize the picture in all its miserable details far
better than could be described by me.
But what of the capitalist ? It is true his position is an
unfortunate one, but it is infinitely better than that of his
workmen. During the time of prosperity, while he received
large profits, the workmen were only living from hand to
mouth, for few persons, especially with a family, can save
money on working wages unless under exceptional circum-
stances. He (as I have supposed) received twelve per cent,
on his capital until competition reduced it to eight, then to
four per cent., and eventually it became non-productive. If
now, we suppose that each of these periods were equal in
duration, this would give an average rate of six per cent, for
the whole period. The workman is totally overwhelmed
with disaster when the concern ceases to be profitable, while
on the other hand, should prosperity attend it, and the
capitalist amass a fortune, no share of that fortune ever
falls to the lot of those who have been mainly instrumental
in creating it.
There is no feature in all our social system that has
tended so much to lift labour out of the mire as Trades
Unions. They have reduced the hours of labour, while they
have enhanced its selling price by raising wages to their
present standard, and by unity and cohesion they have been


enabled to give strength and protection to those who would
otherwise have been weak and oppressed. They have
brought about many improvements, such as the better
ventilation of workshops, and the discontinuance of many
obnoxious practices. But just as organized Government
brings war in its train, so Trade Unions have brought strikes,
and it would be as illogical to object to Trades Unions on
this account, as it would be to urge the extinction of organized
Government, because war is counted among its recognized
institutions. The Trades Union is the standing army of
the workmen, and as the judicious display of power has
sometimes averted war, so have the Unions sometimes averted
strikes. When the nations have advanced many degrees
above their present status of intelligence, their international
disputes will probably be settled by international courts of
arbitration, and wars, as at present conducted, will cease to
exist; and in the same manner, no doubt, the disputes
between labour and capital will all be settled by arbitration
sometime in the future. In the mean time each trade
union is a powerful force organized on the side of
labour, and as a natural sequence it might be
expected that an equally powerful organization would
be arrayed against it. For obvious reasons capital generally
finds it better policy to make small concessions than
to resort to the extreme course of a lock-out, because
in locking out the men they are locking up their own
capital, and in some cases heavy expenses must be incurred
even in maintaining the works in idleness. Besides it
frequently happens that contracts must be completed under
heavy penalties; or in other cases the current of trade, if
once dammed, might become diverted into other channels,
and consequently capital has a tendency towards conservatism,
and seldom assumes the aggressive. But in their disputes,
the unionists would do well to remember that until their
organisation is more comprehensive in its ramifications,
capital will have the power to fight if forced into the
sacrifice; and though, like war, strikes are sometimes
justifiable, yet the best friends of the workmen would never
advise such a course until all attempts at arbitration had
failed. In the event of a strike, whether capital or labour
gains the victory, we know that both sides must lose heavily;


while there can be no doubt on which side the greatest
suffering and misery are entailed. Moreover, there is this
difference between ordinary war and the battles of labour
and capital—the former is carried on between enemies whose
interests are opposed to each other, while the latter are waged
between friends, nay, relatives, whose interests are, or ought
to be, mutual. Unless a great principle is at stake, it would
be almost as injudicious for the wives to organize a strike
against the husbands, or vice versa , as for capital to organize
a strike against labour, or labour against capital, and not
then unless all attempts at a compromise had failed.
There can be no doubt that, as a rule, arbitration, though
it may not carry so many guns, is the wiser mode of settling
disputes between the two great factors of our social system,
and though at times the nett results might not amount to
much, yet arbitration carries a great force of moral power,
and it averts the evils necessarily attendant on strikes. Yet
for some time to come there must be strikes, as there must
be war, for arbitration will not cover all the ground. Arbitra-
tion, without the power of strikes, would never have gained
the concession of the eight-hour system ; ror, I am afraid,
will it secure it now to those outside the pale. It is therefore
imperative, in the best interests of progress and humanity, to
maintain the power of coercion, for where one party is
righteously determined to advance, while the other refuses to
concede, there must be a collision. Though the privation
and suffering endured through strikes have been something
appalling, yet the victories gained were gained for all time,
for the civilized world will never recede from its present
comparatively advanced position in regard to this question,
and the workmen will never yield up what they fought so
hard to win. Therefore, although the victory has been
achieved at the cost of much suffering and misery, it is well
the battle was fought, for “ who would be free themselves
must strike the blow.”
The best and surest method of avoiding strikes, and the
true policy for Trades Unions, is to direct their efforts
towards a real union—a union of capital and labour that


fully and freely concedes that as each is dependent on the
other, so each should share in the profits arising from the
joint operations of both. But though cooperation, if put
into general practice, would greatly benefit those who
participated in its results, yet it would in no way ameliorate
the condition of those vast armies of unemployed which, as
we have seen, are indigenous to all civilized countries whether
high or low in the scale of education, whether under the
religious sway of Protestantism, Roman Catholicism, or
Agnosticism, or whether under a free-trade or protectionist
tariff. In whichever countries the use of labour-saving
machinery has been freely adopted, they are all suffering
from over-production, which is manifested in the number
of willing workers who cannot obtain employment.*
It will not be denied that there are thousands upon
thousands who, though both capable and willing to work,
are at the present time unable to obtain employment.
Nor will it be denied that such a state of things, in
the midst of an advanced civilization, is a huge calamity,
for if we could gather together all the privations and
suffering entailed upon the women and children, as well
as the men who are bearing this burden, what a
gigantic mass of misery it would represent! Nor are
matters likely to change for the better in this respect, but
rather for the worse, unless, indeed, some considerable
reforms are brought about with the object of providing a
* In the United States alone an apparently well-informed writer in the North
American Review for last month (April) estimates that there are 2,000,000 of
people at present out of employment. The same writer says.—“lt required six
days labour at the hands of the machinist with hammer, chisel and file to perfect
a certain piece of machinery at the beginning of this century. The machinist of
the present day can finish a better job in six hours with the aid of a labour-saving
machine. In a yarn mill in Philadelphia the proprietor says that improve:!
machinery has caused a displacement of hfty per cent, of the former employees
within five years, and that one person, with the aid of improved machinery/can
perform the work that it took upward of one hundred carders and spinners to do
with the tools and implements in use at the beginning of this century. In
Massachusetts it has been estimated that 318,768 men. women, and children do,
with imp oved machinery, the work that it won d require 1,912,468 men to perform
if improved machinery were not in use.” And, further, “ Take the iron-moulder
as an illustration. Three flesh-and-blood men, who require shelter, clothing,
recreation, and social intercourse, who must eat or starve, who must pay taxes to
support the State, and whose bodies can be taken to defend the State in case of
invasion or rebellion; one iron man who does not feel, sleep, eat or drink, who
never tires and never rests. Three flesh-and-blood men, who have children
depending upon them for bread; one iron man who has no family to support.”


more equitable distribution of the employment thatis available.
There must be a remedy for this existing evil if it could only
be found, for when we think that these men, women, and
children, are the intelligent creatures of an infinite intelligence,
what an insult it is to the personification of supreme wisdom
and beneficence to assert that through all the future ages, as
in the less enlightened past, a large proportion of the people
should be unable to satisfy the simple wants which nature
itself has made requisite to maintain the God-given existence
with which they are endowed.
One would think that as man is not responsible for his
personal launch into life any more than for the form of
his physical constitution, it would be the work of but a
bungling designer to institute stomachs without providing
the where-with-all to satisfy them. It would not reflect
much credit on a general to send an army into the
field without providing a commissariat; in fact you might
chop out a better general with a tomahawk. But all,
whatever their religious opinions may be, must admit that
infinite wisdom has guided the developement of universal
nature. As man has undoubtedly progressed from little
better than an animal existence into his present exalted state
without any special interposition of Providence, the necessary
means being co-existent and only requiring the application
of dormant but existing intelligence on his part, may it not
also be possible by the expansion of principles already in
existence, and without any disruption of the machinery of
our social system, to rescue the residuum of the industrial
classes from abject poverty and want. At present our
evolution from the darkness of semi-savagery into the bright
light of a scientific age somewhat resembles an individual
who, though otherwise exquisitely dressed, continues to
encase his lower extremities in a dirty pair of torn and
tattered shoes. Such is our present social system, and such
it will remain until in a practical manner we recognise the
principle that every person born into the world brings with
him a charter of inherent right to secure to himself, by the
exercise of his industry, at least such a moderate allowance
of the necessities and ordinary comforts of existence as are
requisite to the passage through life of an intelligent human


being. While society stands in the way of his exercising
this birth-right, society is unwittingly a thief and a robber,
for he is deprived of the opportunity to labour, and is
demeaned to below the level of a well-fed brute.
It is useless to say that society is not responsible for
an epidemic of over-production and consequent lock outs.
Society takes upon itself the duty of checking and suppressing
epidemics of disease, especially so when of a contagious
nature, but fails altogether so far as the epidemic referred to
is concerned, because it so happens that this distemper of
misery and starvation is confined to those on the lowest
rung of the social ladder, while all those above are
possessed of an infallable talisman whose charm never
fails in preventing this disease—the charm of gold. But
what malady is so destructive in all its ramifications over the
souls and bodies of men as this abject blistering destitution ?
Why then should not society charge itself with the strangling
of this giant “ Poverty,” the undoubted parent of the twin
giants “ Despair and Crime.” It is true that in all civilized
countries much has been done by society towards partially
alleviating distress, but what does all this amount to beyond
a mere prolongation of misery, and how much better would
it be to remove the cause of the distemper than to administer
charity in homeopathic doses? Of course we need never
expect to be without some little poverty and destitution in
the world which the fluctuations in the labour market will
necessarily bring about, and in addition there will, I suppose,
be always a ragged regiment of “ne’er-do-weels” who would
not work if employment were offered; but these form a very
small proportion of the immense number of the present
unemployed. However, Trades Unions have rendered
yeoman service in the past by reducing the hours of work
and consequently necessitating the employment of more
workers to produce the same out-put. And it may be
reckoned on as a moral certainty that what they have
succeeded in doing in the past is as nothing to what they
will achieve in the future when the leaven of organization
shall ferment the whole mass of wage-earners throughout
Christendom.


What is to prevent an alliance of the various trade
unions, say throughout these colonies, which for all such
purposes may be looked upon as the neignbouring counties
are in England? Australia would thus present a solid
phalanx of united workers determined to perform their
share of ridding the world of cursed poverty. We have
recently seen, in the seamen’s strike in Sydney and just
prior to that in the bootmakers strike in Victoria, that there
is a liberal and generous spirit of intercolonial brotherhood
growing up through the effect of trade unions. Is it too
much to hope that, in a perhaps not very distant future,
one of the grandest results of this good gift of labour-saving
invention (when subjected to rational laws) may be the
means of effecting a labour federation of the workers of all
civilized nations ; for, as commercial relations are extended,
the difference in language amounts to but a very slight
barrier. If such a result were brought about, the members
of the same trade union would scarcely favour a war between
their respective countries, a war which would probably
exhaust tne resources of both ; and it must be taken into
account ’{that with manhood suffrage the voice of organised
societies must exercise a powerful influence in deciding for
war or peace.
Before Unionism, as now existent, was an accomplished
fact, the difficulties incident to its initial constitution must
have appeared quite as great as those which would require
to be confronted in this greater union. The various countries
are every year coming nigher to each other as telegraphic
communication is practically annihilating time and space,
and the difficulties which at one time appeared insurmountable
are gradually overcome by a reasonable exercise of resolution
and tact *
* Since writing the above, I find from an article in the North American Review,
for January, 1885, on “ American Labour Organizations,” that already at least one
triple alliance is in existence. The article says“ The glass workers, whether
they are organized as ‘ Knights of Labour,’ or in a separate body, have recently
made connection with their fellow-craftsmen in Belgium and England.” And
referring to the Society of the Knights of Labour, it says ; —“ Its international phase
is but just budding, having grown especially out of an alliliated trade —the window-
glass workers—and their efforts to prevent a disastrous competition in wages by the
importation of Belgium workers. This was met by organizing local assemblies of
this trade in England and Belgium.”


What the general effect of labour-saving machinery has
been on the demand for manual labour may be a matter of
opinion, but it can hardly admit of dispute that when
machinery is employed for only eight hours in the day it will
not run through as much work as it would if employed for
ten hours. Therefore, if we can realise the enormous amount
of machinery now employed under the eight and nine hour
systems, we may form some conception of the check
which this reduction in the hours of labour has exercised
on the total result by way of lessening production, and
the immense assistance it has rendered to the working
classes in providing employment for a much larger
number than would otherwise have been required.
For if at the present time we are fully supplied, and
warehouses are filled with over productions, how much
more would this have been the case had the work been
carried on for ten or perhaps twelve hours per day instead of
eight or nine. Or, on the other hand, how many thousands
more of unemployed would there have been in these colonies
and the mother country than is the case at present. It is
sometimes argued by the advocates of the eight hour system
that the worker gets through as much work in the shorter
day as he would do in the longer, However, that may be,
the argument cannot possibly apply to machinery, for its
strength would not fail nor its vigour diminish, and it would
be as fresh and bright at the end of twelve hours as at the
end of eight. If, then, trades unions have been the means
of reducing the hours of work from ten to eight, there must
have been through their instrumentality one-fifth more men
employed in connection with machinery-produced goods in
these colonies where the eight-hour system is in vogue, and,
at least, one-tenth more in England than would otherwise have
been needed to produce the same results.
Had the total production been less than would supply
the total demand, and all the workers had received
employment, then it might have been urged that through
working the shorter hours some must have suffered for want
of supplies, but this has not been the case; nor can it be
fairly put forward, as a set off, that over-production has
cheapened supplies to the poor, for while this holds good so
long as they retain full employment, the argument fails


immediately broken time is introduced on account of
over production. Machinery has undoubtedly cheapened
and brought many articles within reach of people of small
means, but we have not yet arrived at that state of perfection
to be able to supply people of no means; and it does not
require much wisdom to demonstrate that men are better off
while in the receipt of constant wages, with their supplies a
little dearer, than to have the articles cheapened and be
without the means of purchasing.
It must be self-evident that labour-saving appliances
can only to a limited extent be labour employing; in other
words, where there is a saving of labour there must be a
reduction in the number employed, and had it not been
for the compensating effect of reducing the hours of
employment, labour-saving machinery would have thrown
such vast numbers out of the means of subsistence, and
produced such an incalculable amount of destitution, that it
would have proved the veriest curse ever inflicted on
humanity. Many causes have been at work tending to
maintain the equilibrium between production and con-
sumption, and between the rate of wages and their
purchasing power, but with all these ameliorating influences
the fact remains that a dark cloud of distress overshadows
this otherwise brilliant epoch in the world’s history. Is
there no possibility of dispelling this cloud and making this
little sphere brighter and happier by lightening the load of
care and want under which so many of our fellow-creatures
are struggling —men and women who, under more favourable
circumstances, would contribute to the general advancement
and spread the blessings of light and sunshine over the
present dark corners of our social life ?
Will it continue to be a reproach on the wisdom and
enlightenment of the age, that though problems requiring
immense research into the hidden mysteries of nature
have been solved, that though our vision has embraced
other worlds than this, yet with all the acumen, all
the philosophy and all the philanthrophy of the age
thousands of our fellow creatures are as much devoid
of the means of earning what would procure them the
necessaries of life as if their hands had been amputated


at the wrists ? Possessed of no capital but their labour, that
possession is made utterly valueless because the holders of
capital, having secured the power of unlimited production,
are accustomed to exercise it in & cut-throat competition
with each other. But if all the employers could be induced
to agree upon a shorter days work and a proportionately
larger number of workmen, the worst consequence that
could happen would be a small advance in the selling price,
and this would be far more than compensated for in the
general prosperity that would follow —prosperity that would
do more to stamp out discontent and latent anarchy than all
the efforts the police could bring to bear.
Some will say —why do not the unemployed direct
their attention to other avocations? but in the older countries
particularly, where are they to be found? what avenue of
labour is there which is not fully occupied? In very new
countries most men can take a hand at anything that turns
up; but in settled countries when vacancies occur they must
be filled by men of the same trade or occupation. The
needlemaker would not find employment as a tailor; nor
would the blacksmith who had made a pick be employed in
a mine to use it. The minute division of labour effectually
precludes the opportunity of finding employment at other
than their own special trade or calling.
Others say why do not the unemployed emigrate to new
countries; but there is this among other difficulties in the
way; men do not become surplusage until they have lost
their employment, when, as a rule, they are devoid of the
necessary means. Nor will emigration from one country to
another, in constant communication with each other, do
much more than transfer the evil from the country they
leave to the country to which they go. Millions have
emigrated during recent years, but the ratio of unemployed
remains practically the same, because emigrants are usually
the overgrowth of the country as a whole, and not merely
the unemployed. When this is the case it must be apparent
that though the unemployed remaining behind may be
somewhat reduced in numbers, their proportion to the
population remains the same as before, because those who
had emigrated had been consumers as well as producers,


therefore, the demand for productions would fall off ratably
with the amount of emigration. It may be that if the
unemployed were gathered up as they fell from employment
and shipped off to some other country, that country which
adopted the plan might be benefited by shunting their
poverty on to their neighbours, but I much question whether
the country they were sent to would be very much gratified
with such a shipment. Suppose the coal trade in England
became very stagnant and numbers of coal-miners were out
of employment, would our coal-miners like to see the
English Government ship say 500 of them to this colony ? I
think not, for it would only be transferring the evil from
England to this country though of course under the
exceptional circumstances of these colonies some few of
them might drift into other occupations.
With the constant and speedy intercourse between
civilized countries, their various labour markets represent a
series of reservoirs, having open communication with each
other ;so that should the water get low in one, it is quickly
replenished by a natural inflow from the others. And it may
safely be assumed that if, say, the iron trade was dull in
Belgium, it would not long remain particularly bright in
England, unless under such abnormal conditions as war, or
some other disturbing element. America has been the chief
recipient of emigration from other countries, but the current
is so voluminous, and of such a heterogeneous nature, that
it carries within itself the elements of success and prosperity.
It is like the flood of births into life, and the flow of life
into death ; rich and poor, and middle-class, and all sorts
and conditions of men —for it must not be forgotten that
there has been a constant stream of foreign capital as well as
foreign labour into America. It has been as if the population
of a large city with all their belongings was every year lifted
up by a whirlwind, and deposited on their shores, and
America derives no small amount of benefit by this annual
influx, for as soon as they land they become consumers,
while it generally happens that some time elapses before the
new comers commence to produce, so that each year the
Americans are able to increase their output in anticipation of
customers who are sure to arrive from beyond Sea. Yet
the ratio of unemployed in America is quite as large as


in either England or Germany, and although they have the
assistance of rigid protection in excluding the manufactures
of other countries, no nation is suffering more from over-
production than they are. So that ordinary emigration,
though it may probably benefit the majority of those who
adopt that course, has not much effect in reducing the total
number of unemployed, for to a great extent it is a mere
transference from one locality to another.
Of course, the previously unoccupied lands of America
have absorbed a large amount of labour in clearing,
fencing, and other improvements. But once done, these
last for some time, and already in farming, as in other
branches of industry, over-production is the general
cry. And strange as it may seem, it is yet true that
while the Americans continue to work ten hours they
find it necessary to erect a high protective barrier
to keep out English goods manufactured under the
nine-hour system. If this barrier were removed, so as to
allow free ingress of English manufactures, although such
would still have to contend with freight and other charges,
their markets under existing circumstances would be literally
swamped with supplies, for so much has the labour-saving
element entered into every branch of industry, and so great
is the capacity of production over that of consumption that
if they still continued to work the hours as at present, at least
one-fourth of their factories would have to close, and it
would be only by reducing the hours of work very considerably
they would be able to avoid having hundreds of thousands of
their men and women thrown out of employment.
Australia, as yet, can hardly be said to have entered on
the manufacturing age, and is, therefore, hardly a fair
criterion. Yet here, again, we have an example which tends
to prove that the policy of free-trade or protection has little
to do with the question at issue, for protective Victoria and
New Zealand certainly show no better results than South
Australia, which is less protective ; or New South Wales,
which is still less so. The fact is that in each of the colonies
there is at times a considerable number of men who are
unable to obtain anything like regular employment; though
in Australia, as yet, the absorption of labour by new land


settlements has prevented anything like prolonged destitution.
But as the good land becomes occupied, and capital diverted
from land purchasing and improving is invested more
extensively in manufacturing, the old story will be repeated
here as in other countries. Factories will work at high
pressure, and rival establishments, by competition, will force
the pace until ominous signs make it evident that trade is
overdone, that our markets are overstocked, and that we are
producing more than we can consume or dispose of to give
profitable returns. Then will come the old-world experiences
—a reduction in the number of hands at one place —working
half-time for half-pay at another—while a third, perhaps,
finds it necessary to close altogether. When we see able-
bodied men by hundreds occupying their time in making
angry demonstrations, while their wives and little ones
are all but destitute of food, then we shall come to
realize some of the injurious effects of labour-saving
machinery. These injurious effects must be recognized as
the drawback on the immense benefits conferred on mankind
by the genius of modern invention, and which will remain a
drawback, and a more and more serious one as other labour-
saving inventions are devised, and the working population
increases, until some self-adjusting compensation balance
can be applied so as to insure a check between production
and consumption in such a manner as that while retaining
the full maximum of the advantages to be derived from every
labour-saving invention, we may also reduce its evil effects to
a minimum.
But where is this check to be found and how can it be
applied? I have endeavoured to demonstrate that the
adoption of the nine-hours system in England and the
eight-hours system of these colonies were the only means of
retaining employment for a very much larger number than
would otherwise have been possible under the old regime of
ten and in some cases twelve hours work. But while this
reduction in the hours tended to proportionately reduce the
output, on the other hand the net result accomplished w r as
greatly increased through the labour-saving aid of new
inventions. If this be true, and it seems impossible to refute
it, why should we hesitate to again follow a good precedent
which, on a former occasion and under similar circumstances


of over-production, gave such beneficial results? For it must
be acknowledged, by all who give the subject an unbiassed
consideration, that the social, moral, and physical effects
which a reduction in the hours of labour have had
upon the men have been good and only good, and while
they have greatly benefited, it has not been productive of
evil either to the employer or the consumer. Therefore, if
we find that while the hours of work have been reduced
labour-saving inventions have kept marching on apace so
that we are once more in the position of generating more
steam than can be utilized, why should we refrain from
applying the only break which is serviceable so that those
who are being crowded out and left behind on the road-side
to perish, may have the opportunity of being restored to that
degree of comfort and respectability which should be within
the reach of every member of the community ? And if eight
hours work still leaves a large number deprived of employment,
then the only course is to still further reduce the hours to
seven, by which means it would require one eighth more
persons to be employed to secure the same out-put as at
present.
If we take a common-sense and a rational view of the
situation we shall find that in the whole world, just
as in an island set in the sea, only a given quantity
of those commodities which enter into consumption
can possibly find a market, and it is useless to grow
or manufacture more than can be consumed or disposed
of. If the total producing power has increased more
rapidly than the world's population, the only sensible
course is, so far as possible, to regulate the productions, that
while fully keeping pace with consumption we shall not
greatly exceed it. To reduce the production by throwing
thousands of men out of employment is both cruel and
irrational, because as soon as they lose employment they
necessarily, to a great extent, cease to be consumers. Not
having the wherewithal to enable them to purchase, the
consumption must fall off still further, thus necessitating the
loss of employment to an additional number. While, on
the other hand, if the full complement be employed and
they continued to work the number of hours which is at
present considered full time, although in their prosperity


they would somewhat increase the consumption, yet the full
producing power being greater than necessary would soon
overstock the markets. The only practical solution therefore
of the difficulty is to adopt the policy of an equitable
division by employing all, but adjusting the hours of labour
in conformity with the advances made in labour-saving
appliances, and if the men be true to their most vital
interests they must be prepared to make any legitimate
sacrifice to ensure this principle being given effect to. It
does not follow that the whole hour should be reduced at
once, any more than we should expect any one invention to
create a necessity for this, although at the present juncture
it would seem that nothing less than an hour’s reduction in
the working hours of all civilized countries would have the
effect of restoring employment to those who are pitifully in
need of it.
There is no doubt such a proposal would meet with
scorn and ridicule, just as the former proposals for reducing
the hours from ten to nine in England met with the fiercest
opposition, and yet not only has this become an accomplished
fact, but in these colonies we have moved another step in
advance and eight hours is now the generally acknowledged
day's work of Australia, and you would scarcely find one
intelligent person in a thousand who would advocate
reverting to the longer hours of days gone by for ever. But
is there any more charm in eight hours than there was in ten
or would be in seven? We don’t read anywhere in
the Bible that God ever commanded that eight, or
nine, or ten hours should constitute a day’s work,
nor does nature in any way affirm such a proposition.
The question simply resolves itself into this: the men
have labour which they are prepared to sell and
the employers are buyers of the commodity to a limited
extent; if the men determine upon selling only seven hours
work per day, they are well within their rights if they refuse
to sell more, and the employer has no more right to take
exception to this than the workman would have a right to
object to the employer availing himself of the latest
improvements in labour-saving machinery which would
turn out perhaps as much work in seven hours as that
previously used would have done in eight hours. The


employer would probably complain that, under the new
proposal of the men for working seven hours instead of
eight, his machinery would stand idle an extra hour per
day and thus his capital would suffer. This would be true,
but, on the other hand, if it suited the employer to only
work his machinery and consequently give employment
to the men for four or five days in the week, it would
be of no avail for the men to complain that their labour-
capital would suffer by non-employment. The employers
used the same arguments in England when the hours were
reduced from ten to nine, and yet they were unavailing,
and the results have proved that it was rightly so in the
interests of the majority; and even if it be admitted that
capital has in consequence received less returns than it
would otherwise have done, yet we shall find that this is
only following upon the general tendency of the times.
The truth is that, of necessity, labour must be made to
realize a higher price while capital will relatively become
cheaper, for under no other circumstances can workmen
continue to live. Even at the present time unless the
press and other writers on the subject have entered into
a combination to deceive the public, the statement must
be accepted that there is not near a sufficiency of
employment now for the willing workers, and every year
this state of things will grow worse. From the following
clipping it will be seen that at the present moment in
England, as in other parts of the world, the labour market
is in anything but a satisfactory condition. Said the Labour
News of March 28: —“The labour market continues in a
very unsettled state, owing to continued disputes about
reductions of wages, and in consequence strikes follow.
The coal districts of Yorkshire are very much disturbed
by reason of an impending strike, and the result of a
conference of miners now being held at Barnsley is
anticipated with great interest, as over 40,000 colliers
are interested in the result of the conference. In the
Lancashire cotton-weaving districts labour is comparatively
at a standstill, owing to short time in some cases, and the
closing of mills in the others, and the continued reduction
of wages also adds to the weavers’ difficulties. In the
textile trades some works are fairly busy; but, as a rule,


there is not a full amount of work, and much machinery
is only partially employed. The agricultural labour market
is open to improvement. Unskilled labour is not in
sufficient demand to find employment for the ever-increasing
supply of workers.”
If poverty and misery are not to reign supreme over a
large and, with every new labour-saving invention, a
constantly increasing section of the working classes, one
of two things must follow —either we must suppress any
further inventions, which proposal would be about as
sensible as an attempt to explode the sun with dynamite,
or else not only workmen but the representatives of capital
must be prepared to sacrifice something with the object of
more securely retaining the balance. But were it possible
to say that from henceforth we will have no further
development of labour-saving inventions, then, small as is
the field for the prospective expansion of trade in new
countries, yet that would probably, for some time, be
sufficient to absorb the labour of those who are now out of
employment, though of this there would be great doubt, for
though we succeeded in shutting out any new inventions
we should indefinitely increase the number of appliances of
the present patterns. We cannot prevent new inventions
and would not if we could, and it may safely be assumed
that, in the future, greater advances in mechanical invention
will be made than ever before. It is to be hoped that such
will be the case, for the more the work of the world is done
by machinery, the less wear and tear on humanity; and the
more labour is saved, the more leisure for the workman;
and the more leisure the more intelligence, which intelligence
will again re-act in the discovery of still further labour-
saving appliances.
But can any one give this question careful consideration
and yet be of opinion that, notwithstanding inventions
which enable one man to do what gave employment to two
or three before, the workman will for all time continue to
work eight hours as at present? Why, the world would
eventually become piled up with over-productions, or else
one half or two-thirds of the would-be workers would


necessarily take rank amongst the unemployed. The
following clipping from a local paper of recent date is
worth reproduction;—
“An Auger to Bore a Square Hoi.e.—An American paper
states that the first and only auger ever manufactured that will bore
a square hole is now in the shops of the Cleveland Machine
Company. This auger bores a 2-inch square hole, the size used in
ordinary frame buildings and barns, but they can be made on the
same principle to bore square holes any size. Its application is the
ordinary one, and it works on the same principle as round-hole
augers. Its end, instead of having a screw or bit, has a cam motion
which oscillates a cutter mounted on a steel rocking-knife which
cuts on both sides. In order to prevent the splintering of the wood,
the ends of the cutter are provided with small semi-circular-shaped
saws, which help in cutting out perfectly square corners. It is
estimated that this new process will save the labour of three men
who work with chisels, as one man can conveniently cut a 2-inch
mortice in the same length of time as he could bore a round hole.”
As this little invention is said to save the labour of
three men, one man must now be doing the work which
had previously provided wages for four, and though the
general tendency of cheap production is to increase the
consumption, yet it is not likely there will be many more
buildings or barns required on account of this discovery, so
that either the three men, or say two out of the three, must
lose their former employment or two men will be occupied
boring square holes which cannot be used, for the other
branches of the trade would be sure to be fully occupied,
and, therefore, out of the three not more than one man
could be transferred to other work to cover the expansion of
trade caused by the discovery. There will probably be a
few thousands of these borers at work in a year or two!
There is also an increasing tendency on the part of
women to supplant men in the lighter branches of
employment, and this tendency is not likely to decrease,
for as the intellect of woman becomes expanded by
education, their minds will strengthen and develope
individuality of character which will more and more assert
itself in open competition with men for all kinds of what
may be termed “genteel” employment, such as school
teachers, post and telegraph officials, and many other


occupations, all of which must have a tendency to displace
the stronger sex who must perforce fall back on other
avenues of employment.
It would be useless to deny the fact that as our public
schools increase so increases the difficulty of obtaining
domestic servants, and it must be admitted that, rightly or
wrongly, employment in shops or factories is preferred by
thousands of our young women to that of domestic service.
Some of the reasons for this state of things are not far to
seek. In the houses of the wealthy, where large establish-
ments are maintained, domestic service has many attractions
which are not to be found where, as in the majority of
cases, the number is confined to one or two. For downright
drudgery no female employment, as a rule, can surpass the
position of “ maid of all work” or general servant. From
early morning until seven, eight, or nine o’clock at night,
extending over twelve to fifteen hours, their services are in
demand, scrubbing and washing, cooking and ironing,
upstairs and downstairs the whole day long. The
unfortunate “slavey” is kept grinding at the mill, and in
no case more so than in the houses of those who themselves
have risen from the ranks. Should the girl happen to have
a country cousin of the masculine gender (and which of
them have not?) who calls upon her occasionally, it is an
impertinence on her part to invite him into the sacred realms
of the kitchen.
A few years ago an alternate Sunday evening, with
occasionally one evening through the week was the recognized
limit to their perambulations abroad, but latterly these
privileges have been somewhat enlarged, though not through
any willing concession on the part of the mistresses, but as a
condition precedent to their engagement on the part of the
servants. The factory girl, on the other hand, has
every evening, all Saturday afternoon and Sunday, to herself
in each week. “No followers allowed;” “No Irish need
apply“ Protestants or Catholics preferred were much
more frequent addenda to advertisements formerly than now.
The present difficulty is to secure the necessary help; and
the art of grilling a chop or trussing a fowl has generally
become divorced from theological proclivities, or even
national prejudices.


But it must be clear to most people, that if girls are to
be induced to take domestic service in preference to other
employment, there must be more attention paid to their
comfort, and the service must be made more attractive by
partaking less of continuous drudgery, so that their position
should assume the character of a “ help ” more than that of
a “ slavey.” Of course, somebody must do the menial work,
and they are paid for doing it; but it does not follow that
that their service could not be lightened and made more
pleasant in many ways. A little money judiciously
expended in some of the many labour-saving appliances
for domestic use would save many a half-hours’ work, so
that our female servants should be able to secure more
leisure to enjoy some few of the reasonable pleasures of
life.
As the world grows wiser it cannot be that the present
strength of standing armies will be maintained, and it may
be that as we “ improve ” in the art of killing, some will be
thrown out of employment in this “ industry.” At least, let
us hope such will be the case —though wise men will not
convert their swords into ploughshares just yet. But is there
not a growing consensus of opinion throughout the world
that war is a remnant of barbarism, and that some other
method of settling international quarrels must be resorted to
irrespective of the opinions of the governing classes.
The effect of universal education and manhood
suffrage must tend towards a lengthening of the periods
of peace. Of course an educated people do not necessarily
lose their fighting capacity, rather the reverse when driven
into a corner, but they are more inclined to weigh the
disadvantages of war and view its consequences from a
humanitarian standpoint. They find their glory in a
peaceful prosperity and, ceasing to be pugnacious and
aggressive, they incline to the motto “ defence not defiance.”
Though it must be admitted that up to the present time the
results of education have not realized anticipations, never-
theless the ultimate results cannot be doubted, and we must
also bear in mind that the effect of education on the masses
is as yet only beginning to be felt.


Unless civilization be a huge fraud it is only reasonable
to expect that when the whole people of a country come to
exercise political power they will require something more
substantial to induce them to engage in wholesale slaughter
than the flimsy pretexts which in times past have been
advanced as causes for war, especially when an extension of
dominion was looming in the background. Moreover, the
somewhat cool but pious process of free-selecting other
people’s countries is being rapidly completed, and when
there is no more territory-grabbing to be done we may
expect that the Great Powers will wash their hands, sing a
Te Deum, and then settle down to improve their estates.
The arts of peace will then replace the art of war. Certainly
no one will expect this state of things to be realized
immediately, but it must be admitted that at the present
rate of annexation not many generations will pass away
before the mountains in the moon will be the only known
territory remaining unannexed.
As we are dealing with the future we are justified in
enquiring as to the effect of a million or two soldiers being
withdrawn from the position of being mere consumers, and
converted into that of producers with all the aid of steam
and, perhaps, other motive powers at their fingers end.
What would be the effect at present if a sure and
reliable peace were established between all the great
powers and a million or so of European soldiers were
disbanded? What avocation would they turn to? What
form of production is the woild deficient of, or which branch
of labour or occupation is undermanned? People would
not eat more or wear two coats instead of one because
peace was assured. Then what would be the effect of such
an influx of labour into the already over supplied labour
markets of the world?
Of course, the ever ready answer will be ; “ They would
emigrate to new countries.” And if so, this being one of
the newest countries, we might expect a hundred thousand
or so out here, but what branch of trade in this country
is languishing for want of labour. It may be said they
would go upon the land, but they might as well go
into the land as go on it without some capital, and, of course,


if they had much of that useful commodity they would cease
to come under the designation of workmen. But even
supposing the initial difficulty of becoming possessed of the
land was overcome, and the clearing, fencing, and farm
implements were all provided for them—which is not likely
—then from the very first day they commenced to produce
they would simply be adding to an already overstocked
market. In what part of the country do our people go
hungry for lack of farm produce ? It is true that in some
parts they might locally supply the wants, but that would
stop imports, which would proportionately reduce our
neighbour's exports, and throwing them out of employment
would merely be transferring the evil from our shoulders to
theirs.
However, to fall back on the broader view. The
civilized world is at present dully supplied—in fact over
supplied ; and if any be hungry or unclothed, it is because
through over production they cannot obtain employment, and
consequently cannot purchase the articles they need, although
such articles are piled up to the store-room ceiling. If, then
circumstances necessitated say an additional million of men
being forced into the labour market, whose personal wants
had hitherto been supplied from the general stock, you
convert these men into additional producers. Every man of
them that obtained employment would, of necessity, displace
some other man, or else the whole result of the new men's
labours would simply go to swell the present existing over-
supply. With a rapidly circulating commerce, the mere fa'ct of
transferring them from one country to another would only
prove a temporary deviation of the stream from one open
reservoir to another, which would take but a few months to
level up again by the ordinary gravitation of trade. You must
fall back again on the bare unvarnished fact that labour-
saving appliances have enabled the world to produce more
than the world can consume, and, hence, to ease off the
production, thousands of workmen and women are out of
employment; and the only method by which all could
receive employment, and so procure the necessaries and
some of the comforts of life, is for the world to reduce the
number of hours which constitute a day’s work.


Will the world reduce the number of hours which
constitute a day's work? It may be safely answered that the
world will not do so, either deliberately and with one accord
nor yet immediately through independent action. Never-
theless, the world will do so most assuredly in the course of
time though by slow degrees. It required countless centuries
to develope modern civilization, and many ages of that
civilization to eliminate slavery, but though the wheels of
progress grind slowly they grind very surely. As surely as
we have advanced from slavery to eight hours work, so
surely will the advance continue in the interests of humanity,
for the great nations of the earth containing the wisdom and
philanthrophy of millions of enlightened minds cannot, in
the coming light of broader day, continue to look with
indifference on the spectacle which is everywhere visible in
their midst, of thousands of their friends and fellow
countrymen, although surrounded by plenty, yet lingering
in abject misery and want through no fault of their own—
honest people and good citizens subject to greater privations,
with respect to food, clothing, and shelter, than the criminals
in prison.
What is perhaps most to be feared is the too violent
action which long continued oppression engenders; for
while the outburst of pent up gases may relieve the world of
a dangerous element, the subsidence which is sure to follow'
may involve the ruin of multitudes and retard the progress
of civilization for many years. Fortunately, though the
elements of danger to society are significant in their
occasional rumblings, there is abundant evidence of
healthy and vigorous action on all sides in the
vitality of workmen's congresses, trades’ unions, and
conferences of various kinds, assisted and patronized by
men of the broadest sympathies and grasp of mind, which
must result in permanent benefit to the masses. And though
these signs of the times may appear to portend danger,
there is no cause to fear the suppression or extinction of
aught that should remain. They are but the natural
outbursts of spring which lead to summer plenty—the April
showers which bring May flowers. And just as the field-ice
of the rigid winter in the Polar Sea begins to heave and
surge and quake as the returning summer gains the mastery,


so the social icebergs which have been a bar to progress
will float away and melt into a memory of the past under
the genial rays of the coming summer sun.
It has generally been considered that labour-saving
machinery worked advantageously to the capitalist, and such
undoubtedly has been the case, but if we look a little deeper
into the subject we shall find that the reverse of this must
ultimately follow, and if any one has to fear the future effect
of machinery on the labour question it will be the capitalist,
and not the working classes. While labour suffered
oppression because of its weakness, and was devoid of
organization and political power, then, as usual, the weakest
went to the wall. The working classes throughout the
civilized world are now beginning to realize their strength,
and in the manufacturing countries where they must form a
large majority they have been endowed with considerable
political power. As education progresses, and the working man
becomesmoreand more the readingandthethinkingman,they
will realize that absolute success is to be found only in perfect
organization, and that in fighting the cause of their fellow
workers, they are really doing battle in their own best interests
for in the changing vicissitudes of the labour market, what
is their friends position to-day may be their own to-morrow.
The man who agrees to work eight or any other number
of hours and does not work, but idles away his time, is
neither more or less than a fraud, and perpetrates a robbery,
for he thieves time from the employer which he had agreed
to devote to his service, and brings injury on the class to which
he belongs. By a general and acknowledged reduction in
the hours, a way would be opened for providing employment
for the whole of their fellow tradesmen, and securing to all
some additional leisure, legitimately their own, which could
be used to advantage to themselves. When this view of the
question acquires a firm hold of their minds, they will
certainly seek the concession, and as certainly gain it, just
as they have sought and gained previous concessions, and
with more extended organization and loyalty among them-
selves victory would be assured.
Though the hours of labour will as surely come to be
reduced as day succeeds night, it by no means follows that


a proportionate reduction in wages will take place. No
doubt such would, of necessity, be the result in communities
like old Japan or China where for centuries progress and
invention were frozen up, but the law of compensation, if
rightly directed, will operate as favourably for the workmen
of the future as it has for the majority in the past, only
probably with much more potency, for the successes already
gained will give nerve and confidence in the future struggles
and the visible evidence of the benefits secured will bring
them the sympathy that was formerly wanting. It is an old
adage that nothing succeeds like success, and it must be
admitted on all sides that men now work less than previously
and yet the purchasing power of their wages is greater than
ever before.
The only misfortune to be complained of is the
palpable fact that the world does not provide, under existing
systems, a sufficiency of remunerative employment to go all
round amongst those who are dependent on labour for
subsistence. The misfortune will be remedied when the
men fully realize the fact that by effecting a reduction in the
hours of work until all can be employed, none need then
remain hungry while others are well supplied. This is the
only rational method of extracting all the honey from the
hive of those busy bees of invention without subjecting at
least a large proportion of themselves to the piercing sting
of poverty which has hitherto been the chief reward of many
of their comrades who indeed have received more stings
than honey—more poverty than plenty.
Without a thorough organization among the various
trades, both locally and perhaps internationally, any change
which necessitated the employment of an increased number
of men to produce the same quantity of any commodity
would necessarily lead either to a proportionate reduction of
wages, or else to an increase in the selling price of such
commodity produced at greater cost than formerly. These
results would follow notwithstanding such organization if
capital still remained master of the situation, and was as
impregnable in its armour as when labour being without
organization found itself powerless to oppose it. But
can it be assumed that when the interests of labour


are protected under more perfect organization it will not
secure the balance of trade power as it has now undoubtedly
secured the balance of political power in all the large
manufacturing centres, and if the balance of trade power be
secured to labour will it still continue to submit to the
squeezing process and allow capital to escape that
operation?
Capital we are told is everywhere rapidly accumulating
in the hands of its possessors,* because hitherto, owing to
the want of cohesion amongst the workers, capital has been
able to secure more than its share of the profits arising from
the mutual combination of labour and capital. While the
workman could only obtain a sufficiency of remuneration for
mere subsistence, he found himself without the sinews of
war in any conflict that arose between the co-partners —
capital and labour. Capital, on the other hand receiving
the greater share of the profits, was able to store up an ever
accumulating surplus, which surplus must continue to
increase in a geometrical ratio while capital continues to
receive the present rate as its share of the profits.
With more perfect and comprehensive organization, so
that those who have the temerity and self-sacrifice to resort
even to the extremity of a strike may not have their efforts
frustrated by others taking advantage of their struggles, and
when affiliated societies come readily to the front to assist
their efforts by affording them support from their own
accumulated society funds, the workmen will he able to
demand and obtain a continuous but gradual increase on
the selling price of their labour, which increase will be
regulated by a proportionately decreasing return to capital
without in any way interfering with the selling price of their
joint produce; that is to say, labour will secure to itself a
greater share of existing profits than has hitherto been
allotted to it, while capital will only be permitted to retain
a correspondingly reduced share.
*ln a recent article on the increase of wealth, Mr. Mulhall says:—“ In a
single generation the countries of Europe have doubled their capital while the increase
of population has hardly exceeded thirty per cent. In other words, wealth has
grown three times faster than population. * * * In fifty-four years Great
Britain has almost trebled her wealth; while France has very nearly quadrupled
hers; and in thirty-four years the United States have seen their capital multiply
sixfold. * * * The United States are nearly §4,000,000 richer at sunset than they
were at sunrise. The accumulations of Europe and the United States make up
$11,000,000 daily.”


Money-capital is subject to much the same laws as
labour-capital, and must obtain employment before it can
become remunerative ; it must earn to enable its possessor to
eat, and if capital accumulates and has to seek employment,
it must accept a small remuneration if it cannot command a
larger one, for to capital as well as labour half a loaf is
better than no bread. When capital is scarce and in
demand, it holds its hand and labour is the suppliant, and
must be satisfied to accept low wages as an inducement to
capital to join in the partnership. And so on the other
hand when capital becomes superabundant, it in its turn must
rank with the unemployed ; then labour has a voice in fixing
the terms, and will stipulate for a greater share in the profits.
The question then resolves itself into whether labour or
capital will dominate in the future ?
If labour-saving machinery was advanced to such
perfection that it would work automatically, and so
dispense with all the occupations of operatives, capital
might purchase it ; but even then it could not secure
all, the profits of manufacture, for labour would still
remain master of the situation so long as it was true to
its own interests, for the workmen would equalise its labour
dispensing qualities by enormously increasing the cost of
such machinery through advancing the price of their labour
in the making of it. Instead of some being occupied as
operatives they would then all become makers, but so as not
to produce more than they could dispose of, and to find
employment for all, each would work say only one hour in
the day and demand the same rate of wages as at present,
and they would obtain it just as easily as they do now, for
come what will all must live, and in the light of the future
men will neither allow themselves or their fellow-workmen
to starve.
If labour had remained ignorant and uneducated it
would have been easy to prophecy in favour of capital
remaining dominant, but the social and political school-
masters are busily employed, and if there is one principle
more than another that is readily learned and duly appreciated
by the multitude it is the principle which will govern the
future, viz., the greatest good for the greatest number.


When, say each of ten employees become equally as well
versed in the laws of social science and political economy as
their one employer, it will not be difficult to prognosticate
which party will obtain the balance of power. We have
only to retrace our steps a very few years to reach the time
when trades’ unionism was looked upon by the majority of
people as a species of social revolution and a banding
together for unlawful purposes. It required a great struggle
before the funds of such institutions received the protection
of law, but now, on all sides, these societies are admitted to
be as legitimate in their functions as banking or other
monetary associations. If this progress has been made
while the men were doing little more than groping their way
in the early dawn of modern light, what will be the effect of
more advanced education and greater experience of the
benefits derived from mutual help and combination? It
must result in the domination of labour over capital.
Nor is this result one to be deplored, for the education
and training necessary to obtain this position will be the very
best safeguard for capital. Already the intelligent workman
looks upon capital as his best friend instead of as formerly
his sworn foe, and he will come to realize that to protect
capital in all its legitimate functions is as necessary to his
welfare as to protect the lungs through which he breathes
the breath of life. A few rabid schemers and' a large
number of dupes may dream of spoliation, but the discretion
which necessarily attaches to the conclaves of bodies of men
constantly meeting at trades’ union and kindred associations
and the wisdom which comes of self-government will safely
guide the judgement of the educated masses. Danger
lurks in the darkness of ignorance but safety will be
assured in the broad light of educated intelligence.
Besides, the more labour shares in the profits the more
will his social position be improved, and this will obviously
be followed by a greater distribution of property among the
people, resulting in greater conservatism and more tender
dealing with the interests of property, for anarchy and
misrule only thrive where they have a deep substratum of
poverty and misery to feed upon. You may take the
greatest demagogue in the country who will harangue by the


hour in favour of an equal division of property, but let him
once acquire a little more wealth than his neighbours and
his tongue is immediately tied with a golden wire and on
this subject you hear his sweet voice no more for ever.
If labour refuses to sell more than seven, or even six,
five, four hours per day ; labour, when educated and fully
organised, will take care to live by what it sells, and the world
will neither go hungry nor unclothed because of this reduction
in the hours of work, because such reduction can only keep
pace with the progress of labour-saving inventions, and by
that means the necessary production will be maintained,
while all but universal leisure and exemption from toil must
prevail. This reduction of the hours of work will be forced
upon the men in common charity to their fellow tradesmen,
half of whom would otherwise perish for want of the
necessaries of life, and this not because of any inability or
defect of nature to supply the wants of all its children, but
because of a superabundance of supplies. Nevertheless,
through lack of employment, and consequently an absence
of means to purchase, this fruitful world is to the unemployed
nothing more than a barren desert, for it must be evident
that were nature less generous in her gifts it would require
much more labour, and an unlimited amount of employment
would be forthcoming to supply the wants of the present
world population. Fancy for a moment that through some
freak of nature, all the coal or iron giving out, or by some
other calamity, we were to lose the power of steam, and the
world once more had to be clothed and fed by hand ! There
would soon cease to be any scarcity of employment for all
who required it ! Why then should labour’s wages be
reduced because through the development of intelligence,
a third party —the spirit of invention —steps into the ring and
generously offers to gratuitously perform half their work for
them ? Had there been a race of capitalists who had also
developed the genius of invention, then capital might have
claimed all the benefits resulting from labour-saving
machinery, but the facts are rather the other way.
Who should be entitled to receive the benefits accruing
from labour-saving machinery but those whose labour it was
designed to save ? Capitalists are not necessarily a chosen
people of God ! Then why should this divine gift be utilized


to increase the riches of the rich, and not to reduce the
labours of the poor ? If man be the creature of Divinity, and
of this the spiritual essence within him (which few can honestly
ignore) is the best evidence, what can be more reasonable than
to believe he was never intended to grovel in the dirt, except,
if you will, in the childhood of the race; but as man arrives
at racial maturity he naturally attains to better things.
The old fable of countless millions being cursed with
perpetual drudgery because some ancient progenitor,
thousands of years before, had the temerity to eat fruit
which his wife offered him at the instigation of a serpent is
really an insult to the benevolence of God and the common
sense of man, and how highly educated and intelligent men
can continue in this enlightened age to teach such childish
folly for religious truth is one of those mysteries which only
the future can unravel. Surely the intellect of an almost
twentieth century man cannot rest satisfied with such
pabulum for food! The utter untruthfulness of this doctrine
is self-evident for there is not a church in Christendom that
does not contain one or more among its congregation who
toil not neither do they spin, and yet Solomon in all his
glory was not arrayed like one of them. Moreqver, what
can be gained by inculcating such puerile nonsense
when the Bible itself contains so much beautiful imagery
on which to dilate, and, undoubtedly, many glorious
truths to be expounded ? The teacher has only to turn his
eyes to the heavens above or the earth beneath for boundless
evidence of the infinite wisdom which controls the universe,
and to expatiate on these would tend to elevate the Creator
in the minds of His creatures and give them a God worthy
the worship of sensible men.
The joint currents of scientific discovery and invention,
which have worked such wonders in the past, are not likely
to be checked in the future, but will rather be accelerated
until man mounts to the full zenith of his capabilities. To
form an estimate of what those capabilities are would be to
solve all the unsolved problems of nature ! The plant of
inventive genius which has suddenly burst into flower of
such resplendant hues has undoubtedly taken countless ages
to mature, and while we now enjoy its first-fruits may we
not with reason look forward to a long and vigorous life


reaching far away into the eternal future, and with maturer
years may we not fairly expect the yield of fruit to be both
more abundant and of choicer quality? For this is indeed the
tree of knowledge which stands in the midst of the garden
and of the glorious fruit of which neither man or woman
need refrain from eating. Yet, like other fruit, it must be
partaken of with some little prudence or the effects will not
be altogether an unmixed blessing.
While we wisely desire to reap the harvest of invention
and revel in the feast of fat things we know that the serpent
lurks in the undergrowth, and though we no longer listen to
the voice of the charmer we fear the contact of his poison
fangs. The abundant crop must therefore be gathered in
with caution, for the welfare of the reapers demands that the
crop should perish rather than they. That the reapers are
perishing in some fields of labour cannot be denied. There
may not be many cases of actual death by starvation, but
the trail of the serpent is over them, and want and bitter
poverty are poisoning their life’s blood in tens of thousands
of cases, even amongst English-speaking communities.
Notwithstanding all our social progress and the advanced
wisdom of the age we have utterly failed to initiate any
system whatever whereby the full benefits of the discoveries
of science and invention should be secured without entailing
distress and ruin on those whose labour has been superseded,
and while we dare not avail ourselves of the full producing
powers, even of our present machinery, which in many
cases is only working half time or no time, yet we continue
to breed wretchedness and misery on a large scale. There
must be a screw loose somewhere! Yet when the workmen
at various times have resolutely banded themselves together
with the object of exterminating this viperous breed, the
majority of people finding themselves safe from the venom
by the possession of the antidote gold, both hindered and
derided them. Though a somewhat better disposition now
prevails, yet there is little real sympathy outside their own
ranks with the efforts they make to crush the head of the
serpent Poverty, with all its hellish brood.
The chief object to be gained is that those who are
willing to work should have the opportunity of earning the
requisites to a rational enjoyment of life, and this much


every soul born into the world has a right to strive for, and
is justly entitled to obtain ; it is only reasonable to assume
that this fair world, with all its glorious decorations and
surroundings, was intended as a sphere of intellectual as
well as physical enjoyment. That this is the correct view
may be inferred by the eager and desperate struggle for
wealth which we see on all sides, and in every grade of
society, irrespective of the colour of religion, politics, or
nationalities, and though many may strive for more wealth
simply because the love of gain has become a ruling passion,
yet we know that all the first efforts to secure at least a
competency originate in the universal fear of poverty, and
in the almost universal desire that not only themselves, but
those also who are dependant on them, should be secure in
the enjoyment of such pleasure as they individually deem
most befitting. What wonder then if those whose lives
know no pleasure, and who are steeped in poverty and
misery from the cradle to the grave should look upon those
who have secured a monopoly of wealth, and the pleasures
of life, as their natural enemies; or why be surprised that
penury and wretchedness should endeavour, by the aid of
socialism or communism, to wrest some share of the spoil
from the grip of the monopolist ?
Why should the finger of those who never toil be
pointed in scorn at the workmen if they set up a claim to
share in that which is so highly appreciated by themselves ?
Wealth and leisure is the goal for which all strive ; but
though the working millions are hopelessly out of the race
at present, yet considering they also have a monopoly—the
monopoly of labour —why should they not make the most of
it? Who buys labour that can do without? Therefore,
seeing the article is in demand, and must always continue
in demand so long as there is capital in the world to pay for
it (for the non-workers much as they may prate about the
dignity of labour will never bow their necks to the yoke),
what stands in the way of their demanding and receiving say
even double the present price for an article of which they
hold the sole supplv ? Nothing stands in the way of at
least a gradual advance except the want of a more general
and complete organization; the advance sought for not
being a money advance, but an advance of leisure so that
the whole number may obtain a share of employmenl.


Of course the objection can be urged that capital could
hold out longer than labour. This I admit to be the case
if the whole of the various sections of labour were to make
such demand simultaneously, but that would show bad
generalship in this case. Instead of that, should one
batallion advance for say half-an-hour, they would be
supported by the whole strength of the allied forces; then
the first batallion having secured a safe position No. 2 would
move forward, being supported in the rear as well as by the
advanced guard No. 1, and so on until the whole force had
secured the advance of the half-hour, while capital having
no organization or cohesion would be engaged in separate
small detachments and badly beaten all along the line. It
may be urged that capital would retreat to other countries!
Not much; for in the leading Continental countries and America
labour must of necessity follow the same tac tics or labour must
perish in the ever advancing tide of invention. It may also be
safely calculated on, that capitalists would continue to prefer
their own country with two or say even one per cent, to such
foreign countries as remained unaffected by this movement,
though double the amount of interest might be secured.
Why should not the workman demand more leisure, for
we have seen that this is the only method by which he can
advance the price of that of which he holds a monopoly;
and at the same time confer untold blessings on his fellow-
workmen, by securing employment for the unemployed.
Not one yard less of cloth would be manufactured, or one
less bushel of wheat grown; but rather the reverse, for the
present unemployed being then in the receipt of satisfactory
wages, would again become consumers of those things of
which they are now deprived for lack of means to purchase.
Capital also would benefit in some directions. Let us
take England as an example where the day's work consists
generally of nine hours. In some cases capital is idle or half
so, the factories being either closed or working only half time,
Now, if those who are working full time were reduced from
nine hours to eight, there would be an opportunity for the
remainder to get up steam again so that the latter would
receive some return from their present slumbering capital.
What right have we to assume that such additional
leisure would not be equally beneficial to the poor as to the
wealthy. Leisure does not necessarily imply idleness, neither
must it perforce be devoted to pleasure or recreation, though


these are both desirable in a reasonable degree. Where is
the utility of the state spending so much money every year
in education if in later years it is to be of no avail except,
perhaps, to read a few paragraphs in the newspaper. Would
it be of no advantage to the individual as well as to the state
if by reading and study he could gather more knowledge of
men and things. If man be really of dual nature, is the
body which we know must perish, to be fed and clothed,
and taught to perform its part, while what we hope will
prove the living entity is allowed to go unnourished and
uneducated ? If the spirit of man continues to live after
death then the spirit is now the whole man, and the body is
merely the perishable material with which it has clothed
itself so as to give effect to its desires. Is life so long that
the time would be absolutely wasted if some little attention
were devoted to such trifling subjects as may perhaps affect
us somewhat after this little drama is ended, or must the
spirit of man be taught only to grind, and delve, and dig the
whole life long ? If this be our “ first and only ” appearance on
the stage, why then, while the performance lasts let us make
it as pleasant as we may, and as leisure is more pleasant
than toil, why not endeavour to make more leisure in the world?
Leisure need not be spent in indolence, nor would it in
general be so spent. The man who invents new labour-saving
appliances would, under proper conditions, rank as a pure
benefactor to the race ; for all the time taken from the
work-day of the world and transferred to leisure, will
advance the development of intelligence and extend the
dominion of mind, and who so likely to discover new
labour-saving appliances as those whose labour would be
saved ? Moreover, the workman's wife and family would in
many cases realize a distinction between leisure and laziness in
many little additional comforts and pleasures ; a nail here and
a screw there. As the spring came round the little garden plot
would assume a brighter hue than formerly, and what brings
the workman's cottage on a level with a palace more than a vase
or two of fresh cut flowers? Many little matters, trivial in them-
selves, go to make life pleasant, and why should not the work-
man’s home be beautified and his family's life made pleasant?
He is the working bee of the hive and is entitled to his share
of the nectar of life.


It may be said that the eight-hour system provides
leisure enough for all these things, and it certainly is an
improvement on the old regime, but it must be remembered
that eight hours work means ten hours attendance, including
meal times, and the half-hour per day to make up for
Saturday’s half-holiday. Then there is the journey to and
fro which will occupy on the average half-an-hour each way,
so that under the eight-hours system the working day may
be said to extend over eleven hours. Yet all have not obtained
the eight-hour system, and though that system may be good,
why should they not look for something better when the times
are propitious. It has already been shown that the gospel
of leisure can only be fulfilled in proportion to the advances in
labour-saving inventions, and then only through the operation
of more complete organization than that at present existing.
Unfortunately, in the mean time destitution and misery reign
supreme over thousands of families of the unemployed.
Nor is want of employment confined to physical toilers
only for, in all large centres of population, there is an
enormous amount of distress among what may be termed
the genteel poor, and some of the arguments previously used
apply equally to their case although their labour has not,
nor will it probably in the future be superseded to the same
extent by labour-saving appliances.
The only cure for what must be an admitted evil
appears to rest in the principle of reducing the hours of
attendance or the amount of services rendered, and so make
provision for the employment of a larger number. This
would of course reduce the profits of the employers unless
these latter succeeded in spreading the extra charges over
their customers or clients. However that may be, the end
to be gained is a righteous one and worthy the efforts of
every friend of humanity. If misery were material and
could be weighed by specific gravity, the load with which
this world revolves would be enough to mar its equilibrium,
and certainly the sum of happiness in the world would not be
decreased if a greater share of the profits were divided amongst
those whose services were absolutely necessary to create them,
for the rapid accumulation of wealth is in most cases but the
undue usurpation of the results of others labours.


This can never be an idle world in any sense, for either
limb or brain becomes weakened by inactivity, or paralized
by total inaction. Man must either move on or move off;
his intellect could no more brook inaction than could the
world maintain its position in space if brought to a standstill.
There is abundance of work yet to be done in the world
before the race of man sits down to its evenings rest. If
some balloonist could take up a position where this revolving
panorama could all come under his vision, what a trifling
portion of man's estate would he find at present improved ?
In some places the primeval forest would pass before him
for hours together in one continuous blank, while in most
places he would discern but little approach to clearing and
settlement, and to a still less extent would he find man’s
home beautified and adorned as it must ultimately be. As
a small portion of Europe and a few other places came in
view, with their roads and bridges, canals and railways,
their cultivated fields and ornamental gardens, their villages,
towns and cities, they would only go to convince him how
much remained to be done, and before his twenty-four hours
entertainment was concluded he would amply realize that
work is not likely to be scarce in the world for some
few years to come.
But though the work yet to be done in the world is
considerable there is no time fixed for its completion, and
it should be our first care to make comfortable provision for
the workers, and there need be no such hurry to complete
the work that we should cause our track to be thickly
strewed with blighted and blasted lives. The founder of
the estate cannot desire such should be the case, for the
fountain of humanity cannot be less than human. That He
is infinitely greater, and indeed has no pleasure in man’s toil
is evidenced by his good gifts of labour-saving invention so
freely given, along with the vast stores of force and power
made ready for man’s use. Moreover, other supplies of
motive power from sources not yet dreamed of in the
philosophy of man, will, as time rolls on be brought within
his grasp so that, in the full maturity of the race, man shall
indeed be “ little lower than the angels.”
Man must work out his own social and intellectual
salvation, but there is, therefore, no necessity for countless


numbers to perish by the wayside. Why should labour-
saving machinery be converted into a veritable juggernaut,
which it must soon become if advancing science and
labour-saving inventions continue to absorb the employment
necessary to the maintenance of an ever-increasing population.
But he who se ks to predict the ultimate effects of mechanical
invention will find himself hopelessly wandering in a maze
of many possibilities, in lanes of thought which have many
outlets but no termination, and, like one lost in the bush, will
be found following on his own tracks and reasoning within
a circle, though always believing he is making headway.
1 have in these pages crudely endeavoured to glance at
a few features of the labour question without losing sight
of the landmarks of experience, for it is only through the
light of past experience that we may reason by analogy and
hope to gain some slight insight to the future, though onlv a
little, in advance of the present. To unnecessarily sow the
seeds of discontent without pointing to the remedy would be
but to sow the wind and reap the whirlwind. Man, however,
was never intended to grope his way in the dark like a blind
puppy, and if any blame attaches to one who, in even the
most feeble manner seeks to direct him to a better way, that
blame can safely be referred back to nature who primarily
opened the eyes of man and endowed him with intelligence,
and to society who, through recent years, has assiduously
endeavoured to cultivate that intelligence by every form of
education which tended to disprove the assertion that man
should for all time continue to “ eat bread by the sweat of
his brow,'’ for, on the one hand, in thousands of cases, he
has not even the privilege of verifying the statement by
enjoying his share of the curse, hard though such a lot
may be; while, on the other hand, to many millions who
are equally supposed to be sons of Adam the earth gives
forth its bounties with a lavish and unsparing hand.
TURNER AND HENDERSON, PRINTERS, SYDNEY.


