

ADDITIONAL MINISTERS
FOR
SYNOD
OF
EASTERN AUSTRALIA.
PROPOSAL BY
COMMITTEE OF SYNOD.
FOR CIRCULATION THROUGHOUT THE SEVERAL CONGREGATIONS
OP THE SYNOD.
MDCCCLVIII.




MINUTE
OF
The Committee of the Squad of Eastern Australia,
ON
PROCURING ADDITIONAL MINISTERS, AND FOR CHURCH EXTENSION.
Members of Committee.
Rev. Dr. MACKAY, Convener,
„ WILLIAM MACINTYRE,
„ ALEXANDER SALMON,
Messrs. JOHN ADAM,
„ DAVID DICKSON,
„ GEORGE BOWMAN,
„ WILLIAM BUYERS, Elders.
Two separate and distinct objects have been entrusted to this
Committee, by the Synod. Each of these objects is of the
utmost importance: and the Committee cannot but feel that
each of the objects claims the most earnest attention which the
Committee, by the blessing of God, may be enabled to bestow
upon it.
The former of the two objects, the Procuring of Ministers,
the Committee proceeded to take up and consider. It was
submitted that the Synod now consists of but fourteen
Ministers: that the last effort made by the Synod, towards
the procuring of Ministers, was in the year 1853; that in
consequence of that effort, there were added to the Synod,
the number of seven Ministers; but that of these, two have
left the colony; that one has been laid aside by ill health
from all ministerial duty; that a fourth has intimated his
intention of leaving the Colony, on the ground of ill health ;
that one Minister has been admitted into the Synod, from a
neighbouring Colony; and that two Ministers have been
licensed and ordained within the bounds of the Synod,
within the period of the last effort to procure additional


Ministers having been made. The Committee find that the
liability to the Treasurer of the Synod, in connection with
the last effort for procuring Ministers, is now very nearly
adjusted; and they expect that the result of the collection
appointed by last meeting of Synod, to be made in aid of the
Funds of this Committee, will wholly adjust the said liability
to the Treasurer, and will leave a small balance in the
Committee’s favour.
This Committee, in considering the present position
of the Synod of Eastern Australia, especially with
respect to the number of its ministers; and comparing
this with the present state, and the future prospects of the
Colony of New South Wales, with respect to an increased and
increasing Presbyterian population ; and considering further,
the measure of encouragement, which, by the blessing
of God, this Committee’s labours have met with; while
they feel also called upon to mark the disappointments
and trials with which it has pleased the Head of the
Church to visit them, —in the diminishing of the number
of their fellow-labourers that had come to them; would
desire with regard to the former, to thank God, and
to take courage; and to accept the latter as sent for
the trial of their faith and their patience, in labouring for
the advancement of the Saviour’s Kingdom in this land.
The Committee agree to record their approbation of the effort
now in course of being made by their brethren of the Presby-
tery of Maitland, to procure three additional Ministers to
labour in that portion of the Synod’s bounds. But the Com-
mittee at the same time, think and feel, that still more exten-
sive effort is demanded from the Synod at large, in en-
deavouring to procure additional labourers. The Committee
judge from the statements made by individual brethren, and
cases already known to the Synod of existing desires and
wants, there is need of at least four additional Ministers,
to be procured from home, for the supply of those districts.
With such knowledge, and the still more painful experience of
there being districts where the Synod of Eastern Australia
had broken ground, and where those positions have been


abandoned, whatever may have been the causes, this Com-
mittee cannot but regard these facts with deep concern; and
even that such facts should present to their own adherents
and friends, as well as to other communions the unseemly
aspect of retrogression on the part of this Synod. Such a
process being once begun and permitted to continue and to
go forward without effort being made to arrest its progress,
and to remedy the evil, this Committee consider would be
to this Synod, and to all the interests of the gospel, under-
taken by it, a most grievous calamity. To a body consti-
tuted and situated as the Synod of Eastern Australia is,
this Committee consider, that, its healthfulness, even its
existence, and its taking root in the land, must consist, under
the blessed government of the ever living Head of the Church,
in its onward progress being manifested to its own people
at large, and the sincerity of its zeal for the salvation of souls
being made to tell upon the conscience and understanding of
its own individual adherents and members: and that it is as pre-
senting this aspect of activity, of zeal, and of perseverance in
the cause of the Gospel, this Synod will best proclaim and de-
monstrate its own spiritual vitality to the consciences of all
around it. This Committee cannot but be aware, that there is
much activity, and much zeal put forth at this very time by
other communions around them in this Colony, and that they
are making progress. And while they would rejoice in the
prosperity of all other Evangelical bodies, yet they are bound
by the most solemn considerations, to realize timeously, what
the unhappy result must inevitably be, if, in the midst of
activity and zeal displayed by other bodies, they themselves
should be seen either losing ground, or continuing to be in-
active.
This Committee also feel, that while it may be alleged,
and probably with much truth, that there is at present no pros •
pect of the ministry being adequately sustained in all
the localities where even immediate supply of the means of grace,
at our hands, is needed and desired; it must be equally true,
that the capabilities of such places to meet the demands that
are necessary, will never improve, nor be enlarged toward the


cause of the Gospel, in connection with this Synod, while it is
felt by the people that the Synod itself is remaining inactive
towards them. There is moral certainty in the fact, which
the Committee would wish to be impressed upon their own
minds, and the minds of others, that true zeal and persevering
earnestness on our own part, as office-bearers and rulers
in the branch of the Church committed to our care in
this land, must be the special instrumentality, by the blessing
of God, and according to His own word, —which must
awaken, and enlarge, and even create liberality and earnestness
on the part of the people. This alone, can be expected to
draw the people toward us; while it cannot hut be most
plainly seen and anticipated that continued inactivity on our
part must have, not merely the tendency, but the surest effect,
of alienating the confidence of our own adherents, who would
most willingly prefer our communion to that of any other
Church, and of estranging them permanently from us.
There are two farther considerations bearing upon the
necessity of our now making an effort to procure ad-
ditional ministers, which this Committee would desire,
themselves, to realize, and to impress with all deference
and brotherly love upon the minds of their brethren,
and their Christian friends. The first of these is, the
comparative position which we cannot fail to occupy in the
view of other churches, and especially of the I ree Church of
Scotland, in proportion to the seen reality of our positive
activities and efforts. It is in the proportion of these efforts,
that we shall hold a place of estimation and regard, even in
the eyes of pious young men at home, who seek forward to the
ministry of the Gospel. This we hold to be a most im-
portant practical consideration. Other colonies are pouring
in applications for ministers to the Free Church of Scotland.
The applications from Canada, and other parts of British
America, may be said even to be wholesale. One hundred
additional Free Church ministers could now be received in
Canada West alone. They have had a Deputation
at home, at last General Assembly, in furtherance of
this object. Within the Australian Colonies themselves,


demands of the same kind are made. We know the fact,
that not fewer than thirteen additional ministers at least are
now sought for in the Colony of Victoria ; and the youngest
colony of all the Australian ones—Otago, in New Zealand—
is now already in possession of three ministers, and is in the act
of sending home for other three. With the limited supply
of ministers which the Free Church can afford, the supplying
of the demands made upon her, must and shall be, on the
familiar and homely principle, in point of fact, “ First come
first served.” We can expect to maintain no higher position
than that; and it must be borne in mind, that this consider-
ation must tell, not feebly but very strongly, upon the quality
as well as the number of the probationers or ministers that may
be sent to us. Somewhat to meet this, it is absolutely necessary
we should seek to do ; and while the effort to do it may be an
arduous one, and presenting many difficulties, and let us even
say, many unlikelihoods at the outset; it is not too much to
say, that our existence, our usefulness, and our evengelical
influence as a Church, all depend, on true and faithful effort
being made by us, casting ourselves and our efforts upon
Him, who careth for His own, and who will not quit nor
forsake His inheritance.
The next consideration to which we have referred is the
following, and which practically involves as much importance
as the former. It has .reference to the acknowledged difficulty
of finding, even within the bounds of the Free Church of
Scotland, men every way adapted to the kinds and quantities
of service and efforts that are necessary to be made both by
Probationers and Ministers in this Colony, so as to secure their
practical and permanent usefulness and success. One thing
is certain; —nor do we by any means consider it to be anything
whatever like ground of reproach to those whose services
we would most gladly receive ; —we must hold forth to
them adequate temporal inducements. We have strong
confidence in the liberality of the people of this Colony,
dependant of course as that liberality, in its measure,
and in its habits, humanly speaking, must be, upon the efforts
that are made by ourselves to awaken, to sustain, and to in-


crease it. We consider oursleves entitled to hold forth
inducements both to piety and to talents at home, to
make choice of this Colony as a field of Evangelical
labours. But our holding forth any inducements without
affording practical proof of our sincerity and earnestness
would be but to turn our averments into an aspect of empty
boasting. It would be expecting and demanding too
much ; it would be a vain effort to impose even upon the
highest Christian promise, or Christian worth, a yoke which
neither could bear, —to spread before them appeals to come
over and help us, and promises of support, without positive
and practical proof of our being, and the people of our con-
nection in this colony being, both sincere and earnest in doing
it. It will be absolutely necessary, to continue to make, as
hitherto indeed, has been made, adequate provision, not
only for defraying the expenses of outfit and passage to
such Ministers and Probationers as we invite to join us,
but also a reasonably certain, and secure, and liberal, provision
for their temporal support, while they come to us, to take
part with us in this ministry.
It is on these principles and considerations, that the ac-
companying Draft of a Scheme for the obtaining of
additional Ministers to this Synod, has been drawn up and
prepared. And it is now by appointment of the Synod
submitted by this Committee to their brethren, and to all
their congregations and friends.
The second important branch of their business entrusted to
this Committee’s care, is Church Extension. By this must be
understood, the planting of new and additional charges in con-
nection with the Synod of Eastern Australia. The recognition
of what this great and important duty implies and demands,
this Committee cannot but find, beset, in present circum-
stances, with many very formidable difficulties. But the
Committee would gird up the loins of their mind, and not
give way either to despondency or discouragement. While
there is reason to believe, that there are thousands of
our fellow-countrymen, located throughout this Colony,
who would be glad and ready to meet and to encourage our


efforts, —we must lay it down as a principle, a working
principle at least, that until we go to them , —they will not
come to us. Our efforts must be, in this sense of an
aggressive character. This great duty implies vigilance, and
positive exertion on the part both of this Committee, and of
the brethren of the Synod at large. Localities and districts,
both comparatively near, and more remote, will fall to be
personally visited. It is presumed to be well known to us
all, that efforts of this kind have been in time past
attended with good results But such efforts must be
continuous, and sustained, to be permanently and adequately
successful. It is believed there are districts and localities of
this Colony, where Presbyterians in greater or smaller number
are congregated, that have never yet been visited by any
minister of this Synod. And without somewhat being posi-
tively done, in the way both of arrangement and supply, for
the overtaking of this great and most inportant duty, this
Committee can see nothing but actual impossibility in the way of
Church Extension being really even entered upon. There is
not, we believe, any one of the ministers of this, nor, of
our other Presbytery, who can venture to be one Sabbath
absent from his own pulpit without leaving it entirely vacant.
With city and town congregations especially it needs scarcely
be stated, that such pulpit vacancies are deeply prejudicial :
and that however good and desirable it undoubtedly is, that we
should live on brotherly terms, in the bond of peace, and unite
in public Christian and philanthrophic objects with other com-
munions, and the individual ministers of such communions;
it is not considered by this Committee as either becom-
ing, or to the edification of the flocks respectively, or to the
furtherance of our great cause, that we should be dependant
on external aid, in the supplying of such lack of ministerial
labours, from Sabbath to Sabbath, or even very frequently.
The Committee cannot see, therefore, any other outlet from
this preliminary or initial difficulty which meets them at once,
with regard to Church Extension, than that one or two Proba-
tioners be employed, whose business it shall be, for a time,
to supply the pulpits of brethren absent from home upon


duties connected with Church Extension. And this is one
special reason, why the Committee do press upon the Synod,
and that the members of the Synod should press it also upon
their respective Congregations, the imminent necessity of such a
number of additional Probationers or ministers being obtained,
as would afford such an arrangement as this, to be both
set up and maintained. It is not considered that the
additional expense of this arrangement would be very formid-
able. Without its being made, we can but look mournfully
on, at efforts which might be made for Church Extension,
despairingly looking on, while opportunities are passing
away, that can never be recalled. With this regretful
expression of its sense of present difficulties, the Committee
feel as if they could not go farther in present circumstances,
to face the great work of Church Extension in this Colony ;
unless it be to express their strong conviction, that with but a
small auxiliary force supplied to them, even at present, there
are many openings in this Colony, where much toward Church
Extension might be accomplished; and that there are
probabilities in present aspects of providence toward this
Church, which might very greatly enlarge the field of
Church Extension which the Colony is prospectively likely
to afford.
On both grounds, then, of maintaining the position in this
Colony as a branch of the church of the Redeemer, which it
has already been given to this Synod to occupy : and in
seeking to lengthen our cords and to strengthen our stakes,
and to be up and doing in the great cause to which we profess
to have given ourselves, this Committee feel, that immediate
and vigorous effort must be entered upon ; and that it is
necessary the attempt should at least be made, to procure six
additional Probationers or Ministers for the Synod of Eastern
Australia.


PROPOSED DRAFT
SCHEME,
FOR THE
Procuring of Six Additional Ministers or Probationers,
FOR THE
SYNOD OF EASTERN AUSTRALIA.
Theke are now forming the Synod of Eastern Australia,
but fourteen ministers. There is much cause of thanksgiving
to God, that the cause of the Gospel, in the hands of the
Synod has in such measure hitherto prospered; and that the
members and adherents of its several congregations have
hitherto responded heartily and readily to calls made upon
their Christian liberality, to be aiding to the cause which
both its people and its ministers profess to have espoused.
It is also to be borne in mind, that trials and difficulties have
been met with, which the Synod would desire to acknowledge
with submission to the will of God, to be His dealings of
faithfulness with them : and that the true improvement of such
trials, is, that we should be awakened and aroused, both as
ministers and as a people to renewed activity and zeal on
behalf of the Gospel and its cause in this land, and on behalf
of immortal souls, especially our brethren according to the
flesh. The Synod has been constrained to abandon positions
where commencement had been made in forming and or-
ganizing congregations. We are threatened as a body with
coming into the untoward attitude of going backward, and
not forward to possess the land, in that measure and to that
extent which the necessities and the desires of our professed
brethren of the faith of our Fathers demand. The visible
Church of Christ on the earth, according as it adheres, (in all
its branches) to the commandment and the cause of its great
and living Head, must be ever progressive, and making
advancement, even until it shall have attained to the fulfilling
of that command, equally of sovereign grace and of supreme
authority;—“Go ye into all the world, and preach the


Gospel to every creature.” Every true believer will feel tbe
authority of that commandment: and there can be no believer
■on earth free from the responsibility of seeing that it be
obeyed, and even fulfilled.
It cannot, therefore, but be a heavy burden lying upon
the mind and spirit of every living member of the Church of
Christ, if he see at any time that the particular branch of
Christ’s Church with which he himself stands connected be
not occupying in the world, a position of advancement, and
increase, and progress. And if he see the reverse, a position
of declension, and retrograde movement, and that the Church
to which he belongs is occupying, or is even in danger of
occupying such a position, he will feel that it is a time
for active duty, for increased prayerfulness, and for awakened
and persevering zeal. Such now, in some measure, is our
position, as a Church in this Colony. But we would not, nor
do we view it either with discouragement or despair. Let us
accept it as a time for the trial of our faith. We have seen,
and perhaps we did but too slightly acknowledge, the measure
of favour and success which God was pleased to give to our
cause in years past. But now both to regain our former
position, and to advance our cause, a new and special effort
is at this time absolutely necessary.
We must, in order to either or both these objects, have an
additional supply of ministers, sent to us from Scotland, from
the Church of our Fathers. It is only there, we can, for
the present, find them. And to place ourselves renewedly in
the position which becomes us, and to which every principle
of duty urges us onward; —this Committee have to
intimate to their brethren, and to the members and adherents
of the several congregations of the Synod, that not fewer than
nine additional Ministers are at this time required, to place
our church in its proper and legitimate position and attitude,
as an Evangelical Christian Institute in this Colony. The
Synod’s Committee for the Procuring of additional Ministers,
and for Church Extension, are well aware, that the expense at-
tendant upon the accomplishing of this object must be very
considerable indeed. It involves, in the first olace, the pay-


ment of outfit and passage to those nine ministers, amount-
ing altogether, by gross computation, to One thousand pounds.
And in the next place, it involves the securing to such pro-
bationers or ministers as may be found willing to come to us,
and who may be judged to be truly qualified for the discharge
of the solemn and important duties before them in this distant
land, an adequate livelihood for a period of two years at least
after they have arrived in the Colony. During that period
of two years, the Committee’s proposal is—a line of duty
which they would recommend for adoption within the bounds
of the Synod in all time coming, as it has indeed been
adopted already in practice,—that the probationers and mi-
nisters coming to join themselves with us, should, in the
first place, itinerate in the Colony, visiting especially, and
continuing for a time within the particular Districts where
ministers of our Church are understood to be wanting
and sought. In this way every such minister and
probationer as may come to join us in the ser-
vices of the Gospel in this Colony, would obtain
personal and practical acquaintance with all the different
localities desiring their services; and what is still more
important, the people or congregations of those districts
would have opportunity and room for the election of the
ministers of their own choice, to be set over them in the Lord.
This opportunity and freedom of election, this Committee,
and they are sure that equally does the Synod, consider to be
an essential principle of the church of our Fathers, at all
times to be rigidly observed, and carefully maintained. The
Committee reject, as inconsistent with the liberty of the
Gospel, and with the rights of the Christian people, the system
of intruding ministers upon congregations ; or of the people
accepting a Pastor, on the ground of such Pastor being
recommended to their choice, under the authority of any Com-
mittee of the Church, any Presbytery, or any Synod. The
pastoral relation between ministers and people cannot be
formed on Gospel foundations Avithout its proceeding on
the mutual consent of both minister and people. And to
the carrying out of this principle into practice, it is the full


and fixed purpose of the Synod of Eastern Australia, in all
cases, faithfully to adhere.
The Committee of Synod, on full consideration of the sub-
ject, are unanimously of opinion, that it will be necessary
to secure, for a period of two years after their arrival in this
Colony, an annual income of £2OO to each Presbyterian
Minister or Probationer that may come to join them. The
Committee of Synod, without entering into details at present,
will be prepared to make full exposition to every congregation
of the Synod, in due time, of the reasons which have led and
influenced them to come to this conclusion, with respect to
the amount of annual income necessary to be secured to
itinerating ministers during the first stages of their Probation-
ary services Meantime, it is obvious, that this support to
be given to nine Probationers or Ministers for two years, will
demand a Fund to be raised of not less than <P3,600. In this
way, it will be seen, that the whole amount to be raised for the
accomplishing of the object in view cannot be stated at a
lower figure than <P4,600. The question will no doubt at once
be agitated in the minds of many of our brethren and
friends throughout the Colony,—How is it possible a sum of
this amount can be raised ?
This Committee, in the first place, would in treat every
one of their brethren, and every one of the members
of this Church, to consider this most important mat-
ter with earnest and patient care; assured, as this Com-
mittee are, that when duly considered, this whole scheme will
appear to them much less formidable, and much more prac-
ticable, than it may at first sight seem to be. Let none be
alarmed at its first appearance. And in the next
place, the Committee have to express their thankfulness to
God, and to take courage, in the pleasing fact, that one third
part of the whole necessary expense has been already under-
taken ; —the Presbytery of Maitland having nobly set the
example of making the proportion of the Fund that is
needed for Three of the nine ministers, secure; while this
Committee cherish the full assurance that their brethren
and friends within the bounds of that Presbytery,


will be ready, in due time, to do even more. Meantime, it is
still necessary that the sum of i? 2,400 be raised, though
not at once, towards the full accomplishment of the object in
view.
This Committee propose, then, that the following Scheme
should be adopted, viz.:—that the above sum be divided
into one thousand parts of £3 each, and that one-third of this
be contributed when the appeal shall be first carried by
members of the Synod or of the Synod’s Committee to
each, and to all, of our congregations:—that another
third part be paid twelve months from that date; —
and the remaining third part, at an interval of twelve
months again from the date of the second payment.
The Committee of Synod think that this arrangement would
lighten the burden, to each subscriber, very materially, so
as to place it within the reach even of persons of the humblest
means in this Colony, to take their personal share in the
honourable and sacred labour of helping forward the cause of
the Gospel, in connection with the Church to which they
b elong. Surely, there is scarcely a working, well-doing man
in this Colony, but could spare, without injury to himself,
while God gives him health and strength, one pound in a
year, even for three years running. And while the Committee
are well aware, that there may be individuals, whose hearts are
not the least warm and open to such an enterprize,
who might not feel themselves at liberty to pledge them-
selves even to an annual outlay of the small sum mentioned
for a period of three years ; the Committee recommend, that
opportunity should be given to such members and adherents
of our Church, to contribute their olferings, by an annual col-
lection being made in each congregation toward this Scheme;
and they recommend this, under the full conviction, that “the
willing mind” should be accepted by the Church, however
limited persons of such mind may be in their present means, and
that the small offerings should be as readily accepted as the
greatest and most liberal donations and gifts of the more
wealthy. And farther, this Committee have the full con-
fidence and assurance, that among the members and ad-


herents of our church, in their respective congregations and
localities, many will be found who will be ready to take
up considerably more than one share in this enterprize. And
in point of fact, it is the grateful duty of the Committee to
intimate, for the encouragement of their brethren and their
friends throughout the congregations of the Synod, that there
are individuals who already have agreed to take twenty
shares, and perhaps upwards.
The Committee of Synod therefore propose, that the
Scheme shall be forthwith, with all convenient speed, entered
upon; and that members of the Committee and ministers of
the Synod, shall visit each congregation, and make appeal to
them respectively on this most important subject.
The Committee would desire to remind their brethren and
friends throughout this Colony, of how much this age is one
of activity, of enterprize, and earnestness; and to what extent
it is every day practically demonstrated how effort and union
can accomplish what may well be termed great wonders. And
when such efforts are made in dependance on God, and for
His own cause, He will not deny His blessing to them-
This Committee rejoice with thankfulness to God that much of
this activity and enterprise has been turned to the furtherance
of truly Christian and Gospel objects throughout the world;
and that in some measure the breathings of the Spirit from
above do seem to be animating the mystical body of Christ
with zeal, and with the desire of religious enterprize. And
it would truly be a practical separating of ourselves from
the communion of God’s people, should we at such a time,
and surrounded, as we truly are, in this sense by “ such
a cloud of witnesses,” shut up our own hearts, and our
own hands, from taking share in what God shows us to be
the way of accomplishing to His own glory, the ad-
vancement of the kingdom of His beloved Son, and the
eternal salvation of perishing souls around us. This Com-
mittee would instance to their friends and brethren what has
been already accomplished by the Free Church of Scotland,
both at home and abroad. Besides the supply of Gospel or-
dinances to her own members and adherents at home, striking
7 c>


deep her roots into the soil of the land of their fathers, and
causing multitudes to rejoice under her shadow, with none to
make them afraid ; —her missionary enterprizes now may be
said to be world-wide both among Gentiles and Jews, and
from year to year an increase in such labours is attained, and
the Lord of the harvest is seen to be commanding blessings
upon those godly labours; and from year to year also, those
who went forth weeping, bearing the precious seed, are seen
coming again with rejoicing, bearing their sheaves with
them.
The Committee would finally remind their friends and
brethren in the bonds of the Gospel, of the present circum-
stances and the future prospects of this, the land of their
adoption. The ministrations of the Gospel do not yet
pervade it. The land mourns. And on all of us who have
been sent hither to carry forward (with others), the work of
evangelizing this extensive land, —upon us is laid the responsi-
bility, and into our hands is put the talent and the privilege of
being fellow-labourers together with God, as humble but faith-
ful instrumentalities, in His own hand, even here, to display
His banner, because of the truth, and to endeavour, in His
own name, and by His own guidance and strength, to plant
the Church of our fathers, in the utmost ends of the earth.
Can any believer seek an honour more real or high ? A door
wide and effectual is opened before us. We behold the in-
teresting and the grateful spectacle too of other Protestant
communions around us, being zealous and active, and earnest
in the cause. We would bid them all God speed, to whom it
has been given indeed to love the Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity. But let it not be said that while others are up and
doing, Presbyterians should even seem to be as the people of
Meroz of old. What has been the source of all the blessing
and safety of the lands of our fathers; and of all the family
blessings of our ancestral homes, but the glorious Gospel
of the grace of God having been early planted in those
lands! Let us labour to plant it in this land, so
that generations to come may serve and bless the Lord,
and be to the praise of the glory of His own grace,


when this country shall have taken its place among the
nations of earth; and when, through God’s blessing upon
efforts now begun, there may be a race to serve Him in
spirit and in truth.
Let each one think, and consider, as before Grod, —what
shall this land be, even in course of a short time hence.
What shall it be if the means of grace become scarce to
you ?—and that they wither away from among you. Pa-
rents !—what shall your children, now at your knees, be,
some twenty or forty years hence ? And what shall their
children be, in course of other thirty or forty years ? Think
of this, —we beseech every one of you. Is there no responsi-
bility laid upon you, to do somewhat , to plant the glorious
Grospel in this land ? Will any one of you, grudge to give,,
even the matter of one pound a-year, for this great object,
additional to what you have perhaps been giving already?
Will that make you really poorer? Why is it that-God
gives you, in His mercy,—health,—and\strength,—and means?
What is your chief end ? * •, - , •
At Sydney , the eighth day of May , Eighteen hundred and
fifty-seven years : which day the Synod of Eastern Aus-
tralia, being met and constituted.
Inter alia. —Rev. Dr. Mackay, Convener, gave in the
Report of the Committee on the Scheme for procuring Minis-
ters, and for Church Extension, and submitted a proposal to
procure six additional Ministers. On the motion of Rev.
William Maclntyre, the Report was adopted, the Committee
re-appointed, and instructed to carry out the proposal sub-
mitted to the Synod by the Convener; and Ministers were
instructed to receive a deputation from the Committee, at such
a time as may be arranged, to address their congregations on
behalf of this proposal now adopted by the Synod.
Extracted from the Records of the
Synod of Eastern Australia, by
(Signed) ARTHUR M. SHERIFF,
Synod Clerk„


