

pgrl M fWi
iff
* 1 c


' fS


Phalangista lemuroides, Collett.
P.Z.S. 1884, p. 385.
This species does not appear to be plentiful, but in the dense
dark scrubs nocturnal animals of small size are always difficult to
obtain.
Phalangista archeri, Collett.
P.Z.S. 1884, p. 381,
Many examples of this very distinct species were found; the
young have the same distinctive markings as the adult, but not so
well defined.
Phalangista sp., juv.
This appears to be the young of P. cookii, but does not altogether
agree with the examples from the Richmond River, presumedly of
the same species. It may be the young of P. herbertensis, Collett.
{To he continued).


ADDITIONS TO THE FOSSIL FLORA OF EASTERN
AUSTRALIA.
R. Etheridge, Junior.
(Pis. XXXVII.'-XXXVIII.).
Since the appearance of Dr. Feistmantel’s Work on the “ False-
ozoic and Mesozoic Flora of Eastern Australia,”* and the Memoir
by the Rev, J. E. T.-Woods, “On the Fossil Flora of the Coal
Deposits of Australia,”! several additional plant remains have
come to light from various geological horizons in New South
Wales and Queensland.
In the present paper I purpose describing three ferns from
Queensland. One is from the Lower Carboniferous of the Drum-
mond Range, one from the Lower Mesozoic of the Ipswich Basin,
and the third from the Upper Mesozoic series of the Croydon Gold-
field. They will be described in the above order :
1. Aneimites, Dawson.
In his work previously referred to, Dr. Feistmantel has given
several illustrations of the characteristic and most abundant fern
of the Lower Carboniferous rocks of New South Wales under the
name of Rhacopteris iruequihtera, Gbpp., sp.
A casual examination of the fine specimen now under descrip-
tion would tempt the observer to place the plant in close conti-
guity to this species, but a further study at once reveals many
important differences. Thus : —ln Rhacopteris incequilatera , the
frond, so far as it is at present known to us, is simply pinnate;
in the specimen it is bipinnate. The pinnae of the former are
* Palaeozoische und Mesozoische Flora des ostlichen Australiens. Palaeon-
tographica, 1878-79, Suppl. Bd. 111. Leif. 3, Hefts 2-4,
t Proc. Linn. Soc. N. S. Wales for 1883, [lBB4], p. 37.


narrow, long, rigid, and erect; in the latter more or less flabellate,
and to some extent spreading, or rather expanding. The pinnules
in R. incequilatera are stiff, rigidly fan-shaped, and with strongly
serrated edges, the veins after dichotomisation passing one to
each division of the margin. But in our fern the leaflets are
ovate-pyriform, with simple margins, and veins several times
dichotomous. The result of this arrangement is that a much
more graceful outline is given to a far laxer frond than exists in
Rhacopteris.
The resemblance between the two ferns, so generally alike and
yet so different in detail, gives rise to the question—to what genus
should the Queensland plant be referred 1 A really scientific
method has now come into vogue for the determination of fossil
ferns by their fructification, when observable, a method far in
advance of the old separation, simply depending on the nervation
and form of the pinnule, in conjunction with the form of the
frond. In the present instance, the absence of fructification
leaves no choice but to employ the form of the leaves and their
arrangement as our guide. This undoubtedly brings our plant in
close x’elation with the group of ferns represented by such genera
as Cyclopteris, Archceopteris (= Palceopteris), Rhacopteris , Adian-
tites (so-called), and others. The resemblance is specially strong
to Cyclopteris and Adiantites, but I believe Prof. Goppert, the
author of the latter, abandoned his genus in favour of Cyclopteris.
The most philosophical handling of this old Brongniartian
genus, which has yet appeared, so far as the subject is known to
me, is that by Principal Sir W. Dawson, F.R.S., who has given
the following classification.*
Cyclopteris , Brongniart (restricted), after the type of C. flahellata,
Brong. Carboniferous. With three sections.
(a). Archceopteris, Dawson ; typified by Cydopteris hiber-
nica, Forbes, and to supersede Schimper’s genus, Palceop-
teris. The pinnules are ovate and decurrent on the
rachis. Devonian.
* The Fossil Plants of the Devonian and Upper Silurian Formations of
Canada, Geol. Survey Canada, 1871, p. 48.


(h). Aneimites, Dawson ; typified by Cyclopteris acadica.
Dawson ; with more or less flabellate leaves. Carboni-
ferous.
(c). Nephropteris, Schimper; after the type of Cyclopteris
orbicularis, Brongniart. Carboniferous.
Dawson regarded his Aneimites as a sub-genus of Cyclopteris,
but if the separation from the latter is worth anything, to my
mind it merits generic rank, and will be so considered here.
In originally proposing Aneimites, * Principal Dawson evidently
had in mind the British Coal Measure fern, Sphenopteris adiantoides,
Lind, and Hutton, so much so, that to this he at first referred the
plant afterwards called by him Aneimites (Cyclopteris) acadica. f
This being the case we may justly include Sphenopteris adian-
toides in Aneimites. Furthermore, it is to be regretted that
Principal Dawson did not refer to this obvious fact in his second
and more detailed account of the Canadian fern.
The strong resemblance borne by the Queensland specimen to
the British Aneimites adiantoides, L. and H., sp., and in a less
degree to A. acadica, Dm, renders it exceedingly probable that it
should be placed in the genus in question. I shall therefore speak
of it in future as Aneimites austrina.
My friend Mr. R. Kidston, F.C.S., reminds me that Cyclopteris
valida, Dawson, which has been taken as the type of his genus
Triphylopteris by Schimper, is undistinguishable from Aneimites , a
fact in which I cordially agree.
The pinnae of A. austrina are about three inches long, the entire
frond, as preserved, occupying a space of more than one foot. The
frond is generally flabellate, and bipinnate, there being portions of
eight pinnae on one side, alternating with seven on the other, of a
rather broad rachis. The pinnae are elongate and generally
narrow, hardly expanding from a uniform width, and decreasing
• Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. 1860. XVII. p. 5.
t The Fossil Plants of the Lower Carboniferous and Millstone Grit
Formations of Canada. Geol. Survey Canada, 1873, p. 26.


but very slowly in width towards their apices. The pinnules are
ovate or obovate-pyriform, and retain their form throughout the
length of each pinna, until near their apices, when the pinnules
become longer and more wedge-shaped, the pinna terminating in a
uni-, bi-, or tri-lobed pinnule. The pinnules have likewise a some-
what flabellate aspect, seldom sub-imbricate, or overlapping one
another, but separated by an interspace, which is certainly at
times rather inconspicuous. The proximal margins of the pin-
nules are parallel to the rachis, and during fossilization some of
them have slightly infringed on the latter.
The two lowest pinnae exhibit a marked difference from those
above them. The second pair aie the best preserved, and are
deeply lobate and pinnatifid, conforming to the habit we are
accustomed to associate with the pinnules in some Sphenopterids.
The divisions of the pinnae in question have quite lost their
pyriform, or obovate outline; but are irregularly trilobate, and to
some extent incised, the apical lobe being the largest, and more or
less lanceolate. The nerves are but very faintly visible on the
specimen occupying the greater portion of the slab, but are shown
on a smaller example lying near. The lower pinnae seem to be
only a modification of the lobate apical pinnules of the higher
pinnae, as seen on the third to the right from the bottom of the
specimen, and the fifth and sixth on the left hand. But they are
not the basal, as the lower portion of the frond is concealed by
matrix.
The resemblance of A. austrina to A. adiantoides consists in the
similar obovate or pyriform pinnules, with a like modification
of the apical pinnules. The two ferns, however, differ greatly in
the relative sizes of their respective portions, whilst in the British
species there is no appearance of the dissimilar lower pinnae.
From A. acadica, Dn., the form of the pinnules will at once
distinguish it.


The following are the abbreviated specific characters :
Aneimites austrina, sp. Nov.
(PI. xxxvn.)
Sp. Char. —Frond elongately expanding, bipinnate; rachis moder-
ately broad, carinate. Pinnae subalternate, elongate, attenuating
but slowly towards their apices, almost parallel-sided; rachis
carinate, frequently zig-zag ; pinnules petiolate, rather inequilateral,
varying in shape on different parts of the frond, but generally
ovate or obovate-pyriform, sometimes a little sub-imbricate, prox-
imal or inner margins parallel to the rachis; upper and distal
margins broadly rounded, and all entire; pinnules towards
the apices of the pinme becoming more truly pyriform, or pyri-
form-deltoid, the terminal leaflets being uni-, bi-, or trilobed;
pinnules of the lowest (preserved) pinnae lobate, the apical lobe
more>or less lanceolate. Petioles short and straight. Nerves well
marked, numerous, bi- or perhaps tridichotomous.
Loc. and Horizon.—l am indebted to Mr. James Smith, of
Rockhampton, for an opportunity of describing this elegant fern.
He states that it was found by Mr. A. E. Holmes, station manager,
“ where the latitude of Springsure, and the longitude of Bogan-
tungen intersect.” (According to Mr. R. L. Jack, this would be
about Mount Budge on the Drummond Range, Central Queens-
land).
2. Phlebopteris.
The fern from the Ipswich Coal Measures, is certainly a member
of the Dictyopteridao, and apparently referable to the genus
Phlebopteris.
This section, sometimes called a sub-order, sometimes a family,
is already represented in the uppermost Palaeozoic and Lower
Mesozoic rocks of Australia, by the genera Glossopteris, Sagenop-
teris, and Gangamopteris. According to Schimper, * the fronds are
many times pinnate, or pinnatifid, and the nerves reticulate in
some degree or other.
* Traits de Paleontol. Vitale, 1869, I. p. 624.


Of the many interesting genera contained in this family, PTileh-
opteris, as emended by Schimper, is one of the most so, from its
general resemblance in form to certain members of thePecopteridfe
to wit, the genus Alethopteris. In the latter the pinnules are simple,
usually entire, always more or less strap-shaped, decurrent on the
rachis, or confluent, and coriacequs, whilst the veins are simple
and forking. Now in Phlebopteris we again observe the more or
less elongate, and often strap-shaped decurrent pinnules, but with
a wholly different venation—the costa or mid-rib of each having
on each side of it a border of reticulate spaces, from which the
veins take their rise. This reticulation in various degrees of
development is Characteristic of the Dictyopteridse, but Schimper
has wisely restricted Phlebopteris to those possessing but a single
series of reticulations on each side of the mid-rib. His words
a re —“a une seule serie d’arcs de chaque cote de la cote,”
Amongst a collection of plants in the Australian Museum from
the Ipswich Coal Measures on the Darling Downs, near Toowoomba,
I observed some fairly good specimens of what appeared to
be an Alethopteris / but the narrow elongate pinnules, springing
horizontally from tbe rachis did not allow the plant in question to
fit happily into that genus. Close examination of the better-
preserved examples, revealed a small, and very delicate reticula-
tion, consisting of small, elongate, and irregular vesicles, if I may
call them so, lying close to the mid-rib of each pinnule. The
appearance presented by this reticulation is very well shown in
Schimper’s figure of Phlebopteris ajfinis, Schenk.*
Portions of this fern, which I propose to call Phlebopteris
alethopteroides, are as much as seven inches in length, so that the
pinnae must have attained ano mean size. Individual pinnules,
although imperfect, still measure two and a-half inches in length,
their breadth, which is very disproportionate to the length,
remaining very uniform. The greatest width I have observed
.a pinna to attain, and that again imperfect, was four and a quarter-
inches. The pinnules are, on an averge, from a quarter of an inch
* Log. cit. Atlas, t. 39, fig. 15.


1306 ADDITIONS TO THE FOSSIL FLORA OF EASTERN AUSTRALIA,
to five-sixteenths wide, and are separated from one another by
interspaces of about a quarter their width. A good deal of irre-
gularity exists in the manner in which the mid-ribs of the pinnules
are given off from opposite sides of the rachis. Some are oppo-
site, others are regularly alternate, many are sub-alternate, and
others are even intermediate between these positions.
The veins are very regular, and given off at an angle which
slightly varies from a right angle with the mid-rib, to one more
acute. They bifurcate shortly after leaving the reticulation, and
proceed direct to the margin. Along the rachis, on the confluent
portions of the pinnules the veins are longer, and much wider
apart.
The rachis is always broad and well-marked, being ridged and
fiuted; and it may not be uninteresting to note a segmentation of
the stem in some of the specimens, and always at the base of the
pinnules, but arising only from fracture.
The regularity and stoutness of the rachis and pinnules, give to
this fern, especially when not too well preserved, almost the aspect
of a Cycad.
The following are the abbreviated specific characters, which will
serve to distinguish it :
Phlebopteris alethopteroides, sp.nov,
(PI. xxxviii. figs. 1-2.)
Sp. Char.—Pinnse large, probably elongate. Rachis strong,
moderately thick or wide, and longitudinally grooved and ridged.
Pinnules lingual-strap-shaped, narrow, very long, parallel-sided,
alternate, sub-alternate, or opposite, very regular in appearance,
and equidistant, markedly confluent. Mid-ribs strong, tapering
giadually, and extending to the apices of the pinnules j reticula-
tion small, consisting of elongate, rather irregular, scale-like
vesicles; veins almost at right angles to the mid-rib, bifurcating
immediately after leaving the reticulation.
Loc. and Horizon.—Darling Downs, near Toowoomba (Austra-
lian Museum); Ipswich Coal Measures, Lower Mesozoic.


3. Didymosorus, Debey and Ettingshausen,
Even more interesting than the plant just described is the third
and last specimen from the Desert Sandstone of the Croydon
goldfield, and which seems to be of a type rare in Australian
Palaeontology. It is, I believe, identical with the Pecopteris glei-
chenoides, Oldham and Morris, which should be placed in the
genus Didymosorus, Debey and Ettingshausen,* one of the Glei-
cheniaceae, This genus resembles the recent Gleichenia, but
possesses a different fructification. The frond in Didymosorus is
dichotomous and bipinnate, each division being very long, narrow,
and nearly parallel-sided ; the pinnae are quite linear, either oppo-
site, or sub-alternate, on a very narrow rachis.
The typical species of Didymorsorus, D. comptonifolia , D. and
E., occurs in the Cretaceous rocks of Aix-la-Chapelle, whilst
Pecopteris yleichenoides is found in the Mesozoic rocks of the
Rajmahal Series of India.
The Australian plant corresponds with the description of
the genus in every particular, but we do not possess enough of
the frond to show dichotomisation. It is either identical with the
Indian species, or a mere variety of it, although it has points in
common with the European form. Unfortunately for the purposes
of strict identification, the specimens are preserved in a fine
siliceous grit, which has obliterated all evidence of fructification,
if any such existed, and also of the nervation. As regards size
the specimens now under description agree entirely with the Indian
species, but seem to be rather smaller than the European, the
general width of a pinna being two-sixteenths of an inch.
The figures of Oldham and Morris * represent portions of fronds
as long as seven inches, and two and a-half inches wide, but the
largest of our specimens is four inches long, and one and a quarter
* Denks. K. Akad. Wissensch. Wien, 1859, XVII. 1 Abth. p. 186.
* Pal. Indica (Gondwana Flora), 1860, I. pt. 1, fas, 6. p. 45, t. 25, t. 26,
f. 2 and 3.


wide. The plume are certainly narrower than D. gleichenoides y
but as this point may entirely depend on the position occupied by
the specimen in the frond, it cannot be taken as a point of much
importance.
As no fructification has been seen, it would perhaps be more
advisable to place the Croydon fossils, “ characterized by the
slenderness of the whole leaf, and by the delicate linear form of
the pinnae” (Feistmantel), in Gleichenites, as Oldham and Morris
have done with their species; although, be it noted, they refer to
the general resemblance of the latter to Didymosorus. On the
other hand, so close a resemblance can hardly have existed,
without some corresponding affinity in the productive state, and I
shall therefore venture to place Gleichenites gleichenoides in Didy-
mosorus,, and provisionally refer the Australian form to it.
The general relations of this peculiar fern have been ably
discussed by the late Messrs. Oldham and Morris ; but in their
description they state the pinnae are alternate. Their figures,
however, show as much variation from alternate to opposite as do
our specimens. At the same time the pinnae are apparently closer
in the Indian fossils.
The small ovately-pointed pinnules, entirely decurrent as they
are, give to the pinnae a fret-saw-like appearance, and are evidently
a very characteristic feature of the fern. In consequence of the
gritty nature of the matrix the venation is obscure, but Oldham
and Morris say generally—“ The nervation of the pinnules, is
very indistinct, but seems to consist of a small flexuous mid-rib
becoming nearly obsolete at the end of the pinnules, and from
which secondary veins pass off obliquely at irregular intervals.”*
Didymosorus (1) gleichenoides, Old. and Mor., var.
(PL xxxviii. tig. 3.)
Pecopteris (Gleichenites) linearis, 0. and M., Mem. Geol. Survey
India, 11. p. 324.
* Loc. cit., p. 46.


Pecopieris (Gleichenites) gleichenoides, O. and M., Pal. Indica
(GondwanaFlora), 1862,1, pt. 1, p. 45, t. 25, t. 26 f. 1, 3.
Gleichenites (Gleichenia) bindrahunensis , Feistmantel, Ibid. p. 93.
Gleichenia bindrahunensis , Schimper, Traite Pal. Veg. 1869, 11.
p. 670.
Sp. Char.— Frond [bipinnate], long, narrow, parallel-sided,
tapering but very slowly. Pinnae long and linear, opposite or
sub-alternate, rarely alternate, obtusely pointed at their apices,
springing from the rachis at right angles, and in close contiguity
to one another. Rachis straight, non-flexuous, small and delicate.
Pinnules short, entire, broad-ovate, sub-alternate on the pinnae,
and decurrent.
Loc. and Horizon.—True Blue Hill, Croydon goldfield, North
Queensland (R. L. Jack, Esq,, &c.); Desert Sandstone, Upper
Mesozoic.
EXPLANATION OF PLATES.
Plate xxxvii.
Fig. 1 .—Aneimites austrina, Eth., jun. Portion of a large frond, showing
the variation in the form of the pinnules (§ nat. size).
Fig. 2. —Pinnule with venation ( x 3).
Plate xxxviii.
Fig. I.— Phlebopteris alethopteroid.es, Eth., jun. Portion of a frond, with
form and arrangement of the pinnules (nat. size).
pig. 2.—The same. Pinnule enlarged to show the reticulation along the
midrib ( x 3.)
Fig. 3. Didymosorus (?) gleichenoides, Old. & Mor. Portion of a frond,,
with form and arrangement of the pinnules (nat. size).


DESCRIPTIONS OF TWO NEW AUSTRALIAN FISHES
By E. P. Ramsay, F.R.S.E., and J. Douglas Ogilby, F.L.S,
Parascyllium collare, sp.nov.
The head is hroad and flattened above, the snout rounded.
Eyes large; the interorbital space equal to the length of the
snout; the distance between the tip of the snout and the mouth
is three-fifths of that between the angle of the mouth and the
eye. Spiracles very small. Nasal valves each furnished with a
pair of small cirri. A well-developed fold from the angle of the
mouth, extending along the lower jaw to a distance equalling the
interspace between the two folds. Teeth —ln many rows in both
jaws, each with a lateral cusp on either side. Gill-openings The
four anterior ones small, and their own length apart; the fifth
twice as large and contiguous to the penultimate, these two being
above the base of the pectoral fin. Fins. —The first dorsal com-
mences about the middle of the total length, and is the same size
as the second, which commences nearer to the first than to the
end of the caudal; the anal is lower, but with a longer base than the
second dorsal, and is situated entirely in front of that fin ; ventrals
considerably in advance of the first dorsal, their outer edge
obliquely truncate, and forming a very acute angle with the
inner edge ; lower caudal lobe large, posterior rounded. Skin
very rough when rubbed forwards, owing to the scales, which are
numerous and closely set, terminating in an acutely angular point.
Colors —Rich brown, with six broad darker transverse bands :
the first, extending from a short distance in front of the first
gill-opening on either side to the third, and being broadest on the
occiput, is of a deep chocolate brown; the second, behind the tips
of the pectoral fins, much lighter in color, a character common
to the four following bands; between and even on all the bands


P.L.5.N.5.W (2 nd Ser.) VOL,3
PL. 37.




P.L.S. N.S.W. (2 nd ser) VOL. 3
S Sec/yField Ill'll


■




i
4
