

RECORDS
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN MUSEUM
EDITED BY THE CURATOR.
Vol. XI, No. 8.
PRINTED BY ORDER OF THE TRUSTEES
R. ETHERIDGE, Junr., J.P.,
Vale & Pearson, Printers, 2 Castlereagh Street, Sydney,
CURATOR,
SYDNEY, 30th MARCH, 1917:




ADDITIONS TO THE ETHNOLOGICAL COLLECTIONS,
CHIEFLY FROM THE NEW HEBRIDES.
BY R. ETHERIDGE, JUNR., Curator.
(Plates xxxii.-xxxix.)
The New Hebridean collection has from time, to time
received some very valuable additions, amongst others the
following interesting objects:—
I.— 'Stone Poob-dishes.
The largest of these (PL xxxii.), evidently an adapted block
of stone, is broad oval in form, with a rounded rim, or
periphery, of variable width. It measures two feet by nine-
teen inches in cross diameters, the full height is five inches,
decreasing to two inches inside, and is ninety-six pounds in
weight.
It was presented by Mr. J. E. Eysh, of “ Big Bay,” Santo,
who states it to bo about the size and shape of the to-day’s
wooden food dishes. The dish was, for a long time, lying in
the village, close to Mr. Pysh’s house, but when a new
position for the village was selected, and removal took place,
the dish was left behind, it being taboo ; the villagers pro-
fessed total ignorance of its origin or age. Dr. 0, Anderson
informs me the stone is a volcanic tuff.
Dr. W. T. Brigham has figured a similar flat but round
dish, taken from “ a heiau [temple] on Molokai, [and] is the
largest worked stone dish of Hawaiian origin I have yet
seen.” 1 Elsewhere Dr. Brigham says his dish is of compact
lava, twenty inches in diameter, and used as a receptacle for
small offerings in the temple. 2 Except for its circular
outline the liawaiian utensil is quite of the same type as
the present example from Santo.
A still larger, but worn dish, is figured by the
author from Nihoa Island, “ used for grinding awn.” 3
1 Brigham—Oco. Papers Bernice Pauahi Bishop Mns., 1., No. 2, 1900,
p. 20, fig. 6.
2 Brigham—Memoirs Ibid, 1., No. 4, 1902, p. 52, p. 54, fig. 51.
3 Brigham—Memoirs Ibid, pi. xliii., fig, 1227.


The next in size, also of volcanic tuff, is a large shallow
oval dish, seventeen inches long, fourteen inches wide, two
and a half inches high, one and a quarter inches within, and
the weight twenty-eight pounds (PI. xxxiv., fig. 1).
A small mortar-like dish, or bowl, is represented in PI. xxxv.,
fig. 1, with well-rounded sides and seamed with cracks
filled with spar. It is composed of a light-coloured stone,
probably a consolidated coral-rock. It is five inches long,
four and a half inches wide, two indies high, one and a
quarter inches within, and is one and a half pounds in weight.
The fourth and last dish is more or less pyriform with
rounded sides, and at one end two mammillary projections
(PI. xxxiii.) as in the bowl about to be described ; this is also of
volcanic tuff. The measurements are : Thirteen and a half,
inches long, ten and a half inches broad, three inches high,,
one and three quarter inches inside height, and a weight of
twelve and a half pounds.
All four utensils are from Tavanapni and Narata Plantation,,
St. Phillip and St. James’ Bay, Santo, otherwise known as
“ Big Bay.”
II. — Stone Bowl.
Portion of a much-worn argillaceous limestone bowl (PI.
xxxvi,, fig, 1), when entire (PI. xxxvii., fig. 1) oblong oval, in
its present condition comprising a little more than one half
the original. When placed in position it is four and a half
inches high, six inches long, and three and a quarter inches
deep inside ; the aperture is four inches across. The thick-
ness is unequal, but on the fractured side it is one inch
and an eighth thick. At the end, an inch below the rim,
is a flattened projection which is, no doubt, a modified handle,
in fact this becomes quite apparent when the restored vessel
is examined (PI. xxxvii., fig. 1).
The block of stone was evidently chipped into shape by
successive blows with a pointed tool, and hollowed by the
same process, and both externally and internally the pitting
so caused is visible. On each side of the bowl is a kind of
panel; one is one and three quarter inches square, and


divided into twenty parallelograms or pellet-like partitions
arranged in series of five longitudinal, and four transverse.
The other panel is one and a half inches by two inches and
yet imperfect; in each case the longer axes of these pellets
are parallel to the longer axis of the bowl.
The form is not that of any Santo pottery I have seen,
but the small parallelograms on the decorative panels greatly
resemble the rows of pellets that ornament the necks of
Santo pots ; they are also seen on Fijian glazed ware.
Very little appears to have been published on the Santo
pottery. All that Codrington 4 says is that “pottery ....
being present in well-known forms in Fiji/and fn ruder
unglazed dishes in Espiritu Santo.” Of the latter, the Rey,
Robert Steel said : —“ They make a kind of unglazed pottery,
which they use for culinary purposes ; but they all say their
fathers made a far superior kind.” 5
In Mr. G. Oollingridge’s translation of the “ Spanish
Description of the Big Bay of Santo ” occurs the following
passage;—“The natives make from a' black clay some very
well-worked pots, large and small, as well as pans and
poringers in the shape of small boats.” 6 This bowl (PI. xxxvi.,
fig. 1 ; PI. xxxvii., fig. 1) is not unlike a boat.
Mr, Fysh, to whom the Trustees are indebted for this bowl
also, suggested a Spanish origin, but this is untenable, for in
Captain James Burney’s account 7 of Pedro Fernandez de
Quires’ stay in the Bay of St. Philip and Sfc. James, it is
said the people “make earthen vessels work on marble and
on stone.” The sum of this is, therefore, that pottery
making was an established industry around “ New Jerusalem,”
on the bay in question, at Espiritu Santo, previous to 1606
A.D.!
* Codrington—Melanesians, 1891, p. 31S,
5 Steel—New Hebrides and Christian Missions, 1880, p. 332.
6 Oollingridge—Hirst Discovery of Australia and New Guinea, Bvo.
Edit., 1906, p. 107.
7 Burney—Chronological History of the Voyages and Discoveries in
the South or Pacific Ocean, Pt. 11., 1579—1620, 1806, p. 309.


A recent account, speaking of Big Bay says : “We found
they are expert potters. Nearly all their culinary utensils are
made of hand pottery-ware. We made quite a large collection
of many different sorts of hard red pottery, such as pots,
vases, cups, mugs, basins, plates, saucers, dolls, .pigs, and
idols.” 8
The bowl was picked up near an outcrop of “white sand-
stone" [? argillaceous limestone], 0 the place being taboo, on
Tavanapni and Narata Plantation, St. Phillip and St, James
Bay, lo Santo.
lll.— Kava .Stone.
This peculiar heavy, torpedo or cigar-shaped stone _ (PI.
xxxviii., fig. 1) was also obtained by Mr. Jiysh. It, is oi
argillaceous limestone similar to the bowl (PI. xxxv., fig. 1),
with a circumference at the centre of two feet eight and a
half inches; the weight is one hundred and twenty-four
pounds. The apex is obtusely pointed, but considerable
abrasion has taken place at the base.
Mr. Pysh has supplied me with the following information •
In the making of a chief a feast was inaugurated, and at its
conclusion the chief-to-be had to reside in the house wherein
reposed this stone, for four to five weeks. During this period
of seclusion the only drink permitted him was Kava, and
after each potation the dregs were cast on the Kava stone—in
fact a kind of libation ; kava was reserved for the chiefs, to
the common herd it was taboo. 11 No one dare touch this
fetish, anyone doing so, even by accident, would break out
into sores and boils, notwithstanding the payment of a pig
or pigs to the paramount chief.
8 Eaimie—My Adventures amongst South Sea Cannibals, 10,1.2, p. 106.
9 The coast of Espiritu Santo I. is composed of coral and coral rock.
This becomes elevated to the north of the point off which lies
Tatuba, a small islet, only a few feet above sen level. The same
formation underlies the soil for some miles back into the interior,
until it meats the volcanic tufa, of the mountains (Wawn —The
South Sea Islanders, fyc., 1803, p. 86.)
10 The actual name given to this bay by De Quires was that of “ San
Felipe de Santiagq ” (Burney, Loa. cit., p. 280).
11 F. A. Campbell refers to the use of Kava, ■“■which grows ex-
tensively on the southern islands of the group, but nowhere bettor
than in this district (A Year in the New Hebrides, <}o„ 1873, p. 166),


It may be that this stone is akin to the navilah of
Erromanga. The moon is symbolised by a navilah, in the
form of a ring or roughly-shaped crescent. Writing of this
stone cult, the Rev. Dr. H. A. Robertson remarked l2 : “ Stones
large and small, of peculiar shape or origin, in which some
supernatural power is supposed to reside, because of their
connection with a spirit or spirits.” 13
In many of the New Hebridean islands “the chiefs possess
strangely shaped stones to which they attribute remarkable
powers —of making the yams grow large, the cocoanuts
flourish, and the pigs to multiply. To some they ascribe
destructive powers. A spirit, sometimes a ghost, is supposed
to exercise its powers in connection with the stone; and the
possessors of such stones baye great mana which they will
employ on behalf of others in return for fees.” 14 The spirit
does not dwell in the stone, but is associated with it, and may
be near at band. 15
This association of spirits with stones in the New Hebrides
is exhaustively dealt with by Godrington, l3 He said, “any
fanciful interpretation of a mark on a stone or of its shape
was enough to give a character to the stone; and to the
spirit associated with it.” l7
Loo. —From St, Phillip and St. James’ Bay, or' Big Bay,
Santo. Mr. Eysli says :—“ I have sent two Kava stones at
various times—one from off my land at South Big Bay,
about nine miles north of the Jordan River, and the other
about twenty-five miles north of the same.”
12 Robertson—Erromimga the Martyr Isle, p. 435.
13 A. W. Murray refers to the navilah —“a species of idolatry con-
nected with the worship of the moon, the image of which they
exhibit at their idolatrous feasts (Missions in Western Polynesia,
&0., 1863, p. 209),
14 Lamb—Saints and Savages, The Story of Five Years in the New
Hebrides, 1906, p. 213,
u> Lamb— Loo. cit., p. 114.
18 Godrington—The Melanesians, 1891, p.p. 181-5.
17 Godrington— Loo. oil., p. 182.


IV,—Missile Sticks from Tanna and Fdtdna.
So far as I have been able to gather, practical!}' very little
lias been written on these interesting objects, apparently-
restricted to the above neighbouring islands. They are
composed o£ two substances, stone and coral.
The collection contains in all five olivine basalt and four
coral projectiles, and of which the following are the details;—
Stone.
1. Faintly curved, 19J" long, oval in section, weight 3lbs.
From Tanna, presented by Capt. A. H. 0. 0. Home, R.N.
(PI. xxxviii., fig. 2).
2. Faintly curved, 17" long, round in section, weight 2|lbs.
From Tanna, presented by the same donor.
3. Straight, 10|" long, round in section, weight 21bs. 13oz.
Called Kasso-imso, from the village of Gwin-ap, Central
Tanna, presented by. W. H. Truss (PI. xxxvi., fig. 2).
4. Curved, 11" across curve, round in section, weight 11b.
13oz. From Tanna, presented by the Rev. W. Lanrie.
5. Slightly curved, TO" long, round in section, weight 21bs.
From Erromanga.
These stone missiles are either straight, faintly bent, or
appreciably curved, round or oval in section, and with a
fairly uniform girth of four inches.
Coral
1. Straight, 2ft. 4|in. long, round in section, weight 4lbs.
2ozs. A species of Astrma, from Futuna, presented by
Capt. G. Braithwaite,
2. Straight, 2ft. Sin, long, round in section, weight 21bs.
lloz. A species of Gasloria from Futuna, presented by
the same donor.
3. Straight, l£t. llin. long, round in section, weight 31bs.
2oz. Species of Astrma, from Futuna, presented by Capt.
A. H. 0. C. Home, R.H. (PI. xxxviii., fig. 3).
4. Straight, 2ft. long, round in section, weight 3lbs. Species
of Astrma , from Futuna, presented by the same donor.


In forwarding two of the olivine-basalt missiles from
Gwin-ap Village, Central Tamm, the late Mr, W, H. Truss
wrote; “One of their old throwing stones, which were
much used many years ago, but are not now made,” At the
village in question these missiles were known as Kasso-viasu . ls
One of the first writers to call attention to these Tamm
stone throwing sticks was, in all probability, the Rev, Dr. G.
Turner, who said, “ the leuwoe is a lung piece of stone, which
they throw with deadly precission when they are within twenty
yards of their victim." And again It is about the length
of an ordinary counting-house ruler, only twice as thick.” 18
Commander J. G. Good enough, R.N., saw these weapons
in the hands of the liill Tanuese at Port Resolution. “The
article which takes most trouble to make is, I suppose, the
kawass, or throwing stone, about a foot long, and of the
thickness of a thick round ruler.” 20
. On Futuna, or Brrouan Island, no great distance from
Tauna, coral takes the place of olivine-basalt. The first in
our collection from this locality was presented by Capt. G.
Braithwaite, of the “ Dayspring ” (FTo. 1 in the previous
list.) 81
The coral missiles are invariably straight, and of much
larger bulk than the basalt sticks of Tamm. Twe genera
are recognisable, Antrma and Qmloriu, The colonies from
which the missiles were prepared must have been of consider-
able size, possibly from blocks from the upraised bed of the
island, where “ there are traces of four or five different
upheavals.” 22
ls Also spelt catuasse —"The men, throwing away their spears, bows,
and oawasses, formed themselves into a circle " (Palmer —Kidnapping
in the S. Seas, 1871, p. 37.
12 Turner—Nineteen Years in Polynesia, 1861, p.p. 23 and 81.
50 Qoodenougli—Journal of 1876, p, 278.
21 Kamsay—Abst. Proc. Linn. Soc. N. S. Wales, 39th Oot„ 1894, p. v.
22 Steel—The New Hebrides and Christian Missions, 1880, p. 129.


Oapt. [Commodore] J. E. Erskine, R.N., saw at Port Resolu-
tion, Tanna, “a stone of the shape of that by winch scythes
are sharpened in England, and about a foot long, winch they
make from the coral rook, and use for striking or
throwino-.” 23 This was confirmed in the first instance by
A. H. Kiehl, who stated that on Tauna “ branches of coral
rook, about a foot in length and one or two inches in diameter,
are used along with the other weapons. They throw them
at each other." 24 And the same is also mentioned by Dr. C.
B. Meinicke. 25
That both coral and basalt missiles are, or were, used on
Tanna appears to lie a fact well established for long befoie
either Capt. Brskine or Mr. Kiehl saw them at Port Resolu-
tion, that grand old navigator and authority, Oftpt, James
Cook, 8.N., wrote thus, through his historian-author,
Hawkesworth ; —“ The stones they use are, in general, the
branches of coral rocks from eight to fourteen inches long,
and from an inch to an inch and a half in diameter. I know
not it they employ them as missiles.” 26
The Hew Hebridean island, Entuna, must not be mistaken
for Eotnua, one of the Hoorne Islands, away to the north-east
of Fiji. Unfortunately both are sometimes used by Authors
with an o, and again both with an. It would save confusion
and tribulation of spirit if Entuna of the New Hebrides were
simply known by its native name of Erronan. By Cook it
was called “ Footoona.”
Stick missiles are used by the natives of Niene, or Savage
Island, Mr. J, L. Brenohley said that stalagmites were
employed as 'missiles, obtained from pools in the interior of
the island. “ They are made use of as projectiles in their
combats, and which they adroitly throw without the aid of
a sling." 27
Brskine —Jouru. Cniiee Islands W. Pacific, 185 S, p. 319.
24 KieU —Anthropologia, 1., 1873-5, p. 135,
25 Meinicke—Die Inseln des Stillen Oceans, 1875, p. 203.
26 Hawkesworth —Cook’s Voyage towards tlie South Pole and round the
World, 1772-75, 3rd Edit., 11., 1779, p. 82.
27 Brenohley—Cruise of H.M.S. Cura9oa among the South Sea Islands
in 1865, pp. 25 and 28.


The basalt missile said to have been found on Erromanga
was possibly taken there from Tanna, but the locality is open
to doubt.
Y.—■“ Slating ” Stone.
A cylindrical, or perhaps even an obtusely quadrangular
stone (PI. xxxviii., fig. 4), three feet one inch long, with an
average circumference of thirteen and a half inches, but at
one end tapering to nine inches girth ; it is blunt at both
ends, and weighs forty-five pounds. It is, like the stone
missiles, also of olivine basalt.
1 do not think this is a converted stone; it has every
appearance of natural wear and tear, if shaped it must have
been at the expense of enormous labour. On grasping with
the hands a distinct quadrangular section becomes appreciable,
whilst a quadrangular appearance is imparted by four pro-
nounced longitudinal grooves, or valleys, extending the entire
length of the stone.
This interesting object was, as in the case of one of the
basalt missiles, presented by Mr. W. H. Truss, and is also
from Gwin-ap Village, Central Tanna.
Mr. Truss supplied me with the following information s
The stone was known as “ m ul-a-mal” and kept in the village
as a means of despatching a victim. The latter was some-
times seized and held, when the man told ofi: as executioner
would raise it above his own head and crash in the skull of
the victim by simply allowing it to fall by its own weight,
and this was performed openly or secretively ; the victim was
always eaten.
The age of the stone was unknown, but it was credited with
having been the instrument of death of many people.
VI.— MaLLIOOLLAN POTTBIiT.
The Rev. E. J, Patou, who was stationed on Mallicolo,
forwarded to the Australian Museum a number of fragments
of pottery, in fact potsherds, from that island. The donor
informed me that the pieces were dug up in yam gardens or
old village rubbish heaps. “ Perhaps it has not been made


for a hundred years, certainly not in living memory. I have
never seen a complete Mallicollan pot, and it is a lost art.” 28
This is clearly one of those cessations that would come under
Dr. W. H. R. Rivers’ term, “ the disappearance of a useful
art.” »
There are numerous pieces, and most of them much worn.
With the exception of about three of those in which any
decoration is visible, the motive is very peculiar and quite
new to me from any part of the South Pacific. The motive
in question resembles, more than anything else, the scale
armour of a palaaonisoid fish. The individual scales very
roughly laid on in simple overlapping oblique series (PI.
xxxiv., fig. 2, PI. xxxv., fig. 2, PI. xxxvi., fig. 3), are more or
less imbricate, and at times assume a tear-like outline (PI.
xxxiv., fig. 3, PI. xxxvii., figs. 2,3). This is the predominant
motive, but one small fragment has a few parallel groovings
(PI. xxxiv., fig. 4). The largest piece is evidently derived from
a large plain cooking pot, similar both in colour aiid texture
to those of Port Moresby, and one form of Admiralty Island
pot. .Othpr than this, the “ fish scale ” pattern predominates
with one exception. In this, the most elaborate of all the
potsherds, there is a central V-shaped figure, with lateral
oblique grooves, deflected on either side, and there again
bordered by horizontal lines of longitudinal V or V-shaped
fret (Pl.’ xxxv, fig. 3).
The only article I know of on New Hebridean pottery is a
short note by the Rev. J. Noble Mackenzie, 30 who said though
its manufacture is now (1901) confined to a few isolated spots
on the west of Santo, there is evidence to show that it was
in times past made on other islands of the Group, as similar
pottery pieces to that of Santo have been dug up in several
islands to the south. 1 .
One .naturally turns first, for comparative purposes, to the
neighbouring island of Espirutu Santo, commonly known as
“ Santo,” but on twenty-four pots from there examined there
38 Letter dated 18th March, 1903, addressed to Mr. S. Sinclair, Secretary,
Australian Museum.
39 Hirers—Brit. Assoc. Eeport for 1913 (1913), p. 698.
■ M Mackenzie—New Hebrides Magazine, No. A, 1911, p. 21.


is no trace of similar ornament. Again, tlie glazed and
artistically decorated ware of the Fiji Group offers no resem-
blance, nor need the large deep pots of New Caledonia be con-
sidered. Going farther afield, the facies of the best preserved
piece (PI. xxxv., Jig. 3) of this Mallioollan pottery seems in a
broad sense to resemble that on potsherds found .in ft similar
position to the latter, by Mr. P. J. Money at Haitin, near
Wanigera Creek, Oolling'wood Bay, Bast New Guinea. The
potsherds in question were found on excavating the mound
sites of vanished villages, all knowledge of which is denied
by the existing inhabitants of that region. The motive on
these pieces is quite distinct from that of the fine pottery now
made there. These Rainn potsherds, Mr. Money informs me,
are believed to have been the work of a people known a.s the
Geragi, now extinct, who spoke a language quite different to
that now spoken by the Oollingwood Bay people, which is
termed “ Aribi.” With these pottery pieces were associated
carved shells (much decayed), bone articles, stone head-rests,
else. The Rev. J. N. Mackenzie states that the words de-
noting a pot in New Guinea (part not stated) and Santo are
the same.
In the tear-like motive there is a general resemblance to
some of the designs seen on Arkansas burial-mound pottery.
The locality of the Mallioollan fragments is Onua Village,
on Onua Bay, East Mallicollo.
Vll.— Nassau Island Adze-head.
For an opportunity of describing this very interesting
object (PI. xxxix,), I am indebted to Prof, John Macmillan
Brown, of Christchurch, New Zealand, who obtained the loan
of it from Oapt. E. F. Allen, of the s.s. “ Dawn,” Samoa
Shipping and Trading Co. Ltd,, Sydney.
It appears that a comparatively recent tidal-wave swept
ashore at Nassau Island, removing a very large quantity of
soil over an area of five acres, and to a depth of six feet,
when this implement, and a sharpening atone were exposed.
These were underneath a skeleton, which, on exposure, at
once crumbled to a mass of dust.


The implement exhibits the following character
a and pro-
portions :—
Length overall, and measured on the level
Ft. In.
1 0
Tang, from the shoulder to tho poll, on the level
- 3|
Width across the slightly rounded cutting edge
-
Width at the poll
- 1-1
Length of the blade (oblique)
- at
Width at the shoulder
- at
Nassau Island (possibly identical with Ranger Island) lies
in Lat, 11° 33' S., Long. 165° 25' E., immediately south of
the Danger Islets, and north-west of the Hervey or Cook
Group. It was discovered in March, 1835, by the Captain of
an American whaler; it is about fifty feet high, with a
fringing reef. The island was uninhabited when discovered,
but in 1877 one white man and two Danger Island natives
with their wives took up residence there. 81 In 1892 Nassau
Island was annexed by Great Britain and incorporated with
the Line Islands; it now forms a dependancy of New
Zealand. 33
The adze is U-baoked, that is, it is markedly concave longi-
tudinally from the poll to the posterior margin of the blade,
and practically flat transversely; the front face is flat longi-
tudinally and transversely from the shoulder to within about
one inch of the cutting edge, where there is a slight rise.
The sides are quite flat transversely, and sub-parallel to one
another. The tang is plano-convex, plain or flat on the back,
convex on the front face. At the poll the adze projects
downwards, or at right angles to the longer axis, in two
nipple-like projections. The thickest part is immediately at
the posterior edge of the blade, i.c., at that point where the
longitudinal concavity of the back ceases forward ; here it is
2iin., at the shoulder it is 2in., and mid-way between the
two 12in. The angle of inclination of the blade to the axial
plane from its posterior margin to the cutting edge is 21°,
and of the tang, 14°, The implement is composed of a light
grey volcanic tuff, and the weight is five and a quarter
pounds.
31 Findley—Directory S. Pacific Ocean, stli Bd., 1884, p. 662.
32 Pacific Islands, iii. (Eastern Group), Sailing Directions,4th Ed.,
1909, pp. 187-8.


In tlie Doniinion Museum at Wellington is the oast of a
fine adze-head, of which Mr. Blsdon Best says* l3 :—“The back
of the tool is concave longitudinally to an extent but seldom
seen, and convex transversely." The present implement is
very similar in this respect, although flat transversely instead
of convex.
A similar U-backed and flat-faced tool, with a long blade,
is figured by Dr. W, T. Brigham as Hawaiian. 3,1 ’
The all-important point of interest attached to this adze-
head is the terminal nipples or horns of the tang. Mr.
Blsdon Best figured an implement which he described as “ one
of the most peculiar forms in the Museum ” [Dominion] 33 in
that the small poll has a curious lateral projection, “ which
may have served to hold this singular tool in the lashing.’’
This statement is, however, to some extent discounted by
one that immediately follows—“ this tool may be ft polu'ki, or
pounder, that was used in the hand, not hafted.” The lateral
projection can be distinquished in the figure quoted, and 1
refer to it as the only instance but one other I have been able
to find in literature.
The other instance is that of a small Chatham Island adze-
head described by Mr. Best as follows 110 :—“ The chief peculi-
arity of this tool is at the poll, whereat two horns or pro-
jections have been left, one at each Face corner, in order to
contain the lashing.” This is quite in accord with my view
of the use of these similar projections on the Nassau Island
implement.
The sharpening stone previously referred to is simply a
roughly quadrangular piece of grey volcanic tuff.
aa Best—Bull. Dominion Mus., No. 4, Stone Implements of the Maoris,
1912, p. 275, pis. xiv. and xv.
54 Brigham—Mam. Bernice Pauahi Bishop Mns., 1., No. 4, Ancient
Hawaiian Stone Implements, 1902, pi. lv., fig. 3121.
30 Lac. cit,, p. 279, pi. xvi., fig. 96.
30 Best— hoc. cii., p. 265, pi. xxi,, fig. BBn,


Prof. Macmillan Brown examined the adze-beads in the
Dominion Museum and wrote me as follows 87 ; —“ There is
the model or copy of a small one of the same type from the
Chatham Islands with the same two nipples as on the speci-
men from Nassau. I may say that the Morions of these
islands have many tilings that differentiate them from the
Maoris. They have wash-through cauoas (walea-patu) for
fishing; they sit with face to stern as in rowing. They
have in their phonology the consonant oh, which appears in
no other Polynesian dialect except Tongan. I have always
thought they came from a group different from the Maoris.
Their walea-patu remind me of the balsas, or boyant rafts, of
the Peruvian coast. On Lake Titicaca I saw canoes made of
reeds of much the same type (/,<?., wash-through) as the
Moriori, and their attitude in propelling stands alone in
Oceania, except in New Caledonia, where they had double
canoe rafts with holes in the decking through which they
punted their craft,”
The occurrence of these lashing holders, or stops, on adzes
found so far apart as the Chatham Islands and Nassau is both
interesting and remarkable. The subject will, I hope, pro-
vide Prof. J. M, Brown with further matter for consideration
in his well-known Pacific studies.
The evidence of “ lost arts ” throughout the South Pacific
is slowly but gradually increasing, For instance, leaving out
of consideration megalithic and cyolopean structures, we
have the stone implements and figures found in the auriferous
alluvium of the Yodcla Valley Goldfield, 88 and the unknown
pottery at Rainu, already mentioned, both localities in Eastern
New Guinea. It will be remembered that these Baum pots-
herds are accompanied by incised shells, 8(1 but the “art of
carving on hard shell is not now practised.”' lo Travelling in
a south-easterly direction we encounter the stone dishes and
Letter dated 3rd November, X9IG.
a" Etheridge—Rea. Auatr. Mus,, vii., 1, 1908, p. 24, pis. vi,-vii.
as Pooh —Mittl. Anthrop. Gesellseh. Wien,, xxxvii., .1007, pp. 67-71,
figs. 7 and 8 ; Etheridge— Loo. ait, p. 27.
40 Monokton —Brit, New Guinea Ami, Report, year 30th June, 1904.
OommomoeaUh Paid. Papers, 1905, No, 1, C. 700, p, 31, 4th plate.


pottery of Santo, the latter of a type different to that at
present made on the island in question. Again, we are now
in possession of the fact that the pottery art was at one time
in vogue in Maileoollo, and according to the Rev. Mr. Mackenzie
on other islands of the group as well.
To pass to another form of art, it is interesting to note that
petrogdyphs are to be seen on Aneitynm Island. These are
remarkable representations of the sun, moon, 41 and other
objects, “ like what our ancestors did,” say the natives. 42
Others are present on Lilipa, or Protection Island, near
Havannah Harbour. Still farther away are the petroglyphs
of Pitcairn Island, which, were there when the island was
occupied by the mutineers of the “ Bounty.” 48
Too much stress cannot be laid on the Nassau axe-head,
beyond the fact that the island was uninhabited as explained
on p. 200.
It appears to me we have here traces, not only of “ lost
arts," but also of “ lost races.” In connection with the latter
was Dr. H. B. Guppy’s discovery of worked flints on the
islands of Ugi and St. Ohristoval, in the Solomon Group, 44
These “are commonly found in the soil when it is disturbed
for purposes of cultivation, and are frequently exposed after
heavy rains,” and consist of fragments of chalcedony, car-
nelian, and jasper, “ Some were cores, others were flakes,
resembling in their form, and often in their white colour, the
flakes of the post-tertiary gravels.”
11 Mr. A. W. Murray says that amongst the Aneiteumese “thosimand
moon, especially the latter, hold a distinguished place ” (Missions
in Western Polynesia, &0., 1963, p. 26).
42 Gunn—New Hebrides Mag., No. 19, 1906, p. 16,
42 Gunn— lbid, No. 20, 1906, p. 16, pi. p. 17.
44 Guppy—The Solomon Islands and New Natives, 1887, pp. 77-8,


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XXXII.
Shallow, large, oyal food dish of volcanic tuff;
Length ... ... 1 ft. 5 inches.
Breadth... ... 1 „ 2 „
Height 0 „ 2\ „
Inside 0 „ „
; Weight... ... 28 lbs.
Tavauapni.and NarataPlantation, St. Phillip and St. James’
Bay, or “ Big Bay,” Bspiritu Santo.


REO. AUSTR. MUS., VOL. SI,
Plate XXXII.
C. CLUTTON, Auster, Mus., Photo.


EXPLANATION OP PLATE XXXIII.
Pyriform volcanic tnff dish, with two mammillary projections
at the smaller end:—
Length ... I ft. I| inches.
Breadth... ... 0 „ 10- „
Height 0 „ 3 „
Inside 0 „ f „
Weight 12| lbs.
Tapanapni and STarata Plantation, St. Phillip and St. James’
Bay, or “ Big Bay," Bspiritu Santo.


! EC. AIISTR. MUS., VOL. XI.
Plate XXXIII.
C. CLUTTON, Auster. Mus., photo,


explanation of PLATE XXXIV.
Fig. 1. Volcanic tuff food dish ;
Length ... ... 2 ft.
Breadth 1 „ 7 inches.
Height ... ... 0,, 5 „
Inside ... ... 0,, 2 „
Weight 96 lbs.
Tavauapniand Narata Plantation, St. Phillip and St. James’
Bay, or “ Big Bay,” Espiritu Santo.
Fig. 2 and 3. Potsherds with imbricate scale-like motive
Ouua, Bast Mallicollo.
Pig. fi. Potsherd with parallel incisions, probably from the
neck or beneath the rim of a receptacle. Onua,
East Mallicollo.


REG. AUSTR. MUS., VOL. XI.
Pwitb XXXIV.
C. CLUTTON, Auster. Mus., photo.


EXPLANATION OP PLATE XXXV.
Fig. 1 Small coral-rook mortar-like dish, or bowl :
Length ... 0 ft. 5 inches.
Breadth... ... 0 ~ „
Height ... ... 0 „ 2
Within 0 „ 1£ „
Weight ... ... 1| lbs.
Tavanapni and Narata Plantation, St. Phillip and St. James’
Bay, or “Big Bay," Bspiritu Santo.
Fig. 2. Potsherd, bearing fish-scale motive,
Fig. 3. Potsherd with the most elaborate motive of all the
Mallicollau pieces—a central Y-shaped figure with
lateral oblique grooves separated in the middle line
by a longitudinal incision, and bordered on each side
by more or lees horizontal lines of simple fret.
The originals of Figs. 2 and 3 are from Onua, East
Mallioollo,


Plate XXXV.
EEC. A LISTR. MUS., VOL. XI.
C. CLUTTON, Auster, Mus., photo.


EXPLANATION OP PLATE XXXVI.
Fig. 1. Portion oE much worn argillaceous limestone bowl
, with projecting handle.
Tavanapni and Narata Plantation, St. Phillip and St. James’
Bay, or “ Big Bay,” Espiritu Santo.
Fig. 2. Olivine-basalt missile club, known as Kaxso-wa so; —
Length ... ... 10| inches.
Section ... ... circular.
Weight ... ... 2 lbs. 13 ozs.
Gwyu-ap Village, Central Tanna.
Pig. 3. Potsherd, with scale-like motive. Onua, Bast Malli-
collo.


REO. AUSTR. MUS., VOL. XI ,
Pi',atk XXXVI.
C. CLUTTON, Auster, Mus., photo.


EXPLANATION OP PLATE IXXTII.
Fig. 1, The subject of Plate xxxvi., fig. 1, restored; —
Height... ... 0 ft. 4| inches.
Length... ... 0 „ 6 „
Inside ... ... 0,, 3y „
Aperture ... 0 „ 4 „
Thickness ... 0,, l-J- ~
Tavanapni and Narata Plantation, St. Phillip and St. Janies’
Bay, or “Big Bay,” Espiritu Santo,
Pigs. 2 and 3, Potsherds, displaying tear-like motive,
Onna, East Mallicollo,


BMC. AUSTU, MI’S., VOL. XI.
Pi,ATI.; XXXVII.
C. CLUTTON, Auster. Mus., Photo .


EXPLANATION OP PLATE XXXVIII.
Fig. 1. Kava stone, torpedo or cigar-shaped, of argillaceous
limestone:—
Length ... ... 3 ft. 5 inches.
Circumf. ~, 2,, 6-| ~
Weight ... ... 124 lbs.
St. Phillip and St. James’Bay, or “Big Bay,” Espiritu
Santo,
Fig. 2, Olivine-basalt missile stick, slightly curved :
Length... ... 1 ft. 7Jr inches.
Section... ... oval.
Weight ... 3 lbs.
Tanna.
Fig, 3, Coral (Astrcea) missile stick :
Length... ~, 1 ft. 11 inches.
Section... ... circular.
Weight ... 2 lbs. 11 ozs.
Futuna, or Eronan, Island.
Fig. 4. “Slaying” Stone (mul-a-mal), obtusely quadrangular,
of olivine-basalt:—
Length ... ... 3 ft. 1 inch.
Circumf. ... ... 1„1| „
Weight 45 lbs.
Gwyn-ap Village, Central Tanna.


MO. A ITST R. MIJS., VOL. XI.
T’utu XXXVIII.
C. CLUTTON, Auster. Mus., photo.


EXPLANATION OP PLATE XXXIX.
Fig. 1. Adze-head, lower view,
2. „ „ side
Nassau Island.


ItKO. AUSTR. MUR., VOL, XI.
Plate XXXIX.
C. CLUTTON, Auster. Mus, Photo.


CATALOGUE SLIP.
Etheridge, Jimr. 57 28 (934.)
Addition*! to l.lio Kl hntilof'k'n.l C'ollnotioiiH, chiefly from (lie
Now Uobridtm,
lire, Auslr. Mus., ui,, 8, J9J7-
