

ADDITIONAL REMARKS CONCERNING ABORIGINAL BORA
HELD AT GUNDABLOUI IN 1894.
By R. H.. MAHTEWS, Licensed Surveyor.


ADDITIONAL REMARKS CONCERNING ABORIGINAL BORA
HELD AT GUNDABLOUI IN 1894.
By R. H. MATHEWS, Licensed Surveyor.
In 1894 I contributed to the Royal Society of New South Wales
a paper describing a Bora, 1 which took place at Gundabloui, on
the Moonie River, in the colony just named. As stated in that
paper, 2 the information from which it was prepared was obtained
from a correspondent residing at Mogil Mogil, about fifteen miles
from Gundabloui. Although this gentleman gave me his assist-
ance very willingly, he was altogether unaccustomed to the fulness
of detail necessary in original research of this character, and was
therefore unable to satisfy me in reference to certain parts of the
ceremonies. There was the further disadvantage of my corres-
pondent being separated from me by upwards of five hundred
miles, which caused much delay and difficulty in obtaining answers
to my questions. From my knowledge of the initiation ceremonies
of other tribes, 3 I considered that the statements furnished to me
were substantially correct, and I had either to accept them as
they were, or abandon the idea of publishing the results of my
enquiries altogether. As no one had previously attempted to
give a connected account of the Bora of the Kamilaroi tribes, and
knowing that further details could be supplied in the form of a
supplementary article at any time, 1 determined to prepare a
paper from the mass of original information which I had collected.
As the subject of the initiation ceremonies of the Australian
tribes was then very little understood either in Australia or in
England, I also sent a summarized copy of that paper to the
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxviil, 98 - 129. 2 Loc. cit. 105 -106.
3 “The Burbung of the Wiradthuri Tribes”—Journ. Anthrop. Inst.,
xxv., 295-318. “The Initiation Ceremonies of the Aborigines of the
Upper Lachlan”—Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.) xi., 167-169. “The
Burbung of the New England Tribes ” —Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, ix.,
(N.S.), 120-136.
211
ADDITIONAL REMARKS CONCERNING ABORIGINAL BORA.


Anthropological Institute of Great Britain, 1 in order that the
subject might be prominently brought before the members of that
body, for comparison with the initiation ceremonies in other
countries. Being desirous of making my description of the Bora
as complete and accurate as possible, I then determined to travel
into the district in which it took place, and make personal enquiries
among the tribes who had been present at it. From the compre-
hensive particulars gathered by me direct from the natives on
that occasion, I forwarded to the Anthropological Institute a
second paper, 2 supplying some omissions, and correcting some
inaccuracies of detail, which had been made in my former memoir.
The two papers referred to in this paragraph taken together, con-
tain a complete narrative of everything which took place in con-
nection with the Bora held at Gundabloui.
There still remains the further duty of correcting the account
of that Bora which was published in this Journal. 3 With regard
to the statement of Mr. J. A. Glass, at p. 103, that a half-caste
named Billy Clark was allowed the option of either having a front
tooth knocked out, or eating human ordure, I am now satisfied,
from enquiries which I have since made from old blackfellows at
Gundabloui, that Billy Clark was not initiated. These old men
told me that in those days, some thirty or forty years ago, half-
castes were not allowed to go through the Bora ceremonies—that
innovation having crept in after the half castes became numerous.
They further told me that there was no option, and if any novice
had persisted in refusing to eat what was offered to him or to
have his tooth extracted the kooringal would have killed him on
the spot.
The following lines should be struck out: At p. 107, all the
words commencing with “ which ” in line 6 to the word “ head-
man ”in line 14; also from the word “and ”in line 29 to the
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xxiv., 411-427.
2 Op. cit., xxv., 318 339.
3 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxvm., 98- 129.
212
K. H. MATHEWS.


word “arranged ”in line 4on page 108. At p. 109, from the
word “and ”in line 16 to the word “ top ”in line 18. Atp. 114,
from the word “ Every ”in line 29 to the end of page 115. At
p. 116, from the word “the” in line 23 to the word “ring” in
line 14 on page 117. Also at p. 117, from the word “As” in
line 19 to the end of page 118. At p. 119, from the word
“After” in line 10 to the word “circle” in line 1 on p. 120. Also
at p. 120, from the word “ During ” in line 25 to the word “hunt”
in line 28 ] and the words “ and boys ”in line 34. At p. 121,
lines 3to 16 inclusive. At p. 122, lines 15 to 18 inclusive. At
p. 123, from the word “The” in line 8 to the word “come” in
line 1 on page 124.
When the foregoing corrections have been made in the paper
contributed to the Royal Society of New South Wales, the student
is recommended to peruse it in conjunction with ray second
memoir on the Bora 1 communicated to the Anthropological
Institute of Great Britain, when the two articles, read side by
side, will be found to contain a compendious account of the
Gundabloui Bora. Another Bora, which took place at Tallwood,
Queensland, is described in a paper contributed by me to the
Royal Society of Victoria, 2 which contains much important
additional information respecting the initiation ceremonies of the
Kamilaroi tribes.
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xxv., 318-339.
2 Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, rx., (.N.S.), 137- 173.
213
ADDITIONAL REMARKS CONCERNING ABORIGINAL BORA.


