

K( * ■ i ' ' ■ * ' » :
O'
( ■
(Jv ' (54^


*
\
*


H> .(fit
i"7
Additions to the List of the Avifauna of Australia, with
Descriptions of Three New Species. By John Gould,
Esq., P.R.S., &c.
The following birds have been lately transmitted to me by my
brother-in-law, Mr. Charles Coxen of Brisbane in Queensland, and
were, I believe, collected by John Jardine, Esq., late Commissioner
of Crown Lands in the Cape York district, a portion of Australia so
near to New Guinea and the Aru Islands that we need not be sur-
prised if some of the species prove to be identical with, or offer a
close resemblance to, species previously described as inhabitants of
those but partially explored islands.
The first species is an additional member of those insect-loving
little birds known under the generic title of Gerygone , and exhibits
such strongly marked distinctive characters that it cannot for a
moment be confounded with any of its allies.
Gerygone personata.
Crown and all the upper surface olive-green; throat and chest
deep olive-brown; behind each nostril a spot of white; a stripe of
white also descends from the base of the bill down each side of the
neck, and separates the deep olive-brown of the throat from the
lighter olive of the ear-coverts ; axillae, all the under surface of the
body, and the under tail-coverts delicate jonquil-yellow ; wings and
tail olive-brown ; bill and legs olive-black.
Total length 3| inches, bill |, wing 2f, tail I|, tarsi |.
Hab. The Cape York district of Queensland.
The second bird has many characters in common with the Ptilotis
chrysalis of the south-eastern portion of Australia and the Ptilotis
simifis, a bird brought from Dorey by Mr. Wallace ; but it differs
from both in the greater slenderness of its form, in its diminutive
size, and, especially from the former, in the uniform colouring of its
throat and abdomen.
Ptilotis gracilis.
Bill deep olive-brown, with a naked yellow fleshy gape, posterior
to which is an obscure narrow line of yellow; a well-defined patch
of pale yellow on the ear-coverts ; crown and all the upper surface
olive, the uniformity of which is only broken by a slight edging of
wax-yellow on the outer edges of the primaries and tail-feathers;
axillae and the inner webs of the primaries and secondaries pale buffy
yellow ; primaries and tail-feathers brown ; feet dark olive-brown.
Total length 5| inches, bill wing tail 2|, tarsi f.
Hab. The Cape York district of Queensland.
Monarcha albiventris.
This Cape York bird is very nearly allied to the more southern
M. trivirgata, but differs not only from that species, but from
[l]


another, of which examples are contained in my own and Mr, Wal-
lace’s collections from Timor, and a fourth from Batchian. Al-
though these four birds are intimately allied, they possess distinctive
characters by which each of them may be readily recognized. As
I have here only to deal with the Australian members of the genus,
I shall content myself with remarking that this new species is to be
distinguished from the southern M. trivirgata by the unsullied
whiteness of its axillaries, abdomen, and lower part of its flanks, by
the black of the forehead and throat being somewhat more exten-
sive, and by the larger size of the white terminal portion of the outer
tail-feathers.
Bill and legs olive lead-colour ; forehead and a narrow stripe above
the eye, upper portion of the ear-coverts, and the throat jet-black ;
cheeks, lower part of the neck, and the chest bright ferruginous;
abdomen, axillaries, and a considerable portion of the under surface
of the wing snow-white; crown of the head, back of the neck, and
back bluish grey ; primaries greyish brown ; upper tail-coverts and
tail black, the three outer feathers of the latter largely tipped with
white.
Total length 5 £ inches, bill f, wing 3, tail tarsi
Hah. The Cape York district of Queensland.
I am also enabled to add to the list of Australian Birds, pub-
lished by me in my lately issued * Handbook to the Birds of Au-
stralia,’ the following species—
Rallina tricolor, G. R. Gray, P. Z. S. 1858, p. 188,
a bird brought by Mr. Wallace from the Aru Islands.
Of this species of Water-Rail, which appears to be common in the
New Guinea group of islands, an example has been sent to me from
the Cape York district, and the bird will doubtless be hereafter found
in other parts of northern Australia.
Hydrochelidon leucoptera (Meisn. & Sch.).
Schlegel having, I believe, given Celebes as one of the localities
of this species, it will not be a matter of surprise that two examples
should occur in the Cape York collection. Of these one is certainly
immature, the other in a dress which is probably that of winter.
[From the Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London,
May 8, 1866.]


■
/
V
■ - -
✓
f
| n <• - -s. .
"j y \


