

ADDRESS
TO THE
AGRICULTURAL
SOCIETY,
OF
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND,
Delivered on the Thirteenth of August, 1823,
By EDWARD FOORD BROMLEY, ESQ.
PRESIDENT.
HOBART TOWN:
PRINTED BY ANDREW BENT,
GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




In the Sydney Gazette , of the 10 ih July , 1823,
appeared the following Article: —
There isnow in the Press the “ Pirst Anniversary Address,
by the President,” to the Agricultural Society, which was read
on Thursday last. When opportunity offers, we shall feel sincere
pleasure in communicating to all our Readers that satisfaction which
now can he but partially experienced, by the insertion of the most
prominent features of this most highly interesting Address. In the
interim, that the mass of the Public may not he entirely ignorant
of a subject in which their best interests are involved, we have thought
proper to make the following selection: —
“ We have had the pleasure of welcoming many most respectable
free settlers in the course of the past year; but I hope we shall re-
ceive twenty times the number next year. The fine settlements of
Hunter's River, Bathurst, Camden and Argyle, have been liberally
thrown open by our local Government ; and I was happy (in looking
at the map of Hunter's River the other day) to see the whole hanks,
and even some of the back land, coloured with names. One of the
most skilful and intelligent members of our general Committee, who
has manufactured the best cheese yet seen in the colony, has removed
his family to Bathurst. — Othei' respectable settlers are following his
example ; and Ifind we have increased the number of our subscribers
during the past year by 21. We shall doubtless see many more free
settlers in this country, now that the Parliamentary emigration to
the Cape of Good Hope has failed; as soon as our Commissioner of
Inquiry's Report has fixed the future policy and government of the
■ colony ; and when the advantages which New South Wales possesses
over Van Diemen's Land come to be more universally and correctly
known. We can have no ill will to that dependency. On the con-
trary, we benefit by her prosperity. But it is important that emi-
grants, from so vast a distance as Great Britain, should not be ruined
by disappointment. Of the superiority of New South Wales over


Van Diemens Land, lam decidedly convinced, in some degree from
•personal observation, and much more from authentic information.
Van Diemen's Land has gotten the name.at home; and it always
takes many years to put down false pretensions , and to make knoivn
true ones. The mistake is in some degree to be attributed to the
printed hooks upon the two colonies, which generally fall into the
emigrant's hand. These are Mr. Jeffreys' falsehoods on Van Die-
men's Land (for I can call them by no gentler name), and Mr. Wil-
liam Wentworth's declamations on New South Wales. in this
latter work, the preference seems to be given to Van Diemens Land
for the free settler; and, indeed, it was very much the policy of the
'administration, which that book was written to praise, to discourage
any other than convict emigration to this settlement. Sounder politi-
cal principles, however, are now being acted upon; and I hope that
in a very few years, the eyes of the public in England will he opened
to the superiority of this colony over Van Diemens Land; in the
first place, in water; in the second, in climate for fine wool, for
fruits, and even for some tropical commodities; in the third, in the
unbounded extent of grazing land, in room for colonization and popu-
lation for centuries. Much of the stoppage short at Van Diemen's
Land of Australian emigration is also to be attributed to the went i-
somcness of the past voyage; the expense of a visit at Hobart Town,
which often necessarily converts it into a settlement (it is so hospitable
a place that it will not part with its guests) ; thefascination of a little
naturally clear land, like the remote American prairies of Mr. Birk-
heck, whose delusiveness Mr. Cobbett has so well exposed; the beauty of
the mountains, which hem in and storm the town, and line the coun-
try with places of refuge for robbers; the address and talent of the
Lieutenant Governor; and the interested persuasions of the master of
the ship that the passenger had better go no further. But when it
comes to be known (as it cannot be much longer concealed) that lan
Diemen's Land is at least twenty years behind this colony in civiliza-
tion ; that it is a badly watered country; that the clear land is all
granted away, insomuch that the liberal system of grazing occupa-
tions, which may be acted upon here for ever, is obliged to be given
up in Van Diemen's Land; that the only police is situated at the
two extremities of the island; that one of these towns is on the wrong


side of the River, and the other so badly watered, so naturally sterile
and so distant from supplies, that it is about to be removed back to
Launceston; that the climate is so much severer than ours that the
wool will not become fine, and that both cattle and sheep must be
winter-foddered. When these facts are published, Ido confidently
hope, without prejudice to the dependency which has had her day of
popularity, that the tide of free emigration will flow on to these
chores ; and that merchant-transports will be sent hither from Great
Britain direct. Towards so desirable an end, lam convinced the
institution of this Society will in no small degree contribute; and I
should recommend that some of our members would lay before us geo-
graphical and agricultural papers on the superior advantages of New
South Wales as a colony for British Emigration. These might be
beneficially published in England under the authority of our Society ;
and perhaps our Premium Committee might think a piece of plate
not unworthily offered for the best Essay on the subject.
“ Upon the subject so vitally important teethe prosperity of the
colony as the exportation of fine wool, I am truly happy to report
that there went home from this settlement alone, during the past
year, 726 bales, or 181,500 pounds of wool, besides a small quan-
tity, chiefly of lamb's wool, which remains to be sent with the next
shearing. At only Is. 9rf. per pound clear profit, this will amount
to nearly £16,000 sterling. Nothing can shew the superiority of our
wool over that of 1 an Diemen's Land in a stronger light, than the
following extract from a London Commercial Report, dated 20 th
September, 1822:
140 bales wool from Van Diemen's Land, 4 d. to 11 d. per lb.
(2 lots 2s. 2 d. to 2s. Id.)
13 bales wool from New South Wales, 2s. 4d. to 3s. 4c?. per lb. *


At a General Meeting of the Agricultural Society
of Van Diemen’s Land , held at the Ship Inn ,
Hobart Town , on the 13 th August , 1823, the
President delivered the following Address: —
“ At this Meeting I cannot omit to call the
attention of the Society to an agricultural com-
parison (which has lately appeared as part of an
Address, read by the President to the Agricultural
Society of New South Wales), between that Co-
lony and Van Diemen’s Land. —I owe it to the
office which by your favour I occupy, and to my
own connexion with this country as a proprietor of
land and farmer, to state the grounds upon which,
1 trust, we shall be enabled to shew, that we have
better pretensions than those assigned to us.
“ The superiority of New South Wales as a
country, is asserted in several points.—First, as
to water. It would occupy too much time to go
into topographical details, by which only the com-
parison could be brought to test, nor is it necessary
for me to attempt it; I need only dispute the asser-
tion, and express my conviction, that on proof the
comparison would not be unfavourable to our
Island. We are at least exempted from the alter-
nate droughts and floods, to one or other of which
New South Wales is almost annually subject; and


which render its crops so uncertain, that, like those
of a sugar plantation in the West Indies, it may
be accounted to do well if one season out of three
is productive. Since cultivation commenced in
this Island, no failure has been known; nor has a
sufficient degree of fluctuation of seasons occurred,
to prevent us from having an annually increasing
surplus of grain, and from which New South Wales
has supplied its wants.
“ The comparison of climate for wool, at present
also rests solely upon assertion—for proof exists
not. The experiment is here in its infancy; it is
not my place to vindicate our progenitors of the
Colony, for having so long neglected to follow the
example of New South Wales in improvement of
sheep. It is however certain, that only within the
last three years has any systematic attention been
given to it here, and the experiment, as far it has yet
been tried, leaves no ground for doubt or discou-
ragement ; on the contrary, it promises to answer
every expectation.—We all know, that the improve-
ment of wool in New South Wales, has been pur-
sued for the last 25 years at least; but, while we
ought to acknowledge this useful example, we can-
not admit that a present comparison of the wool of
the two Colonies carries any proof of the influence
of our climate being adverse to its improvement;
nor can. we forget, that by many competent judges,
including some of the principal and oldest improvers
and agriculturists of New South Wales, who have
examined this Island, its climate and soil are con


sidered as not less favourable than those of New
South Wales for fine woolled sheep.—We have im-
ported largely, and continue to receive by almost
every ship fine woolled sheep, from the best flocks
in Europe and New South Wales; and we had an
excellent stock of our own.—We therefore reject
the decision now pronounced; and desire that, in
candour, it be delayed till it can rest upon facts and
trial—at present it stands upon assertion —or, at
best, upon opinion only.
“ In noticing the comparative sale prices of the
wools of the two Colonies, as given by the President
of the Agricultural Society of New South Wales, I
must say, that I see nothing to be ashamed of. It
there appears (obscured rather, I confess, in a pa-
renthesis), that two lots of our wool bore 2s. 2d.
to 2s. 7d.; the wool of New South Wales, in large
quantities, from 2s. 4d. to 3s. 4d.—Surely this is
nothing discouraging; if we have already 2s. 7d.,
who shall say, w here we are to stop, with the pre-
sent spirit of improvement, and the means which
accompany it.
“ Our climate certainly forbids any tropical pro-
ductions; it excludes us from some productions of
New South Wales, of which probably maize is the
only important one ; but, 1 think, this is more than
compensated by other advantages.—We have, in
equal perfection, and with greater facility, all the
fruits and vegetables of the Mother Country, and :
w r e can keep them as long, which, in New South
Wales, is impossible.—We may well resign the
orange and the citron, when we can have grain in


substance and produce, and in store quality (for the
weevil immediately invades the granary, as the moth
does the stack of New South Wales), one-fourth
superior in value to what that Country affords ; and
potatoes, to which those grown in the Sister Colony
have no resemblance. To hot winds, and their de-
structive blights, we are nearly strangers; our sum-
mer heat may be taken as 70 to 90 to that of New
South Wales, and our winter is never severe. The
interior of the Island, I need not say to any one
who has seen it, exhibits nothing like a Prairie—
the country described under that name is uniformly
wet and insalubrious. Our Island, in every variety
of surface, is healthy at all seasons. It is through-
out alternate hill and dale; in some parts lofty
downs, but the soil rich ; in others moderately un-
dulated, and generally lightly timbered; and it is
unquestionably a most picturesque and beautiful
Country.—l deny, therefore, the claim to superiority
for the climate of New South Wales; and lam pre-
pared to say, that for the general purposes of man,
our climate has the advantage. Its greater con-
geniality to the natives of the Mother Country, can-
not be disputed; and for grain, for distillation—•
for breweries—for malting—for curing hams, &c.
and for cheese, in short, for all purposes in which
fermentation is required, to which a moderate tem-
perature is favourable, and a long intemperate sea-
son adverse, our advantage over the semi-tropical
climate of New South Wales is obvious.
“ The important benefits arising to New South
Wales from the country beyond the Mountains, I


freely admit; it is the best part of the Colony, and
is stated by those who have seen it, to be in feature,
soil, and climate, very similar to the interior and
north-side of Van Diemen’s Land; without that
country, indeed, I believe the Eastern Colony would
pot have supported its stock. Commencing at a
distance of 150 miles from the seat of Government,
and from navigation, New South Wales has an un-
limited back country open to her. The limits of our
Island are fixed, but large tracts, not half that dis-
tance from a port, are untouched, and new ones
are continually discovered; and we have a large
space, or rather corner of the Island, to the north-
west, which I hope will be better known next sum-
mer; it is already sufficiently so, to assure us of its
importance. We are not likely to feel any pressure
until the efforts now in progress to improve our pas-
tures shall have taken effect, without which no in-
closure system, upon which selection, separation,
and improvement of stock so much depend, can be
pursued. To inclose the native pasture would be
ridiculous, and without domestic pasture dairies to
any extent are out of the question. I deny that
stock require to be winter foddered in this country,
more than in New South Wales.; they must in either
country have unlimited range, with mixture of hill
and bottom land, if they are to subsist on the native
pastures throughout the year; if in inclosures, the
the same pastures that would suffice in the one
country, would answer as well in the other.
“ Having thus explained to the Meeting my views


on the agricultural comparison of these countries*
I may perhaps he excused, if to correct error, I fol-
low the President of the New South Wales Agri-
cultural Society into other topics of comparison. It
is said, that we are 20 years behind New South.
Wales in civilization; that Colony was founded 35'
years ago; this dates to 20 years; To the former!
for 30 years was directed all the capital—all the,
labour—all the advantages of every kind, which
emanated from the Mother Country, or which de-
pended on the Colonial Government. Till eight
years ago, this was a close port; no vessel could
enter, nor could any thing be imported but via Port
Jackson, from w hence we received her refuse treble-:
convicted felons, out of which bands of robbers were
formed, which for years desolated this Colony. New
South Wales then monopolizing every advantage,
even to the monopoly of supplying its depressed
Dependency; the latter might well remain stationary
as to improvement. But better days arrived, and
just prior to the emigration commencing, this Colony
began to obtain relief —its subsequent progress has
shewn its capability.
“ It might be enough, however, for us at present
tp shew, that we are at least upon a par in civiliza-
tion, with the detached countries of New South
Wales, viz. beyond the Mountains and Hunter’s
River, to which emigrants are recommended, in
preference to Van Diemen’s Land; for in the old
Colony all the land is granted away. But, con-
fessing our original deficiencies, and assigning their


causes, we now only require time for the respect-
able Emigration, which pours in upon us, to esta-
blish itself; it is fist doing so, and unless we sup-
pose the civilization—the habits of industry—and
the valuable qualities belonging to Father Land, to
have been lost on the voyage, we cannot doubt of
their effects; and that, in two or three years, we
shall make up for the differences between 20 and
35 years, or I might better say, between 5 and 35
years ; for we can hardly allow ourselves to be more
than five years old.
“ It is said, we have no Police, except at the two
extremities of the Island; that our town is on the
wrong side of the river, and another in a barren
spot; to the former I reply, that it is erroneous;
independent of the establishments at Hobart town,
George Town, Launceston, and Macquarie Har-
bour, we have resident Magistrates in seven districts
between Hobart Town and Launceston; in three
we have District Prisons, with means of confining
and punishing offenders; and we have four Military
Stations in the same districts. The country is, and
has been long, perfectly orderly and quiet; and the
New Settlers, after traversing it's most remote parts,
not only with security unarmed and often alone, but
meeting civility and hospitality wherever they go,
are spreading themselves over the Island, without
apprehension from those Mountains w hich are per-
haps not less pleasing to the eye, than the blue
ridge of New South Wales or the ranges of Hunter s
Piver, and which are certainly as little objects of
terror.


“ The position of this town cannot be very im-
portant to an emigrant, and he will hardly discuss
the point, or admit its influence; it is, at all events,
placed upon one of the finest navigations in the
world, and a most successful station for the whale
fishery; in a fertile soil, with several tracts of fine
land in its vicinity, and receives from its neighbour-
ing Mountain, a stream which insures its supply of
water at all seasons. If a comparison in this point
were material, I should say, that Sydney stands in
an arid sand, and that its supply of water becomes
so uncertain in autumn, as to make it an article of
sale; while the stock perish in numbers from drought.
“ With respect to the towns at Port Dalrymple,
though the situation of George Town be unfavour-
able for the seat of the Establishment, that of Laun-
ceston is undeniably one of the most adA antageous,
as well as beautiful, that any country can afford;
it is at the head of a navigation of 40 miles, open to
vessels of 150 tons close to the town, and is sur-
rounded by one of the most fertile countries in
Australia.
“ It is said, that books written in exaggerated
praise of . this Island have influenced the choice of
emigrants; probably, they did so in the first periods,
but such influence is only momentary, and is inoper-
ative as to any who can be a real acquisition to a
new Colony. Those who emigrate hastily and upon
chance, may be allured by descriptions, for which
every man of common knowledge and reflection
would make a proper allowance; but I allude to


such as emigrate upon reflection and enquiry, upon
authentic reports from those who preceded them and
had made the trial; such chiefly are those who have
lately joined us. We have indeed reason to be gra-
tified at the numerous, respectable, and useful per-
sons who have arrived to settle amongst us, laying
the foundation, I trust, of a Colony, which in a
few years, will require no vindication, with respect
either to its natural or acquired advantages.
“ Adverting to publications on this Island, I find
the first specially upon Van Diemen’s Land, is an
article in the Quarterly Review of May 1820, writ-
ten by a Gentleman of unquestionable talents and
correctness, in the shape of a Review r of Michael
Howe’s Life. He gives a very favourable account
of our climate, soil, and natural advantages, and as
that article was probably the first seen by persons
contemplating emigration, though written before it
commenced, its influence was very probable. On
looking over that article, however, I find nothing
exaggerated, and I should take it, as far as it goes,
as a standard work on the Colony. Another
most useful practical work has probably guided
many; I allude to that published by Captain Dixon,
of the Skelton, upon his return home in 1821, from
his first voyage with Emigrants, for the express pur-
pose of affording information to those who contem-
plated a similar step. Captain Dixon had much
opportunity of seeing both Colonies, and his Re-
port is marked by intelligence and impartiality.—
He expresses himself nearly in these words — If a


man can live at home, let him do so ; if not, these
are the best Colonies for emigration, and of these
two I prefer Van Diemen's Land, for its future pros-
pects.’—These were the words of an intelligent Ob-
server two years ago, who could have no bias,
whose object was to give his Countrymen correct
information, and whose work is strictly practical
and useful. Captain Dixon is now here, preparing
for his second homeward voyage; he has again tra-
velled in both Colonies, and he has made his elec-
tion for himself and friends for Van Diemen’s Land.
“ I believe that five-sixths at least of the emigra-
tion has been directed to this Island, coming out
expressly decided to settle here; this I have an op-
Cportunity of knowing from the official documents
of the ships, and my necessary intercourse with the
passengers on arrival, and therefore the number of
those who arrive, open to any advice or influence,
is comparatively trifling; and I will take it upon me
to assert, without fear of contradiction in any single
case, that every undecided person is recommended
to see both Colonies before he elects his settlement.
I have now troubled the Meeting too long, but 1
thought it my duty to offer such observations as oc-
curred to me upon a subject so interesting to all of
us. Our stake in the soil, the climate, and the
stock of the Colony, must make us wish that it
should be fairly and justly appreciated ; but we dis-
claim any selfish desire to rise by under-valuing the
advantages of our Sister Colony, though we may
be allowed to vindicate and maintain our own.”




Bromley (E.F.) Address to the Agricultural Society,
of Van Diemen's Land, delivered on the Thirteenth of
August, 1825, hy Edward Foord Bromley, Esq., President,
15 pages, small Bvo, stitched, as issued, uncut,
Hobart Town: Printed by Andrew Bent ,
An answer to the First Anniversary Address made by
Mr. Justice Barron Field, President of the Agricultural
Society of New South Wales, in which he claimed the
superiority of New South Wales for settlement to the
disadvantage of Van Diemen's Land.
Bromley answers Field's address very fully, setting
out all the advantages of Van Diemen's Land - "we are
at least exempted from the alternate droughts and
floods, to one or other of which New South Wales is
almost annually subject...we have...all the fruits and
vegetables of the Mother Country,..our winter is never
severe...the country is, and has been long, perfectly
orderly and quiet, &c."


