

'run**
f 4
r
H
i ■.(
'1
fcA I
ADDRESS written by SAMUEL HAWKER BANKS,
AND SPOKEN BY
Ufa JjAeMk liolimnq,
AT THE OPENING OF
Tll K THEATRE ROYAL, BY DYK Y,
SATURDAY, 11th DECEMBER, 1875,
In presence of His Excellency SIR HERCULES ROBINSON, LADY ROBINSON, and SUITE,
Under the Leaseeship and Management of Mr. Samuel Lazar.
Twice where this building stands have fierce flames swept —
Twice o’er the ruins have the Muses wept—
Wept for their glories gone—their temple’s doom,
And saw no brightness piercing through the gloom ;
No rays, save those which mocking flames supplied—
No hope to cheer them, and no star to guide !
Melpomne, in sorrow, hung her head,
While o’er her cheeks a death-like palor spread ;
Thalia sadly laid aside her mask,
Heir, Hoskins, Warner, Mason, Waller, Stark:
Bright meteors who lit the sometimes dark.
Then came our gallent Brooke, Art’s favoured son ;
Montgomery, and stalwart Anderson;
Kean, Sullivan, Charles Matthews, who a name
Each left of honour on Art’s scroll of Fame,
With Fanny Cathcart, Cleveland, Ellen Trek
Whose like, indeed, we ne'er again may see !
Young, Coppin. Howson, Rogers, Lambert, Dunn,
With most of whom, alas ! life’s sands have run ;
And many others of the “ motley ” crew,
Like Banquo’s kings, have passed us in review
Bright, shining stars composed the mirthful train
Whose mission ’twas to banish care and pain ! /
In death or distance all here named have gone,
And left us with our memories alone !
j —:
‘ .
And sighed desponding for her wonted task
The houseless twain together weeping fly,
And seek ifi vain for friendly sympathy ;
Tbeir bitter lamentations wound the air,
Whfle echoes answer with their own despair :
But not from these alone come mournful cries
From other sources sorrowing accents rise:
For Dind and Bartlett from fair visions woke
To see them vanish in thick wreaths of smoke;
But may not we, as time goes rolling by,.
Anticipate more brightness in our sky ?
May not these virgin boards fresh heroes tread—
Art’s faithful votaries, expelled the scene,
In terror witness horrors unforseen,
To this fair shrine new worshippers be led ?
No more as fugitives compelled to roam,
May not our poets herein find a home ?
And from their means of life and mimic state
At once are hurled, and mourn their hapless fate:
Art’s guardians to charlatans give place,
Till but the semblance of an art we trace;
The Lard of Misrule exercised his might,
And turned the drama’s day to darkest night;
O’er all, Monopoly then hung a cloud.
Denoting death—its choicest robe a shroud !
Our “gentle Shakspere, ” and the noble train
Of kindred spirits start to life again ;
And, from the limbo of neglect and scorn
Again our ears enchant—our stage adorn ?
For, mark the change ! where blackened walls appeared
A stately temple to the Muse is reared !
Where dusty ruin lately met the view,
At length—oh, waste of time ! —a cry is heard—
A piercing shriek for aid so long deferred :
Behold a Theatre elegant and new,
Where enterpise and skill have well combined
Across the seas its sounds are wafted far,
And in response there came our Manager—
Whose sire, in days gone by, the drama made
A theme for praise—he, highest aims essayed !
Beneath his rule great Nesbitt trod the stage,
And left his name upon its history’s page,
With those of actors who high praise did win—
To furnish what must cheer and charm the mind ;
Where enterprise and skill will still combine
To make the jewel worthy of the shrine—
Protect the drama from the slightest stain,
Ensure your favour, and prolong their reign !
They enter on their genial task to-night
Of giving you real pleasure and delight;
And from this “ Daisy Farm,’’ may choicest flowers
Spring freshly to enrich your leisure hours ;
Knowles, Spencer, Griffiths, Grove, James, Arabin,
Lee, Thompson, Willis, Deering, Simmons, Simes—
(The pioneers in less auspicious times—
r: *
H
Ere dawned the brightness of the present hour
Your smiles are all the sunshine they’ll require—
When clouds of prejudice have ceased to lour !)
Your plaudits all the tribute they’ll desire!
The “ Prince of Wales” theatre was first opened on 12th March 1855, with Knowles’s play of “The Hunchback,” Mr. and Mrs. Janies Waller,
principals. The farce was “The Irish Tutor,” Mr. P. Tuttle; Mr. Joseph Wyatt, was lessee, and Mr. William Dind Acting Manager. This theatre
was destroyed by fire on the morning of Wednesday, 3rd October, iB6O. The play was “ The Hunchback;” Mr. Joseph Rayner, lessee, manager
and leading actor; Miss Avonia Jones as “ Julia.’ ’ The farce of “A Shocking Affair.” Three persons were killed at this fire, and several injured.
The second “ Prince of Wales ” was opened on Saturday, 23rd May, 1863, with Flotow’s opera of “ Martha.” Principals : Miss Lucy
Escott and Squires ;in the presence of Sir John Young, Governor. W. Lyster, lessee and manager. Architect, Mr. Hilley. Mechanist, Mr. John
I Renno, whose complete and splendid machinery was the admiration of every actor <. f note who visited the colony, who pronounced it unrivalled in
Europe. This theatre was destroyed by fire on the morning of Saturday, 6th January, 1872, after the performance of Akhurst’s burlesque of “The
House that Jack Built.” Messrs. Dind and Bartlett were lessees and managers. Three men were injured at this fire. On the same ground stands
the present Theatre Royal, and it is not unworthy of note that the front of the building, as originally erected, has withstood every attack, and is now
; as fresh-looking as ever.
In addition to those mentioned above, there have been many actresses and actors connected with the colonial stage whose names are worthy of
Record. Some of these I will name alphabetically: Ladies —Madame Celeste, Mrs. Coppin, Julia Matthews, Ellen Mortyn, Mrs. O’Flaherty, Mrs. A.
1 hillips, Mrs. Charles Poole, Mrs. Vickery, and Mrs. Charles Young (now Mrs. Herman Vezin.) Gentlemen —Messrs Bartlett, Belfield, Craven f
Ij Charles Dillon, Drew, Edwards, Fenton, Fitzgerald, j. L. Hall, Hydes, Jefferson, Maddocks, Milne, Noble, G. Fawcett Rowe, Steele, Stephens,
g p Talbot, Torning, Fred and Richard Younge. * v * J.
■ ■ ■ .. . * - ' . 3
\j VJS, LEWIS & GIBSON, Steam Machine Printers, 6 O’Connell Street, Sydney. vJj v
, i n . * ' I <
