

Or Ini&mitii.
ADDRESSES
DKLIVEUED AT TltE
INAUGV RATION
HIS EXCELLENCY
SIR ANTHONY MUSGRAVE, K.C.M.6., GOVERNOR,
VISITOR OF THE, UNIVERSITY.
ANT) Hi THE
VICE-CHANCELLOR,
THE RIGHT REV'. AUGUSTUS SHORT, D.U., OXOX.,
LORD BISMOL* OF ADELAIDE-,
APRIL 25, 1876.
ADELAIDE:
w. C. COX, GOV£RNAILY.'X PRINTER, NORIH-ILRKACE.
1876.


Jk


ADDRESSES
DELIVERED AT THE
INAUGURATION
HIS EXCELLENCY
SIR ANTHONY MUSGRAVE, K.C.M.G., GOVERNOR,
VISITOR OF THE UNIVERSITY",
AND BY THE
YICE-CH AN CELLOR,
THE EIGHT EEV. AUGUSTUS SHOET, D.D., OXON.,
LORD BISHOP OF ADELAIDE,
APRIL 25, 1876.
ADELAIDE:
tv. C. COX, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH-TERRACE.
1876.




HU FtrK /p
to s
TIE INAUGURATION.
The opening meeting of the University of Adelaide took place on
Tuesday, April 25, 1876. The admission was by free tickets, and every
available seat in the body of the Town Hall was occupied, the gallery
also being well filled. About five minutes past three o’clock Sir Anthony
Musgrave, Governor of the Province, arrived, attended by his Aide-de-
Camp and Private Secretary. As he entered the halljthe assemblage
rose, the band playing the National Anthem. His Excellency presided
as Visitor of the University. The following members of the Council of
the University were also on the platform, namely, the Lord Bishop of
Adelaide, Vice-Chancellor, the Chief Justice (Hon. S. J. Way), Mr.
Justice Stow, the Hon. G. C. Hawker, M.A. (Chief Secretary), the
Hon. Sir Henry Ayers, K.C.M.G., the Hon. W. Milne (President of the
Legislative Council), the Hon. A. Hay, M.L.C.; the Bevs. J. Jefferis,
LL.B., and W. P. Wells; A. Campbell, Esq., M.D., Edin.; J. A.
Hartley, B A., B.Sc., President of the Council of Education; Messrs. W,
H. Bundey, M. MacDermott, A. von Treuer, Cand. Jur.; Professors
Davidson,* Read, M.A., Tate, F.R.G.S., F.C.S., and Lamb, M.A.; and
W. Barlow, 8.A., Registrar of the University. Among the audience were
the Mayor and Councillors of the City, besides many representatives of
the Legislature, Church, and Bar. Numerous ladies were also present.
Special invitations were issued to all members of both Houses of Parlia-
ment and Heads of Government Departments, Members of the Council of
Education, Foreign Consuls, the Mayors of the various Municipalities,
Members of the Executive Council of the late University Association, the
delegates of Union College, and benefactors of the University. Seats
were also reserved for graduates of other Universities. Amongst those
present were noticed Dean Russell, Archdeacon Marryat, M.A., Queen’s
College, Oxford; Archdeacon Dove, M.A., Cambridge; Rev. Canon
Farr, M.A., Cambridge; Very Rev. Father F. Byrne; Revs. A. T.
Boas, F. S. Poole, M.A., Cambridge; T. Field, M.A., Cambridge;
F. Williams, M.A., W. H. Sharpe, M.A., Whitmore Carr, M.A., J. C.


Woods, 8.A., J. Pollitt, H. M. PoUitt.W. B. Andrews, W. R. Fletcher,
M.A., London; J. Macbean, M.A., Aberdeen; T. J. Gore, M.A., F. W.
Cox, and J. Lyall; Drs. J. Benson, J. Cockburn, W. Gosse, A. C. Kelly,
S. J. Magarey, W. D. Thomas, R. W. Moore, H. T. Whittell, E. W.
Way, R. Paterson, R. T. Wylde, and W. Wyatt; Hon. C. Mann, Q.C.,
Attorney-General; Mr. C. Todd, C.M.G., Postmaster-General; Commis-
sioner .Downer, S.M., Commissioner Hamilton, Messrs. J. H. Angas,
M.P., J. Robin, Vice-Consul for Brazil; J. T. Turnbull, Consul for
Netherlands; J. Beck, Vice-Consul for Portugal and Chili; and Hon.
L. Glyde, Acting Consul for Belgium ; F. Chappie, 8.A., B.Sc., London;
J. J. Stuckey, 8.A., Cambridge; Fred Ayers, M.A., Cambridge; F.
Halcomb, 8.A., Oxford; J. W. Bakewell, 8.A., Cambridge; R.
Ingleby, Q.C., W. Bartley, H. Gawler, W. B. T. Andrews, H. J.
Andrews, J. F. Cleland, *E. W. Hitchin, G. W. De la Poer Beresford,
G. A. Labatt, 8.A., T.C.D. ; G. Young, Hon. Sec. to Union College;
Messrs. D. Murray, M. Salom, W. D. Glyde, Members of the Council
of Education, Mr. J. Bath, Secretary, and Messrs. C. L. Witham,
8.A., J. Hosking, T. Burgan, and L. W. Stanton, Inspectors; Robert
Kay, Secretary to South Australian Institute. The Judges wore their
robes and wigs; the Professors wore academic dress; Queen’s Counsel,
barristers, attorneys, and clergy had their gowns ; the many gentlemen
who had passed through Universities in Europe were attired in
academic gowns representing the various seats of learning; several
Heads of Departments donned the Civil Service uniform; those
gentlemen who had been honored with decorations of knightly orders
wore their insignia.
11 r/..
■M-j


HIS EXCELLENCY’S ADDRESS.
His Excellency said: —We have met to-day to inaugurate, with
fitting solemnity, an institution destined, I both hope and believe,
to exercise great beneficial influence upon the future of this young
community. Provision to supply the means of higher education
than can be obtained at common schools and ordinary academiec
is specially important where special need for it exists; and although
it may seem at first as if the observation was uncomplimentary
to the people of this Province, I may say that I am acquainted
with no community of English-speaking people where the wants
which the University is intended to supply more manifestly exist.
But to note the fact is not to be uncomplimentary. It is simply
to draw our own attention to the natural laws of development in
any social organism. The early circumstances of all young com-
munities preclude attention to the higher branches of culture in
the first instance. We are too young as a community, and our
growth in other respects has been too rapid and vigorous to leave
much energy unemployed by more pressing requirements, which
must first be attended to; but as wealth increases, the social
necessity and the leisure arise for cultivating the elegancies of
literature and art, and for the pursuit of science for its own sake,
apart from its utility. I have said apart from its utility, and there
is beauty in science apart from the usefulness of what it teaches.
It was Goethe, I think, who told us that we must take care of the
beautiful, for that the useful will take care of itself; and to whom-
soever we may be indebted for it, there is much truth in the obser-
vation. Self-culture, to be worthy of the name, must have no


sordid motive. It should require no incentive but the expansion
of your own mind for your own sake. It is the development of
yourself for yourself, not for what you may get by it. I must
protest, therefore, for my own part, against the mistake of
supposing that education is valueless which does not imme-
diately lead to money-making, or securing a livelihood. If
knowledge is to be regarded as a luxury which few can afford,
it is expressly that this luxury maj be placed within the reach
of more than now enjojr the expansion of mental and moral nature
which the possession of knowledge implies that this University is
now established. The theory held those who founded the
ancient seats of learning which we admire and revere in older
countries was, that for all who sought it a common culture should
be furnished in the first instan c e as a trunk of the tree of know-
ledge, of which the roots are in the common schools, and from
which might branch off subsequently those special studies needed
for professional and technical training. And when of late years the
claim has been pressed, that the natural sciences should enter more
largely than hitherto into the course of general study, the strongest
argument in support of this view is most -seldom heard. It is rarely
insisted upon that the natural and experimental sciences should so
enter, because they have a special value in affording a peculiar and
characteristic discipline for the mind, which is necessary to complete
the fullness of that generous education which, in the language of
John Milton, fits a man to perform justly and magnanimously all
the offices, both public and private, of peace and war—necessary
too, perhaps, to correct the tendency said to be seen sometimes in
classical scholars to lean too much upon authority, and to avoid
the contempt which mathematicians are prone to feel for all
reasoning but that which deals with necessary matter. I am
glad, therefore, that the Legislature, by their annual grant, and by
their liberal endowment of lands, have shown their recognition
that in principle there is no distinction between the claims of
higher education and those of primary instruction to support from
the public funds. There are many who, while fully conceding
that the welfare of the State requires that the children of the
poor, as well as the children of the rich, should receive primary


education, refuse to admit that the same arguments which support
the one claim are equally forcible as regards the other. But surely
it ought scarcely to be necessary to plead the cause of higher
education in any community of which the Constitution is essentially
democratic, whatever may be the form of government. In general
terms its claims are everywhere admitted. It is obvious that there
can be no intelligent guidance of the intricate affairs of State
without something of that discriminating knowledge which comes
from thorough training of the higher faculties. And since it is
wholly impossible that everyone should have large personal ex-
perience, it is the more necessary that he should, so far as possible,
acquire knowledge of the personal experience of others. It is
clear that the more of higher education you can have in the society
the better. All this, however, is rather languidly assented to than
earnestly felt. The idea is not firmly grasped that higher educa-
tion is in every sense quite as necessary to the well-being of a State
as the training afforded by common schools—that it is quite as
essential that the men who make and administer the laws should
be thoroughly educated as that those who choose the law-makers
should be able to read and write. But if this be really so, is there
any object of greater concern to the public, or any mode by which
the interests of higher education can be more certainly secured
than by confiding it to the care of the State? There is an
objection entertained by some to this course, based upon the fact
that in communities without any State religion, Universities sup-
ported by the State must be also without any specific religious
teaching, and are therefore supposed to be surrounded by an atmos-
phere full of danger to students. This opinion has, I know, been
held in the United States of America by large numbers of worthy
persons. But experience has shown it to be without foundation,
and that it has, in fact, exercised a most pernicious influence upon
the cause of higher education. The difference between State Uni-
versities and Denominational Colleges, has been found to exist
rather as between small Colleges and large ones, than in the
efficacy of nominal religious teaching, or in injury from its absence
among those who in earlier youth have already had the benefit of
religious training. In the smaller institutions, which have more of


the character of Collegiate schools, no doubt the pupils are more
immediately under the supervision and guidance of their teachers;
their peculiar wants are recognized and receive appropriate treat-
ment. But each class of institution has its advantages and
disadvantages, and denominational Colleges can never offer that
combination of excellencies which the larger and more eclectic
University will afford—that wider intercourse with men of the
same pursuits and the same ambitions, which best developes the
energies and secures the highest success. But in thus asserting
the claims of the University to public regard, which I desire to do
most earnestly, I would not have it supposed that I think there can
be any isolation of educational appliances. No University, worthy
to be so called, will forget that a chief part of its duty is to
elevate the preparatory schools. Nor must we forget that without
good subordinate schools of every grade, it would be like a
supreme tribunal without inferior Courts. To suppose that it
could so flourish is to suppose that the tower of this building
could stand in mid-air without a foundation. What, however,
may be accomplished, to develop this completion of our educational
edifice, even from beginnings more modest than our own, may
be learnt from the history of Owens College, at Manchester;
which twenty-five years ago was founded upon a bequest that
gave less than £4,000 per annum, but expressly by the will of
the founder with the ambitious design of giving instruction in
all branches of knowledge which were then taught or should be
thereafter taught at the English Universities, and which now has
become a school of which any people may be proud, rivalling those
Universities in the distinction of its teachers and the excellence of
their teaching. In now declaring the opening of this Universitj 7 ,
I will hope confidently—in addition to the munificent donations
for which we have to thank those whose names are so well known
to you —for liberality in our case from others similar to that which
has so richly supplemented Owens* bequest, and for a success
for our institution no less great.
His Excellency then called upon the Yice-Chancellor to deliver
his inaugural address.


THE YICE-CHANCELLOE’S ADDRESS*
May it Please your Excellency; Gentlemen of the Council;
Fellow Citizens of Adelaide and South Australia :
I stand before you this day by force of circumstances over which 1
have had no control, and by a dispensation of Providence as unex-
pected as it was mournful. A task has thus been assigned me,
which, difficult in itself from its importance and dignity, is in my
case rendered still more so by the hindrances to literary and philo-
sophical study springing from an official life, very fully occupied
with duties pastoral and missionary as well as the cares incident
to the episcopal regimen.
The sudden removal of the late Chancellor, so capable of doing
justice to the various lines of thought suggested by the Inaugura-
tion of an University, has also curtailed the time which otherwise
I might have abstracted from my usual avocations; to treat with
proper depth and precision the topics which must engage our at-
tention on this occasion. As it is, I can only offer you my best
endeavors to fulfil this honorable duty ; and claim your indulgence
for my shortcomings.
Before I proceed further, let me pay a just tribute of respect to
the memory of him who so lately occupied—let me say it without
offence—the “ foremost place” amongst you ; a leader among those
who may justly be called the Founders and Fathers of the Colony.
He was a man of tried ability; of much experience in political
life; distinguished alike in the Senate and at the Bar ; a success-
ful Advocate, an able Statesman—powerful in debate ; a man also
of literary tastes and ibnd of reflective study. From him, then,
you might have anticipated an Address, which would have been a
* Since the delivery of this Address His Lordship has been elected to the office of
Chancellor of the University,


fitting introduction to that higher Education, which it is the pur-
pose of our University to promote —that higher Education which
includes all that is known, and can be taught, concerning Man and
Material Nature. He would have told you that in the pursuit of
such investigations, the honest inquirer after truth, be it Material
or Moral, Social, Political, or Theological, has a right to demand
entire immunity from the “ imputation of unworthy motives.” I,
too, quite agree that “ equal credit for the love of truth” (as Mr.
Gladstone said in his Address at Liverpool College) “ should be
allowed by all to all, and the endeavor made, or at least intended,
to unite plain speaking with personal respect.” “ The part,” said
Archbishop Whateley, “of a lover of Truth is to follow her at all
seeming hazards.” “ Any theory that is unsound must be refuted
by arguments drawn from observation and experience,” and any
deduction, I may add, in History, by a more accurate knowledge of
recorded facts and j aster reasoning upon them.
Occupying though we did very different standpoints of opinion
and belief, I had nevertheless many opportunities, while acting
with him in the Council of this University, of appreciating the
calm judgment and friendly courtesy of the late Chief Justice. I
may dispute, however, the accuracy of his information as a critic,
and the soundness of his argument. There is, moreover, in the
following words from the preface to his “ Jesus of History, a
gentle candour which awakens kindly feeling towards him, and
a tone of sadness, which sounds almost like a sigh of regret for the
conclusion at which he had arrived: —“ Though the reason is
convinced,” he says, “the feelings will sometimes refuse to be
satisfied. They are dissevered from their ancient roots; and it is
not always possible for them to put forth equally vigorous roots in
a new soil.”
I have briefly adverted to this difference between us, because I
do not wish to class myself with those who denounce Philosophy,
Science, the spirit of investigation, and the feeling of personal
independence as inconsistent with the faith of a Christian. More-
over, it seemed to me to symbolize that liberty of inquiry, which


the social condition of this Colony and the history of its founda-
tion have stamped indelibly on our University. Indeed, if all
material and spiritual Truths are co-related—if material analogy is
the key to spiritual interpretation, and “all things are/’ as the Son
of Sirach teaches, “ double one against another,” so that parable
is the best teacher of moral truth, then reverent and earnest
inquiry into Material Nature, as well as Moral and Intellectual
Man, his History, his Literature and Language, will, in the long run ,
bring us to a clearer, more comprehensive, and harmonious know-
ledge of that which concerns ourselves and the world we inhabit.
With these views I cannot but rejoice that, from the first, pro-
vision was made in our University Professorships, not only for the
study of Nature in Man , but of Nature as it appears otherwise
than in Man, as well as for the sciences of number, weight, and
measure.
By his earlier professional pursuits, as well as his later interest
in mines, our generous-hearted Founder —Mr. Walter Watson
Hughes—might not unnaturally have given a preference to Natural
Science, Mineralogy, Greology, Chemistry, Mechanics, and made
these the special objects of his endowment. Possibly the genius
of Scotland, her high culture of Mental Philosophy, Literature,
and the Humanities prevailed, and led him to select the latter,
as the special subjects to be handled by his Professors.
While I, then, as representing the older University studies,
rejoice that the first place was thus given in our educational
system to the knowledge which concerns Man himself I am not
less thankful that the munificence of the Hon. Thomas Elder enabled
the Council to enlarge its basis by Professorships of Mathematics
and Natural Science; and I trust that, as the intelligence and
wealth of this country increases, our University will become more
encyclopaedic in its teaching and studies. I long to see the day
when separate Chairs of Natural Philosophy, Anatomy, Botany,
History, Law, and Political Economy, as well as of Practical
Engineering, shall be founded; and the youth of South Australia,


aspiring to eminence in all the various branches of human know-
ledge, shall be able in their own schools and in this Institution to
find a mental training fitting them to take their place side by side
with the graduates of other Universities.
It was the fault of such Institutions in the Mediaeval Age, that
they were too circumscribed in their view of human knowledge.
They were trammelled and hedged up by metaphysical moulds of
thought, which hindered observation and discouraged experiment.
The vast fields of knowledge which Bacon opened through the
latter process invite or claim the attention of every thinking mind;
while the progress of mechanical Art has enabled the inquirer to
penetrate the depths of heaven and explore the minutest organisms
on the earth. Nay more, Chemical Analysis and the Science of
Light seem actually to have brought to our knowledge the elemental
atoms of which the material universe is composed. The investiga-
tion of the properties of matter and the laws of force is thus now
enlarging the boundaries of Science.
It should be the aim then of every University, whether new or
old, to claim for itself the Study and provide for the Teaching of
every branch of such knowledge. Let the constituent elements of
the Earth, the physiology of the Plants which clothe, of the animals
which live upon it, be explored; let the pure sciences of Number,
Weight, and Measure be cultivated to the highest extent; let
them be applied to investigate and explain the cosmical phenomena
of our Planetary system and the Sidereal Heavens ; let the student
of Natural Science use without hindrance or obloquy all methods of
intellectual progress which the law r s of Thought allow, eithei foi
accumulating facts by accurate observation or by logical deduction
from them ; and we shall -welcome the Truth which may be dis-
covered as part of man’s intellectual inheritance. On the othei
hand, we will in nowise disregard or disparage the Studies which
concern man as a spiritual and intellectual being ; but investigate
with equal assiduity the philosophy of his mental and moral consti-
tution, his history, and the languages in which he clothes his
thoughts. Nor will we strip the Student who observes and reasons


upon these metaphysical phenomena or those of Religious Psychology
of the proud title of Science and Philosophy, as if there were only
Science of Matter and of the Human Frame, but no Philosophy of
the Mind and Soul! What are the Ethics of Aristotle but a trea-
sure-house stored with the results of his observation of mental and
moral phenomena ?
The old University education was comprised in two courses of
study named respectively the Trivium and the Quadrivium.
Grammar, Logic, and Rhetoric formed the former course;
Arithmetic, Music, Geometry, and Astronomy the latter. Natural
Science and Natural Philosophy were quite shut out. Astronomy,
from the imperfection of the telescope, was paralysed. The
instrument constructed by Galileo, by discovering the occultation of
the satellites of Jupiter, revolutionized the old theory of the earth’s
immobility, and, in spite of dogma and imprisonment, the whisper
of the Philosopher —e pur si muove (“ It does move though,”) at
the close of his recantation, while it shows the weakness of the
man, demonstrates also the impossibility of overthrowing scientific
truth by the mere authority of opinion. Astronomy then began
to be truly taught on the assumption that the theory might be true;
and about the same time Geology, in spite of ecclesiastical threats,
began to assert the vast antiquity of the earth from the observed
layers of ancient eruptions upon the sides of Etna.
Here I may again cite the words of Archbishop Whateley who,
nearly forty years ago, reproved the timidity and antagonism of
some religionists to the discoveries of physical truth, as if opposed
to the Revelations of God’s Word. “We must not,” said that
able prelate, “ step forward, Bible in hand, to check the inquiries
of the geologist, the astronomer, or political economist, from an
apprehension that the cause of Religion can be endangered by
them. Any theory, on whatever subject, that is really sound can
never be inimical to a religion founded on Truth. If we give way to
a dread of danger from the progress of Physical or Moral Science,
we manifest a want of faith in God’s power, or in His will to
maintain His own cause.”


With regard then to amicable relations between Science and
Religion, so far as I am able to perceive, the progress of Demon-
strative Science has been favorable to the great fundamental truth
of all Religion, both Natural and Revealed, namely, the fact of
design and benevolent will in the order of the Universe. No
experimental philosopher, in his sober moments of thought, will
indulge in “ guesses” so logically absurd as those of Lucretius,
“ That the eye was not made in order to see with,” or “ that having
come by chance” into that delicate and ordered structure, seeing
came by use of the eyes. Lucretius, b. iv., 823.
If he then “ who is not against us is with us,” we will count the
true philosophic inquirer as on our side. Melancholy indeed is the
conclusion to which Materialism brings its disciples; for the author
of “ The Old and the New Faith,” in his philosophy of the
“Universum” represents each individual living man “as but a
temporary partner in it all, who ought to be thankful for relief,
that is, by death, “from what is after all but exhausting day
labor.” This is no happy view of human life and as to the relief
of death on which he so certainly counts, what if, to use the lan-
guage of our great poet—
To die,” be not “to sleep,” but “ perchance to dream—
Aye, there’s the rub!
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil
Must give us pause !•”
Hamlet, Act hi., 1.
Against Strauss’s substitution of the “ Universum 5 (or the cognate
idea of Comte, that is, “ Humanity”) out of which man grows,
and from which he has the morsel of intelligence that he misuses
against that substitution, I say, for a wise and benevolent Author
of the Universe, Natural Philosophy and Natural Science supply
arguments of a positive character best calculated to meet and
correct such views.*
* See illustrative passages, Appendix Gladstone’s Address at the Liverpool College,
December 21, 1872.


There is, moreover, nothing new in this idea of the “TJniver-
sum.” The Pantheism of Nature is as beautifully described in the
following lines of Virgil as the Origin of the Universe from
the fortuitous concurrence of atoms is in the vigorous verse of
Lucretius—
“ Principle coelum ac terras camposque hquentes
Lucentcmque globum Lunse Titaniaque astra
Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus
Mens agitat molem, et magno se corpore miscet.
Inde hominum pecudumque genus, yitseque volantum,
Et quae marmoreo fert monstra sub aequore pontus.
Igneus est ollis vigor, et ccelestis origo
Seminibus, quantum non noxia corpora tardant,
Terrenique hebetant artus moribundaque membra.
Hinc metuunt cupiuntque, dolent gaudentque, neque auras
Dispiciunt clausse tenebris et carcere cseco.” JEneid % vi., 723.
Nor does the Ideal “ Humanity” of Comte differ in its practical
consequences: that Immense and Eternal Being, embracing the
living and the dead; “ the prime mover of their existence, on
whom all, whether individuals or societies, depend, exclusive, that
is, of those human beings who are mere digesting machines , but asso-
ciating with itself all the animals which lend a noble aid “ in for-
warding the destinies of man,” horses, dogs, oxen, &c. Comte
does indeed give a certain Personality (rather Personification) to
his abstract Being “ Humanity,” in order to render it capable of
being the “ object of affection and worship;” but it is simply an
abuse of language to speak of loving “ Humanity” as a whole,
even if that whole be limited to the “ elect” portion of animated
life “ capable of assimilation,” “in virtue of a real co-operation
* Know first, the earth, the heaven, the main,
The moon’s pale orb, the starry train,
Are nourished by a soul—
A spirit whose celestial flame
Glows in each member of the frame
And stirs the mighty whole.
Thence souls of men and cattle spring,
And the gay people of the wing,
And those strange shapes that ocean hides
Beneath the smoothness of his tides.
A fiery strength inspires their lives,
An essence that from heaven derives,
Though clogged in part by limbs of day,
And the dull “vesture of decay.”
Hence wild desires and grovelling fears,
And human laughter, human tears :
Immured in dungeon—seeming light,
They look abroad, yet see no light. Conixotox,


in furthering the common good.” Comte’s Catechism of Positive
Religion, Congreve’s Tr., pp. 64, 74.
In contrast to such views, it seems that Natural Philosophy is
friendly to Natural Religion by demonstrating that “Nature, so far
as it is an object of scientific research, is governed by general laws
of operation and connexion, of succession and co-existence, among
the various elements and appearances around us.”—p. 3, Whewell’s
Astronomy and General Physics.
“ The whole course of the visible universe is the collective result
of such laws its movements are only the aggregate of their
working. All natural occurrences, in the skies and on the earth,
in the organic and in the inorganic world, are determined by the
relations of the elements, and the actions of the forces of which the
rules are thus prescribed.”
“In so far as we consider the bearing of one part upon
we receive an impression of adaptation, of mutual fitness, of conspiring
means of preparation, and completeness of purpose and provision.”—
Ibid., p. 13.
“When we have illustrated the correspondencies which thus exist
in every province of Nature—between the qualities of brute
matter and the constitution of living things—between the tendency
to derangement and the conservative influences by which such a
tendency is counteracted —between the office of the minutest speck
and the most general laws —it will, I trust, be difficult or impossible
to exclude from our conception of this wonderful system the idea of
a harmonizing, a preserving, a contriving, and an intending mind,
and of a wisdom, power, and goodness far exceeding the limits of
our thoughts.”— lbid., 14.
I conclude, then, that there need be no fundamental hostility
between Theology and Science, and a few illustrations of their
general connexion may be permitted me on the Inauguration of
our University, which embraces in its teaching the Mental and
Moral philosophy of man and his Literature: Mathematics, as well
as Natural Philosophy and Natural Science.


I. Astronomy. —The cosmical arrangement of the solar
system, which astronomy discloses, displays a regularity in the
nearly circular orbits of the planets which excludes the notion
of accident. The velocity and direction of the motion of
each planet must have been originally adjusted , so that the
projectile force should be accommodated to the centripetal, and
the selection of a nearly circular orbit seems to be the best,
if not the only one, adapted to the earth as the seat of
animal and vegetable life. Here is apparent design. The stead-
fast and regular order of the solar influence upon our planet
seems indisputably the result of wise and benevolent purpose—
that is, it involves the conception of the mind and will of a Creator.
We South Australians are ever ready to cry out when a single day
of unusual heat seems to scorch the very life out of us, but what, if
like Encke’s comet, our planet described a decreasing ellipse,
bringing us annually nearer to the sun! Shrivelled like a parched
scroll ‘ men would be scorched with great heat;’ and, again, receding
into space, would be imprisoned in thick ‘ ribbed ice’ by a glacial
winter, which in the frozen regions of Siberia has preserved for
unknown ages the carcases of woolly mammoths.
The stability, too, of the solar system, notwithstanding the per-
turbations arising from the law of gravitation, each planet and its
satellites attracting all the others and being attracted by them in
turn, involved a mechanical problem of extreme complexity, which
occupied the mathematicians of Europe the greater part of the
eighteenth century. At length it was shown that the system is
stable ; that the changes in the orbits which take place in shorter
periods are never very great, and finally each orbit is restored to
its normal condition. Meanwhile “ the disturbance never attains
a sufficient amount seriously to alter the adaptations of the system.”
(Laplace, Expos, du Syst. du Monde, quoted by Whewell, p. 164,
Astronomy, &c.) When from such observed disturbance the pre-
sence of some unknown planet was suspected, its orbit was exactly
calculated, and its position so far ascertained by the separate
mathematical labors of Adams and Le Terrier, that the telescope
of the observer Galle at Berlin could be directed to the proper


quarter of the heavens at the proper moment. By Professor
Challis also at Cambridge the stranger Neptune was descried
from this same calculation. Blind, I think then, must he be who
can applaud the skill of the astronomer, and not reverently admire
the creative Mathematician of the Universe, by whose simple Law
of Gravitation the orbits of the planets and their perturbations are
so exactly regulated and preserved.
The circular orbit of the Earth and its adaptation to human and
organic life has already been noticed; but that of the moon to the
uses of this earth, and man upon it, may be familiarized to us by
the verse of Coleridge. “ The rolling ocean’s vast abyss” is kept
from stagnation by its influence, as well as enlightened by its rays.
But for the action of tides the vision of. the “ Ancient Mariner ”
would be realized—
“The very deep did rot O Christ,
That ever this should be!
Yea, slimy things did crawl with, legs
Upon the slimy sea !”
But now our satellite wafts on the swelling waters into every river
and inlet the commerce of distant lands, and in her monthly cir-
cuit through the stars enables the navigator by measurement of
angular distances unerringly to steer his course over the otherwise
trackless ocean.
So too the distribution of sea and land, and their relative specific
gravities, furnish in their adaptation corresponding terrestrial wit-
ness to a Wisdom and Intelligence which adjusted the solar system
so as to secure its stability. “The mean specific gravity of the
earth is five times that of water.” Were it otherwise and the
solid parts of the earth less weighty than the fluid, the former
would float like the fabled Delos, and all the fluid gathered on one
side would overwhelm the highest mountains. But now by virtue
of gravity the denser matter of the planet is gathered nearer its
centre and the equilibrium of the ocean is secured.*'
* The density of Saturn is less than one-seventh of that of the Earth. If an
ocean like ours were poured into the hollows of its surface, the equilibrium would not
be stable. It would leave its,bed and be gathered on one side, rushing over in its way
the highest mountains.—Whewell, Ast. and Gen. Physics, c. vi.


ii. Geology. —While thus having a solid earth on which to stand,
let us examine for a moment its crust, so far as the volcano, or
mining, and the varied action to which its surface has been subjected
enable the geologist to trace its internal structure. The more it is
examined, the more it will, I think, exhibit tokens of designed
adaptation and benevolent arrangement; of progress and sub-
ordinated building up. We shall see also the beginnings and
development of organic life, vegetable and animal, both advancing
upward and onward, until the fauna and flora, the fish of the sea,
and the fowl of the air became adapted to the wants, and therefore
to the presence and increase of the human family. The alternation
of igneous and sedimentary rocks, their upheaval and subsi-
dences, their valleys eroded by water, or lakes scooped out by
glaciers: their periods of tropical vegetation solidified into coal:
the juxtaposition of iron ore as if put there for smelting: the
alternation of porous beds and retentive clays, storing water for
the use of men and animals, all conspire to the end of human
existence and comfort. The comparative scarceness even of the
precious, but less useful metals, and of precious stones, seems to
indicate a deliberate arrangement best suited to that law of
labour which, while it occupies, also invigorates and trains the
worker— Man.
in. Meteorology.—-We are apt also carelessly to think, that the
“ viewless winds” blow round the world at pleasure! But Admiral
Maury (in his Physical Geography) has reasoned on the “ weight
made for, the winds,” as observed by the Arabian Patriarch,
and the “ measure given to the waters.” Job xxviii. 25. The
stability of the ocean has been alluded to above, but consider
the perpetual ebb and flow, the rising and falling currents
of the ambient atmosphere ; how the heated vaporous air near the
earth expands and flies aloft, to be condensed in the chill regions
above, and descend in refreshing showers upon the weary earth,
flow unbearable would this beautiful plain of Adelaide be, were it
not for the cool sea breeze, or land wind which rush toward
the sun-baked surface and lower its temperature ! How otherwise
could respiration freshen the blood which courses through our


veins, and so relieve from apoplectic sunstroke the congested
brain? How much of kindly adaptation to human life is here
exhibited!
iv. Botany. —lt would be disloyal to the special fitness of this
land of South Australia for cereal production, did I not draw from
it an illustration of benevolent design in the structure and fertiliza-
tion of a corn of wheat.
As the cosmical arrangements and adaptations, “ conspiring to
an end,” in the solar system, were made evident through the im-
provement of the telescope, so the minute constructions and adap-
tations of the vegetable world have been revealed by the micros-
cope. The germ in each grain of wheat consists of a few cells,
which contain a substance giving signs of life. Analysis has shown
this substance to consist of carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, and nitro-
gen. In themselves these elements are lifeless. What then gives
them life ?—ln this life, however, surely a purpose may be dis-
cerned. Beyond all question it gives seed to the sower, and bread
to the eater. Bread is the staff of life—of human life; and the
researches of the Geologist have brought to light the fact that the
order of plant to which wheat belongs appeared about contem-
poraneously with the advent of man, in the later superficial strata
of the earth. Of its adaptation to his comfort, as well as support,
the present flourishing state of this Colony is the best proof. What
would it be without wheat ?
But certain conditions also are necessary for its growth. In the
cerecloth of the mummy it has lain unchanged three thousand
years, ungerminating yet retaining its potency of life; but not
until the care of man has placed it in the soil duly prepared t
not until heat and moisture soften the farina which envelops it,
will the germ by its own proper vessels suck up the nutriment
thus prepared for it, and form it into cellular tissue, after the fashion
of the embryo plant. Here the deliberate arrangement of Intelli-
gence seems to manifest itself. The plant begins to shoot in two
opposite directions, and that simultaneously; the one part obeying
the law of gravitation goes downward to the earth; the other, in


opposition to that law, shoots upward to the light and air. The
former performs the functions of the root, selecting and absorbing
such particles of [matter from the soil as are wanted , e.g. silica
for the strengthening of the stem ; the latter puts forth “ first the
blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear.”
Is it consistent with reason to think this all came by chance ?
That no intelligent will designed the structure, adapted it to the
conditions necessary for its growth, and prepared it for the use of
man, with whom it came contemporaneously upon the theatre of
existence ? Or can we suppose our common garden fruits, garden
sweets, the Rosaceao, were not intended to give pleasure to the
senses of man in particular; that refined and innocent pleasure,
which Milton has well described in the “ sylvan lodge ” of Para-
dise, where Adam entertains his angel-guest, and Eve
“ Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalk,
"Whatever earth, all-bearing mother, yields:
fruit of all kinds, in coat
Rough, or smooth rind ; or bearded husk or shell,
She gathers, tribute large, and on the board
Heaps with unsparing hand—
then strews the ground
With rose and odours from the shrub unfumed !”—P.L., v., 338.
As well might we suppose that the rich variety and ordered beauty
of our Botanic Gardens, and the blaze of loveliness which bursts
from its conservatories, the pride of Adelaide and “ cynosure of
neighbouring” Colonies, came not from the deliberate planning of
their skilled and kind Director, but were an Epicurean result of a
fortuitous jumble of potential atoms.
The late lamented Hugh Miller has left an eloquent passage, vin-
dicating from ascetic superstition the moderate use of “ boon
Natures gifts “that ample entertainment,” he says, “sprinkled
with delicate perfumes, garnished with roses, and crowned with
most delicious fruit, which we now know was not only specially
prepared for us, but also got ready, as nearly as we can judge, for
the appointed hour of our appearance at the Feast! Surely there
is less of sense and more of churlishness in shutting our eyes to


the care and kindness which prepared the feast.” —Testimony of the
Bocks, Lecture I.
v. Chemistry. —From Botany then and Geology, Natural Science
supplies phenomena of structure conspiring to an end, suggestive
of benevolent creative intelligence. Nor does analytic chemistry,
in its profound investigations, lead us to a different conclusion.
The theory of Dalton taught that the atomic combination of
different natural elements always took place in definite relative
proportions. The law seemed to eliminate Lucretian chance from
their combination. Later observation leads to the belief that these
atoms, inconceivably small, are ever vibrating with velocities abso-
lutely the same in the same substances. The rate appears to have
been successfully measured, especially in hydrogen: their relative
mass, weight, and number likewise. Their absolute sameness in
these particulars in the same substances shows that they have neither
grown nor diminished. Their relative proportions, too, have been
unchanged. Evolution,* therefore, as well as chance, is eliminated.
There they stand, “ the foundation stones,” as has been said by
Professor Clerk-Maxwell, “ of the Universehewn and squared it
may be added, and laid not in random courses, but by the line and
plummet: “ manufactured articles/* says Sir John Herschel; the
ne plus ultra of scientific experiment. Nor can there be any “ intellect
% The evolution theory of Mr. Darwin was long ago reasoned upon by the author
u The Analogy,” Bishop Butler, in the following manner ;—“ When men find themselves
necessitated to confess an Author of Nature, or that God is the Natural Governor of the
World [and, I would add, when men speak of laws prevailing in Nature as expressive of
the properties of matter; seeing’that there must be some author of those properties], they
must not deny that He does all things at all , because He does them constantly ; because
the effects of his acting are permanent, whether his acting be so or not; though there is
no reason to think it is not” “ Whether the Author of Nature” be “ acting upon us
every moment, or His having once contrived and executed His own part in the plan of the
world, makes no alteration.” “For if Civil Magistrates could make the sanctions
of their laws take place without interposing at all after they had passed them ” —“if
they were able to make their own laws to execute themselves ” —“ we should just in
the same sense be under their government then as we are now ; but in a much higher
degree and more perfect manner” The theory of Mr. Darwin, therefore, if it were
proved to be true (and the “ evolution ” of a working bee, through a queen bee, from a
drone, is a difficulty), would by no means eliminate the conception of a Creator and
Moral Governor of the world.


tual necessity,” according to the laws of experimental philosophy,
for crossing its boundary and assuming “to discern a latent
potency in them of all terrestrial life.” These atoms were found
in the mummy wheat, but lifeless! nor until mind and volition
had brought them into contact with heat and moisture did motion
and life become apparent. Their adaptation, when that life is
matured, to support man, and reproduce year by year the means of
his subsistence, and to give him healthful occupation, surely sug-
gests the idea of intelligent origin. Material means are here
seen conspiring to an end.
vi. Anatomy. —One more illustration of the connexion between
Science and Natural Religion shall be drawn from Anatomy, a
branch of study which, as soon as possible, should be included in
our Professorial Endowments. Perhaps there is no portion of
the human frame so indicative of contrivance to an end as the
eye , and especially that portion of it called the crystalline lens.
Singular to say, while it is assailed by Comte, the leader of
Positive Philosophy, it is selected by J. S. Mill as the basis of
an inductive argument to prove a designing mind in the structure.
In spite of Lucretius, who strongly warns his readers from the
error of thinking that the eye was made in order to see with, we
hold to that opinion.
“ Illud in his rebus vitium vementer avessis
Effugere errorem vitareque prsemetuenter,
Lumina ne facias oculorum clara creata
Prospicere ut possemus.” *
But in order to see correctly objects varying in distance the eye
requires adjustment. The crystalline lens, by a slight alteration
of form in the axis of the eye, accomplishes this end; obeying
without effort the intention of the seer. It seems, therefore, to
indicate design and adaptation for the purpose. The eyes of men
and animals had a beginning in time, when they first appeared on
♦ “ Herein you should desire with all your might to shun the weakness, and with
lively apprehension avoid the mistake, of supposing the bright lights of the eyes were
made in order that we might see.”


the earth. The parts of the eye must therefore have been brought
together by a cause or causes. The number of such instances
excludes a “ random concurrence of independent causes or chance.”
“We are warranted, therefore, by the canons of induction, in
concluding that the parts of the structure were brought together
by a cause common to them allalso, as the parts “ agree in the
single purpose of conspiring to produce sight, that there must be
some connexion in the way of causation between that cause,”
“and the fact of sight.” This fact is subsequent to the
construction of the eye. It “ can only,” therefore, “be con-
nected with it as a final and not an efficient cause. “ This marks its
origin from an intelligent will.” Science then and inductive
reasoning establish in these “ nice and intricate combinations, both
of animal and vegetable life,” “that there is some connexion through
causation between the origin of the arrangements of Nature and the
ends they fulfil.”*
I conclude this part of my subject with the words of Dr.
Henry Acland, Peg. Prof, of Medicine, of Oxford:—“The
structure of the lens is altogether beyond human skill to imitate
its minute structures ; but considered as a whole, and as it is, it
* “ The parts of which the eye is composed in man and animals, and
the collocations which constitute the arrangements of those parts resemble one
another in this very remarkable property, that they all conduce to enabling
the animal to see. If any one of them w r ere different from what it is, the
animal for the most part would either not see, or would not see equally well. Now the
particular combination of organic elements, called an eye, had in every instance a
beginning in time [as geology proves], and must therefore have been brought together
by a cause or causes. The number of instances is immeasurably greater than is by the
principles of inductive logic required for the exclusion of a random concurrence of in-
dependent causes, or, speaking technically, for the elimination ot chance. We are
therefore warranted by the canoes of induction in concluding that what brought all
these elements together was some cause common to them all; and, inasmuch as the
elements agree in the single circumstance of conspiring to produce sight, there mud be
some connexion by way of causation between the cause which brought those elements
together and the fact of sight. Sight, then, being a fact, not precedent, but subsequent
to the putting together of the organic structure of the eye, can only be connected with
the production of that structure in the character of a final not an efficient cause; that
is, it is not Sight itself, but an antecedent idea of it that must be the efficient cause.
But this at once marks the organ as proceeding from an intelligent will.”—J. S. Mill,
Theism, p. 172.


suggests in a marked degree the feeling of helpless wonder, that
it can either be made at all; or, when made, that it can be
maintained.”—Harveian Oration.
With regard to the second objection of Comte—(the first being
that it is not absolutely necessary)—to the crystalline lens, that by
its liability to disease there is the possibility of absolute blindness
ensuing, the answer is, “ more arrangements appear to exist to
protect the eye, the crystalline lens included, than for any other
structure of the human frame.”—Acland, ibid.
It is only fair, however, to the great Positive Philosopher not to
quit this subject without quoting his own words, however incon-
sistent with his views already expressed, but written after the com-
pletion of his Philosophy. “ The order of [Nature,” he says, “is
doubtless very imperfect in every respect, but its production is far
more compatible with the hypothesis of an Intelligent Will than
of a blind Mechanism.”—General View of Positivism, translated
by Dr. Bridges, 1865, p. 50.
Surely if this be so, the Natural Theologian may thankfully
avail himself of the labors of the student of Nature. He must
be friendly to a deep, extended, and varied pursuit of Natural
Philosophy, Natural Science, and Natural History, as well as the
Mathematics ; not merely for the mental training they impart, or
the pure pleasure they confer, or the advantages of scientific know-
ledge when applied to Manufactures and Decorative art; but also
for the positive and tangible evidence which they furnish of a
Personal Intelligent Will as the Author of the Universe.
And here the study of Mental philosophy and reasoning from
the experience of psychological phenomena—the Science of Nature
in man as well as otherwise than in man—becomes necessary to
complete the cycle of knowledge concerning ourselves and the out-
ward world we inhabit. Experiment has led us by the inductive
process to know the existence, properties, and relations of atoms
between themselves. It leads us to the idea of Force ; to the laws
of Heat, Electricity, Gravitation, Chemical Affinity; but to the


Cause of these, or the Lawgiver who fixed their Laws, Experimental
Philosophy cannot penetrate, and becomes illogical in guessing.
Looking inward , however, on our own being—the inner Man—
our true self, which governs the outward, we find that to set force
(whatever it be) in motion, an act of mind and will is a necessary
antecedent. By the inductive process we conclude from observation
that man is the cause of his own actions. He is an agent free to
do, or, if he please, not to carry his conclusions into effect. Society
is built up on this foundation. Men hold each other responsible for
what they do. They consider mind and will as moral causes putting
into action material force. When therefore they find atoms of matter
vibrating according to fixed laws, combining in fixed relations, oc-
cupying fixed and measurable spaces, and each atom identical in
weight with all others in the several elemental substances, they con-
clude from analogy that mind and will set in motion force in matter
according to the laws which an intelligent will has antecedently fixed.
"Nature, then, in man, and experience of his psychological laws, are as
needful to be studied (perhapsmore so), than Nature in matter and
its physical rules of operation. Dr. Main, Eadcliffe Observer at
Oxford, places before us the following conclusion :—“ The molecular
theory has brought God nearer to us. The universe is built up of
atoms. We see now the elements out of which it has pleased Him
to make the world. We see the presence of the One Supreme in-
telligence distinctly in the weed that grows, or the flower that
blossoms on our own planet, as in the stars and nebulae which at
unmeasured distances reflect the glory of God and proclaim His
unvarying laws.”
Science in Art. — At Science in its relation to Art, and the
application of scientific principles which distinguishes civilized
taste from barbaric fancy, I can only take a passing glance. The
field is too wide and varied to admit of more than a rapid survey.
A few familiar illustrations will show the value of Science applied
to mechanic art and social life, as well as how much we owe to the
explorers of material nature.
Terrific accounts have lately reached us of explosions in coal


mines; and though our own mining occupations are free from such
catastrophes, yet we are not less sensible of the value of the safety
lamp of Davy. We only wonder at the recklessness or ignorance
which throws away the protection thus afforded, when the miner
will open his lamp, and thus bring the “ fire damp ” into contact
with flame, which otherwise imprisoned within could not escape
through the meshes of the wire gauze. Which of us can realize
or describe the train of sorrow which follows on the disaster, and
which would be prevented if the teaching of Science had not been
wilfully disregarded. No such folly, I imagine, prevails in needle
manufactories, where the use of the magnetized respirator, inter-
cepting the fine steel dust, has saved the Operatives from otherwise
inevitable disease of the lungs and premature death.
Again the disease called “ painters’ colic,” so common in manu-
factories of white lead, is now arrested, so soon as the workmen
have learned to take as a preservative sulphuric acid lemonade—
a solution of sugar and sulphuric acid.*
Why need I dwell on the wonderful effect of Science developed
in Photography and Telegraphy? The central luminary, which
holds our planetary system in its stable order, is day by day seen
to draw for us the exactest likenesses; just as in the heavens
“ He lights up worlds, or wakes an insect’s mirth”—Keble :
apt type of infinite Power, and Providence working infinitesimally.
The Electric current, on the other hand, quicker than Ariel,
“puts a girdle round the earth in less than forty minutes,” —all but
realizing to us the idea of Omnipresence , and conveying messages of
peace and love over the habitable globe.
The power of Steam, more docile than the elephant, prints with
the utmost delicacy myriads of newspapers, which dispense
* Diluted sulphuric acid has the property of decomposing all compounds of
lead with organic matter, or of preventing them from being formed. Science, then,
suggested the antidote by supplying the reason of its power.—J. S. Mill, Logic,
Induction, p. 446, 4th Ed.


intelligence throughout the earth; and from the sooty coal is
extracted the flame which lights our thoroughfares and warms our
dwellings.
What has not Science done for the Healing Art, drawing from the
mineral or vegetable the hygienic principle, which destroys miasma,
or strengthens the human frame against it, or soothes the agonizing
pain P Science also produces the dyes which add the beauty of
colour to objects which otherwise are rude and unsightly. Thus
Science in art sensibly contributes to the enjoyment of life.
How much again of the produce of our gold and copper mines
would be lost but for the appliances of chemical and mechanical
science ? The scarcely visible speck of gold is arrested by quick-
silver, and the fugitive copper by chemical affinity Or mechanical
skid.
Who shall estimate the usefulness of the Hydraulic Press ; and
the saving of life, or mutilation worse than death on our railroads,
by atmospheric pressure applied to the purpose of a Break ?
To study the laws then by which these results are produced, the
intelligent youth of this Colony are now invited by the opening of
the University. A rich intellectual banquet —a store of unceasing
pleasure is placed before them. For “to the Natural philosopher
to elucidate a principle no natural object is unimportant or trifling;
not even the fall of an apple, or the colors in the soap bubble. A
thousand questions are continually arising in his mind—a thousand
subjects of inquiry presenting themselves, which keep his faculties
in constant exercise, and his thoughts perpetually on the wing ; so
that lassitude is excluded from his life, and that craving after arti-
ficial excitement and dissipation of mind, which leads so many into
frivolous, unworthy, and destructive pursuits, is altogether eradi-
cated from his bosom,”—Sir J. F. W. Herschel, Prelim. Disc., on
Study of Natural Philosophy, c. 1.
The combined munificence of our Founders, and the liberal en-
dowment of the State, have placed these educational advantages


within reach of the rising generation of South Australia. The
University, however, is still in a very embyro and imperfect con-
dition. Our able Professors are impeded, or crippled, in the
absence of means and appliances, in carrying on their teaching. For
example, they have no Class Rooms, no Library, no Museum, no
Laboratory, no Hall or Theatre, where their Scientific Apparatus
may be placed, and regularly brought into teaching use.
It is satisfactory to know that a fair number of students have
enrolled themselves in the classes, when we compare the commence-
ment of the Universities of Sydney and Melbourne.
Complaints have not been wanting as to the supineness
of the Council in not sooner appealing to the public for contri-
butions to the erection of buildings necessary to carry on the work
of the University. Nevertheless, very much preliminary work has
been done, and I will venture to say, ’well done. Our Professors
are now amongst us. Their ability is known of all men. The
Council, then, by my mouth now appeals to the public to give them
the help which they so justly claim.
If the institution of a University was hailed a year ago with
unanimous pleasure and promises of support, I know not why,
now it is in actual existence and operation, it is less deserving
of private munificence. Perhaps Futurity and Imagination,
like “ distance, lent enchantment to the view.” We want
at least £5,000 to lay foundations, and to commence the
necessary class and other rooms, on the convenient site granted
on the Park Lands, opposite Pulteney-street. Shall the names
of Hughes, Elder, and Angas stand nearly alone on the list of
founders and benefactors P
We hear indeed of great efforts about to be made in the way
of material progress, and large schemes for improving inland
communication, dredging harbours, throwing out jetties, and
bridging our rivers. Surely material wealth is not the only or the
highest aim of Political sagacity. Intellectual wealth not less
than Social enjoyment should be the aspiration of an ambitious


Colony and a vigorous Administration. Surely if millions are to be
borrowed in tbe cause of Progress some portion of tbe loan might
well be devoted to tbe cultivation of Literature and Science ! One-
balf of tbe sum given by Messrs. Hughes and Elder would
be sufficient to provide University buildings for tbe present,
which would grow with the growth of the Colony. Oxford and
Cambridge owe their noblest Collegiate structures to Kings and
Prelates. Let the strong Commonwealths of Australia rival by
private gifts the munificence of Princes.
Be assured that whatever tends to make this City the abode not
merely of material wealth, and order, and respectability, but of
mental culture, science, and art, will add greatly also to its material
prosperity, and the enjoyments of its inhabitants. Libraries,
Museums, galleries of the Fine Arts, open, like the Botanical
Gardens, to all , would recall those golden days of the Italian
Eepublics, when the Medicis and other great families, famous
bankers and merchants, became patrons of Art and Science, and
adorned their Capitals with palaces and cathedrals, which are still
the admiration of these later times. With all the appliances of
science and the treasures of a world-wide commerce, England even
cannot rival, far less surpass the Florentine or the Venetian, the
Genoese or Neapolitan cities, to say nothing of Imperial Pome, in
the grandeur and beauty of their architectural monuments.
I know well that there are those, whose Ideal of Christian perfec-
tion is drawn from the Cloister and the Convent, who regard the
studies which I have imperfectly sketched and the advantages
which I boldly anticipate from all honest inquiry after Truth, to
be rather devices of the Tempter to draw down the mind from the
“ Unseen and Eternal” world, and fix its faith and love upon that
which is mundane; a vague impalpable “ Humanity/ embracing
the “living and the dead,” so far as the memory is concerned,
but if, as I have shown, these studies lead to the indelible impression
of a wise and intelligent Creator, by whose superintending will the
Universe obeys the laws which He has assigned to it, then may we
use these His works as the steps of a “ Scala Santa” rising from


earth to Heaven; and yearn to know more and more of Him by
whose fiat we exist, and in whom we really “ live and move, and
have our being.”
I am well aware that no Chair of Theology, natural or revealed,
is contemplated in this University. I have, I trust, shown that
lam not hostile * to it on that account; and lam well persuaded
that the lines of study which I have indicated, combined with the
culture of mental and moral philosophy, together with philology
and literature ancient and modern, will supply spiritual yearnings
over and above material knowledge; and that Poetic fire which never
can satisfy itself with the carnal and earthy, but must rise to the
spiritual and heavenly in all that is lovely and of good report, and
whatever there be of virtue and of praise.
That stern logician himself, J. Stuart Mill, has shown the true
value of Science not only as introductory to Natural Theology, but
even as removing all a priori difficulties to Revealed!
From the contemplation of the eye he was led to the conclusion
that it had its origin in an intelligent will. And “it must be
allowed,” he said, “in the present state of our knowledge the
adaptation of nature affords a balance of probability in favor of
creation by intelligence.” One Paul of Tarsus said the same, only
in words more terse and clear—“ the invisible things of Him from
the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made.”
Moreover, Mill allows that the probability of a Revelation has
some standpoint from the indications of a Creator which have been
proved. These take away all antecedent improbability from the
* Our philosophy, our science, our spirit of investigation, our feeling of personal
independence, our self assertion are, if not unchristian, at least not derived from Chris-
tianity. If they have in part vindicated their claim to subsist side by side with the
Christian profession, it is only after many struggles, and in spite of strenuous opposi-
tion ; and even now their spirit is denounced by all but a few theologians, not only on
account of their consequences, hut also on account of their essential character.
(Hanson, “Jesus,” &c., Introduction, p. 17.)


supposition that a message may Lave really been received from
Him.* Mill, Tbeism, Pt. IV. ’
Nor does he stop even here : he goes on to say, “ Admit
God, and you admit miraclesthat is, I suppose, the possibility
and probability of miracles. And if a message from God be not
improbable, then it is not improbable that the God of Nature would
evidence His message, or His presence, by temporarily changing
the circumstances under which some given Law of that Nature
usually operates.
I have been led into this course of reflection by the charge made
against Theologians of narrow, timid, jealousy of free enquiry after
truth by men of science! I wished to remove the charge, by
showing how needless such jealousy is, when even the leaders of
free thought, such as La Place and Comte, and I may add Mill,
have each in turn borne witness against Epicurus and his modern
imitators.
“ Fas est,” I say, “et ab hoste doceri” (we may learn wisdom
even from an opponent); and I must confess that in preparing this
Address I little expected that I should find support to the views I
have propounded in the quarters I have named—
“ Via prima salutis,
Quod minime reris, Graia pandetur ab urbe.’’—Virg. iEneid, vi., 97. t
I make no apology, my friends, for thus appealing to my old
acquaintance Virgil for words in which to clothe my thoughts. In
truth some of the greatest enjoyments of life are connected with
the pursuits of Literature, and, not least, the glorious remains of
Greek and Latin Poets, Historians, Philosophers, and Orators,
* Here then the rule of Butler strictly applies. “In questions of difficulty, where
more satisfactory evidence cannot be had, or is not seen, of the result of examination,
&c., that there appears on the whole a greater presumption on the one side, though in
the lowest degree, this determines the question even in matters of speculation, and
in matters of practice will lay ns under an absolute and formal obligation in point of
prudence and of interest to act on that presumption.”—lntroduction to Analogy.
f “ The first gleam that gilds your skies
Shall from a Grecian city rise.” Conington, Tr.


which, as a precious legacy, age after age has handed down to
posterity. No one, I think, can ever forget that elegant eulogium
upon the love of letters which Cicero has enshrined in those
charming words in his defence of the citizenship of the poet
Archias—Nam caetera neque temporum sunt neque setatum
omnium neque locorum: at haec studia adolescentiam alunt,
senectutem oblectant, secundas res ornant, adversis perfugium
ac solatium praebent ; delectant domi, non impediunt foris:
pernoctant nobiscum, peregrinantur, rusticantur.*
To these studies, both Literary and Mathematical, we owe the
great orator of our day—the bold reformer, the able financier, the
forcible writer, and the ripe scholar —Gladstone. Son of a Liver-
pool merchant, by studious 'habits and a pure youth he prepared
himself for the arena of public life, in which he has borne so
distinguished and useful a part. The late respected Judge, Sir
John Taylor Coleridge, is another remarkable instance of high
University culture. “ Through a long life he kept up a singularly
fresh and intimate acquaintance with Eton and Oxford. His friend-
ships and his studies and the character of his mind were distinctly
due to the life and society of those great homes of our English
youth.” It has been said of him, with great truth I think, that
he fulfilled the ideal of “ Age,” as drawn by Wordsworth, that
is—
“ A final eminence * *
* ***** a point,
On which ’tis not impossible to sit
In awful sovereignty—a place of power—
A throne, which may he likened unto his,
Who, in some placid day of summer, looks
Down from a mountain top * * *
* * For on that superior height
Who sits, is disencumbered from the press
Of near obstructions, and is privileged
To breathe in solitude above the host
Of ever humming insects, ’mid thin air
That suits not them. Excursion , Book ix.
♦ All other occupations suit not every age, or time, or place; but these studies are
the food of youth, the sweets of age: they give lustre to prosperity, solace and
shelter in adversity: they charm us when at home, hinder us not in public : they keep
watch with us through the night, travel with us abroad, go with us to our country
retreats.


Humble as are the beginnings of our University compared with
those ancient institutions in which these men were trained, the
same Law of earnest attentive study , by obeying which they with
great natural abilities attained to such high eminence, is of
universal force and application. Young Australians! use the
means which are now placed at your disposal, and according to the
measure of your earnestness will success crown your endeavors.




NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
