

ADDRESS
JAMES MOORHOUSE, D.D.
BISHOP OF MELBOURNE
Cljc Cburrb of (!snglanb llsscmbln
MELBOURNE
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 21, 1885
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST
HTclbounu
SAMUEL MULLEN, COLLINS STREET EAST
Price Sixpence.


PUBLISHER’S NOTICE.
Among other propositions affirmed are the following :
This Address is issued in pamphlet form, with'the sanction of the
Bishop.
During its preparation for publication the Session of the Church
Assembly was held, and effect was given to some important suggestions
contained in the Address.
I. The division of the Diocese of Melbourne, by forming the
northern portion into a new Diocese.
11. The establishment of a Church of England Girls’ Grammar
School.
Those schemes are likely to take some eighteen months to bring
into practical utility.
Mb. Mullen would gladly receive subscriptions from those who
desire to relieve Trinity College from debt, and will hand them
over to the Treasurer of the College.


THE BISHOP’S ADDRESS
My Brethren of the Clergy and of the Laity,
—I have to congratulate you to-day upon the
arrival amongst us, since our last meeting in
this place, of the bishop of a newly-consti-
tuted diocese, that of Riverina. I knew
Bishop Linton in very early days, and the
bright promise of his boyhood has been
abundantly realised by his clerical work in
England. He possesses, I believe, the very
qualities which are needed for the work
of the diocese over which, in God’s provi-
dence, he has been called to preside ; and I
anticipate for him, under the Divine blessing,
hearty support, and a career of wide and
extending usefulness. The wise and saintly
Bishop Hale has left us. At the meetings
so frequently held in Sydney in connexion
with the election of a primate, I came to
know and love him. His calm wisdom,
absolute honesty, warm affectionateness,
and deep love of the church of his
fathers, endeared him to all who had
the happiness of enjoying his friend-
ship. But advancing years and de-
clining strength warned him that he could
no longer discharge the onerous duties of the
colonial episcopate, and so, as he was bound
to do, he made way for a younger and
stronger man. Of his successor I have no
personal knowledge ; but all who know him
speak highly of his ability, energy, and devotion
to his work, and thus once more in the mercy
of God our hopes have been raised and our
hands strengthened. This diocese has suffered
two grievous losses during the last ecclesias-
tical year. We have lost Mr. Pyne, the ex-
cellent and indefatigable master of our
Grammar School, and the Rev. Robert Barlow,
the faithful and beloved incumbent of St.
Mark’s, Fitzroy. Mr. Barlow had never strong
health, and at the time of his sudden death
he was no longer young. The awful sudden-
ness, however, with which it pleased God to
call him away, in the very midst of his work,
produced a shock like that which we expe-
THE SUNDAY-SCHOOL WOEK.
C|ie dljuttfr of
I """\
rience when we are told that a young man
has fallen in the morning of his days. Many
will miss the good man—none more than I—
for I think I never met him without feeling
the better for his simple, modest, genial
Christian converse. He was one of the
men whose very look and voice commend the
faith which they profess, and the loss to his
people of his earnest, faithful ministrations
is one which will not easily be made good.
The character of Mr. Pyne was not unlike
that of the incumbent of St. Mark’s. He had
all that good man’s simplicity and unobtru*
siveness, together with a mental energy and
devotion to his work which too soon wore out
the frail body which served them. He had
been so short a time amongst us that he was
not so well known as our clerical brother, but
in the school he was universally respected and
beloved, and to the few friends who knew
him in life and watched him in death he
was endeared by a purity, uprightness, and
deep genuine piety which will make his
memory one of the sacred things of their
life. He has been succeeded in the school by
one who, coming to us with the high com-
mendation of men whose praise is distinction,
has already proved that he deserves all which
was said of him, and who will, I trust, by
his ability, energy, and large educational ex-
perience, continue and extend the good work
of his predecessor.
My appeal last year on behalf of our
Sunday School Association was not without
its fruit The annual income of the asso-
ciation has been somewhat increased,
but we are still far from obtaining the £5OO
a year for which I pleaded. Until our income
reaches at least that sum, we cannot
hope to obtain a clerical inspector for
our Sunday schools, and all practical
men are agreed that without the stimu-
lus which such '“an officer alone can give,


it is hopeless to expect any great advance have been able recently to lighten the strain
in Sunday school efficiency. What would our upon his resources. But still the burden of
state schools be without inspection? Can
any one calculate the practical effect of a
definite aim in study, of an effort, continually
renewed at short intervals, to reach a speci-
fied standard of knowledge, of the hope of
success, of the shame of failure, of the en-
couragement of able guidance and wise ex-
hortation ? All these we lose for want of an
inspector. Will not those, then, who prize
our Sunday-school teaching, and who see in
it the most effective aid to neglected home
education and the purely secular teaching of
our state schools, come forward at once, and
by their liberal contributions deliver us from
our present difficulties? Surely this as-
sembly, which established the association for
the improvement of our Sunday-school work,
will enable it to achieve the object of its
creation.
THE BISHOP OF MELBOURNE’S FUND.
Of the work, needs, and prospects of the
Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund I need say
nothing, for its annual meeting has only
just been held, and its cause was there
ably pleaded both by the primate and
by gentlemen who are practically ac-
quainted with its working. I will only
at present remind you that it is our only
Home Mission Fund ; that upon it depend,
not only the welfare and very existence of
our church organisation among the poor
and scattered populations of the diocese, but
also the education of the poorer of our candi-
dates for the ministry, and the small acknow-
ledgement which we are able to make of the
labours of their theological teachers. He
who fails to contribute to the Bishop of Mel-
bourne’s Fund gives nothing to the general
work of the church, and acts as if he had no
religious interests in Victoria beyond the
limits of his own church and parish.
TRINITY COLLEGE.
Trinity College stands at present in rather a
critical position. Through the liberality of Sir
William and Mr. Joseph Clarke it has been
enabled to provide enlarged accommodation
for students. But increase in the number of
students means increase in the teaching
staff, and for that increase we have
been dependent mainly on the energy
and self-denial of our ablejand inde-
fatigable warden. To some extent we
debt weighs heavily upon the college, and
the council is without the means of paying
the most necessary current expenses. Such
a state of things is a reproach to a church as
wealthy as ours. I am almost ashamed to
tell the plain truth. I am almost ashamed
to say that the head of our great house of
learning has all but stripped himself bare in
the noble effort to make the education of our
sons what it ought to be, and the fathers of
those sons can stand idly by, and see this
desperate struggle going on without stretch-
ing out a hand to help us. The noble
liberality of the few does but cast the
shade of a deeper reproach on the slackness
or thoughtlessness of the many. Let us
make, my friends, one great and determined
effort Can it be so difficult for wealthy
men to raise £5,000 or £6,000, so putting one
of the finest ” institutions in the colony
into a solvent and prosperous condition,
and ridding its managers of the harassing
humiliations of debt and difficulty ?
Every one acknowledges the wonderful suc-
cess and efficiency of the college as an educa-
tional institution ; every one admires the
ability, energy, and high scholarship of the
warden and his staff. If then there be any
truth in the boast that the members of our
church are always ready to give support to
what is worthy of it, we may surely expect
that the effort which is now being made to
rid the college of debt will be crowned with
speedy and complete success.
THE DIOCESAN MISSIONER.
Last year I called a meeting of as many of
the clergy as I could conveniently summon to
Melbourne to consider the expediency of
appointing a diocesan missioner, whose duty
it should be to go into those parishes to
which he was invited by the clergyman or
clerical superintendent, for the purpose of
stimulating religious interest, and of
awakening, by God’s help, religious life and
energy. In many parishes, we all felt
there was sore need of such an agency ;
and, after mature consideration, the
clergy resolved that an effort should be
made to raise £3OO a year, and that the bishop
should be requested to license Mr. Marsh
as the missioner. Effect has been given to
that recommendation. Mr. Marsh has been
admitted to deacon’s orders, and he has


already been conducting missions in several think, I must confess, that this is a ten-
of our country parishes. I am glad to be
able to report that God has signally blessed
his efforts. The clergyman of one
pariah writes :—“ The mission has been in
every respect successful. Much spiritual
good has been done, the results of which are
daily manifesting themselves.” From
another parish, the secretary of the church
(himself an able and energetic honorary
worker), reports that the mission has
awakened people from “ the coldness and
apathy which have a tendency to creep in ; ”
and, further, bears witness “that Mr. Marsh’s
eloquent and powerful addresses have
touched chords in our hearts, the very exis-
tence of which we hardly knew.” The
reader of another parish, after testifying to
the impressive character of Mr. Marsh’s
addresses, and to their remarkable influence
on young men, goes on to entreat
that Mr. Marsh’s stay in the parish may be
prolonged, declaring that the result of his
application is, in his judgment, almost a
matter of life and death. The most sanguine
could scarcely have expected such results as
these in the first months of Mr. Marsh’s
work. They have more than justified the
action which has been already taken, and
they have certainly suggested to me the pro-
priety of increasing this kind of agency, if
only churchmen will give it the support
which its importance seems to demand.
THE DIVISION OF THE DIOCESE.
You will have laid before you, during
our present session, a scheme for the
proposed division of the diocese. I believe
that if there is to be a division, that
scheme is, on the whole, a just one. It
proposes that the mother diocese shall
give to the portion which is to be cut
off £20,000 in a lump sum, and £lO,OOO
more in five annual payments of a gradu-
ally decreasing amount It is further
proposed to endeavour to supplement this
sum by voluntary contributions to the amount
of £lO,OOO, thus supplying a gift of £40,000
on the whole. I believe that the mother
diocese cannot afford to do more than this,
and I further believe that so generous an
offer has never been made in Australia on
the occasion of a diocesan subdivision. It is
opposed, I believe, on the ground that the
northern part of this diocese would be less
ffectually aided than at present. I do not
able objection. I have frequently seen
parishes subdivided at home, and I never
saw a single case of subdivision in which the
same objection might not have been urged.
The new portion of the parish always thought
that it would lose more than it would gain
pecuniarily. Why, then, in such cases was a
division made ? Because it was believed
that this first pecuniary loss would be more
than made up to the excised portion by the
better spiritual administration secured to it,
and by the more energetic development of its
own dormant resources. Where one part of
a parish or diocese can lean upon another it
will commonly do so. When dependence is
no longer possible, it is often found to be un-
necessary. Of course the weaker must be
helped. But it is a mistake to suppose that
an independent body will need the same
measure of help which it once obtained in a
state of dependence. Certain it is, that if a
diocese be never divided until all apprehen-
sion of pecuniary loss is removed, no
diocese will ever be divided henceforward,
unless the central administration has ne-
glected its duty, and left its extremities to
starve. But, say some, it is not only the
prospect of pecuniary loss which alarms us,
but further, and even more, the threatened
loss to the clergy of status and chance of pre-
ferment. Those who make this objection,
forget, I think, that one object of the pro-
posed division is the constititution of
an ecclesiastical province in Victoria.
As things are now, there are two
autonomous dioceses in this colony, with no
constitutional connexion whatever. And it
necessarily follows that there is an all but
complete separation of interests. Nor can
this state of things ever be remedied either by
complaints on the one hand, or benevolent
intentions on the other. One remedy only is
possible, the completion of our constitution
on the ancient lines of the church ; the
establishment of an ecclesiastical province
which shall follow the lines of the civil
division. Political arrangements affect so
profoundly all ecclesiastical questions, such,
for instance, as the relation of religion to
education, to marriage, to the sale of drink,
and the sins of great cities, that any provin-
cial union outside the lines of our separate
political organisations must be well nigh
useless. I for one should never counsel the
formation of such provinces. Their advan-
tage would be merely imaginary, and would


not repay the trouble of their crea- Moira is being more thickly peopled every
tion and continuance. Although, there-
fore, we cannot form a province
in Victoria without the co-operation of
others, the advantages of such an organi-
sation are so manifest that it would not be
difficult, I imagine, to secure the necessary
consents. Suppose, then, our provincial
organisation to be complete ; surely the first
action of a lawfully chosen provincial assem-
bly would be the endeavour to assimilate the
legislation of the separate dioceses, to com-
bine their corresponding organisations, and
to make such regulations as would secure the
free interchange of cures and duties. lam
well aware that such objects as these would
not be achieved without difficulty. Consents
would have to be obtained, prejudices would
have to be overcome, brotherly feeling, and a
readiness to submit to self-sacrifice, would
have to be created. But in an assembly,
fully representative of all dioceses and
interests, the means would be provided of
drawing all the dioceses more closely together
in the bonds of Christian love and mutual in-
terest. It seems to me, therefore, that the act
of separation which is proposed, by making a
Victorian province possible, would have a
tendency, not to create divisions but to heal
them, not to draw hard and fast lines between
separate bands of clergy, but to obliterate
those which at present exist.
THE REASONS FOE A DIVISION.
But, it may be further urged, supposing
division to be in itself desirable, what
reason can be given for making it at
this particular time ? The first reason
is, the diocese of Melbourne is grow-
ing too large to be superintended by one
bishop. But how can this be, it may be
asked, when the boundaries remain the same,
and the population has not been largely in-
creased since the diocese of Ballarat was
formed ? I answer, through the gradual scat-
tering of the population over areas which, 10
years ago, were inhabited only by wild
animals. When I first came to this diocese
the Kev. Horace Tucker was just beginning
to follow the selectors into their new homes in
thenorthern plains. Before he began his work
there was a district 80 miles long, by 25 miles
broad, with scarcely a Church of England
service in it Now it is covered with churches,
and parcelled out among eight clergy and
readers. The wide and rich district of
year. Three or four years ago we had no
service there. Now we have quite a dozen
centres, under the charge of one clergyman
and two readers ; and these ought to be im-
mediately doubled. When I first came to
the diocese, and drove through the Gipps
Land Forest, a region 80 miles long by 40
miles broad, there was only one centre of
population at which people could gather to
hear me. Now, instead of one union church
at Brandy Creek, there are 40 places where
public worship is held in connexion with our
church, and all or most of these it
is desirable that the bishop should visit
if he can. But, of course, this means
that more and more of the bishop’s time
should be given up to country work. Already
I am obliged to devote nearly two months of
the time which I once spent in Melbourne to
country visitation. And even then I cannot
cover the ground. A visit to a remote district
like Omeo means the loss of a week, and in a
week I could have visited in the more acces-
sible districts more than 10 times the num-
ber of people. Last year I contrived to visit
Omeo ; but I was obliged to give up a pro-
jected visit to the Upper Murray. That would
have meant another week’s work among a
very scanty population. But these districts
ought to be visited. It is questionable whe-
ther the bishop’s presence is not more needed
there than anywhere. And if there were a
bishop of Sandhurst, as free from metropoli-
tan engagements as the bishop of Ballarat,
he would have abundance of time to
make his country visitations thorough and
searching. It is quite otherwise in the
case of the Bishop of Melbourne.
This great city contains 300,000 peo-
ple _ nearly a third of the whole
population in the united dioceses of Mel-
bourne and Ballarat. Further, Melbourne is
the centre of wealth, of energy, and of intel-
lectual influence. Without a strong and
deep spiritual interest in Melbourne, the
country work could not be supported. That
the bishop therefore should be obliged to rob
Melbourne of its fare share of his time and
energy, is a double evil; it does harm both to
city and country. This is not at all a
personal question. My time amongst you
must be necessarily short whatever you do.
I am growing older and work tells upon me
more than it did, so that you may safely
leave me out of consideration altogether.


But whoever is bishop of, Melbourne must now, you may still ask? Well,my friends, I have
make it his first care, even for the country’s
sake, to do his utmost to kindle in this great
city that fire of religious conviction and zeal
which can alone warm the extremities with
spiritual and pecuniary support No
policy can be more short-sighted than
that which compels the bishop to neglect
Melbourne.
THE OBJECTIONS TO A SUFFBAGAN BISHOP.
But why, it is asked, cannot the bishop of
Melbourne have the aid of a suffragan
bishop? Because, I answer, the subdivision
of the diocese presents fewer difficulties. I
say nothing of legal difficulties, which how-
ever exist; but it is evident that if a suf-
fragan bishop be appointed here, the bishop
alone must appoint him, as bishops do at
home. It would be impossible for any bishop
to run the risk of having a colleague ap-
pointed who might damage his work and
oppose his policy. No suffragan bishop,
therefore, could be appointed cum jure sue-
cessionis. Such an appointment would in-
fringe the right of this assembly (a
right which it must keep in its own hands) to
appoint the next bishop of Melbourne.
Suppose, then, that upon my death or de-
parture you appointed as bishop of Mel-
bourne a man of a different mind from me,
do you not see that my suffragan might be a
burden and a hindrance to my successor ?
This would be a far greater evil here than in
England. For in England all work runs
along in ruts so deep that it is well nigh im-
possible for any bishop to get out of them.
That is why Episcopal work in a colony like
this is so much more interesting to a man of
any originality and enterprise than similar
work at home. Here such a man can, to a
great extent, plough his own rut; and if his
work be sufficiently prolonged, lay down lines
of thought and effort which it will not be
easy to efface. All the more difficult, there-
fore, is it to appoint suffragan bishops here.
I may tell you, in short, that no suffragan
bisnop will be appointed here with my
consent and that if the want of
that consent be fatal to such a course, then,
in the present emergency, the alternative is
between division of the diocese and the ap-
pointment, as occasion shall arise, of arch-
deacons with exclusively aichidiaconal work
and a sufficient salary. But why come to any
decisive conclusion upon this question just
been in the habit, as you know, of telling you
my whole mind on important questions—
somewhat too frankly, some people
think. Still, it is" my way, and I shall
do it now.
A FUND FOK A NEW DIOCESE.
So far as I am personally concerned,
I have no particular desire that you
should bring this question to a final settle-
ment at present I like teaching better than
administration. And to me the creation of
a provincial constitution, with all which it
implies, would be an unwelcome burden. If,
however, I put myself out of sight, and think
only of the advantage of the church, it seems
to me that the receipt of the rental for the St.
James’s land furnishes an opportunity for the
division of the diocese which is not likely
to recur. This money is as yet unap-
propriated. If, therefore, the diocese of
Melbourne stripped) itself of a great part of
its funded property, and undertook to make
large annual payments to a newjdiocese, it
could fall back for support on this un-
appropriated fund. You must remem-
ber that it would not be easy for
the diocese of Melbourne to raise large
annual sums by voluntary contribution for
the maintenance of those who no longer
formed part of it. You may cry with a cer-
tain amount of righteous indignation, why
not? Ought not the rich churchmen of Mel-
bourne to be ready to make sacrifices for
their poorer brethren over the border ? No
doubt they should, but I am talking of men
not as they ought to be, but as I find
them. And having regard to patent
facts, I say that it would scarcely be prudent
for the diocese of Melbourne to promise to
make large annual payments without some
unappropriated fund to fall back upon in
case of need. Such a fund exists now, but
if you defer division for a few years more, it
will be sunk and lost, in supplying the grow-
ing needs of the diocese. Do not deceive
yourselves. Division cannot be. long de)
layed. The logic of facts is stronger than
that of mere local feeling or prejudice. It
would not be difficult to get rid of that legis-
lation which at present gives a veto
to the representatives of any portion
of a diocese which it is proposed
to separate from the mother diocese. If ever
that power of veto were unreasonably abused,


it ia more than probable that the general know the full use of wealth, and to hanker
synod itself would repeal the portion of the
act which gives it Nothing in such matters
can be safely done by force. No power can
ultimately prevail in these countries but that
of reason and persuasion. I hope, therefore,
that this assembly will set itself to the con-
sideration of this important question with all
calmness and brotherly consideration, pray-
ing God to show them the wisest cdurse, and
to give them grace to follow it.
THE CHUECH AND EDUCATION.
Another very important question is to be
submitted to you during the present session—
whether we shall establish a girls’ high
school in Melbourne for members of the
Church of England. Every one will, I sup-
pose, allow that it is incumbent on us as a
church to give religious education to our
children as far as our means allow. This
last is a very important limitation. For
clearly to attempt to perform this duty in
connexion with primary education, in the pre-
sent circumstances of the colony, would be the
merest folly. Mr. Mozley told us recently,
and I can support his testimony by my own
experience, that many of the country clergy
of England had half ruined themselves in the
effort to keep up their denominational
schools. This has occurred in a country
where the clergy got the aid of a large annual
Government grant. What, then, would
happen here, if the Church should attempt
such a task without Government aid, and
against a Government competition which
leaves no acre of ground unoccupied ? It
would be mere ruin. Since, then, it is no
man’s duty to attempt the impossible, no fault
can justly be found with us if we refrain from
entering into competition with our Govern-
ment in connexion with primary education.
Not the less, however, must we continue to
deplore the fact that primary education in
our state schools is non-religious. It can
never be too frequently repeated that
education without religion must fail
to attain the highest aim of education.
It must fail to form any lofty type
of character. It must send children into the
world with some of their highest faculties
atrophied for want of use—children with
little reverence, and little feeling for the
eternal; children who are already world-
lings in the freshness of their life’s morning,
who learn to calculate profit before they
after pleasure before they have been brought
under the wholesome restraints of duty.
Whatever others may think of a
merely secular education, that is what a
religious man must think of it. And, there-
fore, must he be always anxious to supersede
such an education where he can, and to
supplement it where he cannot supersede it.
Those are doing a good and a Christian work
who are now endeavouring to supplement
the secular education of our primary schools
by such short and imperfect religious instruc-
tion as can be given when the secu-
lar work is over. But those will be doing
far better, who supply where they are
able a religious education which can leaven
the whole daily teaching with Christian
feeling and sanctions, and which can speak
freely of the love of our Divine Master
without the fear of provoking protests or
jealousies. Now such an education as this
it is still in our power to give to those who
can afford to pay for it. And since we can
give it, I believe that we are bound to give it.
Yea, and to make large sacrifices if necessary
in order to win the privilege of giving it. No
money of ours will be better spent than that
which is laid out in achieving such an object.
To all this, however, it is urged as an objec-
tion by some that since this work is being
adequately done by private persons without
any cost to the church, it would be a waste
of funds to endeavour to take it out of private
hands. I answer that we have no better
assurance for the truth of this statement
than the assertion of those who make it ;
and that we can take no security either
that the work shall be done where it is
neglected, or better done where it is scamped
or spoiled.
SCHOOLS OF OTHEK DENOMINATIONS.
There is, however, another and a weightier
reason why this work should be attempted
by the Church. Other denominations in
this colony, feeling the force of those
considerations which I have urged in favour
of religious education in higher schools have
already established denominational colleges
for girls. They could do no other. If reli-
gious education be given at all, I believe that
it can be best given when the teacher speaks
without check or reserve, when he can speak
his mind in the words which naturally spring
to his lips without asking himself whether


any one ia likely to object to it
course, undenominational religious educa-
tion is infinitely better than none; but it is
not so good for many reasons as that which
is without check or restraint By calling
their college lor girls “the Presbyterian
Ladies’ College,” the Presbyterians give
notice to all parents who send their
children to that institution that they feel
at liberty to teach our common Christianity
according to the Presbyterian form of it.
The Wesleyans do the same by calling
their college “the Methodist Ladies’
If children be there taught denominationally,
no parents can reasonably complain. They
knew that their children would be so taught
before they sent them thither. I may regret,
as I know that others do, this sharp accen-
tuation of denominationalism, but it is in-
evitable ; it is forced on us by the pure secu-
larity of our primary schools. We dread the
spread of such a system to secondary schools.
We tty to prevent it by supplying a religious
education in those schools, and we naturally
prefer that form of religious instruction
which we can employ with the greatest
freedom and efficiency. But now the
commencement of such a system implies that
it shall extend to all those religious denomi-
nations which have the means of carry-
ing it out. Neither the Scotch Col-
lege nor the Wesley College was begun
in any spirit of proselytism. Each was
founded with the laudable desire of pro-
viding for the children of the denomination
which established it. But then there are
such great advantages, both as to cheapness
and efficiency in the public school system
that as soon as such schools are established
the parents of church families are sure to
send their children to them, as we find
indeed that they are doing.
THE NEED OF CHURCH OF ENGLAND SCHOOLS.
I have every reason to believe that the best
and most liberal spirit prevails in both the
existing colleges, and that every consideration
is shown in them to the legitimate suscep-
tibilities of Church of England parents. But
how can a child breathe the atmosphere of a
certain religious feeling, or fall into the
habitual observance of particular religious
forms without unconsciously, but most cer-
tainly, imbibing a preference for that feeling
and those forms? It may perhaps be held by
some that it is of no consequence that our
girls should become Presbyterians or W r es-
Of leyans, so long as they remain Christians,
ca- I believe that I care as little about the small
. is differences of religious denominations as
ich most men, and yet, even to me, it would seem
ing to be a calamity that our children should for-
ian sake the church of their fathers and leave a
ive communion not only penetrated with Apos-
ieir tolic truth and reverence, but also furnish-
:eel ing, as I believe, the most hopeful centre of
iity Christian re-union in an age of broadening
it. thought and enlarging sympathies. We
ing cannot, then, I think, dismiss this
;e!” question lightly, as we might have done
lly, had no denominational colleges for girls
ley existed. Such colleges have been founded,
ght They are, I rejoice to hear, succeeding, and I
ret, hope that their success will be tenfold more
en- in the future. But I do not hope—and it
in- would be mere hypocrisy to say that I hope—
cu- that they may succeed at the expense
the of the Church of England. I don’t
als., want to gain proselytes. The spirit of prose-
dus lytism is hateful to me. But I cannot
illy forget that one - third of the inhabi-
ion tants of this colony call themselves
;est members of the Church of England; and
the that it is my simple duty, as it is yours, to
hat spare no pains and no expense in the endea-
ml- vour to give religious education to as many
:ry- of our declared members as circumstances
30l- enable us to reach. That is our plain duty,
jun and all talk about charity, toleration, and the
vas like seems to me to be mere irrelevant non-
>ro- sense until that duty has been done,
ion If our church cannot be made the most use-
are ful and reasonable form of Christianity, God
ess in His own time will supersede it by some
;m other. Let us take care, however,
led that, if it be superseded, this shall be because
to of the decree of the Supreme, and not be-
ind cause of our idleness and disloyalty.
It is our duty to make that form of the faith
prevail which we think to be best and truest,
’ LS - and having done that duty we may calmly
•est leave results with God. If all the Chris-
the tian churches work in that spirit, they
ion will be doing what they can to bring
:ep- into the light of day, that in their
3ut faith and practise which ought to live, and
f a also that which has lost its use, and ought to
the die, and thus they will be doing far more to
sus prepare the great reunion of the future than
:er- if any of them cried with cold disdain, —“Oh !
ing let the churches go, any form will serve.”
by They who have got as far as that have only to
our take another step, and they will be heard
es- proclaiming with a superb indifference, which


they may tnink philosophical ; and if that there is no sign of a sinking
no form survive it will be no great matter.
Charity we must have, and by charity I mean
love for all those of every communion who
belong to the household of faith. But I
never heard yet that a man improved
his love for other families who began
by neglecting his own. We all re-
member Dickens’s story of the lady who,
in her intense affection for the heathen,
so far forgot her own children as to
leave them half-starved and in rags.
We are not, I hope, going to repeat that
conduct in the Church of England.
SOCIAL VICES AND IMMORALITIES.
Last year we formed a White Cross Union in
this diocese, and I am glad to report thaf,
although the progress of the society has not
been what we could have hoped, yet whereve,r
unions have been formed and worked, they
have not been without a cheering measure of
success. Some of our clergy have held back
from this work, chiefly it would seem because
of its delicacy and difficulty ; but surely after
we have read those awful exposures of the
vice of London which have recently appeared
in our newspapers, all such objections must
be scattered to the winds. Some of
us perhaps may have regretted that such
horrible revelations should have been made
to all women and children who read the daily
prints. But they have been so made. Young
and old, men and women, know all about
them. And to talk about the delicacy of the
subject after that, is like talking about the
danger of referring to infection, when thou-
sands are known to be dying of a pestilence.
And that these revelations are sub-
stantially reliable I do not for an instant
doubt Their most damning disclosures are
not a whit worse than those which have been
made on her own authority, and on that of
the Rev. Mr. Horsley, by one of the noblest
and purest-hearted women in England. I
will not shock you by going into details ; it
will be enough to say that they relate to the
foul and unnatural corruption of children—in
some cases of mere babes. Where is our
manhood, where is the righteous indignation
which ought to sweep these scoundrelly
defilers of children into prison, and shave
their heads, and stamp upon them the brand
of infamy, whether they be rich or poor,
beggars or nobles ? Don’t you know
civilisation and a perishing race, so sure, as
i the prevalence of foul and unnatural
sensuality ? Much vice of a natural kind
there may be amongst a people, while refor-
mation is yet possible. But wherever that
vice takes monstrous and unnatural forms,
there the mysterious hand may be seen, by
those who have eyes, tracing the letters
iof doom on the walls of a nation’s
palaces. I must speak plainly on this matter.
| For it is the nature of these sins, when
suffered to go unchecked, to create passions
i so vile and overbearing that at length, by the
pure force of heredity, they become irre-
sistible, driving a people on to doom, as the
storm drives driftwood upon the rocks. It
is vain to resist when resistance has become
( impossible. And mark this : All history
shows—not merely the story of the Canaan-
i ites, but all history—that when nations have
become so vile that their continued existence
wotild poison the blood of the world, those
nations are exterminated. Necessarily and
righteously, I say. For since it is a God who
rules this world, and not a devil, how should
He allow the race which He has created in
His own image to be destroyed by those who
have made themselves so foul that
they can not be purified ? But surely,
you will say, no such danger menaces the
great race to which we belong. I hope not,
indeed. But what is the meaning of all those
warning voices which come to us across the
sea. Mr. Moody is no alarmist. He ip a
shrewd man, with a keen eye and a large
knowledge of the masses of England.
And what did he say the other day
in the presence of 5,000 men in Liverpool?—
“You are altogether mistaken in supposing
that it is intemperance which is the chief sin
of England. What is eating into the heart of
your noble country is the sin of impurity. ”
Now I know where I stand, and 1 know the
solemn responsibility which lies on me to tell
the truth in this matter —no more and no
less ; and speaking under the sense of that
responsibility, I say that I have good reason
for repeating Mr. Moody’s warning here.
Emphatically the greatest danger of our
young men is not drunkenness, but impurity.
Our warmer sun, our lonely forests,
the early age at which our young people earn
considerable wages, even the secular tone of
our thought, all contribute to this result.
And the danger is not distant. It is upon us.


THE SOCIAL PDKITY MOVEMENT.
What will the Lord Jesus Christ think, then,
of you and me, if, with ruin staring us in the
face, we fold our hands and keep si-
lence, talking in a cowardly unreal way
about difficulties, delicacies, and I know
not what, instead of rushing in be-
tween the living and the dead, that
the plague may be stayed. I would not
have you say one word which can
minister to prurient tastes. I would not
have you do one act which can shock the
divine modesty of youth. Oh ! watch and
cherish with the most jealous care that
divinely implanted guard of purity in your
children. But is there anything, I ask you,
in the establishment and working of White
Cross unions which can stain the white purity
of the most innocent? Do we not keep a
wise reticence ? Do we not respect the holy
reserve of the uncontaminated ? Is not our
work of that quiet and unobtrusive kind
which thrusts no one into prominence ? We
take a pledge from the young man that he
will treat all women with respect, that he
will frown down all obscene conversation,
that he will never defile his eyes with foul
pictures or literature, that like a knight and
a hero he will defend the weak and ignorant,
at personal risk if need be, from the attacks
of villains formidable for their craft or
their wealth. We say keep your heart
pure that you may be strong. We say
strike for the weak, shield the helpless, tread
down insolent villany, and do all this because
you are a Christian, a disciple of Him who
lived to succour and heal, who died to rescue
the lost and uplift the fallen. Can you find
me a grander life-task than that for any man
upon earth ? Can you even think that any-
one could be made worse for being solemnly
devoted to it ? Why, then, does anyone hesi-
tate? If you want, still, secondary motives
(though it irks me to come down to such),
then ought it not to encourage you to know
how this work is growing in England ? Work-
ing men are taking it up enthusiastically.
They see that it is specially a working-man’s
question, for it is from amongst the daughters
of the working classes that the victims of
this monstrous modern lust are mostly
stolen. Nor are the generous students at our
universities behind their humbler brethren
in devotion to this cause. The protection of
the weak appeals to their manhood. The
strength of purity is found to beckon them
with a commanding gesture, which they
cannot resist “At Oxford,” we hear,
“ the Purity Association has grown
from 200 to 500. At Cambridge, large and
enthusiastic audiences of young men are
addressed by such men as Canon Westcott
At Edinburgh a powerful White Cross move-
ment is being set on foot among the students,
the medical students taking very prominently
the lead, and the highest men in the Univer-
sity are giving it their sanction. Trinity
College, Dublin, has also formed an associa-
tion on the same basis as Oxford and Cam-
bridge, the students themselves taking the
initiative, and Glasgow and Aberdeen have
both taken up the white cross. ” Thank God
for all this. It shows that the blood of the
mass of our people is still pure, and it pre-
sages, I venture to say, the growth of a public
opinion, which will be so awful in its indig-
nation, that the vice which would turn Eng-
. land into a Sodom, will, ere long, be driven
back in terror, and chained down to
the black abyss from which it came.
And, my friends, you that are
working in this great cause in Victoria,
do not let yourselves be discouraged by
the slow and noiseless growth of your
society. From its very nature your work
must be an unobtrusive one. It is too radical
to be noisy. It lies too deep to be represented
by statistics. The secretary of a temperance
society can easily report how many men have
written their names on a piece of paper, but
who can say how many young men besides
those enrolling themselves in your ranks
have been brought to register a silent vow
before God that they will themselves try to be
pure, and to throw the shield of their manly
respect and defence over the purity of their
sisters. What a poor beggarly account would
a paper of statistics have given of the
mightiest moral revolution ever wrought
upon this earth ! The Son of God had become
man, had suffered and died, and He had
made some score or two of humble disciples.
Yes ; but for all that, the seed had been sown
that should one day develope into a mighty
tree, capable of covering all the nations with
its protecting shade. The work of a purity
society is like that of the kingdom of God. It
has such an inwardness, it reaches down so near
to the very deepest springs of action, that it
can only strike root in quiet and darkness.
But for that very reason, as soon as it once
begins to show upon the surface, all the fields


will be found green with bursting life—the
promise and pledge of golden harvests.
One word to another class upon this
subject, and I have done. Why do men
hesitate to join this crusade, because they
are conscious of wrong-doing in their past, or
even of the rebellious stirring of evil impulse
in the present? I think these are the very
men who should be most heartily with us.
They need the support of such a movement
as this, and they know their need. Are they
not ashamed of such sensual selfishness ? Do
they not hate the sin ? Have they not the
best evidence in themselves of the awful
ravage it can make in heart and life? Men
and brethren, do we hesitate to set forth the
lofty ideal of the Christian life because we
know that we ourselves are so far from having
realised it ? And should we then any more
hesitate to proclaim the need of purity be-
cause we feel ourselves to be less inwardly
pure than we long to be? Fight the evil
within you by all means (the purer the heart
the mightier the blow), but spare not to join
the battle on the broad field of life because
the inward victory is not yet fully won. Not
in the cloister, but in the press of men ; not
in the lonely strife, but in the embattled
ranks of the soldiers of God, are strength
and redemption most surely won. I
have always felt that prevention is better
than cure in the case of such awful moral
diseases as that about which I have been
speaking. But still where the disease exists,
it is surely our bounden duty to endeavour to
find a cure for it. You know as well as I do
that there are low and miserable quarters in
our great city which are a disgrace to our
civilisation—which are the seats of moral
pestilence—the centres of deadly con-
tagion. We rejoice to think that
Christian men and women, like the
members of the Salvation Army, have pene-
trated those jungles of vice, and are labour-
ing there for Christ with a courage and
devotion truly admirable. But does
their faithfulness absolve us from our share
of the duty ? Are there not too many of those
children of sin and misery who once belonged
to our churches, and who would be more
readily reached and more certainly delivered
by our methods than by any other ? Do they
not look to us for help ? And does not our
heart tell us that they ought not to look in
vain? Is it possible, indeed, that we can be
disciples of the All-Pitiful Saviour, if, seeing
them lie in their blood, we leave them to the
care of any chance Samaritan, while we
coldly pass by on the other aide?
THE MELBOURNE DEACONESS’S HOME.
Moved by such considerations as these, some-
excellent ladies, members of our church, have
undertaken a rescue mission to the streets
and lanes of Melbourne. I first proposed it
to the incumbents of our three city
parishes, and with their full consent
and co-operation, “ a council has been
formed, to devise means for establish-
ing a deaconess’s home, and also to super-
intend the mission work of which it is in-
tended that the home shall be the centre.”
Canon Handheld has consented to act as
chaplain of the institution, and already a
house has been purchased in Lonsdale-street
for £7OO, of which one-third has been already
paid as a first instalment. It is calculated
that when fittings and furniture have been
paid for the house will have cost £9OO. Ido
earnestly hope that the members of our
Church will support this movement with
their wealth, their sympathy, and their
prayers. If you think there is too much talk
and too little work in the purity movement,,
here at least is something obvious and
practical ; something which shows itself in
the light of day ; something which asks from
you in the first place nothing but the lowest
form of aid, that which you can give with
the least effort or sense of self-sacrifice
—the aid of money. If such a move-
ment should fail, or even halt in its
beneficent career, it would be a shame to us
all. Besides, all Victorians are deeply in-
terested in it. This great city is the centre
not only of the wealth and culture, but also
of the vice and pleasure of the colony. There
is not a family in our remote mountains and
lonely forests which is not interested in
diminishing the temptations to which its
male members are exposed when they visit
the metropolis. There is not a family which
may not know the shame and agony of having
a poor daughter lost in the mazes of this
deadly labyrinth of sin. Surely, then, we
shall have the sympathy and help of all in
our effort to establish good women at the very
centre of the peril and misery, to seek the
lost, to comfort the despairing, and by God’s
grace to bring back if it may be to hope and
safety those who once were the victims andi
ministers of lust


BELIGIOUS CONDITION OF THE WORKING
CLASSES.
At a conference of clergy the other
day, the remark was made that the work-
ing classes of the colony do not so readily
connect themselves with the Christian
churches as do others. I am bound to say
that I think this evil is exaggerated. I believe
that many of the working classes were lost
to the churches not in this colony but at
home. It is wonderful to see the com-
placency with which some of the home
journals criticise the labours of the colonial
churches, without apparently so much as a
suspicion that most of our difficulties were
created for us in England, and that
with few of the advantages of the home
churches we have very largely overcome the
evils bequeathed to us by the errors and
neglect of our critics. What is the present
religious condition of the working classes in
England, as depicted by well-informed-
speakers and societies? Canon Money, of
Deptford, said at the Plymouth Church Con-
gress, that “ barely 5 per cent, of the working
classes attended public worship.” It appears
from a report of the London City Mis-
sion that “in a group of seven poor
East London parishes, containing 60,000
souls, the total average attendance on Sun-
days at all places of worship is only 3,000, or
one in twenty; ” and again, “ from a house
to house inquiry in another poor part,” it has
been found that “not one in a hundred
attend any place of worship.” Nor can it be
doubted that this abstinence from worship
means in London, as it means everywhere,
godlessness and moral deterioration. The
late Thomas Hugo said, ‘ 1 He knew the mobs
of London and Lancashire well, and there
was no difference between them and the
heathen people St. Paul portrayed ....
they were simply heathen.” Now, it is from
the ranks of the more intelligent and enter-
prising pf these working people that most of
our emigrants are drawn. What wonder,
then, that the working classes have little
inclination to attend public worship. England
manufactures heathen, sends them to the
colonies and then wonders that the
colonial churches do not straightway turn
them into saints. Taking these facts
into consideration, I think I may fairly
claim that the churches of Victoria,
though far from doing what they might,
and from succeeding as they ought, have yet
done something to repair English neglect. In
1882, it appears from the Victorian Year
Book that the number attending on an
average the principal service on Sunday was
321,600. At the same time the number of
our population above the age of five was
789,000. It appears then that of our people
of the church-going age, more nearly one
half than one third attended public worship ;
and, of course, if this be the average number
attending every Sunday, the number of occa-
sional attendants must be much larger. The
home churches would be jubilant indeed if
they could present such a return as that.
But were any large proportion of these,
it may be asked, members of the
working classes ? I believe that a very
large proportion were. In my visita-
tion tours in this diocese, I get, I
believe, a better opportunity of forming a
judgment on this question than any one in
this part of Victoria. And it is my expe-
rience that the great majority of our people
in the country districts are just those work-
ing men of England who have become here
miners or small farmers. The proportion of
working people among the Wesleyans is
greater, I believe, than amongst ourselves.
Still unquestionably very many working
men, especially in our large towns, habitually
absent themselves from public worship, and
having regard to the moral consequences
which commonly follow from such absten-
tion, it becomes a question of very great
urgency both to the churches and to the
state, what can we do to recover those whom
we or our brethren in England have lost ?
LINKS BETWEEN THE SUNDAY-SCHOOL AND
CHURCH.
I believe that we very urgently need some
connecting link between the Sunday-school
and the church—between the age of open-
ing manhood and that of settled mar-
ried life. The leakage which takes place
between these two periods is alarming, and
is such as should put us to shame. For think
what ic means. It means that just at the period
of greatest danger and of largest opportunity
our young men are left unhelped to all the
temptations of idleness, sensuality, bad
company, low conversation, and vulgar
blasphemy. They go away to the life of the
streets and the taverns, and lay waste too
often in a few months all the good feelings
and principles which we have been seeking


to instil for years. Nobody doubts this.
Some of our ablest clergy affirm it in stronger
terms than I have ventured to use. Can
we be contented with such a result ? Is it
not a shame to us, an impeachment not
merely of our capacity as leaders in the
Kingdom of God, but also of our fidelity as
representatives of the Saviour of men ? If
we have hearts, such a state of things should
be intolerable to us, and should drive us on,
at all risks, and at whatever cost of time and
labour, to find some remedy for it Nor ought
it to be difficult to see what is wanting.
CHRISTIAN WORKING MEN’S CLUBS.
We need, in my judgment, in all our town
parishes, some organisation like that which
at home has taken the title “Church of Eng-
land Working Men’s Society.” It should be
one of the principal objects of such a society
to keep together the young men who now
drift from our Sunday-schools into religious
carelessness ; to provide for them teaching,
amusement, opportunities of social inter-
course and mutual improvement, and indeed
whatever will improve while it interests
them. “But where am I to find time and
strength for such work ?” I think I can hear
clergymen say with a groan. My dear
brethren of the clergy, no one wants you to
do it. Is nobody to work the church
but the clergyman? Is nothing to be
done but what he does with his own hands ?
He must lead and initiate no doubt—nay, he
must never suffer himself to lose touch
of such work, but it does not by
any means follow that he should bear
the principal burden of it This spirit in-
deed of exclusiveness in labour, the besetting
fault of men of energy and ability, has, I
believe, done us untold harm in the past.
We raise up active zealous men among our
working-class members, and we too often
lose them because we find them nothing to
do. Work is a necessity of life to such men,
and if they cannot find work in our church,
they will seek it elsewhere. There is one
parish in Melbourne (thank God it is not the
only one) where the clergyman has striven to
find work of all kinds for the abler of his
working men. And what is the consequence ?
That I have got more efficient stipendiary
readers from that parish than from any other
in the diocese. So far then is it from being
an objection to the foundation of such
societies, that the clergy cannot work them,
that this in my opinion is a principal reason
why they should be founded. When the
work is beyond your power, my brethren,
you will get other people to do it, as
you ought. So you will employ the zeal
of your best men, fill your churches, enlarge
your effective membership, and quicken your
whole organisation with energy and hope. If
in special localities it should be found diffi-
cult for the clergy to put their hands on
ready-trained men, why should we not estab-
lish a workers’ training institution in some
central spot where simple and effective lec-
tures might be given them, the apologetic and
doctrinal ones by selected clergymen, the
practical ones by such a man as our excellent
parochial missioner, Mr. Marsh ? A few
months of effective work in such ap institu-
tion would give to many a modest man who
now distrusts his powers definiteness of
view, concentration of purpose, and that
technical skill in labour which inspires con-
fidence. I should be most glad to give in-
struction at such an institute from time to
time while I am in Melbourne. Want of
workers, then, is no valid objection to
such a scheme as I am proposing.
If we do not possess the workers
we must create them. Nothing should
stop us in doing what is necessary for the
welfare of man and the glory of God. I be-
lieve, however, that in the majority of cases,
if the clergy begin to work, the workers will
come to them. I have tried it. Pardon me
if I mention again what I have referred to
before. My excuse is that a man is surest of
his own experience. I once began such a
crusade in Sheffield, where efforts of the same
kind had just failed, and where I was told I
should not get a single helper. I did not be-
lieve it. I never have believed that if a
man’s heart be full of love and zeal for Christ,
and if his will be set with all its force on
giving expression to that Jove, he will be left
without aid and sympathy. The result in
Sheffield justified my incredulity. I never
asked any man to join me. I never advertised
or had monster demonstrations ; and yet be-
fore the end of three years I had 450 men in
the institution, officered by 70 teachers, all,
with the exception of six or seven, working
men. Who are they who have laboured
so nobly and successfully in the Try
Excelsior classes in this city ? Men of the
very class of which I am speaking, men who
can talk to our city lads in their own


language, who know their wants, and the
best methods of helping and amusing them.
I repeat, then, that it is our duty to find or
make the leaders of such working men’s
clubs. Once more, I believe that such
institutions would not only defend our
youths from danger, and promote their moral
and spiritual good, but also supply a great
public need.
THE CHUECH AND DEMOCRATIC MOVEMENTS.
The progress of democratic principles is
fortunately thrusting forward a class of
political questions to which our fore-
fathers gave no heed. Starting from the
unquestionable truth that society ought
to aim, not merely at keeping the peace,
and deiending honest men against rogues,
but further at giving to every one of its
citizens the best possible opportunity of
developing his humanity, modern legislators
are striving to establish just relations between
landlord and tenant, capitalist and labourer,
employer and employed. This effort is bringing
to the front questions which would have simply
terrified our forefathers —questions about the
right of property in land, the laws of inherit-
ance. co-operative manufacture, labour com-
binations, and the like. And it is most im-
portant, as it seems to me, that such questions
should be considered by working men in the
light of Christian principles. Some people, I
know, urge that questions like these should
be left to secular trade societies. I do not
think so. I have the greatest sympathy with
trade societies. I believe that they originated
in a simple determination to seek justice, to
claim and obtain for the working classes an
equal share in the help and protection of
society. And, beyond all doubt, they have
still an important part to play in the organi-
sation of the future. But there is ever the
danger that they may become one-sided and
selfish, that they may endeavour to gain
for working men those exceptional class pri-
vileges which were seen to be so odious when
claimed or enforced by capitalists or nobles.
In a fight it is seldom that the victor thinks
of the rights oi the vanquished, and now that
labour is winning along the whole line, it is
not impossible that it may imitate the selfish-
ness which so long held it down. The
danger of such a result is greatly increased
when men take for their principal object the
equalising of material benefits. This point
of view is a low one, and the outlook from it
narrow. The air of the swampy bottoms of
material interest is close and stifling, and it
is not easy to make such heavenly flowers as
forbearance and self-sacrifice thrive in them.
That is why we see mere economists so often
declining into narrowness of thought, hard-
ness of feeling, and the pitiful ethics of the
counting-house. Nothing is so sure a pre-
servative from such evils as the placing of all
questions of trade and commerce, work and
wages, in the heavenly light of Christian
principles ; for in Christ we are obliged to
remember that brotherhood means more
than trade-fellowship ; that, indeed, it em-
braces within its range of feeling and interest
both rich and poor, capitalist and labourer—
Victorian and Chinese, Englishmen and
Russian. Assembling in the name
of Christ, we feel ourselves to be, not
in a trades union, but in the Kingdom of
God, where every act, and every interest, and
every form of life, and every human relation,
must be determined by the great law of self-
sacrifice —by the thought that for Christ’s
sake we must treat every human being as a
child of the common Heavenly Father, and
do to him as we would wish him to
do to us. Without, then, thinking for a
moment of superseding trade societies, I be-
lieve that we may give them important aid,
and do no little towards preserving them
from patent dangers, if in our working-men’s
clubs we accustom those who belong to
trades societies to consider economical ques-
tions under the guidance of Christian truth.
Suppose, for instance, that social legislation
has been suggested. It would be one of the
objects of such a club to consider carefully the
proposed act, to see whether its provisions
were in harmony with the great law—that
everything should subserve the highest de-
velopment of man ; to suggest amendments,
get up petitions, promote discussion, watch
and work and guide public opinion, till, if
possible, the best and most righteous end
had been gained. Frequently, again, as we
know, quarrels arise between employers and
employed. Now, no one can really under-
stand the merits of such questions without
careful and honest examination of all their
details. To say that working men must be
right because they are poor is just as absurd
as to say that employers must be right be-
cause they are rich. Has it not passed into a
proverb, that in all quarrels there are faults
on both sides. What, then, is the part of


wisdom and good feeling? Is it to rush into
the strife imperfectly informed, with the
spirit of a partisan, sure beforehand that our
own friends must be in the right ? The very
statement of such a course is surely its suffi-
cient condemnation. What then would be
the part of a Christian working-men’s club at
such a juncture ? Would it not be to examine
the whole question fairly and thoroughly, to
arrive at an opinion of what was just and
wise, and then, with manly sincerity, to urge
both parties to adopt that course, without
fear or favour. In short, my brethren, if our
Christianity be worth anything, it must be
worth much more than some of us seem to
think. If it be, as I hold it to be, the expres-
sion of those eternal spiritual principles which
prescribe all our relations to God and man,
then there ought to be no part of our life too
secular, and no act of our daily business
too rifling, to be regulated by it.
Canon Fremantle has put this conclusion
into words which are well worthy of atten-
tion. “When we speak,” he writes, “of
the extension of Christianity, and of
the winning of the world to Christ, we
do not mean a government of priests,
which has sometimes been aimed at and mis-
called theocracy ; nor yet the establishment
of Christian worship in the forms which we
admire and love, but that the whole fabric of
humanity, all the relations of men to God, to
one another, and to the outward world, shall
be pervaded by the spirit of Christ.”
PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS.
Let us then establish working-men’s clubs,
guilds, unions, or societies, in order to give prac-
tical effect to this grand conception, and then,
instead of looking helplessly on while great
questions are being debated and decided, we
shall have organisations ready to deal with
every emergency as it arises, and to make the
force of Christian principles felt and acknow-
ledged in every province of our daily life.
Bear with me, brethren, if I seem to dwell
long and earnestly on this question. I am
impelled to do so by my daily experience.
Men are longing for aid and direction from
those whom they think honest and dis-
interested. If you saw the letters which I
get from all sorts of people, on all kinds of
subjects, letters which assume that
I am a perfect master of all sciences,
and am perfectly acquainted with
all political measures, economical
quarrels, and even future needs—
letters which demand from me an immediate
expression of opinion and an instant and de-
cided course of action, you would see how
men long for light and leading, and how
foolishly and even sinfully we are throwing
away powers of doing good by our neglect
of organisation. Get working men’s
societies, with good and intelligent
officers, and you would have a means of
thrashing out all these pressing questions,
and of making our Christianity a practical
force once more. Some may, perhaps, fear
that in organisations of this kind the clergy-
man might lose touch of his people and
suffer a diminution of his influence. lam
quite sure that this is a vain fear if the
clergyman be such a man as he ought to be,
such a man as these organisations would
make him—a man of genial manners, of
large and quick sympathies, and one who
desires above all things to be permitted to
help and serve.
THE ATTITUDE OF THE CLERGY.
Pardon me, my brethren of the clergy,
if I say a word, which I feel deeply
is quite as much needed by me as by any
one, upon the qualities which will com-
mend us to working men. Let us all try to
be real men, simple in word and manner,
single in purpose, earnest in effort, without
care for the forms and marks and claims of
our profession. There may, I know, be a
good and even a strong heart at the centre of
any number of bristling outworks of clerical
affectation. And if so, the fact will no
doubt sooner or later reveal itself. But not
the less for all that are such affectations
forbidding, especially to working men.
I believe that if we could all get
rid of the suffocating idea of professional
dignity, and just go about our work
as men, saying what we think, acting
as we feel, and restrained by nothing but the
gentleman’s respect for the feelings of others,
and the Christian’s loving desire to make all
men better and happier, there would be
no men in the world who would have
as much influence with working men as
the clergy. They are friends of the
poor and weak by the very necessities of
their position ; they are devoted to the divine
offices of compassion and charity by the very
vow of their order; and if they fawn on the


rich or neglect the lowly, they justly incur
the terrible charge of disloyalty to their
Divine Master. We have only to
live as Christian men, and act as Christian
ministers, to secure and even compel the
love and confidence of the working people.
MODERN CRITICISM AND OPINION.
Time was when we might, perhaps,
have justly feared that the destructive
attacks of modern criticism, popularised, or
rather vulgarised, as they have been by
shallow blasphemers, would poison the
minds of the working classes, and make
them turn a deaf ear to the Gospel of their
Divine Friend and Redeemer. But that
time is, I believe, well nigh passed. Of
course there will always be, in large cities,
men of depraved tastes and habits who will
welcome an excuse for their vile lives, and an
assurance that there is no Holy God who
will one day call them to account But I
believe that the majority of the working
classes have become simply disgusted with
coarse and obscene blasphemy. They
have sense enough to distinguish be-
tween sound argument and impudent
buffoonery, between the fundamental facts
and doctrines of the Christian faith, and
those evil acts of so-called religious men, and
imperfect ideals of early stages of religious
development, which are commonly made the
stalking-horse of the infidel lecturer. Above
all, they are discovering the character of the
alternatives to Christianity, proposed by
those who profess to base their crude
philosophies on physical science or psycho-
logical analysis. Speculation is all very well,
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.
the working man is learning to say, but what
is it to end in? How are your theories
going to affect my life? What moral and
social improvements have you to offer ?
Wherein is your kingdom of philosophy
better than the kingdom of God ? And when
they are told by some that they must submit
to that beneficent force of natural selection
which tramples the weak beneath the feet of
the strong ; and by others that life is so in-
curably vile and miserable that there is no
escape from universal wretchedness but into
universal annihilation, they will cry—yea,
they are crying—" Give us back that blessed
gospel of hope which in the slandered name
of science you have stolen from us. Give us
back the Saviour who loved the poor, and
helped the weak, and bound up the
broken-hearted, who blessed life and
conquered death, and opened the king-
dom of heaven to all believers.
Let us, my brethren, only be steadfast
and loving and true. Let us only do our
utmost to clear the simple gospel of Jesus
Christ from those obscuring theories, those
remnants of bad law, those misleading and
baseless metaphysics, which some have mis-
takenly called the gospel, and then I am sure
it is not too much to hope that we may see a
grand and far-reaching restoration of belief—
of belief not founded on any arbitrary and in-
credible human authority, but upon that
blessed Redeemer who is at once the Son of
God and the Son of man, who, having helped
us in our day of strength, will then suffer us
to close our eyes in our day of feebleness
with the song of holy Simeon on our lips,
"Now lettest thou thy servant depart in
peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.”


