

PET h p Pvm
2-Soi
ADDRESS
DELIVERED TO THE
lloplJlodefjj of ||do Jlout| (Males
AT THE
ANNIVERSARY MEETING,
25th MAY, 1870,
[WITH A POSTSCRIPT,]
the EEY. W. B. CLARKE, M, A., F. G. S.
■V. F.
(' Containing, inter alia, Natural History of the Diamond.)
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY FREDERICK WHITE, MACHINE PRINTER, WILLIAM STREET.




DBEESS
DELIVERED TO THE
'lvopl§flaclj| flf Uefo Smitlj® ales
AT THE
ANNIVERSARY MEETING,
25th MAY, 1870,
[WITH A POSTSCRIPT,]
THE KEY. W. B. CLAEKE, M. A., P. 6. S.
■V. F.
( Containing , inter alia. Natural History of the Diamond.)
SYDNEY:
FEINTED BY EKEDEEICK WHITE, MACHINE PBINTEK, WILLIAM STREET.




ANNIVERSARY ADDRESS,
O-EXTIiEIIEK OF THE TIOYA-L SOCIETY,
*
Some remarks towards the close of last year’s Address
indicated a hope, that on the present occasion my place would
be filled by a younger and more active member of our body.
13ut, having received from the Council an intimation, that
some inconvenience may arise, unless I again venture into the
field, I propose to notice a few of the topics which it may be
advisable to consider at this first meeting of a new year.
We may, I believe, congratulate each other on the fact
elicited by the Treasurer’s Eeport, that we are not in debt, which,
as times go, may be held to be a condition of comparative
prosperity. But we are still unable to meet certain demands
which must be met, if we would carry out the views which on
former occasions have been spoken of.
Our Volume for the session of 1868 is now published; but it
lacks an abstract of our discussions, and contains no illustrations.
These will, however, be necessary for the Volume of 1869, now
in the press, and others may be required in subsequent years.
In some of tbe Scientific Societies at home, the funds are
supplemented by the authors of communications, when the
papers are of a nature to require considerable expense.
It has occurred to myself, to be charged in this way for a
lithographic plate, appended to a paper describing some portion
of tbe geology of New South Wales, and for that plate, I paid
more than £l2 sterling. Of course I was allowed such copies of
the plate as I required.


On Law
1
Mathematics
4
Telegraphy
1
Geology
1
Metallurgy
2
Meteorology
3
Ethnology
3
It strikes me, that unless our Exchequer obtains an increase,
we shall have to follow the example of our friends at home;
but it must also be borne in mind, that, unless some
arrangement is made by which such an expense can be justified,
either a contributor or the Society itself may be a loser in
another way.
It will be readily understood, that the ordinary printing of
some communications may be of such an intricate character,
that our expenses may even, without illustrations, be much
enhanced. It appears to be, therefore, deserving of the attention
of the Council, in what way a difficulty of the kind is to be
encountered. And when I recall the subjects which were
discussed during our last session, I feel assured you will not
consider the remarks just made otherwise than as directed to
the advancement of the Society. To do full justice to some of
the papers presented to us, would require an amount of
illustration which our funds would not justify, though it may do
an injustice to the authors, to refuse them the advantage.
I would go further and say, that a Goverment grant of a
moderate kind would be usefully and constitutionally expended
in assisting our exertions to perform what I am satisfied we are
performing, a very important service to the community. The
papers read in 1869 will justify this opinion.
In the list are some excellent communications entirely dedicated
to Colonial interests, and by enumerating them with the divisions
to which they belong, we find there were under the following
heads:—
Titles op the Same.
1. Opening Address, by Eev. W. B. Clarke, M.A., A 7.?.,
May 12th.


2. “ A Eeview of the Progress of Lands Titles, Eegistration
in New South Wales,” by Q-. K. Holden, Esq. May 12th.
3. “ Analytical Solution to Sir William Hamilton’s Problem,
on the inscription of closed n gons in any quadric," by
Martin Gardiner, Esq. Juno 2nd.
4. “ Important new theorem in the Geometry of three
dimensions,” by Martin Gardiner, Esq. Juno 2nd.
5. “An Exposition of the American Method of Levelling for
Sections —its superiority to the English and Erench Methods
as regards actual field practice, and subsequent plotting of
the Section,” by Martin Gardiner, Esq. June 2nd.
6. “ On the Electric Telegraph between England and India, and
how to connect the Australian Colonies, with the Telegraphic
Systems of Europe and America,” by E. C. Cracknell, Esq.
July 14th.
7. “On the Geological Structure of the country around
Goulburn,” by Professor Alexander M. Thomson, D. S.
August 5 th.
8. “ On the Origin and Migrations of the Polynesian Nation,
demonstrating their discovery and progressive settlement of
the Continent of America, (Part 1,) by the Eev. J. D. Lang,
T).D. November 3rd.
Continued in Part II on November 3rd.
And in Part 111 on December Bth.
9. “ Improved Solutions to Important Problems in Trigonome-
trical Surveying,” by Martin Gardiner, Esq. October 6th.
10. “ On the Water Supply of Sydney from George’s Eiver
and Cook’s Eiver,” by Charles Mayes, Esq. November 17th.
11. “ On the Eesults of the Chemical Examination of Waters
for the Sydney Water Commission,” by Professor Smith,
M.D. November I7th.
.12. “On Gold Eefining by means of Chlorine Gas,” by
E. B. Miller, Esq. (Sydney Mint.) December Ist.
13. “ On a New Apparatus for reducing Chloride of Silver,”
by Dr. Leibius, (Sydney Mint). December Ist.
14. “ Eemarks on Tables for calculating the Humidity of the
Air,” by H. C. Eussell, Esq., Government Astronomer.
December Bth.


I do not know whether any previous session of this, or of the
previous Philosophical Society, has ever exhibited a heartier
desire to turn the channel of our thoughts more freely towards
practical results, than the last; and the thanks of our body
generally are due to those members of it, who laid before us
their able researches in the various branches of Science and
Literature which they have cultivated, for such advancement of
the claim which this Society has to the respect and support of
the community
No one can justly accuse us of wasting our time in idle
speculations realising nothing of lasting value, who looks down
the list which I have read to-night. I trust I shall be pardoned
if I dwell for a moment on one or two of them, especially that
which has suggested a reference in another direction.
It is but a duty to my friend Professor Thomson (without
intending, however, anything invidious in the selection of his
paper), to say, that he has done himself great credit by his
survey of the County of Argyle, ot which 1 can speak with
some kind of authority, having myself examined and reported
on considerable portions of it on various occasions.
Yet, that is not the motive which induces this reference. I
would wish to point out what is a desideratum in the future
geological mapping of the colony. It is a well-known remark,
that where Topography is deficient-, Geology depicted must be
imperfect. Unless the physical features of a district are
faithfully delineated, it is impossible to assign accurate boundaries
to the various formations. It is not the business of the geologist
to undertake the work of the ordinary surveyor; any more than
belongs to a house-painter to form the frame w'ork of the doors
a nd window's he is called on to decorate.
The work of Geology, therefore, is hindered in these colonies,
by w T ant of carefully defined features of the country ;in saying
which, I mean to inferno inaccuracy in that work which has been
so well performed in the various Survey departments.
In the course of correspondence with gentlemen employed in
Geological surveying, I have met with continual allusion to what
is wanted by them. In all truth it must be said, that many of


the maps of different parts of Australia are altogether blanks,
and yet the 19 Counties map of Sir Hhomas Mitchell (with some
few errata), and some other charts from the same office by his
successors, show what can be done im the colony.
At this time a geologist in Iranice, a friend of my own, is
engaged in making a Geological maip of the World; but, it is
easy to perceive, that the boundaries iiu various countries will, of
necessity, be very much distorted.
When, however, a Government geologist has to make a
Topographical survey before he ccommences his appropriate
duties, he loses time, incurs the displeasure of the public who
always want men to run before they c-an walk, and finally brings
upon himself the undeserved charge of not “ earning his salt.”
There is no doubt, that an influence of this kind operated in
the case of the late survey of Victoria, which has been abandoned ;
an example followed, I regret to say, in Queensland, to the
Government of which I had the privilege of recommending two
excellent surveyors who, in spite of topographical difficulties,
have done some admirable work. The only Official Survey now
going on is in Western Australia, to the Government of which
I had the further privilege of recommending the gentleman who
was employed originally in the survey of Tasmania now also
abandoned.* lam inclined to suspect, that, although much has
been accomplished in those Colonies, more would have been done
had full Topographical feature charts previously existed. We
are, therefore, entitled to anticipate great results from the
Trigonometrical Survey, that has been commenced under the
auspices of the Astronomer of New South Wales, whose report
we look for with much anxiety. I would further wish to speak
with great respect, of the efforts made by the present Surveyor-
General, to encourage the study of Geology among the younger
officers of his department by attaching to it a museum and
library of reference and by recommending their attendance on
the lectures at the University.
It will be remembered, that after Dr. Thomson had read his
paper on Argyle, seme discussion took place respecting the
* Mr. C. Gould, to whom reference is made, was succeeded by Mr. Brown,
formerly on the Survey of Victoria.


character of certain granitic rocks which I endeavoured to
explain as the result of transmu'ation. The idea of seeming
stratification in such rocks, was a novelty to some who spoke on
that occasion. Itrmay serve the purpose of fuller exposition, to
mention, that since thar discussion Professor Montagna’s
observations have been made known. In his work, published at
Naples in 1869, the author proposes a new theory of “ Metamor-
phism founded on the fossilisation of animals and 'plants." He
states that he has discovered in granite portions of coal-measure
Lepidodendron, and in porphyry and serpentine L. sexangulare.
Casts of Asterophyllites and Stigmaria have been also found by
him in all kinds of the rock named. If (as he suggests) a new
arrangement of rocks, according to such discoveries, is to be
brought about, Geological science may be hastening to a
development which will cast many long-cherished theories to
the winds.
DISCOVERT OF DIAMONDS IN NEW SOUTH WALES,—OPINIONS AS
TO THEIR ORIGIN.
Connected with coal plants in transmuted deposits, there has
arisen another enquiry amongst ourselves, as to the probable
origin of the Diamond. How has the Diamond been produced,
and to what Geological formation does it belong, are questions
which have had various replies. Although we may not be able
to solve the mystery, it may, perchance, be not uninteresting to
review the statements that have been put forth by different
authorities, now the public mind in Australia is excited by
accounts of increasing discoveries of the precious gem in New
South Wales.
It appears that I did not miscalculate, when, in 1860,1 headed
a notice of five diamonds that had come into my hands, New
South Wales a Diamond country (“ Southern Gold Fields,” p. 272) ;
for, up to the present time, several thousands have been brought
to light. In some valuable papers by Mr. Norman Taylor, and
in a report of similar character by Prof. Thomson of our
University, may be found a clear exposition of the phenomena
presented in the diamond field at Two-mile Plat on the


Cudgegong Elver, which these gentlemen have recently explored
and described.*
The opinions expressed by them are to the effect, that the
Diamond district is limited to the presence of an ancient drift
deposit covered generally by basaltic rocks, and that when
found in the river bed, or in alluvial soil, the diamonds are
frequently scratched and broken, whilst in the drift alluded to
they are found intact. And at the points where they are thus
found in the river bed, they are so found in consequence of the
tailings of the miners having been washed thereto.
The river having changed its course, the area referred to is
merely an alluvial space at one of those points.
The general formations of more ancient date in the vicinity,
are considered to be Upper Silurian traversed by greenstone,
with overlying carboniferous beds as outliers of more extended
strata. Mr, Norman Taylor has suggested, that the Diamonds
have been in some way derived from the carbon in the Coal
measures. Opinions as to the derivation of Diamond from
vegetable matter by a process of distillation, somewhat like that
to which coal is due, and even from animal matter capable of
supplying carbon, have been long held by certain philosophers.
Considering the facts glanced at before,f relating to the
transmutation of rocks by heat and other agencies, the formation
of Diamond in the humid way does not appear to me an
extravagant supposition. But, on examining the sand or deposit
in which the Cudgegong Diamonds are found, I was struck with
the amount of minute gems, such as zircon, topaz, sapphire,
corundum, spinel, pleonaste, &c., which compose the finely sifted
material in which gold is also iuund ; and Air. Norman laylor
dwells on the circumstance, that the Diamond is not only
associated with the gold (as in most other foreign localities), but
with those gems which are held to have had an igneous origin,
* A paper subsequently read before the Eoyal Society, will be found in the
present Volume.
+ “On the Transmutation of Bocks in Australasia,” by Bey. W. B.
Clarke M.A.; read before the Ph.losophical Society of N.S.W., 10th May,
18G5, (T. P. S. p. 266).


occurring as they do in rocks which are so denominated; and in
some cases (I may add) in true lava of modern volcanos.
But, before I go further into this question, I must digress, in
order to explain, that though Diamond is thus associated, on the
Cudgegong and on the Macquarie, as at Suttor’s Bar, yet there
are in my knowledge hundreds of spots throughout the length
and breadth of Australia, where the same gems are found in as
great abundance, often of much larger proportions, with or
without gold and without a trace of the existence of Diamond.
I have found them myself in this way in a variety of places in
this and the neighbouring colonies, in an area which I do not
exaggerate, when I call it a hundred thousand square miles; and
within the last year I have received thousands of such gems
from correspondents and visitors who have consulted me, without
finding among them more than a few Diamonds and but ten
independent of the present produce from Two Mile Plat and
Suttor’s Bar.
Those ten were found not far from Bingera, and are the first
truits of a new locality. They were accompanied by zircon,
larger than any found with Diamonds on the Cudgegong, but
also with very small crystallisations of the same mineral and
quartz. The friend to whom lam indebted for the examination
of these Diamonds, is encouraging a search for more. I may
add, that I have seen no Diamond from Cudgegong exactly
resembling those from Bingera.
I have received also two Diamonds said to be found near
Kangaloon, on the Mittagong Bange; but, as many other
minerals which are probably not indigenous there, have also
been forwarded from the same neighbourhood, I have much
hesitation in accepting the statements made.
A further announcement was made to me in 1870, of Diamonds
on the Darling, a few miles from Port Bourke, but on examining
a large collection of the pebbles consigned to the Commercial
Banking Company as “Diamonds” and “precious stones,” I
found that they were all varieties of silica [[quartz, jasper, agate,
chalcedony,] with small highly polished fragments of fossil wood
and other drift.


Probably no other person has Iliad more experience of this
kind than myself, for I have at timres been almost overwhelmed
with applications, personally or im writing, upon the subject.
Dr. Thomson has also had his own experience of similar
occupation, and, in many instances,, is well able to confirm my
statement.
One might almost fancy, that colonists were going mad in the
search for Diamonds ; and yet one digger confessed to me, that
from the labour of six men employed for six years, he had only
obtained three Diamonds which wer® of small size.
Without wishing, then, to dishearten any diligent man who is,
whilst anxious to serve himself, doing his utmost to develop the
resources of the country, it is surely only right to warn any who
have only their personal labour and privations to look to, against
embarking in a search which, to be successful, requires ample
means, union of energies and machinery.
Moreover, the Diamonds hitherto found have been but of
little commercial value; and as to the other gems, I believe they
have realised scarcely any sale at all. Capital and time and
contrivances may, however, hereafter meet with a successful find.
Some of the inquirers as to Diamonds, have deserved a less
encouraging reception than this. It is with no unkind feeling
that I mention (merely to show the speculative character of the
present/Mrore), that amongst the stones forwarded for examina-
tion, have been found pieces of common glass, portions of
chandeliers or bottle-stoppers, and some of these have been
disguised by grinding and colouring by paint.
With what object, persons supposed to hold respectable
positions in life, could have condescended to such a device,
merely to give trouble to those who have voluntarily given their
time and experience to oblige them, is difficult to imagine. It seems
to me to be an unworthy reward for wasted patience, and, not
unfrequently, unreturned postage stamps and other expenses.
Many times have pebbles of quartz —such as the one rendered
famous by the Townsend imposture —been forwarded, in the
hope that they would be pronounced Diamonds; but I am
persuaded, that, save in the Townsend case, there has been no
intention to deceive in that w'ay, and that the senders were


merely under wrong impressions. A real digger has no object
in imposture. Suchi cannot be said for the g'ass-grinders, who
were sometimes mome transparent than the material they had
manipulated.
So much for this episode. Let us now go hack to the
Diamond, and endeaivour to ascertain some particulars relating
to its history.
On the Cudgegong there are five principal places where the
mineral is found. They occur at various depths from the
surface, greenstone im some instances having caused the formation
ot unequal hollows Lor the collection of drift. The intrusive
rock follows the sttrike of the older rocks, which is about
N. 250 W.
The older drift has-been since covered by a basaltic flow, which
in turn has suffered from the denudation that has spread the
drift, so producing a younger drift, to which Mr. Norman Taylor
assigns the term Newer Pliocene, in contrast with the older.
This designation is, no doubt, due to his Victorian practice.
The basalt he compares with that of the Coliban Eiver in
Victoria, which from my own personal knowledge of that locality,
I can confirm.
The Carboniferous rocks have not furnished much detritus to
the older drifts; but such occurs abundantly in the river bed.
A still more recent wash of drift occurs on the present surface.
Mr. Taylor very properly presents to notice a difficulty which
has been hinted at already.
If the Diamonds wiere derived from the Carboniferous rocks,
why are they not found in the river bed, except where the
tailings of the miners have been washed in ? From all the
evidence arrived at, the newer drift is derived from the older,
and with them is associated a cement of quartz and altered rock
held by a yellowish green silicate of iron and hydroxide of iron,
from hand specimens of which I- have myself taken gold. Mr.
Taylor says it contains Diamonds also.
Many of the pebbltes, which are of quartz and very hard flinty
altered rock, have Hong attracted my attention, on account
of the glaze or polish which they wear. They have exactly


the outward coating which distinguishes so many of the surface
pebbles found in the very heart of tike interior of Australia
traversed by Sturt, M’Kinlay, and Blurke and Wills. What
may have been the way in which (these pebbles have been
polished, is not easy to be discovered. Iron sand, or,
better still, perhaps gem sand, in violent motion, may have been
the agent, since we know granite rodks in sandy deserts are
polished by sand-flows far from water. It has been suggested,
that the polish arises from the action of silicated water, as the
hollows in the pebbles are as smooth as the general surface.
But they are only in the condition of the greatest part of the
surface drift all over the interior of New Holland. Unless,
therefore, we assume, that a flood of silicated water has covered
the greater part of New Holland, we cannot so explain the
phenomenon.* If, on the other hand, the gems and the iron
belong to the bat altic rocks, and if these are younger than the
cement, such an explanation can only be accepted in connection
with a much more distant origin for the pebbles than any local
strata. The older drift, therefore, cannot have a local origin.
It is certain, moreover, that if the other gems have been derived
from basaltic rocks, and not from the greenstone, of which there
is no evidence, the basalt was of an older period than that which
now covers the drift, and such older basalt is not traceable. All,
therefore, favours the belief that the term drift, implying a
driving of material from a distance, is a correct term to apply
to the Diamond-bearing deposits; but a question of another
kind immediately suggests itself,—Was the motive power of this
* On comparing some specimens of Cetacean remains and teeth of Carchar-
odon, brought more than forty years ago from the beach at Felixstow,. in the
County of Suffolk, (which fossils are certainly older than those in the crag
cliffs above, and appear not to have fallen but to have been drifted up from a
probably Miocene submarine bed to the eastward,) I recognise the identical
kind and degree of polish on these Tertiary relics as distinguishes the Cudgegong
pebbles. This, at any rate, is an interesting fact, and may have some bearing
on geological inferences beyond the present use of it. In the superficial local
drift above the ferruginous sandstone beds about Sydney, are numerous
polished pebbles and fragments of the rock which exhibit an oxidised
but the polish in that case is, probably, due to very different agency to that ot
a deposit upon the pebbles, which is the theory of those who regard the
Cudgegong pebbles as coated by an infiltration of silica. The Miocene
fossils on Felixstow beach have, in the presence of iron, more relation to the
Sydney fragments than to the drift pebbles of Cudgegong and the interior—
but there, for the present, the comparison rests.


drift, and of necessity of the gold drifts, fluviatile or glacial? A
marine accumulation is not suggested; and no fossil remains,
favouring such a solution of the question, have been found.
Silicified wood of the Carboniferous age occurs abundantly in
the drift; but it must have been silicified long before any
Diamond could have been formed from the carbon which
the original wood contained, unless Diamonds claim an
antiquity as high as that of the Coal measures themselves,
or even one higher than theirs. In that case, ihey
must also be drifted, as well as the minerals and rocks that are
associated with them.
This may be the final result of our enquiries, but there are
many who (as Mr. Taylor does) think the Diamond is a product of
chemical forces now in operation, and therefore, it is a strictly
local and limited product, not necessarily connected with any
Carboniferous beds of comparatively high antiquity. As Magnesite
exists in the vicinity, and that is certainly a recent product,
arising from the decomposition of the exposed igneous rocks, so
infiltration, decomposition, and reconstruction of carbonaceous
materials, of whatever age, under the influence of chemical
transformation, may be producing Diamonds at this moment,
wherever the needful conditions exist.
An author of some distinction, M. Havre, Professor of Geology
at Geneva, has turned his attention to this very subject, and as
his paper “On Artificial Minerals” may not be generally
known, I will refer to it. [lt is to be found in the “ Bulletin ”
of the “ Socie/e Gedlogique de France ,” vol. xiii., 2nd series.]
He therein reviews the experiments which, up to 1855, had been
made in the production of artificial Diamonds, and refers to the
experiments of M. Jaquelain who had procured from the
Diamond a carbonaceous matter having the aspect of coke, and
those of M. Despretz who had proved that melted Carbon and
melted Diamond are nothing but graphite. This is akin to the
idea of Glocker of Breslau, and of others before him, that
Diamond is an altered coal. Petzholdt also found in different
Diamonds —especially the brown—traces of similar organisation
to that of silicified vegetable matter; but Dufrenoy rejects the
opinion of Liebig, that they can have a vegetable origin.


M. Pavre shows, that of thirty-four minerals found with
Diamond (according to the catalogue of M. Denis), consisting
of sulphurets, carbonates, oxides, silicates, and native metals,
thirty have been artificially prodluced; and of the thirty,
twenty-nine were produced by the aiid of volatile chlorides.
If this be the case, though one off the conditions is heat, the
argument as to an igneous origin ffor Diamond, because it is
found in association with minerals <of igneous origin, must be
abandoned or modified.
Ten years later, Professor Goppert, in his work “On the
Organic Nature of the Diamond,” pointed out, as Jaquelain had
done, that it may be turned into coke. He says, that some must
have been soft, as they are superficially impressed by sand and
crystals ; that others contain crystals of other minerals, germs
of plants and fragments of vegetation. Hence, it would
certainly appear, that the origin of such Diamond s cannot'have
been igneous, and, I may add, assuredly not more so than those
granitic rocks I have already mentioned, that contain Coal
measure plants. He states further, in 1868, that he had a
Diamond which contained dendrites , such as occurs on minerals
of aqueous origin; that there are at Berlin, one which contains
bodies resembling Protococcus pluvialis, and another green
corpuscles linked together, closely resembling Palmogloea macro-
cocoa. To these supposed Algse the names have been given of
P. adamanlinus and Palmoyleites adamantinus. As illustrating
the views he takes of these Diamonds, he says, the Metamorphio
rocks in which vhey occur also contain evidences of vegetable
fossils, such as Jdozoon canadense; and that even in some topazes
there are traces of organic substances.
A very interesting lecture was delivered by Dr. Percy, On
Chemical Geology , on 12th December, 1863, before the School of
Mines, in which he treats of the formation of Silica; of “ that
glorious mineral Corundum of Spinel, and of other gem-
stones ; showing the influence of water, moderate heat, and
salts of chromium, and he then adds ; “ the Diamond will come
ultimately, no doubt.” There is nothing to show that an
igneous origin is attributed to them.


As au item in this enquiry, we may refer to a notice in
Silliman’s American Journal (VI., 110), 1848, by Professors
E. and W. B. Rogers, referring to a previous paper, on “ A new
method of determining the carbon in graphite,” (V., 392,) in
which the authors show, that “ the D : amond may be converted
into carbonic acid in the liquid way, and at a moderate heat, by
the re-action of a mixture of bi-chromate of potassa and
sulphuric acid, in other words, by the oxydating power of
chromic acid.” The method is much the same, as in the process
of oxydating graphite. By this method, they obtained from
half a grain of Diamond, an evolution of as much carbon as was
nearly equal to what was due to the entire weight of the
Diamond.
On the other hand, Sir J. Herschel (Physical Geography)
quotes the case of a Bahia Diamond mentioned by Harting,
which contained well-formed filaments of iron pyrites, and he
infers from the combination of iron and carbon at high
temperatures the possibility of an igneous origin for Diamond.
A paper by Messrs. Sorby and Baker was read in 1869, before
the Royal Society of London, on the structure of certain
minerals, among them Ruby, Sapphire, and Diamond, showing
that these gems contain cavities entirely or partially filled with a
liquid, probably condensed carbonic acid, as well as with
that some Emeralds contain a strong saline solution
with cubic crystals, probably of chloride of potassium, and that
the black specks in Diamonds (such e.g., as those seen incur
Cudgegong mineral) are really crystals, which are sometimes
surrounded by contraction cracks, a black cross appearing under
polarized light. The authors conclude, that the Diamond does
not afford positive evidence of a high temperature, though not
opposed to it.
That its structure has great peculiarities has been show'n by
the changes produced in a yellow Diamond by heat. This stone
was exhibited by M. Eremy to the Academie des Sciences at
Paris in 1866, when it was seen to become rose-coloured by the
application of heat, returning to its proper tint on cooling. It
is said to be the first instance of such a phenomenon. But, on
turning to the 7th Report of the British Association, it will be


seen,thatin 1837, Sir David Brewster pointed out that the Diamond
possesses strata of different refractive powers ; and he uses this
as a strong argument for its vegetable oirigin—the changes of
refraction, and, consequently, the density iin parts and hardness
in the same crystal, being due to the action of the gases
imprisoned in an expansive mass.
If we now consider the relations of the Diamond to the rocks
in which it is found, we shall see how great or how little is the
dependence upon them for its origin.
A statement was made in “Nature,” February, 1870, p. 363,
respecting the finding of a Diamond in granite in the neighbour-
hood of Prague. It is described as exceeding in hardness the
Brazilian diamonds. It was suggested to be Zircon, but this
Dlaschkowitz stone appears to be a veritable diamond. Its
occurrence in granite was also mentioned in the Chemical Journal.
The statement came from Professor Schafarik, who sent it to the
Bohemian paper “ Politik." On such authority it was received
but not believed as authentic.
It was not till I found mention of it in an Italian publication
that I discovered the mistake that had been committed. In a
notice, under the head “ Scoperta di Diamanti in Boemia," in No.
6 of the Bollettino of the Beale Gomitato Qeologico d' Italia, pub-
lished in June, 1870, p. 175, we read “ Fecesi questa scoperta sul
finire dello scorso anno nolle vicinanze di Dlazkovic, villaggio
posto tra Bilin e Lobositz, in Boemia, dove existe un giacimento
di sabbie Granatifere lavorate per P estrazione dei piropi, varieta
di granato di un bel color rosso. Commista al prodotto della
lavatura di ques ! e sabbie, rimarcossi dai lavoratori una piccola
pietra sconosciuta, durissima, e di color giallo-verdastro, che sot-
toposta ad esame si riconobbe essere un piccolissimo diamante
del peso di 57 milligrammi ed in forma di esaedro a spigoli ro-
tundati. Dopo di quest’ epoca altri diamanti di simil fatta si ri-
trovarono, benchb assai di rado in quelle sabbie granatifere
Quantunque sia questa scoperta di ben poca importanza, pure
erediamo bene di segnalarla, essendo indubbiamente questo il
prime giacimento diamantifero die in JEuropa siasi trovaio.”
From this we learn that these diamonds were not found in granite,
but in a garnetiferous sand, which is a new fact for Europe but not


for the supposed origin of diamond in a plutonic rock I have
quoted the original words to prevent mistakes as to the meaning.
DIAMONDS IN BEAZIL.
Brazil seems naturally to claim our first attention. It has been
found that in a certain Brazilian rock called Itaeolumite, diamonds
have been found in situ, and, therefore, all diamonds are assumed
to have been derived in a similar way, wherever a rock imagined
to be Itaeolumite exists.
In 1846, Professor Shepherd, of South Carolina (A. S. J. 11,,
253) announced the extensive development of the rock in that
State, and he gives a figure and description of a diamond from
gold washings in that formation.
In Brazil, however, they occur in great numbers, in the lower
Itaeolumite beds.
According to Humboldt this rock belongs to the very oldest
sedimentary deposits.
So far as my own observation has gone this rock does not occur
in New South Wales, and even in Brazil, as I will show, diamonds
arc not confined to it. My friend Mr. Ulrich, late of the
Victorian Survey, says the same of the sister colony, and assures
me he had very good opportunities of satisfying himself by
examining the Brazilian specimens at the last International
Exhibition at Paris. Humboldt {Essai Glognostique Paris, 1820,
p. 89), includes Itaeolumite in the quartz rock series parallel
with his primitive clay slate.
Yon Cotta places it among the crystalline schists, and describes
it as a fine-grained micaceous talcose or chlontic schist, sometimes
flexible, holding occasional quartz pebbles with magnetic iron and
gold, as well as diamond. According to Eschwege, it passes into
Itabirite, which belongs to the Bed Hsematitic group. Other
writers include it with “ Mica Schist,” “ Quartz of the mica slate,”
and “Elastic sandstone.” Heusser and Claraz consider it a
“ granular quartz,” sometimes bearing quartz veins with pyroph-
illite lim“.
Eschwege says it attains in Brazil a thickness of many thousand
feet, ranging for hundreds of miles.


The North Carolina species lies betwesen limestone and clay
slate. It is said that it occurs in Porttugal, Spain, and on the
Rhine. Put this is doubtful. On the wHiole, it may be held to
be a transmuted sedimentary rock —a frialble quartz or sandstone.
M. Damour (Bull. S. O. de Prance xiii., 2nd Ser., p. 543)
mentions the occurrence in Brazil of diaimond bearing sand, near
Bahia, containing numerous minerals and cores, and states that the
diamonds often contain spangles of gold in their cavities. He
enumerates 32 mineral species, among them very minute rhombo.
hedral dodecahedrons of garnet of a topaz yellow colour ; a
similar occurrence to that of Two Mile Flat, noticed by Mr.
Norman Taylor, where hr own garnets of tlhe same form occur.
M. Damour suggests, in relation to the statements ofM. Favre
(referred to above), that the occurrence of the same minerals
with diamond in different countries would throw some light on
the formation. I may add that this is thes principal reason which
induces me now to enter so fully into this discussion.
Mr. Taylor instances as many varieties as M. Damour; but the
so-called gems in the list given by thee latter are confined to
Quartz, Zircon, G-arnet, and Tourmaline;; Ruby, Sapphire, and
Corundum being absent, and Euclase having been since added.
The metals seem to predominate.
There is according to M. Claussen, another solid matrix of
diamond in Brazil, which he calls Itacolmnite sandstone ( a sec-
ondary red sandstone), which overlies the crystalline beds, and
once had an enormous development; to its denudation he attri-
butes a considerable portion of the materials forming the mixed
erratic diamond-bearing deposits; but in this he finds neither
gold nor platinum. M. d’Archiac gives a very clear abstract of
Claussen’s remarks in his Progres de Qiolmgie (n., 379-383 ).
In the province of Matto Grosso, at the waterparting of the
basins of the Amazon and Parana Rivers, a little south of 14° S.
latitude, and at an elevation of some 1200 tfeet above the sea, is
the diamond field of the Sierra Diamantinai.
But the most important field in a geological, if not commercial
view, is that which, ranging at a distance fmll 900 miles S.E. of the
former, stretches through the province of Minas Geraes, between
16° and 26° S. latitude, and even comes down to the coast at San


Joao do Barro, where, in 1850, a chance washing of the under-
lying schist disclosed the presence of many diamonds. The
deposit is not confined to the beds of rivers or ravines, but covers
the slopes and tops of the hills. This deposit ceases exactly at
the boundary of the bituminous beds of the coal measures of St.
Catherine.
Is this, then, I would ask, any indication of the origin of
diamond in Carboniferous rocks ? If so, ought not those rocks
to contain diamond ?
In the north part of Minas Q-eraes, Jurassic calcareous form-
ations cover the red sandstone, and these are in turn subordinate
to gypseous marls and rock salt. Tet in the ravines, cut
down to the sandstone, through the overlying beds, diamonds are
found, i.e., above the Carboniferous formation.
Moreover, in 1839, diamonds were discovered in the Psammite
of Serro de Santo-Antonio de Grammagoa imbedded in the rock
whereas in the preceding Itacolumite sandstone they occur be-
tween the plates of mica, just as garnets occur in mica-schist.
The edges of these are rounded , whilst in the Psammite the
angles are uninjured, proving that the transmutation of the
sandstone into Itacolumite has also affected the diamond crystal-
lisation. For a long period the red Psammite and the secondary
Itacolumite sandstone have been regarded as the sole matrices of
diamond, whence it has been derived by the detrital erratic de-
posits ; but since then, it has been found in the true Itacolumite
subordinate to the talc schists with quartz.
The diamonds in the derived deposits are more numerous the
nearer the deposits are to the solid rocks.
The detrital beds are classified according to their character.
Thus Qroupiara is a drift not due to the present system of
drainages. BurgaTho or Ourgalhoa consists of superficial frag-
ments of underlying rock. The decomposed schist of the latter
is called Barro. A sandy mass between these is spoken of
as Terra. Another bed of granular Itacolumite is known as
Pizarro; but all belong to the decomposed rocks.
Cascalhao represents the sand, clay, and pebbles in the beds of
rivers, torrents, lakes, and of the hollows in their courses through
the solid rocks. Tahoa-canga or Tayahan-canga is what we call
in Australia cement.


The Cascalhao of the old -watercourses goes by the name of
Guipara; that at the heads of rivers Tabmleira ; and the partly
rounded pebbles of the present streams arte denominated Corrida.
The assemblage of all the minerals associiated with the diamond
is, according to Heusser and Claraz, from whom the last four
terms are taken, called “ the formation."
We learn further from these authors that though diamond
belongs undoubtedly in Brazil to Itacolumiite and Metamorphic
schist, yet it is not so, necessarily ; for the Itacolumite mountains
do not always contain diamond, and in that of Itaeolumi itself
none are found.
The minerals seem to follow a choice as to their matrix and
associations. Thus Anatase occurs with sub-oxide of iron—
Kutile and Brookite. Euclase is found with Topaz, in a whitish
clay of decomposed rock.
Specular iron ore, rutile, black tourmalin©, hyaline and smoky
quartz are associated. Topaz (sometimes rotten”) is abundant,
but is no longer, in comparison with euclas®, an object of search.
Ores of tellurium, as well as sulphur, occmr in some localities.
In the crystalline schists crystals of lime,, arragonite, magnetic
iron pyrites, copper pyrites, manganese cores, and chromate of
lead are met with. Scorodite and pseudoimorphs of the same
also occur in the schists and in the “ tapaham-canga." Amethyst is
found in veins in schists and gneiss, whilst Chrysolite, Cymophane,
and green Tourmaline collect in the Cascallkao of the crystalline
schist rivers.
Mr. Heuland, in 1823, exhibited to the Geological Society of
London ( Transactions, second series 1, p., 119) a diamond in
cascalhao surrounded by Scorodite (a cupreous arseniate of iron),
which I do not see in M. Damour’s lists, but which was found
by Eschwege; and Dana says it encrusts qmartz and beryl, and
is found in Victoria with gold and Arseno-pyrites. Of the latter
mineral Mr. TJlrich gives three localities. It has not yet been
found on the Cudgegong. But Schorl rock does occur there,
and in the sands of Bahia, at Diamantina, im Minas Geraes ; and
this mineral there called Feijao, as well as Hydrophosphate of
alumina, is considered an indication of diamond.


It is stated by Mawo (Travels in Brazil) that the mines of
Cerro-do-Trio annually produced, between 1801 and 1806, to the
amount of from 20,000 to 25,000 carats, and that the weight of
those sent to the Treasury in Eio Janeiro was 115,675 carats.
As an encouragement to diamond seekers in this colony may he
mentioned that numbers of the Brazilian crystals are so small
that four or five make only a grain, so that it takes sometimes
seventeen to twenty to weigh a carat. There are rarely in the
course of the year more than two or three of the latter weight,
and it takes two years to find one of 80 carats ; so that when a
negro workman found one of I7f carats, called an octavo , he was
crowned with flowers, conducted in triumph to the manager, fresh
clad, and set at liberty. This is reported by Malte Brun ( Precis
iii. p. 293 ). Dr. Thompson has ascertained that up to 12th
January, 1870, 9-lOths of the diamonds at the Two-mile Mat
weighed less than a carat, and that 497 together weighed 120
carat grains ; but as they were different in size, the average is
assumed at one carat each, the largest being If carats.
One, how'ever, had been found weighing 6| carats.
These facts are interesting as correlating, so far as is known,
the prospects of this colony and those of Brazil.
To prevent reference to it hereafter, I may mention now that
a new and valuable work on precious stones (“ Handhuch der
Edelstein ”) was published in Vienna last year by Dr. Albrecht
Schrauf. I found a notice of it in the Quarterly Journal of
Science, for January, 1870. In it is given a formula for
calculating the value of diamonds, wdiich tested by the price
actually paid for the Sancy stone (£20,000), taking the weight
at 53 carats, and the price of the first carat at £l5, and which is
near to the theoretical result ( £21,862 10s. Od.), appears to be
tolerably correct. It is this :
m
—■ (m + 2) a = value,
2
where m is the number of carats, and a the value of one.
I have already noticed some of the facts stated by Messrs.
Heusser and Claraz.
There are one or two others which may be quoted by way of
relieving the dryness of these details. But I would mention


that much compact information is given by these authors, in
relation to their physical and geological researches in the
interior of Brazil, in Dr. Petermann’s Mittheilungen (1859. Heft.
The previous and following quotations are taken from a paper
read before the Geological Society of Berlin. Herodotus, we
remember, tells (111., 102) a ridiculous story, repeated by
authors as late as the sixteenth century, of gold being brought
up by ants as big as dogs that guarded it when obtained, and
pursued the man that took it from them ; but Messrs. Heusser
and Claraz tell a far more probable story of diamonds having
been found among the little pebbles with which some “ worm-
like insects” cover their tubular coverings—a fact quite
paralleled by the Phryganea of Auvergne, which covered their
indusi® with the shells of Vidimus atomus or a small Faludina,
forming strata which cover nearly 800 square miles, and are from
eight to ten feet thick. ( Scrupe, Central France, p. 11.)
There is, however, another statement of even greater interest.
In the Cascalhao are found fragments of quartz shaped like an
anvil. These wore used as earrings by the ancient inhabitants of
Brazil. One of these ornaments was found in Cascalhao that
had never been disturbed, in a dry watercourse, covered by 18
feet of vegetable soil, on which many fine palm trees were
growing. Arrow heads and bones were also found with it.
This Cascalhao must, therefore, be comparatively recent, or the
race to whom such implements belonged must have been very
ancient.
According to M. Hockeder the first diamond in Minas Geraes
was discovered in the year 1827. But I believe Brazil was
known to possess diamond just a century before. The effect was
much like that which takes place in Australia when a new lead is
discovered. The gold workings w'ere all deserted by what is
called here “ a rush,” and the greatest excitement followed. Mr.
Hocketer’s memoir, though now little know r n, made also a stir at
the time. [Ueber des vorkommen der diamantem .] There are
other documents referred to in the Bull■■ &oc. Geol. de France.
(xiv. 232 ; i. 19 ; ii. 659.)


Further particulars relating to the diamond beds of Brazil may-
be found in a paper by M. Pissis in the journal just cited {Tom.
xiii).
One passage seems to bear upon certain facts observable in
Australia. He says, “to these stratified rocks we must add
compact Diorites, which show themselves abundantly distributed
on the surface, sometimes forming long lines ot hills, sometimes
simple mamelons in which the matter appears to have been poured
out in the manner of basalts, producing long sheets which cover
the last beds of the limestones, whether siliceous or schistose.”
He then goes on to speak of the sandstones which underlie the
limestones, and which are to be regarded as the true matrix
of the diamond. “ Thus, of all the rivers of the province of St.
Paul those only which flow over the sandstones are diamond
bearing.” And instancing the Eio Gruarahi, he says it leaps over
the escarpment where it forms several cataracts, cutting through
the various beds of Sandstones and Psammites, and it is only
below the cascades that you begin to find diamonds, a similar
remark to that of M. Claussen in relation to the Coal measures.
Other facts worthy of mention may occur in Captain Burton’s
work on the “ Highlands of Brazil ,” but as I have never yet seen
a copy of that work, I have not referred to it.
DIAMONDS IK IKDIA.
We may now turn to another quarter. India was renowned
as a diamond country long before Brazil; Tavernier mention 8
diamonds in 1612.
In 1814, Dr. Heyne published some tracts on India, in which
he described the diamond mines of Southern India, showing that
a conglomerate caps the Cuddapah Hills; and he adds, wherever
diamonds are found they are in alluvia and recent deposits in
which the rounded pebbles are so numerous as to produce the
conglomerate character.
In 1832, Mr. Cullinger published in a Calcutta periodical-—■
“ Gleanings in Silence” —some notes on the geology of the
country between Saugor and Mirzapore, in which he mentions
the occurrence of diamonds in solid sandstone underlying chlorite
slate, and also in a ferruginous agglomerate, of which he gives
several localities.


Mr. Newt)old in a paper that may he found in the Athenceum of
Hth of June, 1843, has described the diamond-bearing gravel of
Cuddapah, in Bundelcund, a little south of Golconda.
It holds rounded pebbles of trap, granite, schists derived from
beds twenty to forty miles distant, quartz, jasper, silex, sandstone,
and limestone of the vicinity. In it are broken or rolled
diamonds 3 and as the diamond beds are occasionally covered by
Begur, or black cotton soil (which is also not uncommon in
Australia), I consider they are of the same age as the older
drift of the Cudgegong. But when these materials are cemented
at the upper part by Kunlcwr, which is a tufaceous carbonate of
lime (very common in some parts of Australia), diamonds are
never found. In the Nizam’s territory, such cemented beds
contain bones of the Mastodon.
In the fifth volume of the second series of “ Transactions of the
Geological Society of London'’ is a valuable memoir “On the
fossils of the Eastern portion of the great Basaltic district of
India,” by the late Mr. Malcolmson, which was read in November
and December, 1837. In it he alludes to the Cuddepah diamond
mines, in the neighbourhood of which is abundance of basalt.
He gives also a sketch of the position of the diamond sandstone
of Bangnapilly, which is horizontal, vertically jointed, resting on
schistose beds underlain by stratified limestone, and surmounted
by a diamond-bearing breccia, which is not interstratified, but is
a mixture of sandstone and other rocks, rounded and angular.
On the opposite side of the valley, according to Colonel Cullen,
the sandstone is replaced by a sharp ridge of trap, and on the
descent the schist and limestone were found to be capped by a
quartzose sandstone. Besides the diamond conglomerate, seams
of rock crystal occur, and fine white quartz charged with galens
and with specular, micaceous and pyritous iron. The slates are
occasionally flinty or jaspideous. The base of the whole is the
granite of the Carnatic, and this rock is penetrated by many
dykes of greenstone. In the diamond sandstone, magnetic iron
and corundum are met with. The fossils in the argillaceous
limestone are of fresh water origin.
Mr. Malcomson opposes the idea of Major Eranklin, that the
diamond rocks belong to the Saliferous deposits of England. In


this part of Bundelcund, greenstone follows tlie strike of the
so-called grauwacke in the bed of the Nerbudda Eiver, and
basalt forms the overlying strata, another analogy with the
Cudgegong diamond district.
Mr. Broderip considered the rocks to be Jurassic, and scarcely
distinguishable from the white Lias of Bath.
As to the saliferous beds, Mr. Malcomson says, there is not a
rock formation in India from granite to recent alluvium in which
salt does not exist; and he further states, that the sandstone,
covering 800 miles of latitude and 400 of longitude, is everywhere
above the limestone which Captain Franklin calls lias.
In 1853, Mr. Carter, in his “ Summary of the Geology of
India,” ( Bombay Asiat. Soc., 1854,) also adopts the view that
these Bundelcund diamond rocks are Jurassic.
D’Archiac ( Frogres , vii., 644,) repeats Carter’s statements,
and puts the diamond-bearing conglomerate with a note of
interrogation above the Punnah sandstone, and much above the
Carbonaceous shales of Kuttra.
I would here wish to remark that these beds must be
distinguished from those which hold Olossopteris, and which
paralleled with the African Karoo beds, Mr. Tate (Q. J. XXIII.)
in 1867, considered Triassic, whilst Dr. Oldham, the experienced
and able Superintendent of the Geological Survey of India ;
agrees with me in assigning them to a Palaeozoic epoch.
But inasmuch as coal may exist in the Jurassiac or Triassic, a s
well as Upper Palaeozoic formations, the proximity of a ecal-
bearing formation to the diamond rock leaves the question as to
the origin of diamond in such a formation just where it was.
Since the establishment of the Indian Survey, under its present
enlightened Superintendent, the Messrs. Blandford and Mr.
Theobald have explored large tracts of India, and have given their
opinion, in which Dr. Oldham concurs, that the Nagpur, Damoodah,
and Talcheer, as well as other Bengal coal-fields, cannot be
younger than Permian. (Mem. Ind. Sun., i., 82.) These beds
in the Damoodah group hold many species identical with those
of our New South Wales coal districts, including the outlying
patches on the Cudgegong.


The Indian surveyors show that the Mahtadeva sandstone (or
Bangnapilly rock) surmounts the Damoodah beds, believed to be
Permian, and that the Talcheer group, wlhich underlies them
rests on gneiss, hornblendic gneiss, schist, ancd quartz schist; and
in the Mahanuddi River to the southward of the Talcheer
coal-field, which runs through the basic formations, a small
amount of diamonds has been found. "Where the Talcheer beds
meet the hornblendic rocks by a fault on the TTakiria River, and in
the Ouli which flows to it from the Mahaudova rocks, gold is
occasionally found.
North of this region the great Vindhyan rocks stretch across
the country north-north-easterly, being the upper of three
groups resting on gneiss and granite. These are described in
the second volume of the “ Memoirs of the Survey,” by Professor
H. B. Medlicott; and both he and Dr. Oldham give good reasons
for placing the Vindhyan series in connection with the Damoodah,
or Coal measures of the Talcheer field, and therefore they are
far removed from the Bangnapilly beds, belonging to the Mahadeva
group to the southward.
Mr. Medlicott shows that the diamond beds are not all of one
age, and instances the mines at Punnah, 600 or 700 miles north
of Cuddapah, which he places close to the junction of the lower
and middle groups of the Vindhyan series, at the northern edge
of the Eewah tableland, in the shales, to which latter group they
belong. This at once places them far below any possible Jurassic
or even Triassic strata.
The Punnah diamond diggings occupy not more than twenty
acres. The diamonds are found in a conglomerate belonging to
relics of old spurs and outliers of the tableland. Pino grits
among rod and green shales, and a few beds of sandstone,
constitute the strata.
At Kumerea (another field), the diamond bed is in an incoherent
ferruginous sandy earth, of variable thickness and undecided
position. To the east it is modified, and near Bridjepur it consists
of two feet of conglomeratic sandstone, resting on strong beds
of sandstone, and is worked at the surface. The “ kukra,” or
diamond bed, is sometimes an incoherent ferruginous and sandy
earth, variable in thickness and position as as are the beds with


which it is associated. It appeared to Mr. Medlicott to be
somewhat of a puzzle where to place the conglomerate among
the regular beds, and he considers the ferruginous element
to he subsequent to the deposition. The beds thin out and thicken
remarkably. The natives seem to have ascertained the limits of
the diamond area, owing probably to the beds dying out. The
base of the hills has not been tried.
As to the origin of the Diamond, he does not think the stratum
in which it is found is its native bed. He saw no diamonds
in situ, but, from what he learned of the labourers, “ the diamonds
came as pebbles with the rest.” Quartz pebbles of any kind are
rare. The most prominent pebbles are subangular red and white
shale, and of what Franklin calls “green quartz,” which is
elsewhere described by Mr. Medlicott as “ glazed or semi-vitrified
sandstone.” Pieces of the calcareo-silieeous bottom rock, of the
size of boulders, occur also. One of the workmen confirmed his
opinion, that the occurrence of these pebbles indicated the
presence of the gem, and that “ they themselves contained diamonds,
and were broken up” as ore or, rather, as gangue.
In a section just north of the mines, twenty feet of regular
beds of cherty and compact limestone rest on fifty feet of
alternating sandstone and shale, based on rich sienite ; the cherty
and jaspery condition of some of the more vitrified beds is shown
by another section to be due to a “modifying influence.” It is
supposed that these beds are the sources of the boulders in the
diamond conglomerate.
Besides these diggings, the great majority are said to be
alluvial.
On the Eewa escarpment, in the Yindhyan region, they are at
the heads of valleys descending from the plateau, where kunkery
and lateritic clays pass into a mixture of clay, gravel, and
boulders, increasing to great angular blocks of sandstone, between
which the diamonds are found. Diggings occur also on the
slopes. In one place men were seen removing twelve feet of
dark brown clayey sand to get at the boulder bed, the base of
which is richest.
“ The limited distribution of the transported diamonds was
more puzzling” to Mr; Medlicott than that of the rock. He
thinks there are indications beyond the area that is worked.


The conclusion is, that the open vailleys of Eewah are not
altogether due to atmospheric and riven l action; the whole must
have been under water when these diaimonds were washed into
their position. “If,” says the author,, “the diamond is but a
pebble in the conglomerate,” then, on The other hand, there is
every chance of further discoveries, since quartz grains of
similar size with the diamonds are abumdant, and there are other
sufficient proofs of the recent submajrgence of the country,
(p. 75.)
In the above references, there is not as clear a relation as was
given in connection with Brazil; but the geology of the region
is not in some respects so settled as to determine exactly where,
in relation to other countries, the Yindhyan rocks of India
belong. Enough, however, has been produced to show that the
Mahadeva beds are younger than the Damoodah, which clearly
correspond with our own Tipper coalUmeasures, and that the
Yindhyan bods were faulted and elevated and denuded before the
deposition of the Talcheer beds that are still lower than the
Damoodah.
Under such circumstances it follows that there is probably no
very close connection between diamond beds in India at distant
localities, and very little to justify the supposition that all, if
any, of the Indian diamond deposits esan be exactly synchronous
with older Pliocene.
I have not yet mentioned two very important and interesting
memoirs, by Messrs. Hislop and Hunter, published in the 10th
and 11th volumes of the Quarterly Journal of the Geological
Society, on the geology of the Hagpmr territory. Differing in
opinion from them as to the age to which they assign what they
term the great Jurassic formation, which extends over enormous
areas and comprises the Coal-fields of Central India and Bengal,
I would still accept their statements with the greatest respect.
They regard the base of the Peninsula ais formed of gneiss, granite,
sienite, pegmatite, mica schist, and quartz ; but these are not all
of anterior date to the sedimentary formations.
Over these occur the Coal-bearing; rocks, the upper part of
which are the sandstones, partly transmuted, which have been
already alluded to, and which other authorities regard as the
source of the diamond.


Over these beds comes the lower trap rock, which is compact
beneath and vesicular at the top, with cresting patches of
nodular trap. These traps enclose in places a thin sedimentary
formation of Tertiary age, which has an uninterrupted range of
1050 miles in one direction, and of 660 miles in the other.
Its age has relations with the Eocene of Europe. Notwith-
standing the order presented in various parts of this large region,
the authors consider the various trap rocks as all younger than
these beds, the lower having in fact been the younger. The trap,
they hold to have flowed into and over and to have altered the
lowest of these tertiary beds, which were deposited in a series of
great lakes of no great depth.
Above the trap another series of beds occurs, the lowest' of
which is Laterite, a well-known term to those who are conversant
with Eastern Asiatic geology. In this, the authors state, occur
the diamond mines east of Nagpur. They dispute the assertion
that the diamonds belong to the transmuted sandstones below the
trap ; and say that at Weiragad (about 80 miles S.B. of Nagpur)
there is no sandstone, but quartzose metamorphic rocks only.
At that place the diamonds occur in alateritic conglomerate which
overlies the sandstone in other places, and in which ferruginous
cements occur formed from the detritus and boulders of adjoining
formations ; and this they hold to be the diamond conglomerate.
It is therefore assumed to be younger than the overlying trap
formation. Above comes in a series of deposits, the lowest of
which is brown, the middle red, with existing fluviatile shells, land
shells, and bones of mammalia (which Professor Owen has since
determined to be those of buffalo and antelope) ; tusks of a
large animal were also found in the brown clay. The uppermost
deposit of all is the Eegur or black cotton soil, in which Kunkur
is mixed. Bones of oxen and sheep are found in it.
Messrs. Hislop and Hunter consider these Black and Red clay
beds to belong to the Post-pliocene formations; the Brown clay to
the newer Pliocene.
Assuming .these Nagpur deposits to be correctly placed,
diamonds of India are still, according to evidence collected from
other authorities and already considered, traced to a conglomerate
which may be more recent than our basalts on the Cudgegong,


but may not be more recent than those ;at Ballarat; but which
seems to have derived its pebbles and bcoulders from Palseozoic
and Metamorphic and ordinary igneoius rocks ; laterite itself
covering rocks alike of every older epoch. Occurring as this
detrital covering does all over India, and having the same
relative position to all kinds of rocks, amd at all heights up to
that of at least 8000 feet above the sea, the idea of diamond
belonging to it as its actual source is not sustainable.
In asubsequent paper (Q.J.Q-.5., vol. xvi.,) theEev. S. Hislop, one
of the authors, considers the Intertrappeam Tertiary bed as lower
Eocene, producing good fossiliferous evidence for this opinion;
and shows that the Mahadeva or Bangnapilly sandstone is about
the same age, in which Dr. Oldham seems! to coincide. (Memoirs
of India, vol. 1, 171.) Hislop’s views have not been thoroughly
received by other geologists ; and doubts have been expressed as
to whether the trap or basaltic formation of India is not all of one
age.
If compared with the Cudgegong Diamond deposits, the older
of which, and from which the younger is derived, underlies the
trap (basalt), it will be seen there is a difficulty to be reconciled
w'th respect to each ; and if the diamond conglomerate of India
be lower Eocene, that difficulty is complicated by assuming that
the Cudgegong deposit is Pliocene.
On reviewing the whole evidence I am inclined to believe that
unless they are much younger than the Pliocene, or Pleistocene
epochs, in fact of recent origin, they must be considered as
drifted from rocks older than the Carboniferous. As they
everywhere exist in limited areas, it would also be a fair inference
that as there is no want of carbon, and similar agencies must
operate over enormous regions, the limited range of diamond is
a strong argument against its recent production. If the facts
advanced by several of the authorities whom I have quoted are
received, then diamond must have undergone processes similar
to those that have resulted in the formation of gems, of which
there is no dispute as to probable age.
It is remarkable, how silent observers in general in India are as
to the multiplicity of such gems and other extraneous minerals
in the Indian diamond regions. Yet Mr. Carter names Quartz,


Jasper, Lydian stone, Epidote, Micaceous iron, Garnets and
Corundum, derived from rocks of different ages.
There is another interesting locality near Gungpur, on the
northern frontier of Orissa, on a river running to the Bay of
Bengal, north of Kuttak ; but I have no accurate knowledge of
its history.
To these remarks on Indian diamond beds, I have only to add
that, in 1867,1 had the honour of a visit from an officer of the
Bengal army, whose official position gave him great opportunities
of acquaintance with the country, and who came to this colony on
a tour of inspection, to examine our railways and coal-beds, and
from him I learned that the "Vindyhyan conglomerate is chiefly
made up of Jasper, Chalcedony, Specular iron, and a green rock,
which latter lies en masse on granite ; that the diamonds are of
all colours —rose, yellow, brown, black, and pale green —which
last being the favourite, or national colour of the followers of
Mahomet causes the green diamond to find a ready sale, whilst
the others are neglected. In size they are that of a hazel nut,
or larger. But, he added, that in the diamond districts the
people are wretched; they think and talk of little but diamonds,
which they often swallow if not watched.
DIAMONDS IN ETTSSIA.
Eussia is a country in which diamonds are also found, but
sparingly, as near Bissersk and Chrestovodsvingensk in the Ural
chain ; the detritus in which they occur being made up of angular
fragments of chloritic, talcose and quartzose rocks. The former
of these places was mentioned in 1831 in the “ Gprnoi ” Journal
of Petersburg ; and in 1839 Baron von Meyendorf stated to the
Geological Society of Prance that diamonds had been discovered
in two different localities, and that they had been found in a
microscopic form in native Iridium which had been brought to
Paris. (Bull, ii., 314.)
The first Ural diamond was found at Bissersk in 1829 after
Humboldt’s visit to Count Polier; three others were found
afterwards in that year. In 1830 other three were found. M,
Karpoff, a mining officer, shortly after was deputed to carry on
the search, and four were discovered, which are described as


colourless, diaplionous, smooth and very briglfat with 42 triangular
facets. One was broken in two.
Thirty-seven others were taken, the last in < July 1833, from the
Adolphskoi Mine and were used by the (Countess Polier in
decoration of her church images- One weiighed f of a carat.
Their forms showed from 12 to 42 curved facets, smooth and
sparkling. In 1881, however, a few were found in the gold land
of M. Medjer near Ekatherinburg. One was given to the
Institute of Mines by his son, after the father's death. It was a
rhombhoidal dodecahedron with rounded edgjes and translucent,
weighing of a carat. {Bull. Oeol. Soc. de France, IV., p. 100,
1833.) The information here given was retoeived from Count
de Cancrine, Russian Minister of Einance.
Sir Roderick Murchison, in 1841, saw forty diamonds from the
Adolpskoi rivulet; but as the gold found with them did not pay,
no further search was made for diamonds. Three other localities
have also been named, (“ Geol. of Russia and the Ural, 1845,” p.
(J 11,) in two of which one diamond and in the (third two diamonds
were found.
Sir Roderick considers that the Itacolumit® of Brazil occurs
in various parts of the Ural, where it was detected by Colonel
Helmersen, and adds what seems to bear upon (certain conjectures
previously mentioned. lie says: —“We may add that as
Carbonaceous grits of the Devonian and Carboniferous periods
exist, it is very easy to conceive how these masses, like other
sediments to which we have previously alluded, have been
transmuted into the quartzose micaceous schists which occur in
the Chain, and how the diamonds have been derived from them
and deposited in the auriferous gravel.” (p. 4.82,)
Finally, I may remark that Osm-iridium found on the
Cudgegong occurs in three places near the Ural, as well as in
South America and in Canada, in gold diggings with which
diamonds are, as we have seen, generally associated. Moreover,
Cinnabar found on the Cudgegong is also associated with the
diamond detritus of Brazil; and as the mode off its occurrence is
precisely that in which it presents itself in the Gilbert gold-field
of North Queensland (as I learn from Mr. Daimtree), and also in
that most wonderful gold-field on the Riveir Thames in New


Zealand (as Dr. Hector has stated), as well as in Otago, i.e., not
in lodes but as a member of drift deposits, there is a sort of union
between these and other regions in which the diamond is found.
Drift or alluvial Cinnabar is not less remarkable than drift
diamonds ; and I believe at present no lode has been detected.
In California Cinnabar is said to be brought up by Solfatara
action. ( Phillips in Phil. Mag., Deo. 1868. p. 431.) It may,
therefore, be that the Cudgegong mineral is due to the action of
former hot springs. The account given by Mr. A. Phillips
respecting the “ Chemical Geology of the Gold Fields of
California ” in the paper cited above, justifies the further inference
that Silicated waters may also have operated in coating and
cementing pebbles and fragments of rocks at Cudgegong as they
have done in California. He even shows, that quartz veins
holding gold and coloured by pyrites, as well as auriferous pyrites
itself, have been formed in recent times by the action of aqueous
solutions.
DIAMONDS IN BORNEO AND AFRICA.
There are but two other countries to which I need refer,
Borneo and Africa.
In the southern ravines of the Eotos Borneo chain, which is
composed of Serpentine, Diorite, and Gabbro, which run north
and south, there is a deposit of red clay with fragments of quartz j
in which spangles of gold, magnetic iron, platinum, and also
osmium and iridium are met with, the whole reposing on
Serpentine, In this clay, on the western slopes, diamonds are
found over fragments of Sienite and Diorite, and with the ores
above-named. Black quartz with pyrites and plates of platinum
are there the indications of diamond and, according to M. Louis
Horner, this quartz belongs to the Serpentine. (See d’Archiac t
ii., 333.)
So varied, yet, to some extent, so consistent with each other,
are facts connected with the history of the diamond. That its
mode of production in all countries may have been the same is
very probable; but that origin, it must be said, obtains little
illustration from the various geological conditions with which it
is associated. Perhaps this very variety, whilst setting dogmatism
at defiance, may serve as encouragement to the close observation
of practical prospectors,


Of African diamonds we have onliy heard much of late.
Knowing that they are generally found with gold, and that Africa
contains numerous auriferous regions, it might have been
anticipated that diamonds would have; had a greater celebrity
in that vast country, forming a quarter of the globe, than they
have had in modern times.
But though Heeren has shown that rthere was a considerable
trade among the ancient Carthaginians iin diamonds brought from
the interior of Africa, the only record I can find in modern times
of the existence of diamonds in that part of Africa, is of three
shown at the Exhibition of the produce of Algiers. They were
found in the Goumel Eiver, in the province of Constantine, and
were given up in payment to M. Peluzo,, the Sardinian consul at
Abners, by an Arab who wished to hnow their value, saying that
they were found in the sand of the (Goumel Eiver, with gold.
One of these is deposited in the School of Mines at Paris; the
second was purchased by M. Brongniart for the Museum of
Natural History ; and the third by M. de Dree. The Arab had
several others. M. Eozet says, however, that he had acquaintance
with the jewellers of Algiers, and had never heard of diamonds
found in the province. The facts stated are on the authority of
hi. Dufrcnoy and the Secretary of the Geological Society of
France. (IV. 164, VI. xv.)
In Southern Africa diamonds were reported to have been
discovered in 1867. After the announcement of the new find,
Mr. Gregory, a well-known London mineralogist, who went to
Africa on behalf of the great diamond merchant, Mr. Emanuel,
sent to the editor of the Geological Magazine (December, 1868)
an article denying the statement and declaring it a “hoax,”
“imposture,” or a “bubble scheme.” To this Dr. W. G.
Atherstone, F.G.S., a resident of Graham’s Town, Cape of Good
Hope, replied (May, 1869) refuting the charge, and declaring
that twenty-one diamonds were known to have been found either
on private or Government land, and thirteen of these were
bought by persons of credibility, one of them the Governor of
the colony, and another by a lapidary. Dr. Atherstone contra-
dicts Mr. Gregory’s account of the geology of the district, the
latter asserting that all the rocks are igneous or their derivatives,


and the former declaring that the rocks are fossiliferous, of the
Dicynodon beds (which by the way brings them into relation
with some of our Australian rocks) ; and that Mr. Wyley (an
accepted geological authority) had, years before this controversy
shown that there was an intimate relationship with the Indian
diamond region of Bangnapilly, and that Dr. Shaw had described
the African district in the Graham's Town Journal of the 20th
January, 1869, pointing out also the same resemblance.
In the “Journal of the Society of Arts,” of the 13th
February, 1869, is a list of the diamonds by Mr. Chalmers ; who, as
well as Mr. Eadeloff, a Missionary, asserts that one of them was
found near Pniol (No. 7 of the list), by a Griqua.
Mr. Gregory, in answer to this reply, explains some personal
remarks of his own, and admits the existence of Dicynodon relics
but south of the district alleged by Dr. Atherstone. And thus
stood the matter till 1870. It now appears, that diamonds have
been found in Tast quantities and that many magnificent and
valuable stones have been disinterred. They are found on the
surface of a calcareous conglomerate near the frontier of the
Orange Eiver territory, and are said to vary in weight from 6 to
13 carats, some of them reach 150 carats. The diamonds are
accompanied by garnet, topaz, and other hard minerals.*
* The locality is at Pniel on the Yaal River opposite Klipdrift (the territory
of the chief Waterboer), distant about 800 miles from Cape Town, where the
v earlier is fiercely hot from all December to all March, Xt is much nearer te
Port Elizabeth eastward of Cape Town, the distance being about 496 miles.
But the difficulties in travelling are great. In November 1870, about 10,000
men were employed. Without mentioning an opinion as to the alleged value
of the diamonds found, I may append here an extract from the Mauritius
Commercial Gazette of 18th November which is not without interest.
“ T *ie late B * telegraphic advices from the diamond-fields is that “at Hebron
they are picking them up at the rate of sixty diamonds per ■week.” And at
Gtonggong, or a little below that place, one man has found two diamonds, one
valued at £40,000 and the other at £BO,OOO. Of ordinary sized diamonds
reports come in daily. A man has just found a ten-carat one on an abandoned
k°P.i e (hillock). Another, Mr, H. S. Jones, son of an auctioneer of Cape
Town, has unearthed one of 26 carats, worth about £BOOO. This he obtained
after ten days’ work. He is on his way back to town to dispose of his find,
while a man who worked with him, named Lance, who came here from St.
Helena, remains, and continues working the claim in his partner’s absence.
The territory which is ascertained to be diamondiferous now fully extends
over 100 miles. As to the possibility of its exhaustion, to speak
of that, competent judges say is to speak of an event which may occur next
century, or perhaps a century hence.


Sept. 14th. —Per R. M. S,
Roman
496
£15,000
.. 29th. Per R. M. S.
Norseman
387
15,500
Octr. 15th.—Per R. M. S.
Northam
67
8,850
,, 81st.—Per B.M.S.
Saxon
110
4,230
Xovr. 13th.—Per R. M. S.
Celt
22,255
Per post
1,300
2326
£64,135
It may bo as well to state hero tha<t diamonds have occasionally
been found in our sister colony oof Victoria, and have been
recorded by my friends, the Eev. Dr. Bleasdale, Mr. Ulrich, and
Mr. Brough Smith, the latter of whmm, in his recently published
valuable official work on the “ G-old-fhelds of Victoria,” mentions
sixty small diamonds of little value ifrom Becchworth, taken out
of, or near to, the usual “ wash dirt” of the diggers, varying in
weight from one-eight to two carats amd a half.
In 1865 fifteen more diamonds wiere also procured from the
AVoolshed diggings.
It is said also, that some small diamonds have been found at the
Echunga gold-field S. E. of Adelaide, iin South Australia.
At the present time, therefore, Mew South "Wales is the
diamond colony of Australia.
I fear, Gentlemen, in thus exhamsting the subject of the
diamond I have exhausted your patkence as well; but I have
been anxious to collect from every available source, in the course
of my own reading and observation, alll that bears upon our new
The following is a resume of the known shipments since the beginning of
September last: —
NVMBEB AND VALUE 01’ DIAMONDS SfflNT WtOJI THIS POST.
1870. Diamonds. Value.
Last week we had intelligence by telegraphi of some very large “ finds.”
The report was that one of 150 carats had beeni found ; one of 117 carats, and
several others ranging from 12 to 18 and 25 carats. With regard to the two
very large ones, I prefer to take the announcement with caution; but as to
0 i U< r ones, Ido not for a moment doubt tlhey were really obtained. A
personal friend of mine found one of them weighing 15 carats. At the same
time there need be no unnecessary scepticism abomt the matter. Large finds are
kepi very close : but it i- very well known for aDI that, diamonds of immense
size have been found. When I say “of immemse size,” I mean above 100
earate up to nearly double that weight. The 88 carat one found by Wheeler
arrived yesterday in town. It is in the keeping iof the Standard Bank, which
tituiion lias made a large advance upon it, amd to which it is entrusted for
dispo al in Europe. Irrespective of this monsteir, the mail steamer Celt will
take home on Saturday nearly 2000 diamonds, vallued at a large amount.”


colonial industry, that the matters thus brought together may be
an assistance to persons anxious to investigate the curious circum-
stances connected with the most mysterious of our minerals.
It seems to me, however, that whatever may be richness of
some of these distant countries which have been spoken of, there
can be no reason to doubt that the gifts of the Creator to this
country, in which we are sojourners, are abundant, and are equal
in many respects, if not superior in some, to those which His
providence has showered so liberally on the lands of the stranger.
May we be induced to make a good use of them !
COAL US' INDIA.
The references that have been made in the preceding part of
this Address to the Carboniferous rocks of India naturally
induce a desire to say a few words respecting their recent
development.
A new Coal-field, intermediate between the Diamond districts,
and of the age of the Upper Damoodah, has within the last year
been determined in Central India, after long examination and
strong convictions of its existence on the part of Mr. Medlicott,
It lies south of Nagpore and north of Hydrabad. It will be of
great use to India, and may, perhaps, have an indirect influence
on the present import of Australian coal. An area equal to two
square miles south of the river Wurdah is said to contain a
thickness of 14 feet of coal, not deeper than 100 yards below the
surface, and easy of access ; whilst to the north of Wurdah there
is even a greater distribution of the mineral.
What renders this discovery interesting to ourselves is, that it
is unquestionably of similar age to our Newcastle coal; and that
it is capable of supplying for at least thirty years a quantity equal
to what India now yearly supplies from her other coal-fields,
which is 600,000 tons, the exact amount exported from Newcastle
in the year 1867. And yet it is said this very sum is only equal
to the produce of a single English colliery.
FOSSILS IN LOUD HOWE’S ISLAND.
During the past year an expedition (quasi scientific) was sent
out to Lord Howe’s Island. Having had an opportunity of
examining the rocks collected, I have been enabled to see that


the Island belongs to a system of forrmations common to many
Pacific islands, with the geology of wbiich I am somewhat familiar.
Howe’s Island consists of a mass of iggneous rock rising abruptly
out of the ocean to the height of upwards of 2800 feet, having
on its lower portions a deposit of elevated coralline sandstone, in
which are embedded the shells of ai Bulimus and what were
supposed to be its eggs. These have siince been determined to be
those of a Gecko.
By the favour of Dr. James C. Cox, H have had the opportunity
of seeing another Bulimus, whichi occurs semi-fossilised in
similar deposits in the Isle of Pine®:; the shell, in each island
respectively, being of still living speciras. The shells of the living
Bulimus, in Howe’s Island, do not cdiffer from the embedded
shells.
It has been said that no reptiles exist in the island; but
Dr. .McDonald, of H.M.S. Herald, who reported on the island
and the little group of rocks and reeifs that belong to it, states
that two snakes and a lizard do existtlhere. This has been partly
confirmed by the Gecko eggs. Certain it is that he distinctly
mentions one as a land snake; the rather, of course, may have
been a Hydrophis, as it was on the How reef on the west side,
which connects the horns of the curve 3 formed by two extremities
of the island. Since the return of thes expedition, I have received
an additional proof that the coral sanc’dstone contains other relics
of animal life besides Bulimus.
About four or five feet above the sesa level on either side of the
island, Mr. Leggatt, who placed thes<e fossils in my hands for
inspection, found numerous bones whiich have not yet been fully
determined as to their character. IThc late Dr. Foulis, in an
account of the island sent to the (Government, mentions the
existence of bones of the turtle; but iit is possible some of these
bones may turn out to be those of binds. At present I content
mvself with suggesting that there iis much to do before the
natural history of this little group will have been exhausted.
Mr. Moore, one of the recent exploreirs, has given an account of
the botany, and dwells on the existemce of a flora there which is
only partially Australian, and more nearly resembles that of
Norfolk Island. Yet in the latter tlhe peculiar tree is the well-


known line, whilst a huge Bauyain or Ficus is the distinguishing
plant of Howe’s Island.
It is this plant which has induced the belief that Howe’ B
Island belongs to a wider area now submerged.
I confess I have always held tlhe opinion that the east coast of
New South Wales formerly extemded more to the eastward; and
as soundings are known to existt between it and New Zealand,
that the ancient land that once exxisted in the open space suffered
the same change that affected, the base of the Barrier Eeef
farther to the south. This, howcever, is certain, that if there has
been subsidence, there has also liaeen elevation in various islands
to the eastward of Australia, ass I showed many years ago in
relation to Lifu Island in the saame region as the Isle of Pines.
And on reference to Sir Charles Lyell’s arguments “On Insular
Iloras and Faunas,” (Principles ii. , ch. 41,) we may see what
can be said on the opinion, thmt such islands as Howe’s were
raised out of the ocean by successive eruptions from great depths
during periods of slow elevation..
The collections I have examimed of the rocks in that group
exhibit nothing of any great antiiquity, a fact also established by
the existence of continuous life iin the Bulimus which is found
fossilised in the beds of detritus <and marine relics that have been,
and are being, now still further iraised above the sea level by the
process of leisurely elevation, suich as is exhibited by the present
surface, the extension of the western beach seawards and by a
similar gentle rising on the opposite Australian coast, as about
Moreton Bay.
Whether Howe’s Island, attaiining as it does to an elevation
equal to the height of many parts of the Australian Cordil-
losa, may have been one of tthe sources, whence flowed the
great basaltic streams that cap) so many points of the mainland
it would not be easy to demonstrrate ; but there does not appear
to be any discrepancy between tlhe ages that have been assigned
to those lava flows and to thes islands on which Lyell has
commented.
As a further proof that we lhave much to learn as to the
continuance of certain species from a somewhat earlier epoch
into the present ( which is the ciase with the Bulimi of Howe’s


Island and the Isle of Pines), I may mention an announcement
made by Professor Owen about three months ago, that he had
received from Queensland with the remains of Diprotodon (a
Pleistocene animal) fragments of a crocodile, similarly fossilised,
which he has determined to be identical with the species of that
animal still existing in the Queensland rivers—a fact similar to
the fresh-water shells of living species attached to the Diprotodon
bones. Crocodile’s teeth similarly fossilised I sent home to
Professor Huxley some years since, collected from the
neighbourhood of Peak Downs, by Mr. A. Gregory.
As to Howe’s Island Dr. Macdonald has shown that the coral
sandstone has undergone an elevation in the middle of the island,
producing a saddle-formed ridge distinct from the lower horizontal
beds of the same rock which was probably produced by a
paroxysmal heaving similar to that which I pointed out must have
been the case in Lifu.
During the last year, also, I was enailbled to announce in the
local papers and in the Geological IMagazine (YI. 383), the
important fact that a femur of a bird alllied to, if not incidental
with the Dinornis or ancient Moa off New Zealand, has beeu
disinterred from the depth of upwards of 180 feet in drift and
under lacustrine deposits, on Peak Downs, in Queensland, thus
proving another link in the chain of (evidence to show that all
through the southern lands in the Eastern hemisphere flightless
birds have existed, of which a living bird in Howe’s Island is
another example.
And if it be true that the New Zealand Moa is still living ( or
is only recently become extinct), we have a similar fact to that
illustrated by the occurrence of the living and fossilised Bulimi
before-mentioned.
The Bulimi in the Pacific Islands appear to be as distinct in
species as are the flightless birds in genera and orders between
New Zealand, Bourbon, and Madagascar; and now we have the
gap somewhat filled up by the Peatk Downs bird, which is an
ancient example of what we have ini the Emeu of this colony, the
Cassowary of the Solomon Isles, amd the Ostrich of Africa, so
that, as before said, there is, despitce the differences, an apparent


oneness of design in the structure of certain inhabitants of the
separated lands of the Southern hemisphere.
It is perfectly clear that birds incapable of flight could not
have passed by the use of their wings, from island to island, nor
could they have partaken in the ordinary character of the
migrations of birds.
We can only surmise that these Southern lands had once a
connection now no longer in existence, or that they have from
the beginning remained separate and distinct, each with its
peculiar and independent creation.
I must confess that so fair as I understand the received
explanation of the formation of the Barrier Eeef, or comprehend
the existence of peaks like that of Mount Q-ower in Howe’s
Island, it appears to me that neither could have been formed
without an older base and support of rocks than are now visible ;
and that although the productions of either belong to the present,
that present extends backwards in time to what may be called
the past.
Those who are interested in such enquiries will find some very
striking illustrations of the subj ect in the 2nd vol. of Wallace's Malay
Archipelago, published in 1869, in which he assigns reasons for
the former connection with Africa of the Malayan Archipelago.
As, however, in that case Australia as well as India is excluded,
it is, nevertheless, maintainable on similar data, that other
connections in the Pacific may have existed between the present
insulated tracts of dry land which must have bridged over many
great spaces now occupied by the ocean.
Elsewhere ( Remarks on Sedimentary Formations of New South
Wales) in 1867, I suggested that the older Australian deposits
are repeated in New Zealand, &c. Dr. Hector has since then
( Lectures on Mining, 1869 ) by a very ingenious device, placing
an outline of New Zealand on a map of Australia, adjusted to the
same meridian, shown that the gold-fields of the former tally with
those of the latter in the same re-arranged general latitudes in
which the character of the gold as to the proportions of silver agree ;
so confirming the previously expressed idea with additional


emphasis, ( See Trans. N.Z. Inst., 11., p. 366, issued April, 1870),
and the comparison holds good from the Ovens Eiverand GHpps’s
Land to Eockhampton.
SUPPLY OP WATEE. FLOODS. CLIMATE.
With a few words on another topic I will conclude. I refer to
the Water Commission, to the evidence before which I contri-
buted several facts relating to the elevations in the districts from
which it has been proposed to obtain a supply; and as I had
myself reported on a supply for Paramatta nearly thirty years
ago, and afterwards, in 1850, was the chairman of the Artesian
Well Board, I am not stepping out of my way in noticing this
subject.
Nature seems this year to have given us a further insight into
her operations. And, in consequence, we have the seeming
inconsistency of a body of scientific gentlemen seeking a supply
of water; and a portion of the same Commissioners employed in
seeking how to get rid of a superabundance of it. Of course
there is no actual contradiction. It iss Sydney that wants the
supply ; Maitland that wants to get ridl of one.
Now, touching the former, I have bieen confirmed recently in
my previous views, that it is to tanks amd reservoirs that we must
look for our domestic supply. The milllions upon millions of tuns
that have been running away uselessly:, or doing damage, during
the last few months would have been suifficient, if properly stored,
to have sufficed for many years for a greater population than we
have at present. The valuable datia in the report of the
Commissioners for dealing with this question of supply will not,
assuredly, be thrown away ; and it is only a matter of cost that
has to be considered, if their scheme is to be adopted.
This very question is attracting attention at home, and in the
last number (brought out by the mail on the 16th instant) of the
Journal of the Boyal Agricultural Society of England (Yol YL,
No. 11, p. 268), are some calculations showing the practical value
of private tanks and public reservoirs, in an excellent paper
“ On Village Economy,” communicated by Mr. J. Bailey Benton,
C.B. But private individuals need- not allow the bounty of
Providence to bo wasted, if they would, Iby a very simple contrivance,


store it for use. Yet very few do this, confining themselves to
periodical interludes of alternate complainings of droughts and
deluges, and doing nothing whatever to help themselves.
Similarly, with an utter regardlessness to the “laws of nature”
of which we hear so much, men go with their flocks and herds to
dwell in places, from which, as a rule, they are sure to be swept
away by such floods as those which have of late desolated many
parts along our river beds, balancing in their minds, or not as the
case may be, that what they lose in one way is gained in another
though not always by the sufferers.
The main body of a great flood destroys much of the property
that is on its immediate border ; but the backwaters of the same
flood spread over the more distant flats a rich manure brought
down from the hills as a compensation for its ravages elsewhere.
The ancient inhabitants of such places as the Pomptine marshes
in Italy built their dwellings out of the reach of miasma, though
once, before the sea invaded them, they were fertile tracts and
thickly inhabited. And to this day the people who farm the
Campagna only visit it for the sake of needful husdandry, return-
ing from its pestilential atmosphere to the higher lands. Not
one of these, I verily believe, would have had the folly to dwell
hi a Siver bed liable to a repetition of floods week after week;
though it must be admitted that the older settlers, continue to
occupy the sites of towns, that were exposed, but at long intervals
(many centuries), to the ashes and lava streams of Vesuvius, as
the remains still testify.
Certainly, after the disasters of Gundagai in 1851, and of the
Hunter and Hawkesbury in 1870, it would be a merciful inter-
ference of Government to prevent any fresh formation of town-
ships in such perilous places as many that could be named; for
jnstance, on the Shoalhaven Eiver many houses have been erected
on a sandy deposit, itself produced by floods, and forming the
actual bank of the river.
No doubt, it is a noble act to assist nature by engineering
skill to carry off the torrents that have had their original
channels disturbed and blocked up by careless occupiers of the
soil, and it is generous and praiseworthy to relieve distresses that


are even brought on by inconsiderateness; but it would be far
better to prohibit the possibility of such risk, than to look calmly
on whilst the people take their own way of running into
mischief.
The meteorological conditions ought to be known well enough
at present to require no such comment as this.
But it appears there are seasons when the ordinary eccen-
tricities of the climate are greatly exaggerated by combinations
of phenomena that taken together are irresistible.
When we hear of a flock of sheep, numbering several thousands,
swept away without warning from an upland pasture in which no
regular stream or channel exists, as was the case lately in the
North ; or when we hear of a thousand head of cattle enclosed
in a paddock near a river level, from which the person in charge
would not release them, though warned of the coming deluge,
and of poor, helpless families surrounded in the night by roaring
torrents, deep as the roofs of their solitary habitations, it is quite
clear that the labours of our Belief Committees and the supply
of seed wheat are very insufficient measures for the final preser-
vation of people from such calamities. Excelsior should be the
only motto for the occupier, whilst the lands of the owner are
getting the periodical top-dressing Providence brings about by
means of Inundation.
Connected with the morale of this topic are some considerations
associated with the more special objects of our gatherings here .
and inquiries are suggested which at the present moment can only
partially be answered, though a full explanation may be hazarded
ere long.
Everyone has noticed the peculiar conditions of the present
period, —Earthquakes, interrupted electric and magnetic forces,
displays of the Aurora, Sun spots, irregular Gales, absence of hot
winds, sudden Storms, Tropical rains, —disturbing the usual order
of summer weather, yet dressing the ground in a mantle of
verdure which rivals the freshness of an English spring.
We may not be able to explain it all just yet; but when the
time arrives we shall probably leamn that a great disruption of


ice has, within a year or so, taken place from the Antarctic
harrier.*
A south wind during November was the prevailing wind,
though, as we learn from the tables of my colleague the
Astronomer, a N. E. wind prevailed that month for ten years
preceding.
With this upper wind were combined lower temperature, greater
humidity, heavier pressure of the atmosphere, and more abundant
rains than were recorded during the same ten years. When
these conditions are taken in relation to the tropical current that
sets along our shores, from the heated volume of which has been
a great evaporation over an unusually wide-spread surface, we
can understand how the cool heavy air above pressing upon the
lighter moist strata below may have produced unusual condensa-
tion, which, in the production of the rains, has caused those
occasional heats which were so remarkable in the intervals of the
more boisterous stormy gales which we have experienced.
There has been a great disturbance of the ordinary electrical
atmospheric status of the air; and without taking into account
any local or incidental occurrences—such as the influence of the
telegraphic wires or the iron rails now stretching across the
colonies, which must have affected in some degree the electric
state of the atmospheric strata near the surface, or of the peculiar
state of the sun—-we may conclude that the present is a period
when we are naturally incited to enquire whether w T e are living at
the commencement, or middle, or end of a Cycle in the terrestrial
and meteorological movements of Nature.
After an examination, long ago, of many thousands of
phenomena, I came to the conclusion that at certain intervals or
* Since this was written, I have had my attention drawn to an announce-
ment on the part of the Hydrographer of the Admiralty, of which I had no
previous knowledge respecting the fact that Icebergs were dangerously
prevalent on the Cape Horn Route in November 1869 and for several months
before, and I have also received intelligence, that the Swedish Expedition to
Spitzbergen had in 1868 met with lee in an unusually disturbed condition,
heavy drifts blocking the coasts, and betraying a disruption. It is not
improbable therefore, that my conjecture as to one cause of our present
extraordinary seasons in Australia may have been correct. [Jan. 31st, 1871.]


multiples of them nearly the same meteorological occurrences
took place.
I am informed hy a close observer.’, that the year 1819 was
distinguished hy just such a season as tlhis —that was immediately
after a great disruption of ice in the .Arctic regions which pro-
duced just such changes as we have experienced here. Of course
we cannot know what took place in th© Antarctic regions at that
time. But having observed that im this part of the world
occurrences are noted at about six months date from the time of
similar occurrences in the Northern hemisphere, it is not without
a show of reason that one might conclude that the irregularities
of 1819, which was a marked year im this hemisphere, may have
nearly corresponded with those of the same years in the other
hemisphere. And if so, this year, at an interval of fifty-one
years (a multiple of 17), satisfies the- period in question.
It may he said, that in all this therei is little else than conjecture,
and that we have no right to make application of events in such
a way.
But if the planting of Hawthorn hedges in England is known
to have produced some climaticall effects; if the clearing of
forests in Poland, and of the summit of St. Vincent in the West
Indies, are also known to have produced dryness to a surprising
degree, depriving, in the latter case, the vegetation of the
mountain top of the power of condensing water from the trade-
wind ; if, too —what I can testify fto from my own observation of
of what I saw ther e—paragreles (which are nothing more than
posts at certain intervals, just like telegraph posts,) when placed
in the vineyards of the Canton de Yaud, in Switzerland, convert
the once destructive hail to snow, thus protecting the vines ; so,
I think our clearing of the Australian forests (any great tree of
which produces daily a great amiount of electricity), and our
continuous lines of electric posts amd wires, and the iron lines of
our Railroads, must have some affect in the transference and
spread or collection of that atmospherical Electricity which is in
connection with those grander amd more universal combinations
which enter into the formation of our climate.


It may be also reasonably believed that the usual Trade winds
of the Tropic have recently had a more than usual southern
range.
If, however, but little weight be attached to such considerations,
they may, perchance, direct the thoughts of inquirers into a
channel which may lead eventually to something more satisfactory
than theory.
We are all so much interested in our climate, that it can neve r
need apology even for failure in attempting to explain its
phenomena. Without the belief that it is possible to prevent the
ravages of a flood, we may still anticipate the time when Common
sense, Science, and Nature shall all unite to advance the prosperity
of the country.
It should be the consolation of every mind that is rightly
constituted, that He who gave this lower world to us His
dependants; who impressed upon its organism laws that cannot
by us be abrogated, gave us, at the same time, permission to
investigate these laws and authority to turn them all to our
advantage.
But if men will go into deserts where there is no surface water
to be had, without the appliances to bring it from below; if they
will persevere in defying the floods, and expecting to dwell safely
in the midst of their channels, do not let them complain that the
world has been made as it is, or that they cannot with impunity
defy the power by which Nature is governed, whilst neglecting to
see that even floods have their uses, and that Deserts are not as
waterless as they appear.
When about fifteen years ago, the Marabout Arabs of the
Sahara saw the fresh waters springing from the wells made by
the Drench Engineers in that once-desolate region—the bottom
of a dried-up ocean —in their joy they called one the “ Fountain
of Friends,” another the “ Fountain of Blessing ,” and a third the
‘‘ Fountain of the Fesurrection.”


"Without going to the extent of their gratitude, we ourselves
may still desire that the labours of our “ friends” in executing
the duties of their Commission, whether in diverting an inunda-
tion or in bringing a supply to our cities and towns, may be hailed
as a “ blessing” to the community at large.
I do not wish this Address to he incorporated in the Transactions
of the Royal Society, without a further and regretful reference to
the Trigonometrical Survey, mentioned at p. 5.
This work, there alluded to in connection with a promised
Report upon it from the then Astronomer, George Robarts
Smalley, Esq., E.R.A.S., was unfortunately interrupted by his
illness and unexpected death. But seven weeks elapsed between
his occupation of the Chair, at my reque st, on the occasion of the
above Address and my officiating at his funeral on the 13th July
following.
He was one of the most useful members of our Society, and
had often rendered it important services. He had been my
colleague as Vice-President from the time when the Society took
its present title, and was mainly instrumental in that change of
designation.
Mr. Smalley took his degree as B.A. of St. John’s College,
Cambridge, in 1845, and was afterwards Professor of Mathematics
at King’s College, London, and Assistant Astronomer in the Cape
Town Observatory. He was son of the Rev. George Smalley,
Vicar of Debenham in the County of Suffolk, where I remembered
him as a boy.


His official position at Sydney, as Government Astronomer, is
now being worthily filled by his former Computer, H. C. Russell,
Esq., B.A. (Sydn.), whose name appears in the list of contributors
to this volume; and to another able member of our Society, also
mentioned in the Address, P. F. Adams, Esq., Surveyor-General
of N.S.W., has fallen the duty of continuing the Trigonometrical
Survey of the Colony commenced by Mr. Smalley. As a native
of the same county in England, to which belonged the late
Government Astronomer and the present Surveyor-General, this
commemoration of their consecutive services becomes to me a
somewhat more suitable duty than it might otherwise appear. I
have now spoken for myself in relation to the former. But as
concerns the Society to which we have belonged, it may be proper
to add, that, at the meeting in August, next after Mr. Smalley’s
death, it was my privilege to submit the following Resolution,
which was supported by Professor A. M. Thomson, D.S. (who had
been a Student under Professor Smalley at King’s College), and
unanimously adopted:—
“The Royal Society of New South Wales, at this its first
monthly meeting after the death of the late G. R. Smalley, Esq.
desires to express its sympathy with his family, and to record on
its minutes its regret at his loss, with a deep sense of the
valuable services which he rendered to the Society during his
connection with it.”
W. B. C.
St. Leonards’ 28th Feb., 1871.


