

Address to Working Men
Hy Varley.


Printed under the authority of His Majesty's Stationery Office
by the South Esses Recorders, Ltd, Ilford.
(621) Wt. P0376/3835 50 7/49 3.E.R. Ltd. Gp. 432


Address to Working Men, by Mr. Hy. Varley
Delivered at the Town Hall, Melbourne, 18th August.
The words I wish to speak from to-night are those of Paul to the
Jailor of whom we have just been reading. I think this man was a
bad sort of fellow, for, though he had received instructions to keep
these two prisoners safe, it seems to have been a piece of gratuitous
insult of his own to make their feet fast in the stocks. Yet it is
always true that the world displays great enmity against the
Christian, and I doubt not many of you Christians have a bad time
of it in your workshops. Men of the world have very strange ideas
of what a Christian is. They look upon him as a milksop, and
always represent him in a false way. If, for instance, they try
to represent a Christian on the stage, they bring forward a man over
six feet high, with a very drawling voice, and so on. Why, it is all
prejudice. One bad workman does not make it necessary that all
should be bad. If I send out and get a sovereign changed, and, on
counting the silver over, find a bad florin, you would think me mad
if I threw away the whole handful. Suppose I invite you all to
come to my house to dinner some Christmas time, and then go to one
of your cheesemongers and say, “Now, I want one of your very best
cheeses; there’s one that looks first-rate.” Instead of reaching it
down, he gets another and brings it, saying, “There, sir, that’s a
first-rate Stilton.” I reply, “But I don’t wan’t it; give me the one
I showed you first.” Well, he goes away, but comes again and puts
down on the counter another one, which he declares to be a beautiful
Cheshire. I tell him again I want the one I noticed first, and no
other. At last he brings it; but when I try it with his knife, lo and
behold, it is nothing but a piece of ivood! Now, what would you
think if I were to go straight out of the shop, saying there never
was such a thing as cheese at all? Yet that is just what a number
of you say when you meet with religious “dummies,” and say there
is nothing in Christianity. I tell you Paul must have had a principle
and power worth knowing, when he could stand all this buffeting
and trial, and then could say to Agrippa, “I would to God that not
only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost, and
altogether such as I am, except these bonds.” Oh, when a man.
becomes possessed of the Lord Jesus Christ, he has a power which is
greater than all others. Now, we see this man convicted of his sin;
and it is a wonderful testimony to the power of the Gospel of Christ
that Paul had love enough in his heart to speak to him, saying,
“Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.” The
Gospel is full of God’s love to the sinner. He cannot love your si)),
but He loves you; therefore we say, “Believe on Him, and though
thou art guilty thou shalt be saved.” Some of you may have a deep
sense of your sin, and feel that there are still the sins of the past not
yet blotted out. Oh, think of the power men have to commit sin,
yet can never undo it. I remember hearing Dr. Parker preaching in
his church, and by the side of the pulpit was the gas lamp.
Touching it suddenly with his finger, the waves of sound at once
were heard floating through the air all over the chapel, and he said,
most solemnly, “I can never bring back that sound, nor stay its out-
ward course; even thus sin in its terrible consequences never ceases.”
Just at that time a horrible murder had been committed in London by
a man who had taken away the life of a young woman previously se-
duced by a Liverpool merchant. Doubtless he thought, when he paid
her fare to London and sent her away, his sin would stop; but no, the
effects of it will be manifested throughout the ages of eternity.
w 1


we who hold this doctrine have any pleasure in the sufferings of the
wicked. If I were at the summit of this lofty building, do you think
God would suspend the law of gravitation if I threw myself down?
Suppose you saw me do this, and, stooping over my prostrate body, heard
me cursing God that He had let me fall. Why, the law of gravitation is
not more certain than the one that the sinner must be cast into hell.
God cannot set aside law, and I believe the perdition of the lost is as
much a necessity as the sun’s rising to-morrow morning. I pray
you, sirs, do not trifle with sin, for God has done all that infinite
love could .do to put it away for ever, by the sacrifice of Himself.
Look at the beautiful form of the Apostle’s words. All he asks you
do is, to believe. Did it ever occur to you that our salva-
by the death of Jesus Christ? He has died for you
wand it is on the ground that He suffered on the Cross of
CalvaryyfchVt I have peace. “Oh, yes,”’ you say, “if ever lam
J#>, for it is past. His death is accomplished, never to be
repeated, aim if you go out of this hall, believing His word, you
¥]y e passecilfrom death unto life. Oh, that God may write this
■fitprd m'yCuT hearts. Thousands in Melbourne only need to have
the light o|/trut,h to rejoice in Christ as much as I do. There are
thousands Jm this city just like a dark room, whose shutters have
been cht-Af for years. All that is wanted is, to take them down
and lAsjw the glorious light. If one of my friends here had saved
drowning in the bay last week, I would call him my saviour
sense, and I should, by saying so, refer your mind to
•ffast deliverance. I could not call any of you my saviour in that
sense, because you have never yet rescued me out of peril; but I
pall Jesus my Saviour because He has saved me—not is going to do
it. Oh, I beseech you give up this sin of unbelief—more terrible
than drunkenness or adulteiy; nay, it is worse than all others put
together, because it makes God a liar. That sin of unbelief—look
at the effect it would have in our homes. Why, as soon as a wife
begins to distrust her husband all the comfort and confidence of that
family circle are broken up. There is not an honest man here who, if
his master began making all sorts of inquiries and watching him sus-
piciously, would not leave his employ at once; and the boy who could
say, ‘ ‘ Mother, I cannot believe what you say, ” would break her loving
heai-t. Yet, when the blessed God comes and says, “You receive the
witness of men, and mine is greater,” men deliberately reject it.
Let us consider the Lord Jesus Christ, whom Paul here mentions.
First of all, J esus ; for He shall save His people from their sins. I
would remind you that He has died for us, and if to-night you believe
on Him, He removes your transgressions as far as the east is from the
west. If the law of Victoria had condemned you to death for the crime
of murder, and then consented to mine in your stead, don’t you see that
my death would be your salvation; or if I were a wealthy capitalist
and chose* to go and pay a debt of say £2OOO which one of you owed, it
would set you free. So Christ Jesus suffered for the sinner, and
died, the just for the unjust. A very interesting incident occurs to
my mind in illustration of this truth. At the time of the Franco-
Prussian war there was a German physician in London who had an
excellent practice, but was nevertheless summoned to Germany to
take up arms. As he could not do this except at a great sacrifice, he
bought, with a large sum of money, a substitute who took his place.
This man was killed at Sedan, and now, in the eye of the German
law, the physician himself is dead, and should another war happen,
he could not be called upon to serve. That is the philosophy of the
Cross of Clirjst. We can say, “I died then, though burdened with
sin. If I had on this platform the corpse of a murderer who bad


Lord Jesus Christ on the cross, was to bring your sinful corrupt life
to an end. He will subdue the activities of cursed lust; the proud
man shall lose his pride; the love of dress and novels will be over-
come, for the dead do not care for such things. This is the glory of
the Cross, and if there is a man here steeped in sin, who says,
“Years ago I resolved to be better, yet still my life is a disappoint-
ment,” I bring to him the Lord Jesus Christ. That great name tells
that He saves you, not only from the penalty of sin, but also from
its power. Notice again, our text, “Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ.'’ Christ has a different meaning to Jesus; Jesus is
an all-comprehensive word the name of the living God in
its most wonderful development. In the beginning, He is
known as God; then as the Almighty God; then as Jehovah;
and now, in the New Testament, He is called Jesus. In
this Book are 367 different titles of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the one word, Jesus, embraces them all. In the New Testament,
“Jesus” is specially identified with deliverance from sin by death ;
but when Christ is used, it is always in connection with the new life.
Now, if you have a murderer’s corpse here it would be no use to
revive the old life in him, for he would then be simply the old
criminal; but, if I were Divine, and could infuse into that body the
very life of the Son of God—pure, lovely, gentle, and peaceable—he
would at once be able to say with Paul, “ I live, yet not I but Christ
liveth in me.” There is not a man here who is not welcome to
receive Christ, and then at once he is a new creature, with the Lord
J esus living in him. A Christian is not a man trying to live a new
life ;heis a man who has received Christ Jesus. There is not a man,
woman, or child in this hall who may not go out saying, “My body
is the temple of the Lord Jesus, and lam in Him.” If there were
here a boy of fourteen years, and I were able to impart to him my
strength, my will, my knowledge, and my power, who do you think
would rule—he or I ? Why, 1 should of course, being by far the
stronger. Now, we who have believed in Christ have received him
into our hearts, and we know that through the power of the Holy
Ghost He is in us, mighty to will and to do of His good pleasure.
If the Son make you free ye shall be free indeed. Oh what a glorious
thing it is to be a believer. lam afraid some of you have been so pre-
judiced against the Gospel that you really don’t know anything about
it. You have never believed and never understood that Christ could
come and dwell in your body. You say, “I’ll do as I like,” you
have become independent, what the world calls self-made men. May
God save us from being self-made men. The Christian is the man
who says with Paul, “Lord, what wilt thou have me to do.” The
light that shone upon Paul then, which was brighter than the noon-
day sun, could only have been the Sun of Righteousness, who in
the fourth day of creation flung out that glorious sun into the
heavens, and bade him shine with such splendid power.
Perhaps some of you think Christ is beyond your conception.
Turn for a few moments to Isaiah xl., 11-12: “He shall gather the
lambs with His arm and carry them in His bosom. ” Oh, see the infinite
tenderness, and, as I might reverently say, the infinite littleness of
that description. But read the next verse: “Who hath measured the
waters in the hollow of His hand. ” Oh, let the mighty Atlantic and
Pacific come, they will lie in these; and add all the gigantic rivers,
and they will all come into the hand of the eternal God. Again,
“Who meted out Heaven with the span.” The space between the
outstretched finger and thumb is sufficient to measure the wide
heavens, and the palm of His hand sufficient for the mighty waters,
but He gathers the lambs with his arm. He can reveal Himself to
i - 11 1 - ' ' ' - 1 3


not had enough?” Listen to what He says, “Come unto me all ye
that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” Oh,
blessed word! Now notice He is the Lord Jesus Christ. He is
King over us who have come to Him. We search His word to see
what His mind is, for we love to walk according to His government
and will. Freedom from the law and power of sin, from the desires
of the flesh, and of the mindsuch is the blessed liberty in which we
stand. It is a question of highest moment, “Am I loyal to the Lord
Jesus? Ho I surrender my will to His?” For if any man pro-
fesses to be saved, and does not submit to His government, he is de-
ceived. “Many are called, but few chosen.” Thousands take up
lightly the name of Jesus Christ, and pursue their own way until, in
His presence, they hear His words, “Depart from me, I never knew
you. “Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?” is the daily, nay,
hourly prayer of every true-hearted believer; whilst He on His part
“ works in.us to will and to do of His good pleasure.” Never will
He will in you to commit sin. Never will He lead the working man
to scamp his work, waste his time, lie, cheat, or swear. Never will
He lead into the drinking house or dancing saloon. Never, under
cover of the darkness, lead thee to scenes of iniquity with “the
woman whose house is in the way to hell.” 0, yield yourselves unto
Him to-night. Come into His kingdom where His sceptre is
righteousness, and where His power shall keep thee continually.
Truly we can say, The Lord is my keeper. He shall preserve me from
all evil. He will preserve my soul.
Some time since there was in the Manchester Zoological Gardens
a working man. He had a small terrier dog with him. He had laid
a wager that his dog would kill so many rats in a given time; and
the little fellow had failed; so, in a fit of passion, he caught hold oi
the dog and thrust him into the lion’s den. A crowd assembled,
expecting to see the dog torn in pieces; however, unless modern
critics are to be believed, the lion is really a noble beast; and he
suffered the dog to lie at his feet, and very soon they were fast
friends. The keeper, attracted by the people, came to the cage;
and, upon inquiry, heard how the dog was thrust in. Amongsi
them was th’e owner of the terrier, and, relenting somewhat, he
ventured to say in real Lancashire dialect, “That’s my dawg. ]
wants my dawg.” “Is it?”, the keeper replied, “and so you wani
him, do you? Well,” he added, “you put him in there, mj
friend; and, if you want him, you must fetch him out. ” My illus-
tration is a quaint one ; but you can see its teaching. We, who
have given ourselves to Christ, have indeed come to lie down at tin
feet of Jesus, “The Lion of the tribe of Judah.” We, too, are fasl
firm friends; and we too may say to all adversaries, especially to th<
great adversary of our souls, “If the devil wants us, let him conn
and fetch us.” Whether it be from sin within or without, never let us
forget that “greater is He that is in us than he that is in the world.’
How blessed it is to hear our Lord saying, “Holy Father, keej
through Thine own name those whom Thou hast given Me. I praj
not that Thou shouldst take them out of the world; but that Thoi
wouldst keep them from the evil.” We believe and know that Jesus
has put us into the Father’s hand as a sacred deposit for safe keeping
He will not betray that trust. I rest there. Ido not keep myseli
He keeps me, and this is the grand song we sing.
Now unto Him that is able to keep us from falling, and present u
faultless before the presence of His glory with exceeding joy, unt
Him be praise, dominion, and power for ever and ever. Thus
indeed, are we brought back to our text,
‘ ‘ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and then shalt be saved. ” Amei
. . _ -a r r> j i m . . » r> • , -i ,7




