

F. WHITE, MACHINE PKIKTEK, WILLIAM STHEET.




ADDRESS
DELIVERED TO THE
Socittuof |lefe Hrat| ffilales
AT THE
ANNIVERSARY MEETING,
12th MAY, 1880,
THE REV. W. B. CLARKE, M.A., E.G.S.
SYDNEY:
p, WHITE, MACHINE PRINTER, WILLIAM STREET.




ADDRESS.
Q-entl/Emeit of the Eoyal Society,—According to annual
custom, and in compliance with the request with which I have
been again honoured by the Council, it devolves upon me to
address you at the commencement of a new session.
I would very much have preferred that one of our younger
and more able members had taken my place this evening ; but
I do not wish to be unmindful of the responsibilities of an
official position, nor of the use there may be in briefly noticing
the several topics on which I will now proceed to speak.
Since our last session closed, one of the objects mentioned
in my Inaugural Address in 1867 has been attained. I refer to
the remarks made by me respecting the erection of some lasting
testimonial to the memory of Captain Cook, the first, and till
recently, the only record of the kind having been the work of
the original Society from which this has sprung.
The hundredth anniversary of the landing of the great
navigator has been anticipated one year, and the work has been
commenced under the most favourable auspices and most
appropriately by H.E.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, who, a month
or two since, again visited these shores.
It is satisfactory for us to know, that though this Society was
not invited to any assistance in the ceremony, the Centenary will
not pass without the completion of a design which will embellish
the city and express the gratitude of the community.
Turning now to ourselves, I am glad to be able to congratulate
you upon what ought to be considered an improving state of
our affairs. The report which will be read to-night proves that
our members have recently increased, and the funds will, of


course, necessarily increase with them. And on looking to the
work done during the past year, we have no reason to think that
the spirit of the Society has suffered any loss of zeal. The
volume of Transactions for 1867 has been completed and dis-
tributed to the members (though, I believe, not offered for sale
to the public), and though deficient in a brief abstract of the
business of the Committee meetings, and of discussions on
papers read at the monthly meetings, which sometimes lead to
hitherto unrecorded communications of value and interest; that
volume will show that the Society has not been idle. Nor in the
list of papers brought before you in 1868 is there less evidence
of vitality. The following is the order in which they were
read: —
List of Papers read before the Eoyal Society of New South
■Wales. 1868.
1. June 3rd—“ Opening Address,” by G. E. Smalley, Esq.
2. July Ist—“ On the value of Earth Temperatures,” by G.
E. Smalley, Esq.
3. August 5th —“ On the Improvements effected in Modern
Museums in Europe and Australia,” by Gerard Krefft, Esq.
4. August 14th, adjourned meeting —“ On the Hospital
Eequiroments of Sydney,” by Alfred Eoberts, Esq.
5. September 2nd—“ On the Causes and Phenomena of
Earthquakes, especially in relation to shocks felt in Aus-
tralasia,” by the Eev. W. B. Clarke.
6. October 14th—“ On the Water Supply of Sydney,” by
Professor Smith.
7. November Tlth—“ On the Distribution of the Australian
Volutes,” by James Cos, Esq., M.D.
8. December 2nd—“ Eesults of Wheat Culture in New South
Wales during the last ten years,” by Christopher Eolleston
Esq. “Eemarks on the Dry Barth System of Conservancy,”
by Edward Bedford, Esq.
9 December 9th, adjourned meeting —“ On Pauperism of
New South Wales—past, present, and future,” by Alfred
Eoberts, Esq.


As the papers just enumerated have not yet been collectively
published, they cannot be subjected to any general investigation
now ; but I think it right to make a remark in connection with
one of them, that on Earthquakes. (No. 5.) Objections were
raised by one or two writers in the public journals to the view
taken of the earthquake sea wave, as propagated by the shock
off the coast of South America to California, the Sandwich
Islands, New Zealand, Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria,
South Australia, and as far as King Q-eorge’s Sound in Western
Australia. It was objected, that the sea-wave was not so propa-
gated as to travel at the rate of 400 miles per hour; and the
author of a pamphlet, published in Melbourne, considered the
view that such was the case to be a subject of ridicule. It may
be sufficient to remind such objectors, that the daily “ tidal
wave ” itself is known to travel at more than double the speed
assumed, rising to the eastward of us, and in succession visiting
the lands between us and the coasts of northern Europe ; and
that they have neglected to consider that the velocity of waves
of translation in deep waters, such as those of the Pacific, has
been already defined by accurate calculations, and may be used as
a means for ascertaining the depth of the ocean. The anonymous
writer of the pamphlet in question hopes never again, after his
attempt to refute it, to hear of such a proposition; but if he
inquire, he will find it is one which has already the acknowledged
sanction of the most eminent physicists in Europe, as well as
that of the Astronomer of the colony in which his objection was
made. He may be referred also to the last Quarterly Review.
So far as the earthquake sea-wave was regarded by myself it
was in strict accordance with facts, as was demonstrated, when
after a considerable time, the conjecture that the impulse (as
stated at our last September meeting) probably came from South
America was confirmed.
The learned mathematical treatise by the Chief Justice of
Queensland, although beyond the appreciation of many, does
honour to the pages of our new volume, emanating as it does
from the President of the Philosophical Society of Queensland
We may infer that the highest powers of reason are likely to be
discharged in duties which affect the whole community, when


their exercise is made the amusement of leisure to a man in
high judicial position.
Our associate Mr. Krefft, the able Curator of the Australian
Museum, has given a valuable catalogue of the Vertebrata of
Tasmania, including remains (partly fossilised) of Halmaturut
Benettii and Phalangista fuliginosa, found by Mr. Wintle, of
Hobart Town, in the caves of G-lenorchy. Though they do not
exhibit any very great geological antiquity, yet they are of deep
interest when we consider that our Australian caverns contain
the mingled relics of extinct and living genera. Whatever may
have been the processes by which caverns were filled during the
Pleistocene epoch, it is clear that similar processes must have
been in operation during some part of the present epoch ; and
although no human remains have been found in Australasia
mixed with bones of mammalia, yet the Glenorchy caves in
Tasmania when further explored; those discovered by Mr. Selwyn,
near Mount Macedon, in Victoria; the Wellington Caves in this
colony, recently re-explored with much success by Mr. Kreift, and
those at Tesseba, near the Macleay Eiver, visited by Mr. Rudder,
may be found hereafter to be of like age with that at Engihoul,
near Liege, in Belgium; or that of Bise, in Erance. The
osseous remains of extinct marsupials in the Darling Downs of
Queensland have often attached to them testacea (a case parallel
with that of B'se) of species still living in the creeks of that dis-
trict. It has long been known, that in the caves of this colony,
remains of Thylacinus of a species still living in Tasmania, but
here extinct, and also of a wombat (P. latifrons) now extinct in
this colony, but living in South Australia, are found with the
other relics.
The processes of extinction must, therefore, have been gradual,
locally operating, yet affecting distant areas, and not always con-
temporaneously. It would seem also, that the separation of the
Australian Continent from Tasmania must have taken place in
the lifetime of still existing species, for the Thylacinus in question
was once common to both areas, aud these, therefore, must hare
been connected.
A grant of money was some time ago made by our Legislature
for the exploration of caves. It would be advisable if it were


applied in the investigation of the Tesseba, the Coodradigbee, the
Fish River, and some Abercrombie caves.
Mr. Wintle has more recently distinguished himself by another
discovery. At the height of from three to four thousand feet, on
Mount Wellington, near Hobart Town, he found in the rocks of
considerable antiquity vegetable fossils named Endogeni-phy Hites
(i.e. an endogen plant) by Professor M'Coy; an occurrence of
some interest, inasmuch as endogenous plants have only hitherto
been found in formations not older than the upper Cretaceous )
whereas the particular beds on Mount Wellington may be
Palmozoic. Prom Mr. Wintle, I received the specimens now
produced.
The occurrence of endogenous plants in such deposits seems,
however, to be no greater anomaly than many other occurrences
in the distribution of fossil plants recently noticed, such as Aus-
tralian forms in the upper cretaceous beds of Aix-la-Chapelle.
Since I read the papers in our Transactions “ On the auriferous
and other metalliferous districts of Northern Queensland,” I
have learnt some interesting particulars from my two friends, Mr.
Daintree and Mr. Aplin, which I may be allowed to mention.
It is satisfactory to me to be able to state, that the places indi-
cated by me in those papers have been found to realise the
expectations I had formed ; and this is particularly the case with
M‘Kinlay’s range, and the country at the head of the Burdekin,
where gold is now being found. And from my friend Mr. Lands-
borough, the Resident on the Gulf of Carpentaria, I learn that
there is every prospect of the future prosperity of that distant
region.
There are, certain remarkable differences between the
gold-fields of Queensland and some of those in the Southern
colonies. Notwithstanding the surprising richness of much of
the quartz on the Mary River, it would appear that the lodes or
reefs do not occur generally as in Victoria, and parts of New
South Wales in slates of the Silurian epoch, but in diorite or amidst
granite. Moreover, the strike of the lodes is occasionally
rectangled to those just named, being then from east to west,
instead of from north to south,


There are exceptions, however, even in Victoria, for the reefs
of Wood’s Point, in the Australian Alps, run through diorite.
In the northern division of Queensland, as on the Cape River ;
some of the gold occurs as threads traversing the quartz, which
are difficult to he separated. In fact, nothing is more
variable than the occurrence of gold in matrix; as may be seen
by comparing it from those places just mentioned with one of
the gold rocks of the north-east of Hew Zealand, where Silica
and Gold almost equal in quantity occur in a mixed solid mass-
Mr. Hacket in his Report of 15th April last, states that at
Gympie, gold sometimes occurs there in threads and wires as
cementing quartz.
In my short paper on the Mary River, I stated that the gold
was in patches. This is confirmed by Mr, Aplin, who, in a letter
dated Bth April, states that the fields he had then visited, viz.,
Jimna, Gooroomjam, Talgai, and even Gympie, are “ very patchy
and limited in extent. Still they each possess characters differ-
ing from each other and from the most of them in Victoria, and
are certainly interesting in a scientific sense. It really seemg
to be the case here that slate and sandstone country, with quartz
veins, is not the auriferous portion of a gold-field. At Gympie
there are fine looking quartz reefs among the slates, but all the
auriferous ones are confined to that portion of the gold-field
which is occupied by Diorite.” ‘, ! The alluvial is on the boun-
dary of granite and slate rocks. At Gooroomjam there is is no
quartz even in the alluvial, and one quartz vein, two or three
inches wide, in diorite, but without gold. The gold here has evi-
dently been derived from the greenstone, as, with the exception
of numerous nodules of haematite, the whole of the drift material
consists Of greenstone fragments. At Talgai also the reefs are
east and west. Hot a meridional one out of the twelve that have
been opened. Most of them are in a hard cherty rock, without
cleavage or lamination, and the bedding very obscure. One or
two of them are in a hard siliceous sandstone, but they can
hardly be called reefs, and are really nothing more than an
assemblage of strings of quartz with sandstone partings.”
These results of Mr. Aplin’s researches are valuable to our-
selves. They indicate also the truth of a doctrine I have endea-


voured to enforce, that those who look for gold according to the
hypothesis that it can only he found under one set of conditions,
are not always likely to succeed. “ Quartz veins in slates ”is
the stereotyped notion of thousands, without even considering
that slates may be of various geological epochs, and California
was once quoted as justifying a search for gold in this colony,
though the age of the gold rocks in the former country is very
far distant from, and very much more recent than that of the
latter. Mr. Hacket has recently furnished me with a valuable
map of the reef at Gympie. These occur in dioritic schists, and
not in lines uninterruptedly, but in steps, as if occasioned by
faults. Some run E. and W., others S. and S.AV.
In Southern Queensland, and even so far north as the East
Rurdekin country, the surface is strewn with loose fossils of Car-
boniferous and Devonian age, and it is not unlikely the matrix of
some of the gold was in part originally of the same epochs. Such,
too, is the actual view of Mr. Daintree respecting certain areas
in Northern Queensland.
I have ascertained, by examination, that sulphide of lead
(Galena) exists in Queensland under circumstances that make
it an indication of gold: just as in parts of Victoria the
auriferous veins are often charged with Galena. On comparing the
examples, I see a great resemblance. In one place in the latter
colony, the gold is attached in crystalline particles to the lead
ore, but without combination with the contained silver. Re-
cently some very fine lead has been produced from a rich ore at
Woolgarlo, near Yass,the age of which cannot be older than the
base of our Carboniferous rocks, as in a direction not far off the
lead veins are charged with fossils of that age —a curious fact
analogous with the existence of casts of Silurian fossils in the
copper lodes of Bombala.
A report from Mr. Daintree has only reached my hands a
week ago. It is a most valuable document, and is accompanied
by an admirable map. From it I learn that the anomaly of the
Tulgai gold lodes running east and west is not exactly the case
in the Cape River district. Mr. Daintree considers them to have
there a general trend along the meridian ; but he distinctly shows
that they are accompanied by felspathic elvans, to which he attri-


butes a gold-producing agency; and in one instance the Eelstone
porphyry, or Elvanite, was undoubtedly found to be the matrix
itself, as its broken up fragments were very remunerative. The
gold there is like the black Canoona gold, covered by manganic
iron. In this spot there is no slate and no quartz ; the inference
is, therefore, sound. Moreover, where, in its extension, this
El vanite did traverse slate, there the deposits of gold were richest.
In other localities the gold is carried by quartz. Galena (as I
have already stated), copper, and iron pyrites, are metals asso-
ciated with the gold.
The strike of these Silurian slates is from S.E. to N.W.; their
average dip, S. 25 W. The quartz lodes, which sometimes appear
as continuations of the elvans, dip W. 13 S. Granite bounds the
field, and that also is traversed by quartz and elvans, but the
gold does not appear to be continued in such quartz. However
there is, probably, a connection of some kind.
The association of Porphyry with Granite in some of our New
South Wales gold-fields was reported by myself, and it is noto-
rious what an amount of gold was obtained at Araluen, where a
porphyry dyke or elvan cuts through the granite.
Mr. Daintree gives ground of hope for a wide extension of the
field when the vast area of the slates beyond shall have been
searched; but he regards, what to some may be a new feature
Elvanite as a chief indication. He compares the occurrence of
the diorites of Gympie, the serpentine dyke of (Janoona, and the
hornblendic and felspathic dykes of Mount Wyatt, as similarly
influencingthe production of gold,traversing as some of them,mem-
bers of the Silurian formation. He further confirms my previous
statements respecting the extension of the Secondary rocks of
the Maranoa and Barcoo, pointing out their spread from the
Thomson to which I had traced them, 300 miles further up to
M‘Kinlay’s range. This report is the more welcome to me, as I
had eight months ago received from the accomplished author a
numcrous series of photographs and a fine collection of the rocks
and minerals of the region described. I have also had from Mr.
Holmes, the discoverer, copper and gold from the Leichhardt and
from Messrs. Henry and Sheafie, the ores of the Cloncurry, men-
tioned in my paper of 1867, and Mr. Daintree states that these


ores occur in lodes which follow the meridional strike of the Cape
River lodes, and are, therefore parts of one same great mineral
region.
I have dwelt on these facts, not alone because I am personally
interested in them, but because they belong to the progress of
the year 1868, and cannot but be equally interesting to many
here present. lam well satisfied to mention that these papers,
which form a part of our Transactions, were sent to the Home
Government by Sir George Bowen, before his Excellency de-
parted for New Zealand, with a despatch, in which he gave me
full credit for my exertions in favour of Queensland ; the whole
being transferred for publication, by the Secretary for the Colo-
nies, to the Royal Geographical Society.
Whilst on the subject of gold, I cannot omit to interpolate
here the mention of a valuable paper (which I saw for the first
time yesterday), by one of our associates, Mr. E. B. Miller, of
the Sydney Mint, “On the application of chlorine gas to the
toughening and refining of gold,” which was published in the
Journal of the Chemical Society in December last.
It is well known how scientifically the author has conducted
his work in the establishment to which he belongs, and the pre-
vious records of our Society contain evidence of his endeavours
to overcome acknowledged difficulties in the separation of gold
from certain combined mineral matters. He has now come for-
ward with a cheap and effectual process for simplifying the re-
fining of the precious metal.
In this memoir which details his experiments in the process
now patented at home, and which appears to be very successful,
he does two other of our Associates, Mr. Hunt and Dr. Leibius,
the justice of recognising “ their valuable suggestions and assist-
ance ” in reducing the new plan of refining to a workable
method, and for “ their earnest encouragement under difficulties.”
It is pleasant to see such recognitions as these among fellow
labourers in the field of science, where with right-hearted men
there is the feeling of true brotherhood.
The Sydney Mint has, on a former occation, added another
name to the list of public benefactors in the person of Mr.
Jevons, whose more recent work on Coal was one of undoubted
merit, receiving as its due the attention of the Parliament and


Scientific bodies of Great Britain. Mr. Jevous was a member
also of this Society.
The papers on Scurvy, by our excellent Treasurer, and that on
Mortality, by one of our Secretaries, whose careful reasoning it is
pleasant to follow, will prove that our pursuits are not confined
to aids of wealth or questions of physical science, but that the
public health and social advancement find able advocates among
our members.
The last paper in the volume under notice, by my learned col-
league the Government Astronomer, is of a curious character-
There is in it a combination of concentrated knowledge and
minute observation. It touches the theory of vibrations, which
has a wide field and is destined hereafter, we may believe, to lead
to important practical discoveries, explaining many hidden phen-
omena. Mr. Smalley is conducting some very important mea-
surements connected with the Geodesic survey, not far from Lake
George ; and he has only recently returned from the settlement
of the true Boundary line between New South Wales and South
Australia, in which he has, in combination with our friend Mr.
Todd, of the Adelaide Observatory, and Mr. Ellery, of Victoria,
taken part in some intricate calculations. One fact, incidentally
mentioned in Mr. Todd’s report, struck me much when I read of
it. The observer determined that the velocity of the galvanic
communication between Sydney and Adelaide was at the rate of
11|- (11'250) miles per second. This is at the rate of 40,500
miles per hour. At this speed a communication would reach
London in twenty minutes, so that the words of Oberon can be
realised by our telegraphists :
“ We the globe can compass soon
Swifter than the -wandering moon.”
literally performing the act of Puck in the Midsummer’s Night’s
Dream: —
“ I’ll put
A girdle round the earth in forty minutes. ’
When 1 think of these abridgments of time, I feel that we
waste it often very wantonly, and, perhaps, with this acknowledg-
ment, I ought to waste no more of yours to-night; but though
such fairies as Mr. Cracknell, such brownies as Mr. Eussell, and
such sprites as Mr. Todd, can whisk a message across a hemis-


phere in less time than I have now beem speaking, I must crave
your indulgence a little longer for a few' other memoranda that I
have set down for noti ee.
Since we last met, a new industry has commenced in our own
colony, which I hope will realise tho expectations of those who
are engaged in maturing it.
In the year 1843, I obtained from the neighbourhood of the
Cudgegong Eiver a sample of native Mercury, which at the time
did not appear to have any great importance. It was at first
supposed, from the small amount, to have been derived from a
broken barometer; as a similar accident occurred to myself in 1851,
near the head of the Shoalhaven Eiver, and the loose globules
were found and reported by a subsequent visitor to the spot as
one of commercial promise. Moreover, in the paper on the ores
of Mercury, which I read before the Philosophical Society in the
year 1858,1 mentioned three other incidents, as on the Page River,
on the Murray, and in Tasmania, occurring without any subsequent
discoveries. But after ten years from the last date, we have full,
conviction that a rich ore of Mercury does exist in the neighbour-
hood of the first find of quicksilver; and those who saw the mag-
nificent lump of ore exhibited by the Colonial Treasurer
last week, at the Agricultural Society’s show —accompanied by
the quicksilver distilled from similar ore—must have felt that the
colony in its copper, lead, tin, bismuth, antimony, gold, and
mercury, promises to attain to the eminence of a rich mineral
country.
In 1858,1 was favoured by Colonel Gribbes with a statement
of the value of mercury imported into this colony for five years
up to the end of 1857, which was £3241. By a similar kindness
on the part of the present Collector, W. A. Duncan, Esq., I am
now enabled to mention, that from that year to the end of 1868,
the imports were valued at £20,519, of which there was an
export to the value of £10,515, or about half. The exports from
1853 to 1857, Ido not know. But the average import for five
years was £649, and, deducting the export, for the second period
from 1858 to 1868 inclusive, the average retained Import was
upwards of £9OO. So that whilst the consumption here was
increased half as much again, an export equal to that increase
has gone forth to the other colonies. As the present tendency


of gold production is in the direction of reef gold, there will, of
necessity, he an increased demand.
I am glad, therefore, to say, on the best authority, that since
the commencement of the search for Cinnabar, the Cudgegong
mine has sent to the company working it a considerable amount
of ore, and that from the ore different trials, by Mr. Watt, have
produced from 30 to 50 per cent, of quicksilver, though that
may be taken as excessive on the average of the lode.
As in other countries, so at Cudgegong, the geological age of
the formation appears to be Silurian in the neighbourhood of
overlying Carboniferous deposits. I may refer inquirers for the
evidence as to the age of the quicksilver rocks of Spain to
the paper read by me, already named.
There is one other product of which I would wish to say a
word or two. The display of mineral oils from the cannel of
Mount York and the coal shales of Mount Kembla, made at the
Exhibition last week, was sufficiently encouraging to recompense
any public disappointment at present experienced in other
localities. So far, however, from discouragement arising from
the fact that the peculiar condition of the coal seams is limited,
in every case, to a comparatively small area, caused by the con-
centration of the volatile ingredients in certain spots, whilst the
rest of the seam retains its condition of ordinary coal (for such
is the case near Mount York and at Anvil Creek, the one in the
upper and the other in the lower coal measures ;) this very circum-
stance shows that no coal seam is excluded from the possibility
of exhibiting the phenomena in question.
In a paper of mine, read before the Geological Society in 1866,
it was stated that the cannel of Stoney Creek (which for a time was
submitted to distillation on the North Shore) belonged to seams
that, by an anticlinal at Harpur’s Hill, descended to the level of
Anvil Creek, where I saw the coal in 1842, in connection with the
marine fossils ; the presumption, therefore, was that oil-bearing
coal would occur there. This was realised by some trials made
by Mr. Keene, the Inspector of Coal Mines, in 1868, and in his
valuable collection from the coal measures, at last week s Exhi-
bition might be seen samples of all the varieties of coal, from the
ordinary mineral to the peculiar woodlike crystalline cannel, which
recalls to the mind the product of Petrolia.


My section from Stony Creek to Anvil Creek was published
in the 6th volume of the “Transactions of the Eoyal Society of
Victoria.
Since then I have sliced and set for examination under the
microscope portions of all the oil-bearing cannels from near
Hartley, Kembla, Mount Victoria, Cox’s River, the Grose, Stony
Creek, Anvil Creek, Colley Creek, and from a spot near Circular
Head, on the north-west coast of Tasmania ; and in them all I
recognise a common feature —the existence of yellow resinous-
looking translucent spots, which induced me in 1861 to mention
resin, in a notice of the subject printed in the New South Wales
Catalogue of the International Exhibition of 1862.
As it is now determined that where the largest specimens of
coal plants of Europe occur the seams are thickest, so the infer-
ence must be, that where certain trees of the Australian coal
period occurred in our seams, there would probably be left some
evidence of their existence. Such I assume to bo the case, and
from it I deduce the further inference that all our coal seams
whether upper or lower are of one continuous epoch ; and, if so,
the oil-bearing products of the coal pabulum may be looked for
in any part of the coal measures though in none to any consider-
able extent.
I believe that the known extent of the mineral, near
Hartley, does not exceed an area of 80,000 yards, but that is a
considerable area. The Colley Creek cannel being full of sand
and quartz grit, and having the external surface of a dried mud )
and occurring with muddy deposits, seems to point out that it
must have been once in a swampy condition, capable of receiving
successive layers of grit washed into it from time to time, whilst
the swamp was under water.
Mr. Selwyn, of Victoria, in his late visit to this colony, came
to a similar conclusion respecting the character of our oil-produ-
cing beds as merely transmuted portions of ordinary coal-seams ;
and the fact that the distinguishing fossils of the latter occur
also in the woody cannel justifies the opinion, even if the passage
were not as readily traceable as it is.
Having mentioned Mr. Selwyn, I cannot refrain from expres-
sing my regret that, after an expenditure of £IOO,OOO on the


Geological survey lie so admirably conducted, and before Ms
work was completed, the Government of Victoria should have
been compelled to break up the survey, and cause the withdrawal
of its experienced Director. But lam glad he is on his way to
succeed Sir W. Logan, who is retiring from the Survey of*
Canada.
It may be satisfactory to our geological friends to know that
before he left these shores he had the opportunity of visiting New-
castle, Mount Victoria, and several spots nearer Sydney, and con-
vinced himself that in the tough fight I have had on this question I
had sustained my views on correct grounds, and had come to the
only safe conclusion respecting the age of our coal deposits.
As the Tasmanian survey is also broken up, Queensland is the
only colony that maintains one in Australia. The general
public will have, therefore, to depend as formerly on the unpaid
labours of voluntary observers. Mr. Daintree’s report ought to
be a sufficient encouragement to Queensland not to follow the
Victorian example. If no other advantage arises from support
by a Government, it, at any rate, enables work to be done (if
even not remunerated properly) which it falls hard on even a
zealous labourer to provide for out of insufficient private
resources.
Work such as that of the Victorian Survey when done once is
done for ever, and is cheap enough at any cost to the occupiers
of a new territory.
I do not like to close these remarks without referring briefly
to two of the societies which are working side by side with our-
selves. The Entomological Society has not published any Trans-
actions since 1866. Bat its able President, W. A. Scott, Esq.,
has during the interval given us the history of a Moth which has
made itself of some influence for evil during the last few years.
Some of its annoyances were described by myself in an account
I gave of the numbers which infested the North Shore in 1867,
where it was conspicuous also in 1851 and 1855. It is known by
Mr. Scott’s description as Agrotis vastator ; but he has since in-
formed me that its specific name should be changed.
In 1851 1 was camped on the snow under Mount Kosciusco, and
from a horde that came down from the granite peaks into our scanty


fire, I preserved a few, one of which, wlixen compared with those
that visited the North Shore, appeared tto he the same. Some
witless critic, who took exception to any remark that I had
“ counted more than 80,000,” when I ought perhaps to have said
“ calculated ,” must have been afterward* consoled by Mr. Scott’s
statement, that in one paddock on the Hunter, some years since,
they were so numerous that he “ calculated ” there were at least
21,780,000. Mr. Scott very properly pioints out the appalling
destruction these creatures are calculated to produce, when each
pair has a progeny of 80,000.
My chief object in now introducing this subject, is to state
that last year, and even during this, several of these moths have
been seen by me in a state of activity, and numbers have been
destroyed in the building before infested by them ; and therefore!
the probability is, that we shall have, in addition to the floods
and drought, and other varieties of trials of the patience of
cultivators of fields and gardens, to look forward to a future visita-
tion from Agratis vastator. A further reason for this notice is, that
the Agrotis in question was assumed by me to be identical with the
Bugong moth first brought into notice by Dr. Bennett, and on
which the aboriginals used to feast luxuriantly. But it is now
stated that the Agrotis vastator is not the Bugong moth, which is
probably Oxycanus fuscomaculatus, belonging to the family
Hepialidce, of the tribe Bombysites.
Having so recently had the vegetable products of the colony
brought conspicuously into consideration by the Annual meeting
of the Horticultural, and the magnificent Exhibition of the Agri-
cultural Society, it may not be out of place to remind those con-
cerned that there is a vastator preparing, in due time, to send
forth it legions to destroy fruit blossoms and devour the grass of
the field.
Erom modern Agriculture to Palseophytology is an easy traverse
through the agency of Botany. One fact seems of sufficient
importance to detain us a moment.
The question of the age of the earliest deposits bearing evidence
of ancient life is one that has occupied not only the Naturalist
but the Theologian with many wild conjectures. After Hugh
Miller had drawn up his parallel of epochs and days in one of


his last works, he must have been surprised to find the Azoic
strata revealing a life-form in beds much lower than the most
ancient strata he had argued from as the oldest. The Eozoon
Canadense was shortly after discovered in the Laurentian rocks
of Canada, far below the lowest Silurian. Trilobites have also
been lately found in the Longmynd or bottom rocks of England
and Wales, 1560 feet lower than any previously found fossils.
And now, to prove the unity of design in the works of the
Creator, we hear of vegetable remains discovered in the Cambrian
rocks of Sweden and South Wales, no previous land plant
having been found in beds older than Upper Silurian. One
of these plants which is taken to represent the whole, is
called Eophyton Linnceaum. This plant is monocotyledonous
and allied to rushes; to the same chass, in fact, as that before
named as having been found by Mr. "Wintle.
I have been anxious to allude to amothcr branch of scientific
inquiry, in order to invite attention tto the discoveries made in
1868 respecting the sun, meteors, andl comets.
Our time is so limited and I have allready trespassed so much
upon it, that I must omit most of whait I had to say on one of
these topics and refer you, gentlemen, to the last number of the
Quarterly Journal of Science for a mosst compact account by Mr.
Coombes of die flame like protuberancces seen on the edge of the
sun’s disc during total eclipses. Thesro were in the long totality
of the great eclipse of 1868, carefully photographed and examined
by the spectroscope, which proved title existence of Hydrogen,
Sodium and Magnesium in the Sun. Thiore is also therein a further
account of the way in which the protuberances, which are shown
to be connected with the spots on the siun, may be viewed at any
time even when there is no eclipse.
The application of photography to the heavenly bodies has
furnished physicists with many convenient means of reference.
Those of the sun I have not seen, hint I possess some clever
views of the moon ; and I have now the’ pleasure of showing you
what is equally interesting, a Photograjph of a Thunderstorm at
Eockhampton last January, done by thte glare of the lightning,
the flashes of which are depicted by itstelf, the plate having been
exposed for the space of a minute.


A question, has arisen about the distance of thie sun from the
earth; and it has been found that the hitherto aissumed measure-
ment is incorrect. Professor Airej admits that that distance is
too great by more than 3,000,000 miles ; and Sir J. Herschel
that the error is equal to lin 31. At a meeting last year of the
Royal Geographical Society, the subject was diiscussed, and the
speakers there and then agreed with the that
the proper way is to wait for the next Transits iof Venus, which
will be in 1874 and 1882, the present distance Ihaving been calcu-
lated from the transits of the same planet in 1761 and 1769.
Airey has distinctly shown the uselessness of tall other methods.
An ingenious writer in this city (not I believe a member of our
society) having made several attempts to biring before you a
method proposed by him to measure this distamce, those members
of the Council who are most familliar with such
subjects, and to whom it was referred, receommended that the
papers should not be received, simply becausee the method pro-
posed was impassible, though if possible, it wa»s good. They did
not, therefore, see any object iu discussing as a strict means of
measurement that which could not be possilbly ascertained. I
deem it my duty to say this, because I am quiite sure the Council
have never acted except for the general beneffit, and the Society
which has at least three good astronomers might be made respon-
sible in the opinions of astronomers abroad, for giving the sanc-
tion of their consideration to that which the most eminent among
them had already proclaimed useless and impossible. For myself, I can
say, that I should be sorry that any discourtesy should be exhib-
ited by any of us; but having been appealed to as a sort of referee
on the question, I can only call attention to the third Bye-law of
our Society which leaves the expediency of receiving any paper
offered for reading and discussion, altogethesr in the hands of the
Council.
Attention has been called to the remarkable displays of falling
stars, which are now ascertained to be annual and periodical.
These were first noticed by Humboldt in Cumana, in 1799, and
since in Europe as well as in America at various times from the
year 1832.
In 1833 and up to 1835 I was engaged in correlating terrertrial
and meteorological phenomena, and gave a published opinion,


with some perseverance, that these falling stars were merely elec-
trical meteors. I have since found that I was mistaken; but Mr.
Espy, in America, and other writers besides myself, dissented also
from the view taken of them by Dr. Olmsted. So much evidence
has been since collected, that without denying that there may be
meteors due to electrical action, it is maintained with every
ground of reason, that the displays in question are occasioned by
the earth in her orbit crossing or coming near a vast elliptical
hoop or band of solid bodies revolving round the sun, and about
90,000 miles broad, which is subject to undulations that occasion-
ally throw them out of their usual course, so that the earth en-
counters them sometimes unexpectedly. As the calculated
velocity of such bodies is from 18 to 36 miles per second, and as
the heat generated by friction with the earth’s atmosphere at
such velocities would, according to Tyndall, cause combustion
and volatilization in some instances, we may account for the
brightness of the meteors and the infrequent discharge of Aerolites,
though these must be far more numerous than is generally
known.
The Zodiacal light is also held to be of similar constitution,
and one of Professor Tyndall’s conjectures is, that these meteoric
bodies constantly falling into the sun, and battering him with
indescribable force, are sources of that heat which requires to be
continually renewed.
The 13th November, 2nd January, 20th April, and 10th August,
are days when these displays are most common ; but it has been
determined that there are fifty occurences annually, each with
its proper Eadiant, or point in the heavens, from which they
appear to proceed. Such a display has not been seen, I believe,
in A ustralia ; at least, though I have seen many grand meteors
here (which might be connected with such a shower), I have never
witnessed any such display as I saw in 1834. The Cape of
Good Hope is in nearly the same parallel as Sydney, and in 1832
the shower was visible at the Cape Observatory a quarter of an
hour before it reached Great Britain, the earth in two hours
having passed through a stream of these meteors 30,000 miles in
thickness.
It is much to be desired that the planetary influences would
produce such an undulation as would bring the meteoric stream
over this colony.


Connected with these meteors is thee discovery that several
comets revolving in elliptic orbits coinmident with the meteoric
orbits throughout an entire revolution, lhave appeared about the
time of the meteoric showers ; and the spectroscope, turned upon
the light of the comets and that of the meteors, proved them to be
identical, and, therefore, to indicate similar composition. Hence
it is begun to be believed that there iss an intimate relationship
between these bodies. But if comets admit through their nuclei
the light of a star of the eleventh magnitude, there cannot be
very close relationship with heavy miineral masses. Yet a con-
nection seems likely to be established, between these meteors and
showers of meteoric stones. On the 126th April, 1803, a meteor
burst over L’Aigle, in Normandy, aned two thousand stones fell
on the trees and houses. In May, 1812, 200 fell on an oval area
of twenty-four square miles, between: Vienna and Prague ; and on
14th May, 1864, only five years sincte, an area of ninety square
miles in France was visited in the sanne manner. In 1866, three
years ago, there fell in Hungary on fan area of forty square miles
a mass weighing 6 cwt,, with nearly a thousand smaller stones.
On last new year’s day, there fell ini Upland, in Sweden, a shower
of stones, still hot. Some fell on icoe, which they penetrated.
Now, at Dandenong, rather mor® than twenty miles from Mel-
bourne, there lately existed an emormous mass of meteoric iron,
which is generally considered to have fallen in a similar manner.
And I have recently often been inclined to attribute the existence
of the obsidian buttons (of which I gave an account to the Geological
Society of London: Q, J. xi. 403, xiii. 188 in 1855 and 1857,)
which occur on the surface in various parts of this colony, in
Tasmania, and on the plains of Victoria (where Sir T. Mitchell
found one, which wag described by Darwin, Volcanic Islands, p.
39) to a similar origin; for though they resemble some of the
volcanic bombs of the Island of Ascension, yet they often occur
here hundreds of miles away from known igneous rocks, on low
muddy plains, and in alluvial and gold deposits, the only really
volcanic hills being extinct craters in Victoria and South Australia
where I have not heard that they have been found at all.
Not only might I now refer these to a meteoric origin, but
also the bits of Native Iron which I have found in almost every
gold washing not only in this colony, but in those I visited in


Victoria, and which look very much like the ends of mining picks
but cannot be such, first from their composition, and secondly
from the fact that they have been found in wash dirt freshly dug
up from spots where no mining tool was ever before used. I
have a large specimen of this metal from Weary Creek, near
Carabobila, found there long before gold began to be
worked.
As I have elsewhere stated, on good authority, all the mineral
matters known to have fallen from the sky are common to earthly
products, and of no other than minerals and metals known to be
also terrestrial are they composed. In this way nickel, iron tin,
copper, lead, chloride of soda, potash, ammonia, sulphur, gypsum,
lime, graphite, chrysolite, feldspar, phosphate of lime, magnetic
pyrites, olivine, and other substances common to earthly volcanos,
and in one instance a peaty carbonaceous substance, have occurr-
ed in stones known to have fallen, and the records of which are
in existence.
Now if, as before mentioned, hydrogen, sodium, and magnesium
(and, according to Kirchof, iron, calcium, chromium, &c.) exist
in the sun, so may the minerals enumerated exist in other
parts of the solar system and be carried with the meteors through
space, to be dropped on the surface of the earth when their
orbits are near enough to each other. There is but one other
conclusion to which we can come, viz., that if these bodies that
have so fallen do not come from beyond the earth’s orbit, they
must come from the earth itself, having been first volatilised here ;
and this is the argument I used many years ago respecting the
sulphate of lime, like that of Wielicska, which fell in Poland
during a thunderstorm near Widdin in 1828.
Supposing that the former supposition is correct, then we
should arrive at the conclusion that there are other bodies in the
solar system constructed of similar materials to those of the earth,
a conclusion quite in agreement with the statement that the same
Divine Author “created the heavens and the earth,” which (as
the record adds parenthetically to embrace other systems, “He
made the stars also”) must be taken to mean the solar system, in
which the same law of motion and the same principle of gravita-
tion regulate all its parts.


Looking, too, at the present state of kmowledge of the super-
ficies of the planet Mars, whose boundaries of seas and land, straits
and islands, and polar snows, have been < charted, the hypothesis
wears an air of truth, that the other jplanets are of similar
structure with that of the earth.
I will not go further—for I should be; brought within the reach
of the severe logic of my friend the latte Astronomer, now our
present able Secretary, who, in his papper “On the Plurality of
Worlds,” read to us in 1858, warned uss against wandering into
paths where we may go astray; but I tnmst there is no scientific
heresy in expressing my own belief (that other worlds in our
system may be habitable, and, for aujght any one can decide
against me, may be parts of the many imansions in our Father’s
House above.
Gentlemen in concluding this discomrse, I can only reiterate
the expression with which I began, tlhat I undertook it simply
from my respect for the Society in whcose ranks I have been happy
to be accepted as a humble worker. But advancing years and
frequent failures of health warn me tlhat there is a night coming
when no man can work, and it may Ibe wiser to leave to those
whose energies are elastic and strong; —exertions for which nature
affords only diminishing support, andl the only impulse to which
is in the hope (perhaps a vain one) that we are in the path of
duty.
It is this feeling which has led me to introduce reference to
myself in the course of my address, as I wished to set right some
things for which another so good an opportunity might not
perhaps, occur. In looking round for a subject to discuss, I was
perplexed by the multitude that offered, and I have been com-
pelled to neglect the consideration of one only, for the sake of
rendering what I have had to say less irksome, and of noticing
the points which connect the general subject with ourselves.
The topics on which 1 have ventured to speak are all based on
observations, and on reasonings from them up to principles. And
I would desire to close my remarks with two quotations, which I
commend to your consideration —the first from a paper which I
could not further quote to-night, and by an author who thus
sums up his review of the progress made in the sciences during


the year 1868. “We are advancing steadily towards a realisa-
tion of the fact, that mind and mind only, is the ultimate source
of power. Every practical application of science is a sermon on
this text Mind is the master of matter. We live under
the reign of law, hut every fact discovered, every speculation
of any value uttered, carries forward thenever-to-he controverted
truth that law cannot he without a lawgiver —consequently that
all the laws which the mind of man is steadily evoking from the
arcana of space and time, are the material manifestations of the
energies of one Almighty mind.” (Scientific Year, E. H.—in Q.
J. S., No 21, January, 1869.)
To this may he added the concluding words of the Duke of
Argyll’s remarkable book on the “Reign of Law.” “The laws of
nature were not appointed by the Great Lawgiver to baffie His
creatures in the sphere of conduct, still less to confound them in
the region of belief. *******
On the whole they stand in harmonious relations with the
human spirit. They come visibly from one pervading mind, and
express the authority of one enduring kingdom. As regards the
moral ends they serve, this too can be clearly seen, that the pur-
pose of all natural laws is best fulfilled when they are made, as
they can be made, the instruments of intelligent will, and the
servants of enlightened conscience.” —(6th Edn., p. 390-1.)


