

ARTHUR PHILLIP, RJNL
Founder and First Governor
Australia
ADDRESS
given at
THIRD ANNUAL
SERVICE
of
THANKSGIVING
on October I Ith,
1935


The complete memorial in position on the front of
St. Mildred’s Church, Bread Street, City of London


ADDRESS
given on the
occasion of
Third Annual Service
Thanksgiving
In Memory of
Admiral
ARTHUR PHILLIP, R.N.
Founder and
First Governor
of Australia




Admiral Arthur Phillip Memorial
PATRON.
H.R.H. The Duke of Kent.
PRESIDENT.
Colonel and Alderman The Rt. Hon. Viscount Wakefield
of Hythe.
VICE-PRESIDENTS.
The Rt. Hon. The Lord Mayor of London.
The Rt. Rev. The Lord Bishop of London, P.C., K.C.V.0., D.D.
The Primate of Australia.
The Prime Minister of Australia.
The Rt. Hon. The Secretary of State for the Dominions.
His Excellency The Governor-General of Australia.
The High Commissioner for Australia.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Denman, P.C., G.C.M.G., K.C.V.O.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Forster of Lepe, P.C., G.C.M.G., D.L.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Stonehaven, P.C., G.C.M.G., D.S.O.
Admiral Sir Dudley De Chair, K.C.8., K.C.M.G.
Sir Archibald Weigall, K.C.M.G.
The Chief Justice of Australia.
The Chairman of the Royal Empire Society.
The Master of the Cordwainers’ Company.
The Master of the Curriers’ Company.
The President of the Australasian Pioneers’ Club.
The President of the London Australian Society.
COMMITTEE,
Colonel and Alderman The Rt. Hon. Viscount Wakefield of
Hythe, Chairman.
Rev. J. Richardson-Eyre, M.A., Rector.
Mr. T. G. Devas. j
Mr. W. L. Taylor. > Churchwardens.
Mr. Herbert E. Hill, C.C. I
Mr. Deputy J. H. White, C.C. Mr. A. Mackenzie Hay, C.C.
Mr. J. Northcott, C.C.
Mr. E. F. Donne, C.C.
Mr. F. B. Coates, C.C.
Mr. H. Meldrum, C.C.
Mr. S. Parkes, C.C.
The Official Secretary of Australia House,
The Master of the Cordwainers’ Company.
The Master of the Curriers’ Company.
Mr. Hanbury Davies.
Mr. D. Hope Johnston, M.A., F.R.Hist.S.
Mrs. D. Hope Johnston.
SECRETARIES,
Mr. F. W. Mander, M.A., Ward and Vestry Clerk, 7, Cannon
Street, E.C.4.
The Official Secretary, Australia House, Strand, W.C.2.
The Secretary, The Royal Empire Society Northumberland
Avenue, W.C.2.


AN ADDRESS
by the
Rev. JOHN W. WARD
(Rector of Newdigate, Surrey, and formerly Archdeacon of Monaro and
Vice-Dean of St. Saviours Cathedral, Goulburn, New South Wales.)
HIS address was delivered at St. Mildred's Church, Bread
.gj.BII Street, City of London, on Friday, nth October, 1935, on
the occasion of the Third Annual Service of Thanksgiving
in memory of Admiral Arthur Phillip, who was born in the Ward
of Bread Street on this day in the year 1738. The Rev. John
Richardson-Eyre, Rector of St. Mildred’s, officiated, and was
assisted by the Rev. W. R. Hodges, the Rev. R. W. Hudgell, and
the Rev. S. Coleman. The Service was attended by the Alderman
of the Ward, Viscount Wakefield of Hythe (who read the lesson),
Mr. Deputy J. H. White and the representatives of the Ward on
the Court of Common Council, together with the Master of the
Curriers' Company (Mr. H. Wharton-Wells), the Acting Master of
the Cordwainers' Company (Mr, F. T. Miller), and the Clerk of
the Cordwainers' Company (Mr. F. W. Mander).
Lord Stonehaven (a past Governor-General and Commander -
in-Chief of the Commonwealth of Australia), Paymaster-Com-
mander White (representing the High Commissioner for Australia),
Sir Hal Colebatch (Agent-General for Western Australia),
Mr. J. W. Ferguson (representing New South Wales), and Mr.
and Mrs. Douglas Hope Johnston were also present.
At the close of the Service the congregation sang u Advance
Australia," and the Service concluded with the National Anthem.
Page Six


At the reception at Cordwainers' Hall which followed,
Mr. Deputy White read the following letter from Sir Kelso King,
President of the Australasian Pioneers' Club (of which
Lord Wakefield is an Honorary Life Member): —
Dear Viscount Wakefield,
At the last meeting of the Committee, reference was
again made to the very appropriate address you
delivered on nth October last on the occasion of the
Second Annual Service of Thanksgiving in memory
of Admiral Arthur Phillip. I understand that it is
intended that the ceremony will be repeated each year
about the same date, in which case the members of the
Committee desire to express their grateful appreciation,
and wish to join in spirit in honouring the immortal
memory of the great founder and first Governor of
Australia, to whom the Empire owes the possession
of the interests held in the Southern Seas.
With kind regards,
Yours faithfully,
K. KING, President.
28 th August, 1935.
Page Seven


THE ADDRESS
SHOULD like to preface what I have to say by
voicing, if you will allow me, on your behalf as well
as my own, the sense of obligation of which we are
conscious to Mr* Douglas Hope Johnston for his
persevering labours in initiating this annual commemoration
of the man we all wish to honour.
Nothing but an intense patriotism and a keen sense of justice
could have inspired such a movement. We praise it because it
strikes such a responsive chord in our hearts.
Arthur Phillip was reared from infancy in the home of a teacher
of languages. It was the haunt of sailors, soldiers, and traders, all
full of stories of the wars with Spain and France, the conquests in
the East and the West Indies, and the prospects of trade with
India and America.
The child from his cradle must have been fed with stories of a
world ever growing wider and more wonderful —his imagination,
no doubt, already stirred and developed by a mother whose first
husband had died in a former Spanish war.
All his childhood years were filled first with a war with Spain
and then a war with France, with a threatened invasion of England
in the interests of the Stuart Pretender. This civil war and the
real danger of invasion must have been felt by every patriotic
family in London, and by none more than the pro-Georgian family
of Phillip. Then peace came. Destined as he was for the sea,
Phillip, at the age of 13, went into training for the merchant service.
Page Eight


But peace lasted only a short time, and the outbreak of the
44 Seven Years War '' found him, at the age of 17, serving in the
Navy. At its conclusion, he had gained a varied experience
of the greatest practical value.
Even as a young boy, Phillip could scarcely have failed to catch
the influence of the great political and commercial City of London,
with its pulsating life of wide interests and Imperial aspirations.
England was already getting into its full stride of development
in trade and industry, and London was its most vigorous centre.
As a young man, his political sympathies were obviously touched
by London's idol, William Pitt. No man in the political world in
London was more wholeheartedly adored. Phillip chose rather
to serve in the Portuguese Navy in her struggle with Spain than
embroil himself in his country's ill-judged quarrel with the
American colonists. He immediately returned to his national
allegiance, however, when France declared war on England in
1778.
Other influences in his early life contributed to the formation
of his character. London was the centre of the moral and
religious revival in England. Methodism, with its evangelical and
missionary influence upon the Church of England, had changed
its centre from Oxford to London. The great middle-class com-
mercial heart of London had retained its Puritan soul throughout
the days of religious indifference and moral laxity.
Here in London, spiritual revival and religious life had a better
chance than elsewhere, and the homes of the more thoughtful
citizens welcomed the movement.
It is not difficult to imagine the pious parents of Arthur Phillip
in the family pew of this or some adjacent sanctuary drinking in the
fresh atmosphere of a fervid Christian faith.
Page Nine


How easy it is to picture Phillip in such a church as this, finding,
with all the susceptibility of a child's mind, just that help which
clung to him all through his life. This explains, as nothing else
does, his rigid morality, and his simple religion. It also throws
light on his loyalty to, and friendship for, Richard Johnson, who
could hardly have been appointed as the only Church of England
clergyman to go with Phillip to Australia without the Governor's
approval. The fact that Johnson was nick-named u the Metho-
dist," points to Phillip's religious sympathies.
Here, then, we have a typical Englishman of average head, hand,
and heart —neither sage nor fool; neither wealthy nor poor ;
neither scholar nor dunce ; neither exceptionally brilliant nor
peculiarly lacking ; neither to be crowned with garlands nor pelted
with stones ! But just one of the many thousands that this great
City has sent out into the world to be makers of our Empire. And
right well did Phillip contribute to this !
The strength of modern England has been created not by the
genius of exceptional men, but by the loyalty and hard work of
average citizens —by men whose arch of vision has been higher
than their immediate job.
The greatness of England is due not to dreamers, whose feet
never touched the soil of practical possibilities, or to men whose
arch of vision has been confined to the limits of their own interests,
and the gaining of their own ends ; but to average men like our-
selves, who have sense enough to do as well as we can our immediate
job, and yet have an arch of vision high enough to see beyond our
own interests, and seek the welfare of others and the good of our
country.
Phillip's immediate job was the founding of a penal settlement;
but the height of his vision was such that he was able to see the
possibilities of a great future behind and beyond so small a purpose.
Page Ten


He saw the possibility of England finding compensation for the
loss of her American possessions. He never wavered in his
opinion of the future greatness of the country he was so modestly
colonising.
He knew that no colony could be founded upon a country's
wastage and social outcasts, and he was constantly urging upon the
Government of the day the free settlement of free men.
He certainly found discarded gems amongst the rubbish, and,
like a sensible man, reset them in their proper place amongst free
men, where their value was soon established.
Phillip's solid strength of character, so typical of the best
average Englishman, and his simple determination to see things
through ; his courage in the face of difficulties ; and his initiative
and hard work secured to the Empire its place in the Antipodes.
Five hundred years ago the Mediterranean was the centre of
political and commercial activity. Then, when the Saracens
blocked the way to the east, Columbus sought a way to the west,
and de Gama sought it to the south. The former incidentally
discovered a new Continent, and the Atlantic became the great
gangway of the world.
And, now that the centre of the world interest is again changing,
and the Pacific is fast becoming the new centre, Phillip's work, as
the founder in the Southern Seas of the most British of all British
possessions, is seen in its true importance.
Australasia, a term which includes the sister Dominion of New
Zealand, represents British civilisation, British influence, and
British friendship amongst the peoples of the East. Suspended
like a huge pendant on a chain of bejewelled islands round the neck
Page Eleven


of Asia, Australasia —Southern Asia —is associated, for good or ill,
with the future of the peoples of the East. It holds the only white
race, and is the only Christian country in that half of the world,
which contains by far the larger half of the population of the globe.
Few pioneers have had a humbler immediate job. It was so
little thought of that most chroniclers of that day leave it un-
mentioned. But fewer pioneers have reaped for England a richer
harvest.
No one, save Clive, has added more wealth to the Empire's
exchequer. No one, save Phillip, has added a Dominion to the
Empire without bloodshed.
It has its humorous side when we recall the fact that the
expedition left England and forgot its ammunition. The two
warships and the nine transports had to draw on Phillip's
friendship with the Portuguese at Rio de Janeiro to secure 10,000
cartridges for its 200 soldiers.
The essential value of the average man is brought out in the life
of this simple sailor. Phillip was one with his fellow men. He was
so good-hearted as well as sound-headed. London's influence is
again brought into the picture. The Puritan heart of the average
citizen was keenly sympathetic with the work of John Howard, the
prison reformer. The penal system of England was a disgrace
to a Christian civilisation.
Phillip's appointment must have been influenced not merely by
his war experience, or by his record in the West and East Indies, or
by his achievements in the Portuguese Navy, or by his interest in
farming ! Surely his appointment must have had something to
do with his practical interest in the welfare of the criminal classes.
There was at the time a growing agitation in the City of London
for reform, with a deepening public interest in the question which
Page Twelve


no Government could ignore. Phillip, from the moment he took
charge, showed his concern and thought for the social outcasts of
this country. Freedom from chains; cleanliness and proper
feeding ; clothing and sanitation were his first moves on board the
transports. The health and morality of prisoners were so much
his concern that he was able to land his contingent, after a nine
months' voyage, with an insignificant loss of life. He never
failed to help and encourage the well-disposed, and always im-
posed discipline in the best interest of such a community, and
never for the purpose of airing any petty authority.
Phillip's arch of vision was always higher than the actual. That
is the real secret of the power, as well as the strength and value, of
the average man— to be able to look beyond himself, and make
men see how ordinary average men may contribute to great ends.
We honour Phillip as a Londoner ; we honour him as a pioneer ;
but most of all we honour him as one of ourselves, a man who has
set us a splendid example in doing an ordinary task in a great way.
He has shown how men with average gifts and capacity, by
courage and endurance, with hard work and good cheer, with an
eye for larger interests, and with a hope for better things, may gain
much for their fellows, and great things for their country.
Page Thirteen


TRUSCOTTS, LONDON




