

Abbresa
$a Ijottor ttjp iPpmonj
of tfye lalp
IFrpib. 31. Marlpll
Sdittarrb by
i®r. A. iE. QL IKrrr
Prpaibm!
Abam ICmbauy (Snrbmt fJlmortal Cfnttagr
(ttnmmitt**, ©allarat




uUji? Eatp
Jffri'il 3). fKarteU




Address
Delivered by
MR. A. E. C. KERR
President of the Adam Lindsay Gordon
Memorial Cottage Committee
Sunday, 3rd April
1938
at the
Memorial Cottage, Botanical Gardens,
Ballarat
The occasion being the
assembling of Gordonians
to honor the memory of
their late President
MR, FRED, J. MARTELL
whose remains were cre-
mated and the ashes
scattered around
the Cottage




Aiuun HtniiHcUi (Smium
Ifflfmonal (Enllage
Untauiral (Sariirus
Ballarat, Btr.
Australia


Ladies and Gentlemen, —
Tft
ALLARAT is a historic City, famous for its Art
and Culture, as well as its richness in the production
of gold and wealth of flower gardens. It is aprro-
priately named Ballarat the Beautiful, the Garden City
of Australia, and is noted for its public-spirited and
generous citizens, for its Pioneers with civic pride and
the fact that the present generation is carrying on the
traditions and the fine heritage bequeathed by their
forefathers.
We are gathered here to-day to honor the memory
of the late Fred. J. Martell, President of the Adam
Lindsay Gordon Memorial Cottage, and really its
founder. Mr. Martell lived a long and useful life to
the age of 84 years; his remains were cremated, and
the ashes are to be scattered to-day around the Gordon
Memorial Cottage which he loved so well. The earthly
man has gone, but his spirit remains with us and will
for ever be associated with it.
Mr. Martell was born at Geelong, but lived in
Ballarat practically the whole of his active life, and
he was mentally alert to the very end. Ballarat was a
city in which he was able to foster his natural bent
for Science and Art, principally Art. He was a force-
ful personality, packed with ideas that were entirely
his own, with plenty of fire and force. He was a
thinker, a worker, and an artist. He rejoiced in beauty
and was a good craftsman, and no changes can rob
this Cottage of its memories and of Mr. Martell’s
intimate association with it.


In passing, I might mention that Mr. Martell was
one of the founders of the Ballarat Art Gallery, and
was Registrar of the School of Mines for a period of
20 years, doing pioneer work of first rate importance
for Ballarat. He had a great liking for contact with
human affairs and never knew a dull hour. He recog-
nised that the honor of being useful far transcends all
riches, for as one passes through life nobody finds it
a bed of roses all the way, and perhaps that is just as
well, but the knowledge that you have the confidence
and esteexn of your friends has a marked and tonic
effect. His work in connection with the Gordon
Cottage was one of love and devotion. Here he always
found refreshment and exhilaration and an ardent
affection for all its treasures, laboriously got together
over a number of years; in fact he searched the Empire
for them, thus the Memorial becomes a National
possession. One of the most prolific contributors was
Mr. Douglas Sladen, the well-known author and
novelist, of London, who became a personal friend of
mine. Mr. Sladen told me he had a mass of corres-
pondence with Mr. Martell, but had never met him,
but considered him a wonderful man and one of the
most enthusiastic Gordonians. He was delighted when
I informed him that his opinion of Mr. Martell was
quite correct. Douglas Sladen was responsible for
having the bust of Gordon placed in one of the most
prominent positions in the Poets Corner of Westminster
Abbey, in the midst of the Empire’s great and honored.
Mr. Sladen is 82 years of age, full of life and vigor,
despite his years; it was a rare pleasure to converse
with him. His photograph is in this Cottage together
with his priceless gifts.


Doubtless most of you know this humble cottage
was the first home of Adam Lindsay Gordon, in
Ballarat, and formed part of the original Craig’s
Stables, in Bath Lane, when Gordon took over the
lease at the latter end of 1866 and relinquished it in
October, 1868, having been in occupation for nearly
two years. It was afterwards shifted and incorporated
in the outbuildings of Craig’s Royal Hotel, and was
used for travellers’ samples. Later, it was recognised
and brought to light through the medium of the
"Ballarat Courier.” Mr. Martell, with his usual vigor
and enthusiasm, interested himself in having the
Cottage restored and placed in a proper setting. Our
first effort was a celebration at the Cottage, as it stood
in Craig’s Hotel back-yard, on Gordon’s Centenary,
19th October, 1933, a photograph of which may be
seen at the entrance to the Cottage, and that was the
start of this Memorial. No one knows the amount of
energy and time Mr. Martell devoted to this work more
than Mr. Edmond Doepel and myself; we worked
together from the beginning. My parents were per-
sonal friends of Gorden when he lived with his family
near Wendouree Parade. Seventy years ago Adam
Lindsay Gordon used to visit our house and nurse the
new baby—the first boy—and that baby was myself.
Mr. Martell spent practically his spare time and talents
in gathering relics of Gordon, the splendid result of
which may be inspected in the Cottage before which
you are standing to-day. He little knew that it would
also be a monument to himself. Our committee are
truly grateful and thankful to the generosity of
Colonel R. A. Crouch who met the whole of the ex-
pense incurred in the removal and re-erection of the
Cottage, which was carried out under the supervision


of one of the members of the committee, Mr. W. C.
Morrow, of the firm of Clegg and Morrow, architects.
Mr. J. J. Brokenshire, another member of the com-
mittee, also lent us great asisstance in getting Colonel
Crouch interested in the movement.
The Ballarat Gordon Memorial Cottage is now
one of Australia’s National Shrines. Henry Kendall
wrote that "Gordon was the first poet who sang the
first great songs these lands can claim to be their own.”
Here you see the Cottage reposing in an ideal sylvan
setting, making an added attraction to the Botanical
Gardens, surrounded by beautiful flowers, lawns, wide
spreading shade trees, and some of the finest marble
statuary in the Southern Hemisphere.
Gorden wrote:
"Here we have the elm, in the place of the wattle,
And in lieu of the gum, the oak.
Years back I believed a little,
And as I believed I spoke.”
And that is the setting of this Cottage, in the
poet’s own words.
The Cottage is a humble, yet a noble place, full
of relics precious to all Gordon lovers, which Mr.
Martell collected, treasured and guarded with a loving
care and diligence. There is a constant pilgrimage of
Gordonians to this Memorial. Sundays and holidays
found Mr. Martell as a guide-lecturer, showing all the
intimate relics of Gordon with pride and earnestness
when they were examined and discussed with great
interest and enthusiasm.


Ballarat is proud in having the finest Adam
Lindsay Gordon Memorial in existence. Everything
the Cottage contains has been a gift of a Gordon lover,
and it will not be complete until we obtain his statue
or a bust of the poet similar to that in Westminster
Abbey. Some day we hope this may eventuate. Every
new exhibit was a rare treasure to Mr. Martell; here
he was able to indulge his taste for the rare and
antique. He had a fine taste for Art and delighted to
welcome Gordonians, or anyone interested, in his
treasure house. How fitting it is that his ashes should
surround this humble cottage on which he has devoted
wholeheartedly the last years of his life —a genuine
labor of love for a poet, and the joy of giving pleasure
and instruction to others.
We, as members of his committee, take a natural
pride in being associated with our late President in his
unselfish devotion to this fine memorial in which his
name is indissolubly associated. Gordon’s peoms are
read and loved by many thousands, for his was a
nature that appeals not only to Australians, but to all
sportsmen and lovers of nature. Gordon was a man
of many parts —a mounted policeman, a sheep farmer,
a horse-breaker, Member of Parliament, and a famous
jockey. Gordon wrote:
"For the great things of earth are small things,
The longest life is a span.”
"Whose glory is dust and ashes,
Whose spirit is but a spark.”
"We know not whether they slumber,
Who wake on earth no more.”


No, my friends, Fred. J. Marteil will waken on
earth no more. You will see his ashes scattered
around this Cottage, therefore he will live with us in
spirit, and we will endeavor to carry on his good work.
As for our late President, we can only say,
"WELL DONE,
THOU GOOD AND FAITHFUL SERVANT”
Tulloch & King, Printers, Ballarat.


Aii ain iCtuftnat) (jj»uriunt






National Mutual Building,
Lydiard Street,
BALLARAT.
24th August, IS3B.
Mr. J. A. Ferguson,
Queens Square,
SYDNEY. N.3.W.
Dear Mr. Ferguson,
My President, Mr. A. E. C. Kerr, has handed me your
letter to him of the 19th inst., for attention.
I have, with pleasure, forwarded to you today, under
separate cover, a copy of Mr. Kerr*s address, and trust same
will arrive safely.
We have not previously issued any reports or other
publications, but should we at any time do so, I will be only
too happy to forward on to you such copies.
We presume that you are aware that our Cottage contains
the finest collection of Gordon*s life in the world, and it is
visited by thousands every year.
With kind regards,
Yours faithfully,
Avl it (Vvwi^
(F. W. Marxsen)
Hon* Sec. Adam Lindsay Gordon
Memorial Cottage Committee.
