

ADDRESS
TRADES UNIONISM
Mr. LEWIS McIVER
( The Unionist Candidate for South Edinburgh),
TO A PUBLIC MEETING OF THE ELECTORS —CHIEFLY COMPOSED OF
WORKING-MEN—IN VIEWFORTH FREE CHURCH HALL,
GILMORE PLACE, EDINBURGH.
ittelbourne r
Sands & McDougall Limited, Printers, 365 Collins Street.
1891. wr




ADDRESS
TRADES UNIONISM
Mr. LEWIS McIVER
( The Unionist Candidate for South Edinburgh) ,
TO A PUBLIC MEETING OF THE ELECTORS—CHIEFLY COMPOSED OF
WORKING-MEN —IN VIEWFORTH FREE CHURCH HALL,
GILMORE PLACE, EDINBURGH.
JEcI bourne:
Sands & McDougall Limited, Printers, 365 Collins Street.
1891.


TO THE READER.
I HAVE frequently read, and fully endorse, the views of
Mr. Lewis Mclver, as set forth in the following lecture.
These views, if widely circulated, are, in my judgment, calculated
to do much real service to true Unionism in these colonies, and.
therefore, without consulting either workmen or employers, I
have decided to reprint his lecture, and freely distribute a
number of copies amongst those whom they mostly concern.
When employed as a workman, I was always -a staunch
Unionist, and when, in later years, I became an employer, I
employed none but Unionists, and never disagreed with them.
Now that I am retired from business, I still hope that Unionism
may become universal. Without Unions workmen are powerless
either to maintain a high standard of wage, fair conditions of
employment, or reasonable hours of work, all of which the
public of these colonies earnestly desire, and firmly believe are
absolutely necessary to secure peace between employers and
workmen, and prosperity to the colonies.
Though I would gladly see every workman a member and
active supporter of some Union, yet I cannot approve force in
any form being used to induce them to become members.
Reason and persuasion, exercised privately and publicly, are, in
my opinion, the only means necessary to carry conviction to the
minds of all who are worth having, and especially so in these
colonies, where labour occupies a much higher platform, and is
more powerful, than in old countries. For these reasons I
commend to the earnest thoughts of all working men the many
wise words contained in the following lecture.
R. B.
Royal Park,
Melbourne, August , iBgi.


TRADES UNIONISM.
MR. McIVER, who was most cordially received, in proposing
“ That this meeting of Edinburgh electors rejoices that
Her Majesty’s Ministers are directing attention to the considera-
tion of urgent social questions, and congratulates them on the
appointment of a select committee to inquire into the working
hours of railway servants, and of a Royal Commission to examine
into the causes of recent industrial disputes,” said : —lt was with
no slight sense of relief that I listened to the wording of the
resolution which the chairman has just read to you, and which he
calls on me to propose. It refers to two separate but kindred
acts of the present Government, which, taken together, fore-
shadow, if they mean anything at all, a new departure in social
legislation. The subject-matter of one of these references covers
an immense field, and the inquiry may be made to touch vital
points, from the very largest and most remote interests of the
community down to the smallest and most immediate interests of
the individual.
This resolution, therefore, while it refers to matters with which
we are familiar in our workaday lives—matters which touch us
very closely, which affect the nearest and dearest interests of our-
selves, our wives, and our children—deals also with questions
which go down to the foundations of our personal and domestic
well-being, of our social cohesion, of our national prosperity, and
our Imperial greatness. (Cheers.) Notably, however, it relates
to matters which each man and woman amongst us of average
common-sense is quite as competent to discuss as the most


learned politician or economist. But if I say it is a relief to me
to speak to the subject of such a resolution, it is not only on
account of its inherent and absorbing interest, but because it
gives us temporary escape from a certain stale, and now some-
what discredited, old controversy. (Hear, hear.) For six years
Unionist speakers have too often been as voices crying in the
wilderness—proclaiming woe in many forms of jeremiad, calling
to ears that could not or would not hear, demonstrating truths,
plain and obvious truths, to eyes that would not or could not
see—and always on the one subject, the subject of Ireland. It
was none of their choosing. (Hear, hear.) Their opponents
selected Ireland as the exclusive subject—a veritable Aaron’s
serpent among subjects—and, although they have not succeeded
in preventing legislation on all other subjects, they have forced
Unionists into talking of little else. That extremely tedious and
monotonous condition of things is all over for the present. As a
matter of fact, our opponents, with one eminent exception, would
prefer that we should talk of something else, and we are only too
willing to oblige them. (Laughter.) They say that one set of
inconvenient events ending last November are ancient history,
and to treat them now as of importance is an anachronism —
(laughter)—and then they say all subsequent history comes under
the proscribed title of “ recent events,” and to mention them
would be indelicate. (Renewed laughter.)
If we are not quite able to accept these limitations in their
entirety, I am glad to act on them to-night; and in dealing
exclusively with the subject-matter of this resolution, to avoid
archaic references to the occurrences of last year, or equivocal
reminiscence of recent events at Kilkenny, Boulogne, Sligo, even
more unspeakable places. (Laughter and cheers.) To-night we
may forego fitful and jerky allusions to topography. To-night
you need not remember Mitchelstown, and if you can, you may
forget Aston Manor. (Cheers and laughter.) Let us even ignore
that, whereas there used to be two Irelands, there are now three,
with Irish potentialities of several more in the near future.
(Laughter.) The resolution before you asks your approval of a


courageous attempt on the part of a Unionist Government to
grapple with the two most burning questions which affect the
wage-earning classes to-day. It congratulates Government on
facing the questions of railway hours and of trade disputes. The
gravity of both subjects has been so forcibly presented to the
Edinburgh public this year that I cannot believe that any burgess
of this city could conscientiously dissent from the words of this
resolution. (Hear, hear.) Now, without any exaggerated antici-
pation of the direct result of such inquiries, we may regard their
inception as a hopeful sign. (Hear, hear.) It means that the
country, as represented by the two principal parties in the State,
recognises a great evil, a great and growing danger to the com-
monwealth ; and this recognition is the first step, if not to its
removal, at least to its mitigation. And in anticipation of these
formal inquiries it is well that' a gathering of electors in a
democratic country should gravely consider what are the interests
of the working classes ; the guarantees and special safeguards of
those interests; the beneficent agencies which advance, and the
dangers which threaten, those interests.
These questions indicate a large subject, upon which a whole
library of books has been written. It has been responsible for
acres of pamphlets and miles of newspaper articles. You will
hardly expect me to exhaust it in a single speech. Such an
attempt would more probably succeed only in exhausting the
speaker and his audience. But, approaching the matter in a
an earnest and uncontroversial fashion, we might profitably occupy
half an hour in trying to get at something in the nature of
definitions, and to separate what is true and permanent from what
is false, misleading, and ephemeral. (Hear, hear.) I suppose, if
we tried to generalise, after the fashion of our old copy-book
headings, we should say that roughly the interests of the working
man are represented by work and wage, in conditions of health,
freedom, and security. (Hear, hear.) It sounds very pat, and no
doubt it is true; but it is very far from exhaustive. (Hear, hear.')
Each one of the five points requires to be qualified by one or
more adjectives, and when so equipped each one is sufficient text


for a lecture all to itself. The work must be permanent or con-
tinuous, and not of excessive daily duration. The wages ought
to be fair or equitable, bearing due proportion to skill, risk, and
profits. Those two propositions open a wide enough field for a
whole course. And when we enter on the questions ot health and
other conditions, I leave you to consider the vast vistas of
discussion which lie before us. 1 ake the word “ security, for
instance —I am speaking in the interests of the working man.
Now, while security is the first interest in the whole community,
it is especially that of the worker for wages —(Hear, hear) and
the loss of security, or injury to the prevailing security, would hit
him sooner, would hit him harder, and would hit him longer than
the members of any other class. (Cheers.) Security is of
two sorts, external and internal—security for our trade and
food supply, and security for our persons and homes. Physically
they are represented by the Imperial police, which is our
navy, and the municipal police, which includes more than
magistrates, constables, and turnkeys; it includes the deep-seated
feeling of law-abiding which has always been one of the
special virtues of our countrymen. Law and order are
the particular privilege and protection of the poor. (Hear,
hear.) You need not fash yourself about the rich. They
have always been able to take care of themselves. They always
will. (Hear, hear.) Protection of life and property can be
bought like any other commodity. But if they have not the
protection of the law, how about those who cannot buy ? (Cheers.)
What is it enables the working man to leave his house of a
morning without fear or anxiety; and not only the working man
in a crowded city, but the crofter and the shepherd on the hill-
side? (Hear, hear.) What guarantees his wife and bairns from
molestation and outrage, his property from plunder, his house
from incendiarism? (Hear, hear.) Law, gentlemen—law and
order. (Cheers.) What secures the capital and creates the credit
on which the vast labour-providing works of this country depend
but the existence of a certain fixed system of law and order ?
(Loud cheers.)


Again, consider how directly the working man is concerned in
external peace. Happily this generation in Britain knows nothing
of war, its thousand horrors, its losses, and its sufferings. But
any thinking man can realise that war would mean an immediate
cessation of employment in many trades and an immense rise in
prices. (Hear, hear.) Some manufactures thrive on war, but the
great bulk of our industries would be wholly or partially paralysed.
The wages fund would diminish, the cost of living would increase,
while there is always looming in the back-ground that terrible
possibility—an interruption to the food supply —which, it
prolonged, would add famine to the other dreadful aspects of
war. (Hear, hear.) I ask you, whom would these things hit first,
hardest, and longest, if not the wage-earner? (Cheers.) I have
referred to these two points —the overwhelming importance to our
working men of external peace,, and of external law and order
merely to illustrate how wide the question before it is—how far-
reaching the roots of their interests are, and how essentially it
benefits the working man, who is now the real ruler of this country,
to look well round the facts, to widen his horizon, even when he is
seeking legislation especially in his own interest. With the same
object I might appropriately, were there time, go on to point out
how vital to the wage-earner is Imperial unity. (Cheers.) I
might furnish you with very striking figures in support of the
maxim that “ Trade follows the flag,” and prove to you beyond
cavil the mighty interest the artisan has in the maintenance of
close relations with other colonies. Aye, and were I dealing with
controversial subjects, I might ask you to think of the effect on
the trade, the shipping, the shipbuilding, the iron and other
industries of the Clyde, if we had an independent and probably
hostile Ireland in our flank. (Cheers.) Again 1 might dwell at
length on the immense bearing on the well-being of the people of
sanitary, factory, and educational progress, or enlarge on the
subject of improved dwellings and water supply, on leisure,
recreation, and self-improvement. But to-night I will ask leavp to
get down to the “ bed-rock ”of the matter—to the question of
work and wages. Dealing with these simple words, ‘‘work” and


“wages,” undecorated by any adjectives and unlimited by any
conditions, I ask you to consider apart from the question of
security—their guarantees and their dangers. How are those
guarantees to be maintained and strengthened, and how are the
dangers, present or threatening, to be averted or minimised?
(Hear, hear.) One answer —the one we hear a little too frequently
—is, “By legislation. ” Some folk have a child-like belief that
Parliament can do all things—from annexing a province to pro-
ducing a pill to cure earthquakes. Others have a still more deadly
creed, that Parliament ought to do a thing because it has the
power, and that Parliament ought to aim at making all men
equal—equally well off and equally happy. Now that is what
Parliament cannot do. (Hear, hear.) Parliament is very power-
ful, but it cannot alter human nature any more than it can cure
the toothache. (Laughter.) It can make all men equal in the
sight of the law, and it can give equal rights. But it cannot give
men equal abilities and equal ambitions any more than it
can give them equal stature. (Hear, hear.) Go into any
workshop and watch the different way in which two men tackle
the same job, and then tell us whether they are or ever can be
equal. A higher Power than Parliament has made us unequal,
and Parliament cannot reverse His decree. (Cheers.)
What Parliament can do, and ought to do, is to equalise con-
ditions —not to equalise men; to give men more equal oppor-
tunities ; to give us all more of a fair start, and let each man work
out his own salvation from that start; to remove disabilities and
unfair privileges ; to give us, as far as possible, a fair field and
no favour. (Cheers.) Now, for many years, this is precisely
what Parliament has been trying to do—not always very wisely ;
sometimes very slowly, and only in a few cases as completely as
we might wish ; but the general trend of legislation has been in
the direction of improved opportunities. For 40 years—whatever
may have been the case before—Parliament has legislated chiefly
in the interests of the less well-off part of the community. There
have been very few laws passed in favour of the rich man during
that period. The burden of taxation has largely been lifted from


the shoulders of the poorer, and put upon those better able to bear
it. Fetters on labour and shackles on combination have been
knocked off. We have had sanitary laws, improved dwellings,
Factory Acts, employers’ liability, food adulteration laws, and
many more under the head of health. In the direction of improved
opportunities, we have had education —primary and technical,
public’library, allotments, and many other beneficent statutes.
Administrative acts have given us labour bureau exhibitions
and other means of self-improvement, and free trade and a
generally wise economic system have helped to cheapen food and
other necessaries, while wages have risen and hours have
shortened. But we want wages to rise yet higher—we want hours
to grow yet shorter. (Hear, hear.) Those are the working men’s
interests which are most obvious, and those are the working men’s
interests of which the working man himself is most immediately
conscious. And the question is, how are these advantages to be
obtained? There is a section of the community—a young and
impatient section^ —which again answers, “By legislation.” I say
No—(cheers) —and in repudiating this fatal fallacy, I am not
condemning beforehand any legislative result of the two references
to which this resolution relates. If you think the matter out, you
will find that what I will call the objective side of the working
man’s interests, the qualifications —health, education, opportunity,
and so forth —are for legislation and Government action ; but
that the substantive matter —wages and hours —are to be dealt
with by combination and by your own action. (Hear, hear.)
That, gentlemen, is my text to-night—combination, combination,
and yet more combination. (Cheers.) You have the right to
combine; you have also the duty to combine. (Hear, hear.)
Your right is contained in 34 and 35 Victoria, chapter 22, and
confirmed by other statutes. Your duty you will find in the sth
to yth chapters of Matthew, and throughout the Old and New
Testaments. Combination to help one another is the civil birth-
right of the weak.
I hold also it is the moral duty of the strong, and by combina-
tion, and combination alone, will the British working man work


out his rights in the matter of wages and hours. (Cheers.) Even
the work appropriate to legislation requires your combination to
start it and push it through; much as your trade unionism has
accomplished in the way of wages and hours, it has given legisla-
tive and administrative improvements in the condition of the
people. (Hear, hear.) But, none the less, keep the question of
your wages and your hours in your own hands. Among many
reasons for this there is one above all others —if you once allow
Parliament to dictate your hours, Parliament in the end must
dictate your wages. (Hear, hear.) A legislative day means a
legislative wage. If better wages and shorter hours are to be won,
as I believe they can be won, it will be done on the old lines by
self-reliance, and, above all, by combination, by more trade
unionism. (Hear, hear.) The trade unions which won those pre-
cious victories in the past will win those of the future. But it will
have to be unionism of the wise, deliberate, old model—not the
mushroom caricature of trade unionism which has raised its head
in London and elsewhere, and which has done such infinite harm
to the whole country, but chiefly to the men who have trusted to
it. (Cheers.)
Personally, I can honestly claim to have always been a stead-
fast believer in trade unions. I am no new convert to their
virtues. To me they represent not only the working man’s best
weapon, but the employer’s best buffer. They are in the interest
of labour, of capital, and of the whole community. What we
want is, not less combination, but more combination and
further amalgamation. I am convinced that the bigger—the
more solid—the union the better for trade, and that large
wealthy trade organisations furnish the best ballast for the
commercial ship.
I remember, many years ago, hearing a manufacturer in one of
the textile trades lamenting that his men had no union. I asked
him why. “Because,” he said, “to us a union is the best insurance
against disturbance of trade. It steadies the men and it steadies
the employer. If the men form a permanent union, they put
their best and wisest and honestest men —the men they


can trust—to the top. The men they can trust, you may bet
your pile, we can trust. In bad times we can show them our
books, and they can understand them. In good times they can
appeal to our books and gain a rise without a row. But with no
union, when a wave of discontent comes, the noisiest, frothiest
‘ sea lawyers ’ among the men take the lead, and strikes and lock-
outs are the result, more often than not without any justification,
and always with loss to the trade and infinite suffering to the
men.” That, of course, was a very enlightened man. If more
employers had looked on unions in that way, we should have
fewer strikes. (Cheers.) Even to-day if more employers would
realise that in the great societies the best men almost invariably
are the leaders, we should have less of the miserable difficulties
raised about etiquette and punctilio, and fewer objections to meet
the natural leaders of the men. , (Hear, hear.)
I admit that in some recent labour struggles the prominent
men, by their language and attitude, have made it difficult for
employers to meet them, but these are exceptions, and are cases
where professional firebrands Ijave seized the helm. I am satisfied
that in ordinary trade difficulties the safest, best, and quickest way
out is to accept the men’s selected and elected advisers as the
fittest negotiators. But then, gentlemen, lam speaking of trade
unions from the points of view of men like Burt and Broadhursft,
Burnett and Bradlaugh, like Fred. Evans and Joe Leicester, like
Shipton and Harford, I am thinking of unions gravely and wisely
formed in quiet times to advance and protect the interests of
the members in all directions—of unions which benefit as well as
protect, which provide sick and out-of-work benefits as well as
funds for “ trade purposes,” unions whose chief aim is to prevent
strikes and lock-outs, which regard strikes as an evil—sometimes a
necessary evil, but an evil to be resorted to-only on two conditions
when it cannot be avoided, and when there is a reasonable hope
of success. Of such unions the most perfect is the one which has
never had a strike. The next best is that which has never had an
unsuccessful strike. When troubles arise, the leaders of such
unions look all around them before they take decisive action.


When they take it, the employers know they mean business, that
they probably have means to enforce their views, and that the men
will follow them. They also know that if these leaders make
terms, whether before or after the fight, they will stick to them
loyally, and the men will stick to their leaders, and when having
exhausted every means of negotiation, conciliation, and com-
promise, such a union is compelled to call out its members, it
selects its ground, its time, and its methods with judgment and
strategy, and when once embarked on warfare, fights the thing out
with legality, steadfastly, and to the bitter end. The history of trade
unionism gives many such instances —memorable strikes involving
terrible suffering to the men and those dependent on them, but
calmly, deliberately undertaken on just grounds, and resulting in
great and permanent gains to the working man. Such a one was
the great nine hours’ strike in the north of England in 1871, from
which it would not be too far-fetched to trace some benefit to
nearly every associated trade in the country. But in these strikes
you do not find appeals either to public disorder or to public
subscriptions. You do not find the good employer punished for
the acts of the bad employer. You do not find the public
punished for the acts of individuals by the calling out of allied
cognate trades, and you will not find they depend for success
upon manifestoes and demonstrations, appeals to passions or
fictitious telegrams, but on good grit, on the determination of the
men to suffer and to win. And when the leaders of an old union
on strike realised they were beaten they said so, and let the men
go in. They did not delude the men and prolong the suffering by
shouting “Victory all along the line,” or telegraph “ We are winning
hands down,” when they knew the game was up. (Hear, hear.)
And why this difference, gentlemen ? The unions I speak of—
there are many of them, and I wish there were more—were
formed deliberately in peaceful times for the general good of the
members. They were the outcome of forethought, wisdom, and
unselfishness. The strong sacrificed to assist the weak by their
common union in a common cause. Their members knew that
peace was their chief interest, but if they wanted peace they must


prepare for war. And so they don’t grudge their subscription
when wages were good. They were democratically based. Their
leaders were elected 'by their fellows, the best, the wisest, the
most prudent arid most trusted rising to the top as surely as water
finds its level. They were completely equipped unions, and
fully manned with competent officers. They were not jerry-built,
not coffih ships for one voyage only, but permanent seaworthy
craft, with big funds for ballast and good seamanship to guide
them; and, lastly, the crew obeyed the officers. How is it with
some of the ephemeral unions of to-day ? They flash into existence
in a night, and always in times of trouble. Born of the storm,
they exist exclusively for fighting purposes, and they are bad at
that. They are not democracies; they are irresponsible des-
potisms. They do not create a leader; a leader creates them.
They are often the outcome ofipersonal vanity, the love of power
in a single man. The old unions sought freedom to combine ;
the new claim power to coerce. Ignoring liberty, they rely upon
compulsion ; without judgment, they appeal to passion ; without
funds, they turn to public charity. And, gentleman, their vitality
is as feeble as their morals are lax. I said they flash into exist-
ence in a night; they disappear almost as rapidly. The present
is not the working man’s first experience of them; we had a fine
crop of them early in the “ seventies,” and they died down like the
mushrooms they were. They have no natural strength and no
stability; they cannot stand the “ storm and stress ”of bad times ;
they cannot unaided worry through a long strike. They make
much noise and a brave show for a time, attracting the less
thoughtful into their folds; but their existence is short-lived, their
temporary successes are fleeting, as Burns—of course, I mean
Robert—(laughter)—says, their triumphs
“ are like poppies spread.
You seize the flower—its bloom is shed :
Or like the snow-falls in the river,
A moment white—-then melts for ever. ”
Tactically considered, their methods have been one continued
series of blunders. By violence and illegality they have alienated


public sympathy. By disregard of true unionist principles they
have disgusted the old-established unions. More than once they
have thrown away the superb weapon in the hands of trade
unions, the competition of employers. The thing the capitalist
has most reason to fear from a strike is permanent loss of trade —
that is to say, his business slipping into the hands of his rivals.
This fear the old unions knew well and used to the best advan-
tage. But these new unions call out their members from good
and bad employers alike, and give away their best leverage, and
at the same time they give away their military chest. For if they
let the men who are satisfied go on working, they can look to
them for strike pay. Instead of this, they call them out indiscri-
minately, to the great discomfort of the public—and then they
ask the public for support. Professedly to benefit the men and
punish the bad employer, they adopt methods which punish the
men, punish the good employers, punish the public, and practi-
cally let off the bad employer altogether. They have done
infinite harm to their members, to trade, and to the country, and
to the progress of true unionism, and they have not scored
one single victory. Even their temporary success at the London
Docks has been converted into a huge disaster for the real
docker, while the permanent damage they have done to the trade
of London and to the wage-earning community is immense and
apparently irreparable. “Five thousand strikes in one year,”
gleefully boasted one of the new leaders, with that superb disre-
gard for fact and childish delight in large figures, which belong to
his order. He judiciously omitted to say how many were success-
ful strikes led by new unionists. And he did not say what those
strikes cost the wage-earners. They didn’t signify so long as the
bloated capitalist suffered. As a fact, there were not 5,000
strikes, but 1,145. More than enough, I should have thought,
even to satisfy a new unionist. 930 of those strikes threw close
on 350,000 men out of work for an average of 18 days. So we
may take it that, on the whole, 400,000 men (who with their
families, aggregate over a million and a half) were without wages
for two weeks and a half.


It is competently estimated that the 930 strikes, of which we
have particulars, cost the wage-earners of this country in 1890
1,122,500. I say nothing of the 14 or 15 millions worth of
plant lying idle; nothing of the millions of capital scared away
to pay wages in other countries ; nothing of the dislocation and
loss of trade; but I point to that sum of the wage-earner’s
property lost, and I invite the working man to bless the new
unionism. (Hear, hear.) But, from a trade-unionist point of
view, their great and unforgiveable offences are these: —They
strained the relations of capital and labour as they were never
strained before till they have taught employers to combine, and
they have sought to enforce the monstrous practice of coercion
till they have set working-men fighting with working-men.
Gentlemen, things were bad enough formerly, when the men had
to struggle with, it might be, a hard and unyielding employer.
But at all events it was then a case of man to man. Personal
character and old associations counted for something. Kindly
feeling might perhaps be evoked. Men who knew one another,
and had worked together, or under one another, met and had it
out. But now the secretary of the union meets —sometimes he
doesn’t meet—the secretary of a syndicate or federation. The
former may be wise and conciliatory, the latter may be “as mild
mannered a man as ever scuttled ship or cut a throat,” but they
have no knowledge of, no sympathy with one another, no direct
interest in the subject-matter. The wages of neither are at stake.
They are professional fighting-men, and may be vastly agreeable
to one another, while engines are idle in the siding, furnace fires
are blown out, ships are laid up, mines are shut down, and women
and children are starving. These things do not appeal to them.
All sight of the human side is lost. It becomes a matter of
figures —of money—merely a question of who can hold out
longest. And this state of tnings —its birth and its growth—-we
owe to the new unionism. (Cheers.) Last among its sins against
the working man’s interest I charge it with promulgating the
pernicious doctrine that capital and labour are natural enemies.
Capital and labour are no more natural enemies than twin


brothers are —(hear, hear) —they are absolutely essential to one
another, and although they are frequently in conflict, as brothers
often are, the conflicts are the accidents, not the essence, of their
necessary relations. I say they are brothers, and they have a
joint inheritance in profits. In order that the younger should get
their fair share, they must co-operate and combine, but they must
co operate and combine wisely and justly. And as capital is
gradually united more compactly, labour must form up to meet
it with equal battalions.
The modern tendency to mass capital under limited liability,
and to transfer the control of manufacturers and production from
individual capitalists to large companies, demands a parallel
movement in labour protection. Increased centralisation and
organisation of capital should be met by the increased amalgama-
tion and solidarity of the workers. The fallacious methods of the
new unionism work precisely in the opposite direction. They
fritter away the energies of unionism in hasty, ill-considered
combats, undertaken at the wrong time, and conducted in the
wrong way. If what I have said to-night has any purpose, it is,
first, to urge on working men to combine further, to amalgamate
further, to subscribe loyally, and to select and to trust their
natural leaders. And secondly, to remind you that, although work
and wage are the most obvious concerns of the working man,
work depends on trade, and wages on capital, and that the
successful maintenance of prosperous relations among these,
depends on peace and union—peace abroad, which in the last
resort means our naval supremacy; peace at home, which means
law and order in the street, conciliation and compromise in the
workshop and factory. (Cheers.) Unionism in matters imperial
or trade unionism in matters economic. Within a united empire,
safeguarded from external attack and internal disruption, which
gives you markets for the produce of your labour, combine as
working men, not in Spasms nor in anger for the purpose of war
with capital, but continuously, and with deliberation in order to use
your strength peacefully to secure your just share of the profits of
your labour. Combine not for war but for peace ; not to foment


strikes but to prevent strikes; and believe that conciliation or arbi-
tration are not only words of wisdom, but that they are the surest
results of strong combination. I repeat, strong, sound trade union-
ism is the greatest safeguard of the working men’s interest; combi-
nation based on the old principles of wisdom, justice, mutual self-
sacrifice, and loyalty ; weak, spasmodic, unprincipled combination
is its greatest danger. (Cheers.) I feel this so strongly that I
have perhaps been betrayed into occupying your time unduly with
this branch of the subject, and especially with one form of danger
to working men’s interests to the exclusion of others of equal
urgency. Unhappily, there are but too many of them. Foreign
competition, assisted by long hours, and the levelling influence
of new machinery, which tends to neutralise the acknowledged
superiority of British labour; hostile and excluding tariffs; the
disastrous effect on our printing trade of the American Copyright
Act, which, I hold, ought to be met by prompt counter action ;
the expiry of commercial treaties ; the importation of manufactures
which we used to export; the decay of some British industries,
the total extinction of others—on these I hope to have other
opportunities of addressing you; but to-night I have sufficiently
tried your patience.
All I will say now of the dangers and difficulties which these
questions suggest is, that they are not insuperable to British
enterprise and British statesmanship; and if the trade prospect
before us is, in some respects, gloomy, it is not all dark. There
is a silver lining which should promise to the stout-hearted a
triumphant issue from our present troubles. (Hear, hear.) The
heresy of the new unionism is scotched for the present. The
spirit of arbitration is once again in the ascendant—three-fourths
of last year’s strikes were settled by conciliation or arbitration-
while public interest has been thoroughly awakened, and there is
a widespread public desire to go to the root of the matter. There
is ground for great hopefulness in all this. But, above all, I have
faith, and I call on you to have faith, in the working man hitnself,
and in the future his self-reliance will work out for him. If at
times you are minded to doubt or to despair, I ask you to think


of the Scottish working man as he was 50 —aye, 20 —years ago,
and of his condition now. Then picture to yourselves what it
may be made 20 or even 10 years hence. Think what the wise
old unions have done for you in the past, and realise what they
can do for you in the future if you will only, stick to them and
strengthen them. What were luxuries have become ordinary
necessaries—what was hopelessly beyond reach is now within easy
grasp. Consider the possibilities of leisure and comfort and
culture which lie before you and your children if you will but use
your strength wisely, steadfastly, and for mutual support.
To those who hold aloof from their trade associations very
earnestly I would recall how largely the gains of the past have
been due to that spirit of unselfishness which lies at the root of
the old trade combinations, which is the pride and the glory of all
true trade unions—the self-sacrifice of the strong for the sake of
the weak. It is that spirit of sacrifice which we want maintained
and increased. We want to get rid of the sentiment— “ Why
should I join a society when I don’t feel the need of it ?” The
true trade union answer is—“ Because others have need of it and
need of you,” or, in the word of one of the most earnest and
self-sacrificing friends the British workman ever had —Charles
Bradlaugh—“l urge that there is a duty as well as a right of
association. Every man who does not unite in an association with
which the members of his trade are connected is failing in duty to
himself and to them, failing in duty to them if he is strong, failing
in duty if he is wise, for it is his duty to give them the benefit of
his strength and wisdom.” As a nation we are professors of a
faith whose key-note is self-abnegation. To the honour of the
old unionism it can claim to have made this virtue its own. And
while the annals of the labour movement record the names of
noble self-sacrificing workers who have devoted their lives to
the cause of their fellows, there have gone down to unknown
graves many “ mute, inglorious ” servants of the working man,
whose sole reward was the consciousness that their sacrifice was
not wasted, and that the ranks of labour would furnish them with
fitting successors.


Six years ago, when I was working at the same work as now,
and was appealing to the true Liberalism of working men, to the
duty pf each to work for the many, to that unselfishness in trade
unionism to which I have referred, I was constrained to quote a
famous passage from Henry George. He was seeking to touch
the altruism, the brotherly love of men, and glorifying the modest,
retiring services to their fellows of those who work for them
almost unknown to them. The words were true then, they are
true now, they always will be true : —“ The old myths still have
their meaning. Ormuzd still fights with Ahrimon ; the Prince of
Light with the powers of darkness. He who will hear, to him the
clarions of the battle call. How they call, and call, and call, till
the heart swells that hear them ! Strong soul and high endeavour
—the world has need of them now. Beauty still lies imprisoned,
and iron wheels go over the'good and true and beautiful that
might spring from human lives. And they who fight with Ormuzd,
though they may not know each other, somewhere—sometime-
will the muster-roll be called.” (Loud cheers.) Mr. Mclver
concluded by moving the resolution that had been read by the
chairman.
Mr. Hall, rubber worker, seconded the resolution, which was
put to the meeting and carried unanimously.






