

ADDR E S S
81 s ü* gotten,
LIEUTENANT-GOYEENOR OE VAN DIEMEN’S LAND
&C. &C. d’C.
irosîîiont of tfte Royal Society of Wan Bmnnt’ö a;a it*.
from
THE COUNCIL AND FELLOWS OF THE SOCIETY.
SIR, —The near approach of the period for Your Excellency’s departure from this Colony
seems a fitting time for us, the Members of the Council and Fellows of the Royal Society of Van
Diemen’s Land, to give expression to the deep feelings of respect and esteem we entertain towards
you as President of this Society .
While we cannot but express our cordial congratulations upon the mark of confidence evinced by
our Most Gracious Sovereign in your appointment to the Government of the oldest and most
influential of the Australian Provinces and to the. General Government of the entire Australasian
Group, and which Your Excellency’s great ability, sound practical judgment, and unwearying
assiduity in business, coupled with untarnished private worth, has so richly merited, we cannot but
confess with sincere concern that as Members of this Society we are to sustain Your Excellency's
removal a loss not easily to be repaired.
The leading part which Your Excellency took in the re-organisation of this Institution soon
after your arrival amongst us, and the great zeal, ability, aid, and encouragement, both official and
personal, which Your Excellency has brought to its support and to the advancement of the important
objects for which it was established, demand of us this frank and unqualified acknowledgement, at
the same time from your ardent love of Science and Art, and your readiness and anxiety to favour
every liberal Institution, we are led to hope, no y even to expect, that the more extended sphere


power and usefulness to which you are called you will not permit to pass unimproved any convenient
opportunity which may arise for promoting the objects of a Society which, under your presidency
and auspices, has become hnown amongst kindred associations in all parts of the world.
With earnest wishes for Your Excellencys success and happiness in the new field of exertion
opened to you,
We have the honour to be,
Your Excellency s obedient Servants,
Hobart Town, 22 nd December , 1854.
SIR, —The above copy of a Valedictory Address from the Royal Society of Van Diemen’s Land to His
Excellency Sir W. T. Denison, President, which was unanimously adopted at the Special General Meeting of the
Society, held on Wednesday the 20th instant, is ordered to be forwarded to each of the Fellows, in order that
residents in the country may, if it meets their approval, at once sign and return it to me, to have their names
attached to the original Address previous to presentation ; and that Fellows resident in town, who were not
present at the meeting, may be informed that it is now open upon the table of the Museum, Harrington-street,
to receive signatures.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient /Servant,
Secretary,
