

~ *
ADDRESS
JAMES MOORHOUSE, D.D.
BISHOP OF MELBOURNE
% Cjnmlj of j£nglanb Assembly
MELBOURNE
* 1 M'ONDAY, SEPTEMBER 22, 1884
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
iftelbffurrtt
SAMU'EL MULLEN, COLLINS STREET EAST
Price Sixpence.




THE BISHOP’S ADDRESS
®bc Clnmb flf
000 ' '
The annual meeting of the Church of
England Assembly for the diocese of Mel-
bourne for this year was commenced in
the Diocesan Registry, William-street, on Mon-
day afternoon, September 22 ; the Bishop of
Melbourne presiding. The large hall of the
building and its approaches were crowded
by the clergy, lay representatives, and others,
and the gallery and a large adjoining room
were filled by ladies.
The proceedings were opened by prayers
read by Canon Goodman, the bishop’s chap-
lain.
THE BISHOP’S ADDRESS.
The Bishop of Melbourne, as president of
the assembly, delivered the following ad-
dress My Brethren of the Clergy and
of the Laity,—l cannot think that it
is good for any church to be con-
tinually weighing its purse, and count-
ing the number of its adherents. Such
a proceeding insensibly sets up a false
standard of comparison. Work comes
to be estimated rather by its visible re-
sults than by its essential quality. People
become more anxious for a good display
than for a good conscience, and with conse-
quences which are sometimes disastrous.
Anxiety for success is apt to put a perilous
strain on truthfulness. And if in the con-
tinual eddy of temporary change there should
appear in any given year to be de-
cline and falling off, discouragement too
readily degenerates into indifference and
relaxation of effort. Numbers again
are sometimes extremely deceptive. We
hear at times, for instance, of the mar-
vellous success of some special mission to
the intemperate: and if we were to believe
the returns we might imagine that the passion
for intoxicating drink had been finally quelled
amongst the classes which are most prone to
its indulgence. Fifty thousand men have
written their names down on a piece of paper
■more than that, the magistrates in certain
police courts have suddenly lost their occu-
pation. Society is regenerated. A month or
two afterwards, however, everything is as
bad as ever, until by renewed efforts the same
magical results have been again attained, only
to end once more in the familiar and disas-
trous failure. In time men get used to this
kind of thing, and so at length pay no
more heed to the brass bands, and
torch-light processions, and spurts of
enthusiasm, and long lists of converts,
than if they were the signs of some
recurrent disease through which men had
to pass in the natural course of things,
as children pass through the measles.
For such reasons as these I confess that
tables of returns, when they relate to tem-
porary results, have very little interest
for me. Unless they relate to periods long
enough to test healthy and persistent work,
I look upon them as almost without mean-
ing, and expect their publication to do more
harm than good. For such reasons as this I
have never asked for the customary annual
reports of numerical and financial progress,
and have taken no notice of their disclosures,
even when I had approximate knowledge of
their character.
CHUKCH PROGRESS.
This year, however, a return has been
made—not by my direction—which ex-
tends over a period sufficiently large to
make its indications trustworthy. I shall
therefore shortly notice its most significant
results. It enables us to compare the
amount of our funds, and the number
of our active members, at three im-
portant periods. First, at that immediately
preceding the division of the old diocese of
Melbourne into two ; second, at that imme-
diately following this division ; and third, at
the end of 1883. It shows us that in the
year before the division of the old diocese
there was church accommodation for 65,000


persons; that in the diocese of Melbourne themselves with simply maintaining their
alone in the first year after that of Ballarat
was separated from it, there was accommoda-
tion for 46,000 persons; and at the end of
the year 1883 there was accommodation for
69,887 —or nearly 70,000. This year, I doubt
not that, owing to the opening of several
new churches, there will be accommodation
for over 70,000. This shows that in nine
years we have gained additional church
accommodation for 24,000 persons, and that
we have now, in the diocese of Melbourne
alone, a larger number of sittings in our
churches than existed in both dioceses
together at the time of separation. The
return is not less satisfactory when we look
to the number of persons availing them-
selves of this accommodation. Before separa-
tion the number was 40,600. In the diocese of
Melbourne, in the year after separation, it
was 27,800. In 1883, it was 43,500. The
increase of funds, again, has quite kept pace
with that of worshippers. The total receipts
of the church in the two dioceses before
separation, amounted to £66,700. In the year
after separation they amounted, in the diocese
of Melbourne alone, to £53,000. In the
year 1883 they had reached, in the single
diocese of Melbourne, £83,700. That is to
say, a sum which exceeds by £17,000 what
they had been before separation, in the
dioceses of Melbourne and Ballarat together.
This is the record of a large and gratifying—
and, what is far better, a gradual and secure
advance. And now, what is the duty laid
upon us by this divine blessing upon our en-
deavours ? That with hearty gratitude to our
Heavenly Father, we press forward with all
our might upon the lines which have been
thus proved to be those of efficacy. Let
us beware of looking back to please
ourselves in lazy congratulations. We
have done far less than we ought to
have done—far less than the needs of our
people required. One-third of the people of
this colony profess to belong to our church,
and it is but little we have done as yet
towards satisfying their spiritual necessities.
For the large movabl€»population which is
taking up land in our forest districts, we
have done far less than we could desire, and
for those especially who are making their
homes in the rich clearings of Eastern Gipps
Land, almost nothing at all. It is our
bounden duty to carry the spiritual needs of
those brethren of ours upon our hearts.
Those churchmen of Melbourne who, amply
supplied with the means of grace, content
own ministers, are neglecting a plain
duty. We are not a mere knot of
scattered congregations, who may feel
ourselves at liberty, if we please, to
subside into parochial selfishness, but
the members of a church which is dis-
tinctly bound by the most sacred obligations
to provide spiritual food for all its children.
So long as any are neglected, the idle and
illiberal cannot be without sin. It is simply
absurd, not to say heartless, to tell our poor
selectors to provide for their own wants. I
know that some, who see them perhaps come
in their best suits to the market, or the law
court of some principal township, are likely
to gain the idea that they can easily help
themselves. But let such persons drive into
the country, go upon the clearings, talk to
the selectors, and acquaint themselves with
the heavy charge entailed on small com-
munities by the unhappy divisions among
Protestant bodies, and they will speedily
change their opinion. To send a special
agent to pick up the gleanings of the selectors’
poverty for the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund
would be to court failure—to incur an
expenditure which could not possibly
secure any adequate return. What is
wanted is more Christian sympathy
among our town congregations, espe-
cially those of Melbourne and its suburbs.
There our principal wealth is to be found.
There, were there' true brotherly feeling in
men’s hearts, it could be given with scarcely
the sense of self-sacrifice. There are two
Melbourne parishes where the organisation
of the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund is a reality.
And does any one suppose that the inhabi-
tants of those parishes feel themselves one
whit the poorer for what they contribute ? Let
me exhort you, my brethren, in all brotherly
kindness, to give a little more time and care
to this necessary work. Let me ask the
clergy to take the initiative; and let me
entreat churchwardens and vestrymen to rise
above the jealous local feeling which cannot
bear to see money devoted to any but
parochial objects. If in a large, generous,
and Christ-like affection for our poorer
brethren, we would but make that little
effort which is involved in starting and
maintaining efficient parochial organisations,
all the immediate wants of the diocese
would be speedily supplied, while the very
effort would enrich those who made it, with
larger measures, not only of spiritual life,
but even of pecuniary resources.


SUNDAY-SCHOOLS.
I would bespeak your special attention to
the work of our Sunday-school Association.
This is no mere society of energetic men who,
taking interest in a particular branch of
church work, are a law unto themselves, but
a society called into existence by the Church
Assembly, and put under the restraint and
direction of laws carefully fashioned by that
great representative body. It is the Church’s
own organ for sustaining and improving one
of the most important branches of her work.
We are all, therefore, bound to give it our
earnest and energetic support. The claim of
this society does not, however, rest solely on
the nature of its constitution. It has done
good and stimulating work, and it only
awaits the possession of increased means
to extend its wholesome influence to
every form of Sunday-school effort and
to every parish in the diocese. Very
few are aware of the great and
urgent needs of our Sunday-schools. In
many of our town schools, in most of our
country schools, there is an utter absence of
those educational appliances which are
thought to be absolutely essential to the
efficiency of the state schools. Maps, black-
boards, and illustrated lessons for infants are
either entirely wanting, or very insufficiently
supplied. My recent inspection of some of the
Melbourne Sunday-schools has convinced me
that in large buildings classes cannot be effi-
ciently taught without curtains supported on
rods to separate the classes. How can
volatile children attend, when with one
glance of the eye they can take in all the
temporary causes of disturbance in the whole
building, and when the observations of their
own instructor are well-nigh drowned by
those of neighbouring loud-voiced teachers.
In large schools curtains are an absolute
necessity, and even in churches (when,
unhappily, classes have to be held in
churches) curtain-rods might easily be
affixed to detached stands, which could be
removed on the dismissal of the school.
But how are poor parishes to provide such
requisites, or how is the Sunday-school
Association to give them aid while its
annual income amounts to no more than
£80? The association requires, at the present
time, in order to enable it to give that
stimulus to Sunday-school work which is
needed, at least £5OO a year. What might
not be done if our association could offer to
supply half the expense of books and appa-
ratus to all poor schools in'the country ? if it
had the power of paying a clerical inspector
of our Sunday-schools, and if it could extend
its examination and prize organisations so as
to make their stimulus felt in every parish of
the diocese? Laymen do not easily realise
the immense importance of Sunday-school
work ; they fail to see that it has become
almost as necessary a part of church organisa-
tion as the regular Sunday services, and that
in a colony which banishes the Bible from its
day schools the old make-shift ways and
slovenly methods of teaching are nothing
better than a blind for neglect of
duty. We need an immediate and de-
termined effort to increase the resources
of the Sunday-school Association. The
question of the inspection of our Sunday-
schools has been referred to the rural
deaneries of Melbourne, and the reports
which I have received from the rural deans
disclose a great variety of sentiment on this
subject amongst the clergy. Some recognise
the great value of inspection, and are ready
to welcome it. Others fear that it might not
be acceptable to the teachers, or that it might
be too inquisitorial, or that the examiner
might not respect justifiable susceptibilities,
or that the method of appointing inspectors
might be unsatisfactory. I gather, however,
from the reports that, if we had the means of
paying a clerical inspector, to be appointed
by the bishop, nearly all objection would
disappear. If Christian men in this
diocese would exercise a little self-de-
nial, and give us an adequate increase of
funds, they could without stirring a finger
double—yea, quadruple—the efficiency of
the association at once. I can testify that
the general meetings of the society
during the past year, including its
model lessons, have been most interesting
and useful. I never leave one of those meet-
ings without feeling that I know something
more about the spiritual wants of our chil-
dren, and that I have been brought neaier to
the hearts of some of the most earnest and
lovable of ail our church workers. I could
wish that more of sueh meetings were held
in the widely-separated centres, of that com-
bination of cities which we call Melbourne.
Several interesting questions have arisen
during the past year, at some of these meet-
ings—among them the query, how far we can
provide Sunday instruction for the children
of the wealthier classes. The practical
answer to this question involves grave diffi-
culties, which it would be of little use here to
specify. Let me simply say that I only know


two methods which are likely to be success- the intimate relation between that rite' and
ful. The children of our wealthier people
might be gathered into a Sunday class, to be
held in some private house, and taught by
some well-educated Christian man or woman.
The multiplication of such classes might per-
haps be attended by one great indirect advan-
tage. It might induce some of our better-
educated young people, who now, alas ! give
but little of their time to Christian work, to
practise that self-denial lor Christ’s sake,
which would do so much to hallow and ele-
vate their own character. Better still, how-
ever, I think it would be if all the children of
a parish, rich and poor together, were assem-
bled frequently in church on a Sunday after-
noon to be catechised by the clergyman.
Should it be found difficult for one person to
command attention in our larger town
parishes, I would suggest that a series of
curtains on moveable stands should be set
along the middle of the church, and that
while the clergyman catechised the children
on one side of the screen some highly-edu-
cated Christian layman might do the same
office for those on the other side of it. By
alternating the sections on successive Sun-
days, the clergyman could thus bring all the
children of his parish within the reach of his
own influence. There is a very venerable pre-
cedent for this method of teaching. Some 300
years ago the saintly Charles Borromeo,
Archbishop of Milan, finding his diocese in
a lamentable state of vice and ignorance,
instituted what may be called the first Sun-
day-schools in his magnificent cathedral.
These schools still exist, and their modus
operandi is described as follows by one who
saw them at work ;—“ The south aisle of the
cathedral, its north aisle, and its south tran-
sept were curtained off. In the first a large
number of boys were being taught, in the
second an immense crowd of women and
girls, and in the third quite 400 men of all
classes and ages, from the lad of 16 to the
white-haired veteran. The teachers some-
times sat in the midst of large circles of
listeners—sometimes used a movable pulpit.” l
If one may curtain off spaces without loss of
dignity in the vast marble minster of Lom-
bardy, there can surely be no objection to
resorting to a similar device in the humble
parish churches of Melbourne.
CONFIRMATION.
I rejoice to know that the importance of
the rite of confirmation is being increasingly
felt in this diocese. I think, however, that
our Sunday-school system is not very gener-
ally recognised. If the teachers, especially
those in our higher classes, would more con-
sciously and avowedly direct their lessons to
the preparation of their scholars for confirm-
ation, they would find this an admirable
means, not only of securing attention and
promoting solemnity of thought and demean-
our, but also of securing the attachment of
their scholars to the school at the age when
they are particularly tempted to irregularity
or desertion ; and then how admirable an
opportunity is furnished to the clergyman at
the season of confirmation for securing effi-
cient Sunday-school teachers. Then he
gathers his young people into classes, gives
them systematic instruction, seeks to deepen
their devotional feeling, and to prepare them
in every way for that important crisis when
they make a public profession of their faith
in Christ. At what time, then, may he more
reasonably hope to arouse in the more gifted
of the candidates a desire to do work for God ?
Complaints are sometimes made, that too
many of those who have been recently con-
firmed become irregular in their attendance at
church, and finally drift away into religious
carelessness. But why is this ? Mainly I
believe because work of some kind is not
provided for those of more active tempera-
ment. Nothing so fixes and deepens our
resolves, nothing so effectually turns pro-
mise into performance, as generous and self-
denying labour. While, then, you keep up
your evening institutes and communicants’
classes for the mass of your confirmees, let
me urge you, my clerical brethren, to en-
deavour to convert into Sunday-school
teachers all of them who show special fitness
for this office.
CHURCH MISSIONS.
One word I would say on the present posi-
tion of our missions to the Chinese and abo-
rigines. For some time past these missions
have received a very inadequate measure of
public attention and support. People have
the impression that as the aborigines are
rapidly dying out, it is no longer a duty to
contribute to their support and instruction.
This is a great mistake, as a single glance at
the report of the church missions in Victoria
will convince you. But whatever view people
may take respecting the wants of the abori-
gines, of the need of more active efforts for
the evangelisation of the Chinese there can
only be one opinion. The Chinese in our
midst are the representatives of the most


numerous family of the human race. None the state. Where there is a church, a state
of them, or very few of them, remain
willingly to die amongst us. It is their aim
to return to their native land to enjoy the
fruits of their Victorian labours. Now, if
those going home were in all, or in most
cases, well-instructed and well-established
Christians, they might do more to evan-
gelise China than all the European mis-
sionaries at present labouring in that
country. Why is it, then, that this great
opportunity is being allowed to slip
by unimproved, or at least very in-
adequately improved? Mainly, I believe
because we cannot afford to employ a Euro-
pean superintendent of our Chinese missions,
who can speak fluently to both Chinese and
Europeans. At present no one can
thoroughly understand the reports of the
Chinese missionaries, and, worse still, no
one can test the real character of their
labours by direct communication with those
who profess to be converts. Again, our
difficulty is a money difficulty. Were
wealthy men more generous, more heartily
Christian, more capable of perceiving the
true relative value of the different objects of
their expenditure, our difficulties here, as else-
where, might vanish in a day. I wish to
judge no man, knowing how much 1 stand
in need of a lenient judgment myself, but I
cannot refrain from saying that if some of
our people compared the sums spent by
them in promoting the kingdom of God, with
those wasted on race-meetings and amuse-
ments, they could hardly feel that they were
acting as stewards of God in the distribution
of their wealth. If the clergy were more
willing to make collections on Mission Sun-
day on behalf of our home missions to the
heathen, the lack of private liberality would
be less severely felt.
PRIMARY EDUCATION.
The issue of the report of the Education
Commission since we last met demands some
slight notice. We seem to have got beyond
that depressing time when it was necessary
to convince Christian men that no morality
could be secure or effective which was not
based upon religion. Professor Seeley does
not even claim to be an orthodox believer,
but in his late work on the “Expansion of
England,” he says, “I always hold that re-
ligion is the great state-building principle.
These colonies (the American) could create a
new state because they were already a church,
since the church (so 1 hold) is the soul of
grows up in time, but if you find a state which
is not in some sense a church, you find
a state which is not long for this world.”
And why not long for this world ? Because it
has no motive at the centre of its life strong
enough to be the basis of abiding righteous-
ness, strong enough to resist the disinte-
grating forces of idleness, sensuality, cove-
tousness, and heartless egotism. Of course
to atheists and materialists, whose loftiest
idea of man is that he is a lump of organic
matter on its way to disorganisation, and of
morality, that it is an attempt to make this
course of change as pleasant as possible, all
reference to an Eternal Father, and to the
morality which is built upon the perception
of our filial relation to Him, must seem vain
and foolish. But then, thank God, atheistic
materialists are an insignificant minority
amongst us. And nothing so filled me with
amazement when I first came to this
colony as to see men calling themselves
Christians allowing themselves to be made,
on one flimsy pretext or another, the
tools of an atheistic propaganda. Surely
they must know that their Master’s morality
depends wholly on the affirmation that in Him
God is the Father of all mankind. Suppress
that truth, and Christian morality is destroyed.
How can I love my neighbour as my brother,
if we have no common Father, and if there
be no spiritual family, of which we all are
members? You may trifle and conjure with
words as you please, but if you suppress in
our state schools the truth that God is in
Christ the Father of the whole human race,
you make them at a blow un-Christian, and
so far as the training of the character
is concerned, all but useless. Men at
last are beginning to see this, and to ask
themselves, shall we pay all that money for
an education which cannot practically affect
conduct, in order to force Roman Catholic
children into our state schools, or in order to
punish those who refuse to do as we wish ?
For some time men tried to evade the force
of this appeal, by saying to themselves —well,
after all, the name of God is not excluded
from the reading books. True, the name of
our Divine Master has been blotted out; and
with His name all that morality has gone
which depends on the love of Him.
Still, after all, there is some ghost
or shadow of Theism left there. But
what if there be? Where is the use of it,
if the God thereby revealed is not that Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, through our relation


to whom all we are brethren ? And how long where it really rests—upon the Christian
do you think you can keep what remains ?
It has no business to have a place, even in
the reading books, as a mere exercise of
spelling. The 12th clause of the act was
framed by men who intended to make the
exclusion of religion from the state schools
an absolute exclusion. How does it run?
As follows :—“ln every state school secular
instruction only shall be given, and no
teacher shall give any other than secular in-
struction in any state school buildings.” In
the -absence of any special interpretation,
those words mean, and can only mean,
“ there shall be no religious instruction in
the school, and there shall be none on the
lips of the teacher.” It is the most fright-
fully desolating piece of legislation I ever
saw. And how any Christian man can up-
hold it without the sense that he is unfaith-
ful to his Master I cannot conceive. How can
your Ministers of Education resist the appeals
of secular bigotry, with such words unlimited
and unexplained, on the statute book? It
does no doubt seem a horribly arbitrary pro-
ceeding for a Minister of Education to have
struck the name of Christ out of the reading-
books without consulting Parliament. But
what was an honest man to do ? Could he
go to Parliament and ask them to give an in-
terpretation of their own words which
should be only an informal and not a legis-
lative interpretation? His position was a
most difficult one ; and it is this whole com-
munity which put him in that difficult posi-
It enacted the law, and then found fault with
its administrator because he carried it out.
We have got a new book of secular morality,
and in the preface to that book it is recom-
mended that the teacher shall illustrate its les-
sons from Holy Scripture. I saw with a shudder
that a Roman Catholic member of the Legis-
lative Assembly required that the teachers
should be directed to abstain from compliance
with that recommendation. Now, what
enabled that member of the Assembly to say
in effect, “ Give us what we want, or your
children shall not hear in the state schools,
from the lips of the teachers, one syllable of
that Book which their parents believe to con-
tain the words of eternal life ? ” What
enabled him to take that action, and what
compelled the Minister of Education to listen
to him? The law which you have made, and
which you insist on retaining unaltered,
although it starves and degrades the souls
of your children. I cannot blame the
Ministers of Education. Let the blame lie
people of this country, who allow the law to
remain unaltered. That law, in its pre-
sent form, interferes seriously with the
movement for giving voluntary religious in-
struction in the state schools. It is difficult
to define the lawful time of such instruction
difficult to say how the children shall be
induced to attend it, difficult to deter-
mine whether state school teachers, even
when willing, shall be allowed to attend
at such instruction for the purpose of
keeping order. Accordingly, successive
Ministers of Education differ in opinion as
to the latitude of interpretation of which, as
they imagine, the act admits. One Minister
gives to its words a large and liberal mean-
ing. Straightway every facility is afforded
for voluntary teaching, and the state school
teachers, as they are very willing to do, give
most valuable assistance. But another
Minister comes, who thinks the words have
been strained, and at once everything changes.
Facilities are refused, state school teachers
withdraw, classes are thinned, children be-
have badly, and we hear such complaints of
inconsistency, hindrance, and failure as were
recently urged by a deputation from Gee-
long. What can be more discouraging to
zealous religious teachers than this regime
of government by Ministerial caprice; and
yet what can possibly put an end to it but
such an alteration of the law as shall
deliver Ministers of the Crown from the
temptation to interfere in this arbitrary
and pernicious way? What do we mean,
my friends ? Do we want our children
to have religious instruction in the state
schools or not ? If we do, let us say so, and
put an end at once to arbitrary personal
government. If we do not, then don’t let us
pretend that we do, but say at once that we
have resolved to abandon religion in
education, and to take the consequences.
That is really the issue which at the
present moment is presented to us. Those
who think it may be avoided by the extension
of voluntary religious teaching after school
hours are simply shutting their eyes to patent
and inevitable facts. It has been pointed
out again and again that while the Protestant
ministers of religion are in number less than
a fourth of the state school teachers, it is
vain to look to them to give adequate religious
instruction to all the children in the
colony, in addition to doing the special
work of their calling. It is said that
a large staff of voluntary lay assistants


might be found available. I reply that in the I sincerity with which we object to purely
country districts, where the need is greatest,
it is almost impossible to find a single
individual who has sufficient ability and
leisure for the task. Under the energetic
leadership of Mr. Saint, whose work has
been beyond praise, a determined attempt
has been made to provide religious instruc-
tion by voluntary effort to the children of
the Prahran district, and with what result as
to teaching ? I find that in this district no
fewer than 12 ministers are engaged in
teaching, in addition to five laymen and
seven ladies. But where in the country can
you get 12 ministers and 12 lay people for
three schools ? I know country districts in
which you can only get one minister and no
lay person for from five to seven schools. Very
recently the Bible in State Schools League
sent a circular to 306 boards of advice asking
for a return of the numbers receiving volun-
tary religious instruction in the state schools.
Answers came from only 244 of these, so that
the return is not complete. One may, how-
ever, safely assume that the boards which
have not answered are not those which have
favourable results to report. It we make
this assumption, the returns show that out
of a total number of 220,000 children only
21,393 were receiving voluntary religious in-
struction. Of this number 11,363 resided in
Melbourne, leaving only 10,030 for all the
other towns and townships of the colony.
No fewer than 142 of the boards reported
that there was no religious instruction in
their district. I will not say that a very de-
termined effort might not improve this
result, but I am sure that no voluntary effort
could improve it greatly. The number of lay-
men able and willing to give religious instruc-
tion on week days is much smaller than any
one imagines. We are so busy a people, and
there are so few hands to do the necessary
work of our lives, that we cannot hope to
find a large class in our midst with leisure
and culture for such a work for many years to
come. In the country such a class is ab-
solutely non-existent. It has been suggested
that the religious bodies might combine, and
raise a fund for the payment of religious
teachers. Such a scheme would involve an
outlay which is utterly beyond the means of
these bodies, if even the initial difficulties of
combination and administration had been
overcome. I am entirely in favour of push-
ing on the voluntary movement to the utmost
of our power. I think that if we fail to do
so, Government may fairly question the
secular instruction. But there is nothing of
which 1 am more certain than of this —
That our utmost efforts, unless supple-
mented by those of the whole body of state
school teachers, will be inadequate to the
task which we are attempting. If, however,
we are to obtain the aid of the state school
teachers, there must be some modification of
the act, and if any be made, the question
naturally arises, how far shall it go ? I think
it would be of very little use to permit state
school teachers to volunteer to add to their
labours without any corresponding remunera-
tion. They have often been kind enough to
keep order by their presence. But it is too
much to expect that they would voluntarily
add to the hours of their permanent labour.
What alteration, then, I may be asked, do
you seek ? Precisely that which the commis-
sioners recommend. They differed as to the
best method of meeting the Roman Catholic
difficulty, and therefore I leave that difficulty
out of consideration. In regard, however,
to the proper method of meeting the
needs and demands of Protestant Christians
they were agreed, and I think we ought to
press on Government the importance of
carrying their recommendations into effect.
Shortly they are these following:—(1) That
an interpretation clause be introduced into
the act, whereby the term “secular instruc-
tion” shall be declared to “include general
religious teaching of a non-sectarian cha-
racter (2) that the school curriculum shall
include such Scripture lessons as those con-
tained in the book issued by the Board of
National Education in Ireland, such lessons
to be given before or after the time set apart
for secular education, a conscience clause
being added for the protection of children
whose parents do not wish them to receive
religious instruction; (3) that such instruc- ,
tion may be given by any teacher approved
by the parents ; (4) that religious instruction
may be given by as many of the state school
teachers as are willing to impart it.
It is only in the last of these recommenda-
tions that I should propose a slight alteration.
Instead of merely permitting teachers to give
religious instruction, I would require all to
give it who did not allege a conscientious ob-
jection. Under the former condition a man
might refuse to teach simply because he did
not care to take the trouble to do so ; while
under the latter he could only claim exemp-
tion on the ground that he did not believe
what he was asked to teach. The supply of


substitutes for the latter class of objectors energies—by the desire to make sinful
would not be, 1 believe, beyond the power of
the religious denominations. Kemember,
my friends, that the recommendations above
specified have been adopted unanimously by
a commission of representative laymen, of
different churches, and very various opinions,
after an exhaustive inquiry into the whole
subject. Are we to say that the trouble and
expense of the commission have been
utterly wasted, and that the only use of
their report is to furnish material for
lighting fires? If not, then some action
should be taken upon it Government should
be pressed to give effect to its recommenda-
tions, and Christian men especially should
bestir themselves to obtain a distinct expres-
sion of public opinion upon the subject. The
true friends of the Education Act of Victoria
are not those who fight blindly for the retention
of its one pernicious provision, but those
rather who endeavour to insure its per-
manency by removing its defects.
SALVATION ARMY.
I must say to you a few words about a
spiritual organisation which is working
vigorously in our midst, and which, by the
tremendous power of its enthusiasm, is sure
to affect all our work for good or ill. The
Salvation Army has, I think, a special
mission. Its avowed object is a very large
one—to make every man love God.
Practically, however, its labour is con-
fined almost exclusively to the lowest classes
in our cities and places of considerable popu-
lation. All its methods of appeal are shaped
with a view to reaching those classes, win-
ning their interests, and bringing them into
the kingdom of God. I cannot believe that
its religious patois , its military ritualism, its
noise, and disconcerting familiarity can ever
be made tolerable to men of thought, culture,
and largely developed religious reverence. If
I had to judge this movement by its adapta-
tion to any classes but to those who are
lowest in culture and intelligence, I should
pronounce it a huge mistake, and say it was
destined to disastrous failure. But Ido not
judge it thus. I look upon it as an effort to
win classes which the Christian churches
have not won. And so considered, it must be
judged very differently ; its means must be
estimated with reference to the object which
they are intended to attain. And now I must
say of the Salvation Army, in the first place,
that I believe it to be inspired by the
noblest impulse which can direct human
men love and follow Christ. I see in its
leading ministers and agents a holy self-
denying enthusiasm, which, on the large
scale, is nowhere equalled at the present
time. When I read of the bold assaults
which they make on the very strongholds of
vice in this city—of delicate women risking
insult and braving disease that they may
rescue their fallen sisters from the grasp of
loathsome vice and reckless violence—l feel
my heart go out to them in love and ad-
miration. They are God’s children. They
are Christ’s people. If the Master were
here, I am sure that He would own them and
honour them, and set them above me. If
they don’t shame all of us into more earnest
self-denying efforts to fight the great foes of
Christ and humanity, it must be because our
hearts are cold, and we have lost the glow of
our first love. Again, I must say that in
reading their book of doctrine and discipline I
have been very much struck by the sanctified
common sense which to a very large extent
leavens its teaching. It is old-fashioned
Evangelical Christianity, with a few of its
excellencies, and also with some of what I
should call its objectionable features, left
out. The firmness and fulness with which it
insists upon holiness of heart and life are
most cheering. Antinomianism as a doctrine
is, I should say, impossible in the Salvation
Army. It is refreshing to see with what
trenchant common sense Mr. Booth de-
molishes the idea that a man can be living a
twofold life—the one perfectly holy, and the
other utterly fleshly. It was also somewhat
of a surprise to me to find that this authorita-
tive book repudiates the doctrine of sinless
perfection. It is true that we still find in it
the claim of “ entire sanctification,” not only
as an aim, but as a realised fact. But when
we come to ask what is meant by “entire
sanctification,” we find a meaning attached
to the words which is different from that
which they naturally convey. It is a kind of
sanctification, we are told, which admits of
growth, and which answers to the pulling up
of weeds in a garden, in order that the more
profitable plants therein may make better and
more fruitful growth. There is, of course, a great
deal of confusion in this representation. The
great weed is selfishness —the good plant is
love. Selfishness cannot be entirely plucked
up while love is yet imperfect; for the only
thing which hinders the perfection of love is
the presence of selfishness. We must be
prepared, however, in a popular movement


like this for some confusion of thought and vised his officers never to read the news-
expression. If the Army Manual would
only adopt some less misleading words than
“ entire sanctification ” to describe its mean-
ing, there would be little to quarrel with
upon this point. But I fear the kind of
people for whom the book is written will not
easily distinguish between the “sinless per-
fection,” which it condemns and the “entire
sanctification” which it affirms. There are
again some excellent practical directions in
the book for the conduct of mission services
amongst the poor. What can be better than
the reminder that “anything will be pardoned
by the mob rather than dulness ?" Or what
better directions could be given for the
avoidence of dulness than such as these :
“ Short, sharp speaking, full of facts and il-
lustrations.” “Plenty of lively, sharp singing
to plaintive or merry tunes —song tunes for
preference.” “ Plenty of music. Music
always means life and interest, and never
loses its charm.” “ Never practisemor allow
tomfoolery.” Might not some of our ru-
bric worshippers study with advantage such
directions as these when laying their
plans to get hold of the less educated
classes ? Nothing, to my mind, can be
better than our ordinary services, judiciously
shortened and varied, for people of education
and reverent character. But these services
are entirely out of place when an effort is
made to get at the rougher classes of our
alienated home heathen. Use the church’s
services at the times appointed for them,
by all means. But what is to prevent
any of us from having short, sharp-
cpeaking, lively singing, and plenty of
music at mission services, out of the
ordinary hours. There is full liberty
of prophesying for the clergy, full liberty
of singing for the people, and if any
one should think himself restricted as to
prayers by the clergyman’s promise that ‘‘ in
public prayer and administration of the sac-
raments he will use the form in the said book
prescribed, and none other, except so far as
shall be ordered by lawful authority,” I
shall be glad to authorise suitable prayers to
be said out of canonical hours, as far as I
may. Of course, there is much in this book
of the Salvation Army of which no English
churchman can approve. There is a great
deal of narrow asceticism. There is a con-
tempt for the results of honest and reverent
thought which is nothing less than amazing.
Unless I had read it, I would not have be-
lieved that an intelligent man could have ad-
papers or anything connected with secular
and religious literature, but to confine
themselves to the study of the Bible,
the Salvation Hymn Book, the general
orders . of the army, and the War
Cry. Again, what can anyone ex-
perience but sorrow and recoil at such
suggestions as the following, in re-
spect to bills and posters. After the
recommendation of glaring colours, and so
forth, it is suggested “they can be carried
about on an umbrella, on a man’s hat, round
his person like a church bell, with his head
out at the top and his feet at the bottom,
or in ten thousand different forms.” And
then, after these precious suggestions,
it is added, to stir the imagination
and stimulate ingenuity, “Invent for your-
selves.” Could the man who wrote those
words have had in his mind his own ex-
cellent rule, “There must be nothing which
would not be in perfect harmony with
the feelings of Jesus Christ, if He were
present with you in the flesh.” Can anyone
imagine Jesus Christ sending his apostles
through Jerusalem so bedizened, or tolerating
the kind of testimonies and the scenes of
uproar which are permitted, and even en-
couraged, at many meetings of the army?
That is just what repels me. I can
make great allowances when I remember
the mental inertness, the rude vulgarity,
the gross animalism of the classes
principally addressed. But I cannot believe
that much which is done at army meetings
is “in agreement with the feelings of Jesus
Christ ; ” and 1 grieve to see noble men and
women, whom I love and admire for their
work’s sake, condescending to such unworthy
vulgarities for any cause whatever. I fear
that instead of lifting what they call “the
mob” to Jesus Christ’s level, they will in
time let the mob pull them down to its own.
One thing more I must say has astonished
and pained me in the doctrine of the Salva-
tion Army—the manner in which it deals
with the sacraments of the Christian Church.
Scanty enough surely is the ritual which our
Lord appointed, and how those whose pro-
ceedings are throughout so ritualistic can
treat their Master’s appointment in this par-
ticular with such contemptuous disregard
I am unable to conceive. The ques-
tion is asked in the manual, “Does
the army consider baptism as a duty
which must be performed ? ” And the
answer is, “ Decidedly not.” But who was it


then who said, “Go into all the world and
make disciples of all nations, baptising them
into the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, and teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have com-
manded you?” Jesus Christ says, make
men disciples by baptising and by teaching.
The army says teaching is enough, bap-
tising is not necessary. The quibbling inter-
pretations by which the manual seeks to
evade this dilemma show, I fear, something
worse than ignorance. The question is
asked, “Was not baptism by water quite a
common rite among the early Christians ? ”
And the almost incredible reply is given,
“ Yes ; and so was circumcision, shaving the
head, washing the feet of the saints, and
many other Jewish ceremonies.” Surely the
thought must have suggested itself to the
composer of this outrageous sentence—“ Did
Jesus Christ command His Apostles to make
disciples of all men by circumcising
them or shaving their heads?” Nay,
were not the Gentiles forbidden to
practise circumcision by the same Apostle,
who declares “ all we, who were baptised
into Jesus Christ were baptised into His
death,” and again “ as many of you as were
baptised into Christ did put on Christ ?” Such
disingenuous trifling is simply amazing.
Even worse, and more inexcusable is the
slip-shod sentence which answers the
question, “ What is the teaching of the army
on the subject of the Lord’s supper ?” “ When
such an ordinance,” replies this astounding
teacher, “ is helpful to the faith of our
soldiers we recommend its adoption.” So
that everyone is to judge for himself whether
he will obey the Lord’s plain command, “ Do
this in remembrance of Me,” and also
whether he will seek that great gift which is
covered by the words “ This is My body ; this
is My blood.” How could a man like Mr.
Booth, one naturally exclaims, give utterance
to such foolish and pernicious directions
as these. We may be quite sure that
mistakes of such gravity denote some
great oversight, some lamentable omission
of essential truth. And that I believe
is the fact in the present case. In answering
the question, “What did our Saviour do for
us?” the Army Manual replies—(l.) He
made known his father’s will. (2.) He set
forth a perfect example for our meditation.
(3.) He made an atonement for our sins by
his death. Thus Jesus Christ’s connexion
with us would seem to cease with his death.
Not one word is said about that vital union
with Christ which follows belief, or about our
continual communion in his life, and all
which follows from this. The Divine life in a
man’s soul seems to be conceived of as an in-
dependent gift of God. It is not once hinted
that the Holy Spirit only gives to us what
Christ has gained and stored up for us in his
new humanity. And yet the New Testament
and especially the Epistles of St. Paul, are
full of this. A man is a Christian because he
is “in Christbecause he is related to Him
as the branch to the vine, or as the member
of a body to the head ; so that, except a
man “eat the flesh of Christ and
drink his blood,” he has no life in
him. This essential truth, the Army Manual
drops out of its system, a circumstance all
the more remarkable because it has so close
a connexion and affinity with another truth
on which the Manual delights to expatiate—
the personal sanctification of the believer.
The result is twofold—(1) a mechanical
doctrine of the Atonement, and (2) a me-
chanical, or at least unexplained doctrine of
the Holy Spirit. I believe that all the Army’s
offensively materialistic talk about “blood
and fire ” is caused by this fatal omission.
No one, of course, can deny that St. Paul
continually speaks of Christ’s death as a
sacrifice for the sins of the world. But in
what sense? Does any spiritual Christian
believe that there was some magical charm
in the mere bodily accident of Christ’s death,
or that in any literal sense Christ’s blood will
be sprinkled on his conscience ? If not, then
it may be asked why so much stress is laid in
Scripture on the blood and death of Christ ?
First, because it was by His death that
Christ completed that sacrifice of His own
will to God’s, which was required in
the representative of sinful humanity, and,
secondly, because He could only prepare for
us that new life which He came to bestow by
passing through death. Before our whole
humanity can be effectively sanctified, the
life of Jesus, consecrated for us in His own
person, must pass really, however mystically,
into the several individuals who compose the
race. Now, Christ’s death was simply the
most critical and decisive step towards that
consummation. That step taken, all the
rest must surely follow. From death He
would pass to life again through the resurrec-
tion ; after the resurrection, He would go
from earth to heaven ; that, becoming wholly
* ‘ inspirited, ” He might shed forth the glorious
gift of Pentecost. Each of these great events
was a decisive step in the grand procession


by which the Christ without passed on to
become the Christ within—by which the
Babe of Bethlehem passed on through the
streets of Nazareth, and the ways of
Galilee, and the courts of the Temple,
and the Garden of Agony, and the
pains of death, and the kingdom of the
shades, and the golden streets of a recovered
Paradise, into the destined sanctuary of the
human soul to purge it and sanctify it for
God. Each of these was a step; but
the critical, the decisive step, that which
ended the period of trial, and insured all the
rest, was the awful blessed death on Calvary.
Just, then, as the martyr’s death is said to
buy all the political and religious results
thereof, so is the death, the cross, the blood
of Jesus declared to be the means of our re-
demption and atonement with God on the one
side, and of our sanctification on the other.
Now, that is what the Army has never seen.
And hence its vague, aimless, and sometimes
irreverent talk about blood and' its efficacy.
Hence, too, its prevailing idea that the office
of Christ is confined to the giving of
pardon, and that after conversion the soul
is committed to the ministry of the Holy
Spirit, considered as an independent
source of grace. Hence the loss of that
feeling (the deepest and most fruitful of any
in the Apostolic church) that at every instant
the soul is in living union with the living
Redeemer ; and that it is in Him and from
Him that the Spirit ministers to us the gifts
and graces of the new life. And hence, also,
that disdainful depreciation which we
deplore of the signs of all this in the sacra-
ments appointed by our Lord to be of per-
petual and universal observance. Like two
great pillars set at the entrance of the Divine
Temple of Truth, stand the two Christian
sacraments in the New Testament, and upon
them several ly are these two inscriptions, “The
life of God begins by union with Christ,” and
“the life of God continues and grows by
maintaining our union with Christ.” If,
then, the fact itself of this vital union be
ignored, what wonder that the signs and
means ot it are depreciated ? You will see
that I have here marked a grave deficiency in
the doctrinal system of the Salvation Army.
It is right for our own warning and instruc-
tion that we should note it. Other-
wise we might suffer our people to fall
into views which mutilate the fair system of
Christian truth, and into ways which may
lead to the perilous neglect of plain Christian
duties. But do not think that I have made
these observations in the spirit of antago-
nism. Very readily do I admit that it would
be difficult to find a Christian church which
is not obnoxious to criticism ; and even more
readily that our own comparative coldness,
formality, and want of elasticity are shamed
by the enthusiasm and practical resource
of the Salvation Army. The men of it I
must needs love for their love of Christ,
and for their valiant and devoted self-sacri-
fice. Not the less, however, yea, rather all
the more, is it necessary to notice any capital
defects in a new system ; for nothing is more
common or more dangerous than to let the
goodness of a man cover the defects of his
doctrine. I am not even without hope, so
evident is the honest intention, so marked is
the good sense of the compiler or com-
pilers of the Army Manual, that some
of the errors which I have pointed out
may be amended, and a grand effort of
Christian love be made all the grander and
more powerful, all the more secure and
more useful, by conforming more closely to
the mind of Christ
PURITY.
I have been credited by some with making
a suggestion, founded on my own large ob-
servation of the physical characteristics of
our northern territory, which may not be
without its influence on our material pros-
perity. I will now make another, which goes,
I believe, very much nearer to the secret of
our national and individual well being. It
is that every true friend of Australia shall
bend his utmost energies, in this formative
period of our history, to the maintenance
of social purity. The life of the nation
depends on the life of the home,
and that of the home depends on
the purity of the individual. The world
is full of signs that the struggle for
purity is to be the great struggle of
our age. Have any of you been driven
by the sense of duty to read one or
more of the terribly realistic sketches
of the most famous of modern French
story-tellers? If you have, perhaps you
have thrown them down, after reading
a dozen pages, in impatient disgust. I
do not wonder if it were so. Sometimes,
however, one is not permitted to yield to the
first righteous instinct. And, knowing as I
do, that one at least of those stories is the
simple exhibition of facts in Parisian life,
laboriously collected and thoroughly re.
liable, I overcame my dfSgust, and read to


the end. That book is the real record of
French decadence. I do not wish to make
too much of it. I know that there are pure
populations in French villages, and I would
fain hope that the future of a noble race is
not to be determined by the life of its cities.
But should that hope be vain, then I feel
that I know the end of the French nation as
certainly as if I had seen it arrive—in blood-
shed, poverty, and shame. It is not, how-
ever, in Paris alone that the fleshly school
is lifting its brazen face, and inviting
men in the outraged name of nature to de.
vote all the energies of their spiritual being
to the indulgence of animal passion, and the
glorification of carnal luxury. There is a
fleshly school of poetry and art in England ;
and many, alas! of the so-called leaders of
society are making themselves (unwittingly it
may be) the tools of an aestheticism which
has for its heart the heart of a beast.
The apostles of that cult have visited our
own land, and taking advantage of the
temptations of a life, free, bright, prosperous,
and lived under an ardent sun, have sought
to justify or excuse that amongst us which
is our deepest shame. It is our bounden
duty to look this evil straight in the face, to
tear the mask off its painted features, and to
overcome our shame in talking about that
which is shameful, lest taking refuge in its
foulness, this vile gospel of the flesh should
burrow unseen in the hearts of our young
people, and only then reveal itself when it
is too powerful to be overcome. Its com-
mon subterfuge is that it is calling men
to be natural. Let us see, then, if that
be so. Man has a body and bodily instincts,
like the lower animal. As we see in those
animals, it is the purpose of the instinctive
passions to secure the preservation and con-
tinuance of the species. In the lower animals
those instincts operate beneficially, because
they are followed in blind unconsciousness.
They come into active exercise only with the
presence of their appointed stimulants. With
us it is otherwise. Superimposed upon our
animal nature is one of higher kind and finer
quality, that conscious life of intellect, con-
science, and will which is the sole preroga-
tive of man. Our higher faculties have their
appointed objects—the wonders of God’s
wisdom in nature, the complicated relations
of man in society, the great august realities
of the supersensible sphere of religion and
worship, the history of the wonderful past,
the prevision of the more wonderful
future. When our higher faculties go forth
to their proper objects and find a
worthy exercise in their predestined sphere,
the instinctive passions are left untormented
to perform their beneficent purpose in man
as in the lower creatures. It is possible,
however, in an unbelieving materialistic age
so to discredit some of the loftiest objects of
human thought, and so to neglect others, as
to draw down all the glorious powers of our
human nature into the low province of sense,
and to bid them find their only exercise in
connexion with the pleasures and interests
which meet them there. What, then, follows ?
That the whole force of man’s conscious life,
of his far-reaching intellect, of his potently
creative imagination, of his masterful will,
and of the culture which comes from memory
and association, are exerted to enlarge, in-
tensify, and diversify the pleasures which
belong to his lowly instincts. But these poor
impulses were never designed to bear such a
strain. They and their purposes are essen-
tially simple. So pressed and strained
beyond their capacity, they are driven into
irritation and monstrosity. They become the
fruitful source of bodily disease, mental dis-
quiet, and emotional torment. They drag
down the loftiest faculties of the soul into
the mire of their unnatural debasement. And
at length by this horrible process, man, made
in the image of God, is reduced to the image
of a beast possessed by the soul of a fiend—
a creature without sense of duty, thought
of God, power of self-control, or capacity
for self-denial. Then the individual and
national ruin is consummated. Then if
a pestilence like the cholera makes its ap-
pearance, it finds a nation of cowards whose
only thought is to escape the natural death,
which is their uttermost idea of evil. Then
the attack of a horde of savages, once no
more to them than that of so many wild
beasts, becomes a terror and a danger. No
man will suffer for his fellow —no man will
run risks for his fellow. Society is ground
down into a collection of selfish, non-coher-
ing atoms, and, resolved thus into its ele-
ments, perishes. It is useless to deny that
this young society of ours is threatened with
such disaster, for the elements of danger lie
all around us, and on the very surface of our
life. Immigrants bring them from Europe,
criminals bring them from New Cale-
donia, literature brings them some-
times openly displayed, sometimes subtly
hidden in stories, reviews, and even
philosophies. And these fruitful germs of
evil fall on no uncongenial soil. They find


in a city like Melbourne a rampant larri-
kinism, impudent, irreligious, idle, self-
indulgent, capable of forms of brutal vice
and crime which make the blood run cold ;
they find a system of prostitution so hideous
that its facts have to be hidden away from
decent eyes in Parliamentary blue-books;
they find, too, I fear, in some quarters prac-
tices of immorality which, if less infamous,
are scarcely less pernicious than these, the
existence of which no one affects to doubt
but those whose interest it is to conceal
them. What, then, are we to do in this
strait ? I answer at once—organise resistance
to the evil. It is not enough that we indivi-
dually hate and avoid it. If we are to resist
it effectually, to drive it back, and to deliver
our children and the future race of this great
and glorious country from ruin, we must
create a public opinion which will not
tolerate it—which will smite with the
whip of public shame and reprobation any
man, no matter how rich or great, who
lends to it his countenance or the support
of his example. Law can do something
for us by prohibiting and punishing the
vilest forms of the evil. But law can
never grapple effectually with a spiritual
influence. Thoughts are things of too subtle
a mould to be grasped by the hand of a police-
man. Impurity is a thing too secret and
intangible to be set at the bar of a court.
You may have a city as gay, as brilliant, as
orderly as Paris, and have at the same time
(as Pere Hyacinthe says is the case now)
150,000 harlots in its houses. A spiritual
force like this must be met and encountered
by a spiritual antagonist—one which knows
and seeks its enemy, which meets him at
every point of social life, and will tolerate his
presence nowhere. It is this conviction
which has led to the formation of a white
cross union in our church. We refused
to adopt any badge, thinking that on
such a subject as this, at least, our
efforts must be as silent and unob-
trusive as they are real and efficient. We
refused to call ourselves an army, dreading
the intrusion of that military slang, and of
those mock military titles which sooner or
later make the best movements grotesque.
We have a object—to resist the
growth of impurity—and we adopt a definite
means of resisting it, the power of the cross
of Christ. These things we have indicated
in our white cross, and beyond that in the
way of symbolism we do not intend to go.
The society hopes to gain its members among
our young men. While, therefore, urging
the clergy to push it forward in their parishes
let me give to young men a few reasons for
enrolling themselves in its ranks. The best—
it should be the all-sufficient reason—is fur-
nished by the natural relation which God has
established between the man and the women.
Man is the stronger creature —stronger in his
physical development, stronger in his intel-
lectual grasp, and stronger, far stronger, in
his force of will. Now, why has God
made this inequality of the sexes
a natural ordinance? We know that
in many species of the lower creatures
the female is the stronger and more
formidable animal. Why, then, was it not so
ordered in the human species ? It is rash to
attempt to specify final causes, but we can-
not go wrong, in looking for an answer to
such a question, in the direction of the
faculties which are peculiar to the human
race. Man alone among earthly creatures
has a moral consciousness, and it is upon
obedience to the imperative dictates of this
consciousness that his worth and happiness
mainly depend. What, then is the secret
of moral health and greatness ? It is the
subordination of the selfish to the altruistic
impulses. Let a human beinar forget self in
devoted service to what is weaker than self,
and he is already on the highroad to moral
nobility. For woman, the natural stimulus
to such self-forgetfulness is furnished by the
relation of the mother to the child; for
man, by the natural weakness and clinging
dependence of the woman. Why is the
weaker appointed to bear the pain and
helplessness of maternity—why is she for
so large a part of her life, especially
in civilised communities, absolutely de-
pendent on man for subsistence and
protection? Why is her nature set to the
law of these natural conditions, so that, with-
out effort or sense of disharmony, she can
accept a position of dependence and trustful
love, feeling it her greatest joy to give herself
to her beloved ? That she may be to the man
what her child is to her, and that thus our
whole wondrous human life may become one
great school of virtue. The equality of mere
atomism is simply a school of selfishness, a
provocation of strife, an organisation of
egotism and discord. Harmony, love, moral
development, implies distinction and grada-
tions of functions and powers. And there-
fore is such distinction and gradation made a


part of our very nature. We look for a time
when sickness, poverty, and misery shall be
indefinitely diminished. If, therefore, the
altruistic and sympathetic instincts depended
on the mere service and relief of suffering, it
would seem as if men must become less
moral as the race grew happier. But this is
as far as possible from being the case. If
sickness, destitution, and sorrow were
banished from the world to-morrow, the
helplessness of the child would still call for
the self-devotion of the mother, the weak-
ness of the woman for the chivalrous and
knightly devotion of the man. Still, and for
ever, the Christian law of unselfish service is
the law of the noble life ; still, and for ever,
the cross of self-sacrifice is the symbol of a
great and gentle nature. Can we say, then,
on the warrant of nature, not less than on
that of Scripture, that the man is the head of
the woman ? Then, it follows that the man
is bound to serve the woman, and to use his
utmost strength to guard her from scath
and wrong. Feel tenderly to every woman
—the humblest and plainest—feel that it is
unworthy of your manhood to abuse her
divinely-implanted trust in you, and readi-
ness to sacrifice herself for you—feel that it is
as much the action of a cur and a blackguard
to wrong a woman as it would be to oppress
a child, and then your manhood will grow,
your courage, your self-control, your chivalroua
gentleness, and it will be with more right
than the proud Douglases of old that
you will write upon your shield “ Tender
and true.” Who are the strong men, the
bold men, the men of such high knightly
character that all look to them for leading,
and lean on them in danger ? They
are the pure-hearted men, the men who look
on women as sacred beings, made sacred by
their weakness and trustfulness, and, above
all, by their holy functions as priestesses of
the home. If man be the head of woman,
woman is the heart of man, the natural fount
of those holier and tenderer feelings which
are too often dulled or dried up in the hard
conflicts and selfish interests of his life.
That is why it is a liberal education to live
with a pure, high-minded woman. She
elevates a man’s motives, stimulates his
imagination, purifies his feelings, and adds
tenfold to his moral force and influence,
whether in the church or the state.
Woe to him, then, if in his passionate
selfishness he corrupts his heart, and
abuses a weakness which was associated
with hia life to call out its nobleat and moa
chivalrous impulaea. Careful obaervera of
human life have often been aurpriaed
at the subtle, wide-reaching degeneration
of character which attends sins of impurity.
Their influence seems to reach to the distant
recesses of the spirit, and to have a power of
breaking down and deteriorating every moral
impulse, which is like nothing so much as
that which is exerted by certain subtle
poisons upon the bodily tissues. Whence
then, it has been asked, does this sin derive
its tremendously noxious and far-reaching
power? I think I have already answered
that question. From its intrinsic baseness ;
from the continually hardening force of
selfishness which is required to shut the ears
to that voice of woman’s suffering, which, as
the sin developes its consequences, pleads so
mightily to man’s natural pity ; above all,
from the extinction of that divinely appointed
stimulus of man’s sympathetic impulses
which is furnished by the pure relation of
husband and wife, of youth and betrothed
maiden. Trample on woman, and you
trample on your own moral nature. Re-
spect woman, care for her, work for her, give
her knightly shelter and protection from the
human beasts who would wring a moment’s
pleasure from her ruin, and with continually
accelerating force, in secret unconscious ways
of which we can give no account, you shall
find the loftier emotions gaining sway in your
heart, and touching your life to finer issues.
Believe me, the maintenance of purity in the
relations of the sexes is vital to national
greatness and prosperity. For in the re-
lation of husband to wife, of parent to
child, through long gradations of mutual
tenderness and support, each is bound to
each and all “with golden chains about the
feet of God.” Break once those golden links
of loving help and service, and all the strong
bonds of civilised society will be weakened
and loosed ; men will be driven asunder into
selfish atomism, and the whole ,firm struc-
ture of the commonwealth fall into ruin.
Resolve then, that whatever be the temp-
tations which assail you, you will resist
them in the might of Christ, that never by
any act or word of yours will you become
guilty of the murder of a woman’s body and
soul; thatifyouseesomeconsciencelesswretch
stealthily weaving the web of seduction round
a helpless maiden’s feet, you will with all
your strength rend it in pieces and take the
consequences. Fight down the ape within


0 15
you. Trust in the might of Him who is religion have been prosecuting their woi
greater than the world. Be vigilant—be
confident.
“ So niffh to glory is our dust,
So nigh is God to man,
When duty whispers low, Thou must,
The soul replies, I can.”
And by way of strengthening this resistance
of your individual will, take measures to
create a public opinion which shall be a
terror to every evil doer. Law, as I have
said, can do but little, but public opinion can
overawe and bridle the mightiest trans-
gressors in the world. Organise yourselves,
therefore, into a vast white-cross union, the
members of which shall be pledged to stand
together, to seek the life of the King of
Purity in Holy Communion, and to strike
with all their collective force against the dark
fiend of social corruption. You not only
double your strength, you increase it a
myriad-fold by association. gain
thus the force of sympathy, the conscious-
ness that a thousand minds are perfecting
your plans. A thousand hands are sustain-
ing your work; a thousand voices are swell-
ing your prayers. You will thus create a
literature, a propaganda of purity ; above all,
a banded might of righteous opinion, before
which the boldest libertine will shrink and
falter. Oh ! whether you be young or
old, think, I pray you, of the holy names
of sister, wife, and mother; think of all
the holy influences which stream forth
upon an evil world from the relations which
those sacred names represent, and resolve,
one and all, that under no sky from which
the sun shines down, shall those names have
a holier, tenderer meaning, than in this fair
land of our birth or adoption. Do much and
dare much in this blessed cause, resolving
that if you cannot conquer at once, at least
you will do what in you lies to prepare the
victory for a coming generation. Remember
what the poet has said about that glorious de-
feat which is the pledge and condition of
ultimate victory—
“ They outtalked thee, hiss’d thee, tore thee—
Better men fared thus before thee ;
Fired their ringing shot and passed,
Hotly charged, and sank at last.
“ Charge once more then, and be dumb !
Let the victors, when they come,
When the forts of folly fall,
Find thy body by the wall ! ”
THE CLERGY.
One word to the clergy, and I have done.
For a whole generation the ministers of
religion have been prosecuting their work
under the pressure of crippling disabilities.
From a past full of mistakes and short-
comings they' - 'inherited a popular distrust,
which identified- them with the party of
privilege and reaction. Again, without any
fault of their own, they found themselves
confronted by a parasitic philosophy,
which, winding its poisonous and strang-
ling arms about the healthy trunk
modern science, craftily identified itself* *
with that which it concealed, and created the *■ '
pretended conflict between religious and
scientific truth. Once more, as if these diffi-
culties were not enough to test their courage
and resource, Christian ministers in these
southern lands have had to contend with all
the disadvantages of division, competition,
poverty, exhausting toil, and the thousand
privations attendant on the rough and ever-
changing circumstances of a new settlement.
Their life has been a hard one, and, if at
times oppressed and weary, battling des-
perately with adverse influences, and de-
pressed by indifference or contempt, they
have felt as though their efforts were hope-
less, who amongst us is entitled to question
their fidelity, or to stand apart and say, I am
holier than thou ? It has been a weary fight
for many. But take courage my beloved
brethren. The clouds are lifting, the stum-
bling-blocks are being rolled away. He whom
we have served in the darkness is visibly
coming out of His place to honour his faith-
ful servants, and to prove to them once again
that He is the Lord of man’s heart,
and that not one of his words of promise
shall fail of its fulfilment. Be it ours then to
cast away every theory, however venerable,
which is more or other than His words will
justify, to affirm boldly everything which He
has taught us, however apparently para-
doxical or opposed to powerful interests ; to
set Him forth fully as the Friend of the poor,
the Saviour of the sinful, the Divine Founder
of that Kingdom of God, in which strength
is to be the servant of weakness, love the
destruction of privilege, and the brotherhood
of man the crowning glory of the Gospel of
the Fatherhood of God; and then, sooner,
perhaps, than we have ventured to hope,
and in secret marvellous ways past man’s
finding out, the heart of the world shall
be opened to receive our message, to
rejoice with us in its blessedness, and to
cherish it as the truth and the power of
God.


••e^uo
# p.ia.'76'-1
■\i^
MELBOURNE:
STILLWELL AND CO. PRINTERS,
COLLINS STREET EAST.




