

Petv* v*tevv)
KCLiaiOUS PAN 3
OOX M
ADDRESS
JAMES MOOR HOUSE, D. D.
BISHOP OF MELBOURNE
(He Clnirfb of ®ngknir Assembtjr
MELBOURNE
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1883
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
HUlbournc
SAMUEL MULLEN, COLLINS STREET EAST
Price Sixpence.
~ _ . > / . / ) 4
*2 w w ■' » /




THE BISHOP’S ADDRESS
Cburrjj of (Shtglanb
At the opening of the Church of England
Assembly on Monday afternoon, September 24,
the Bishop of Melbourne (Dr. Moorhouse)
delivered his annual address to the clergy and
laity of the diocese.
The Bishop of Melbourne said My
Brethren of the Clergy and of the Laity,—
We are met again in stormy and troublous
times to take counsel for the benefit and
guidance of that branch of Christ’s Holy
Catholic Church of which we are members.
You will naturally expect me to say some-
thing to you about the most urgent questions
of the day ; but I must first remind you in a
few brief words of the ordinary wants of the
diocese.
THE BISHOP OF MELBOURNE’S FUND.
Our most important organisation is the
Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund. Upon this
depends the amount of help which we shall
be able to give to our country clergy, who are
labouring in the midst of poor and scattered
populations. Upon it depends no less the
employment of that large auxiliary corps of
stipendiary readers, without the aid of whom
the poorest, remotest, and most neglected of
our fields of labour would have to be aban-
doned, the church organisations in them
broken up, and their people—born in our
church, and earnestly desiring her ministra-
tions—left to the occasional and charitable
aid of other denominations. In one word,
I may say that the whole of our
bush mission-work depends on the help
furnished by this fund. Any failure, therefore,
to give it vigorous and liberal support would
immediately inflict upon those least able to
bear it serious pecuniary loss, and would in-
evitably lead to the abandonment of that
portion of our work which most urgently
needs to be done. Nor could such negligence
fail to re-act perniciously upon those who
were guilty of it. The heart may easily starve
the extremities, but not without feeling itself
the fatal influence of a disturbed circulation
and enfeebled vitality. The body is one, and
if any member thereof be diseased, the poison
of its morbid condition will be speedily and
righteously diffused throughout the frame.
Popular misunderstandings warn me that I
must repeat information of another kind
respecting this fund, which ought by this
time, one would think, to have become un-
necessary. The Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund
is not only our Home Mission Fund, but also
our Clerical Education Fund. lam glad to
learn from Mr. Leeper that his generous offer
of evening instruction on liberal terms is
bearing good fruit. Many promising young
students are offering themselves as candi-
dates for the ministry of our church. The
theological scholarships are already too few
for the applicants ; and the requirements of
business seriously impede the progress of those
who can only give the overplus of their time
and energy to the work upon which they
have set their heart. A few more theological
scholarships would at this time be peculiarly
valuable. But, meantime, assistance can
only be furnished to these students from the
Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund. How impor-
tant it is, at such a crisis as the present, to
encourage young men of devotion and ability
to consecrate their talents to the service of
Christ in the ministry of His church, I need
not stop to prove to you. Under God, the
church’s whole future may be said to depend
on the ability and character of her clergy.
No efforts, then, should be spared to help
forward those who, by their natural gifts and
the vocation of God, are plainly marked out
as the future heralds of salvation. But to
starve the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund is to
make such aid impossible, and to throw
away those precious opportunities which
Providence is placing within our reach. We
have lost, alas ! the most generous supporter
who ever gave aid to this fund. Since we
last came together our friend Mr. Grice has


been called to his rest. Simple, modest, and whose courage and judgment his brethren
retiring in character, he was a man whose
whole life and conduct were swayed by
Christian principle—one of the very few who,
in an age of talk and dispute, let his acts
speak more loudly than his words. The
death of such men is a public calamity.
For though little is said of them while
they live, their noble silent deeds stand forth
as a visible witness of the power of divine
grace ; stirring in the hearts of the good and
true, not merely feelings of hope and grati-
tude, but resolves of larger labour, and more
real self-sacrifice. The thought of Mr. Grice
always did me good. The spectacle of his
silent sturdy principle, which would not talk,
and would not be flattered, was a sign to me
that the deep and simple faith of my boyhood
was not dead ; and whatever others may have
done I honoured the good man in ray own
thoughts exceedingly. Last year his family
generously kept up his noble subscription to
the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund, for which I
desire to express to them our grateful thanks.
But, my brethren, when God takes away from
His church such members of it as our de-
parted brother, He does in effect summon us
all to simpler faith and greater liberality.
May He preserve us from turning a deaf ear
to such a summons, and show to us, as He
did to His servant whom He has taken to
Himself, the immense importance of the
work which lies before us. Consider, I pray
you, the continual and healthy development
of work which we have been privileged to
witness during the past few years ; consider
the large and vital interests which would be
compromised by any adverse change in
the position of the Bishop of Mel-
bourne’s Fund ; consider especially that
as this is our sole fund for the
furtherance of general objects, refusal to
contribute to it implies refusal to help your
church in any way outside the borders of
your own parish; and you will need, I am
sure, no further exhortation to give to it a
large, a liberal, and an increasing support.
The mention of Mr. Grice reminds me that
the church has recently lost in the late Canon
Becher one of the ablest and most respected
of its clergy. Since I came to the diocese
Canon Becher has been in declining health,
but he struggled bravely with increasing
infirmities so long as he could labour for the
Master whom he loved. Canon Becher, as
all those testify who knew him in the days of
his health and energy, was a man whose
help no one ever sought in vain, and upon
were wont to rely in every emergency. Those
who knew him best loved him best, and his
memory will long be cherished as that of a
faithful minister of Jesus Christ, who, having
served God in his own generation, fell asleep
in the hope of a glorious resurrection.
TRINITY COLLEGE.
I have already referred to the need of addi-
tional theological scholarships in Trinity
College, and before quite passing away from
that subject, I may perhaps be allowed to call
attention to another want which has re-
cently made itself felt in the same
institution. Through the liberality of
Sir W. J. Clarke and Mr. Joseph Clarke,
we have been able to finish and throw open
to students the block of buildings (named
after their donors) which forms the com-
mencement of our handsome court. The
Clarke buildings are rapidly filling with
students, and there is good reason for
believing that at the beginning of next year
they will be full. This is exactly what we
hoped and desired. But it has created a new
difficulty. The child has grown so rapidly
that it has quite grown out of its clothes.
The old chapel is found too small to accom-
modate all the students. Now, what are we
to do in this emergency? No one would
advise us to exclude students from divine
worship because we have no room for them.
But, if not, then we must needs build either
a temporary wooden chapel or the handsome
permanent chapel which Mr. Blackett
designed for us. We have already got a
temporary wooden dining-hall, which must
some day come down. Surely it would be
better not to waste further money by building
a temporary chapel.
THE SUNDAY SCHOOLS.
I have recently inspected a large num-
ber of our Melbourne Sunday schools.
I find that they are of very unequal
efficiency, and that thus any report of
their condition which based itself upon the
examination of one or two of the most
conspicuous would hardly be worth the
paper it was written upon. Show schools,
like show sermons, are apt to be misleading,
and yet it is generally of show schools that
we get reports in the newspapers. To compare
the teaching power in our Sunday-schools
with that in the state schools is simply ridi-
culous. You might as well compare half-
drilled militia men with soldiers of the line.
In the one case we have trained teachers re-


quired to reach a definite standard of know- tion to do it well. Nothing in this world
ledge and skill; in the other, volunteers who
may have in many cases received no training
at all. No doubt zeal and enthusiasm go a
long way to make up for technical defects
where there is natural ability, but training is
sure to tell, as it does in a marked manner,
upon the rank and file. It is a great disadvan-
tage to our Sunday-schools that the pious
teachers of our day schools often find them-
selves prevented from engaging on the Sun-
day in the work which lies nearest to their
hand. In England they not only lend large
personal aid, but also set an example of dis-
cipline and method which other teachers are
not slow to imitate. Our metropolitan schools
would be greatly strengthened if more of the
day school teachers would volunteer where
they may to render service on Sundays. As
it is, in many classes, through the teachers’
want of knowledge, method, alertness, firm-
ness, and general mental resource, there is
hardly any pretence of order and attention
among the scholars. Three or four may be
attending, but the rest are trilling, laughing,
playing, or yawning. Such scholars are not
taught. They have been kept out of mischief;
they have been made to feel such sense of
order as the loose discipline of the school im-
poses, and they no doubt receive bene-
fit from the school prayers and hymns and
general addresses. But surely this ought not
to satisfy us. These children give us their
time and presence, and we ought to take care
that the utmost advantage is taken of these
inestimable gifts. So long as there is one
scholar untaught in a school there is an ines-
timable opportunity wasted. How, then, are
we to secure that no one shall remain un-
taught ? I would suggest, first, a very large
increase in the number of model lessons. We
want not merely one or two central lessons
in the year—useful as these are—but similar
lessons in every district of the city, for every
group of three or four schools. The sight of
a class well managed and thoroughly in-
terested, catechised and not preached to, no
single boy being suffered to drop his eyes, or
send his thoughts wool-gathering for a single
moment, would show not only that such a
thing can be done, but also how it is to be
done. Again, clergymen ought to make a
conscience of holding weekly teachers’ meet-
ings, and teachers ought to make a conscience
of attending them. Does the love of
Christ impel you to undertake this
great and blessed work? Then the same
love ought to inspire you with the determina-
which was ever worth doing at all could be
done without trouble, without steady and
persevering effort. Let us all, then, try to
take more pains, and be ready to submit to
the self-sacrifice which painstaking always
imposes. Let the clergy take pains in preparing
the lesson for the teachers’ class. It is quite
as much worth trouble as the Sunday sermon;
nay, if we only remember that it is the teach-
ing of those who are to teach others, and
those others the whole body of children who
are to form the next generation, perhaps it is
more worth trouble than anything which the
clergyman does. Let him then first carefully
prepare a logical analysis of the lesson, one
which shall bring out all its principal
thoughts, and arrange them in their due
subordination. Then let him try to give flesh
and nerves, life and colour, to this skeleton, by
deductive amplification, apt analogy, and
bright illustration, keeping all the while as
near as he can to the ways of common life,
and to the thoughts and things with which
the children are familiar. The preparation
of such a lesson requires time and effort. It
cannot be thrown together in half-an-hour of
hasty meditation. Lessons so prepared de-
ceive no one. Their confusion, their poverty,
the staleness of their thought, the tiresome
iteration of their too-well-remembered illustra-
tions, too plainly betray their origin. We of
the clergy must take pains in the preparation
of teachers’ lessons, and then we shall have
the great reward not only of seeing full and
interested classes, but of feeling that glow of
satisfaction in saying something worthy to be
said, which Dr. Hook declared to be the
greatest enjoyment of his life. But next, the
teachers must make a conscience of at-
tending such classes, and of working at
them and after them. If the clergy-
man should adopt the excellent plan of
printing the outlines of his lessons by
any of the handy little machines now in use,
don’t let the teacher imagine that the dead
skeleton on the slip of paper is any sufficient
substitute for the full and bright exposition, the
glow of common sympathy, the charm of the
living voice. Do believe me, you that are
Sunday-school teachers, for I speak from
painful experience, more study is necessary
on your part if the children are to be in any
true sense of the word taught. lam not of
course speaking to the few who are diligent,
but to the many who are not. If then, on
the day of the class, you feel a 1 ittle tired, or are
asked to a pleasant party, or fancy you would


like to take a stroll with a friend, remind fall short of the lofty ideal which he has set
yourself that Sunday is coming, with its up for himself. But then I know that he has
blessed privileges, with its solemn responsi.
bilities, and that if you idly or selfishly de-
prive yourself of the advantage within your
reach, not only will every child in your class
be the worse for it, but you will lose yourself,
both in character as a Christian, and in
happiness and usefulness as a teacher.
MISSIONS TO THE CHINESE AND ABORIGINES.
Turning now to another subject, it seems to
me that the church mission to the Chinese and
aborigines has peculiar claims on our in-
terest. The latter once owned the land we
dwell in, and have been perforce driven back
and dispossessed as we pushed forward our
settlement and cultivation. The former are
the representatives among us of one-third of
the human race. They seem to have been
sent to us in the order of Divine Providence,
that learning amongst us the truth and
power of the Gospel, they may become mis-
sionaries of the Cross to that swarmingpopula-
tion which we find it so difficult to approach.
Surely these peculiar relations lay upon
us a special duty towards two these races, and
should stimulate us to greater efforts than we
have yet made to discharge it worthily.
THE NEW BISHOP OF SYDNEY.
I learnt with great pleasure the other day that
Dr. Barry had formally accepted the position
of Bishop of Sydney. Australia will now have
a primate, and, with God’s blessing on his
work, such a primate as will make his in-
fluence felt for good in every diocese of this
wide continent. The Church of Christ in
Sydney has been doubly widowed by the loss
of him whose death we last year deplored,
and more recently by the sudden and unex-
pected removal of one of the ablest and most
energetic of Australian prelates, Archbishop
Vaughan, lately the chief minister of the
Roman Catholic Church in the sister colony.
Now, however, in the good providence of
God, she will have in the new ‘primate a
leader of thought, a master of assemblies, an
able administrator, a maintainer of evan-
gelical truth, a friend of all the churches, a
good ard large-minded man. This is high
commendation, but I am in some degree able
to speak with authority on this subject,
having had the honour and advantage of
Canon Barry’s friendship before I left
England. He, no doubt, like the rest of us,
will have his difficulties, will fall into
mistakes, make enemies, and in every way
such an ideal before his eyes, and that he will
labour for its attainment with a mental force
and a trained energy which very few men
possess either in church or state. God helping
him, he is a primate to whom we may
confidently look for help, and whom we may
all be proud to follow. He is an acquisition
not only to the Church of England but to the
Church of Christ in these colonies.
THE RE-UNION OF PROTESTANTS.
By common consent, the Church Congress held
last year in Melbourne (thefirst of those gather-
ings attempted in Australia) was a great—an
almost unexpectedly great—success. It drew
churchmen of all dioceses into closer and
more brotherly sympathy; it developed an
amount of ability in our leading men, clergy
and laity, of which the church had known
little; above all, it gave an opportunity for
the discussion of many questions of great im-
portance and urgency which cannot be con-
veniently debated in our Legislative Assem-
blies. For this diocese, however, it had one
rather painful result—it encouraged an ex-
periment which has produced no little differ-
ence of opinion amongst us. “ The Relation
of the Church of England to all Protestant
Churches” was one of the subjects con-
sidered, and in the course of the debate upon
it the question naturally arose—Can we do
anything, and if so, what, to promote the re-
union of Protestants? A more important
question could not be put at the present day
to an assembly of Christian men. What is it
that has banished the Bible from our common
schools here in Victoria ? What the news-
papers truly call “our miserable sectarian
differences.” What is it which is wasting
our energies and starving our clergy in poor
country districts? Again, our sectarian dif-
ferences. What is it which weakens our hands
in the conflict which we have to wage to-day
against an unbelief more extreme and more
unscrupulously fanatical than any which
Christendom has known ? Once more our
sectarian differences. What is it in fine
which is disturbing the faith and harassing
the feelings of many of the younger and more
thoughtful members of the Christian church
itself ? Still, and ever, our most unhappy
differences. “ Union,” said young Daniel
Macmillan—a devout and thoughtful believer
if ever there was one—“ union is the thing
you want. How you can meet that want
wisely is a difficult problem, but one which


must get itself solved some day, if men are mand, I had come to the conclusion, which I
not to lose all faith in each other and in
'God.” Oh ! it seems to me, my friends, to be
positively monstrous that men who name
themselves by the name of Christ should go
on bickering and standing apart, calling one
another ill names, hating one another, and
suspecting one another, when the world is
positively dying for want of union. Call all
the Christians upon earth together, men of
the Eastern church and of the Western, men
of the Homan communion and of the Eng-
lish, Lutherans, Calvinists, conformists and
nonconformists of every name, and you will
find them agreed on such points as these :
That Jesus Christ is the Son of God, that lie
has revealed to us the heart of our Heavenly
Father, that He has redeemed us to God by
His blood, that He has sent to us His Holy
Spirit to quicken and sanctify us, that He has
founded His church to be our home on earth,
and that He will bring us through the
discipline of grace to eternal blessedness
and the vision of God. We believe all this
—every one of us. And we have opposed to
as a creed —if indeed so black a denial of all
human hope can be called a creed—which
sets before a sensual world as sole reality
matter without a mind, laws without a pur-
pose, man without a future, the universe
without a God. And we, fronted by such a
foe—a foe growing in strength and audacity
every day—are mad enough to scold and
wrangle among ourselves about our relative
position in Christ’s army, about conditions of
enlistment, fashion of uniform, any folly or
fribble whatever ! Nay, we are madder even
than this. In full sight of the enemy we are
dividing ourselves into hostile bands, turning
our weapons against each other, waging a
fratricidal and unrelenting war in the
very bosom of the church itself. It is as
though on the great field of Waterloo, in
presence of the gathered might of France,
and under the eye of the greatest military
genius of the age, English, Hanoverians, and
Belgians had fallen to desperate strife about
military punctilio and precedence. Surely it
is a spectacle of wickedness and stupidity to
make the very angels weep. The man, it
seems to me, who cannot perceive it must
needs be blind, and certainly he who seeing
it cannot feel its horror, must be as desti-
tute of heart as of understanding. How to
diminish the evil is one of the questions
which I have most frequently and most
anxiously asked myself. And considering
the question, with the best aids at my com-
expressed at the congress, that we of the
Church of England might make at least one
step towards reunion. There was nothing ]
as it seemed to me, in the law of the
Church of England, as interpreted by the past
actions of her most illustrious sons, to
prevent our asking well-known ministers of
other denominations to exercise amongst us
occasionally the ministry of the prophet or
teacher. I was not alone in that opinion.
In our Prayer Book we are directed to ask
God “to give us grace seriously to lay to
heart the great danger we are in by our un-
happy divisions.” And, good men laying
those dangers to heart, have striven at every
church congress which has been held at
home to devise means whereby they might be
diminished. The question has been, and is,
growing in urgency, and every year more and
more liberal concessions are being advocatedi
At the last English congress its president, the
Bishop of Lichfield, congratulated his brethren
that they had been trying to find not merely
a modus vivendi, but a modus operand /, with
nonconformists. Among the measures re-
commended at that congress for establishing
such a modus operandi was the following by
the present Bishop of Nelson: —“We can
surely allow, and even invite them (noncon-
formist ministers), under proper restrictions,
to preach in our churches as we in theirs, the
incumbent requesting leave for such indi-
viduals as he is willing to be responsible for
from the bishop of the diocese. ”
THE EXCHANGE OF PULPITS.
Precisely this, which the Bishop of Nelson
recommended, was done in a case with which
you are all acquainted. Dr. Bromby, in his own
name and in the name of the churchwardens
and vestrymen of St. Paul’s, asked me to
allow the liev. Charles Strong to preach on
behalf of the Church of England and Presby-
terian Pastoral Aid Society in the pulpit of
St. Paul’s. I had the right to withhold my
consent, and had I done so Mr. Strong could
not have been suffered to preach at St. Paul’s
without a breach of the law. While, how-
ever, I had the right to veto the proposed
action, I did not see that I was required by
the law to exercise that right, and this being
so, I felt compelled to act upon my own
previous recommendation. Nothing, to my
mind, is more demoralising than the practice
into which a public man is sometimes
tempted to fall, of first saying pleasant
words to win a round of applause at a pub-
lic meeting, and afterwards hesitating when


called upon to fulfil the promise implied in the dangers of internal division in order to
those words. Nothing, at any rate, can justify
such hesitation but a decided change of
opinion between promise and requested per-
formance. No such change of opinion had
occurred in my own case, and therefore I
gave the consent for which Dr. Bromby had
made application. This act of mine, to my
no small astonishment, excited a great
outcry, and produced more than one heated
protest. These protests were not, however
backed by arguments which possessed in my
eyes even the appearance of validity. I could
not, therefore, recall my consent. Mr. Strong
preached at St. Paul’s, and there ensued a
series of communications in the newspapers
which filled me, I confess, with grief and
misgiving. In the face of such a spirit as
breathed in those letters, the attempt to
bring the Protestant churches a little nearer
to each other seemed to be hopelessly in
advance of the age. What could be the
value of brotherly advances by one party in
the English Church if they were to be accom-
panied by language so irritating from another
party therein ? I felt tempted to recall that
picture of brothers hopelessly estranged,
which represents them as frowning cliffs,
split asunder by an earthquake, and severed
by the inrushing sea: —
“ A raging sea now rolls between,
But neither rain, nor frost, nor thunder
Can wholly do away, I ween,
The marks of that which once hath been.”
The scars of the original rift appeared to be
ineffaceable, and it seemed that the raging sea
must ever whelm beneath its bitter waters of
pride and prejudice every vessel which strove
to bear the olive-branch from one of its
shores to the other ; must ever drown in the
clamour of its stormy passions every timid
whisper of returning love. One thing, how -
ever, reassured me. It was not difficult for
me to make allowance for the irritating words
of men whose piety and sincerity I know.
But what would be the effect of such words
upon the nonconforming communions?
Would they not necessarily produce indig-
nant and scornful recriminations, so
making the position worse than at first ? To
my joyful surprise they did not. Those to
whom some of us were trying to hold out
the hand of brotherly love refrained from re-
turning blow for blow. Nothing would have
been easier ; but for the most part they held
their peace. They knew, doubtless, how
hard a thing it had been for the most chari-
table of us to throw off the prejudices of cen-
turies, to risk misconstruction, and to brave
make even so small a step forwards as we
had taken. Perhaps, however, there was one
thing which they did not and could not
feel, keenly as it was felt by me.
Since I came to this colony I have learnt to
know and love, and prize very highly for
their work’s sake, some of the men who,
when the exchange of pulpits took place,
stood in most open and bitter opposition to
me. My time amongst you cannot be very
long, and whenever I leave you the names
and deeds of those very men, not less than of
their opponents, will dwell amongst my
cherished memories. To have, then, thepain of
grieving them, of driving them it might be
into a cold estrangement, was a sorrow which
none, perhaps, of those outside our own body
could fully appreciate. But I doubt not they
made some allowance for this too, amongst
other things, and for the sake of it, kept a
silence for which I thank them. But now, if
this effort produced such painful feelings on
the part of a minority of earnest churchmen,
would it not, perhaps, be well to abandon it ?
But how abandon it, if the need for it be in-
creasing every day? The occasional ex-
change of pulpits, merely to show good feel-
ing, may seem, I acknowledge, too small an
advantage to be purchased at so great a cost.
But do you think, let me ask, that men,
measure the meaning and value of an act by
its outward appearance alone ? If our
fellow Protestants know that it is hard for
us to do this thing, that in order to do it we
must not only subdue our own prejudices
but bear also the opposition and miscon-
struction of friends, will they not regard the
effort to do it an unmistakable sign of our
love for them? Must it not bring us a step
nearer to their hearts? How do we measure
the love of our Father in heaven ? Is it not,
to use Dr. Bushnell’s language, “by
the cost to which God went” in the
gift of His Son ? And will not our
brethren measure our love in the same way ?
Will they not whisper to their heart, even if
they do not say it aloud, here is the hard
stubborn old mother—mother still, as the
Wesleyan minister called her, when church-
men and nonconformists combined lately to
welcome the new bishop of Truro—here is
the hard old mother, proud of her past,
obstinate in her demands, who once scourged
us with scorpions—here is she, now scourging
her own pride and braving the taunts and
reproaches of her own children, that she may
grasp our hands once more and bless us ?


Ihere is love in her heart, then, let men say no means follows necessarily from the
what they will, love for us who stormed out
of the old home long years ago, because we
have proved in a life of faith and labour that
we love her Lord and ours. Now, if the re-
union never goes one step nearer than the
creation of that feeling, I, for one, say that
the gain will be richly worth the sacrifice.
But we should not stop there. If a man
makes the last effort possible to him in the
way of reform, I have found that Providence
commonly opens a way—through means, it
may be, which none could have foreseen—for
further beneficial advance. Do all you can
to achieve a righteous end, and God will help
you. Do Jess than all—and then, by way of
punishing your cowardice and idleness, the
same Providence will stop the way to progress
and success. Well, but after all, it may be
objected, whatever the gain, whatever the
expediency, was it lawful for you to take
this step? I believe it was, or I would
never have taken it. Let me try to make
you understand what exactly the question
was which I had laid before me. I believe
that mistakes have been made upon this
point. I have heard it said that the bishop
was trying to thrust nonconformist ministers
into the pulpits of reluctant presbyters. Now
in the first place the bishop has no power to
do this, even if he had the will. He can him-
self preach when he likes and where he likes;
but into the pulpit of an unwilling clergyman
he cannot thrust anyone—not a clergyman of
his own diocese—not even one of his arch-
deacons. Before a man can enter any pulpit in
this diocese he is liable to three objections—
that of the bishop, that of the clergyman, and
that of the congregation through their church-
wardens. The bishop can refuse his licence ;
the incumbent can refuse his consent; the
churchwardens can demand to see the
bishop’s licence, and, if it be not produced,
can prevent any one from preaching, even
though he have the consent of the bishop
and incumbent. It is obvious, therefore,
that the bishop can have no power to
thrust a nonconformist minister, without
his licence, upon any congregation where
there is an incumbent, or even a church-
warden. But suppose an incumbent and his
churchwardens request the bishop to allow
them to invite a nonconformist minister to
preach in their church. Is the bishop bound
to restrict their liberty ? He can do so if he
pleases ; he has a veto, but is he bound to
exercise that veto, and so disappoint
the presbyter and the people ? This by
bishop’s possession of such power. In this
diocese he can veto every measure passed by
i the clergy and laity of this assembly, but it
by no means follows that he is bound to do
so. In like manner he has the power to for-
bid anyone to preach without his licence ;
but is he obliged, in all cases, to exercise that
power ? As a matter of fact he does not. He
allows, forinstance, asdoallthehomebishops,
clergymen from another diocese to officiate
for two or three Sundays without his licence.
May he, then, allow a nonconformist minister
to do so, upon one occasion, when his per-
mission is requested by presbyter and people*
or is he required by the law and practice of
the Church of England—so far as these are
applicable to this colony—to restrict their
liberty, and refuse his permission ? That is
the question which came before me; and I
believed, and believe, that the law does not
require me to refuse all liberty to the presby-
ters and people in my diocese in this parti-
cular. An exactly parallel case has been de-
termined already, by the abstinence of the
bishops from exercising their power of veto.
The only authority for the introduction into
our services of any hymns, saving the anthem
after the third collect, is the tacit allowance
of the bishops, who might forbid them if
they pleased. They have the power of veto,
but they have refrained fiom exercising it.
Now, how is this ? Is it because the dangers
which might arise from the unauthori-
tative introduction of hymns were trifling?
By no means. The teaching embodied
in a hymn-book which is in habitual use
is not fleeting and soon forgotten, like
that of a single sermon. A hymn-book may
introduce any number of heresies, and its
teaching is repeated and impressed anew
every time it is used. Furthermore, I may
observe that there is probably not a hymn-
book in use which does not contain sacred
poems composed by nonconformists of all
denominations—Roman Catholics, Presby-
terians, Wesleyans, and Independents. And
yet, in spite of all these dangers, many of
them by no means imaginary, such hymns
are sung in all our churches, and it has not
even been suggested that the bishop, who has
the power of veto, shall use it to keep them
out. But if the bishop may allow noncon-
formists to teach our people by their written
productions, why is he to refuse to allow non-
conformists to teach by the living voice on
rare occasions ? Surely, if a certain section of
the presbyters demand that he shall in this


matter restrict the liberty of a certain other of all creeds. Certainly all my opinions and
section of the presbyters, they must produce
the law which compels him. That is what I
represented to those who presented their pro-
test to me. A little later I proposed to them
the following course :—They should write out
their reasons for thinking that the law com-
pelled me to veto the preaching of Mr.
Strong. I would then write my reply to those
reasons, and we would refer both reasons and
reply to the learned chancellor of the diocese,
and be bound by his opinion of the law.
The protesters agreed, provided I would con-
sent to refer the chancellor’s opinion to legal
experts at home, should either party be dis-
contented with it. I agreed to the proviso.
The reasons and my reply to them were written.
When, however, these documents were re-
ferred to the chancellor, he declined the posi-
tion of arbiter, not thinking that it belonged
to his office. In these circumstances it has
been agreed to refer the legal question to
eminent ecclesiastical lawyers at home, and
be ruled by their opinion. I, for my part,
shall be content with their decision. If they
say that the law compels me to restrict the
liberty of my presbyters and people, I shall
do so, for I will never disobey the law. If,
however, they decide that I have an option
in the matter, I shall claim the right to
exercise that option, according to my own
conscience and my view of the needs of
Christ’s church in this land. Although I
have spent much time upon the examination
of the legal question, I have not entered upon
it in this address, nor shall Ido so. A full
argument of the case would introduce into
our debates doctrinal differences, which,
while provoking angry feelings, would help
in no way to the solution of the question
before us. Avoiding, then, the temptation
to waste those energies in barren contro-
versies, which are so sorely needed for the
common war against ignorance and evil, let
us exercise a little patience and mutual for-
bearance. Let us wait till we know on good
authority what the law of our church is,
praying meanwhile to our Heavenly Father
that He may so dispose our hearts, and order
our circumstances, that in us, and by us,
or if it must be so, in spite of us, His will
may be done and His Son may be glorified.
While thus, however, earnestly desiring
to find some basis of practical union amongst
Christians of different denominations.
THE VALUE OF CREEDS.
I amnot prepared to follow those whocounsel
us to provide such a basis by the abandonment
sympathies incline me strongly to the simpli-
fication of creeds and relaxation of tests,
wherever the growth of opinion and the cir-
cumstances of the church make such a course
possible and expedient. But the total aboli-
tion of creeds is a very different matter.
Why did the church adopt creeds in the early
days? Partly to furnish her more ignorant
members with a short and comprehensible
account of what was most important in her
belief, and partly (in later days principally) to
defend her members, especially her lay mem-
bers, from the attacks of licentious specula,
tion. Have these needs and dangers ceased
to exist, then, that some are so anxious to
get rid of creeds ? I quite admit that if all
men were pious, and sincerely desirous of
knowing the truth, creeds would be unneces-
sary, just as if all men were sincerely loving
laws would be unnecessary. If every man
loved God with all his heart, and his neigh-
bour as himself, there would be no need of
special statutes defining the outlines of obedi-
ence. Nay, under the inspiration of that love
which is the fulfilling of the law, men would
render an obedience to conscience far more
hearty and exact than any law or canon can
venture to require. But who amongst us
ever thinks of advocating the abolition of
law because love is better? Neither in
my judgment, will any sober churchman
think of advocating the abolition of creeds
because free and truth-seeking thought is
better. We must consider our actual circum-
stances, our existing dangers, and ask
whether it be the part, either of wisdom or
of charity, to leave clergy and laity without
the protection of creeds. With the best in-
tentions, it is not always easy for the pious
student to discern the meaning of those
deep simplicities, those pregnant aphorisms,
those apparent paradoxes, in which our
Saviour frequently embodies His spiritual
teaching. Some one must interpret, and who
then is it to be ? The Roman Catholics have
lodged this power in an individual, affirmed
for this purpose to be infallible. Protestants
rightly refuse to recognise human infallibility
in any church whatever. But still some one
must interpret for the assistance of the rest,
and in the absence of creeds, who is it to be ?
If the minister of a particular congregation
be a man of great intellectual vigour, he will
practically think for his people, and they will
be led whithersoever his active and specula-
tive mind may carry them. If he be a man
of less vigour, some lay deacon, with his Owen


■or Baxter in his hand, will probably under- fore, of the tremendous miracle of the In-
ake to guide him, and will demand that
the minister shall conform his teaching to
that of better and wiser men than himself.
It is not every man who can afford to meet
such arrogance with the words of a popular
and well-known Independent minister —“I
shall teach what I please, and if you
don’t like it you can give up your
pews—there are plenty of people wanting
them. ” It is not always the case that there
are “plenty of people wanting them,” and in
such circumstances how welcome and how
reasonable a protection is it if the minister
can say, I have nothing to do either with
you, or with Owen, or with Baxter. These
are the articles of my church. They contain
what the church demands of me, and you
have no right to ask more. Such a reply may
not mitigate the ire of the critic, but it will
satisfy the minds of all the reasonable mem-
bers of the congregation, and thus reduce the
critic to his natural insignificance. Again,
are the laity in no need of such protection ?
How often have perplexed congregations
thanked God for this defence against the
doctrinal innovations of young and ardent
clergy. The young theologian has broached,
it may be, some startling theory of priestly
power and privilege, supporting himself by a
mass of quotations from councils and fathers.
The quotations may have been exactly or
inexactly made, they may have been inter-
preted according to their context or violently
wrested from their original meaning. But of
all this, as of the relative learning and autho-
rity of the authors cited, the ordinary layman
is utterly ignorant. Still, with articles of
faith behind him, he can be at no loss for his
answer. With all these councils and fathers,
he may say, I have nothing to do. But men
who knew more about them than you do, men
who had marie them their life’s study, have
affirmed that the doctrines you profess to draw
from them are false, and not even taught by the
authors you cite. These men, and the church
with them, have formulated this result in
articles. On the one side is the church to
which you and I belong, on the other is
your interpretation of certain authors. I pre-
fer to follow the church. Such, however,
are not the only, nor even the most formid-
able dangers, which threaten believing lay-
men in these days. There are theologians of
great learning and high name on the Conti-
nent of Europe who have openly broken
with the supernatural, who deny the possi-
bility of any miracle, and a fortiori, there-
carnation. If you cite against them texts of
the Bible, they reply that the book, or part
of a book, which you cite is without
authority ; or that the particular text has
been interpolated ; or that your ideas of in-
spiration lead you to lay too great stress upon
it. Now, if the church, as a whole, is not
to help her members by dogmatic affirmations,
what can ignorant men do against such re-
presentations as these ? Will you say that
they must examine the subject for them-
selves ? They cannot do so. They have
neither the ability, the knowledge, nor the
leisure for such a task. Shall they then
follow the guidance of their minister ? Their
minister may agree with the new opinions.
If, then, he tells them, and tries to prove to
them, that Jesus is not the eternal Son of God,
and that to measure God’s love by the gift of
His Son is nothing better than a super-
stitious mistake, what is to be done? The
poor layman is required either to sur.
render his faith, or to prove his minister
mistaken. Which shall he do ? Some
will follow the minister whithersoever he
leads them, and others will very likely
leave the church of their fathers, and so
contribute to accelerate that fatal progress of
division which is breaking the Protestant
churches to pieces. But are the foremost
minds of the church, I may be asked, to be
hampered in their teaching by a regard for
popular opinions which they have outgrown ?
Most decidedly I answer that they are.
Thought is free. Let a man read, think, in-
vestigate as he will ; but when he comes to
teach, let him remember the claims of love,
and that it is his bounden duty to accommo-
date the quick movements of his thought to
the pace of those who move more slowly, and
who can only be injured by hurrying, count-
ing it better to carry his people with him a
mile than to rush ahead of them twain.
Not seldom will he find, if my own experi-
ence is to be any guide, that this subordina-
tion of impatient speculation to the claims
of Christian charity has saved him from
impetuous mistakes, which might have
marred his own character and have injured
or destroyed his usefulness. Of course, the
difference between a minister’s belief and his
church’s may become so great that he cannot
any longer teach with honesty what the
church demands. In that case, the honour-
able, and indeed the only possible course, is
to change the communion in which he minis-
ters. Such extreme cases are, however, I am


convinced, more rare than they are commonly
supposed to be, and I believe that relief may
very easily be found for independent thinkers
without going so far as to abolish our creeds.
In the first place articles of faith can be
altered and gradually conformed to the de-
mands of increasing knowledge. All sudden
and revolutionary changes I suspect. They
are commonly the demands of some unrea-
soning reaction, which in a few years will
pass away to give place to some other,
perhaps in a directly opposite direction.
Secondly, the terms of subscription may be
relaxed, so as to afford the minister a greater
freedom in interpreting the confession to
which he gives his assent. It is commonly
asserted, I know, that such alterations
never have been made, nor are ever likely
to be made, in the Church of England.
But that is not true. Within my own expe-
rience whole services have been excluded
from our Prayer Book, and the terms of sub-
scription in the Church of England have been
so largely relaxed that dogmatists have
nicknamed our present simple requirement of
assent the rag-and-tatter declaration. Let
us only have a little patience, my brethren,
making allowance for our own proneness to
error on the one hand, and for the necessary
slowness of ordinary and partially-educated
minds on the other, and we shall be able to
pass through the present crisis of unbelief
without severing our connexion with all the
ages and churches of the past. We in the
Church of England have a very large liberty.
Let us seek its extension by all means, but
let us remember at the same time that to be
without limitation in truth, as in conduct, is
not liberty but licence.
MR. JUSTICE HXGINBOTHAM'S LECTURE.
Mr. Justice Higinbotham’s address seems
to have called out deeper feeling and
in some quarters deeper apprehension than
I should have thought likely. Of course
no utterance upon such a theme of a
man so honest, able, and widely respected,
could be other than influential and deeply
interesting. It was most interesting to me.
And I suppose that many of you will be
astonished to hear me say that upon first
reading it I was most deeply thankful for
what it contained. It was clear of that
paralysing agnosticism which to me means
spiritual death. Mr. Higinbotham knows
that there is an Eternal Father, and that the
Lord Jesus is the light of the world. And a
man who knows so much may come in time
to know anything. Then, again, in these-
days, while there is so much shallow
irreverence on the one side, and so
much unreal wordiness on the other,
when I hear the true cry come out
of the centre of a man’s heart—Christ is
my master, my teacher, my Lord—it warms
me into the glow of a true brotherly love.
For I so love Christ. —I who am unworthy
to say it, so love Him above all things that
have been, or can be that if anyone does Him
honour, even the least, I can’t help loving:
and thanking that man inwardly. No matter
how far or how deeply he may differ from
me otherwise, even upon the nature and work
of the Lord himself, I can’t help saying to
myself with the apostle: “Notwithstanding,
every way, . Christ is preached : and I there-
fore do rejoice, yea and will rejoice.” This may
partly explain to you why I did not rush
forward to criticise an utterance with many
parts of which I could not agree. There
were also other reasons. I heartily approved of
the plain speaking of the lecturer. I was right
glad that an able man should tell us plainly
what he thought of us, instead of confining
himself to silence, or to cynical innuendos.
Of course such plain speaking was sure to
provoke rejoinders. The good judge spoke so
plainly, I suppose, in order to provoke re-
joinders. But it seemed to me, that for a
time, there was no need that I should add
to the multitude of such. Besides, I will
confess to you that I am dimly conscious of
a certain absoluteness of idealism, which I
discern also in Mr. Higinbotham ; and that,
in virtue of this, I sometimes see an idea so
much more clearly than its expounder, that
I am liable to say things of the idea in-
carnated in the man which I should be very
sorry to say of the man separated from the
idea. Swayed by such feelings as these, I have
hitherto abstained from criticism, and it is only
the sense of public duty which moves me now
as the official head of the Church of England
in this diocese, to give you my ideas on
some important points in the lecture. First
of all, then, I think that the lecturer will
feel, on reflection, that when he stigmatises
the clergy as teachers who do not teach—who
do not even attempt to teach educated lay-
men—he is too sweeping in his condem-
nation. I suppose we shall all be ready to
admit that “ the reasoning intellect in man
demands ideas as its needful and sole
proper aliment;” that “it is only through
ideas that the human intellect can be enabled
to render that service which the religion


professed by all the Christian churches
claims from the intellect, as well as from the
affections of our human nature. ” Is it true,
then, that “in all the churches the clergy dis-
play more and more unwillingness to allude
in their addresses to the laity to the intellec-
tual bases of religious truth and of moral
obligation ? ” There is an obvious reason for
reticence upon such subjects in popular ad-
dresses to mixed audiences. The lecturer is,
I am sure, a man of too large a heart to turn
a deaf ear to Tennyson’s touching appeal:—
Leave thou thy sister when she prays
Her early heaven, her happy views,
Nor thou with shadowed hint confuse
A life that leads melodious days.
Her faith, through form, is pure as thine ;
Her hands are quicker unto good :
Oh ! sacred be the flesh and blood,
To which she links a truth divine.
But now, due heed being given to this rule of
charity, I affirm that I have heard over and
over again, from clergymen ot our own
church, sermons which to an instructed ear,
like that of the lecturer, spoke “through
form” of the deepest principles of divine
truth. I think that either the lecturer’s
experience must have been an unfortunate
one, or that he has given ear too readily to
the assertions of sceptical writers, who seem
to me to qualify themselves too often for
criticism by never entering a church. Of the
startling ignorance shown by some scientific
sceptics of the actual knowledge and views of
the clergy an amusing illustration was fur-
nished not long before I left England. An
eminent scientist undertook, at Sion College,
to dispel the well-known ignorance of the
clergy in respect to the discoveries of geolo-
gists, and he concluded a popular resumA of
geological science with the question, how is it
that the clergy are ignorant of these things ?
To his surprise, his audience responded by a
loud and hearty laugh. There was probably
not a man there who, before he entered the
room, did not know everything of any im-
portance which the lecturer had told him.
By way of showing him, I suppose, how
utterly he was mistaken, one or two leading
men got up and criticised sharply cer-
tain of his own views; and when he
found that he had neither too much
knowledge nor too much ability to hold
his own upon his chosen theme, he
frankly acknowledged that he had been mis-
taken. Mr. Justice Higinbotham’s charge,
however, is that whatever the clergy may
know, they fail to apply such knowledge in
their teaching; they fail to give to the soul of
the educated laity those ideas which are its
proper food. Now I have been honestly laying
this lesson to heart—for, bitter as it sounds,
I hope lam not unwilling to learn; if there
be any just ground for enforcing it on me.
When, therefore, I read these words, I went
rapidly back on my own ministry among
you, and asked myself—Wherein have I failed
—not wherein have I failed to succeed, but
wherein have I failed to try to succeed?
Taking the precaution to separate my lectures
from public worship, so that none of those
who charge me with unsettling faith, making
displays of scholarship, and the like, need
come to hear me unless they like, I have
successively considered in the pulpit of St.
Paul’s the following subjects:—“The ex-
pectation of the Christ in the Old Testament
“ The peculiar characteristics of the teaching
of St. John’s Gospel;” “The development
of ideas in the writings of St. Paul “The
development of monotheism, as illustrated by
the connexion of the religion of Abraham
with the polytheism of the heathen tribes of
Canaan, and of their probable progenitors in
Chaldsea “ The connexion of Christianity
with the philosophy and social life of Greece,
as illustrated by the Ist Epistle to the Corin-
thians;” “The dread problem of evil, as
treated in the Book of Job and in
existing systems of speculation ;” “The
great social problems of the present
day, as illustrated by the . symbols of
the Apocalypse, and the ancient life to
which they refer.” I have no doubt that
my treatment of these subjects has been
very inadequate, but one thing, at least, I
can say, it has been as good as I could
make it with the time and means at my
disposal. It has taxed my utmost energies,
and it has concealed nothing of my real
thought. What more could Mr. Higinbotham
fairly require of me ? It is my misfortune
to disagree with him in some important
particulars, but I should never, therefore,
think of saying that he has not given
me valuable teaching in his admirably
honest and outspoken lecture. It may be
said, perhaps, that his objections refer
rather to the mass of the clergy than to in-
dividuals. But that is not so. His language
is perfectly general. “In all the churches
the clergy,” he says on the one hand, “dis-
play unwillingness ” to teach ; and the laity,
on the other, “remain intellectually un-
taught by those whose mission, if they
have any mission, it is to teach.” If
the laity remain untaught, of course I am as


much in fault as anyone, and yet I can
honestly say that I have done my best to
teach them. I speak of myself because I
have been taking myself to task, and asking
myself what I ought to have done in this
particular which I have left undone. And the
answer of my conscience is that many as
have been my faults and omissions in other
directions, it would have been difficult for me
in this particular matter to have made a more
resolute effort to do my duty. Others, lam
sure, have done the same. Prominent
members of other religious denominations
have come forward from time to time to treat
of the relation between religion on the one
hand, and science or philosophy on the other.
And our critics should remember that if only
a small number of persons venture to repre.
sent the churches on such questions, it is
only a small number in any profession who
have the special mental capacity and training
which fit them to attempt such a task. How
many laymen in Melbourne would deal
clearly with such subjects as Mr. Justice
Higinbotham has handled in his lecture?
What do laymen desire? Do they think
they would be better taught if every clergy-
man were to take to metaphysics, and,
abandoning the simple preaching of the
gospel, were to insist on dragging his
congregation after him through intricate
speculations upon the relation of being and
knowing, of subject and object, mind and
matter, and all the rest of it? If not,
then surely the lecturer’s language of
blame and rebuke is proved to be both
excessive and undiscriminating. All this,
however, it may be said, has little to do with
the great questions which are stirred in the
address, and which urgently demand settlement
in some way. This I admit ; and therefore
eschewing details, in which it might be easy
to catch the judge tripping, let me say to you
a few words on what I deem to be the
essential points of the lecture. Ist. As to
the effect of an enlarged apprehension of
space and time upon our conceptions of God,
particularly as to the bearing of such new
thoughts upon anthropomorphic representa-
tions. 2nd. As to the central subject
in the teaching of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 1. At great length, and with
several popular illustrations, the lecturer
sets before us the fact that astronomy has
enlarged our ideas of space and its contents ;
geology having a little later performed
for us the same service as to time, and
creaturely development in time. And he
claims it as a result of these revelations that
“ God is presented in an entirely new and
inexpressibly grander form of conception ;
anthropomorphism, or the representation of
God in the likeness of man, being no longer
possible in any shape.” I believe this state-
ment, and all which hangs by it—and nearly
everything may be made to hang by it, both
in philosophy and theology—to be an entire
mistake. To the learned lecturer’s state,
ments I oppose these two(1) That en-
larged conceptions of space and time, and of
the extent of the material universe, do not
alter a philosopher’s conception of God
in the very least ; and (2) that it
is impossible to think about God at
all without anthropomorphism. First,
then, let me ask, What is the effect on
my conception of God, of your telling me
that you have measured distances in space so
vast that if I want to realise them I must
imagine a bit of Elizabeth-street to represent
6,000 millions of miles ? Good, I say, let us
take this as a unit, and measure away as far
as you like. Have you come to an end of
your measuring? Yes, the astronomer says,
I have measured at last as far as I can.
Well then, I reply, count all that you have
measured an inch, multiply that by all
the inches you have measured, and con-
sider every one of those inches any
number of thousands of millions of miles
you like, and even then I am not a whit
nearer to the end of my conception of
space. Any unscientific heathen would have
told you the same at any period of the past,
for it is human thought that is greater than
all your computations. So of worlds. You
have seen them by hundreds of millions, you
say. Well, how large do you think that any
of these is in the eye of the Infinite ? I can
already conceive the Infinite, and I ask this
question to test the assertion that a vast
number of worlds will enlarge my conception
of Him. How large, then, is the vastest sun
that blazes in the far-off depths of space in
the eye of the Infinite ? Is it as large, do
you think, as the smallest conceivable
molecule to you ? If not, let me ask if it
seems so very wonderful a thing to you that
there are thousands and thousands of mil-
lions of such molecules in a cubic inch of
matter? A child thinking about all this,
or an uninstructed childish mind, may
think it very wonderful, but how can
the mind of a philosopher? Let us
apply these forms of our thought to the
Infinite itself, and see how they look. Sup


pose I said to you, If you would appreciate
the size of the Infinite, you must imagine the
distance between the earth and Sirius to be
represented by the length of a foot rule ; if
you would gain any idea of his age, you must
take as your minute the time that has
elapsed since the earth was in the condition
of an attenuated gas ; and as for the weight
of the Infinite, if you would approximate to
that, you must take as your ounce the
combined energy with which all the planets
of our system gravitate towards the sun.
Would you not feel at once that by trying to
represent the highest object of our thought in
terms of space, time, and mass, I was using
an order of conceptions so mean and inade-
quate as to produce the sense of irreverence,
and even of grotesqueness ? It is not the
size of the worlds, nor their number, northeir
vast distances, but the appearance among
them (in their law and order) of the signs of
thought and purpose, of the presence
and activity of an Infinite Mind, which
constitutes the greatest wonder of the
heavens. And there is yet another reflected
wonder. The discovery of all these things
proves to us the greatness of the mind that is
in man. Man, a mere creature of clay, living
on this little planet, with means of calcula-
tion so imperfect, has measured these vast
distances, discovered these innumerable
worlds—yea, more wonderful still, has pene-
trated so deeply beneath the veil of appear-
ance, that he can realise in his thought the
attractions and repugnancies which go on in
the universe of the infinitely little, of those
atoms, or knots of aether, which Clerk
Maxwell called “ the foundation-stones
of the universe.” Now, what is the
real wonder here? That the mind impri-
soned in human flesh could discover all
this! Mind —that is the real wonder of
the universe; that is the one created
object which alone reveals to us any-
thing of God. “Nature,” says Jacobi, in
a passage which must be familiar to some
of you, “conceals God; for through her
whole domain, nature reveals only fate ; only
an indissoluble chain of mere efficient causes
without beginning and without end, exclud-
ing with equal necessity both providence and
chance, . . . never producing what alone
is of God, and alone supposes liberty, the vir-
tuous, the immortal. Man reveals God, for
man by his intelligence rises above nature,
and in virtue of this intelligence is conscious
of himself as a power, not only independent
of, but opposed to nature, and capable of re-
sisting, conquering, controlling her. As man
has a living faith in this power, so has
he a belief in God. . . . As he does not
believe in this power, so does he not believe
in God ; he sees, he experiences naught in
existence but nature, necessity, fate.” Mr.
Justice Higinbotham perceives this truth
quite clearly, and all I wonder at is that this
perception should not have delivered him
more completely from what I must call the
illusions of size and number. Epictetus
even could say, 1,800 years ago—“ Know you
not what an atom you are compared with the
whole—that is, as regards your body ? Since,
as regards your reason, you are no whit
inferior to, or less than, the gods? For the
greatness of reason is not estimated by size
or height, but by the doctrines which it
embraces. ” The judge’s measures of size and
height would have been nothing to Epictetus,
a few inches, more or less, which would have
altered his conception of the Divine in no par-
ticular.
ANTHROPOMORPHISM.
I think it must surely have been these
clinging illusions of “height and size”
which produced that remarkable (and from
Mr. Justice Higinbotham, with his masterful
grasp of the importance of mind, almost
inconceivable) statement that “ anthropo-
morphism is no longer possible in any shape.”
A very simple experiment should surely have
convinced him of his mistake. You saw
what grotesque results were produced by
applying conceptions of space and time to our
representation of the infinite. But are we
sensible of anything of the kind when we
take our representations from the phenomena
of thought, feeling, and will—from the
properties of the thinker rather than of the
objects of his thought ? Does it sound
to you irreverent to say that God is wise and
just and loving, to call him Our Father, or
to say that the order and harmony of the
worlds are manifestations of His power and
purpose? Yet all these representations are
only anthropomorphisms. Indeed, as I have
said, if we refuse to employ anthropo-
morphisms, we must give up thinking of God
at all. Will you bear with me if I drag you
through some necessary metaphysics, in order
to prove this vital truth? We know, and
can know, nothing but states of our con-
sciousness. To contradict this statement
is to use words without meaning. But
now, observe this —Before we can know
any state of our consciousness, there
must arise some change in it, so that we


can compare what it was with what it has
become, or what it is with what it was before.
This implies, in the first place, limitation, the
distinction of one state of consciousness from
another. It also implies, in the second place,
a necessary relation—the relation between
the perceiving subject andthething perceived,
between subject and object. Without limita-
tion and relation there can be no knowledge
of statesof our consciousness—the only know-
ledge we possess. It follows, then, that we
can never gain any knowledge of the infinite
and absolute as they are in themselves. If
nothing can be known in consciousness
without limitation, the infinite, which does
not admit of limitation, can never be so
known. Similarly, if nothing can be known
in consciousness except under one funda-
mental relation, the absolute, which does not
admit of being brought into relation, can
never be so known. The laws of thought
forbid such knowledge. And yet we are not
the less obliged to believe that there is an
infinite and an absolute. The finite necessarily
implies the infinite ; the related necessitates
the absolute. We can know neither of the
terms of these two pairs of related thoughts
but as the inseparable correlative of the other ;
just as we can gain no conception of the sub-
ject apart from the object. Further, as Mr.
Herbert Spencer has shown, when once we
have gained the ideas of the infinite and
absolute, they persist within us. We cannot
think them away again. That there is an
infinite and absolute we are sure, though
what in themselves they are we can never
know. Such, in few words, is the state, such
the extent, of our knowledge of the infinite
and absolute. It may, perhaps, make the
thoughts more manageable to you if I apply
them to two well-known classes amongst us—
the lecturing materialists and the agnostics.
Nothing appears to be thought more effective
by our lecturing materialists than arguments
like the following:—lf there be an infinite, it
must include the finite, and the finite can
have no real existence. But we know that
the finite really exists ; therefore there can
be no infinite. Or, again, to begin from the
other end, if the finite be different from the
infinite, it must limit and exclude the infinite.
But the infinite cannot be limited ; and since
we are sure that the finite exists, there can be
no infinite. This kind of word-play is, I
believe, thought very clever in such lectures
as I have referred to, and wins great applause.
But, now, what does it really represent?
Any uncertainty, either in our consciousness
of the reality of our own existence, or in our
belief of the neeessary existence of the infinite ?
Not in the least. It represents only this.
—that having tried to do what was absurd
and impossible, to comprehend the illimitable
by means of limitation, we have fallen
over into those contradictions which were
intended to warn us of our folly and weak-
ness.
AGNOSTICISM.
Agnosticism furnishes another illustration
of the meaning and importance of the
truth we are considering. That perception of
the infinite which comes to us necessarily
with the thought of the finite, is the reason-
able basis of our belief in something behind
nature. We know that the infinite something
is there, that it underlies all which is ; that
though unrelated, it is the fount of all
relations; that though uncaused, it is the
cause of all causes. These conclusions are-
necessarily involved in our own perceptions
of change and relation. And what if we
can never know the infinite as it is ; still, if it
be the unseen energy of all life and thought,,
signs of its nature, dim hieroglyphics of the
character of this highest object of human
thought, we can more and more clearly
discern as we study them under the light of
those native intuitions which are the wit-
ness of our birthright in the family of God.
Already as the apostle teaches “ we know in
part.” Some people I see claim us as agnostics
for this reason. That, however, is not the
meaning of agnostic. Agnostic means a
know-nothing. And the very writer who-
claims those who know “in part ” as
agnostics, proceeds to prove plainly that he
is himself a know-nothing. He will receive
nothing as true which he does not under-
stand in the same way as he under-
stands geometry ; that is, nothing beyond
what is comprised in the category of
the limited and conditioned. He forgets
that the consciousness of the limited gives
us that of the unlimited, and that having this
consciousness, the mind as naturally goes out
in belief to the infinite as it does in thought
to the finite. The agnostic looks upon faith#
as an unnatural repression of reason, brought
about by the action of the will. It is the
very opposite. It is the twin-sister of reason,
born in the very moment when the reason,
by thinking the finite, was compelled to
think the infinite. Belief, in this sense, is
as fundamental a fact of the human con-
sciousness as thought itself is. In an
essay prefixed to his “ Outlines of Primitive


Belief,” which, short as it is, contains more
light on the genesis of faith than I ever
found in all the agnostic books which I have
read, Mr. Keary defines belief to be “the
answering voice of human consciousness
to the call of the something behind.” The
agnostic gets his superficial clearness by
ignoring this voice—by ignoring, that is to
say, one of the deepest and most fruitful
facts of the human consciousness. He tries
to win the poor pride of “ knowing” by shut-
ting up the soul of man in the prison of the
finite. He cannot. We see the infinite
stretching everywhere beneath and beyond
the finite. There is the sphere of immor-
tality. There it is that feeling and imagina-
tion find space for freedom, wonder, worship,
and love. There poetry, music, all art, yea,
and all religion, are born. To turn aside
from this, because we cannot know it as we
know geometry, because the soul’s natural
mode of apprehending it is belief rather than
knowledge, is to commit spiritual suicide.
For belief is the very life of the soul; and
when our Saviour demanded belief, He spoke
to that voice within which answers naturally
to the “ something behind.” He showed that
“ something behind He uncovered the glory
of the Father. Was it unnatural, then, that he
should cry—Can you not see ? Will you not
answer ? Your heart was made to answer. If it
does not, it is because you “are not of God”—
“ not of the truth”—pedantic slaves of
prejudice, or degraded slaves of sin.
Believe me, because I show you the
proper object of faith; or, if not for
this true and highest reason—then, at
least, believe me for what your bodily eyes
can see, “for the very work’s sake.” It is
significant of the agnostic’s position that
this lower form of faith is the only one which
he can conceive. But once more. As the
agnostic wins a superficial clearness by
ignoring the most fruitful facts of conscious-
ness, so he seeks the praise of a pseudo-
humility by professing to wait for more light.
But what does he call light ? We have seen ;
the knowledge that comes from limitation.
Well, then, what is he waiting for when he
demands such light about the infinite ? He
is waiting till he can know the illimitable
by means of limitation. He might as well
wait till he can see the sun without eyes.
That which can be known only in part must
be embraced by faith, not by knowledge;
and he who waits to know it as he knows
geometry, proves only that he has not
learnt to think accurately on the subject.
I have delayed you by illustrations of this
matter, because if you do not understand it
clearly you can never form a final judgment
upon Mr. Higinbotham’s protest against
“anthropomorphism in any shape.” Mr.
Higinbotham will have nothing to do with
agnosticism. Perceiving its earthly specu-
lations to be nothing better than flimsy webs
of sophistry, woven across the fair heaven of
truth, he has boldly torn them away that he
might display the vision of glory which they
concealed —God our Father, and Jesus Christ
who reveals Him anew to the heart. But
then he hardly sees what he has done. He
stumbles at anthropomorphism—at the repre*
sentation of God under forms of our own
consciousness as thinking, feeling, and
willing—when in truth, if we may not so re-
present Him, we cannot think of Him at all.
But if we may not think of God at all, how
can there be any religion? How can we keep
up conscious relations with that of which we
may not think? If there cannot be anthro-
pomorphism “ in any shape,” then certainly
there cannot be religion “ in any shape.” Mr.
Higinbotham has felt this, and so, while pro-
testing against anthropomorphism, has himself
fallen into a liberal use of it. He tells us that
astronomy and geology have revealed to us
clear proofs of “ design and increasing pur-
pose,” and that Jesus Christ has “ revealed
God anew to us as the father and the
friend of the human race. ” Surely he
must see that to attribute the order of
the heavens to “ design," the succes-
sions of life to “ increasing purpose,” and
the inspiration of our Lord’s love and moral
greatness to the heart of a “ father and a
friend,” are all so many anthropomorphisms.
I suppose, then, that though in words pro-
testing against anthropomorphism “in any
shape,” he really only meant to refer to
certain objectionable kinds of it, such as
attributing to God “arbitrary dealing,
capricious favour, vengeful punishment,
sudden passionate change.” In this I heartily
agree with the lecturer. If it be alleged in
any dogmatic creed that we ought to think
of God as acting upon principles upon which
it would be immoral for men to act, positions
being changed, we must refuse to believe it,
for it is impossible for us to believe that God
would set before us the image of an immoral
man as that which was fit to represent Him
to our mind. There are modifications of
anthropomorphism which are certainly
inadmissible, and I quite agree with the
lecturer that theologians have some


times been guilty of propounding such
-objectionable representations for human
belief. But, then, on the other hand, it is
absolutely certain that if we think of God at
all we must do it by means of some kind of
anthropomorphism, seeing that it is only in
modes of our own consciousness that we can
think of anything—God included. “We may
confidently challenge all natural theology, ” says
Kant, “ to name a single distinctive attribute
of the Deity, whether denoting intelligence or
will, which, apart from anthropomorphism, is
anything more than a mere word, to which
not the slightest notion 'can be attached,
which can serve to extend our theoretical
knowledge.” Kant’s is the greatest name
upon the roll of modern philosophers.
Mansel, however, may be cited even in the
same breath with Kant. “Fools,” he
cries, “to dream that man can escape
from himself, that human reason can
draw aught but a human portrait of
God. They do but substitute a marred
and mutilated humanity for one exalted and
entire ; they add nothing to their conception
of God as He is, but only take away a part
of their conception of man. Sympathy, and
love, and fatherly kindness and forgiving
mercy have evaporated in the crucible of their
philosophy, and what is the caput mortuum
hich remains but only the sterner features
of humanity exhibited in repulsive nakedness?
Man is still the residue that is left—man
in his purposes, man in his inflexibility,
man in that relation to time from which no
philosophy, whatever its pretensions, can
wholly free him. Yet this, forsooth, is a
philosophical conception of the Deity, more
worthy of an enlightened reason than
the human imagery of the Psalmist.
‘The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous,
and his ears are open to their prayers.’”
Why have I dwelt so long upon this point,
my friends ? Because it seems to me that, in
the absorption of their physical studies, men
are suffering their imaginations to be over-
powered by the illusions of mere physical
size and weight. They forget that all the
worlds they see, or dream of, are to the
Infinite less than the pebbles of the brook
were to the shepherd David. When, there-
fore, you speak to them of a revelation of
God, they fall straightway to counting their
cosmical pebbles, and weighing them against
each other, to see whether any, and, if so,
which of them, was worthy to be the theatre
of such a revelation. What has the size of
your pebbles, yea, of the whole cosmical
scrip full of them, to do with the matter?
Have you forgotten those grand words of the
old pagan, “ The greatness of reason is not to
be estimated by size and height ?” Suppose
you have reason, of what consequence is it
what is the size of the boiy or of the world in
which it abides? Were not reason, if, as
Heckel imagines it, lodged in an atom, as
great as if the body which held it stretched
from here to Uranus ? Tell me where there
is mind; and there, wherever it is, in whatever
body or planet, small or great, I will show
you the possible theatre of a revelation of
God. Firm and masterful as is the grasp
which Mr. Justice Higinbotham laid upon
this truth, when he declared that his con-
sciousness of the power of his mind to move
his limb gave him assurance of a similar
power in the Divine mind, yet when he came
to deal with anthropomorphism in general,
he seemed to me to relax it again. Well
were it for him, and tor all of us,
if we could keep constantly in our mind
those familiar but not less profound
and magnificent words of Pascal :
“Man is but a reed, the frailest in nature,
but he is a reed that thinks. . . . Should
the universe crush him, man would yet be
nobler than that which destroys him, for he
knows that he dies, while of the advantage
which the universe has over him, the universe
knows nothing.” It is from this point of
view that a great philosopher has profoundly
said, “ Personal conscious existence, limited
though it be, is yet the noblest of all the
existences of which man can dream, for it is
that which knows, not that which is known.”
He might truly have added, it follows hence
that if God revealed Himself at all to His in-
telligent creatures, it would certainly be rather
through that which knows than through that
which is known —through man rather than
through nature.
THE ESSENTIAL ELEMENT IN CHRISTIANITY.
I come lastly to consider another very
important part of Mr. Higinbotham’s lec.
ture—that, viz., in which he professes to
set forth the essential element in Christianity.
It may be at once conceded that he has truly
indicated the ethical aim of the Gospel. Its
design is to make men love God with all their
heart and their neighbour as themselves. Let
that be done, and all is done. Most important,
again, is it for men to know this ; for unless
we know what to aim at, our efforts may be
put forth in wrong directions, and so fail to
attain what is most truly3| valuable. So, if


a treasure were hidden on the top of the
Matterhorn, it would be most important to
indicate the place of its concealment, seeing
that without such knowledge search must
needs be made at haphazard, with a probable
issue of failure. But now, suppose that
between the searcher and the treasure
there intervened a deep precipice, the
frowning crags of which all the art
and strength of the searcher were power-
less to surmount, of what avail would it
be to him to know where the treasure lay
concealed? The essential thing, in such
circumstances, would be such help as might
enable him to climb the precipice. Is there
no such precipice between man and holiness?
And does he need no such help to enable him
to surmount it? In Mr. Higinbotham’s
lecture there is no hint of such a thing. Sin,
for all the notice he takes of it, might be
non-existent, and the power of man’s will, if
his representation is to be trusted, is adequate
without help, or with the help, at most, of a
perfect law and an inspiring example to the
task set before it. It is obvious to remark
upon this that such has not been the expe-
rience of the holiest men, and that such is
certainly not the teaching of the New Tes-
tament. If ever there were men who were
disposed to think highly of human nature,
and to make much of the power of the will,
those men were the Roman stoics. And yet
what is the testimony of the greatest and
best of them? Says Epictetus, “If you
wish to be good, first believe that you are
bad.” Says Marcus Aurelius, in one of his
nine remarkable directions for meditation,
“ We are ourselves feeble and by no means im-
maculate, and often our very abstinence from
faults is due more to cowardice, and a care
for our reputation, than to any freedom from
the disposition to commit them.” Says
Seneca, in his “Treatise on Anger,” “ If we
wish to be just judges of all things, let us
first persuade ourselves of this, that there is
not one of us without fault.” It is
the universal testimony of the great
and good that “All men are sinners.”
Let us ask, then, in the first place, what is
the meaning of this remarkable fact? The
lecturer objects to the doctrine that man fell
from a higher moral condition to a lower, and
that the evil instincts of the parents have been
transmitted, in accordance with the well-
known law of heredity, to the children. Of
the proper interpretation of the details of
the story of creation I say nothing. I
believe that great light will yet be thrown
upon those details by the researches of
Assyriologists. It is about the great fact
which that story sets forth that I am now
making inquiry. If then, I ask, there be no
fault in the very nature of man, how is it
that all men are sinners? How is it that
some men do not live perfectly according to
the dictates of conscience ? If ever since the
dawn of history man has been rising to a higher
condition, not only intellectually but morally,
how is it that in so many thousands of years
the race, where it is outside the influence of
Christianity, has made so little progress?
Oh, but, answer a certain school of sceptics,
there has been great progress. It is true that
we know nothing certainly of the moral con-
dition of pre-historic man, but look at the
difference between a celt and a needle-gun ;
and can you doubt that the moral progress of
man has kept pace with his intellectual pro
gress ? I do not doubt about it at all. I
know that it has not. There is one civilisa-
tion, that of Egypt, which has left to us
records more than 5,000 years old. Here
then, at least, is time enough for develop-
ment, if any took place; and we have no
need, in this case, to go groping for our in-
formation among celts and inferences, but
are brought face to face with recorded facts.
Is it true, then, that in this ancient civi-
lisation there was any observable moral pro-
gress ? The opposite is the fact. The
maxims of Ptahotep are 5,000 years old, and
they are the purest in heathen antiquity
There is one of them which we should do
well to ponder to-day in Victoria : —“ If thou
art a wise man, bring up thy son in the fear
of God.” Egypt, alas ! forgot the lessons of her
seers. “ It is incontestably true,” M. Renouf
tells us, “ that the sublimer portions of the
Egyptian religion are . . . the earlier
and the last stage of the Egyptian religion—
that known to the Greek and Latin writers
heathen or Christian—was by far the grossest
and most corrupt.” Yes, but it may, per-
haps, be urged, even though religion and
morality declined in Egypt, may we not
discern a moral development in the Persians,
Greeks, and Romans, who sucessively
took up the leadership of the world ?
The opposite is again the fact. “ I am
obliged to acknowledge,” writes M. Renouf,
after quoting J. H. Newman’s definition or
rather description of God, “ that single
parallel passages to match can be quoted
from Egyptian far more easily than from
Greek or Roman literature. Where shall we
find such a prayer in heathen Greek or Roman


times as this : ‘ Omy God and Lord, who hast
made me and formed me, give me an eye to
see and an ear to hear Thy glories.’” The
theory of moral and religious development
outside the sphere of revelation, is decisively
contradicted by facts. Well, then, again I
ask, what means this universal prevalance of
sin, and of its aggravation rather than alle-
viation through the long course of heathen
history ? Can it arise from the very consti-
tution of our nature? Shall we say that
sin is a necessity, and that our conscious-
ness of guilt and of moral freedom are alike
illusions ? That were to contradict facts of
our consciousness of the reality of which
we have an assurance more certain and direct
than of those which we accept on the evi-
dence of our senses. Whence, then, was this
universal tendency to sin derived ? It may
help us to an answer if we recal Kant’s well-
known tests of the judgments which arise
from the very constitution of our mind. They
are, you will remember, these two —that
they shall be necessary and universal. That
“change is due to some cause” is such
a judgment, because we are able to say every
change has a cause; and not only so, but
that every change must have a cause. Can
we then say in like manner, not only every
man does sin, but every man must sin ? You
know that we cannot. We say that men
ought not to sin, and that therefore there
can be no necessity that they should. Sin,
then, is not a necessity of our being. Still, if
every man does sin, is not that a proof that
in some way, if not by the necessity of our
constitution, still, in some way, sin has found
an entrance into our nature ? How, then ?
Surely there can be but one answer ; by here-
ditary transmission from those who gained
evil instincts through sinning, when they
need not have done so. And is not this an
account of the meaning of sin full of hope
and encouragement? If sin be not a normal
constituent, but only an hereditary disease of
our nature, it may admit of cure, if only we
can find a remedy potent enough. Yes, if
we can find a remedy ; but who can furnish
that? Happiness and holiness, to revert to
our former illustration, are waiting for us at
the top of the Matterhorn; sin is the great
precipice which prevents us from getting at ,
them. How, then, to scale the precipice ? i
That is what we want toknow. “When I would
do good,” says Paul, “ evil is present with me. i
Oh, wretched man that I am, who shall deliver j
me from the body of this death ?” Can that <
question be answered in the affirmative ? If i
it can, then He who can give us the answer
) brings with Him the eternal gospel, or good
s news, for humanity. Now, the New Testa-
-5 ment professes to answer that question ; for
r it tells us that the Christ was called Jesus,
[ because “He should save his people from
t their sins.” How is it then, one may well
■ ask, that in setting forth what he deems to be
. the central truth of Christianity, Mr. Justice
Higinbotham makes no reference to sin, or to
i salvation from it? Because, he intimates,
Jesus himself makes no reference to such
things. Does He not? Can it be that
deliverance from sin, from the universal
tendency to forget God and our neighbour, is
the one great need of humanity, and yet
Jesus makes no reference to it? The lecturer
strangely overlooks our Lord’s institution of
baptism and the Lord’s Supper. Nay, by
implication he denies that they ever were
instituted by the Divine Founder of our
faith. His words are, “No ritual was pre-
scribed, no common prayer was directed, but
only a closet prayer.” No one will, of course,
deny that baptism by water, and that the
eating of bread and wine with a common pur-
pose and a symbolical reference, are forms
of ritual. Can it then, let us ask, be held by
any competent critic that Jesus Christ never
instituted these ? For the sake of shortness,
let us confine ourselves to the question,—Did
Jesus Christ institute the Lord’s Supper?
The three synoptical evangelists tell us that
he did, and describe in detail the form
of institution. St. Paul, writing to the
Corinthians in the year 57 a.d., not only
speaks of the ordinance as being cele-
brated in the church which he is ad-
dressing, but himself recapitulates the
form of institution, saying that he had
received this account of the Lord, and
had delivered it to them. This delivery, of
course, took place when he founded the
Church of Corinth, in the year 52 or 53; that
is to say, twenty years or less after the Lord’s
death. When he received this account it
would be difficult to say, nor is it necessary
to determine. For if within twenty years of
the Master’s death, and in the lifetime of the
principal apostles, Christians celebrated the
Lord’s Supper in memory of their Master’s
death, as related by St. Paul, it is absolutely
certain that Jesus commanded them to do it.
How could any one have invented such an
ordinance while all the apostles were alive, and
have persuaded them and all the Christian
churches that they had always observed
it, if no such thing had ever been done ?


Could any one make us believe, here in
Melbourne, that ever since the death of Sir
Charles Hotham, we had kept up the custom
of observing a funeral feast in his memory
every week? Just as impossible would it
have been to impose a similar belief on the
Christian churches in the lifetime of the
apostles. Does any one doubt that St. Paul
wrote the words to the Corinthians to which
I have referred? Not one single critic of
name, whether he be a sceptic or a believer.
Remember, then, that it is just as certain
that our Saviour appointed the sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper as that there is a statue
to Burke and Wills in Collins-street. And
now, this being so, let us ask what was our
Saviour’s purpose in instituting the sacra-
ment ? Why did He take a particular
doctrine out of the whole circle of His
teaching, and giving it this prominent
place, this visible embodiment, command
his disciples to keep it ever before their eyes
by a continually repeated representation?
Surely because it was of capital importance,
of central and decisive significance. Nor are
we left merely to infer this. St. John tells
us, in the sixth chapter of his Gospel, that
our Lord had already taught, at a critical
period of His ministry, the decisive im-
portance of this doctrine. “ This is my body
this is my blood” —eat it, drink it—He said, on
founding the ordinance. In other words—
become one with me, take my life, the life
which I am to make perfect by sacrifice, by
the offering of my body and shedding of my
blood, and make it your own. In like manner,
in the sixth chapter of St. John’s Gospel, He
had said—“ Except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of Man, and drink His blood”—except
ye appropriate by faith his sacrificial ly-
perfected life—“ ye have no life in you.’
Here, then, decisively and unmistakably, the
Master sets forth the necessity of spiritual
union with Himself as the central fact and
doctrine of the faith. We are to conquer sin
by spiritual union with our crucified and
ascended Lord. Such is the teaching of our
divine Master. Can any doubt that it was
the teaching also of the beloved apostle?
When I repeat his significant words “He
that hath the Son hath life, and he that
hath not the Son of God hath not life,” do
you not feel at once that I have expressed
the central truth of all His teaching ? How
is it again in the writings of St. Paul?
Baur will not be suspected of too strong a
partiality for mystical doctrine. What,
then, does he say of St. Paul’s representation
of the central verity of the faith? “The
fundamental and ever recurring thought of
the apostle is,” he declares, “that only
in union with Christ can the Christian
be what he is and ought to be, as
a Christian; that in Him alone has he
the essential principle of his being and
living.” This union he points out is repre-
sented in the Lord’s Supper; and he
concludes with these remarkable words—
“ Thus the Lord’s Supper, as the central
point of the Christian religion, cannot be
dissociated from this historical commemora-
tion ; and he who fails to hold the feast in
living consciousness of what it means, must
thereby be removed, more or less, from the
centre of the Christian religion. It is only
in the living reference to Christ, and His
atoning death, as brought home to the
consciousness in the Lord’s Supper, that the
Christian community becomes a soma
Ghristou. It is then as certain as anything
can be that the Lord Jesus and His greatest
apostles set forth, as the central privilege of
His church, spiritual union with Himself by
faith, in order to the partaking of that life
which He consecrated by His death, liberated
from the bonds of flesh and blood by Hia
resurrection, glorified by His ascension, and
shed forth by His Spirit at Pentecost. This
was the power in which Christians were to
vanquish sin, in which they were to
attain to the love of God and their neigh-
bour, in which they were to scale the
precipice, and gain the prize. Take away
this promise of union with Christ, and you
have a gospel without any good news in it, a
command without power to obey it, an ex-
ample without strength to follow it. True,
the Cross was a scandal, and union with
Christ a mystery ; but what if the
scandal and the mystery were justified by
results ? What if slaves and blasphemers and
profligates actually became able, through
union with Christ, to subdue their
sins, and to pass forth from the
misery and darkness of their former lives
into the light of God’s presence and
the joy of God’s love? Was not this a
true salvation? Was not this the very
deliverance for which poor enslaved and
overburdened humanity had been looking and
praying so long in vain ? And was not St.
Paul entitled to exclaim, as he pointed to all
this, “ I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, for it is the power of God unto
salvation?” But now, of all this, demon-
strably the very heart and essence of the


Gospel, there is in Mr. Higinbotham’s lecture
neither hint nor word. Is it then uncharit-
able to say that whatever it contains which
is excellent, it omits essential elements of
the Christianity of Christ ? And this being
so—this fatal omission having been made—
can anyone be astonished that Mr. Higin-
botham should demand the abolition of those
creeds which are full of the omitted element ?
Even the Apostle’s Creed must of course
be surrendered, for does it not recount those
great facts in our Lord’s history through
which a spiritual union with Him was made
possible? What do we want with a resur-
rection or ascension if Christianity consists
simply of a law and an example ? If there be
no tyrant sins to vanquish, and no life of
Jesus in the power of which they are to be
subdued, then all which has hitherto been
regarded as of the essence of the Gospel, all
which the Lord Jesus Himself taught to be
of its essence, becomes mere surplusage-
mere aberglaube —to be consigned with
other dreams of a loving and pious but over-
heated imagination to a kindly and eternal
oblivion. But what then becomes of the
authority of Christ Himself ? What becomes
of the gospel which He preached? What
becomes of the certain experience of His
people that by union with Him they have
vanquished sin and obtained peace with
God —are all these to follow them ? In order
to simplify our creeds shall we consent to
mutilate our Christianity ? For the sake of
obtaining some hollow and momentary truce,
shall we throw down our arms and surrender
at discretion ? No ; if the Church of
Christ is to fall in these lands, let her fall
at least in fair battle, wielding to the
last the sword of the Spirit, and dying,
if, like the African church of old, she must
die—where death, I ought to say, is im-
possible—beneath the outspread banner of
the Cross.
THE GOAL TO STRIVE FOR.
Have I spoken too hotly, my brethren,
with too little consideration for the great
ability and transparent sincerity of the
learned lecturer whose utterances I have
undertaken to criticise ? My excuse is that I
have spoken of his theories, not of himself.
For himself, I feel, God knows, nothing but
affectionate respect. He has done for us
what so many of our critics refuse to
do—he has told us in plain and un-
mistakable words what are the griev-
ances under which he feels himself to
labour. He has done more. Dissatisfied with
the barrenness of mere negation, he has made
a manful effort to construct a positive faith
in which men like himself can believe, and
in the power and inspiration of which they
can try to live. Such efforts are never made
in vain. Their very failures are instructive,
their very imperfections may give them
wholesome influence for a time. Mr. Justice
Higinbotham may be heard in quarters where
our words are disregarded; there are men
whom he may teach to look to our Divine
Master as the Light of the World, by means of
those very omissions which, to us, seem de-
structive of the Gospel. If it be so, then
God speed him, and teach him, by methods
which we cannot follow, secrets of
divine truth which may glorify his Master
and ours. He is still our brother—we all
feel that—still our brother by virtue of his true
love for Christ. And what if, for a time, it
seems to him that he must walk apart, is not
that too often the sorrowful penalty of our
mortal blindness? We are like men starting
from different points to climb the weary
steeps of some lofty mountain. Far away
from each other our paths seem to lie, so far
at times that we can neither see the face
nor hear the voice of our fellow-
travellers. But if the eyes of all be fixed on the
summit, if the feet of all be bent reso-
lutely thitherward, every hour will bring us
nearer to each other, till at last, in the even-
tide, among the gleaming snows, we shall
join hands, and know that our goal was one.
So, by the divers ways of human speculation,
all true souls, all children of the ideal, are
climbing, consciously or unconsciously,
towards the Light of the World. Far off He
sometimes seems from us, in the impetuous
morning of life, far off in its sultry noontide,
but, as the evening shadows fall, and we draw
nearer to the mountain peak of self-sacrifice,
where His throne is, we shall surely draw
more nearly to each other. Only seek Christ,
only keep the eye steadfastly fixed on Him,
and then, sooner or later, in this life or
another, we shall forget our differences, find
our brethren, and rejoice together in the
vision of God.
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.


• ' . -'* ~ -* ,. N > ■- . ' ' ' . . ‘ . Av \ " >'o-v •
'
i - " - ' ■- - V - ’ .
. ' . ■ >
• ■* — --■■■ - --< ■ ■
■ , ■ • ■ ■'
, , ■ ■
■
' \ - ■ . ■■>■■■■ -
. ' ■* . ■ • ' . e--\ ' ' - '
■ ’ V.; • , »V- ' «'■' - ' ' ■' ;
■ n ■ £> ■ ■ < , ■ ■ ■ ■
■
■
; - ■ ■■ V. ■ - y
■ / ■ . ■ . jj ' , - - ' ;
■ ' - ■■■ ■
•
• ' ■; ■ ■ ' - -
, i; ' V V ■■ f-.' . , ■ - ‘ ■ ■ '
■
' ■
■
■
'


