

/ I? /




ADDRESS
ON THE
Opening of tjrc J?tl)ooi of flints,
BALLARAT, VICTORIA.




jAbxess
THE OPENING
THE SCHOOL OF MINES,
BALLARAT,
VICTORIA.
DELIVERED BY
SIR REDMOND BARRY,
ON WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 26TH,
A.D. 1870.
MELBOURNE;
MASON, FIRTH, & M'CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
1870.




ADDRESS
THE OPENING OF THE SCHOOL OF MINES.
Mr. Chairman, Ladies, and Gentlemen— We assemble this
evening to elect directors for the management of the School of Mines
for Ballarat. It affords me much pleasure to assist on the occasion.
My good fortune has associated me before this with the inhabitants
of Ballarat in furthering the cause of voluntary mental improvement.
Their zeal, discretion, and perseverance prepared me for the ex-
hibition of similar invaluable qualities in the members of your
provisional council: that expectation has been completely realised ;
and their exertions ably regulated by the good judgment and un-
wearied assiduity of your provisional vice-president, Judge Rogers,
have matured within a short time, and in the face of many difficul-
ties, the plan for the organisation of the school.
My first duty is to thank very heartily the gentlemen who initiated
these proceedings for the honour they have conferred on me by
naming me the provisional president, and to assure them, as well as
the members of the provisional council, that I am very sensible of the
distinction. Indeed, these gentlemen have left me nothing more to do
now, and but little to say, because as the school has become, in the
phraseology of the day, “an accomplished fact,” it may be presumed
that everything connected with its establishment and maintenance
has been thoroughly debated and determined upon. Nevertheless,
it is quite possible for an entire community to accept the conviction
that it is expedient and desirable to open such a school, and yet it
may not present itself to the minds of all that the maintenance in a


perfect state of efficiency will require something more substantial
than their meed of approval of the project.
You may already have considered the advisability of making this
a proprietary establishment. Such a system possesses numerous
advantages, not the least of which is the direct pecuniary interest
which the proprietors have in the good management. This has a talis-
manic effect on the regular attendance of directors.
You may reasonably expect that the Government will help you,
more particularly as in other countries where such schools exist they
originate with and are supported mainly at the cost of the State, and
especially as you have proposed to give to the Crown the power of
nominating six of the members of your council. You may for the
like reason look for the support of the seven mining boards. You
may further rely, and with reasonable confidence, on the sympathies
of many of the general public. Still something more is required.
Liberal salaries must be provided for your masters, lecturers, and
teachers; a library must be formed; collections of minerals, models,
«fcc., must be made; other things indispensable for the course of
instruction must be got together.
You will doubtless see the advantage of founding exhibitions for
the encouragement of your pupils : the question of maintenance
becomes consequently one which addresses itself earnestly to a
much wider circle than the audience who honour us with their
presence here to-night.
Although it be not probable that in this community, so forward
to avail itself of opportunities to assist in enlightened movements,
any will be found actually opposed to the establishment of this
school, there may be some persons indifferent to change, and of that
timid disposition which shrinks from the responsibility of supporting
any novel scheme; or perhaps there may still linger amongst us a
few of that courageous old conservative stamp who, long since driven
from their outworks by the advancing waves of general education,
still hold the citadel in defence of the practical man, and contend
strongly that all goes on well enough as it is.
The first will meet us with the inquiry—What is the use of
such an institution 1 When such questions were put to Ben-
jamin Franklin, not unfrequently in the vein of petulant inter-
rogation, depreciating the value of his scientific pursuits, the
philosopher replied by asking another, “ What is the use of a


baby ?” Indeed, as an abstract proposition it is not easy for
any person, except the idolising mother or proud father, to
pledge himself prospectively for the eventual utility of any indivi-
dual infant. Yet Wordsworth has said;—
“ The child is father of the man
Or, as was sung before by Milton—
The childhood shows the man,
As morning shows the day.
And truly the culture of this scion, which is to be developed into a
rational, accountable member of the body politic, clothed with his
rights and duties, and his responsibilities here and hereafter, is
deserving of our solicitude.
Those who have meditated on the subject have been made
uneasy by the growing tendency to obliterate childhood —to
hurry on our yputh either to drudgery for which the physical
powers are unequal, or to occupations which induce an impatience
of parental control —an independence for which it is not ripe;
and disquieted by the fatal propensity to sharpen youths, who
should be boys, into imperfect men. In no regions can uneasiness
on this point be more keenly felt, than where the population lives in
that state of chronic excitement caused by the search for gold,
amongst which speculation is so rife, so stimulating, so contagious.
Nowhere can the compensating influences of education be more
required to moderate these precocious inclinations; and no kind of
education can be devised better suited to calm the juvenile enthu-
siasm, to steady the volatile, and give a wholesome discipline to the
mind, than a sound training in moral and physical science, in mathe-
matics, engineering, geology, mineralogy, chemistry, and metallurgy,
which we undertake to teach.
This simple statement would, of itself, suffice to show that the
school is one of the best and most useful that the community could
project. Your excellent prospectus, which has, it is hoped, had an
extensive circulation, declares the uses which this school is expected
to serve. Quoting from it, with your permission, it states :—“ The
object sought to be obtained is the combination of the highest
scientific with the most practical training for all men engaged in the
enterprise of mining in its various branches—whether so engaged as
mining managers, engineers, surveyors, mechanists, working miners,
directors, or promoters of companies,”


“Hitherto in this colony no means of scientific education in this
most important occupation has been provided. The result has been
an enormous waste of capital, time, and labour. Indeed, it may be
fairly stated that the present depression in the mining market, and
the distrust of mining property as an investment, may in great
part be traced to the numerous failures of enterprises either
ignorantly entered upon or unscientifically conducted. The scien-
tific education of those engaged in mining pursuits would, it is
believed, not merely render gold-mining a safe and generally more
productive speculation, but would bring into profitable prominence
and activity many branches of mining now wholly neglected, or
distrustfully, and consequently unsuccessfully, pursued.”
Here, then, is an exposition which completely exhausts the subject,
and puts the question beyond the reach of controversy. For insti-
tutions, political, social, and educational, there is, as for mankind,
an infancy ; and you may be congratulated on the rapidity with
which this has emerged from its swaddling-clothes. The sum of
£6OO, wanted to enable you to commence operations, has been sub-
scribed. The Government has so far recognised your movement as
to grant you a lease, at a nominal rent, of the house in which we
are met, formerly the building in which were held the sittings of the
Supreme Court. It has been repaired and adapted to the require-
ments, and you are now ready to set to work.
If there be amongst us any indifferent to the movement on
account of its novelty, to them may be said, with all deference for
striking on so low a chord—You cannot afford to be listless your
self-interest demonstrates the imperative necessity for action. Your
calling, whatever it may be, is so interwoven with, so dependent on,
the mining for gold, which has enlisted so large a part of the popu-
lation of the district, that the question is brought home to you in
a serious light. You cannot decline to move on with the times.
Only sixteen years ago, when the valleys around this spot were
crowded with upwards of 40,000 stalwart diggers, working amidst the
alluvial drifts with an energy almost incredible, an admonition was
given, which sounded prophetic, and was consequently disregarded ;
yet the verification of this has come upon us in our generation with
a startling and unpleasant truthfulness.
Many a one of you, when consulting the author of Siluria, for
guidance in your operations, to which his profound and philosophic


investigations have imparted such pre-eminent value, may have paid
but scant attention to the conclusion of the sixteenth chapter. Let
me read it to you. Speaking of these alluvial workings, he says:
“ Now, as every heap of these broken auriferous materials in foreign
lands has as well defined a base as each gravel-pit of our own country,
it is quite certain that hollows so occupied, whether in California or
Australia, must be dug out and exhausted in a greater or less period.
In fact, all similar deposits in the old or new world have had their
gold abstracted from heaps whose areas have been traced, and whose
bottoms were reached. Not proceeding beyond the evidences regis-
tered in the stone-book of nature, it may be therefore affirmed that
the period of such exhaustion in each country (for the deposits are
much shallower in some tracts than in others) will, in great measure,
depend on the amount of population and the activity of the workmen
employed in each locality. Anglo-Saxon energy, for example, as
applied in California and Australia, may in a few years accomplish
results which could only have been attained in centuries by a
scanty and lazy indigenous population, and thus the 'present large
flow of gold into Europe from such tracts will, in my opinion,
begin to diminish within a comparatively short period .”
These italics are his own. You may answer whether undue emphasis
be thus given to the passage. What is the obvious moral to be drawn
from this pregnant sentence? Does it not show that what has oc-
curred on this spot within this short time, under our own eyes, proves
amply that, in this quarter at least, the era of the cradle and the
tin dish has already passed away into an antiquity as dim and
distant as the age of Tubal Cain; that the present epoch of deep
leads to reach the banks of what were at some remote geological
period superficial streams, or to follow out, what may be of still
more or less ancient formation, gold-bearing veins of quartz, demand
agencies wholly different from those which hitherto sufficed; that
while you will still rejoice to possess the help of the miner’s brown
arm, the time has come when the calculating and inventive brain
and the cultivated intelligence must play their part; and that you
now must enlist higher forms of sagacity, employ auxiliary forces,
and that these forces must be directed to suit the altered circum-
stances which have arisen.
But our old and valued conservative friends, who conceive that
new-fangled ways and contrivances are all weariness and vexation


of spirit, and who rest their faith on the proverbial u practical
man,” will allow me in all amity to remind them that the practical
man does not want to be pampered and coddled, to be nurse-
tended and protected after their fashion. Self-training, practical
experience, hard-earned knowledge, and other similar expressions,
worn threadbare long since, are captivating to some. Neverthe-
less, the self-trained practical man who rises to eminence—after
all, one in many hundreds of his order—is the last person in
the community to be seduced by them. He knows that nature’s
precepts are the same as they have been before all worlds, and that
while none can claim a monopoly in them, no one can appropriate
them without a long and earnest servitude to acquire them. He
recognises the truth announced by the poet’s description of gravi-
tation ;
“ That very law which moulds a tear,
And bids it trickle from its source,
That law preserves the earth a sphere,
And guides the planets in their course.”
He knows that he has had to earn his knowledge by studying the
same laws of nature and physics, and gaining the same general in-
formation which others do who have attended schools and univer-
sities—a privilege denied to him. He feels that he has had to
struggle alone under a thousand discouragements to reach by rugged
and circuitous tracks the same goal; that he has been like one trying
to decipher unaided a secret writing, who has had to compare
symbols in different positions and under different combinations,
obliged to conjecture many a time and oft what their meaning may
be, until, after a multitude of fruitless experiments, he compre-
hends their separate and relative significations. No such man
would decline the help of teachers familiar with every branch of
science he desires to master, or the use of a library, collections of
properly classified minerals which you will doubtless cause to be
assembled, or of apparatus to illustrate for him at once problems, by
which he has been for a long time perplexed.
Apart, however, from this, let us view the matter in a broader
light, and strike a key more in consonance with the liberality of
sentiment with which you wish this matter should be treated.
When we reflect on the distinction between science which collects
principles, and art which applies them, we may acknowledge the
force of the more rational persuasion of enlightened men of every


age, that theory and practice, instead of being hostile, are only dif-
ferent phases of the same form of thought, that to impose on them
the ban of celibacy is for practical purposes the most impracticable
of things, and that they should be allowed to continue undivorced,
for ever bound together in indissoluble bonds of holy matrimony.
While discussing this, your attention may be called to the opinion
of Robert Stephenson. He was, as you know, son of George, father
of railways, who, when the unknown brakesman of Killingworth,
disputed with Davy of world-wide reputation the priority of inven-
tion as well as usefulness of the safety-lamp, and who stinted the
indulgence of his days of sparingly-requited labour in order to give
his son the best education to enable him to aid his own acknowledged
deficiencies. Writing from South America in 1825, whither he had
been sent to superintend the working of gold mines at St. Anna, he
says; —“ Practical men are certainly to be esteemed as such, but I
am far from attaching the importance to them which our masters
appear inclined to do. Indeed, in the working of gold and silver in
veins in this country it is absolutely essential that theory and
practice should be united and go hand-in-hand.”
It is difficult indeed to know how to repress this natural proclivity
to innovate, or by what rigour to restrain this stationary mediocrity
so erroneously attributed to the practical man. He, himself, rises in
rebellion against the favourite code prepared for him, for no sooner
does he allow his genius to soar above his mechanical occupations,
and to speculate on some improvement on his servile toil, than he
becomes himself a theorist —one of the obnoxious body of q)hiloso-
phers looked upon as idealists or dreamers.
Is it not manifest then that when a knowledge of mathematics and
mechanical principles affecting the direction and pressure of forces, an
ability to estimate the strength, the elasticity, and other properties of
materials, with a view to economy, convenience, safety, and durability,
has been gained by a man before he enters on the practical application
of the principles of construction, and sets himself to build a house,
&c., he will have an immeasurable superiority over the one whose per-
formances have been for years chiefly imitative, who has not been able
to find time to learn, or find others with leisure or inclination to teach
him those principles calculated to simplify or expedite his unvarying
handiwork, but who has been obliged to rest on the actual experience
of his own working hours. Might we not as well expect to find a


person skilled in the art of navigation who is ignorant of the science
of astronomy; or of mensuration, who knows not geometry; or of
logic, who was unacquainted with the science of reasoning; as an
engineer, who had not mastered the science of mechanics; or one able
to direct the search for, and profitable working of minerals, to whom
geology, chemistry, hydraulics, and other cognate sciences were not
familiar.
The question is sometimes narrowed as to what are the best means
of acquiring technical proficiency, and it is asserted that the practical
details of civil engineering may be best learned by pupils in the
field, and in the offices of engineers engaged in the execution of
extensive works—in fact, dealing with the professional man as with
an ordinary tradesman, and insisting that he should be taught as is
the apprentice to the shoemaker or hatter. Now, we are not obliged
to admit or deny this proposition, for it embraces only one portion
of the general subject, and the conclusion drawn from it, that private
tuition, under an exceptionally favourable state of circumstances in
both master and pupil, is, or may be, that best calculated to ensure
a certain proficiency, is not the true issue. What is required is—not
a partial adept in some one branch, or a few branches of work, but
a man with comprehensive learning, which embraces the wide range
of philosophic theory, the precepts of which invigorate the under-
standing, and keep him from the perpetual blunder and mischance
into which the practical empiric is so prone to fall; and who, in
addition to this, can apply those precepts with readiness and apti-
tude. Yet even on this point it may be well maintained that
isolated pupilage amongst seniors of different dispositions, engrossed
with their own independent responsibilities, more prompt to neglect
or chide than to instruct, cannot be so congenial to the young man
as the association with his fellows of the same age, all mutually
bringing to bear on each other in honourable rivalry the knowledge
which they daily acquire. And as it is in a great degree a parent’s
question, the school presents the protection of superintendence, the
exercise of moral restraint, and the absence of temptation to idleness
and dangerous self-indulgence, not so well insured against in the
early emancipation of the other system.
But what testimony can be more eloquent than the lamentations
of our most distinguished practical workers, at their not having been
blessed with the benefit of education in early life ? What more


touching than their struggles, what more worthy of respect than the
spirit of enquiry and perseverance by which they were animated 1
What more convincing than the care they took and the expense they
incurred to secure for their children that early instruction the want
of which was by them so feelingly deplored 1 However profitable it
might be to exhibit instances of this, displaying in almost every
variety of form, intelligence, strength of character, firmness of pur-
pose, frugality, intense sensitiveness, and many a manly virtue—such
would be more suitable for another occasion.
It is not to be imagined that those invited to give their support to
this institution are to be stirred solely by appeals to self-interest,
or by an exposition of the fallacies of obsolete prejudices. Members
of an intelligent community when in search of reasons to guide them
at such a juncture will look back upon the experience of the past to
guide their actions, forward for a motive for their conduct.
How, there is in history, perhaps, nothing more deserving atten-
tive consideration from the point of view we are now regarding it
than the astonishing impulse given to all the industrial and me-
chanical arts since the beginning of the present century. That this
is to be ascribed in some degree to the increase of population and
the very augmentation of wealth which reduplicates itself, is true;
nevertheless, far the greater portion of the prosperity is due to the
improved means of intercourse, the discoveries painfully elaborated
by means of the singular intellectual activity of the age, the spirit
of inquiry, and the bold and persevering researches of scientific men.
While nothing is so truly surprising as to observe the rapidity of
development of several of these grand implements of pacific revolu-
tion swelling from the tiny nucleus which was seen on our own
horizon to the gigantic proportions which they have already assumed.
Chemistry, enfranchised from the superstitious trammels of alchemy,
had moved forward for some time with halting steps and slow; but
it is within our own day, so to speak, that she has enlisted the ser-
vices of those utilitarian workers, unnecessary to enumerate by name
here, who investigated the mysteries of nature, evolved from inert
matter a host of elementary substances, the existence of which as
such was unsuspected before, capable of forming new alliances, and
in simple compound or allotropic forms delighting us by the unex-
pected nature and energy of their action, their usefulness, and their
beauty. Operations in most of the industrial arts, including the cul-


tivation of the soil, where now conducted upon true principles of
economy, are largely indebted to the discoveries of chemists, and it is
well known that some, productive of no inconsiderable gains, could not
be worked profitably but for the appliances thus obtained. At the
same time, in the more speculative walks of science, it is with her
help that astronomers, now learned in the laws which govern the
composition and relations of the rays of light, and using the spectro-
scope, are enabled to determine the primary constituents of planets
which lie beyond the limits of space reached by the best optical
instruments employed by their immediate predecessors.
Electricity, but recently deemed a pursuit only for the amuse-
ment of the curious, has been enlisted as an additional ser-
vant, obedient to man’s behests, and exhibits its tractability
to perform offices of the most various kinds. The years 1793-4
witnessed the contention between Galvani and Yolta,* which estab-
lished the distinction between animal and contact electricity, and now
we hear of electro-magnetism, diamagnetism, magneto-electricity,
magno-crystallic action, diamagnetic polarity, and hundreds of other
wondrous things which wait on Dr. Tennant like attendant Ariels on
the magician Prospero. The electric light irradiates the blackness of
darkness with its peculiar effulgence. The telegraph wires, conveyed
by land and under the sea for hundreds of thousands of miles, flash
messages everywhere—already almost round the globe—a circuit
which it is expected will be complete in less than three years; and
powerful magneto-electric machines worked by steam generate heat
which yields a current of electricity used to produce a chemical
change in the precious metals, and deposit gold and silver on moulds
with a delicacy and precision incapable of achievement by the hands
of the most practised goldsmith.
Steam, substituted for the uncertain powers of water and of wind,
and for the muscle, sinew, and nerve of man and beast, saved from
waste, or called from a dormant state into existence as a labour
agent, and directed at will, now accomplishes more work than could
be performed by the united operation of the adult male members of
the human race; and the daily growth of perfection in the construe-
* Galvani attributed the contraction of the muscles of the frogs’ legs to
animal electricity. Yolta accounted for the phenomenon by the contact of
the heterogeneous metals, zinc, &c., with the muscles. Galvani replied by
showing that the contraction may be produced without metals. Volta
retorted by producing electricity without frogs .


tion of machinery, as also the adaptation and adjustment of each
kind to its special duty, so augments the power of production, in a
ratio of such velocity, as to set completely at defiance the sobriety
of calculation of what it may reach with the next fifty years.
Or take the advance of engineering science in the improvement of
means of locomotion, from the canals of Brindley, Rennie, and Tel-
ford, to the railroads which now traverse continents, scale mountain
ranges on gradients, within our memory deemed impracticable,* per-
forate Alps through tunnels excavated by methods of applying the
forces of water and of air, as new as they have proved effectual. It
may be observed incidentally that this process is now being worked
at the Tangil mines of Gipps Land. Also to cross straits and rivers
by such bridges as those of Menai, of Montreal, of Friburg, or Niagara,
or valleys by such viaducts as the Indre, Nogent Sur Marne, or of
Congleton, or our own highly creditable Moorabool, only 66 feet
shorter than the great wrought-iron tubular Britannia bridge.!
Or consider the progress made in providing for means of accelerated
intercourse on the ocean, the highway of nations, from 1802, when
the first steam-tug was launched on the Clyde, and compare her
lilliputian apparatus with the engines used in many a Cornish mine,
or those which worked the pumps, with cylinders 144 inches in
circumference, employed to drain the lake of Haarlem. Or contrast
the first steam passenger vessel, the “ Comet,” which plied on the
same river in 1812, with the “ Great Eastern,” 619 feet long, or 87
feet longer than St. Peter’s, at Rome, registering 18,914 tons, with a
capacity of 25,000, built of iron, a species of engineering Cosmos,
containing within herself an example of almost every improvement in
construction known when she was built, moving through the water
under two independent systems of propulsion, paddle-wheels and
screw, of the power equal to the combined strength of 8400 horses,
as large, in fact, as 350 vessels of the size of that in which Chris-
topher Columbus ventured to cross the Atlantic.
A leap like this is almost as great as was accomplished in naval
* The Semmering between Gratz and Vienna, 1 in 40; the Bhor Ghaut,
between Bombay and Poonah, lin 37; the Blue Mountains, between Sydney
and Bathurst, 1 in 30.
11. Menai, 570 feet long, feet above the water; 2. Britannia, 1488 do.,
do.; 3. Montreal, 6592 do., do.; 4. Friburg, 880 do., 180 do.; 5. Niagara,
800 do., 350 do.; 6. Indre, 2463 do.; 7. Nogent S.M., 2722 do.; 8. Congleton,
2870 do,; 9. Moorabool, 1426 do.


architecture in three thousand years, from the launching of the good
ship “Argo” 1 to that of the “ Comet,”
1 The Argo is described as a penteconteros, propelled by 50 oars; she
carried 50 heroes, as some authors say, or 100 according to others. The
pseudo-Orpheus* sings, that after Jason had taken the golden fleece he passed
up the Tanais, and the ship was transported by land to the head waters of a
river which flowed into the Baltic. Hence she made her way through the
German Ocean by Ireland to the Straits of Gibraltar, and up the Mediterra-
nean to her port of departure. She must thus have been of light con-
struction, and a tolerably good sea-boat. Others f tell us she returned
by the Southern Ocean, which, to meet the exigencies of that version,
flowed from the Red Sea across what is now the dry land of Northern
Africa. Prose authors,! to whom of course the least credit is given,
suggest as likely that she came back the way she went. Unravelling
the meaning of traditions, respective events said to have happened about a
generation before the siege of Troy, may amuse antiquarians and perplex
historians, but is not very profitable to us. Still you may be detained for a
moment, as one of the interpretations of the objects and results of this ex-
pedition goes to show the antiquity of one of the contrivances employed in
gold-washing ; and that it has been perpetuated by the like means and by
artificial substitutes amongst various people, separated from each other by
distances of time and space. We may suppose that the people of Colchis
were in the habit of collecting the particles of fine gold washed down from
the Caucasus by placing sheepskins in the stream, as is now done in South
America by using ox-hides for that purpose ; or as it is done daily at every
quartz claim here by placing baize or blankets on your shaking-tables or rip-
ple-boxes, to the pile or filaments of which the laminated gold adheres. The
strictness with which they preserved the secret, and the jealousy with which
they protected their treasure, may account for the fable of the golden fleece
guarded by dragons. Chrysomallus, the gigantic ram, engendered by the god
Neptune and Theophane, daughter of Brisaltis, King of the Island of
Cremissa, may then be sobered down to a sagacious old gentleman who com-
bined the operations of sheep-farmer and alluvial digger—who depastured
his numerous flocks on the banks of the Phasis, between Trebizond and the
Straits of Kertch; and turned his fleeces to a double purpose—subject, never-
theless, to the royalty imposed by King Aectes; that Jason, a buccaneering
young Greek, invaded the country, and contrived to outwit the monarch,
eased him of his two chief staples of export, wool and gold, eloping at
the same time with his daughter, the fair enchantress Medea. Another
instance of the similarity of the method of mining in ancient times and in
modern days, when resort is had to simple means unaided by scientific
appliances, is furnished by Monsieur CaillaUd, the persevering mineralogist,
who recently discovered the famous emerald mines of Mount Zeborah,
in the isthmus which separates the Nile from the Red Sea; and confirms in
all respects the testimony of Strabo and other writers. Worked during the
dynasty of the Ptolemies more than 2000 years ago, excavations following
the veins of mica, talc, and schist, were driven for many hundred yards into
the granite mountain. Subterranean canals, huge causeways, and other
massive structures, show on what an extensive scale, and on what rude and
uninformed principles, the work was carried on. It would seem that the
operations were suspended, and the miners withdrawn suddenly; from what
cause is unknown (not improbably from a panic fear of ghins, ghouls, or
evil genii entertained by the superstitious workmen), for ropes, baskets,
* Of this way of thinking are also Timoous and Seymnus of Chios,
f Pindar, Pythic Ode 4.
X Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus.


No attempt is made in this cursory retrospect to present to you
anything not known to all of you. My desire is to suggest by this
brief recapitulation an idea which arises out of it. Each of these
sciences, with many others to which no allusion has been made, are
the willing handmaidens of the art of mining. Knowledge of the
suitable locality in which to sink your shafts, and of the direction in
which to push your drives—how to support them with due regard to
economy and safety in working them, to drainage, lighting, ventila-
tion, and the precautions for the preservation of health and life, the
expulsion of foreign substances which detract from the value of the ore
and interfere with the direct action of your quicksilver on gold, or of
the fluxes and reagents employed for refining other minerals, even the
means of speedy carriage to the port of departure and transit to the
ultimate market—concerns you all; and though it may not enter into
the calculation of the gentlemen who with such eagerness ply their
vocation in the sale of scrip at your u Corner,” ignorance, or the mis-
application of ill-digested science in the elaboration of any one of
the stages of the lengthened series of operations, may make a sensible
difference in the actual tangible amount of the dividend promised
when you associate yourself with the latest “ floated ” company, pro-
fessing to be conducted on the most approved scientific principles.
levers, grinding-stones, vases, lamps, tools, and utensils, in all respects like
those in use by the Arabs of the present time, were found lying about as
though the owners had retired five minutes before these implements were
found.
The Latin version of the portion of the Argonautica of the pseudo
Orpheus relating to this ( ineert. auct .), is given :
Inde sub Arctois angusto rapta meatu,
Finibus oceanum versus prolabitur Argo,
Defessi noctesque novem, totidem quoque soles
Linquimus hinc atque hinc ignotas nomine gentes,
******
Atque übi diva diem jam clarum Aurora revexit
Ehiphasas valles attingimus, inde pepente
Prosilit angusti puppis per littora ponti,
Oceanumque intrat, Saturnius ipse vocatur
Pontus Hyperboreis a gentibus, et mare mortuum,
Unde etiam lethum fugiendi nulla fuit spes,
Ni puppim validis Ancaeus viribus actam,
Innixus pulchra temonibus arte dolatis,
Dextra coegisset cursum per littora ferre.
******
At multa Ancseus temonem dirigit arte,
Insulaque ante omnes offertur lernis, et Argo
Insequitur metuens atram non stulta procellam,
Yelaque franguntur.


We have glided so imperceptibly into the enjoyment of many
advantages, comforts, and luxuries, the offspring of these discoveries
—we have familiarised ourselves so complacently with the results —
that we do not fatigue our minds to investigate how these results
have been brought about; nor do we reflect as attentively as we
should do as to what the future of this country is to be, and how
those who succeed us must acquit themselves.
Our most accomplished geologists assure us that the area of aurif-
erous drift is far from having been yet explored; that the extent of
gold-bearing rocks is wholly unknown; that the depth to which
they may be profitably worked is still undetermined; that unmis-
takable indications announce the presence of other minerals of no
mean value; while the natural products already so abundantly
cultivated, and those capable of bearing acclimatisation, display
unbounded resources to employ industry, and for manufactures
demanding a higher order of scientific and technical instruction than
has been hitherto available for their judicious development. For it
is not by wrestling against the inflexible laws of nature, which
compel the industry of man to conform to the conditions of soil
and climate, and the limits of his own knowledge; nor by ill-advised
competition with the capital of older communities, employed under
circumstances which give it an overwhelming superiority ; nor by a
contest with the stubborn principles of political economy, that we
can expect to establish the permanent prosperity of our adopted land.
We are not, even in our time, satisfied to import the discoveries
of others, and to invite the man of science and the skilled artisan to
direct their operations. Australia can point with a modest satis-
faction to the invention of Osborne in photo-lithography, and the
test for blood by Dr. Day; to the cure for snake-bite by Professor
Halford; to the method of removing pyrites, that inveterate enemy
of the metallurgist, as well as the native alloys from gold, and
toughening the metal by the use of chlorine gas, by Mr. Miller, of
the Sydney Mint; to the scientific preservation of the meat of our
redundant flocks and herds, so largely exported; and also to many
others, mention of which would detain you too long, the omission to
specify which will be pardoned, and not deemed invidious by the
able and zealous men to whom the community is so much indebted.
Far be it from me to depreciate the benefits to be derived from
sitting at the feet of those great masters who instruct mankind in


Europe, or to underrate the incalculable advantages to be gained by
travel in expanding the mind, making it receive readily, almost
involuntarily, impressions of the most improving description. Still,
it is not to be supposed that parents will sever themselves from
their children, or that they can afford to incur the risks and ex-
pense of educating their sons in another hemisphere, when it is
possible to procure for them, all things considered, a good
training in this busy human hive; where, in the midst of mines,
factories, and workshops, with gifted operatives in every branch
of every trade at hand, opportunities for the technical illus-
tration of every department of theory exist, such as it is rare
indeed, if not impossible, to find assembled in any other spot in
such close proximity. We should not, then, ungraciously under-
estimate the faculties of our young men, and deem them incapable
of holding their ground with their own relatives resident in the
countries from which we have come. We should not act towards
them in a manner at once ungracious and unjust, by denying them
means to prove their ability and to try their constancy.
As the ranks of the learned professions become more densely
filled, other sources of equally useful and honourable employment
must be sought for those who come after. Your surveyors, your
engineers, your architects, must be called into existence here, and
the time will come when Victoria may, with pride, address to her
own sons the mandate—
“ Bid harbours open, public ways extend,
Bid temples worthier of God ascend,
Bid the broad arch the dangerous flood contain,
The mole projected break the roaring main,
Back to his bounds their subject sea command,
And roll obedient rivers through the land.”
Let those, then, who desire that such things should be, come to the
front, and with good will and open hand support your school.
It is not my intention to delay you by dilating on the detail of the
course of study to be pursued here, already mapped out with much dis-
cernment from those of the great schools of Europe, our safest guides.
You would not, however, excuse a neglect to acknowledge gratefully
the obligation we are under to the eminent geologist, Sir Roderick
Murchison, the venerable director of the Jermyn-street School of
Mines, for the advice with which he has kindly favoured us, and the
donation of books which form so acceptable a contribution, to our


library. That he should express, as he has done, a lively
interest in the formation and success of this school is natural,
when so many references are being constantly made by him to the
geology, natural history, and peculiar characteristics of this portion
of the globe. In his address to the Royal Geographical Society
in May, 1868, he made especial allusion to the subject when
passing on Sir Charles Lemon (a name honoured by every true
Cornishman) a well-deserved eulogium, of whom he says:
“In a word, no man of my time was ever more generally respected
and beloved;” and adds—“in the year 1846, being president of the
Royal Geological Society of Cornwall, he invited me, his guest, to
attend an anniversary meeting of that body, and say something
which might give encouragement to the tin-miners, who were at the
time in a suffering state, and many of them out of work. It was
then—referring to what I had been speculating upon in our own
society and at other places in the two previous years, as to the
auriferous character of the Australian rocks when compared to those
of the Ural Mountains—that I ventured to counsel these tin-miners
to emigrate to Australia and dig for gold. Some of them took my
advice, and in 1848 I was in possession of small specimens of ore
sent home by them. Thereon I took more courage, and warned her
Majesty’s Government of the great event which was about to be
fulfilled. I will only add that the so mis-called discovery of gold,
i.e., the diggings on a profitable scale, were not opened out till 1851,
and that my much earlier letter to the Colonial Secretary is printed
in the Blue Book on Gold.”
Having, as it is my apprehension, already trenched too largely on your
indulgence, you will allow me, in conclusion, to add that there is
one principle which cannot be too forcibly recommended to you, in
the value of which the rational concurrence of the council may be
expected. It is, that the standard of the education to be given in
the school be fixed sufficiently high at first, and kept up, unrelaxed
by a too ready compliance with ill-judged solicitation or remon-
strance. You are aware that the teaching is to be special—of a
nature to unfold the most active faculties of the pupil’s mind not
by dwelling exclusively on the ideas of others, but by enlarging the
circle of his own thoughts, and inculcating an habitual self-reliance.
The teaching must therefore be thorough and honest, or it may not
only be useless, but mischievous and dangerous.


We charge ourselves with the training of young men, to whom may
eventually be entrusted the expenditure of considerable sums in pre-
liminary inquiries and trials, on which will depend the investment of
capital (to form, perhaps, in some instances, the source of main-
tenance for persons who cannot labour), the preservation of property
liable to injury or destruction, the winning of minerals under circum-
stances of uncertain and unexpected danger, and who will conse-
quently be responsible for the safety of the lives of many human
beings. Such training is different in quality from that in other schools,
in which the precision exacted by physical science is not enforced.
There are no degrees of mathematical accuracy —the results must be
correct, or they are wholly vicious. Moreover, the admixture of
subjects, practical and theoretical, to be taught here will have a
peculiar use in enabling you to resist any such attempts—the
pupil’s hand will be busied in forwarding the improvement of his
understanding. When employed in tracing, fitting, moulding, veri-
fying, and putting together the parts of machinery, in making
drawings, working plans, &c., calculating quantities, he will have to
think out the process by which he directs the instruments he uses,
in a manner very different, on the one hand, from committing to
memory languages or the theories of philosophers; on the other,
from the traditionary practice of the hereditary artisan. Facilities
will be thus afforded for testing the soundness of his w r ork at every
stage of his advance. This will, to a great extent, correct the
unwholesome system of “ cramming.” This will show those who ima-
gine that loading the memory with dates, events, maxims, and rules
will suffice, that something beyond a superficial varnish of accom-
plishments is expected here, and that, as when they become profes-
sional men it will be required of them that they will not permit
vamping or scamping of work to pass with their approval, so it is
their duty now to prepare themselves for the discharge of those
responsible functions by a faithful devotion to the course of teaching
laid down for them here.
Another feature in this school fortifies the position you may
assume. There will be, as it strikes me, something eminently agree-
able to the well-constituted mind of a youth who is to attend this
school, to behold the full-grown man—perhaps father of a son of his
years-—applying himself after the exhausting labours of the day to
the drudgery of self-improvement. If anything can be conceived


more likely than another to arouse the indolent, to abash the trifler,
to restrain the irregular, to encourage the diffident, to stimulate the
ardent, it should be such a prospect —manhood voluntarily placing
itself under the ferule, and labouring by the voluntary cultivation of
the intellect to make itself more useful, more trustworthy, more
respected. If there be anything more than another more likely to
instil into your young men that reverential feeling towards their
parents, and to cherish a due regard for the feelings, the wishes, and
the affections of their seniors, without which virtues whatever be
the material wealth of the country it will not be fit to live in—it is
this; if there be anything more likely than another to make them
sensible of the wisdom of your strictness and the justness of your
severity—it is this. Better for them that our young men should be
warned betimes of their inaptitude for the profession they seek to
join, by reason of want of capacity, or power of sustained attention
which is to qualify them, so that they may fit themselves for some
more congenial occupation, than that they should be permitted to
lounge through your school empowered to practice on public cre-
dulity under the colour of your certificate.
When Napoleon I. decreed that a university should be established,
he proclaimed, “ The Emperor wants a body whose teaching may be
free from the influence of the passing gusts of fashion—a body that
may be kept moving even though the Government be lethargic.”
It is not for us in the modesty of our humble efforts to promulgate
such a manifesto; but we may remind ourselves that all who feel an
interest in the success of this school, and look forward hopefully to
its sending out in fullness of time a band of well-educated pro-
fessional men, expect that the standard of proficiency once established
will not be lowered without substantial reason; also, that such im-
provements in the system as may be suggested by the intelligence
of others, or dictated by our own experience, be adopted without
delay. The cautions reiterated on this head by many persons
competent to offer unprejudiced comments have been numerous; to
multiply quotations would be superfluous, when the principles
accord so completely with common sense. It is right, therefore, at
the outset, to dispel any expectation which may be entertained by
the pupils that the standard of qualification is to fluctuate according
to the scale of their shortcomings. The announcement will be the
best means of inspiring them to do what is demanded of them.


It is well also to remember that in cases of imperfect training
under a system tolerated by supine administration and weak conces-
sions, the discredit will not fall exclusively on the pupil : much will
be expected from our teachers, much must be left to our examiners,
in whose firmness and discrimination faith must be reposed—a faith
which ought not to be lightly shaken. Much will depend on the
council of directors you proceed to elect to-night. If it be not unbe-
coming me to say so, the assurance given by the ability with which
the provisional administration has been conducted, justifies me in
expressing a belief that the gentlemen who are to become the objects
of your choice will enter office convinced of their responsibility, and
determined to do their duty.
If, then, these precautions being taken, our efforts be crowned by
the success we invoke —to the reputation for enterprise and
energy in acquiring wealth, as. well as for liberality in applying it to
the worthiest uses, which was won by your Maiden City before the
recently-conferred honours were bestowed upon her, you will add the
credit of founding an institution calculated to meet a peculiar want
of the country and of the age. You will thus elevate her to the level
of those venerable seats of learning which, though wanting in many
of the natural sources of material prosperity which exist on the sur-
face of the soil around us, and altogether destitute of those found in
the earth beneath our feet, are rescued from geographical insigni-
ficance and obscurity, and deserve an honourable pre-eminence by
reason of the encouragement they afford to literature and to arts of
that becoming order which lend a grace to life.
MASON, FIRTH, AND M'CUTCHEON, PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.


