

ADDRESS
OF THE
QUEENSLAND IRISH,
AND TO IRISHMEN AT LARGE,
FROM THE
GYMPIE BEANCH
OF THE
Irish National Land League.
GYMPIE:
PRINTED AT THE “GYMPIE TIMES" MACHINE PRINTING OFFICE.
MDCCCLXXXII.




ADDRESS
FROM THE
Gympie Brauch of the Irish National Land League
TO THE
QUEENSLAND IRISH,
AND TO THEIR COUNTRYMEN AT LARGE.
i iMjjtM] NE of the largest meetings of the Gympie branch of the
:f Irish National Land League ever held on Gympie, assem-
bled the Hibernian Hall on the Bth October last.
The proceedings throughout were characterised by the
„jsS> greatest unanimity and enthusiasm. Part of the business
was to take into consideration the Rev. M. Horan’s resig-
nation of the office of President. The meeting enter-
tained the idea that there might be some connexion between the
Reverend President’s resignation and Propaganda’s recent utterances
indicating the line of action to be imposed on the subordinate Irish
clergy in regard of the Irish land agitation, and also reflecting on the
Ladies’ Land League, as both matters were set forth in a recent issue of
the Australian. Be this as it may, there was nothing in the Reverend
gentleman’s letter of resignation to warrant any such conclusion. It
was felt, however, by the meeting that a severance of the priests from
the land agitation would be nothing short of a calamity—that so long
as the clergy continued to identify themselves with the Land League,
it would be vain for the enemies of the Irish people at home and
abroad to denounce it as a immoral and wicked association; since
none, except insane fanatics or such as were interested in feigning
credence, could for a moment believe that the clergy would identify
themselves with any movement, whose object is to do an injustice to,
or inflict cruelty on any of God’s creatures whether man or beast, the
clergy being thus a guarantee to the world for the righteousness of
the Land League cause and the legality of its action. Influenced by
this conviction, the meeting were indignant at what they considered
Propaganda’s officious intermeddling between the priests and the Irish
people, more especially at a crisis when they are literally battling for
existence and for permission to live in their own land. The meeting
also keenly felt that the Ladies’ Land League constituted a “ tower of
strength ” to the cause, and were further indignant that those noblo-
mindod women, who had done and ondurod so much for the alleviation


of human suffering, should be singled out by Propaganda for repro-
bation. The remorseless landlord faction, backed by a brutal soldiery
and constabulary, could easily crush any action or meeting of the
unarmed people however legal and constitutional, but the imprison-
ment of ladies for advocating the Land League cause was the moral
triumph of that cause in the eyes of Europe. With these two wings
of the Land League army, the Ladies’ Land League and the Clergy,
the Irish Executive, though backed by its triple army of soldiery,
constabulary, and the landlord faction, were unable to cope. For the
rest of the population, now that the priests have been severed from
them, a Coercion Act of the proper stamp rigidly (i.e., brutally)
enforced, will make short work of them. Such, at least, is the opinion
of their enemies ecclesiastical and civil. Dominated by these senti-
ments the meeting passed the following Resolutions and Address,
which were not only carried unanimously, but with the hearty con-
currence of all.
“1. Whereas the connection of the Irish Catholic Clergy with the great
Land League movement is a sufficient guarantee for its being conducted
within the lines of the Constitution, and whereas the resignation of our
Reverend President (M. Horan) may be owing to the recent action of
Propaganda in endeavouring to sever that connection which has hitherto
subsisted unbroken between priest and people. Be it resolved that the
Reverend President’s resignation be not accepted, but that a deputation be
appointed to wait upon him and if possible induce him to reconsider the
step he has taken ; and further, that this branch of the Irish National
Land League draw up an address embodying its views on the action of
Propaganda, both in virtually condemning the Ladies’ Land League, and
in bringing about the severance of the Irish priests from the Irish people
in their struggle for permission to live in the land of their birth.” Moved
by J. C. Pollakd, seconded by J. B. Carroll.
“2. Whereas the recent action of Propaganda in regard to the great Irish
land agitation, is not only calculated to drive the people into unconstitutional
courses for the redress of grievances, but is likely to be fraught with disaster
to the Catholic religion and the Papal authority amongst the Irish people,
Be it therefore resolved that an Address embodying our views be forwarded
to His Holiness the Pope, to the President of the Irish College at Rome, to
the Irish public bodies, and the Irish newspapers throughout the world.’
Moved by J. Farrell, seconded by John Mahoney.


ADDRESS.
Fellow Countrymen",—
We regret to have to say that the recent Address of the Irish
Catholic Hierarchy, setting forth the future line of action to be imposed
on the subordinate clergy in connexion with the Irish land agitation, is
unworthy of their exalted position and antecedents, and will severely
shock the moral sense of patriotic Irishmen throughout the globe.
The people having been brought to the present point in their political
progress largely through the instrumentality of Bishops Croke, Moran,
and Nulty, and of the subordinate clergy (for without their countenance
and co-operation the Land League leaders would have been compara-
tively uninfluential) a grave responsibility attaches to the Irish
Hierarchy in abandoning their past position, a step we believe they
never would have taken, proprio motu, nor unless coerced by some
outside sinister influence.
We conceive further that the Irish prelates, when giving the text of
Propaganda’s ‘‘instructions,” should have accompanied it with an
English translation, in order that the people might more correctly
appreciate both Propaganda’s “ instructions ” and the prelates’ com-
mentary thereon. It cannot be pretended that the matters involved
merely concerned the Propaganda, the Hierarchy, and the subordinate
clergy. On the contrary the people are vitally interested in them,
and should not be treated as though they counted for nothing, and
their approval or disapproval alike immaterial; for neither the Propa-
ganda nor the Hierarchy in their “ Address, ” are discussing questions
of faith and morals, but merely announcing the respective parts they
mean to play in the future, for whilst the Propaganda in effect avows
its adhesion to the Irish landlord party, the Hierarchy declare them-
selves Propaganda’s most obedient, humble servants, though in doing
so many of them, with pain we say it, belie their antecedents—virtually
eat their own words.
We now proceed to remedy the Hierarchy’s omission alluded to
by supplying a translation of Propaganda’s “ instructions,” incorpor-
ated in the Hierarchy’s Address. The first of these “ instructions”
is as follows :
“ But since it is of paramount importance that the wretched con-
dition of the Catholics living in that island (Ireland) should be allevi-
ated, the Sacred Congregation does not fail to act its part, with a view
to the cause of the Irish being recommended to the civil power, clearly
foreseeing that on the restoration of tranquillity, that nation may bo
brought into a better and more flourishing condition.” In regard of
the foregoing “ instruction ” we remark,


The ignoring the mutual relations between England and Ireland
in this Propaganda “ instruction,” whether it arise from defective
information or otherwise, is positively ludicrous. Propaganda which
sets itself up as our teacher, has, it seems, yet to learn that the two
aristocratic factions, Whig and Tory, which alternately govern and
which are composed of landed, manufacturing, and trading capitalists,
supplemented by the privileged and ruling classes, are the deadly
enemies of Ireland, and that Ireland has never succeeded in wringing
any important concession from either, until she has been brought to
the of civil war —that whatever we Irish may expect from then
fears, we have nothing to expect from their sense of justice We are
surprised to learn, however, of the new born influence of the Propa-
ganda with the civil power of Great Britain, and that it 'will be
exercised on Ireland’s behalf, but would like to know the precise date
of its origin and whether it resulted from the Ernngton mission; also
the precise consideration by which it was acquired; for the Propaganda,
is not any more than a nation, a purely disinterested body, and does
not exercise its powerful influence on behalf of a government outside
the Catholic pale gratuitously. We repeat it, therefore, we desire to
know the precise terms of this religio-political compact, the stipula-
tions on both sides of the high contracting parties, the Propaganda on
the one part and the British Government on the other. It, however,
the Propaganda feels such a lively sympathy for the plundered and
persecuted Irish nation as it professes, it is strange that it should bo
so slow in manifesting it, and that now, when we are within a
measurable distance of success,” it should interfere unasked, in ordei
to divide people and clergy, and so mar all.
Commenting on the first paragraph of Propaganda’s ‘‘instructions,’’
the Irish prelates remark, “Therefore it is that while the Sacred
Congregation is keenly alive to all our trials, it cautions us against
dangers which might imperil the high character, the clergy and people
of Ireland have always maintained.” It is somewhat singular that
the Sacred Congregation which makes this profession, is regarded in
Queensland and throughout the Australian colonies as decidedly
unpropitious to the colonial Irish clergy, both bishops and priests; for
instead of recognising and rewarding Irish zeal, piety and learning,
bv the elevation of Irishmen to the episcopate, it intrudes Italians
and other foreigners as bishops, oyer sees as intensely Irish as those ot
Dublin, Cork, or Tuam.
There is no disguising the fact, that a world-wide conspiracy, largely
the nroduct of English intrigue at Rome, has been inaugurated against
the Irish race at home and abroad. The factors of that conspiracy
are Gladstone operating through Propaganda ; the Propaganda in
Ireland operating through the Irish Hierarchy to sever the clergy,
especially the curates, from the people ; and in these colonies operating
bv excluding Irishmen from the episcopate, and intruding foreigners as
Biohops over Irish flocks ; Euerlish nuns to keep the children ignorant
of their country’s history, and to anglicize their tender minds; tho


English Catholic press, which (notably the English Tablet) is never
tired vilifying and misrepresenting the Irish cause, and all who uphold
it, and is even more hostile to Irish national aspirations, than is the
English secular press ; lastly the reptile landlord press of the United
Kingdom, which not content with exaggerating and multiplying
actual outrages, by presenting the one fact under sundry variations,
fabricates others out of its diabolical ingenuity. Toward the work of
denationalizing the Australian-Irish, Gladstone is further stimulated,
from seeing what a power for good for Ireland the Irish element is in
the United States and in Canada, and what a power for the same end
the same element may soon become in these Australian colonies, and
this work of denationalization he hopes to bring about by the co-oper-
ation of his ready tool and stipendiary the Propaganda. A
little reflection will show the mode of operation: Gladstone
has obtained a large sum from the British Parliament to be
employed in expatriating the evicted Irish to Australia, and we
learn from the press that his Government has communicated on the
subject with the Colonial Governments. The Propaganda undertakes
for some consideration, which time will disclose, the work of denation-
alizing the Australian-Irish, and as a first step toward that end, is
appointing English and Anglo-foreign Bishops, who will further carry
out Propaganda’s aim, by means of English nuns in our schools. So
that the expatriated tenant farmers on arriving in Australia, will find
a gigantic establishment prepared for their reception, whose primary
object it will be to anglicanize them, and .divest them if possible of
every vestige of national sentiment.
So far as we Queensland Irish are concerned, we have nothing to
thank Propaganda for, unless we are to thank it for an uhscrupulous
and systematic attempt to wheedle us out of our national sentiments,
even at the expense of our religion ; for it is a truism that when an
Irishman ceases to be Irish, he ceases to be Catholic. Nor are
Propaganda’s anti-Irish machinations confined to this colony.
Already nearly half of the episcopal or quasi episcopal jurisdictions in
Australia are in the hands of English or foreign ecclesiastics ; and all
the recent episcopal appointments in this colony, with the exception
of Dr. Dunne’s, are Italian ; while the latest issue of the Catholic
papers tell us that the appointment of Dr. Luck, an English monk to
the See of Auckland, is a proof of the Propaganda’s “ fixed determina-
tion” to hand over that see to the English Benedictines. Seeing that
all these foreign ecclesiastics are comparatively young men, and the
Irish Australian Bishops nearly all, or quite all old men, who cannot
in the ordinary course of nature live much longer, we cannot but view
with alarm the manifest purpose of Propaganda to fill their places as
they die off, with English and foreign ecclesiastics. These men will
hand over the Catholic schools, attended by Irish children, to
English religious, who will studiously screen from them the appalling
story of their country’s wrongs, while the prelates themselves, as
some have already done, and are now doing, will represent our
exemplary Irish clergy and ourselves to our fellow colonists, as a


drunken immoral and degraded crew. Thus will our children s
minds be imbued with anti-Irish prejudice, while the prelates outside
the schools will make them ashamed of the very name of Irish ; and
yet this Propaganda, the author of all these machinations against the
colonial Irish clergy, would have us believe that it is most solicitous that
“ the high character of the Irish clergy should be maintained.” But we
in doe public bodies as we do individuals, not by their professions, but
by their deeds, and those of Propaganda are not calculated to win for
it the confidence of the Irish. We may add, the officious intermeddling
of Propaganda in those mixed Irish questions which partake at once
of a religious and political character, is nothing new. In O’Connell s
day an attempt was made by the British Government to bring the
Irish Hierarchy under the operation of a royal veto , the effect of which
had it succeeded, would have been to render it illegal for any Irish
Catholic Bishop to exercise his episcopal functions in Ireland, without
the previous sanction of the Crown, equivalent to the conge delire,
with which the Anglican episcopate is shackled. This project of the
veto was favorably entertained at Rome, and the English Catholics
would have cheerfully acceeded to it for themselves. The irish
bishops however sent a strong remonstrance to Rome by the hands of
Dr. Murray, coadjutor of the archbishop of Dublin, to which, however,
not the slightest attention was paid, so predominant at that time was
English influence at Rome, and accordingly Dr. Murray returned to
Ireland unsuccessful. At a subsequent meeting however of the Irish
prelates, very energetic resolutions were adopted, one of which was as
follows“ Though we sincerely venerate the Supreme Pontiff, as visible
head of the Church, we do not conceive that onr apprehensions for the
safety of the Roman Catholic Church in Ireland, can or ought to be re-
moved by any determination of His Holiness adopted or intended to
be adopted, not only without our concurrence, but in direct opposition
to our repeated resolutions, and the very energetic memorial presented
in our behalf, and so ably supported by our deputy, the Most Revel.
Dr. Murray, who in that quality was more competent to inform His
Holiness of the real state of the Catholic Church in Ireland, than any
others with whom he is said to have consulted.” This last phrase
referred to the emissaries of the English Catholics in Rome, who were
as active there against Ireland then, as the like emissaries are now.
The calm but resolute stand of the Irish Hierarchy against the veto
produced its due effect, for the project was incontinently dropped, and
has never since been openly revived ; but the snake is merely
scotched, not killed, and what Propaganda dare not attempt openly it
essays to accomplish by a serpentine policy, as we will proceed to show.
It may not be generally known, but is nevertheless a fact, "hat
Propaganda formed the design of subordinating the Irish Catholic to
its younger sister the English Catholic Church by making Ireland a
religious as it is conventionally a civil province of England, and was
only diverted from its purpose, by a late most eminent prelate who re-
fused to submit to such an infraction on the rights and libertiesof the Irish
Catholic Church. Had that scheme succeeded, not only would Ireland
have been stripped of one of the most distinctive tokens, of her being a


nationality altogether distinct from England, but the veto would
have most probably been carried by the English Catholic Hierarchy,
when Ireland in the case supposed being a mere religious 'province of
England, would have had to follow suit. And here we cannot forbear
expressing our keen disappointment that our Irish Hierarchy have
allowed themselves tobecoerced by Propaganda, instead of emulating the
example of their predecessors of O’Connell’s day, and the no 3 less
spirited action with which the eminent prelate referred toatonce resented
and defeated the attempt, to subordinate the ancient Irish Catholic
Church, founded by St. Patrick, to her relatively modern sister the Saxon
Church, founded by St. Austin. We again recur to Propaganda’s
“ instructions,” the next paragraph of which is as follows :
“ The Bishops must take care that the priests in the churches
especially, never treat of politics in their discourses, and when preaching
the word of God ; and therefore the more they must not take part in
the discussions of the prevailing mobs.”
We are reminded by the foregoing, that “ If the shepherds be smitten,
the sheep will be scattered abroad,” It was on this principle the
Gladstone Government acted, when it arrested on a pretended suspicion,
the more notable Land Leaguers throughout Ireland, merely because
they were Land Leaguers. On the same principle they have introduced
a Coercion Act still more stringent than that expired, and under which
no man’s life or liberty is safe in Ireland who speaks in the popular
interests ; and now the Propaganda through the Hierarchy seeks to
deprive the people of the guidance of the Soggarth Aroon. Ireland
is in truth sold, betrayed, and the people may v/ell exclaim, now that
they have been robbed in their priests, of their natural leaders, coun-
sellors, and protectors, “God Save Ireland.” Yet if this desertion
teach the people to be more self-reliant, and disregarding the vacilla-
tions of their espiscopalsuperiors, to carry out toits logical consequences,
the groat principle enunciated by Bishop Nulty, and if possible
still more forcibly by Bishop Moran, that the use of the soil is the
common inheritance of all, they may not have reason to regret the
course things have taken, though the Bishops may, for their influence
with the people will certainly not be increased by their present
retrograde policy. It is as well to note here the complimentary terms,
in which Propaganda speaks of assemblages of Irishmen, designating
them “ the prevailing mobs.” When it speaks thus, it only proclaims
that it does not know what it is talking about, that it “ neither
understands what it says, nor whereof it affirms.” The following is
the next paragraph of Propaganda’s instruction.”
“ Especially must they moderate the zeal of the junior clergy, and
not allow all indiscriminately to betake themselves to the public
harangues at meetings, whether to deliver or hear such, but for that
purpose let them delegate certain of the more prudent and more wise,
such as understand how to restrain the passions of the people, and
keep them within the bounds of justice and charity.”


One would imagine, that if the curates can be safely entrusted with
the care of souls, they can be safely left to take care of themselves in
political and such like secular matters, but the fact is the Propaganda
is fully as much a political as it is a religious body, and has engaged
with the Gladstone Government to convert the Irish Hierarchy into a
sort of spiritual constabulary for Gladstone. Hence the subordinate
clergy are not left to the guidance of their individual conscience, but
are required to conform to Propaganda’s crafty policy, however distaste-
ful and anti-national.
It is most deplorable that the curates should be gagged, and the
people abandoned to their own devices in the hour of their greatest
difficulty, when intelligence, wisdom, and sobriety are so urgently
demanded. The guidance of the curates would have proved a sure
guarantee for the preservation of order, and the diminution of those
occasional outrages which unhappily do occur, but which can never
altogether cease so long as eviction outrage is the law of the land, and
is carried into effect by the forces of the Crown. It is idle for Propa-
ganda to insinuate that the junior clergy are raw youths, destitute of
judgment, and carried awiay by enthusiasm. On the contrary, they are
men in the full vigour of mental and physical development, ranging in
age from 30 to 45 years and even more. They are moreover as a rule
highly cultured, and, unlike some of the Bishops, and what Propaganda
calls “ the older clergy,” trained by the ablest teachers in modern
science, and ancient lore—the very men in fact best qualified to lead
their oppressed countrymen out of a worse than Egyptian bondage.
Hence Propaganda, Gladstone’s ready agent at his instance gets
them gagged by the Bishops, of whom we may truly say under present
circumstances, “ How are the mighty fallen ! How has the fine gold
become dim.” Had they been appointed Bishops under a royal veto,
they could scarcely have been more subservient in the interests of the
Gladstone Government than they are at present. We strongly suspect
that the reward anticipated or promised for this subserviency, is the
establishment of a Catholic University on a footing acceptable to the
Irish Hierarchy and Irish Catholics generally, but we must protest
against the lives and liberties of the masses in Ireland being bartered
away, for any consideration actual or conceivable. Now comes “the
unkindest cut” of all in the “ instruction” that follows.
“But let them with special zeal apply their minds, to the examination
of that association of females called the Women’s League for the
preservation of the agrarian cause (the Ladies’ Land League), and let
them consider how many effects clearly calamitous to female modesty
are much to be apprehended in consequence, which we must altogether
shun. Of a verity political movements of women, and assemblages of
women generally, in the abstract are not to be tolerated.”
First we note that in the foregoing paragraph the Ladies’ Land
League is grossly misrepresented, it being an organisation not for the
preservation of the agrarian cause, but for the preservation of the


lives of the landlords’ victims, by supplying them with the necessaries
of life, and a roof to shelter them when thrown out in all weathers, without
distinction of age or sex, to perish by the wayside. What would have
become of those unhappy persons, men, women, and children, had not
the Ladies’ Land League thrown around them “the shield of its
protection.” The Catholic Church has many beneficent agencies for
the alleviation of human suffering, all excellent in their way in the
ordinary course of events, but it had no agency adequate to meet the
stupendous case of so many evicted, or if it had such agency was not
forthcoming. What was to be done ? Were the ladies of Ireland to
shirk a public duty, because its performance involved somewhat of
masculine energy? No, they did better; laying aside the natural
reserve and timidity of their sex they boldly grappled with the difficulty,
and acquitted themselves heroically, and their sublime devotion will
be rewarded in heaven, and immortalized in story to the remotest
generations, despite Propaganda’s detraction. As to the assertion that
“ political movements of women and assemblages of women generally are
abstractedly not to be tolerated,” the only meaning we can attach to that
dictum, is, that in ordinary times it is unbecoming in women to meddle
in politics or to pronounce collectively on political problems—a point
on which there is room for two opinions; but the Propaganda apparently
forgets that these are not ordinary but very extraordinary times, and
that the Irish people without distinction of age or sex are battling fop
their lives, and for permission to live in the land of their birth, against
the enemies of their country and their race, those robbers and convicted
extortioners—the Irish landlords, aided by a foreign and hostile
government.
It is idle for Propaganda to refer to the example of the Virgin as a
model tor imitation, for of her life public or private we know next to
nothing, the Scriptures not being communicative on that head. In
the absence of facts therefore, however we may idealize, we must not
presume to positivize or dogmatize, and in this particular Propaganda
is in no better position than the mass of the faithful. There are not
wanting, however, instances in Scripture of women who renouncing
the timidity of their sex, have acted a bold, nay a manly part, in special
crises of their country’s history, and who so far from being censured
are extolled in consequence. Among these we may mention Deborah
the lady judge and general of Israel, also Jael, who smote to earth
Sisera, her country’s enemy, and has not only been pronounced
“ blessed among women” but immortalised in a national song, on
account of her intrepid deed. There is also the case of the beautiful
widow Judith, who struck off the head of the drunken Holofernes.
We have not words to express our indignation at Propaganda’s
obvious design to disparage the noble-minded women of the Ladies’
Land League, by assimilating them with the Petroleum slingers and
furies of the Paris Commune ; and we trust that the sound common
sense of the humbler class of our countrymen in Ireland will enable
them to detect the true character of the attempt, and resent it as it


deserves “ The base, bloody, and brutal Whigs,” availing themselves
of an obsolete statute of Edward 111. enacted against prostitutes, applied
it to the pure and noble-minded women of the Ladies’Land League, to
secure their incarceration and, if possible, degradation ; and now the
Propaganda, that government’s ally, similarly but vainly endeavours to
degrade them, and has only succeeded in degrading itself.
Some may imagine that in venturing to express our disapproval of
the ioint action of Propaganda and the Irish Hierarchy in regard to
Ireland we are presumptuous, but we are prepared to show, that in
doin" so, we are perfectly within our right. The Pope’s claim to in-
fallibility and consequent universal obedience on the part of the
faithful is rigidly confined to matters of faith and morals ; and his
decisions in these particulars only command obedience, when announced
ex cathedra, that is to say when he speaks formally as the Doctor of
the Church : and so far from the Pope’s claiming infallibility in matters
•nolitical or scientific, he repudiates any such claim as a malicious
invention of his enemies. Nay, it is admitted by the most eminent
theologians, that cases may arise when it would be our bounden duty
to withstand the Pope. In the present instance it is true we are not
concerned with the Pope but with the Propaganda and the Irish
Hierarchy but no one will contend that the Catholics are bound to
yield to them, that obedience which they would not yield to the Pope
himself in like circumstances. We condemn the joint action the
Propaganda and the Hierarchy as embodied in the Irish prelates re-
cent Address, as being prejudicial to Ireland in many ways, as a retro-
grade movement and abandonment of the people, and a siding with the
people’s enemies ; as well as being subversive of episcopal influence, as
we would equally condemn it had it emanated from the Pope
himself.
Few perhaps have explained more lucidly than Cardinal Newman
the nature of the Pope’s infallibility—in what domain it is operative,
and the specialities which accompany and indicate its exercise, yet
he does not hesitate to state,
“lam far from saying that Popes are never in the wrong, and are
never to be resisted, or that their ex-communications always avail, l am
not bound to defend the acts or policy of particular popes whether before
or after the great revolt in the 16th century. There is no reason that
I should contend, and I do not contend for instance, that they at all
times have understood our people, our national character, our resources,
and our position in Europe, orthattheyhaveneversufferedfrombad coun-
cillors or mis-information. I say this the more freely because Urban
YIII about the year 1641 or 1642, blamed the policy of some Popes of
the preceding century, in their dealings with our country. Now if
the Popes can thus make mistakes in their political dealings with
nations, and may in consequence be resisted, how much more may the
Propaganda and the Irish Hierarchy similarly err, and be resisted
accordingly.


In view of the urgency of the case, and considering the importance
of the issues involved, we must not compromise Ireland’s cause by a
culpable silence certain to be construed into acquiescence in and
approval of the joint action of Propaganda and the Irish Hierarchy
as outlined in the latter’s address, but on the contrary protest strongly
against it as much in the interest of the Bishops themselves and°uf
the Catholic Church in Ireland, as in that of Ireland itself. Were
we to act otherwise we would be lending some countenance to
Gladstone’s calumny, that “Catholics are slaves, destitute alike
of moral and mental freedom.”
Signed on behalf of the League.
J. A. Shanahan, J.P., Vice-President and Treasurer.
Jas. Farrell, Secretary.
Committee :
P. Lillis, J.P.
J. C. Pollard
J. B. Carroll
M. COGAN
M. Collisson
J. COMERPORD
T. M ‘Mahon
T. M ‘Sweeney
A. Grotty
Ptiuted at the Gytnpie Times Office.


