

ADDRESS
Professor W. G. KERNOT.
DELIVERED AT THE
Annual Demonstration of the Working
Men’s College, Melbourne,
MONDAY, 16th APRIL, 1894.
3£lclbcruvnv:
Stillwell and Co., Printers, 195 A Collins Street.




ADDRESS.
Ladies and Gentlemen, Teachers and Students
of the Working Men’s College,—
Two years have elapsed since the Public were last
invited to a Working Men’s College Demonstration, On
that occasion, it was my pleasing duty to present a most
favourable Report. The institution, after five years’
work, had far more than realised the most sanguine
anticipations of its generous founder. With 2500 stu-
dents on the roll; with a body of teachers of the highest
eminence in their various specialties, not only performing
their covenanted duties with regularity and efficiency,
but also devoting voluntarily a large section of their
leisure to the preparation for, and improvement of, then-
lectures, and otherwise showing their interest; with a
thoroughly organised system of courses, examinations,
and diplomas, similar to that which obtains in the
University itself, as far as the differing scope of the
educational work would permit, the College was, in the
highest degree, an object of pride and satisfaction to its
governing body. It was, by common consent, one of the
greatest successes on record.
Such was the state of things in April 1892. Let us
now consider their present state in April 1894. In the
first place, we find the number of students reduced by
over 50 per cent., there being only 1200 as against 2500.
We find several of our best and ablest teachers have—
in spite of the bad times, which make men willing to
accept even the most unpleasant positions, if thereby they
may obtain a piece of bread—drifted away ; we find those
mxi
x7*s-ir


that remain greatly disheartened, performing their duties
with a marked absence of the old enthusiasm. We find
our excellent system of examinations, organised upon the
model of that in vogue at the Universities of Melbourne
and Sydney, broken up, with so far nothing definite and
satisfactory in its place ; while the governing body is
weary and dispirited, and the splendid esprit de corps
that of old characterised the institution, and all connected
with it, is a thing of the past.
And what is the reason of this painful change ? Is it
depression, retrenchment? I answer emphatically, No!
The depression may account for a portion of the falling
off in the attendance, but has nothing to do with the
disorganisation, the dissatisfaction, and loss of enthusiasm.
The history of the past two years, which I will now
endeavour to relate, will explain the matter.
At the commencement of this period, the College may
be said to have been pervaded with University influences.
With a Melbourne University Professor as President,
a Melbourne University Graduate as Secretary, and
University men occupying positions too numerous to
mention, as teachers and examiners, the College enjoyed
a healthy connection with the great national centre of
higher education, a connection beneficial to itself and also
O ?
to our alma mater. Our teachers and examiners were,
in not a few instances, teachers or examiners in the
University, or graduates there with special honours; and
where this was not the case, as in, for example, the art,
trade, and commercial subjects, they were a carefully
selected band of experts, combining in a high degree the
two qualifications often so difficult to find in one and the
same person, namely, skill in the art or handicraft in
question, and teaching power. The system of examina-
tion adopted was, in my opinion, the only satisfactory


one for the higher technical and scientific branches, the
teacher having associated with him, as co-examiner, the
best available expert, and the papers being set, and
the answers dealt with by the two in consultation.
The Government provided a liberal subsidy, the amount
of which being known early in the year, enabled the
Council to make its arrangements with certainty and
convenience. Under these conditions the College had
grown and flourished, and when similar conditions are re-
established, it will, I venture to predict, again flourish as
of old.
About the middle of 1892, a communication was
received from the Education Department, intimating that
current arrangements would continue to the end of the
year, after which an entirely new system would be
instituted, the regulations of which were attached. On
perusing them, the gravest objections at once appeared,
which may be classed under two heads—administrative
and educational. The first objection was based on the
fact, that the was to be calculated in a com-
plicated way, depending upon a variety of unforeseen
and unforseeable contingencies, so that its amount could
not be predicted with any degree of certainty. All that
was clear was, that the money would be paid in driblets,
that a very large portion of it would not be paid till a
very late date, and that the final adjustment would
be difficult and complicated, opening possibilities of
unpleasant disputes, and not capable of accomplishment
until long after the close of the year’s work. Bis dot qui
cito dat, “ He gives twice who gives quickly,” is a very
wise old Latin proverb, and the converse is true, that long
delay in paying, and uncertainty as to the amount, rob
pecuniary assistance of a large portion of its value. This
peculiar mode of paying has added immensely to the


difficulty of managing the institution, and has compelled
the Council to deal with the instructors in a way that
has given great and natural dissatisfaction. In these
times, of all others, men want their duly earned salaries
paid promptly and in full.
The educational objections are summed up in the
words fixed syllabus and payment by results, conditions
attractive no doubt to inexperienced educationalists
through their mechanical simplicity and uniformity, but
condemned emphatically by all the ablest and most
thoughtful teachers. It is the greatest possible delusion
to imagine that different persons, in different places and
under different teachers, can all be taught with advantage
exactly the same things in exactly the same way, and
tested by exactty the same examination, and to attempt
to enforce this is to rob education of its highest and most
valuable qualities, to suppress the individuality of the
teacher, and sacrifice true and wholesome teaching for
that spurious imitation of cram and sham that so often is
mistaken for it in these days. A fixed syllabus may be
defensible in the elementary and unprogressive subjects of
the primary schools, such as reading, spelling, arithmetic,
and the like. But advanced and complex branches—such
as physics, applied mechanics, applied electricity, and so
forth, which are so vast that no teacher can possibly
cover all the ground, but must make a selection in which
his own idiosyncrasies may desirably find an expression,
and which are in some directions developing so rapidly
that what is high-class teaching this year may next year
be obsolete —cannot be so dealt with. There never has
been and never will be more than one way of dealing with
such branches of study, and it is the way every successful
University and high-class technical college in the world
adopts, namely, to be excessively careful in choosing the


teachers, but when once chosen to trust them fully, to
give them the freest possible hand, to impose no
degrading mechanical checks, but to depend upon their
honour. Treated in this way, any man worth his salt
will do his utmost, will take a pride in his work, will
endeavour to develop the understanding instead of merely
cramming the memory of his pupils. I would not
altogether forbid a syllabus, as I do not object to it
if taken in a liberal sense as indicative of the desired
scope of teaching, but I do maintain that, within certain
wide general lines, large liberty should be allowed for
individual proclivities, and the rapid changes in advancing
branches of study.
Then as to payment by results—a system admirably
adapted to the cure of smoky chimneys, but most fatal in
its effects on cloudy intellects. Of all the specious
delusions that ever came under my notice, payment by
examination results in education is about the worst.
It is to true education as phylloxera is to the vine,
depriving it of its best and most fruitful properties, and
leaving it a miserable and almost useless thing. All
advanced and thoughtful teachers will at once know what
I mean by this. To those who are not teachers, I would
submit two propositions, which might be almost inde-
finitely enlarged upon did time permit:—
(1) No examination, no matter how carefully and
honestly conducted, is an absolutely certain test of
education, especially in the higher and more complicated,
branches, while examinations, if conducted without great
care, prudence, and experience, may easily become
absolutely fallacious in their results.
(2) When the passing of an examination is made the
sole end and aim of education, true teaching disappears,
and in its place arises the wonderful, ingenious, and


detestable art of cramming, which may be defined as the
process of passing students through examinations without
teaching them their subject.
All my experience assures me, that the least objection-
able and most useful examinations are those conducted by
the teacher himself, who knows the scope of the teaching,
and the mental development of the pupils; while partly
to check and partly to protect him, a good expert,
preferably a teacher in some other school, should be made
co-examiner. This is the system of the Melbourne and
Sydney Universities, and was that of the Working Men’s
College.
Not many years since, under the title of the “ Sacrifice
of Education to Examination,” a public and most emphatic
protest against the too great prominence of examinations
was made by some hundreds of the most advanced and
reliable thinkers of England. With this protest, which
will be familiar to all students of educational matters, my
experience causes me largely to agree. More recently
still, the Education Department itself—after trying
payment by results for a number of years in the primary
schools where, owing to the simplicity, definiteness, and
non-progressive character of the studies, and the ease of
finding examiners whose decisions would be accepted
without dispute, the difficulties of and objections to the
system are at their minimum—became convinced that its
action was mischievous, and expressed a desire for its
abolition. (See Report of the Hon. the Minister of Public
Instruction, 1892). And yet, marvellous to relate, at the
very same time, it stultified itself by imposing it on the
technical schools, in face of unanimous and emphatic
protests from all parts of the country.
A reply to the departmental communication was sent,
stating fully the objections to the scheme, but offering to


submit to very large retrenchment, provided that the
principle of a fixed and definite subsidy was maintained,
and the organisation of the College remained undisturbed.
This letter, after some time, was followed up by numerous
interviews and deputations, but with no useful result.
The Council was simply assured that its fears were
groundless, that financially the scheme would work out
far more favourably than it imagined, and that, as for the
examinations, the status of the examiners would be so
high that their decisions would command universal respect,
while the standard for passing would be so lenient as to
ensure an excellent pecuniary result to the College. On
no occasion, however, was an opportunity afforded to fully
and fairly discuss the question. Weeks and months
passed, the year terminated, and the time approached
when the College ought, in proper course, to re-open
after the holidays, but no progress was made, with the
exception that certain vague hints were let fall as to
possible modifications of the system. At the eleventh
hour, the Council pressed the Department strongly for a
definite answer, and elicited a letter, couched in the
briefest and most absolute terms, to the effect that the
regulations would be enforced. As carefully made
calculations led to the conclusion that the College could
not live under the proposed regulations, and as the
Council was personally responsible for its finances, there
was no choice but to close the institution.
The next event was the invitation by the Department
of representatives of the various schools to a conference
to consider the regulations. A number of gentlemen,
some from distant parts of the Colony, assembled at the
Education Office, and discussed the matter very fully,
the sitting occupying portions of two days. At this
conference, over which I had the honour to preside, the


Government scheme was emphatically and unanimously
condemned, and the necessity of maintaining the existing
state of things, as far at least as examinations were
concerned, affirmed, while various modifications of the
mode of paying the subsidy were recommended. These
conclusions were communicated to the Department, which
adopted some of the minor suggestions, but remained
inflexible on the question of payment by results.
Numerous and anxious were the discussions of the
Council of the College during this eventful period. The
desire to save and re-open the institution on the one
hand, and the determination not to enhance the already
serious personal pecuniary liability under which the
members laboured with respect to certain outstanding
debts of the College on the other, came into direct
conflict. At last, through the services of the Secretary
and Director, a temporary arrangement was made,
whereby the Council on the one hand undertook, alter
paying necessary expenses, which were to be kept down
to the lowest minimum, to divide proportionately all the
remaining revenue of the College, whether from fees or
from Government subsidy,amongst the instructors; while
the instructors on the other hand undertook to hold the
Council free from all liability as to their salaries. In
other words, the Council were to pay the teachers as
large a percentage of their salaries as they could, and the
teachers were to give a receipt in full of all demands.
Under this peculiar and humiliating arrangement, sug-
gestive of proceedings in insolvency, the College was
opened at the commencement of the second quarter, with
about 1000 students, and the work was continued during
the third and fourth quarters in a manner that, under the
circumstances, was as well as could be expected, but
which was painfully different from that of the golden


days of old. As the action of the Council under these
trying circumstances has been the subject of some
criticism, I should like to say that mature reflection
convinces me that we were thoroughly right in closing
the College, but that I am not so sure that we took the
wisest course in re-opening it. Had we remained firm,
and had the other schools followed our lead, I think the
Department would have yielded, and a satisfactory modus
vivendi been attained. However, all that we did, we
did for the best under exceedingly perplexing circum-
stances, and our action was no doubt influenced by the
knowledge that we had hanging over our heads a most
serious pecuniary liability in connection with the College
buildings, a liability of which we have but recently been
relieved by legislative action.
At length the end of the year drew nigh, and with it,
the much debated departmental examination by which
our work was to be tested, and our subsidy largely regu-
lated. At the Melbourne, Sydney, and other Universities,
and at leading technical schools where things are done in
decent and orderly style, the date of the examinations is
publicly announced months beforehand ; and the teachers
are expected to formally conclude their lectures, to gather
up and harmonise the various threads of investigation,
and deliberately and carefully give utterance to those final
important discourses which complete the systematic treat-
ment of the subject, as the keystone completes the arch.
Then comes the long expected, long prepared for day of
examination.
The examination conducted by the Education De-
partment, however, set at complete defiance all these
reasonable and wholesome rules. Contrary to all pre-
cedent, the unfortunate students all unprepared, weeks
before the lectures were completed, were unexpectedly


and peremptorily ordered into the examination room. So
brief was the notice given, that it was only by the most
strenuous exertions that the candidates could be mustered
at all. Then the examination took place, upon which
the future career of the students, and the Government
subsidy to the College, depended. Could anything more
grossly improper, more totally unjust to students, teachers,
and managers of the schools be conceived ? I think not;
and I am positive that, were anything so outrageous
attempted in any University, it would lead to instant and
universal rebellion. But I cannot imagine such a proposal
being for one moment entertained in any properly con-
ducted institution. The examination then proceeded, but
on lines to which I take the strongest exception in
many directions. For example, the subject of Mechanical
Drawing is one of the first importance to the Engineering
profession, and the numerous trades connected therewith,
and is one of the most popular and numerously attended
courses in the College. It is taught by two highly trained
and experienced engineers, both of them University men,
and both actively engaged in engineering practice, when
they have daily experience in making and using drawings
of this kind. The co-examiner is a gentleman who, some
years since, took the highest honours in the Engineering
course at the Melbourne University, and who has had
years of practice in connection with some of the largest
engineering works in the colony, and whom I am proud
to have as my own co-examiner in several of my most
advanced courses at the University—more competent
teachers and examiners could not be found. But this
most important subject has been handed over by the
Department to the tender mercies of a gentleman who
is not an engineer at all, but simply an art inspector, or
drawing master, as sole examiner, from whose decision


there is no appeal. A more mistaken policy, and one more
calculated to shake the confidence of the engineering
profession and associated trades cannot be imagined. I
now desire to assert, with all the authority that my posi-
tion as head of the Engineering School at the National
University involves, that the examining in Mechanical
Drawing at the technical schools must be done by
engineers who know the name and use of the objects
delineated, and the most desirable way of arranging and
dimensioning a drawing for employment in the workshop,
and not by an outsider, who will naturally overlook, or
misunderstand, these more important matters, and attach
undue importance to the mere neatness and technical
finish of the draftmanship—the least important part of
the whole business.
Another subject, in which I take a special interest, is
Practical Solid Geometry, This is also of great value to
engineers, architects, builders, and artisans. It was in
past years taught and examined in most efficiently by the
same gentlemen as deal with Mechanical Drawing. The
departmental examination paper on this subject was of
the most unsatisfactory and unsuitable character, and has
been protested against in all directions. Those protests
1 most heartily concur with. The questions were
injudiciously chosen, were quite unsuitable to the stage
of mental development of the students, and were so
peculiarly expressed, as to render their real meaning a
matter of considerable doubt, even to experts in the
subject. In fact, it was about the worst piece of examin-
ing that has ever come under my notice.
As to the other subjects dealt with by the Department, I
have little to say, not being an expert or authority in them.
But now I wish to mention what, from one important
point of view, is the gravest irregularity of all. It will


be recollected, that the temporary arrangement between
the Council and the instructors, caused the emoluments of
the latter to depend to some extent upon the examination
results. Well, before the examination had proceeded far,
a communication was received from the Department,
requiring these very teachers, in a number of important
cases, to conduct their own examinations, and the
teachers did it. Now, this is exactly equivalent to making
a man a judge in a question in which he is pecuniarily
interested—a thing which every right-minded man will
condemn at once. And this tremendous impropriety arose
from the failure of the Department to carry out its own
scheme, and conduct examinations for which it had mors
than twelve months to prepare.
The year’s work then terminated, but even up to the
present time, the subsidy for the year is not fully paid,
and the instructors are complaining at not having re-
ceived their duly earned wages. This is due to the
complexity of the calculations required, and difference of
opinion as to the true interpretation of the Government
rules.
This then is the history of the College for the last
year and a half, a history of good work spoiled, of good
teachers discouraged, of lamentable waste of valuable
time on fruitless deputations and conferences, of universal
anxiety, disappointment, and dissatisfaction, all entirely
due to the fact, that a number of officials lacking the
training and experience necessary to enable them to deal
with the difficult and complicated problems of higher
technical and scientific education, will persist, in spite ot
the earnest and vehement protestations on the part of the
people who were actually doing the work, in overturning
arrangements that were the result of most mature
experience, and had worked admirably for years. t


Nor is the Working Men’s College the only sufferer by
this most unfortunate action of the Education Department.
The Gordon College, at Geelong, has just published a
report couched in terms that are simply piteous in their
expression of the distress and disappointment of men who
have nobly devoted their time and money for years to the
good work which now, in spite of all their efforts, is to a
large extent ruined. And from Ballarat and Bendigo
comes the same deplorable story, while the minor
schools at Castlemaine, Daylesford, and elsewhere, are
practically dead, except as regards a few drawing classes
of no special technical significance.
Again, I say, it is not retrenchment that has done this
mischief, but another cause entirely, a cause that need
not for one moment have existed. A good old proverb
says, it is a bad thing to change horses when crossing a
stream, but the very midst of a torrent of depression and
distress was most unfortunately taken as the suitable time
for utterly breaking up and reconstructing the relations
existing between the schools and the Government—hence
the disaster.
What the Government ought to have done under the
circumstances was this :—lt ought to have approached
the managers of the schools and said, “ Gentlemen, we
fully and gladly recognise the services you have so dis-
interestedly performed in establishing, organising, and to
a large extent, bearing the cost of these useful institutions.
We most sincerely regret that financial disaster renders it
impossible for us to accord you the aid w*e have hitherto
supplied. Your subsidies must be largely reduced. With
the modicum of assistance we can still afford, we beg you
to continue your work, and we will most carefully refrain
from adding to your difficulty, by vexatious regulations,
by delay or uncertainty as to payment of subsidy, or in


any other way. Here is your money, take it, and do the
best you can with it.”
Had the Government taken this, which, I desire to
most emphatically assert, was the only decent, reasonable,
and couiteous course under the circumstances, the schools
would have been but little affected. A few classes might
have been discontinued, salaries slightly reduced, and
expenditure on books and apparatus curtailed, but
otherwise there would have been little change. The
goodwill of the teachers would have been preserved, the
work of the scholars would have gone on as usual, and
all concerned would, appreciating the necessity of the
step, and encouraged by the sympathy of the Government,
have rallied round the institutions, and done all they
could to help them in the time of distress. Appreciation,
goodwill, sympathy, and patriotism would have been
evoked, where at present there is discouragement, disgust,
and smouldering rebellion.
In conclusion, I feel it my duty to say, with all courtesy
to those concerned, that:—
(1) Technical education is an entirely different and
much more complex thing than primary education. The
status and character of the students and teachers is quite
different, and so are the conditions under which the work
is performed.
(2) The Education Department, with its simply
scholastic experience in the primary schools, is in no
way qualified, but rather the reverse, for this higher work.
It is not in touch with the professions and trades most
deeply interested, and it is constantly liable to apply
methods which, while suitable enough to the humbler
grade of educational work, are quite inapplicable to
high-class scientific, or technical experts and their
pupils.


(3) That the South Kensington system, upon which
it is understood that the Education Department bases its
policy, is by no means generally approved. That while,
no doubt, it has in past years done useful work of a
rather limited kind, it is now generally felt to be behind
the times, on account inter alia of its want of accommo-
dation to local requirements, of its depressing effect upon
the individuality of the teacher, and of the too great
stress it lays on the mere passing of examinations.
(4) That the best work is done, and the most eminent
and successful teachers found, in great autonomous institu-
tions which do not recognise or hold any direct connection
with South Kensington, and that these have been taken
as a model for imitation bv the founders and organisers
o
of the Working Men’s College.
o o
(5) That the centre and source of the higher education
in this Colony is the University, and that the more
strongly University influences are felt, University
methods imitated, and University trained men employ-
ed in the technical schools, the better for all parties.
The technical schools forming the natural outlet for the
energies of the highly-trained young men the University
is continually sending forth.
(6) That under the present system the schools are
languishing, and in some cases moribund, and that they
can be saved and restored to their pristine condition only
by a return to methods analogous to those under which
they grew and flourished in past years.
I am aware that, in departing from the course of mutual
congratulation usual on occasions such as this, I have
laid myself open to charges of discourtesy and want of
taste, and of spoiling the harmony of what should be a
pleasant meeting. All that I have to say in reply is,
that the crisis is so grave, and the state of the technical


p IIIoLi&s
Al c&frf
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, 195 A COLLINS-ST.
schools so painfully unsatisfactory, that were I to hold
my peace, I feel I should be utterly failing of my duty to
the University where I was trained, and whose repre-
sentative on the College Council I am ; to the late Mr.
Ormond, at whose special request the University Council
first appointed me as its representative, and to my own
convictions, based on a quarter of a century’s experience
in teaching scientific and technical subjects.
Finally, I desire to say that this is purely a private
expression of opinion. The other Members of Council
in no way are responsible for it. Being unlike them, a
practical educationalist, my standpoint is different in
several respects, and I thought it best to go alone in this
matter, I would assure them, that nothing would grieve
me more than for them to consider themselves in any
way slighted by my independent action. Ladies and
Gentlemen, I have done. y


■
.


