

pETVI
I*s *» 2»
ADDRESS
SIR GEORGE GREY, K.C.8.,
TO THE
MEMBERS
OF THE
NEW ZEALAND SOCIETY,
AS THEIR FIRST PRESIDENT,
SEPTEMBER 26, 1851.
NEW ZEALAND:
PRINTED BY R. STOKES, AT THE “ SPECTATOR OFFICE,'’ WELLINGTON.
1851.


«
*
‘
.
■
\


ADDRESS.
When, Gentlemen, I, a few months since, assisted some
zealous friends in organizing this Society, a proposal was
made to me that the Governor-in-Chief for the time being
should be, ex-officio , your President. I then suggested that
the adoption of such a rule might injure the interests of the
Society; that the Governor-in-Chief would not necessarily,
from his holding that office, have any strong attachment to
science or literature; and that, if such should prove to he the
case, then his probable neglect of his duties, as your Presi-
dent, would tend to retard the advancement of the high ob-
jects in the promotion of which you have determined to take
an active part. I further, at the same time, suggested, that
so honorable a position as that of your President, ought to
be held in some order of rotation by those amongst the in-
habitants of these islands whose acquirements and devotion
to scientific pursuits best entitled them to such a distinction,
without any reference to mere official rank. For it appears to
me that, in the aristocracy of literature and science, those
should be recognised as the actual chiefs whom nature and
their own exertions had in fact made so, and who must neces-
sarily be, in these respects, the chiefs amongst you, whether
or not you termed some other official person your President.
Moreover, a rank so bestowed upon the Governor-in-Chief,


in mere official routine, could add nothing to his influence
or reputation; whilst the fact of your choosing from amongst
your own fellow-colonists some person whom, from his talents
and attainments, you recognized as worthy to be, for the
time being, your head, would enable you to bestow a dis-
tinction not only highly honorable in itself, and therefore a
just and fitting incentive to exertion, but which, in the
event of some colonist of much talent, but without influence,
and but little known in Britain, visiting the mother-country,
might prove of great use and benefit to him. While, if
your choice were well and justly made, he would, when his
attainments had become widely-recognized, repay you for
your assistance at the commencement of his career, by re-
flecting back lustre upon the Society, whose representative
he would be.
It was for these reasons, I believe, that you determined,
and I think wisely and judiciously determined, to retain in
your own hands the power of electing your President; and
it was, I think, partly as a tribute to the arguments I on that
occasion used, partly as a recognition of the efforts that I
made for the establishment of this Society, and partly from
feelings of personal good-will, that you chose me as your
first President: for, fortunately, in this the youngest and
one of the smallest of Britain’s colonies, there are already so
many persons who have gained so considerable a name in
scientific and literary pursuits, that no one can even suspect
me of an affectation of humility in saying, that if such
qualifications alone had been considered, then some one of
them must have been chosen before me. As, however, your
choice fell upon me, I felt it to be my duty to accept the
office of your first Presidential the same time resolving to
do my utmost to aid you in carrying out your views for the
promotion and advancement of science and litciatuie.


1 am told that some, dissenting from the opinion I have
expressed of the learning and talents of many in this colony,
think that the amount of knowledge that we individually
and collectively possess is so trifling, that the attempts we
propose to make to preserve it, to increase it, and to transmit
it to others, are useless and uncalled for. It is true, il we
measure our knowledge with that now possessed by many
of the illustrious men who adorn the scientific circles of
Europe, that our learning may he but scant indeed. But
measure their knowledge by the boundless limits of the
truths of science and nature, and what do they then appear
to know ? Nothing —absolutely nothing. Measured by such
a limit, our knowledge would, then, be found to be a very
important increment of theirs. But would they, from knowing
so little, be justified in ceasing to strive to learn more ? or
in wasting scandalously an amount of knowledge which many
successive generations of ingenious and accomplished men
have laboriously acquired, and munificently transmitted to
them ? Could the learned of these times, who have so freely
inherited from their ancestors, dare to commit so base a wrong
as to waste the rightful inheritance of their descendants,
and to rob them of a birthright which the noblest and most
gifted of their race have been accumulating for thousands ol
years ? If there is any truth in such arguments, then, I ask,
shall those now in New Zealand, who have received the most
important gifts from the great of other times and ol other
countries, churlishly refuse to strive to profit by them, 01
to try to transmit them to the young, or the less learned
of maturer years, who live around us ? Or, shall we leave
to our descendants the lands we have won from the forests,
the choice breeds of cattle and horses we have imported
from the remote ends of the globe, the houses we have built
amidst the agitations of war and the shocks of nature, the
wealth we have accumulated, all material all physical com-


forts, and not strive to hand down to them the lar nobler
treasures of a lofty mind, of a highly-cultivated intellect, ol
aspirations after the great and good, which could alone prompt
and teach them to use wisely, for their own and the general
advantage, this fertile country, and the hardly-won material
wealth, which they will inherit from us ?
To call the knowledge we possess trifling, may even be to
undervalue it. It is built up of innumerable slight incre-
ments, which have been each acquired with an amount ol
labour and previous learning, and after a lapse of time, of
which we can hardly form an adequate idea. Imagine that
a Plato, an Aristotle, a Bacon, or a Newton, had declined to
make any efforts to increase or to transmit their knowledge,
on account of its limited nature —a truth which none felt
more fully, nor expressed more freely, than themselves, —
where, in such a case, would mankind now have stood ? T]iat
we can only darkly guess. But we can safely affirm that,
in such a case, much that at present brightens the prospects
of the human race on earth, or lightens their toils, or alle-
viates their sufferings, would now be wanting. Yet there
stand many here who are acquainted with truths, imparted
to them by others, which Plato, Aristotle, Kepler, Bacon,
or Newton, would meekly and thankfully have sat at their
feet to learn. Should, then, I ask, such treasures be wasted?
But, to take another and a higher ground. Let us, with
all humility, admit our entire ignorance, if we compare our.
knowledge with the boundless expanse of the whole realm of
science and truth, —our comparative ignorance, if we compare
our knowledge with that of the most learned of our own
time: but, in thus admitting our humble littleness, Ict us
not forget our real dignity and greatness. We stand here
the servants of our Maker, with that degree**!* knowledge


which the talents He has endowed us with, and the opportu-
nities He has afforded us, have permitted us to attain. In
this respect, we are equal with the most learned, the most
highly-gifted, of our time. Neither they nor we have anything
of our own. They are the mere stewards of the Most High, to
whom certain talents have been entrusted; so, likewise, are
we. To all of us equally is committed the glorious task of
ushering into the world the mankind of the future: upon
ns, upon our conduct, upon our exertions, are in a great de-
gree dependent the happiness, mental and social, of countless
generations of unhorn men. Should we then, from indo-
lence, from indifference on our parts, suffer a single strag-
gling ray of the light of truth to vanish from the earth ?
should we lose any opportunity of enlightening or encou-
raging any single individual of the masses of mankind who
surround us, each one of whom, as well as ourselves, is in
sonn? degree the parent of the future, —an influence!’ of the
fate of all who arc to be born into the world ?
I think, if we view the subject in this light, we shall he
of opinion that we have begun too late, not too soon; that
a profitable, a noble field of exertion, lies open around us
upon every side. Before us —as long as we have strength or
capacity to labour for the welfare of our fellow-men.
It is evident that such a field of exertion lies open imme-
diately around us. Numerous voices are from every side
calling us, perhaps with more urgency than on any previous
occasion in the history of the human race, to exert ourselves
to stimulate and foster the spread of knowledge, the estab-
lishment of educational institutions. For we have not only
to aid in raising the numerous native race that surrounds us
from barbarism to civilization, from ignorance to knowledge;
but we must remember that it is our duty to help to provide


instruction for the numerous families of our own countrymen,
many of whom have not themselves had the advantage af-
forded them of much educational knowledge, and who are
daily withdrawing themselves from the immediate influence
of civilized life, and retiring into the interior parts of the
country, living with, and surrounded almost wholly by,
persons of the native race. Thus, in this respect, a double
duty is imposed on us; to raise one race from semibarbarism,
—to take care that some of our own race do not suffer from
their isolation amongst, and their intermixture with, that
semibarbarous race.
Such may be said to be a part of the duties of this Society
to those who immediately surround them. Oui duties to
our fellow-beings throughout the civilized world are also
great: but here our ignorance prevents us from perhaps
fully understanding what those duties are, or how we 'hiay
best fulfil them.
We should remember that our ignorance is so great, that
we are even ignorant of the value of the knowledge we pos-
sess or might acquire. For the value of knowledge is twofold
in its nature. Each truth acquired has first its own true
proper value, inasmuch as it is a truth learned, and theicfoic
so much knowledge gained by him who has acquired it.
And, secondly, it may have a value infinitely greater for him
who knows how to combine it with other truths; —that is,
the greater the degree of knowledge possessed by any one
person, by so much the mure does the value increase of any
new truth that may be imparted to him, or which he may
acquire. r lhe majority of us are, theiefoie, but little in
a position to estimate the real value of any observations
which we may be enabled to make in this new country.
Facts which we may observe, and which may appear to us


to be of little value, or entirely uninteresting’, may prove,
to the learned of Europe, of the highest possible impor-
tance and interest. Combined with other facts previously
observed and recorded, they may serve to fill up links which
were the only ones wanting to furnish the true clue to some
mystery of nature, or to establish some truth which may
prove of the greatest usefulness to the human race. Nor let
us forget that knowledge is progressive; that the next age
may be more learned than that which preceded it; and that
observed facts which, in the present state of human know-
ledge, cannot so be combined with others, as to prove of any
great or striking present utility, may, even within a few years
from this time, be found to be of very great value and worth,
for that generation more learned, more wise than ourselves,
for whose advent we are now preparing the material and in-
tellectual world.
It therefore is, I apprehend, our duty sedulously to collect
and record facts gnd information in each department of
science and human learning; carefully abstaining from that
foolish pride which would lead us to reject as useless all
that our ignorance can neither comprehend nor make use
of.
Regarding our duties under this light, we should find that
a field of vast usefulness lies open before us.
Every creeping moss, or lofty tree, every waving fern,
every common plant, in this country, every weed that
floats its tangles in the sea, is worthy of our observation
and study. Numbers of them are wholly unknown to
science, —numbers of them present new forms, and sin-
gular anomalies. There is hardly one of the great mul-
titudes of plants to which I have alluded, the history and


properties of which are fully known to botanists. We
have yet to learn what colours lie hid in their tissues, which
shall add now unknown lustre to future works of manufac-
ture and art, —what hidden medical properties they possess,
which shall give relief to suffering man, —what nutritious
substances they afford, to increase the amount of food for the
nourishment of the human race. Yet we do know that, even
to an unlearned people, with no chemical appliances at their
command, they yielded several excellent dyes, some medi-
cines in frequent use, and many esteemed and nutritious
articles of food. Does it then become us, men of a learned
and enquiring nation, either to let the knowledge of these
subjects, which centuries of experience had imparted to the
Natives, be lost for want of recording it, —or to refrain from
pushing it, and carrying it farther ?
Again, if the trees and plants of these dense and humid
forests are worthy of our attention, we should also remember
that there is not a bird that wings its way through them —
or which, deprived of wings, stalks with strange ungainly
emit about them —which does not claim our observation.
Some genera and species of these, unable by flight to avoid
the enemies which man has introduced amongst them,
have already disappeared: others are so fast disappearing,
that many Natives now living have never seen them, although
they were previously found in numbers in these islands.
Still, there is not a single one of these birds, a record of
whose habits would not be of very high interest to science:
and already, by the exertions of some of our Members, seve-
ral singular varieties of birds, believed to have been extinct,
have been obtained and transmitted to the naturalists of
Europe; and accurate descriptions of them have thus been
preserved.


But, to whichever side we turn our thoughts, we shall find
that an equally wide field of scientific inquiry, and of de-
lightful mental recreation, opens itself. Should we walk
along the sea coast, we may remember that the ebb and
How of its tides have been here but very imperfectly ob-
served and recorded, —that the great mass of shells it con-
tains is still unknown, —that the multitudes of fish it con-
ceals, consist for a great part of new and striking forms;
regarding which, some of the most celebrated naturalists
are making earnest inquiries, and are receiving but most
imperfect answers.
So, also, the geology of these islands is yet most imper-
fectly known: the few fossil remains that have been dis-
covered, have proved to be of the highest possible degree of
interest. But who can doubt that, when the islands are
more perfectly explored, remains of many other striking forms
of now extinct animal life will be discovered ? Or, can we
doubt but that their mineral wealth will prove to be as great
as the mines already discovered would lead us to suppose ?
We who stand in this country occupy an historical posi-
tion of extraordinary interest. Before us, lies a future already
brilliant with the light of a glorious morn, which we are to
usher in to gladden unborn generations. Behind us, lies a
night of fearful gloom, unillumined by the light of written
records, of picture memorials, of aught which can give a certain
idea of the past. A few stray streaks of light, in the form of
tradition, of oral poetry, of carved records, are the only guides
we have. And, in the gloom of that night, are fast fading
out of view, although dim outlines of them are still visible,
some of the most fearful spectres which have ever stalked
amongst mankind, in the hideous shapes of idolatry, human
sacrifices, and cannibalism, —mixed up with which, in uu-


couth unison, was much of real poetry, and of actual grace
of fancy. Future generations will almost doubt that such
gloomy forms of thought have haunted their then highly-
cultivated and civilized homes; or that a people, debased by
such barbarities, could yet have felt and cherished so much of
the poetic and good: and if they could then question us, who
have seen these now fading superstitions ere they wholly va-
nished, what eager questions they would propose to us re-
garding their monstrous shapes, their horrid aspect, the rude
and inharmonious voices with which, with horrid shouts and
yells, their orgies were fulfilled ! —How eagerly the poet, the
painter, the sculptor, would seek to recover some traits of
their terrible lineaments,—or of their softer outlines, when
they related to scenes of the gentler passions, or of domestic
life!—that either a stern grandeur, or the romantic glow of a
primitive state of existence, might be imparted to some work
of art.
Let us, as far as concerns the past, prepare to answer
these questions, not deeming that our answers will solely
gratify a mere idle curiosity. In preserving a record of
such things, we may he doing more for the benefit of the
mankind of hereafter than we at present think of. These
may, in the course of generations of successful pursuit of
learning, and in the pride of such learning and power, forget
or hardly believe that their race ever has, or ever could, fall
so low; —and believing that they stand firm and fast, and
that their fall is impossible, they may, by their own pride,
he overthrown.
Already twice, in the history of the human race, has man-
kind, increasing from a few individuals of a single family,
who had a perfect knowledge of their Maker, fallen into the
depths of ignorance, wretchedness, and wickedness, —of the


greatness of which we who reside in New Zealand are for
the most part living witnesses. —Once so fearful was the
state of wickedness amongst men, that all but one family
were swept from the earth in a flood. To that family, mi-
racuously saved, was again entrusted a full knowledge of
the Divine ways, —of the tender mercies of God to the good,
of His fearful judgments on the wicked. Around us, in
these and the neighbouring islands, are whole races of our
fellow-men, sprung equally with ourselves from that one
family so learned in the ways of God, and yet plunged in
gulfs of idolatry and sin, which some of us have witnessed.
—How little could the Patriarch, on stepping from the Ark,
his heart swelling with gratitude to his Maker, who had so
wonderfully preserved him, believe that, in a period so short
(as four times the length of his own life must have seemed
to him !) such large numbers of his descendants could again
have fallen so low as to have become idolaters, sacrificing
their fellow-men to idols they had set up, or devouring their
bodies in their savage triumphs! —ln reflecting on these
things, it is difficult to feel assured that some portions of
the human race may not yet for a long time either remain
in, or again sink into, habits of idolatry and its attendant
vices: and should there be even a mere contingency of such
an event occurring, those may render a great service to their
fellow-men, who take the trouble to aid in compiling for
future times a chart, on which are clearly marked out some
of the most fearful shoals upon which whole nations have
made shipwreck of their hopes and happiness.
Even should there be no chance of such a calamity
again overtaking any portion of the human race, still, when
Christianity and peace have encompassed the globe, and
light has shone upon the nature and laws of the whole deal-
ings of the Maker with His creatures from the very com-


mencement of the world, it seems to me that the learned
and the wise of those times will, with equal benefit and de-
light, frequently attempt to retrace the entire history of
their race; and that they will then look back upon those
as benefactors and friends, who may now humbly, yet
zealously, endeavour to preserve some record of the faith,
forms of thought, history, language, and laws of a family of
the human race, who, from their insular position, were for
centuries separated from all mankind ; and thus have a pecu-
liar interest for the Christian, the philosopher, and the
historian.
'I cannot but think that the benevolent of future times
would, with astonishment and joy, search eagerly the re-
cords which will shew that even centuries of idolatry and
crime had not wholly obliterated, in the minds of such
a race, a knowledge of their Maker, and a desire for His
divine laws; and had not left them less prepared for the in-
troduction of Christianity than the most polished pagans of
antiquity were. That, on the contrary, so intolerable was
the burden imposed upon them, that we have seen whole
races, in all these islands, in a few years, throw off the yoke
of idolatry, and eagerly embrace the Christian faith: —that
powerful chiefs, to gain the benefits of the truth, sacrificed
worldly rank and power. Without compensation of any kind,
manumitted their slaves, whose labour constituted their chief
source of wealth, —and established in their territory Chris-
tianity in its simplest and most primitive form, —although
such a proceeding was alike opposed to their power, their
prejudices, passions, and apparent worldly interests.
Then when, again, it was found from the same records,
that, when the next generation arose in the same country,
they had become colder in their faith, less ardent in the


profession and practice of Christianity, I think it may yet
hereafter perhaps he eagerly contended that those are wrong
who now attribute this falling off to a mere wearing away of
the novelty of Christianity. On the contrary, I think it will
be alleged that the warmth and ardour of its first professors
sprang from their having themselves seen the horrors and
evils of the system from which Christianity was their divine
and welcome deliverer; and that the comparative apathy and
coldness of the next generation of its professors arose from
their being unable to make such a comparison, and conse-
quently, vividly to realize to themselves the evils of a system
which they only knew traditionally, and in the existence of
which they could perhaps hardly fully believe.
These, and other similar points connected with the past and
present history of the inhabitants of the islands of the Pacific,
will, I think, undoubtedly prove of the highest interest to
future times. Again, all questions connected with their laws,
traditional customs, and languages, must equally attract the
attention of posterity, as tending to illustrate and clear up
the history of the entire human race, and of all time, consi-
dered as one harmonious whole.
I fear, Gentlemen, I must have already wearied you by
the length at which I have pointed out the many matters of
interest to which the attention of this Society might be so
beneficially directed. I shall therefore conclude by expos-
ing my earnest wish, that our labours may be productive of
benefit not only for the inhabitants of this country, but even
for the learned of Europe, and by again assuring the
Members of the Society of my anxious desire, as their
President, in every way to promote its interests.


. ..
'
*
'
.
'
