

PAMS
BOX II
ADDRESS
JAMES MOORHOUSE, D.D.
BISHOP OF MELBOURNE
TO THE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND ASSEMBLY
MELBOURNE
TUESDAY, OCTOBER 19, 1880
PRICE THREEPENCE
MELBOURNE
CHURCH OF' ENGLAND BOOK DEPOT
53 WILLIAM STREET
i-f. y, V


,
.■■ V i' yf ; S V ;
.
s ■'
, <■ • : •
■*;, 'f y\:)T* ■ ' ;Vt '
J * . , . -k k. v A „ ,' *
• . : y: : V■*.X X' ;:;fx r- ■ *,■ y;'5 t
. V .-y ■ -r . - .' V .. : >. .
\xS- " s -f--
7 e s - ' v '
- -Is . \ . ' ;.;C
v V
\ v .
■ - ' - ■ ■' v." J.
' ‘ , - / " r x' r '
, - ■ ■ ' ■ •
' '' ;• ■•; vy *•. ■ -■
■ ■ v / > . Jx-’
' : x.’ % ’’"
' '' ’ • '
*i.' r H - . ,-;i •"••'I •(■ ■' v„' w . \ , v-;
' ’ > f ’ / k
■-’• ; /- ■ • - .
Jr' /''I ' > * - . >
Sv, ■'- / -v . • v. v i-<- ,.. .t- •*;
-■ \' r- ' -1 H - - •
; ■ • 7 - ■ - ~ ■ i, ■ ■ - ■’ ■ ' - ■ '• k_ •-■■■■ 7',- ''•• • , •:■
' ' - ' . , “* .
:K 1 ’ *•
•
•
. v - ■ v ,■
' . " ...... r ~ . _ .; -* : - ',X; ;
, S - Y- N - -
■ y 1 ;. ‘X r ' -- - . , '
.
- ■* ' . % * w v 7 ' "X''/ j y/'/ c, c-. - •; X : • x
. ■ t> ' v* 1 v 'S' ' . - ■ ■ \
, t£* i r v v ' , k x;--;.
V-. - . ; : ' •’ ■''.. ■
.J-vf'Si ! : ,w;-' . -v -
’ ' * ’ ‘ -
' ‘ • •• ‘ ✓ ’ 'y'"* . . X. • ' • .■■
,-V
- -y >-
--- , > , . . _ ;
y \C''
/ ■ ''7' ; _ \ ‘ *’• „ V‘ ,
■' ' ■ ' ' . ''' v. >,> ' / X ,; - - ' ’ *'
-
/ ‘ . ■ ‘ :Y’
/' '/ cr - l -■
, .V -• =, "7'. .
i - 1”V ’’ } i t .
' ' 7 - ■' v . . ' 1, ' ," -X. ,f ■> ' • ■_ -
-
k. '-x
• ",; *-’ x Vo ■■ .
, . •>■'• ' • • • <.■; .'V-'* •- C- • -f _•■• . 1 - - - , ' ...
VW • •. r ■ : _W s'
' ' ,f v f \ J y<
' „ *-- ", ' V’
.. —r^-..
,-r /, „■ - : v /;;_,4 •
y " "
' , ’ • -
% ( \ >u s -
■ • ' ■ ■ ... ■ ‘ • . ■ •
/■- -vv • ,v, . ,• : ‘ ■-'■■■ ,v
- ■-
vV. : -*' v --v, •
V • ' ' , ' ' , _ * / / r- . ' > "* ' '
> . Vn ' t ~ >' v - >
$T .-■Vj


’Ft.-nst
THE PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS
Cl ]t cf (Stoglanb JssmMg,
My Brethren of the Clergy and the Laity—
You will have observed that although I have been amongst
you for nearly four years, I have not thought it necessary to hold
one of the old formal Episcopal visitations. It is desirable, per-
haps, that I should explain to you the reason of this. It is
because I think lam at liberty to do something better. At the
annual session of our Assembly I am able to address to you such
observations and counsels as I think our circumstances require,
and I am further able, through God’s mercy, to visit _ea,oh of
our clergy in his own parish. This is the better, as it is the
more ancient way. One of our home Bishops has pointed out
that among the canons passed at the synod of Cloveshoe, in
747, “there is an injunction, not as of a new institution, but
as of an existing custom, that each Bishop should make a
visitation of his diocese every year, * by going through it and
round it, and looking into its affairs.’ ” It was only when
(through the increase of population) such visitations became
difficult or impossible that Bishops were directed to call to-
gether the clergy and laity to some suitable place. There
may be some disadvantages in the disestablishment of the
Church, but that measure is not without its compensations,
and amongst them, not the least, is this: that the Bishop'
can spend the time formerly taken up by attendance at Par-
liament in visiting each of his clerical brethren, and seeing
how they do. When at home, I used to think it somewhat
strange that colonial Bishops could not imitate the example
of their brethren in England by living and dying in their
dioceses. I have changed my opinion. I find that a colonial
Bishop needs an exceptional amount of physical strength, and
I believe that when that measure of strength is lost, he will


do well to make way for a younger man. No one can do the
Bishop’s work for him. He is the appointed overseer, and he
must oversee. Many may help him, especially the arch-
deacons, whose duty and office it is to do so; but none, I
believe, can act as his substitute. The office of Suffragan
Bishop, recently revived in England, is nothing more than an
experiment, and, for my own part, I do not think that it will
succeed. I have known several excellent coadjutors in Eng-
land, but never one who could stand in the place of the
diocesan Bishop, either in his own feeling or in the feeling of
the people. The coadjutor can only do what he is directed
to do. And so long as he is not the source of Episcopal
authority, though he may be an abler and a better man than
the diocesan Bishop, he will not command the attention
which men accord to one whom they call at home 1 our own
Bishop.’ Episcopal training can be gained in the office of
archdeacon, and I think that, in the long run, it will be found
better to divide large dioceses than to appoint coadjutor
.Bishops for their government. I make these remarks, not
because I think there is any special need at present to divide
further the Diocese of Melbourne, but only to keep the matter
before your mind as a possible future necessity. I have also
another reason. Only a Bishop can know the full difficulty
and anxiety of his work. Not only ought he to acquaint him-
self with all that is being done in his diocese, that he may be
able to correct what is amiss, and to suggest new methods of
operation ; but he should do this with the minimum of fuss
and friction. Our best and ablest clergy are not always those
who are most patient of minute criticism and frequent inter-
ference. What is most needed in a colonial Bishop is not
criticism, but help ; stimulus in work by word and example ;
sympathy, encouragement, and direction. Without support
from the State, a clergyman should be able to fall back in
trouble on his Bishop, not, as children do, in helplessness, but
as men do in sorrow or perplexity, when the mind is dis-
turbed by difficulty, or stirred by doubt and trouble. I re-
mind myself of these high functions of the Episcopal office,
partly to assure you that I am ready to attempt the discharge
of them according to my ability, and partly to ask your
prayers for me in my bodily and spiritual weakness, that our
Lord Jesus Christ may make me fitter for my office as the
years go on, less unworthy to be a chief pastor in His Church,
less slenderly endowed with the love of Him and of His
truth; more adequately replenished with courage to utter
that truth simply, to contend for it strenuously, and to fling
to the winds all fear of man’s opposition, reproach, and con-
tempt.


My brethren of the clergy and laity, this request of mine is
no mere form of words, but the deepest craving of my heart.
That many of you love me, and are ready to help me, I know.
And now, in the sense of my own weakness, and of the diffi-
culty and vastness of the work committed to me, in all
humility, and with all earnestness, I ask you not to forget me
in your prayers.
We begin this session of our Church Assembly at a very
interesting time. The doors of a new Palace of Industry in this
city have just been thrown open to the world. We have before
our eyes specimens of the art and science, of the taste and
skill, of the whole civilised world. It is a spectacle at once
of pride and of profit—of pride at the achievements of a com-
munity so young as our own, and of profit when we survey the
triumphs of knowledge and energy which are displayed to us
by older and wealthier communities. Such an Exhibition
helps us, moreover, to realise the unity of our race, and the
identity of its best aspirations and real interests. It is a ser-
mon upon that angelic song which hailed the birth of our
Redeemer. It is yet another si'gn and pledge that, in spite
of past disappointments, men are still longing everywhere
for brotherhood and peace. The Church of Christ exists to
realise that divine ideal; to proclaim and prepare by the only
efficient agencies, “ peace on earth, goodwill toward men.’’
It is not without a certain fitness, then, that soon after the
Exhibition shall have closed its doors our Church proposes to
make a special effort in Melbourne to proclaim those truths,
and deepen those influences which can alone effectually pro-
mote the brotherhood of mankind. We propose about next
June to hold a Melbourne mission.
But what need can there be, some may be disposed to
ask, for any such special effort ? Have we not a perpetual
mission in Melbourne in the work of our parochial clergy, who
are bound, one and all, not only to proclaim the gospel in
church, but also to carry it from door to door in their parishes ?
No doubt that is the case ; and I do not hesitate to say that
for ordinary times this parochial mission is the best. But
the special effort now contemplated is by no means to set
aside the parochial system. It is no mere vagrant evangel-
ism which we are thinking of, but a spiritual appeal based
upon our permanent system, and intended to give it greater
efficiency. A moment’s consideration of the nature and
method of the mission will make this evident.
We believe that there exists in Melbourne at present much
coldness and indifference among professing Christians, and
that this state of mind is attended, as, indeed, it must be,
with much lamentable inconsistency of conduct. The mis-


sion, then, will first of all be an appeal to professing Chris-
tians to examine their hearts and lives, and to ask them-
selves whether they can fairly conclude from what they
find there that their Christianity is real. It will be a
loud cry to them—“ What is the state of your heart as to
temperance, purity, truthfulness, equity, brotherly-kindness,
liberality, humility, long-suffering, meekness ? Do you find
that these things exist in you, and abound?”
But it is by no means addressed to professing Christians
alone, or even to these chiefly. Eather is it a solemn call to
those (and must they not be counted by tens of thousands)
who are dead in trespasses and sins. Think of the drunken-
ness of Melbourne, of its godlessness, of its absorption in
money-making and pleasure; above all, of its horrible im-
purity. I desire to be careful in what I say ; but if any one
wishes to know what an awful cancer of impurity is poisoning
the blood of this city, let him read, not the declamation of
any clergyman, but the ghastly report of the Select Com-
mittee on the Contagious Diseases Bill. Melbourne, believe
me, needs a special mission, and a very faithful one.
The principal aim, then, of this mission is, not to provide a
religious sensation for ordinary church-goers, but to startle a
careless city out of its false security; first, to convince it of
sin, and then, if God blesses us, to lead it to that Saviour
who can deliver it from its worst miseries and their cause.
There need be no extravagance in such an effort; indeed,
I believe it will be in the only true sense successful in propor-
tion as it is free from extravagances, in proportion as its
agents feel their office so real and so solemn an one, as not to
admit of one word being said which is not as reverent as it is
true. To avoid extravagance, all feverishness of feeling, and
all wildness of language, special precautions have been taken.
Only clergymen are to conduct the proceedings. Only in
churches are the after-meetings to be held. Only in the
vestry and by the clergy are those to be seen who
seek private help and counsel. God helping us, these
measures ought to secure that solemnity which such a
mission should impose, and to exclude those merely bodily and
hysterical phenomena which it is too often the aim of the
ignorant and inexperienced to produce.
Again, if there be nothing in the nature of our mission to
excite the apprehensions of the reverent, as little is there in
its method to give just alarm to the admirers of the parochial
system. Under God, the success of the mission will depend
mainly on the manner in which the parish priest prepares
for it, and follows it up. Unless, for weeks before it opens
he does his best to stir up the careless to attend it, we


shall not come within spiritual reach of those to whom we
specially address ourselves. Lovers of excitement may fill
the church, but without such preparation as I have indicated
the careless and indifferent, the godless and profane, will not
be there.
Again, after the mission, if God should please to bless it to
the awakening and conversion of some, it will depend mainly
on the efforts of the parish priest whether such effects become
permanent, whether the awakened become holy and steadfast
Christians, whether the mission be a true enkindling of the
divine life, or nothing better than “ a fever followed by an
ague.”
Seeing, then, that there is clearly need of a mission, and that
all possible pains have been taken to guard that which we
propose to hold from the well-known dangers of such move-
ments, let all true Christians help forward this effort
by their sympathy, their work, and their prayers, that so
when it is over we may be able to say of many, as was said of
the converts of the first Christian mission ever held in the
Christian Church, “ They continued steadfastly in the apostle’s
doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread and in
prayers.”
Let us turn now to some matters more directly connected
with the ordinary work of the diocese.
Having regard to the present condition of primary education
in this colony, I would most earnestly commend to our clergy
the revival of the practice of catechising our children in the
church. The prayer-book directs all parish priests to cate-
chise diligently every Sunday; and although change of cir-
cumstances may justify and even demand certain modifications
of the practice, yet we must not forget that our educational
system in Victoria creates such a need for it as was never
even thought of when the rubric was composed.
Now, catechising, if it is to become effective, must be made
a study. Careful attention must be paid to the service which
precedes it. In towns I would suggest that the Litany
(omitted from morning prayers) should constitute the devotional
part of the service. Its own intrinsic and holy beauty would
at once commend it for such a use. Being largely an inter-
cessory service, it would teach children in practice to think
more of others and less of themselves than it is natural for
them to do. In its very frequent responses it would provide
for them a part in the service admirably adapted to quicken
and sustain attention ; besides, it is not too long for children.
Let the minister say his part of the service (reverently indeed)
but without any of those chilling pauses which take all heart
out of the service; and let the teachers promptly and audibly


lead the children’s responses. Let great pains, again, be taken
in the selection of hymns and tunes. Avoid doggerel. Don’t
put into children’s minds words which, although set to taking
tunes, they will learn afterwards to despise. There is no surer
way of bringing religion into contempt amongst a generally
educated people. Hymns abound in which the words are as
simple as they are impressive—all the more impressive,
indeed, for their very simplicity. Let such be chosen, and then
let them be wedded to bright and simple tunes —tunes, striking
for their melody, and thus easily caught and easily remem-
bered. Last of all, let the greatest pains be taken by the
catechist in the preparation of his lesson. Get ready a lesson,
carefully thought out; its parts logically arranged; its thoughts
striking and practical; its illustrations bright and reverent;
its very words in great part fitted into their places. Some
catechists seem to think that it is enough simply to glance
over the lesson, depending for interest and elfect on the
answers and mistakes of the scholars. No good catechising
can come of such a plan as that. One of the best catechists
in his day, Archdeacon Bather, used to say, I always catechise
a lesson into the children. No one was readier than he to
take advantage, of all the new and unexpected openings pre-
sented by mistakes; but he always took care that he guided
the direction of the children’s thought, never suffering
them to guide his. He catechised truth into the children as
well as drew it out of them.
I know that in making this recommendation, I am asking
the clergy to undertake a serious labour; but then the need
is great and urgent, and I know by experience that the
delight of it, when proper care Las been taken, more than
compensates for the toil. I could wish that in all our larger
town parishes the clergy had curates to give them relief, and
to set them at liberty on Sunday for this, among other
necessary labours. Will not the wealthier laity make an
effort to furnish their parish clergymen with such help, as well
in the Christian training of the young, as in other necessary
duties ?
Last year I recommended that instructive lectures should,
from time to time, be delivered in our churches by the laity
and others. lam glad to observe that in some few instances
that recommendation was not without its effect. I would
again urge it upon the attention of the clergy. This is an
age and a country of boundless curiosity. Men are athirst
for real instruction ; while at the same time, for all instruc-
tion upon ecclesiastical, moral, and spiritual subjects, they
are likely to be more and more dependent on the clergy.
Immense pains are being taken to make secular subjects in-


teresting. Attention is being called to them; effort is being
expended on them ; thought and interest in respect of them
are being quickened and extended. This is all as it should
be. But if the clergy and our better instructed laity neglect
to excite a corresponding interest in Christian philosophy,
Christian history, and Christian doctrine, the very activity of
secular thought will thrust such matters into the background.
Attention will be wholly engrossed by one class of subjects, and
itwi!lfollow(as certainly as if sacred truth had no existence) that
all care for it will die out from the midst of us. The clergy have
thus a difficult task thrust upon them, but one which they
cannot decline without imperilling the cause of their Master.
I would further urge upon my reverend brethren, in this con-
nexion, that they do not wholly neglect the systematic exposi-
tion of our Church’s services, creeds, and articles. There is not
one churchman out of a hundred who either knows the history
or understands the rationale of our daily services. And yet
those services have a history second in interest to nothing of
merely human origin, and they are, moreover, the expression of
an ideal of Christian worship so lofty and sublime, that it only
needs to be seen to be loved and reverenced. Let the people
know why our service consists so largely of praise; let them
know the history of the beautiful words which they take into
their lips; call attention to the grand thoughts which those
words embody, to the deep theology on which they rest; to
the might and sanctity of the feelings with which they are aglow;
and our people will learn to love them with a new affection,
and to use them with a larger understanding, and an unac-
customed profit. Helps for such lectures abound. I would
suggest such books as Palmer’s Origines Liturgicce, Blunt’s
Annotated Prayer-book, Archdeacon Freeman’s Principles of
Divine Service, and such lectures as those of Dean Goulburn
on the Collects, I do not always agree with the opinions
expressed in these books, but I recommend them for their
suggestiveness. The fault of such lectures usually is that they
go too much into details, and are extended to an inordinate
length. If they be only short and bright, and adapted to
bring out clearly the great liturgical principles, which lie at
the foundation of our reasonable service, they will be listened
to, lam sure, with profit and delight. This, however, is
after all only one of the directions in which churchmen should
seek to quicken and direct the life and thought of the age.
Besides that general danger to which I have referred, there
is one special influence in Victoria—the immense and
universal love of amusement, which is the enemy alike of all
steady labour, and all solemn reflection. (Applause.) I verily
believe that if large numbers of our fellow-countrymen were


left to follow their own devices, they would try to fill up with
amusement every moment which they could steal from the
hours of necessary labour. The tendency of our people is to
live only for this world, and only for those things in it which
minister to their pleasures. We must hope that the Inter-
national Exhibition will in time exert upon us its proper in-
fluence ; that it will enlarge our mind, refine our taste, and
develop our resources. But already I see that it has been
turned into a place of amusement, and attention occupied
rather by the throngs that visit it, than by its proper con-
tents. Now, this insatiable thirst for amusement, for glitter,
and show, and excitement, is likely to have a very prejudicial
effect on the national character. It relaxes self-control, pro-
motes idleness and effeminacy, makes work distasteful, and
self-denial almost impossible.
The only way to counteract it effectually is to provide
competing entertainments, which, while ministering to all
refined tastes, and giving their legitimate culture and satis-
faction to the eye and ear, shall yet appeal to something
higher than the senses, and set before the mind something
nobler and diviner than the mere flash of colour aud glitter of
well-dressed throngs. We must determine, in short, to make the
elevating tastes and higher knowledge of mankind interesting
to the mass of our people, and to do this must be prepared to
take the necessary pains and submit to the necessary sacrifices.
A more direct means of influence, however, will be found
in the careful preparation of candidates for confirmation.
Those who have been received into the Church at baptism,
and have been assured thereby of the love and grace of their
Heavenly Father in Christ Jesus, have yet to appropriate that
grace, and to make public confession of their intention, with
God’s help, to improve it. At the season of confirmation the
Church calls upon those of her children who are attaining
the age when responsibilities can be intelligently assumed, to
remember those obligations, to pray God to incline their
hearts to undertake them, and then with all humility, but
with all confidence, to promise that, in God’s strength, they
will follow their Saviour in all holy and godly living. When-
ever a clergyman is satisfied that the doctrines and obliga-
tions of the Christian faith are adequately understood; and
that there is in any baptised person a humble but firm resolve
to holdfast that faith, and yield his heart to those obligations,
he is justified, in my opinion, in presenting that person for
confirmation. No one has any business to look for a ripeness
of spiritual life in the young postulant which belongs only to
the Christian of mature age. Is there understanding of the
fundamental truths of the Gospel 1 Is there a sincere desire


to forsake evil and follow Christ ? If there be, then the
young Christian should be encouraged to confess Christ before
men, and, seeking divine grace in the fellowship of worship
and of the holy supper, to go on unto a perfect man —“ to
the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.” How
salutary an influence such a decision may exert at the opening
of manhood, what dangers it may put aside, what privileges it
may secure, I need not stop to explain to you. The prepara-
tion of candidates for confirmation in this diocese has been,
so _ far as I am able to judge, in general most careful and
faithful. I fear, however, that as in England, when confirm-
ation is over, the pains spent on retaining and edifying the
young Christian are nothing like so great as that which was
expended in giving him his preparation. Let me urge upon
my reverend brethren more earnest and systematic efforts to
retain the newly confirmed as regular communicants. What
earnest minister is ignorant of the vast influence exerted on
young people at this season 1 What a quickening of holy
emotion; what an awakening of religious interest usually
results from the efforts put forth by both minister and friends !
Where amongst all your people will you find individuals so
willing to receive instruction, so ready to respond to appeals,
so fully prepared to welcome and improve special sympathy,
as amongst those who have been recently confirmed 1 Then
the mind is specially open, the heart is specially tender, the
Spirit of Christ is specially and manifestly present to lead and
to bless. Let me ask you, then, my reverend brethren, to
endeavour to exercise a loving ingenuity, a special diligence
in devising and carrying out methods for preserving and
developing the spiritual influence of that exceptional time.
It might powerfully contribute to this end, if all the clergy
kept lists of communicants. Should any of the newly
confirmed be then found to absent himself, the minister might
call upon him and point out with affectionate earnestness the
danger of relapse, and the vital importance of early decision
and perseverance. Such visits would have all the greater
effect, if the minister could invite his young parishioner to a
weekly, or at least monthly, meeting of communicants, where
the influence of pastoral exhortation would be seconded and
increased by that of brotherly sympathy and encouragement.
Of the vital importance of the Sunday-school, at this crisis
it is unnecessary to say anything. A bill is to be introduced
this session for the formation of a Sunday-school Institute, to
which certain definite functions are to be committed. It was
high time that such a movement should be made. The
Sunday-school work of this colony is becoming of too import-
ant a character to be entrusted to the management of any


body of unofficial persons, however able or faithful. The
Church, as a whole, is bound to recognise the importance
of the work, and to bend its best energies to the task of
carrying it out more efficiently. We shall have gone, of
course, a very little distance on the road to this end when we
have created a board of management and prescribed its duties.
Under God, the whole success of the movement will depend on
the wisdom, the energy, the fidelity with which the new board
address themselves to their task. I would suggest that, first
of all, careful and particular inquiry be made as to the actual
condition of our existing Sunday-schools, and I hope that,
in the event of such an inquiry being instituted, no false
delicacy or false pride will hinder the full disclosure of all
defects and shortcomings.
Simultaneously with this inquiry another should be made,
having a different object—to ascertain those methods and
measures which, in other religious communions, have been
found to be of advantage. When we know our own defects
and the excellencies of our neighbours, we shall be in a
position to take counsel upon the future; to prepare books,
to suggest improvements, and, it may be, to provide some
little pecuniary help where it is most needed.
We must remember, however, that the necessity for exertion
is most urgent. No time must be lost, no effort must be
spared, no half-heartedness must be tolerated. We have a
great work to do, and we must do it with our might.
Last year I made the suggestion that it might be possible,
in spite of certain objections and difficulties, to admit a small
number of highly-qualified laymen to the diaconate without
requiring them to give up their secular calling. This sug-
gestion has been received by some with favour, by others
with hesitation and doubt. It has been pointed out to me
that it is difficult to find a precedent for such a step
in the ancient practice of the Churrch. This is, no doubt,
true. But, then, I may observe that if the Church be a
living organism, the earthly body of the Spirit of Christ,
she must be prepared to make such changes as her vary-
ing circumstances demand, even as the ancient Church
was accustomed to do. A Greek unchaugeableness means
a Greek torpor and decline. I would never rashly desert
great lines of action laid down for us by primitive
antiquity; but neither would I slavishly follow ancient practice
when circumstances had clearly altered. The Church has
never bound herself to do so. There is one closely analogous
case, for instance, where the Church in this colony has felt it
right already to assert her liberty. In ancient times not only
the hierarchy (bishops, priests, and deacons), but the mem-


bers of inferior orders (sub-deacons, acolites, readers, &c.—the
ministri insacrati), were forbidden after dedication to return
to a secular life. And yet now it is one of the promises
exacted from our readers, that if the Bishop shall require it,
they will return quietly to their secular calling. Changed
circumstances required and justified a change of ordinances.
And even so it may be in the case of deacons also. I may
explain, however, that I never intended to propose a general
admission of honorary readers to the office of deacon, but
only of those amongst them who showed special fitness, and
who might afterwards choose to leave their secular callings
altogether, and so, with the approval of the Bishop, find a
door of admission to the regular ministry, which else had been
closed against them, to the great detriment of Christ’s Church
and people.
Bishop Milman, moved by the exigencies of his vast and
scattered charge, appears to have entertained a similar design.
We are told in his life that “he wrote to the Archbishop of
Canterbury on the subject of a sub-diaconate and lay-diacouate
for the Diocese of Calcutta. The Archbishop approved of the
idea, and said that he (the Bishop, as Metropolitan) was com-
petent to introduce those offices into his own province,”
It must be remembered, however, that when this advice
was given, there was no Provincial Synod in India to which
such a matter could have been referred. Had this been the
case, there can be little doubt that the Archbishop of Canter-
bury would have advised Bishop Milman to refer the question
to that body.
The Bishop of Calcutta did ultimately introduce two new
orders of ministers into India; calling them, however, not
lay-deacons and sub-deacons, but sub-deacons and readers.
He gave as the reason of this nomenclature the precedents
furnished by the early Church. It is to be observed, however,
that, although he adopted the title sub-deacon in deference to
ancient usage, he, at the same time, attached duties to this
office which are hardly distinguishable from those of the
diaconate. The sub-deacon was to read the service, preach,
and visit; and, says the ■ Bishop, “at the Holy Communion
he might, after receiving himself, assist the clergyman by
giving the chalice to the commumicants. In case of real
emergency, he might baptise infants according to the form of
private baptism. He should be ready at the desire of the
civil or military authorities to officiate at burials. He might
also be entrusted with the preparation of candidates for con-
firmation, under the superintendence of the clergymen.”
Ho such duties as these belonged to the primitive order of
sub-deacons. They performed such offices as are now assigned


to vergers, and, in addition, carried messages for the Bishop,
and prepared the sacred vessels for use at the holy table.
They were, however, forbidden by a canon of the Synod of
Laodicoea, in the fourth century, either to enter the diaconicon
or to touch the holy vessels at the communion-table. And
yet, moved by the spiritual exigencies of our own day, so
conservative a Bishop as Dr. Milman, while giving the name
sub-deacon to his new order, felt himself at liberty to assign
to it duties which more anciently belonged to the diaconate.
To me it seems that the name is of little consequence, if
only laymen following their usual calling may undertake such
duties as those assigned to them by Dr. Milman; and per-
haps this, after all, may be the best way of meeting our pre-
sent difficulties. If this Assembly should think so, it might,
perhaps, be advisable for it to refer the whole matter for
consideration to the next General Synod of Australia, with
a recommendation, or, at least, a suggestion, as to the most
expedient course to be pursued.
I have spoken so lately on the paramount importance
amongst our Church organisations of the Bishop of Mel-
bourne’s Fund, that it may be enough to refer the members
of the Assembly to what I then advanced. I would here,
however, repeat the observation that I think the prosperity of
our Church is dependent so largely upon no fund as upon
this; that if it prospers, the Church prospers ; if it fails, the
Church fails, loses her Master’s love for the poor and helpless,
loses that brotherly sympathy respecting which St. John says
—“He that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how
shall he love God whom he hath not seen?” Anything had
better fail than this fund; for, losing our interest in it, we
lose our sense of unity, lose orar consciousness of corporate
life, and fall back into the feebleness and dislocation of
parochial selfishness.
Since last we met here we have put our hand, as you know,
to a new and serious undertaking. We have begun to build
our Cathedral. Of the uses of a Cathedral and of its chapter
I have likewise recently spoken at length, so that upon that
point nothing more need now be said. It is a matter of regret,
however, that some appear still to be allowing their private
opinions as to the site and plans to interfere with their
liberality. This surely is as unreasonable as it is discouraging.
In so great a conflict of opinion as existed in respect to the
site and architect of the Cathedral some must have failed to
get their own way. But how can any great work be done
unless the minority of a community be prepared to yield to
the majority ? After careful and prolonged discussion, the
Church Assembly did that which seemed best to the larger


number. We could have acted in no other way ; and to
blame the Church for doing what it was obliged to do is
surely as unreasonable as it is ungenerous.
For my own part, I believe that the choice of the site was
a good one. Had the Cathedral been placed in any one of the
suburbs of Melbourne, it would have become a parish church,
and have entered into competition with the parish churches
of that suburb. Placed where it is, it enters into competition
with none, while it is easily accessible to all. It is the Anglican
Cathedral Church, not of Carlton, or Pitzroy, pr Kichmond,
or Prahran, or St. Hilda, or South Yarra, or Emerald Hill,
but of Melbourne.
Some, I hear, have ‘made objections because I have sent
appeals for annual subscriptions, not only into our wealthy
suburbs, but also into the poorest of our readers’ districts.
My answer is, that I should have felt it both wrong and in-
expedient to do otherwise. The Cathedral is to be neither a
rich man’s church, nor a church built wholly by the rich for
the poor. It is to be the property, and one day I trust the
pride, of all the churchmen in the diocese of Melbourne. I
especially wish the poor to feel a proprietary right in it.
Every seat will be free, and thus the poorest man in the
diocese can take in it what place he pleases without asking
any one’s leave. But in the nature of our poorer brother
there is an innate shyness, and perhaps a little jealousy of
patronage, which makes him hesitate to put in a claim to any-
thing which is not in some real sense his own. Unless, then,
he has helped to build the place, unless he can say to himself
(whether he says it aloud or not), “1 have paid for my own
stone in it; I have given my half-crown a year to make it
what it is ; little perhaps, yet what I could ; and not, perhaps,
despised by that Divine Proprietor of me and it, who noticed
the widow’s mite”—unless he can say to himself something
like that, I don’t think he will ever feel the Cathedral to be
his own, or freely and happily make use of it. What
wealthy Churchman would not respect such a feeling as that,
and be glad that his poorer brother should become like him-
self, a part proprietor of their common temple!
Having said so much about the religious education of our
children recently, it will not be necessary for me to make now
more than a brief reference to this question. Such a refer-
ence, however, seems to be required, by certain comments
which have been made since I read my paper.
It has been frequently alleged that Government can
have nothing to do with religion. , What then, I would
ask, has Government to do with education? The right and
duty to educate the child rests with his parent. It is just as


much the parent’s duty to feed his child’s mind as to feed his
body. The only difference between the two cases is this, that
generally the parent perceives and acknowledges the latter
duty, while as yet he is not sufficiently educated to perceive
and recognise the former. In this state of affairs it is the
duty and interest of the State to take the parent’s place. The
State needs intelligent and, above all, virtuous citizens. If
it cannot get these, it will have to pay police and build gaols
to restrain the vicious. It cannot afford to do this. It has,
moreover, no -business to let society be harassed, injured, and
torn to pieces by the viciously ignorant. All this is granted.
If the parent neglects his duty, the S(pte must do it, making
such regulations in respect to the negligent parent as the
justice of the case demands. But now, if the State under-
takes this duty, it is bound to perform it. If by its competi-
tion, it prevents others from interfering, it must do what it
undertakes to do—it must make virtuous citizens. Now, I
affirm that intellectual training alone will not do this. There
must be distinct moral training, and no moral training can be
effective, as I recently showed, which is not built on a religious
basis and enforced by religious motives. If, then, the State
meddles with education at all, it is bound to make it religious ;
not denominational, not dogmatic, but religious. (Applause.)
But it is objected, education cannotbereligious without being
dogmatic. You must either teach dogma or satisfy yourself
with a barren reading of the Bible. The answer to that is
that undenominational religious teaching is required by law,
and is daily given, without objection from any, and with
astonishing success, to nearly 200,000 children, in the Board
schools of London. Further, I affirm that what is there done
can be easily and satisfactorily accomplished anywhere. As a
parish priest I gave religious instruction to children con-
tinually, and I can declare it to be a fact that children are
far more easily and profitably interested in the great funda-
mental facts of religion than in those minute points of
doctrine upon which Christians differ from each other.
But even if this be true, it has been argued that school-
masters are not generally fit to be religious teachers. Would you
set men to teach religion, I have been asked, who were only
appointed to their office for their knowledge of arithmetic?
To which I reply—Dare you appoint men to such an office for
no other than such a reason ? Is a knowledge of arithmetic,
or of the three R’s, qualification enough for a man who, by his
example and conversation during four hours of every day, must
have more influence on the formation of our children’s
character than any other human being, to say nothing of the
respect commanded by his office? Has character nothing to


do with the choice of our schoolmasters ? The present Minis-
ter of Education, to his great credit, has more than once
publicly announced that he should lay the greatest stress upon
inquiries as to character.
Well, then, if he is as good as his word—and there is
no reason to believe that he is not —I affirm that men
so selected are fit, not, perhaps, to convert children, not,
perhaps, to touch their heart with the fire of religious en-
thusiasm, but at least to teach them the facts and principles
upon which religion is founded. It is one thing to teach a
child that he ought to love God ; it is another thing to make
him do so. (Applause.) To teach him the duty is the office
of the schoolmaster, to induce him to perform it is the office
of the Church. Does any one think, perhaps, that to get the
schoolmaster to teach the facts and principles of religion is but a
small advantage 1 Let him then remember the effect of the
ignorance of these things on the French mechanic. He
listens, we are told, to the ordinary addresses of religious
teachers with a bewilderment as great as that mani-
fested on a like occasion by a Hindoo or a Buddhist.
He has never heard anything about the facts and princi-
ples to which the religious teacher appeals. There is no
common medium of thought between teacher and hearer. The
words, facts, and images of the Bible are to the city mechanic
in France like the accents of an unknown tongue. They
awake in his mind no definite thoughts, no hallowed associa-
tions. Now nearly half of our children never enter a
Sunday-school, never, so far as we know, receive any religious
instruction whatever. Do you want to reduce these to the
condition of a French ouvrier? (Applause.)
Oh, but it is objected, why does not the Church secure the
attendance of such children ? Because, I answer, it cannot.
How do you get such a proportion of our children into the
State-schools as actually attend there? By a compulsory
law. Are you then prepared to pass a law compelling all
careless parents to send their unwilling children to Sunday-
schools ? Of course not. Then what is the use of asking
why the Church cannot get them all ? She does as much as
she can by invitation and inducement to get both teachers and
scholars.
Is it a small achievement to have induced 13,300 adults to
teach and 120,000 children to learn? Perhaps this estimate,
which is that of our public returns, may be a little excessive;
perhaps the attendance put down may not be always average
attendance; but still it remains approximately true that so
much has been done. But what is left undone ? Another
100,000 children never enter a Sunday-school. You ask us,


then, to provide another body of 13,000 teachers, and to get
them, moreover, of such excellent quality that they shall be
able to keep the worst and most indifferent of our children in
regular attendance at Sunday-school. Who dares to hope
that such a thing can be done?
But supposing that it could be done, what, even then, is
the amount of instruction they would receive ? For about an
hour and a half once in seven days they would receive
instruction, in some cases from trained teachers, but generally
from persons, who, however zealous and well-intentioned, have
no idea of the necessary conditions of securing attention and
imparting knowledge.
That is an impossible task. It is right to spur the Church
on to do everything in her power ; but to overtake this vast
deficiency is simply out of her power. Even the enthusiastic
determination of a Mary Carpenter was obliged to seek aid
from Government, as we do to-day.
Besides, I must again remind you that to assign to the
schoolmaster the duty of imparting general religious instruction,
is to supply him with the only effective means of keeping up
the moral tone of his school. A head-teacher asked me, not
long ago, if I thought that the Act allowed him to refer to
God’s will, or to the future results of sin, in rebuking children
for lying, cruelty, or impurity. Don’t you see from the very
fact that such a question could be put how the Act chills the
teacher’s heart, and seals his lips; or when he does speak,
smites his words with barrenness ? What moral force can there
be in rebukes which have been thus scorched and withered
by the burning sirocco of secularism ? With such disabilities
inflicted on masters, and with 100,000 children who never
enter a Sunday-school, what do you think, in a generation or
two, will be the result?
France was flooded by M. "Willemain, in the reign of Louis
Philippe, with socialist schoolmasters. And, says Bishop
Mil man of these officials, “ the mischief they did was extra-
ordinary. I believe that the troubles, corruptions, and
failures of France resulted in great measure from the weaken-
ing of the individual character of the generation which passed
through their hands.” Perhaps the Bishop does not give
sufficient weight in this opinion to the secularising influence
of the whole revolutionary period ; but there can be no doubt
that the general deterioration of French morality was greatly
intensified by the cause to which he referred. To what extent
that deterioration went we may partly judge by the picture
of French—especially of French city —life, as given to us
recently by one who collected the testimony of the most
eminent men of the period referred to.


Heine testifies that “morality, wthich is nothing but religion
grafted into the character and halbits of a people, has lost its
vital roots.” “ There are no atheeists here. They have not
preserved enough respect for ‘le Bson Dim' to be at the pains
of denying Him.”
De Lamennais exclaims —“ Thro absolute extinction of the
moral sense prevents men from talking interest even in specu-
lative error.” “It is a systematic ignorance ; a voluntary
sleep of the soul; a complete numlimess of the moral faculties.”
The result of this state of things is summed up by another
contemporary, Alfred de Musset, as follows :—“ Man is here
below to serve himself of his senses. He has more or less
of a yellow or white metal, with which he has the right to
more or less of regard.” “ The rich tell themselves the only
reality is wealth; all the rest is a dream; we rejoice, and we
die. Those of a middle fortune tell themselves, forgetfulness
is the only reality ; all the rest is a dream ; we forget, and
we die. The poor tell themselves misfortune is the only
reality ; all the rest is a dream ; we blaspheme, and we die.”
This, on the testimony of three of its greatest men, was
the result of French secularism in the reign of the citizen
king. But, surely, you will say, we have nothing like this
in Victoria. Secularism, I answer, is not so old in Victoria
as it was in France when these words were spoken. But
already we see a most portentous sign of what may be. I
have it on the testimony of a public officer that already in
Victoria we are developing a new type of criminal. In the
old country, he says, and in the early days of the colony, he
had no difficulty in getting information about crimes. Now,
however, the educated larrikin is driving the police to their
wits’ end. This modern Victorian criminal is intelligent
enough to know the advantage of combination. He keeps
his own counsel, and he baffles the police. Now, observe
that of this class of crime (the most dangerous of all) there
will be absolutely no record in the returns of our police
courts and assizes. For the most part it is committed with
impunity. It goes to swell that enormous mass of sensual sin
of which the law takes no notice, of which its returns exhibit
no trace, although they are so often fallaciously quoted as a
reliable test of our moral condition.
You know what ordinary criminals are. You have yet to
learn what intelligent criminals can be—what a scourge to
society, what a terrible peril to the commonwealth. God
grant that we may take warning before it is too late.
One word upon our greatest speculative danger and I have
done.
There can be no doubt that faith is now, in one sense, more


easy, and in another more difficult than it was when I was
young. It is more difficult to believe without questioning—to
receive the statements of God’s Word as the audible accents
of the divine voice equally in their form and their spirit,
equally when declaring to us spiritual truth and when
illustrating that truth by the imperfect science and frag-
mentary traditions of an earlier age. No doubt there was
much that was very beautiful in such a faith as this. It had
all the rest and calm of a Sabbath day. Unvexed and
unexhausted by intellectual struggle, it had leisure
to spend its undivided energies on communion with
God, and holy service to man. And what if it
failed to catch some gleams of scientific light? or what, if
in its survey of the world and of history, it failed to appre-
ciate those ever enlarging horizons of space and time, which
are filled for us with the beauty and grandeur of creation ?
Heaven was still infinite above; God was still infinite around;
and it found in these grand and sublime objects the space and
largeness which it lost elsewhere. Such a faith, however,
was only possible while ignorance was inevitable and satisfied.
The day came when the quick eye of human intelligence,
prying and searching everywhere, detected signs of a time so
much longer, and of a life so much larger, than any which
the mere letter of the Bible suggested, that after one brief
effort to discover the new truths veiled beneath, the ancient
form, it turned impatiently away, and with a kindling in it
at once of hope and of scorn, gave itself up to the enchanting
visions of a newly-discovered world.
Then followed for the men of a simpler faith an era of per-
plexity and pain. They felt that a whole ocean rolled be-
tween them and the new explorers. But day by day news
came to them from beyond the sea of marvellous discoveries ;
and every time the rumour spread that some new land had
been found, richer and fairer than men had dared to dream of,
the plaudits of the world shook the calm heavens above
them, and found an echo in the fears of their own hearts. Be-
lieving still intensely (how could they help it ?) in what they
knew of the love of their Heavenly Father in Christ Jesus,
they still had trouble within. They were ever listening
timidly for disquieting rumours, ever clutching eagerly their
old beliefs as a mother clutches her children in the hour of
danger, believing, and yet fearing ; trusting, and yet not at
peace.
That day for many of us has happily passed away. The
science of the Bible we have abandoned to scientific investiga-
tion; the letter of the Bible, to truthful criticism. We no
longer dread every sound, or tremble at every footstep.


Science is welcome to us as the twin sister of faith; the one
to lead us with her lamp on this side the veil of sense, the
other to guide us with her star-crowned brow when, thrusting
that veil aside, as man only can (man, the high priest of
Nature), we advance into the holiest place, into the invisible
presence of God. Is this an altogether fanciful comparison ?
Are there not these two worlds, with the veil of sense
between them—the lamp of science burning in the one, the
lamp of faith illuminating the other ? And is it not true that,
ever as the lamp of science glows more brightly and pours an
intenser radiance on the veil of sense, that veil appears to glow
and attenuate ; yea, to shake and waver, as if it might rend
and be rolled up like a scroll, giving way to the sunburst of
such a day as faith had dreamed of? What student has ever
stood on the confines of science, gazing with all his power on
those ultimate forces and elements which it reveals to him,
without feeling that he was very near to the real and the true,
that almost a veil might lift, that almost he might soon pass into
God’s most secret place ? That is where humanity stands to-
day, peering, hoping, sometimes shivering in the keen air of
that border-land. Sense cannot breathe in it; hate cannot live
in it; all impure and evil things reel back from it, to where
afar, with dying lights and sinking revelry, lust grovels and
blasphemes. But faith lives and rejoices. She fears no more.
The terrors and dangers of her pilgrimage are past, and she
descries the nearness of her home. These are no fancies, but
the brightening visions, the growing convictions, which science
herself is bringing to the birth.
Before the Son of God awoke the heart of a well-nigh
despairing humanity, there was the voice of one crying in the
wilderness —“ Prepare ye the way of the Lord.” Science, to
some of us, is the Baptist of this latter age, the prophet of an
approaching regeneration. And of her we can say as of that
earlier herald of the Lord—she is “ not that Light, but is sent
to bear witness of that Light, that was the true Light, which
lighteth every man that cometh into the world.”
God grant that the burning and shining lamp of this
heaven-sent prophet may lead us through the night to where
the better day is breaking.
Mason, Firth & M‘Cutcheon, Printers, Flinders Lane West, Melbourne.


fr: ■J'
J ;■ • $; ;; y/i > -iy j. { : ..\ C': : d; r.; C : Ut£ :
; ' . ■ s- ", , 1 , *• , “ ’ * ■ - ~ „
* , Sr' . . . 7 ~ ~
v$r v
*/' ■'< r ‘ ■
H ■ f
-
'- -- - . > r ;,_ -. -..-■ U , - < ■-,-
. •
<r
■ -•r-v'-’ ’ - - .
■
' ,'** ,,'/■-- - - f
i -v. "-s -■„• :-■ - ■-,;.»;•
tsSfeax .'TiiSgSH-’
-/• y '■'■-■;■■- y '■ . ■ ‘ •;. ■■ , " - ->■ ■
,?> ■>: '•'• :-* P^:-.
. v-.ly- y-/ y
■
~ s i .r v
r- i - ' * -
? ; '•
■
> . ••. > ' f ' t k . y y -;-^h
; V> > y ~
. . r; -W - *
•;.
if - -,vf. < . « jxajrj
• ;>.v,- ic;-,'' / -
•> ;/i V. r-. ■'
: ■ 737*'•/ -' ■■■■
‘‘Vvl-V'C
;
■ 'rtt >'$&$ *
y -.
-;7.>
/' i-^T^v
Mili
• - > >J
'■ »
4s>
;,,^
■
-’■ V'-’’
v : V!-- $*%£
; .,t'
.<„ ---Jx:::*, .y^ 1 :
i ' -
■:
:■■■■■ '•• U- f,~
;S
-
,
■-Jt : rji v - ' *' • :■-' ,&C
f>
, * 7 * ~&
•
■ 7''V" ' iPt* . ~ i?* ! '■
■'
- >7^;r«.' / '- ■ - ■
'• ’;■- .:■. ' ,V , ■ •
r-.-.'S: .W--
,S
7; • ' -* :'■■ 'i.,
’r*<i*s-1-?'-.- ':
';‘ v - /■>•/’>•'.'.■•
■ • 4-. ' - - - v
‘
■
"--w.' v/° ~ X "- "* v ' , v .;■
•
■ vi • " 7 ■ ' ■ ■'■• • ■ : K .'
' - ; - -'
• ■ , ■•■:-:■: V , ,,•
• •
' ; ' , . - ' - , . . 4,
■ - .. ■ - , ' v
•Vi- -V ; . „ •■. , , . - : ■■ • -■
5 ■ ’ . "5- -s : :j~ ’ 'v.
, - ~, ■ ■ . ‘ . y- > .
:-y - -■■■■„■ ' y. : ■■■ v -- -V-. ~»■ V'
, > r * , \ * ■ ■ - , ; _. ■ ■
>V'-v:v‘-. - :x'" / ■ ...• <:
- ' - . '• y • . ' • - •: - » ■•■■■■ . »
.
■■■- • ■ ■ '
'
.* , • V, ; -■ ■ ■ . ~ „
~; *'"*•*; ... 1 4% f; v V' ’ V-' -
-,r'/ . ■■ ' ,
;4. -•- - 7r—''- .•> ■; •--•• ’ • • -••• .: • »- ■;
■ ' v -( ■■■■ ■ ■ ./‘-y *.v . /*-• .
. ■■ ■ / • ■ -■ - ' • Js. "" S ■■ •• V - ,
'
■
.v.- >-•• . ■ ‘ *'
... - • ■ - - - ■ . - ■ .-■•
- ■ •• •. v-Lj-.i- --«r ' • :* •j' f •' • ■ . - ' ■ rv;' ?. ?i :
