

f/3 7$ 7
Address written for the feaupratifflr^^
OF THE
Burke and Wills Statue.
Afar!
Mid the silence of Australia’s central wastes
Their ashes lay whose monument we honour here ;
Now gathered in our midst may they repose in peace,
While from henceforth by us and our posterity
Their resting place shall be accounted holy ground
And they who dared the perils of the wilderness
To learn its mystery, and knowing spar’d not
To use the costly measure of their life to mete
The nation’s heritage ; they who with dying lips
Proclaimed how rich and goodly is that heritage,
What save the living nation should remembrance them ?
Australia itself shall be their monument !
That monument is yet to rise ;
And to our hands and to our children’s hands,
The task is given to lay
Its broad foundations. Brethren,
See they are well and truly laid ;
Give place therein to Justice, Truth,
Wisdom and Mercy. Bear in mind
Ye may not rend the stones from out
The quarry of Futurity
By one blast of fierce excitement
But that they must be hewn and shap’d
By the daily, hourly, ceaseless chipping
Of your common lives. Let the workmanship
Deserve its destiny ! See that no flaw,
No careless stroke, no selfish idleness,
Betray the superstructure to a fall.
If ever at your task your hands
Should weary, or your hearts grow faint,
Come ye to this memorial
And courage draw from the heroic tale
Of men infirm and frail as ye,
Who in the wilderness toiled on—
In spite of loneliness, of weariness,
Of want, of nakedness—-
Till they achiev’d success ;


And who, when death approached
In place of recompence
Received him calmly since their work was done.
Yea, and for further stimulanty^/^’
Would that ye knew and realised
The value and responsibility
Of individual life !
As are the particles,
So is the aggregate,
A nation’s form’d of individuals,
And is that which they are.
As in ocean depths the coral worm,
Fash’ning its cell, foundeth a continent,
So ye, whilst shap’ning your affairs,
Do found an Empire. Such consciousness
Would dignify the petty cares
The anxious hopes and fears
The ceaseless harassings
Of the daily strife for bread;
Would make you honest, brave,
Patient and striving in adversity ;
Kind and courteous in prosperity ;
And always of thought, word and deed,
Watchfully reverent;
For who in such an edifice would build
Dishonour, or a lie ?
The springs of England’s greatness : where are
For speak of Empire, and our thoughts
Unconsciously revert to her
Our glorious Mother !
Flid in the sunken graves of men,
Who in an earlier
And a less genial hour of the world’s day,
On Roman courage and self-sacrifice,
On Saxon industry
And Norman enterprise
Did graft the love of Christ,
Who served their God as David served,
With earnestness, though all imperfectly,
Who ever as the strengthening light,
A brighter gleam did cast upon
Some precept misinterpreted ;
And ever as the wid’ning range of thought
Gave clearer glimpses of
The Father’s purposes,
With penitential zeal and loving haste
Made practice follow knowledge
So generations toiled, and as they toiled,


Their savour brin’d the lump,
And England’s glory grew ;
Till in her homes were nursed
Babes who to giant manhood grown,
Grand stirring words of truth and liberty
Peeled forth in such stentorian tones
As startled Europe from degen’rate sleep.
Even in these, our days,
Their echoes sharply ring ;
Yea, and they shall reverberate
Adown the aisles of time while men exist.
Still did her glory grow, and still it grows;
And now the task seems nigh accomplished,
Since England’s name doth"head the roll
Of nation heraldry.
Standing where we do stand, and marking well
How firmly rests the present on the past
We are constrained to say, yea, verily,
Those men did found th’ Empire.
Read not the record of their deeds in vain,
For what our fathers did unwittingly
We consciously perform ;
And if in thought we nurse the hope
That this Australia, in time to come,
May stand the first in the band of stalwart sons
Who, infants now clustering round her knee
Shall solace England’s age ;
And claiming precedence,
E’en of the scions of still older race,
May from her failing hand receive
L ruth’s flag, find lead th’ advancing world,
Remember and believe
This truth immutable
Our noblest are our servants ! Teach’t your sons
And bid them teach their sons, and their sons’ sons,
For he alone hath power to rear
That ponderous banner,
And with unfaltering step to lead the van
In that triumphal march whose soul
Bears truest reflex of the Deity.
Oh, nation in that place of pride
Stretch forth no hand to reign !
The excellence which dazzleth thee to-day
Is but a typal shadow of
The excellence to-morrow shall behold.
Still grasp the solemn truth by which thou climbed’st
And its duality will humble thee
Our noblest are our servants ; Earth’s


The theatre of man’s development
And nationality
Only the gardener’s art
Which tends the choicer seed
E’en as the past doth underlie thy roots
And thou drawest thence rich essences
With which to blend thine own experience
And therewith build thyself, who art
The glory of thine age. So must thou lay
The precious things which by life’s growth
Thou did’st eliminate
From past and present at the future’s foot,
To be rewrought in more majestic forms
dhan thine intelligence can dream.
Yet friends sigh not for this
Nor yet be sorrowful
Is it not well that good should die
If better take its place ? Nay friends, rejoice,
For though each sep’rate wave hath its recoil,
The tide of Progress knows no ebb,
But floweth on for ever ! Yea ;
And we are immortal!
And with the latter born shall share
The glory and the gladness of
Earth’s harvest home ! Our heart’s shall throb
With triumph and our voices swell the shout
As spirit-reapers bear the sheaves of Time
Into the garners of Eternity.
JANET O’CONNOR,
Ballarat,
