

Ipjbress of tlit %xnstus
OF THE
MELBOURNE PUBLIC LIBRARY:
Presented to His Excellency Sir Henry Barlcly, K.C.8., Governor-in-Chief of the Colony of Victoria, on the opening
of the Museum of Art, on Friday, May 24 th, 1861, being the Birth-day of Her Most Gracious Majesty,
Queen Victoria; with His Excellency s reply.
Since the occasion upon which you were pleased to open the Queen’s Room, the Trustees have been
enabled to make such further progress in completing a portion of the left wing of the building as to have it now in
their power to invite your Excellency to declare the first Chamber of the Museum of Art ready for the reception of
the public. In doing so they cannot refrain from expressing their regret that it was not in their power to claim
your assistance earlier.
However, it is not unknown to you that the funds voted for the purpose were small, and that they were
placed at the disposal of the Trustees at considerable intervals of time.
You are, moreover, aware, that it was necessary to send to Europe for the objects which form the
collection. Of these, many were procured from various parts of the Continent. The selection required much
discrimination, the execution of the orders much care and attention. The transit of the instructions and of
the objects occupied many months.
Under these circumstances, then, the Trustees may be absolved from the charge of having caused any
unnecessary delay or unreasonably disappointed public expectation.
On the 24th of May, 1859, when the Trustees last had the honor of addressing you, the number of books
on the shelves was 13,214. The number this day is 27,240.
Letters recently received, announce that 1800 may be expected to arrive within the ensuing four months,
so that at the close of this year the number in the Library will reach, if not exceed, 29,000 volumes.
Experience has shown that the classification and distribution of the different departments of literature, as
suggested by the Librarian, Mr. Tulk, has proved alike convenient to the public and beneficial to individual students.
The resources of the Library on any subject may be discovered at a glance, and the wants and desires of
all being ascertained, provision can be made to meet the demands of any particular section of visitors, as far as
the necessity for maintaining the balance in favour of the general body of readers will allow ; while the flexibility of
the system will admit of the gradual expansion of the arrangement without any material disturbance of the general
plan.
When the Catalogue, now in course of preparation for the press, is printed, it will form a guide-book of
reference such as has long been required and often demanded by the visitors, and it will show that a watchful circum-
spection has been exercised, so that the various classes of literature should be respectably represented.
It is not proper to detain you, Sir, by particular allusion to any of the works with which the Library has
been enriched of late. You have had opportunities of judging, during the frequent visits with which you have
favored us, of the merits of many which are costly and rare. \ou will have seen that these have recommended
themselves, not solely because they are scarce and expensive, but because they possess a value admitted in all
communities, and because they are held in peculiar estimation here, consisting chiefly of the productions of writers
who have explored and illustrated those arts and sciences which are calculated to draw forth and increase the natural
wealth of our adopted land, and to advance social improvement with the elevation and refinement ot principle and
thought.
You will be gratified, doubtless, to learn that the Trustees have received many important donations.
Several private individuals have exercised a most laudable generosity.


The Governors General of India and Canada, and the Governments of Switzerland, Belgium, and the
United States of America, through the respective Consuls of those nations, have contributed many useful works, some
of which are not to be procured through other channels.
The Directors of the British and Foreign Bible Society, with a liberality which has been thankfully
acknowledged, presented 153 copies of the Sacred Writings, translated into as many different tongues ; and a
complete copy of all the publications from the Patent Office has, after renewed solicitations, been obtained.
When it is borne in mind that two copies of this great national work, comprised in upwards of 1800 large
octavo volumes, have been already bestowed on this country —one given to the library of the Houses of Parliament,
the other to the office of the Registrar-General —the unusual presentation of a third copy to this Institution must be
regarded as highly complimentary.
With this excellent addition to the mechanical and scientific works, equivalent in money value alone to
three thousand five hundred pounds, but in other icspects inestimable, it has become more demonstratively essential
that a separate apartment for study and reference should be erected.
Without such a room, in which unrestrained and uninterrupted access to the authorities can be had by
those pursuing complex or abstruse questions connected with art, science, and the various branches of industry which
constantly arise, the books are divested of much of their intrinsic value ; while members of the different learned
professions those in search of technical and practical information afforded by reference to maps, plans, and
drawings,—and those who for literary purposes would wish to make extracts written in ink (the use of which is as
yet necessarily prohibited), complain frequently, loudly, and with reason, that they are denied the opportunity
of turning to the best account the choice works which the Library contains, and which as copies have been
procured at the public expense, it cannot be expected that private individuals will buy for themselves.
These inconveniences and obstructions the Trustees have been most anxious to relieve and remove, but
unfortunately the urgent representations pressed by them on behalf of the public have not met with the ready
acceptance which was expected.
It is not to be denied that the demands upon the general revenues of the State are large, and it is self-
evident that the occupation of so extensive an area of Country as is included within the boundaries of this Province
has entailed upon its inhabitants burthens with which other communities equal in number are unacquainted. Still,
it is not unbecoming to appeal to those who disburse the three millions of income at the disposal of the Representatives
of half a million of people, in order that they should vindicate the principles of political wisdom, by placing upon a
really efficient basis establishments founded to educate the people up to the right enjoyment of political freedom ,
which is to be done only by enlarging the sphere of usefulness of those establishments, as the just claims of their
supporters are temperately put forth, and by tbe exercise of a judicious bounty, and even munificence, giving that
direction to popular instruction, which will prove the best safeguard against the encroachments of ignorance or vice.
The success of the circulating department has been as complete as could have been expected, regard being
had to the limited means employed, and the confined area to which the operations of the Trustees have been practically
limited by Parliament.
The number of duplicate volumes lent out of the Library is about one thousand, they have been distributed
in cases, containing about two hundred volumes each, to the Mechanics’ and other Literary Institutes of the different
suburban municipalities situated within a radius of ten miles from Melbourne. Ihese have been removed from and
returned to the Institute at the expense of the borrowers, who, furthermore, pay for insuring the books while in their
possession, and for having them collated when the period of the loan expires.
Notwithstanding the restricted nature of these Societies (supported as they are by private subscriptions),
the Directors have allowed all persons who may visit the places in which these volumes are deposited to have access to
them with the same absence of restraint and inducements to study which prevail here.
The regularity with which they have been sent back, and the excellent condition in which they have been
returned, prove clearly that an absolute reliance may be placed on an honourable fulfilment of the terms on which
they have been lent, The anxiety shown for the issue of a further supply, and the numerous applications from
different remote parts of the interior for the extension of the privilege, amply justify the belief that if the Trustees
had been empowered to carry out the project on the comprehensive scale originally proposed by them, the influence
of the parent library would ere this have diffused itself through those and other districts also.


Had their expectations on this branch of their labours been realised, instead of stating that they have been
reluctantly compelled to refuse compliance with such applications, they might have had the satisfaction of reporting
that this Institution had assumed the position of a National Establishment for adult voluntary instruction, and
literary, professional, and scientific improvement of the highest order—and that at the present time it had
completed its communication with many Local Societies established for a similar purpose, which in affiliation with
it were working together in harmony to fulfil the same great end.
They may be permitted to express a hope that a due consideration of the superior economy of such a mode
of employing portions of the revenue devoted to the support of literary pursuits, as well as a prudent regard for the
general interests of the community at large, will lead to the consummation of the desire which the Trustees have
entertained.
According to statistics obligingly furnished the inhabitants of the suburban municipalities are
Collingwood ... ... . ... ... ... ... 21,397
Prahran... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 8,165
St. Kilda ... 4,763
Brighton ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,721
Williamstown ... ... ... ... ••• - 3,536
Kew and Hawthorne ... ... ... ... ... 2,400
Total 42,982
A considerable proportion of the members of this population has thus participated directly, though without
its walls, in the benefits of this Library, and should therefore be taken into account with the enumeration of actual
readers who have availed themselves of its advantages within. Of these latter the numbers have increased with the
enlargement of the building, and the additions to the collection in a ratio which it may interest you to hear.
As taken from the books, in which the names are inscribed by the readers themselves, they appear as
follows ;
1856 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23,769
1857 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42,226
1858 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 77,925
1859 127,887
* 1860 (eleven months) ... ... ... .- ••• 162,115
1861 (three months) ... ... ... ... ••• 41,850
* This exceeds the number of readers at the British Museum in the year 1857.
Let it not be assumed that this large number of persons is composed of an assemblage impelled hither by
an idle curiosity, or of those who come to while away hours for which there is no other employment than a species of
weak and frivolous mental dissipation. The steady increase shows that there must be some more sterling attraction.
The works here are not of a character to yield such shadowy entertainment; they present, rather, that substantial
food which turns the minds towards worthier aims than those gross pleasures which enslave the senses; which begets
a relish and creates a veneration for letters, and causes those who partake to revert to it with unsatiated appetite
and ever increasing satisfaction.
Passing from this topic, the attention of your Excellency is requested to the subject more immediately
requiring your observation—the Museum of Art.
The primary idea entertained by the Trustees, in recommending the formation ot this department, had
reference to the establishment of a School of Design, in which would be assembled types of those choice productions
of genius by the ancient sculptors, which have been alike the astonishment and delight of ages.
This in a country such as ours, so far removed from the seat of such uistinguished works, would, with the
different other efforts of genius to be associated with them, much assist in moulding the public taste, creating
betimes in the young an appreciation of what was correct and beautiful, and thus inducing a respect for the
refinement which is the characteristic of those people amongst whom the spirit of liberty and an acquaintance
with the true uses of wealth have fostered art.
/VI


JWrp
B(6lllO
f 1 4.4.11
ti cqm
1 With this view casts of some of the best known works of antiquity have been procured. They arrived
here much mutilated by injuries received on the voyage, but the skill and patient labour of Mr. Summers (himself
an accomplished sculptor), have wrought a complete restoration.
It is to be lamented that they do not appear under conditions as favourable for their exhibition as in
justice to them is to be desired ; however, the acquisition is so novel to some, and awakens sensations of admiration
in so many, that the general wish to have them displayed in a building more suitable for their reception may lead to
such provision being made at no very distant day.
What you have seen forms but a small part of what the collection will be—the remainder, which has
not yet arrived, consists of objects of equal interest. It embraces, moreover, many remarkable illustrations of
Works of artistical excellence, which the ingenuity and felicity of modern scientific invention have multiplied,
to lend their charms to those denied the opportunity of dwelling on the sublime originals.
Thus far, Sir, we have proceeded in the willing discharge of the duties with which we have been
honoured.
Ours is the silent pleasure of ministering to those wants and those aspirations which it should be the
endeavour of every just Government to supply and to cherish.
Ours the solid satisfaction that we are helping to make good citizens, useful and faithful subjects of Her
Most Gracious Majesty, the anniversary of whose birth we this day celebrate with genuine loyalty —a loyalty which
is on this occasion moderated by a chastened respect for her exemplary affections, now clouded by the event which
has cast a passing shadow over the fortunes of her illustrious house.
JUUW'-
His Excellency Sir Henry Ba.rkly replied in the following terms
Sir Redmond Barry and Gentlemen, —Although no inattentive observer of the rapid progress of the Public
Library, I am equally surprised and delighted to learn from the statistics just quoted, that during the brief space of
two years, which has elapsed since I had the pleasure of opening the Queen's Reading Room, the collection of books
upon its shelves has been more than doubled, whilst the number of readers has increased in an even larger
proportion. g
I cannot doubt that the official announcement of such facts will lead to your speedily obtaining from the
guardians of the public purse, the funds so evidently requisite to provide extended accommodation, as well as to
carry out the enlightened yet practical view which the Trustees entertain of rendering this the central source of
intellectual development for the Province at large.
To cramp such a noble Institution by withholding the few thousands necessary for its completion, whilst
tens of thousands are appropriated to less imporUmt or less worthy objects, must, I am confident, strike all who have
the welfare of the people at heart, as poor economy.
With regard to the particular which we are assembled on this festal anniversary to perform,
there can be no question that the Trustees have conferred an inestimable boon on this community, by directing their,
attention thus early to procuring good casts of the most celebrated Statues and Bassi-Relievi of ancient and modern
times ; and I most earnestly trust that the Gallery of Sculpture about to be thrown open, may be destined to form the
foundation of a Museum of the Fine Arts suited alike to the wants and the resources of the Australian continent.
It is the first step at any rate, as you have pointed out, towards the establishment of a School of Design,
in which the future artificers and manufacturers of Victoria may be imbued with purity of taste and correct
principles of beauty.
Its enjoyments however will extend to all classes and all ages, from the Students in our Schools or at our
University, who may here realize the poetic fancies of classical literature, and gather illustrations of what they read
in Hesiod or in Homer, in Virgil or in Ovid, —to the accomplished citizen of the world, who will rejoice to be thus
reminded in this distant realm, where he has perhaps come to spend the evening of his life, of those forms of beauty
and masterpieces of art, with which he was so familiar in younger days amid kindred climes of Greece or Italy.
Congratulating the Trustees on the auspicious commencement of so grand a design, I now formally declare
the Museum of Art open to the public.


JWP
Eifcllio
p 1 4,4-11
K com
1 With this view casts of some of the
here much mutilated by injuries received on the voyage, but
an accomplished sculptor), have wrought a complete restora
It is to be lamented that they do not appear
best know
justice to them is to be desired ; however, the acquisition
in so many, that the general wish to have them displayed ii
such provision being made at no very distant day.
What you have seen forms but a small part ol
not yet arrived, consists of objects of equal interest. It
Works of artistical excellence, which the ingenuity and
to lend their charms to those denied the opportunity of
Thus far, Sir, we have proceeded in the will:
honoured.
Ours is the silent p;
endeavour of everv iust Gov
Ours is the silent pleasure of ministering to tli
endeavour of every just Government to supply and to
Ours the solid satisfaction that we are helping t
Most Gracious Majesty, the anniversary of whose birth we'
is on this occasion moderated by a chastened respect for I
has cast a passing shadow over the fortunes of her illustri
-aaaATJVVvw
His Excellency Sir Henry Bxrkly replied in the following terms
Sir Redmond Barry and Gentlemen, —Although no inattentive observer of the rapid progress of the Public
Library, I am equally surprised and delighted to learn from the statistics just quoted, that during the brief space of
two years, which has elapsed since I had the pleasure of opening the Queen's Reading Room, the collection of books
upon its shelves has been more than doubled, whilst the number of readers has increased in an even larger
proportion. %
I cannot doubt that the official announcement of such facts will lead to your speedily obtaining from the
guardians of the public purse, the funds so evidently requisite to provide extended accommodation, as well as to
carry out the enlightened yet practical view which the Trustees entertain of rendering this the central source of
intellectual development for the Province at large.
To cramp such a noble Institution by withholding the few thousands necessary for its completion, whilst
tens of thousands are appropriated to less important or less worthy objects, must, I am confident, strike all who have
the welfare of the people at heart, as poor economy.
With regard to the particular which we are assembled on this festal anniversary to perform,
there can be no question that the Trustees have conferred an inestimable boon on this community, by directing their.
attention thus early to procuring good casts of the most celebrated Statues and Bassi-Relievi of ancient and modern
times ; and I most earnestly trust that the Gallery of Sculpture about to be thrown open, may be destined to form the
foundation of a Museum of the Fine Arts suited alike to the wants and the resources of the Australian continent.
It is the first step at any rate, as you have pointed out, towards the establishment of a School of Design,
in which the future artificers and manufacturers of Victoria may be imbued with purity of taste and correct
principles of beauty.
Its enjoyments however will extend to all classes and all ages, from the Students in our Schools or at our
University, who may here realize the poetic fancies of classical literature, and gather illustrations of what they read
in Hesiod or in Homer, in Virgil or in Ovid, —to the accomplished citizen of the world, who will rejoice to be thus
reminded in this distant realm, where he has perhaps come to spend the evening of his life, of those forms of beauty
and masterpieces of art, with which he was so familiar in younger days amid kindred climes of Greece or Italy.
Congratulating the Trustees on the auspicious commencement of so grand a design, I now formally declare
the Museum of Art open to the public.
