

■ ' ",
■
'f ■
ADDBESS
TO THE
OP THE
ON THE SUBJECT OF
(With Appendix not hitherto published).
HONORABLE MEMBERS
Jbgtrfatert ul[ Titkijiir,
THE GOLD DISCO YEEY
FEBRUARY 12, 1851,
E. H. HARGRAVES,
ifcjjlfneg:
J. G. O’CONNOR, PRINTER & PUBLISHER, 26 JAMISON STREET.
1881.
F/Pzt* g-




h iiss/F'oAfc£
16877
TWELFTH EDITION
( With an Appendix never before published,)
Issued February 12, 1881, the Thirtieth Anniversary of the
Discovery of gold in New South Wales, which then included
the Colonies of Victoria and Queensland.
ADDRESS
Gentlemen, —I feel it due to the people of Victoria,
of whom you are the representatives, as well as to
myself, to remind you that an act of justice lias yet
to be performed towards me by your Government on
account of my gold discovery on the 12th February,
1851.
It is my object in now addressing you to point out
that Victoria is under an obligation to me, in respect of
my public services. wh ; yet been fulfilled,
and to express my that the honor of your
colony is concerned in the satisfaction of that obligation
—a conviction shared by many whose opinions are
entitled to the highest respect, and who have made
themselves thoroughly acquainted with the facts of the
case. I will briefly indicate the grounds on which I lay
my claim, as a matter of right and justice, to additional
compensation from your Government for my services in
respect of the gold discovery, and trust you will give
them such consideration as befits men to whom not only
the purse but the honor of your colony has been entrusted.


Having gone to California shortly after the discovery
of gold in that country, I made a close observation of
the external features and geological structure of the
gold-producing districts there, and became convinced
that certain portions of New South Wales, situated in
the Great Dividing Range, with which I was well
acquainted, were also auriferous. I therefore immediately
returned to Sydney, with the express purpose of verifying
my conclusions and opening up to the colonists the
sources of wealth which, I felt sure, existed in abundance
in the western districts, and all along the range common
to both New South Whales and Victoria.
Ho w I succeeded and what have been the immediate
and direct results of my discovery are matters of history ;
but my negotiations with the Government and their
promises to me, both before and after I made it public,
may not be so well known, and I therefore beg your
attention to the following facts :
In the course of my treaty with the Government of
New South Wales (which, be it remembered, then
included the present colony of Victoria) respecting the
terms on which I would disclose and make available the
discovery I had effected, I addressed to the then Colonial
Secretary, the late Sir E. Deas Thomson, a letter, dated
3rd April, 1851, in which, after stating that I had “ made
very satisfactory discoveries of the existence of the
precious metal in several localities on crown lands,” and
that my first discovery was ’~ o de on the 12th February
(then) last, I proceeded to —“ I have now the honor
to submit, for the early consideration of the Government,
the following propositions, viz. : —Tiiat if it should please
the Government to award to me in the first instance
£SOO as a compensation (e'.e., for the expenses I had
incurred in making the exploration) I will point out the
localities to any officer or officers they may appoint, and
will undertake to realise to the Government my repre-
sentations, and will leave it to the generosity of the
Government, after the importance of my discoveries and
disclosures have been ascertained, to make me an


additional reward commensurate with the benefit likely
to accrue to the Government and the country.” In reply
to this letter, I received the following communication :
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney,
15th April, 1851.
“ Sir,
In reply to your letter of the 3rd instant, l am directed by the Governor
to inform you that his Excellency cannot say more at present than that the
remuneration for the discovery of gold on Crown lands, referred to by you,
mustentirely depend on its nature and value when made known, and be left to the
liberal consideration, which the Government would be disposed to give it.
I have, &c.,
E. Deas Thomson.”
These were the terms on which I made my discovery
public. I performed my part of the stipulation to the
full extent of its letter and spiritand now, I ask, have
I been dealt with as liberally as I had a right to expect
from the distinct promise in the agreement above stated ?
Considering that the gold-mines have produced an
amount of wealth exceeding £200,000,000 sterling to
New South Wales and Victoria within the last twenty-
three years, the sum of £20,000 cannot surely be regarded
as too large a reward for my services. And considering
also that the opening of the Victorian gold-fields was the
immediate and necessary result of the discovery of 12th
February, 1851; and further that Victoria, at that time,
was a part of N. S. Wales, and therefore bound by the
stipulations entered into by its then Govenment, and that
it has been benefitted by the discovery to a larger extent
than N. S. Whales, was it not reasonable to assert that the
former was bound to contribute at least a moiety to the
sum referred to ? In point of fact it was perfectly
understood, at the time when my claim was first submitted
to the N. S., Wales Legislature, that £2.0,000 was the
amount at which the reward should be fixed; but, as in
the meantime the separation of the two colonies had
taken place, New South Wales contented itself with
awarding me £IO,OOO, there being no reason to suppose
that the Victorian Government would refuse to contribute
the other moiety ; but quite the contrary.. The
Governor-General, Sir Charles A. Eitzroy, recom~


mended my claim on the Government in the
strongest terms; and in equally strong terms the Governor
of Victoria recommended it to the most favorable
consideration of the Victorian Legislature, a select
committee of which reported in favor of my re-
ceiving £IO,OOO. Indeed, the Victorian Government has
never directly repudiated their liability in this respect,
although I have in vain endeavored up to this time to
obtain a settlement. I have visited Melbourne ten times
for that purpose, at an expense of upwards of £IOOO. I
have proved the justice of my claim beyond dispute, and
am able to satisfy any doubt that may exist, or meet any
objection that may be urged against its fairness or equity.
On the last occasion when my case came before the
Victorian Assembly, my claim was refused by only a bare
majority—twenty-one to nineteen —and, considering all
the circumstances connected with the discussion of that
application (but to which it is unnecessary here to refer),
I think the result is at all events a prima facie proof that
my claim rested on a reasonable foundation. The most
influential and enlightened portion of the press in both
colonies has always been in my favor, and the states-
men in both colonies who are most cognizant of the
circumstances, have repeatedly and distinctly asserted
the justice and equity of my title to the additional
compensation I ask for.
When the question of my reward was first entertained
by the Legislature of Victoria, a sum of £IO,OO0 —being
equal to that awarded by New South Wales —was, as I
have stated, recommended by a select committee to be
paid to me on the part of the first mentioned colony.
But other claimants having put forward applications for
reward in respect of services in connection with the
development of the gold discovery, the amount so pro-
posed to be awarded to me was cut down to £SOO0 —the
remaining moiety being distributed in equal proportions
among these other claimants. I extract a passage from
“ Dicker’s Mining Record,” of 15th August, 1867, to
show how these gentlemen and myself have been respec-


£
£
8.
d.
Mr. Hargraves, 1855...
• •••
...
...
... 5000.
..2381
0
0
Balance of reward still unpaid
...
...
..2619
0
0
Rev. W. B. Clarke, 1855
• • •••
... 1000.
.. 476
4
0
Further reward, 1861
• • •••
• ••
• •• •
623
16
0
Mi-. Michel and others, 1855
... 1000.
.. 476
4
0
Further reward, 1861
• • ...
... •
.. 523
16
0
Mr. Hiscock, 1855
• • •••
• ••
... 1000.
.. 476
4
0
Further reward, 1861
• • •••
• ••
. .
.. 523
16
0
Mr. Esmond, 1855
• • •••
... 1000.
. 476
4
0
Further reward, 1861
• • •••
• ••
• •• •
.. 523
16
0
J. Mechosk and others 1855.
• • ...
... '1000.
. 476
4
0
Further reward, 1861 .
M
...
...
. 523
16
0
tively dealt with —“ The sister colony voted him (Mr.
Hargraves) £10,000; and in 1851 a committee was
appointed in Victoria to consider the claims of the dis-
coverers of gold-fields, and the following amounts were
recommended to be paid, as given in the first column —
Owing to the financial crisis which occurred in 1854-5,
only moieties of these amounts were paid Mr.
Hargraves received £2381, and the others £476 4s. each.
When, subsequently, in 1861, the balance of the money
was paid to the other claimants, Mr. Hargraves’ claim
alone was left unsatisfied.” The editor adds—“ By the
gold discovery this colony has been raised, in the short
space of fifteen years, from a mere sheep-walk to be the
second colony in the British Dominions. Thirteen years
ago the colony resolved to reward the man who had been
the main instrument in bringing this about with the
munificent grant of £5OOO. An instalment of less than
half that sum was paid in 1855 ; and, after an interval
of twelve years, he has been again allowed to unsuccess-
fully urge his claim for the balance. It is so great a
wrong —that of leading any individual to suppose himself
entitled to public acknowledgement for ever allowing
him to urge his claim, and so often defeating it —that
we consider even the ultimate voting the money will be
no honest equivalent. Dive thousand pounds for the
practical discovery of the gold-fields of Australia ! It is
less than the value of a single washing of one of our
Ballarat companies.”
In the last session of the Parliament of this colony I
was voted an annuity of £250 for life, in consideration of


the inadequacy of the remuneration I had hitherto received
for my services—that sum being equivalent to the
interest on £SOOO. I consider that the Government of
New South Wales has fully done its part in satisfaction
of my claim, on the supposition that in all probability
I should not receive from Victoria more than the sum of
£SOOO, which, as stated above, was voted to me by your
Assembly, but of which I have received only £2381,
although the other claimants have received the sums
awarded to them in full. I take leave to add that I
have been put to much vexation, expense and disappoint-
ment in the prosecution of my claim in your colony.
Under these circumstances, I cannot see how it can be
denied that I am entitled at least to the balance of the
£SOOO from Victoria—and that with interest from the
time the other balances were paid. And I respectfully
submit that the responsibility accepted by Victoria of
contributing its share to the satisfaction of that claim
should be carried into full effect on the basis of the
contract and understanding above stated.
I have now briefly placed the facts before you, and
submit them respectfully to your sense of justice, fully
hoping that your honorable House will take the matter
up, and save your colony from the reproach of illiberality
and unfairness to the person who, under God, has been
the instrument to which it is mainly indebted for its
present greatness and prosperity.
I have the honor to be, Gentlemen,
Your most obedient Servant,,
EDWARD HAMMOND HARGRAVES.


APPENDIX.
VICTORIA, 1853-4.
Report from the Select Committee of the Legislative Council on the
claims for the discovery of gold in Victoria, (D.—No. 17, a.) “ Draft report,”
paragraph 19. “ Considering that the gold discovery has advanced this
Colony a century in progress, has placed it first in position of all the Austra-
lian Colonies, and materially benefitted it much more than New South Wales,
y our Committee recommend that a sum equal to what has already been voted
by that Colony should be presented to Mr. Hargraves.” Note, £lO,OOO.
FINAL REPORT.
“ That Mr. Hargraves returned to the Colony from California, for the
express purpose of searching for gold, and that he succeeded in discovering gold
deposits, and taught parties how to construct and use the apparatus required.
And it is known that since success has shown the soundness of his views as
to the richness of the Goldfields of Australia, he has steadily refused many
valuable opportunities of remunerating avocations—trusting for his reward to
the honor of the Government and the gratitude of his fellow colonists. To
say that Mr. Hargraves’ discoveries led to the discovery of the Goldfields of
Victoria is merely another mode of stating that the great dividing range,
which stretches from one colony to the other, is rich in auriferous deposits.
Without doubt, on the first discovery of the northern diggings, a considerable
number of our laboring population was drawn thither ; but the infinitely
greater evil of emigration to California was stopped at once. Nor is it pro-
bable that the migration to the Sydney district would have been more
than temporary, even had the Victorian diggings not been discovered ;
for it does not appear that either Tasmania or South Australia complain of
their proximity to the mineral riches of Victoria. Your Committee are
therefore of opinion that the person who has opened out to us the road to our
apparently exhaustless treasures, with a noble disinterestedness, unexampled
in history, should receive a liberal reward. Considering that the gold discovery
has advanced this Colony a century in progress, has placed it first in position
of all the Australian Colonies, and materially benefitted much more than New
Soufh Wales, your Committee recommend that the sum of £SOOO should be
presented to Mr. Hargraves, and that the sum of £IOOO should be awarded to
the Rev. W. B. Clarke, in appreciation of his researches into the mineral
wealth of the country.”
NOTE. —Committee recommended in same report, £IOOO each to four
other persons who discovered gold in Victoria. ( Vide pamphlet).
“ L* closing this report, your Committee would observe that their sittings
have been protracted to an unusual length, through their anxiety to examine
thoroughly a very complicated subject, involving many conflicting claims, by
means of evidence difficult of access, and frequently of an imperfect character.
They have been solicitous, also, not only to do justice to rival claimants, but to
form an accurate record of this interesting portion of the history of Victoria.
“ The discovery of the Victorian Goldfields has converted a remote de-
pendency into a country of world-wide fame ; it has attracted a population,
extraordinary in number, with unprecedented rapidity ; it has enhanced the


“ Committee Rooms, 10th March, 1854.”
B/6UO
fIOSA%
J, G. O’Connor, Printer, 2G Jamison Street, Sydney.
value of property to an enormous extent; it has made this the richest country
in the world ; and, in less than three years, it has done for this Colony the
work of an age, and made its impulses felt in the most distant regions of the
earth.
“ (Signed) A. F. A. GREEVES,
“ Chairman.
NOTE.—Report adopted by the Council, and the £5OOO placed on the
amended Supplementary Estimate of expenditure for the service of the year
1854.
E. H. H.
Amended Supplementary Estimates of Expenditure, 1854, Victoria, page 7.
Gratuity to Mr. Hargraves, £5OOO
Gratuity to Mrs. Chisholm, £5OOO.
NOTE.—Mr. Hargraves paid, £2381
Mrs. Chisholm the full amount voted.
E. H. H.
MEMO.—On the discovery of the Californian Goldfields the Governor-
General, (the late Sir Charles Augustus Fitzroy), with
the Secretary of State for the Colonies suggesting that an experienced
Geologist should be sent out to examine the country, and _ set _at
rest as to whether New South Wales was auriferous or not, as the emigration
to California was depopulating the territory, and rendering property almost
valueless. With great promptness on the part of the Home authorities the
late Samuel Strutchbury, F.G.S., was selected, and on his arrival (1850) con-
ferred with the late Sir E. Deas Thomson and the Rev. W. B. Clark as to the
probabilities of finding gold in New South Wales, and his attention was
directed to the basin of the Macquarie, in the counties of Bathurst add Wel-
lington, and that gentleman was many months on the goldfields previous to
my arrival from California, but failed to discover gold, or any trace of it. I very
reluctantly mention this fact; but now do so in self-defence, as during my 17
months residence in Melbourne, recently, it has been said : “Well, Mr. Hargraves,
thebe is nothing in it, as, if you had not discovered the gold, some one else
would, and the claim is old.” “Yes,” I replied, “and more’s theshame it
should be called old. I have never ceased from year to year agitating it,
and urging for payment of a just debt. Had I slept on my claim till now,
I could understand it being said ‘ the claim is an old one.’” I cannot refrain
from characterising such reasoning as unjust and ungenerous and not in the
spirit of the Report of the Select Committee herein recited. If Columbus had
not discovered America, Harvey, the circulation of the blood, and Watt
discovered the steam engine, they would no doubt have been by some one
else ; but in my case it appeared a sort of forlorn hope to attempt to discover
gold in New South Wales after an experienced geologist, who had actually
lived on the gold-fields, had signally failed in the attempt. I trust I have
said enough to ensure the appointment of a Select Committee.
E. H. HARGRAVES, F.G.S.
12th February, 1881.




