





ADDRESS
DELIVERED TO THE
ROYAL SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
AT THE
ANNIVERSARY MEETING,
25th JUNE, 1873,
WITH AN APPENDIX.
THE REV. W. B. CLARKE, M.A., F.G.S., F.R.G.S.,
SYDNEY I THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




ss-rr
ANNIVERSARY ADDRESS,
Delivered 25th June, 1878, ly the Rey W. B. Clarke, M.A.,
F. G.S., F.F.G.S., tye., Vice-President.
Gentlemen oe the Eotal Society,—
The last, an introductory meeting, held on the 80th
May, in which we were interested and instructed by the exhibition
of numerous most ingenious and valuable instruments in the ser-
vice of spectroscopic and electric science, very ably described by
Professor Smith, reduced the amount of necessary official work
which would otherwise have occupied us this evening. Before I
proceed to address yon on the various topics which I propose to
bring to your notice, I must pause, in order to congratulate you
on the improved condition of our finances, and on the absence of
such losses by deaths of associates and friends of our Society as
it was my painful duty to introduce into the Anniversary Address
of 1872.
"We have, however, to regret the departure of one who was
only this morning laid in his grave—the President of the Legis-
lative Council, Sir Terence Aubrey Murray, —whose tastes were
literary and scientific, and whose name will now disappear from
the list of our members. To him, as a friend, who took an
interest in my own pursuits, with whom I have been officially
associated in advancing the Industrial Progress of the Colony,
and to whom I owe many personal attentions, I would desire to
record this brief tribute “ in memoriam
liss/f sito


I must also mention, with the thanks of the Council to the
respective authors, the independent valuable contributions to our
Transactions mentioned in the following list of papers read during
the last session. But, whilst so doing, I must not forget to
tender also our united acknowledgments to the (government, for
the acceptable aid they have rendered us in undertaking the
printing of the volume for 1872, which has relieved our Treasurer
of some anxiety, and given us fresh encouragement to persevere
in our otherwise unassisted work.
List of Papers read before the Poyal Society of New South Wales,
during the year 1872.
(1.) The Anniversary Address, by the Rev. W. B. Clarke,
M.A., E.G.S.
(2.) “ A Suggestion for an improvement in the projection of
Maps,” by the Eev. Thomas Horton. -
(3.) “On Australian Clems,” by George Milner Stephen,
Esq., E.G-.S.
(■l.) “Astronomical Notices,” by H. C. Russell, Esq., 8.A.,
E.R.A.S.
(5.) “ On the Coloured Cluster Stars about ‘Kappa Crucis,”
by H. C. Russell, Esq., 8.A., E.R.A.S.
(6.) “ On an improved method of separating Gold from
Argentic Chloride, as obtained in Gold-refining by
Chloride Gas,” by Dr. Leibius, of the Royal Branch
Mint.
(7.) “ Remarks on the fallacy of a certain method of assaying
Antimony Ores given by some Manuals of Assaying,”
by Dr. Leibius.
(8.) “ Remarks on Tin Ore, and what may appear like it,”
by Dr. Leibius.
(9.) “ Statistical Review of the Progress of New South
Wales in the last ten years, 1862-1871,” by Christopher
Rolleston, Esq., Auditor-General.
(10.) “On the Deniliquin Meteorite,” by Archibald Liver-
sidge, Esq., Reader in Geology, University of Sydney.


Discoyeet of Atjstealia.
Among the many interesting events that have recently invited
the attention of geographers at Home is one which ought to
awaken sympathy among ourselves. Certain opinions expressed
during a discussion some time ago in a colonial journal have, in
my humble judgment, done injustice to the claims to our respect
of the great circumnavigator, Captain Cook. Long ago, also, it
had been insinuated that Captain Cook was not the discoverer
of New South Wales, but that he borrowed the names and places on
his chart from a chart of some older navigator. It is frequently
the case that merit is denied to those who work for the public,
and unworthy judgments are passed by ill-natured critics. On
reading Mr. Major’s work, published by the Hakluyt Society, I
find the author has very properly quoted, in refutation of the
unjust surmise, the able and satisfactory defence of Captain
Cook’s reputation from the jealousies of an adversary, by M.
Metz, a Frenchman, published in the year 1805. M. Metz states
that Dalrymple never forgave Cook on account of his having
been preferred to himself in the command of the “Endeavour,” and
therefore he endeavoured himself to do Cook an injury, by trying
to show that localities named by him were to some extent very
much like places named by others in distant parts of the world.
The French author shows conclusively that it is perfectly foolish
to think that Cook could choose names that would betray
plagiarism of the kind. The particular object of my reference to
this matter is to lead to an earlier event in the history of
Australia, and to point out, from recent researches, to whom the
first discovery of it is to be assigned.
The Rev. Julian E. T. Woods, in his carefully compiled history
of the discovery and exploration of this great Country, has given
an excellent account of “ Early Voyages” to it, and stated in a
foot-note that he was indebted for many facts and quotations to
the work written by Mr. R. H. Major, and published by the
Hakluyt Society, in 1859. That work bears the title “ Early
Voyages to Terra Australis, now called Australia.” It consists


of an introduction, copies of charts, and various documents.
The author, who is a distinguished member of the Society of
Antiquaries, as well as a member of the Hakluyt Society, and
also one of the Secretaries of the Eoyal Geographical Society,
has for many years occasionally turned his attention to solving
the problem —“ Who discovered Australia ?”
About twelve years since, he had come to the conclusion that
the discovery was not made, as generally supposed, by a Dutch-
man, but by a Portuguese. He has more recently published
another paper, in the “ Transactions of the Society of Antiquaries,
which points to the discoverer in a very different direction. At
the time mentioned, he held as authentic that this great land was
first made known to Europeans by Manoel Godinho de Eredia, in
the year 1601. The supposed fact was founded on a comparison
of a MS. map and certain printed documents ; and more recently,
in the Burgundian Library, at Brussels, there has been found
the original report of Eredia, illustrated by charts and other
drawings.
In 1809, Mr. Major had pointed out the existence in the British
Museum of several Erench maps, in which the date of the
discovery was placed at an earlier period than 1601, the date of
the oldest map being 1542.
The names of places on the coast of Australia, called on the
charts “ Jave la Grande ,” were considered to be written in
“ Gallicized Portuguese” and hence the discovery was given to
Portugal.
Another map, of the date of 1531, still more recently has been
found, in which Australia is denominated “ Pegio Patalis ” by the
author, Oronce Eine, the Astronomer of Brian9on, Coincident
with this is the fact that, on the Portuguese maps of the period,
where Australia ought to have been, if discovered by that nation
at the time, there is a perfect blank. Mr. Major was, therefore,
induced to reconsider the idea of “ Gallicized Portuguese ,” and


soon came to the conclusion that instead, the names on the old
charts of “ Jave la Grande ” were written in the common idiom of
the Langue Eomane or Provempal—a language then spoken
commonly in the south of France. Moreover, it was found that
on one of the maps now in the War Office in Paris, bearing date
1555, the name of the author was the renowned Provengal
navigator Guillaume le Testu, a native of Grasse. The con-
clusion from these inquiries is, that the discovery of Australia is
due to France, and not to Portugal.
Sir H. C. Eawlinson, President of the Eoyal Geographical
Society, from whose Anniversary Address of 27th May, 1872,1
have taken, for brevity’s sake, the above particulars, states that
Mr. Major’s subsequent researches, communicated to him, remove
all doubt as to the claim of France to this discovery, and adds, —
“ We must own that the French are without a rival in the field.”
One of the curious points indicated is, that, “ Cap de Grace,”
on the French maps of “ Jave la Grande ,” was named in honor
of Le Testu, who describes himself on the chart as a native “ de la
ville JFrangoyse de Grace” It is satisfactory to be able to
announce the settlement of the disputed claim to the discovery
of this continent in favour of the great nation who have become
our neighbours, without in the very least infringing on the
satisfaction we ought to feel as Englishmen, that there is no well-
grounded claim to the discovery of the coast on which we reside
but that of the illustrious navigator whose services the members
of the Society which we ourselves represent have placed on record,
on the tablet erected by them to commemorate the event, at the
entrance of Botany Bay. (See Trans. Eoy. Soc. N.S.W., 1869,
p. 8.)
It is also satisfactory to have the pleasure of repeating this
announcement to the Society this evening, in the presence of the
Eepresentative of France in this Colony, who is about to be
elected a member of our body.


Eecent Exploeatioks ik Noetheek Austealia akd
Queekslakd.
(1.) From these greater events we may now turn to some more
recent local discoveries, made in the progress of settlement and
development. These are, respectively, on the west and east
sides of the Gulf of Carpentaria, in Arnheim’s Land, and in the
York Peninsula. The former is now familiarly known as the Port
Darwin country, a settlement there having heen mao.6 by South
Australia, which now holds it, though widely separated from it.
Some of its features are known to ns from the notices in the
public papers and reports respecting its supposed auriferous
character; and long ago I expressed an opinion in print that
gold might occur there, judging from the character of the rocks
which I had examined.
The whole of the country forming that part of Arnheim’s Land
appears to be a trough resting on granite as a base, which is
flanked by slates supporting sandstones, and Tertiary deposits
still younger. The general strike of these formations appears to
be N.E. or N.N.E. Melville Island is an outlier of the granitic
formation, with littoral deposits of white clay and red sandstone,
such as occur from Port Essington round Yan Diemen’s Gulf to
Cape Hotham on its southern border. Granite again occurs S.E.
of Port Darwin and on the Alligator Eiver.
A similar strike of the rocks appears to mark the line of
country from the Victoria Eiver of Gregory to Caledon, Arnheim,
and Melville Bays, at the northern and north-western corner of
the Gulf of Carpentaria, where granite again occurs, the slates
following the same trend. There is, no doubt, a large area of
country in many respects resembling the auriferous regions else-
where.
From Leichhardt’s description of the massive plateau along the
Alligator, it would appear to have much in common with the
great sandstone tracts in New South Wales. But in absence of
any fossil evidence (for the data of that kind collected by Leich-
hardt he was compelled to abandon), the exact age can hardly be


assigned at present. But having received from a more recent
explorer of the country to the south-east a trilobite of a Devonian
species, and from Leichhardt’s statements to myself personally,
believing some shells which he found to be upper Palaeozoic, it is
probable that much of the region may be of similar character to
that of Queensland.
Captain (Admiral) P. P. King gives in his book a view of the
red sandstone on Prince Regent's Piver, about 360 geographical
miles, on a parallel coast trend to S.W. of Port Darwin,
which looks there to be a thick bedded rock. The fossils Leich-
hardt found on the Roper River were in a baked rock, which
occurs in various places in connection with basalt. The trans-
mutations occurring in other districts where copper, iron, and
gold exist, are frequent; and these changes are on both sides of
the great sandstone plateau. Taking the Victoria Piver as the
southern boundary of the region, we know that Admiral Stokes
found fossils which were lost on their way to England; and
Eossil Head obtained its name from them. Jukes says the rock
in which they must have occurred resembled the Palaeozoic sand-
stone of New South Wales. Stokes says they were “casts of
shells not of a recent appearance.” Although, in the absence of
other evidence, Mr. Daintree may claim the sandstone for his
“ Desert ” rocks of that name, I believe that they are far older.
Some of the granite is very large-grained, with lithia mica.
The granite passes occasionally into pegmatite and syenite.
Much of the sandstone is fine-grained.
After all, however, the chief advantage of a settlement so far
to the north-west, although in a climate unsuitable to the labour
of Englishmen, holds out prospects of intercourse with India, and
therefore, by transmarine communication, with England ; and on
that account, if on no other, now the overland line is completed,
we ought to wish well to the opening up of the whole of that
distant territory ; especially as we saw in the late Exhibition
proofs of the value of exploration, in the pearls which formed part
of the exhibition from Western Australia, and which occur also


in the great oyster beds to the northward of that Colony. It
■would be a grand consummation of colonial enterprise if a rail-
way to the new settlement could enable the south-east of
Australia to be so connected with the north-west of it. A\ e
should then be free from the jealousies that now trouble the
settlement of the postal communication with Europe.
It may add to the interest excited by ideas of gold in the north-
west of Australia, to mention that, in a letter to Sir Henry Ellis,
dated Ist May, 1861, Mr. Major has quoted from a Portuguese
author an account of a visit to “ the Island of Gold, which lies in
the sea on the opposite coast, or coast outside Timor, which is
properly called the Southern coast.” The pamphlet itself was
printed at the Eoyal Press, in 1807, and bears in its title that it
is an account of the Golden Chersonese, or Auriferous Peninsula
and Islands, &c. The discoverers were fishermen, who were
driven out of their course by a tempest, and found so much gold
that their boat would hold no more. Whether the story be true
or not, the land indicated is no other than the north coast of
Arnheim’s Land, and in the territory now occupied by the Port
Darwin Settlement.
(2.) I can speak more confidently respecting discoveries in the
York Peninsula.
In my Anniversary Address of 1872 I mentioned two expe-
ditions —one undertaken in 1871, the other to be commenced last
year.
The first was under the direction of Mr. Hackett, of Lolworth
Station, accompanied by Mr. Hann.
In Leichhardt’s journal of his expedition to Port Essington,
mention is made of a “ fine conspicuous range,” named Kirchner’s
Range; and as the geological features were considered by Mr.
Daintree and others to be of considerable importance, and as it
afterwards proved that it was on the same general strike as that
of the schist rocks on the Gilbert River, the search for this range
became of interest to those who wished to ascertain whether the
metalliferous formations, so important to the southward, extended


to the westward of the lino traversed by my unfortunate friend
Mr. Kennedy. My own impression, as stated many years ago,
was that which was afterwards shared by others —viz., that gold
would be found in that direction. In my paper, read before this
Society, September, 1867 (Trans., vol. 1, p. 52), on the “Aurife-
rous Districts of Northern Queensland,” I then stated that I
always expected another gold-field about the 144th meridian, on
the heads of the Mitchell waters and the Kennedy Eiver, and that
it was not unlikely that at the back of the east coast there are
patches of auriferous country as far as 18° S.”
In this opinion it will be shown I w r as correct; for although
Mr. Hackett’s explorations referred to in my last Anniversary
Address did not prove it, it was proved by the second expedition,
under Mr. W. Harm and Mr. Norman Taylor in 1872, up to the
north of 16°, the course of the Kennedy Eiver being still left
unexplored.
Mr. Hackett’s party (as many others have done) did not
clearly recognize the actual position of Kirchner’s Eange accord-
ing to Leichhardt’s definition of its features, but passed it unob-
served, and so they followed down the Lynd Eiver, as, on
comparison of Leichhardt’s and Mr. Ilackett’s memoranda, I
found to be the case, nearly to the junction of the Mitchell,
During this journey they suffered considerable privation, and had
to feed their dogs and themselves on fish, which abounded in the
river, and were often of great size, —but they found no gold, or,
at most, only minute indications of it. Erom a description of one
of the fish, I presume it to have been allied to that shot in the
Burdekiu by Leichhardt; or, as the account is not very clear, it
may have been a Ceratodus. At any rate, there is evidence of
abundance of life of that kind in the otherwise almost azoic region
through w r hich the river flows.
On their return a second exploration was made to the north-east
during which the party crossed to the summit of the coast range.
A third journey carried them to a district more northerly, in
which they became entangled in a mesh of water-channels, which
probably belonged to the heads of the Mitchell.


Subsequently, on the 26th June, 1872, the second expedition,
under the leadership of Mr. William Hann, accompanied by Mr.
Norman Taylor (geologist), Dr. Tate (botanist), Mr. Warner (sur-
veyor), and Messrs. Stewart and Nation, and Jerry (an aboriginal),
commenced a more systematic and organized survey. Leichhardt
did not, however (as surmised by Mr. Hann), say anything as to
the probability of gold occurring near Kirchner’s .Range; but the
latter gentleman, reasoning from discoveries of a later date, did
right in looking for it there, though he only met with a result
similar to that of Mr. Hackett’s expedition. Both explorers,
nevertheless, confirm Leichhardt’s statement as to the general
features of the country; and Mr. Hann calls Kirchner Range
itself “ ahold and conspicuous feature, abutting on the river.”
The range this time was ascended ; and from it, to the north
and north-east, as well as from Gregory’s Bluff (a precipitous
notable feature, not mentioned by Leichhardt), was obtained a
view of a large, wild and broken, undulating country, in which
gold was, after search, not found. Mr. Hann —not accepting
Mr. Taylor’s opinion, that that part is not auriferous —still thinks
strongly that it is “ well worthy of the attention of gold-diggers.”
It would seem to me to be of a geological formation too much
transmuted, as it mainly consists of mica-schist often very gar-
netiferous ; for so soon as they got into a region in which slate,
with quartz ridges, occurred (though quartz drift was common
enough before), they struck gold. This was on the Palmer
River, one of the new discoveries north of the Mitchell; but in
all the country to the south, between it and the Lynd district,
watered by the Tate and Walsh Rivers (both new to geogra-
phers), no gold was found. The principal formations there
besides granite, porphyry, and garnetiferous and mica-schist, with
some greenstone and basalt, consisted of sandstone, with
occasional patches of limestone, some undoubtedly Devonian, in
the vicinity of which occurred Mesozoic deposits, which from the
fossils I have examined, are partly Cretaceous, and partly
Jurassic.


In the vicinity of the older limestone, not far from the junction
of the Walsh with the Mitchell, Mr. Taylor recognized what he
considered to be a Carboniferous formation, and a range of that
character was marked upon the chart. The junction of the Lynd
with the Mitchell was fixed in 16° 23'; that of the Walsh was
found to be in 16° 24' 39". Conglomerates are common in the
area between the rivers, and signs of “ coal ” were noticed.
In Mr. Taylor’s report the existence ofGlossopteris ” is also
mentioned. This cannot now be verified, as in the long travel
the specimens collected were destroyed, and all I could find in
the collection submitted to me for examination of this character
were a minute portion of coal and a piece or two of shale, which,
in defect of evidence, may have belonged to one of the most
Mesozoic formations, as these, according to Mr. Taylor, were
found occasionally to be bedded in situ. It would be very in-
teresting to have determined that our own Carboniferous forma-
tion, however reduced infarea, exists so far to the north.*
Of other minerals, magnetic iron, agates, and a profusion of
garnet of a pale rosy tint, forming vast accumulations in some of
the water chanuels, attracted attention; the former, no doubt,
derived from disintegrated amygdaloidal basalt, the latter from
decomposed mica-schist. Quartz drift and sand are also marked
features.
On the Palmer Eiver which comes in from the east where the
Coast Eange seems to make a great bend in that direction, but yet
a westerly water, in 15° 49' 14", gold was first found. Below this
the country was on mica-schist, and barren ; but above, where the
bed-rock was granite or slate, gold was traceable for several
miles, generally fin or close to the river on both sides.
The slate country extends to the coast between Weary Bay and
the Endeavour Eiver, with quartz-ridges, basalt and sandstone.
There can be no doubt that the great masses of the latter and the
associated conglomerates may be connected with a Carboniferous
deposit, unless they belong to Daintree’s “ Desert sandstone ’
which, according to the specimens I have examined, his descnp-
* See Appendix A.


tiou, and photographs (of which a very interesting series was
shown at the late Exhibition,) imitates the features of some of
our Hawkesbury rocks in the plateau and ravines of the Blue
Mountains.
“ Carboniferous” ranges and “ fossil shells” were found by Mr.
Taylor on the Kormanby, a new river coming from the south-east,
and joining the Kennedy not far from latitude 14° 36' south.
Connecting this locality with others of similar character, we
may assume a strike of about N.E. or N.N.E. for these sandstone
ranges. They seem to have a resemblance to the Arnheim’s Land
ranges.
Gfold -was prospected for on the return journey from Princess
Charlotte’s Bay in several places, but without result. Considering
the physical difficulties presented by the country along the East
side of the main Coast Eange, and the necessarily imperfect way,
in which, under the circumstances, any search would be made,
together with the impossibility of examining any reefs that may
have existed (and such do exist on the Tate Eiver), this reported
want of success is not to be taken as a final determination : and
the fact that gold (and of a very good quality) was found on the
Palmer Eiver, proves that there are sources yet undeveloped.
It is, therefore, to be hoped that the Queensland Government
will pursue the investigation, by means less harassing than those
to which Mr. W. Hann’s zealous and energetic labours and those
of his Staff were exposed.
They discovered much good, as well as some bad pasturable
country ; and in the difficulties of the Eastern Coast Eange they
merely experienced that which Kennedy suffered from in his
ascent from Eockingham Bay,
In the course of the journey crocodiles were found to be
numerous, and on the Kormanby Eiver a number of heads of
these animals were found attached to a sapling; and as the blacks
were numerous there, we may suppose it to be a trophy. The
existence of the “ climbing kangaroo” is attested in the diary;
and of a snake sixteen feet in length. There is, therefore, pro-
bably, a new field for the naturalist in this northern region.


As to the Aborigines, they seemed congregated in some locali-
ties, but appeared sparsely distributed; and- though some were
friendly, others seemed as treacherous as those who offered poor
Kennedy as a martyr to Colonial exploration.
I have had an opportunity of inspecting hastily a considerable
portion of the fossils collected by Mr. W. Hann and Mr. Norman
Taylor, which were kindly submitted to me by the Queensland
Minister for Works, on their way to the Agent-General in
London. The principal portion consisted of Mesozoic genera and
species of lower Cretaceous and Jurassic ages, among which were
a Crioceras, several Ammonites, Belemnites, and other shells ;
and many of these I can identify with the fossils in my own
collection, from the more southern and western great Secondary
formations of Queensland. That area is indicated by the brown
colour on the map I exhibited in this room in 1872, and which I
again produce.
Although there is nothing actually new to Queensland Geology
in some of these Mesozoic species, yet inasmuch as their existence
proves the former extension of the Secondary formations far to
the north of previous discoveries, they are entitled to great con-
sideration ; and, if I cannot exhibit them to-night (because I have
already forwarded them to England), I can at least supplement
the evidence by showing you some of the species from other parts
of Queensland, which, having been just received back from
England, whither I sent them for examination, description and
comparison with European species, are to be considered as the
typical Australian representatives of various Jurassic and lower
Cretaceous animals.
Of the kind assistance I have received in connection with
these from geological friends at Home, I have before spoken in
various publications ; but I have not been able till now to exhibit
them as the authenticated species which are named on the labels
I have attached to them. It may be interesting to some here
present to see how far upwards in the zoological scale we have
been able to carry out Australian evidence. Of this, however, I


have yet something more to say. I must now add that, with the
fossils mentioned from the Mitchell and Walsh Eivers, there were
in the collection sent to me by the Hon. W. H. Walsh several
very minute fossils ; among them a beautiful foraminiferous shell,
and several others to which no clue was given as to actual
locality. Ido not, at present, know whether any of these were
supposed to he of the Carboniferous age ; they exhibit, however,
a proof of another formation besides those mentioned already.
Moreover, there was included with the above a very fine
centrum of the vertebral bone of some gigantic Saurian reptile,
which did not appear to me to he that of an Icthyosaurus. The
only illustration of it I can now offer is a photograph kindly
made for me at the Museum. These, and some bones (not in good
condition) of Diprotodon, and, probably, of a species allied to
Wombat, and some small Marsupials—with a few specimens of
agate, limestone, basalt, &c.—are gone home to be immortalized in
the records of Science, and exhibited to British geologists in the
Annexe to the Exhibition building in London. Whatever may
be their actual value to theoretical Palaeontology, these things
furnish an additional testimony to the fact of the wide distribu-
tion of the relics of the peculiar mammalian creatures that are
now known to have existed from the south to the north of Eastern
Australia, and which must have lived very close up to, if not into,
the recent epoch to which we ourselves belong.
Queensland Mesozoic Fossils.
The collection which I sent to Mr. Moore, of Bath, E.Gr.S.., who
kindly reported on it iu his paper on “ Australian Mesozoic
Greology,” read before the (leological Society in 1870, embraced
no less than eighty-nine species, of which eight at least are also
European. It is from this collection that the specimens on the
table have been selected. Many others in my possession in
addition to the collection spoken of, have not yet been examined;
but those, and the collection from the Mitchell and Walsh Eivers,
will swell the amount of species considerably. As Mr. Moore
included in his paper, from his own collections, fifty-six species


of Liassic and Oolitic fossils from Western Australia, of which
twenty-four are also indigenous to British or other European
districts, —and as I have also already numerous uncompared fossils
from that distant Colony, received from the Colonial Secretary,
the Hon. E. P. Barlee, and the Eev, J. C. Nicolay, —the list of
these Secondary fossils, ranging from the lower Cretaceous
downwards to the Lias, will doubtless ere long be greatly
extended, both by purely Australian species, and by those which
have a more cosmopolitan range ; the latter, in some degree,
linking this continent, as the fossils of the Palaeozoic formations
also do, to the world north of the Equator.
A more recent service has also been performed by the “ Notes
on the Geology of Queensland,” read before the Geological
Society, in April, 1872, by my friend Mr. Daintree, illustrated by
the description of fossils by Mr. Etheridge, F.E.S., and Mr.
Carruthers, E.E.S, This was published in the Quarterly Journal,
in August, 1872. Among the fossils are those I mentioned in
my last Address (p. 37) as having been sent home by me to Mr.
Daintree, in consequence of his loss by shipwreck. Mr. Etheridge
describes thirty-eight new forms, of which ten are common to
England and Queensland. Of these, fifteen are Devonian marine
species from Gympie : five from the Barwon Eiver, six from the
Don Eiver, one from Wealwandangie, and two from Cracow
Creek (all Carboniferous). Of Mesozoic fossils the list contains
six from the lower Oolite, at Gordon Downs ; and, belonging to
the Cretaceous system, fifteen species from Maryborough, five
from Marathon, two from Hughenden, and one from M‘Kinlay’s
Eange.
As Mr. Daintree acknowledges the above contributions made
by myself, from Gordon Downs, Cracow Creek, Wealwandangie,
and the Don Eiver, it is my duty to transfer the acknowledgment
to the gentlemen who, at my request, procured them for me from
the respective localities, in order that I might have them de-
scribed. And here I would earnestly entreat the assistance of all
who are interested in the full development of the physical


structure and former condition of this continent to follow the
example of those friends in the other Colonies who have already
assisted me, and to forward me such fossils, whether shells or
corals, or whatever they may meet with of fossil organisms, in
order that we may, as soon as possible, he able to complete the
Palaeontological history of this Colony, which, in some respects,
is yet defective, and in which men of science at home are equally
interested with ourselves. Many persons living in the very
heart of rich Palaeontological treasures are not, perhaps, aware of
their scientific value; and if I may be pardoned for the expression,
I would say they do not recognize the duty they owe to the
world in the endeavour to make them known.
Mr. Etheridge, in reference to one of the fossils, has this
remark: —“ I figure it, like many other forms, to draw the atten-
tion of Australian f gcologists to the Lamellibranchiata of the
Palaeozoic rocks of Queensland and elsewhere, through the con-
tinent, in the hope that search may be made for more perfect
specimens.”
I cannot forbear quoting from another passage in his most valu-
able Appendix to Mr. Daintree’s paper, respecting an additional
series of fossils from Queensland forwarded by Mr. W. Hann; —
“Nearly the whole,” he says, “are Cretaceous. The localities
from which they are derived are Bowen Downs, head of the
Thomson Piver, Tower Hill and Barcoo Piver beds, near Tambo,”
“ These interesting fossils will receive further elucidation ; it was,
however, deemed of sufficient interest to thus notice their occur-
rence, which bears out geographically the distribution of the
Cretaceous series previously noticed, and confirms the view taken
of the great westerly extension of the Cretaceous rocks through
the plains of Queensland, thus, perhaps, accounting for the uni-
versally and widely spread level land in the western plains.”
In his Appendix the learned Palaeontologist has given his view
of the “ Succession of the Stratified Pocks of Queensland,” an en-
larged copy of which I also introduce as likely to afford instruction
to those who may look for it, but who also may be unable to obtain
it otherwise except from a repetition in this way. And this, let it


be observed, has been tbe sole object I bave bad in view in refer-
ring so often to tbe work done out of tbe Colonies, in assisting
those in them to understand what progress is being made in the
knowledge of Australia.
At present we bave no discoveries in New South "Wales of
Cretaceous or of such other Upper Mesozoic deposits as are
referred to in the above remarks. But of the Palaeozoic rocks in
this Colony and Tasmania we have abundant examples, and small
amounts of their fossils have been described by Dana, Sowerby,
Lonsdale, Salter, Morris, M‘Coy, and de Koniuck of Belgium:
and I am now about to dispatch about 1,000 individuals selected
from the Palaeozoic strata of this Colony to the latter authority
who has undertaken (at my request) to examine, compare, and
describe what, I trust, will give us a complete account of the
great marine formation in the lower portion of our coal-beds.
Coal.
This allusion very naturally suggests a reference to the great
question of our coal supply.
(1.) In England there has been of late immense excitement as
to the probability of coal diminishing rapidly and generally, owing
to the enormous expenditure of fuel in various ways, and the
increase of machinery and manufactures, and also of population ;
and various calculations have been made as to how long, even at
the present rate of consumption, the mines will last, and also as
to the possibility of obtaining additional supply from fresh locali-
ties below geological formations that have never been pierced for
that purpose.
I confess, after all I have read on the subject, that I am not
convinced of the necessity for any alarm, so far as natural
resources are involved. Economy is, undoubtedly, the best pro-
tection against useless risk ; and if some system could be adopted
by which the fearful waste of fuel in domestic expenditure could
be regulated, it would be well.
According to the latest calculations—founded on the com-
pletest data —it is computed that, allowing for the present annual


rate of increase in consumption, there is sufficient coal in Great
Britain, within a limit of depth suitable for working, to last 276
years —allowing that at the end of the first century the consump-
tion might be 415 millions of tons per annum ; and, allowing the
consumption in that time to reach 274 millions of tons, with a
diminishing rate of increase, the coal would last 360 years. As
one of the means of great expenditure of coal is in the working
of iron, attempts have been successfully made in some districts to
reduce the consumption of coal. An instance is given by Mr.
Hull, where 1 ton 33 cwt. 1 qr. in the North Lancashire line has
been found sufficient for a ton of pig iron, whereas seventy-seven
years since the consumption of coal on the Clyde was 9J tons.
Again, it is said, a saving of 25 per cent, has been introduced in
ocean steamers ; but, according to Mr. Hunt, as quoted by Mr.
Hull, a third of the whole quantity raised is consumed in house-
holds, amounting to 37,000,000 tons, or about a ton per head of
the whole population ; but the Coal Committee say that in 1869
it was 14 cwt. per head. It becomes, therefore, no longer a mere
theoretical but a practical inquiry, whether the system of heating
apartments must not be revised. This, and improvements in
scientific inventions of various kinds, will probably postpone the
time assumed for the evil hour. Mr. Hull, whose work on the
Coal Fields of Great Britain has now gone into a third edition,
has embodied the facts just referred to, in an Essay on what
he calls “The Coal Famine,” Quarterly Journal of Science, April,
1873, and points out how the high price of coal at home, so
Vexatious to the poor, and so injurious to all classes, does not
arise so much from the croakers as from the abominable system
of strikes, which inevitably ruin the prospects of the miners them-
selves —a system fostered by the worst enemies of the pitmen,
and nourished by immorality and semi-barbarism of life adopted
by or forced on that population ; so that after all, as in most other
cases, immorality and irreligion in a portion of a community have,
even in unlooked-for ways, a tendency to bring injury to the
whole.
Now, it may be asked how does this affect us at the Antipodes?
Perhaps there is an effect even here from what goes on in the


collieries at home • but if I mistake not, we even here are at this
time suffering from similar causes as to advanced prices of coal,
occasioned by strikes. But this is not the question we have now
to consider. Our manufactories here are on the increase, and the
present rate of consumption of coal in this Colony is also wonder-
fully increased.
A few weeks ago I had the opportunity of witnessing a state
of great activity in the city of Newcastle, and also a proportionate
activity in the Illawarra district. There is also a kind of coal-
fever breeding among speculators, which may, unless well looked
after, give as much trouble to many as the late gold, copper, and
tin eruptions have occasioned.
It is quite true, however, that these mineral epidemics cannot
really affect the amount of underground wealth that the Provi-
dence of G-od has placed beneath our feet. But what that amount
may be is another question.
At present our idea of the extent and thickness of coal in this
Colony is not founded altogether on positive proof so much as on
scientific deductions. Nevertheless, it may be satisfactory to be
assured that so far as such deductions go, when founded on the
best data we have (and for the present we can have no others),
the probability is great that there is an abundant supply for a
long period of time.
I am fond of believing in a Providential ruler of man’s destiny,
and it appears to me hardly philosophical to suppose that the
nation to which we belong, whose tendencies and ingenuities are
somehow connected with what coal has done and is doing for it,
should be permitted to send off large offshoots of its population
into distant regions without everything being already prepared
to render them capable of following the instincts of their brethren
at home.
s This ma 7 be fanciful, but the fact is that all the great coloniza-
tions by the Anglo-Saxon race have settled where there are the
natural supplies which its genius does or will require.


"Witness the United States, and British possessions in North
America; witness India, witness Tasmania, New Zealand, New
South Wales, and Queensland, in which Colonies, if anywhere in
Australia, coal is abundantly distributed in proportion to their
extent, though not everywhere of the same geological epoch.
All the other Colonies come to us for some of their supplies,
and even India, that does not want them, for she has enough for,
herself and us too ; and China and Japan, where coal abounds
come also. The coal fields in China have an area of, at least,
400,000 square miles.
(2.) This seems only a natural process, for, on looking over the
tables of a very old friend of my younger days (Mr. E. C. Taylor,
who emigrated to, and died in the United States in 1850, having
made himself a great name in that country), I find it stated
(Statistics of Coal, p. 240) that from 1801 to 1853, the United
States imported no less than 2,995,047 tons of British, Colonial,
and other foreign coal, which gives an average of 57,597 annual
importations of tons at 2,240 lbs. to the ton; and of this, from
British Parliamentary returns, from 1831 to 1846, the imports
from Great Britain amounted to 687,936 tons. The British
exportation is on the increase.
As illustrating the above remarks, let us see first, what is the
calculated extent of the American and Indian coal-fields. I take
the last estimates by Professor Hitchcock, in his Eeturns to the
United States Government. He says there are eight distinct
areas:—
1. New England basin: area, 750 square miles; maximum
thickness of coal seams, 23 feet.
2. Pennsylvania: 434 square miles; average thickness of from
twenty to twenty-five seams, 70 feet.
3. Apalachian basin : 63,475 square miles, all of bituminous
coal.
4. Michigan basin: 6,700 square miles; thickness of seams
up to 11 feet.
5. Illinois basin: 51,700 square miles; ten to thirteen
seams, 31 to 35 feet aggregate thickness.


6, Missouri basin: more than 100,000 square miles, all
considered productive.
7. Texas : 5,000 square miles; coal in places 4 feet thick.
8. Arizona: not fully developed, hut known to he rich in
numerous localities.
The total amounts to 230,659 square miles, and the whole are
of the old Carboniferous era; besides which, there are the
Virginia Triassic coal, and the immense amount of California.
In 1861, Mr. Hull stated the produce of the coal-fields of the
North American British possessions to have been 2,000,000 tons.
In 1871, as I learn from reports received from Canada, 500,000
tons; and in 1872, 800,000 tons of Cape Breton coal, were sold
in that dominion. Mr. Hull also calculated that the whole of the
area in North America was thirty-eight times larger than that of
the British coal-fields, whilst the production of the latter was
eight times greater than the American. (“ Coal-fields of Great
Britain,” p. 217.)
In 1867, Mr. Warington Smyth (“ Treatise on Coal and Coal-
mining,” p. 96) rates the annual production of the United States
at 18,000,000 tons, but with an annual importation of half a
million.
The same writer adds a cautionary remark, justifying what I
said before 1 “ It is reported he quotes from “ Her Majesty’s
Secretaries of Embassy and Legation,” 1866 —“ that great loose-
ness seems to exist in the compilation of figures involving large
sums, as well as in the returns required to be made by the
Companies.” He adds this : —“ On passing, then, to what is of
more weight —the thickness of workable coal —we are constrained
to believe, whilst fully realizing the colonial value of the Apala-
chian, and of the Illinois and Indiana deposits, that the data for
the estimation of the contents of the others are not yet satis-
factory, and that the progress of exploration in such vast tracts
will show many an element for subtraction.” (p. 98.)
What may have been the management of our own coal mines
up to this date is not generally known; but there can be no harm


in making one more quotation from Mr. Smyth’s work, —that with
which he concludes. He is speaking of Great Britain. “In no
other country in Europe is there such a laxity of vital importance
to our successors. Under the Inspection Act every colliery is
bound to keep up plans on a certain scale ; but how partial is the
advantage when, at the end of a lease, the documents are subject
to be lost or destroyed. And, unless the Government, on behalf
of the Nation, insist upon the deposition of duly guaranteed min-
ing plans in a suitable office, and lessors and lessees co-operate
in rendering available at a future day those tracts which the
exigencies of trade prevent us from turning to present account,
we remain open to the charge of an unworthy stewardship of the
riches which a bountiful Nature has committed to our care.”
The comparative amount of coal produced at present in the
world is taken by Professor Leone Levi to be 200,000,000 tons
per annum, of which 120,000,000 —the Treasury statistics make
it in 1871, 117,000,000 —are the produce of Great Britain; the
other Countries, such as France, Germany, Belgium, and North
America, notwithstanding her enormous coal areas, consuming
more than they produce. During the last half-century, Great
Britain has exported, in a continually increasing decennial propor-
tion, no less than 43,442,000 tons, the export in 1871 amounting
to 12,816,000 tons. In 1870, France took 2,074,000; Eussia,
805.000 ; Denmark, 695,000 ; Italy, 612,000 ; Egypt, 374,000;
Sweden, 370,000; Brazil, 261,000; Norway, 248,000; and Cuba,
222.000 tons ; and in addition, other Countries, including America,
took, 5,842,000 tons. So that in fact British coal has fed the
naval and commercial prosperity of half the world.
It is quite clear, therefore, that when the other coal-bearing
countries have their mines in full operation, unless Great Britain
can undersell them all, she must lose her prestige. To use the
words of the author last cited, —“ Cheap iron, coals, and labour,
have made England what she is ; there is nothing of such prime
importance to England as cheap coal. If she is deprived of
this, she will lose the very prop to her manufacturing and com-


mercial prosperity. The rise in coal means a rise in steam, and,
therefore in the price of all goods produced by its aid. It is the
same with iron. That metal is necessary for all kinds of
machinery; the price of it, therefore, is an essential element in
the cost of machinery and in the value of the goods produced
thereby ; and as coal and machinery are equally useless without
labour, a rise in it must necessitate a rise in produce. A general
advance in the price of all English manufactured goods is there-
fore inevitable, if the advance in the price of coal be maintained.
The enhanced value of British goods will offer a new opportunity
to increase American manufactures. As soon as England ceases
to be able to undersell her competitors, her hold on foreign
markets, which is the basis of her commercial supremacy, will
diminish.” —(Daily Telegraph.') We may presume that this
reasoning is, in some degree, applicable to this Colony ; and that,
as respects the world at large, it is for the universal prosperity of
all nations to remain at peace.
(3.) It was my intention to offer some special remarks on the
Coal Statistics of India, in continuation of those made in my
Address in the year 1870; but I am compelled to be brief,
though the subject is most extensive.
By the latest document on Mineral Statistics, by Dr. Oldham,
Superintendent of the Geological Survey of India (Memoirs, vol.
vii.), I find that the quantity of coal raised in all India in the
year 1868 was 547,971 tons, this amount being more than double
what it was in 1858, and that the Raniganj field produced in 1868
more than six times that raised in 1850. The East Indian
Railway alone consumes nearly half the total quantity raised in the
country. The number of steam-engines has more than doubled
in the Raniganj field in eight years. Other coal-fields are now
being wrought, and fresh discoveries are being often made, so that
the supply from India itself must rapidly increase. Dr. Oldham says
that, in 1868, the Madras Railway used of English coal, imported
direct, 1,285 tons, together with a small proportion of Australian
coal. The Scinde Railway used in 1867 of coal, coke, and patent


fuel imported from Europe, 5,645 tons j and in 1,868,4,016. And
in 1867 and 1868, the great Peninsula line consumed 116,824
tons, all imported. But on the lines connected with Calcutta, it
appears that, of 447,644 tons used in the two years mentioned,
on the East Indian Bail way, only 4,029 were imported coal.
The Eastern Bengal Railway used in 1867, 16,120 tons of
Indian coal, and in 1868, 16,330 tons of Indian, and only about
573 tons of English coal, and these chiefly in river steamers.
The Calcutta and South-eastern line, and the Delhi and Umballa
line used only Indian coal from Eaniganj. The Salt Range
supplied a portion used between Lahore and Umritsur. These
data are sufficient to show that Indian coal bids fair to supple-
ment the fuel imported from England and Australia. And to
point out what India is doing with her coal, I quote a passage of
a speech delivered in the British Parliament by Mr. Laing, on the
7th March, 1873, on moving for the continuation of the broad
railway gauge in India.
The main railway system of British India now comprises 5,000 miles
actually opened, inaugurated by Lord Dalhousic, and constructed on the ■wide
gauge of 5 feet 6 inches, by separate Companies, under guarantees, at a tota
cost of £90,000,000, or between £16,000 and £17,000 per mile. * * *
The construction of those railways has been an enormous advantage to the
Indian Empire, where within fifteen years the revenue has been raised from 30
millions to 50 millions sterling per annum ; and the aggregate import and
export trade from 50 millions to 100 millions sterling—an increase in a great
measure attributable to the railways. That lamented statesman, Lord Mayo
—one of the most able and popular of the many great Viceroys they have
had in India—being impressed with the advantages conferred by the railways
on that country, was very anxious for a large extension of the system, and
arrived at the conclusion that 10,000 additional miles of railway were
urgently required. ( Times , Bth March.)
Eresh coal-fields in India have been recently explored ; but of
one of them, the Kurhurbari field, Mr. Hughes says (Memoirs
vii, part 2) that the assays proved its coal was superior to the
Raniganj; and that, deducting waste and all impediments to work-
ing this field, it will produce 80,000,000 tons; and that, at an
annual consumption of 250,000 tons, the field has a life of 300


years. The seams in this area vary from 9to 32 feet, giving an
average of 6 feet each to twenty-two seams ; and on the whole an
average of 15 feet.
The same explorer describes the Karanpura coal-fields, in
which some of the seams attain a thickness of from 14 to 21 feet.
These fields form a part of the Damuda Valley, and Mr. Hughes
gives the areas of all the basins in it thus :
1. Eaniganj, 1,000 square miles.
2. North Karanpura, 472 ditto
3. Bokaro, 220 ditto
4. Jherria, 200 ditto
5. South Karanpura, 72 ditto
6. Eamgurh, 40 ditto.
These 2,004 square miles do not, however, make up all, and
only a portion of the coal-fields of India. But of this we may
take the calculation of Mr. Hughes as correct, —that of the
Karanpura fields alone there is proved to be a quantity capable
of meeting all demands, and that in the northern basin of the
name (No. 2 of the list), taking only 250 miles instead of 472
square miles, there are eight thousand seven hundred and Jiffy
million tons of coal.
In the south (No. 5) basin, taking only 15 square miles, as
the average ascertained thickness of the seams (deducting 20
feet for partings) is fully seventy feet, that area will supply
75,000,000 tons. There are eight seams, with a total thickness
of 62 feet, and sixteen with a thickness of 159 feet 3 inches.
The thickness of the seams in most of the Indian fields is
remarkable. Thus, in the Eaniganj beds, nine seams have an
aggregate thickness of 120 feet; eleven, amounting to 100 feet;
and four, in the lowest Damuda series, attain to 69 feet (W . T.
Blandford, in Memoirs, vol. 3, part 1). The last announcement
is of a new coal area, west of the Damuda Valley, which supplied
coal during the mutiny war of 1857 and which Mr. Hughes thinks
■will prove of great advantage. It is called the Daltonganj field.


Besides these data as to the amount of coal in India may be
mentioned the Jherrhia field, 170 miles from Calcutta, with
465,000,000 of tons ; and Bokaro with 1,500,000,000. The upper
or Rajmahal Hills turned out 657,827 tons in 1858-9-60 ; and
the Khasi Hills 1,917,000 tons.
No time is left to me for any reference to the great iron beds
in various parts of India; but there remain some pressing
considerations which will induce me to trespass a little longer on
your patience, in regard to our own coal prospects. I may ask,
perhaps, first of all, —is not it very probable that the coal trade
now carried on with Indian ports will be soon cut short, when
the cost of transport from the mines of India will be reduced to
an equality with, or to a level, and perhaps below the cost of the
importation of Australian coal ? Some may suppose that the
superiority of the latter will always carry a market. But that
superiority is not so apparent. Some of the Indian coal (though
much is inferior) rivals the Australian ; and some of the Aus-
tralian is as good, for certain purposes, as British. It is quite
true that this year the Admiralty contracts for the Eastern
depots are for Australian, to the extent of 11,000 tons, and not
for English coal; and, in the West, the Colonial coals of Cape
Breton are to be firstly employed with American instead of
British. But this arises from the difference in price when the
contracts were made; since then, Australian coal has risen, and
the saving calculated on by the Admiralty of £23,000 per annum
will have to be diminished by the difference between the old
prices and the new of our Australian coal.
Australian coal will, perhaps, before many years, be as little
needed in China or India as British will be wanted in the United
States.
(4). But in case of necessity, what is the actual known amount
of our Australian coal ? Whatever may be wanted for oiirselves,
we are not likely to get any from Victoria ; for although upwards
of one hundred thousand pounds have been expended by the
G-overnment in geological surveys and mining operations*
* See Appendix B,


including coal, from 1851 to 1873, and upwards of four thousand
vertical feet of strata have been pierced in the search for coal,
yet it is found necessary in this year of grace to send for the
New South Wales Examiner of Coal Fields to find it, if possible,
for those unquestionably able geologists who have declared over
and over again that it cannot exist in any great payable quantity.*
Eor my own part, I do not believe that the gentlemen at the head
and on the field staff of the late G-eological Survey Department
could have been mistaken, though I sincerely hope that my
friend the Examiner may receive a crown of Glossopteris and
Vertebraria for his pains. The field staff of the survey alluded
to would do honor to any scientific body in the world ; and we
may suppose that all that could be done has been done to find
what Nature either never deposited or has removed by denuda-
tion. At any rate, we have the confirmation of this view in the
opinion long ago expressed by the late experienced Director of
the Geological Survey of Victoria.
A question, as the members of this Society well know, has
been raised as to the age of our worked New South Wales coal;
and, basing his opinion on the existence of certain plants in the
beds of the formation, Professor M‘Coy holds that the coal now
supplying the markets is not of Palaeozoic, but of Mesozoic age,
and of the Oolitic epoch. My own opinion has been that it is
not Mesozoic, but Palaeozoic. Finding that, after great search for
coal in Victoria, nothing valuable could be discovered, a Com-
mission issued by the Parliament invested three gentlemen
(Mr. Clement Hodgkinson, Mr. E. Brough Smyth, and Mr.
Thomas Couchman) with the direction to report upon the coal-
fields of “ the south-eastern part of the Colony.” This was a
praiseworthy proceeding, and I am sorry to find that it has not
been successful. Out of forty-nine seams enumerated, there
are but three that attain the thickness of a foot, and of these
a foot seam is said to occur at Cape Otway; and at Cape
Paterson are two, respectively 4 feet and 3 feet 6 inches thick. Of
course, as the Eeport states, there may be others ; but such are
* See Appendix C.


put down as “said” to have occurred —“said” to have been
worked —“ said” to have been “ discovered, but not seen.” There
is, that is to say, no actual knowledge of them. And this is all
we learn from the Eeport as to the existence of coal of all ages
(for “ lignite” and “ tertiary” are included) under the title —
“ Number and thickness of coal seams in Victoria.”
So far, so good. What Commissioners have seen should be
respected ; but unhappily the two thick seams spoken of in the
last report as occurring at Cape Paterson, they confess they
“ did not see ; the excavations were filled in with rocks and sand,
and we had no means of descending the shafts.” They add,
however, that they “ accept the statements made regarding the
character and thickness of them as correct. (Eeport, p. 11.) I
do not call in question the correctness of these statements, but I
would merely say that, including the three seams pointed out
above, the average thickness of the forty-nine seams is just a
little under (I would not rob them of a decimal even) four and a
half inches *
I had intended to discuss this Eeport at considerable length, in
order to point out some errors in it, and to explain more fully
than I can now the history of the controversy which has taken
place about the ages of our various Australian Coal-fields. But
finding that what X had prepared on the subject would occupy
more time than we can spare this evening, I have withdrawn it in
order to use it in another way.
I will merely say now, that although within a brief recent
period, as explained before, great progress has been made in the
exploring of largo regions of Mesozoic age to the north of us, and
in the finding of coal therein, some of which is younger than our
Newcastle coal, yet I adhere to my opinion that the latter is
not Mesozoic, and maintain still, that the field in which it occurs
rests on Palaeozoic rocks having lower seams beneath, which
repose on other marine beds (so that they do “interpolate” each
other in the series), in this respect exactly resembling the older
coal-fields of Queensland ; and further, I maintain that both
series of coal beds hold the same characteristic fossil plant.
# See Appendix C (p. 95).


I may therefore add, for Professor M‘Coy’s information, that
the coal seams at Rix’s Creek, •which he distinguishes as of a
different epoch, by a line drawn below “ shale with Glossopteris,”
because he thinks the lower do not hold that plant, do carry
Glossopteris; and this fact I had confirmed in writing by the
present Examiner of Coal Fields, whom I requested to verify the
fact. Rix’s Creek is only another example of what may be seen
at Stony Creek, at Mount Wiugan, at Coyeo, at Murrurundi,
and in various other parts of the Hunter River basin. And Mr.
Daintree, on my appeal to His Excellency Sir Henry Earkly, went
up to Stony Creek, examined the place, confirmed my statements*
refuted Professor M‘Coy’s notions of a reversal of beds, and
published his report in Ho. 100 of the Melbourne Yeoman, 29th
August, 1863. Such evidence cannot be set aside, though it
remains unnoticed by Victorian annalists; and as to Glossopteris
there, it was that very plant which astonished the Professor, and
led to a most unjustifiable and indefensible misrepresentation of
what I said to him when I produced it as proof of a Newcastle
plant below the marine beds, and finally, also, to Mr. Daintree’s
investigations.*
(5.) I pass on now to some further remarks on the prospect
of Coal production in this Colony.
It is the fashion to consider a patch of colour on a map
indicative of a Carboniferous formation to be tantamount to
asserting the existence of beds of coal under the -whole area so
coloured. This is, however, a wrong conclusion. In a very large
portion of our Carboniferous area, no sufficient operations have
exhibited the proof that any coal, or how much, exists under the
surface. All mineral deposits are found to thicken, grow thin,
and sometimes to die out altogether, or to renew their strength
again, and there are plenty of proofs of this in New South Wales.
Coal beds also change their character, as shown in the occurrence
of oil-cannel and other hydro-carbons, passing from or into ordinary
coal, andbearing still the prevailing phytologicalimpressions which
* See Colliery Guardian, Feb. 20, 1869.


are common in the shales associated with it. Thus, all the area
indicating “ Coal” on certain maps recently published must not
be supposed to be so full of coal as to justify the search for it in
every portion of that area, and other parts may be untinted as
coal where coal does exist. But there is, so far as has been
proved, coal enough to last for a long period, with proper economy
and due attention to the limitation of exports.
The quantity, for instance, actually produced in 1871, from
mines now in operation at or near Newcastle, was 790,113 tons,
and of this, 565,429 tons were exported ; and of these exports
84,916 tons went to Victoria, 39,705 to New Zealand, 1,694 to
Queensland, 29,786 to South Australia, 5,974 to Tasmania, and
390 to Western Australia ; the United States took 24,814, China
372,800, and India 7,118, &c. The whole was exported to twenty-
seven different ports, in nearly 1,000 vessels.
Smelting operations will increase, and, in places where coal
cannot be obtained on or near the spot, the cost of working in
the interior will be enhanced; and as steam communication is
encouraged from place to place along our leagues and leagues of
Australian coast, or to foreign ports, the demand on our coal
mines will increase the cost. It would be well, therefore, if steps
were taken to ascertain not the possible or probable, but certain,
existence of coal in such districts as have never yet been prac-
tically sounded. There may be a promising coal area, but the
thickness of the seams may be insignificant; and to point out this
was one chief reason that induced me to enter so minutely into
the case of America and India, and to quote the words of Mr.
Warington Smyth in relation to what he strikingly denominates
“ the elements for subtraction.”
I have had on my mind another impression to which I must
give utterance. There is no doubt that there may be almost in-
surmountable difficulties in obtaining coal for certain localities ;
and it is just in such places that all the growing timber has been
removed by the axe of the miner, leaving large tracts quite bare


where wood and coal are necessary. Many tracts of this descrip-
tion have been traversed by me ; and especially in some of the
cedar districts is this clearing the effect of wanton wastefulness.
If the time has arrived for a Minister for Mines to be ap-
pointed, would it not be well to extend his jurisdiction to Woods
and Forests also ?
In the year 1863, in conjunction with me, the present Examiner
of Coal-fields published a series of sections of the coal-field from
Newcastle to Morpeth and Stony Creek into the lower coal
seams ; and this, on one sheet, was shown by him during the late
Exhibition. He also exhibited there a new series of sections,
marked A to J consecutively, —showing the actual thickness and
depths of the coal-beds in the following localities, viz., Newcastle,
Wolgan, Lithgow Valley, Burragorang, at Eitzroy Iron Mines,
Kangaroo Creek, Mount Keira, and Coalclitf. The whole of
these are in the upper coal-beds, between the first out-crop and
the underlying Palseozoic marine beds, —being the seams that the
Victorian Commissioners insist on being Oolitic, though one
of the Newcastle beds contained fish which the highest icthyo-
logical authority in England considered Palaeozoic. In the large
section the place of this was shown, but in the new sections it
has been omitted; but the whole of the beds are shown to hold
Grlossopteris and Vertebraria, and those underlying the marine
beds to hold excellent coal and cannel.
The contrast between this display and the forty-nine Victorian
threads of coal is very striking.
Mr. Mackenzie has ventured on a calculation as to the amount
of coal in a certain area of country “ known to himself,” which
he considers to occupy “ 15,419 square miles. One of the seams
of coal, 8 feet in thickness, under this area, should, he says, after
allowing one-third for loss and waste in getting, &c., yield
84,208,298,667 tons, which, at the present production of about
1,000,000 tons per annum in New South Wales, would last about


84,203 years,” and, at the present production of Great Britain,
“ 112,000,000 tons per annum, our 8-foot seam would last about
751 years.”
This calculation is not, perhaps, strictly accurate, and it may
be doubted whether there is any continuous area of the kind as
9,8G8,1G0 statute acres, uninterrupted by intrusive rocks.
But regarding this as a hypothetical case, the result may be
accepted, under the assured conviction that it falls very far short
of the actual quantity of coal in New South "Wales, as will
some day be pimved.
This subject, Gentlemen, has occupied so much of your time
as to leave but a small margin for two other topics, which I must
not pass over in silence.
Metalliferous Areas.
During the last year there has been a great declension in the
marketable value of shares in the metalliferous mines of the
Colony. But it is not surprising that disappointment of the kind
should have occurred, seeing that it has arisen in most instances
without any bearing upon the mines themselves. Stock-jobbing
on the part of persons who have had no interest in the mines,
but only in their own profit by ventures in the market, does not
affect the actual value of the productive capacity of well-ascer-
tained underground deposits. They remain just as they were,
and cannot be affected by the trickery or the deception of such
as have taken advantage of ignorance or credulity, or the too
sanguine expectations of honest but incautious speculators.
Bar from being discouraged by the results of these mistakes, I
look forward to a nearer realization of the words I ventured to
use in my last year’s Address, viz. : —“ When the excitement
that is (was then) rife shall have subsided, and we shall have less
dread of spelling speculation without the initial letter, there will
be found inducements to study the structure of the country
more than the market price of its products.”
But even the “ excitement” had some good effects, for various
fresh finds of diamonds, cinnabar, copper, gold, iron, and tin
have occurred, and the large area between the Darling and Bogan


Fivers Las more and more cast off its obscurity. Copper, iron,
and gold have been found in fresh portions of that region ; and
even within four or five miles of the spot where Mr. Cunningham
lost his way in the scrubs, and finally his life, during Sir T. L.
Mitchell’s Expedition of 1835, a lode of copper has been found,
in beds of metamorphic rock which the first explorers did not
know existed there. Moreover, several new gold-fields have been
proclaimed in 1872-3.
(1.) Another result to science and true mining industry had
been derived from examinations in the tin country to the north-
ward, —not by half or almost entirely ignorant mining managers,
but by skilled and properly educated geological surveyors,
qualified to report on all the delicate questions involved.
Thus, in the “ Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society of
London, for February, 1873” (vol. xxix) we have first a report,
read on 6th November, 1872, bearing date 2nd July, from Mr.
T. E. Gregory, in a letter to the Queensland Government, and
communicated by the Earl of Kimberley to the Society.
In this report Mr. Gregory gives the outlines of the stanni-
ferous region, the principal stream beds and fluviatile flats, and
some of the minor lodes or veins in the Queensland part of the
area; one of the latter, as he says, traceable, at intervals, for nine
or ten miles. Mr. Aplin, whom he quotes, states that he met in
that area no other tin ore than the peroxide (cassiterite) which
is associated only with an “ invariably red granite,” the felspar
being a pink or red orthoclase, and the mica generally black, but
when tin is present in situ the mica is white. The granite, he
adds, is coarse-grained and readily disintegrating, with bands of
granitoid character highly micaceous, traversed by veins and
bands of quartz, in which the tin ore abounds, as if they had been
local feeders in the courses of drainage. The crystals of tin ore
are found along the margin of the quartz veins, though some-
times in the micaceous portions, in which cases the mica is
white. “ The strike of the bands and the distinct quartz veins is
generally N.E. and S.W. No tin floors, as at Elsmore mine, in
New South Wales, had been discovered.” This is an abstract
only of Mr. Aplin’s notes.


Mr. Gregory calculated then, that the population of miners
and their families would not for three years be less than from
5,000 to 8,000, but would increase.
(2.) The next communication made to the Geological Society,
on the same evening, is entitled “ Observations on some recent
Tin Ore discoveries in New England, New South Wales; by
Mr. G-. H. F. Ulrich, F.G.S.”
The author speaks first of the granite plateau of which Ben
Lomond is the summit, the height of which he gives as nearly
4,000 feet above the sea. It is, however, exactly 5,000 feet, as
may be seen in my eighth Northern [Report to the Government,
7th May, 1853, p. 17. [Parliamentary Papers, 26th May, 1853.]
He says the predominant rocks are granite and basalt, in-
closing subordinate ranges of slate and sandstone; the basalt
having broken through and overflowed the summits, greenstone
occurring in the slate. He describes the country as park-like,
with the climate of central Europe. He says of Elsmore, twelve
miles east of Inverell, that it includes a granite range two miles
long, and extending under basalt, micaceous in character, rendered
porphyritic by crystals of white orthoclase (sometimes several
inches long), with occasionally bluish grey oligoclase ; quartz
veins traverse the rock up to a foot in thickness, and druses,
seams, and crystals of cassiterite stud them. Portions of the
veins are micaceous, representing the “greisen” of the Saxon
and Bohemian tin ore districts, differing only from the rock at
Beechworth, in Victoria, in that the granite there is fine and
euritic, and rarely porphyritic.
He considers the veins of softer granite, which are highly
micaceous, of more importance, the quartz and felspar being
insignificant compared with 75 per cent, of mica.
In these micaceous dykes Cassiterite is distributed in crystals
from the size of a pin’s head to above that of a pea, and in
“ nests and branches yielding lumps of mostly pure ore to above
50 lbs. in weight; part of the mass of one of these dykes forming
a breccia of mica and imperfectly crystallized tin ore, cemented


by hydrate of iron.” He comes to the conclusion that the
granite represents one of what in Saxony and Bohemia are
called “ stocks or stockworks, but of incomparably greater size
and thickness.”
He found beryl associated with quartz crystals, in a ferrugi-
nous clay in the spoil heaps of a shaft, and the same mineral on
tin crystals, in fragile small thin crystals ; rock crystal, holding
tin ore; arsenical pyrites; wolfram in the granite, disassociated
from tin. The wolfram itself is either pitch-black, brown, or
hyacinth-red in colour, forming occasionally in twins, as at
Schlaggenwald, with twelve-sided prisms and one pyramid.
The drift is rich, and of recent granite detritus, from six inches
to twelve inches thick, spread over the range ; and there is an
older, probably Pliocene Tertiary cemented gravel of water-worn
pebbles and quartz (rock crystal and cairngorm), hard granite
and hornstone, capping the top and dipping under basalt. The
granite detritus gave from 3 oz. to 2 lbs. of ore to 20 lbs. weight.
He says that for 150 miles far into Queensland all the creeks of
the granite country have proved to be stanniferous.
At Grlen Creek the granite simulates that at Beechworth, in a
small patch of 10 chains, in the creek which runs through hard,
flinty, unfossiliferous slate. Small veins of arsenical and copper
pyrites are enclosed in the granite, which gradually passes into
slate ; the veins of the granite also intruding, without change or
interruption.
This flinty metamorphic slate forms the base of the area, but
in it are outcroppings of micaceous granite, with large radiating
crystals of schorl; and near these protusions are veins of solid
tin ore traversing the slate. The granite is harder than at
Elsmore, and is occasionally traversed by an augitic greenstone
diabase, rougher at the surface than under a covering of drift or
alluvium, and passing, occasionally into a variety of serpentine.
Mr. Ulrich concludes with this remark:—“ Positive want of
water, or too great an expense attached to the bringing of it to
the stanniferous localities will, however, I am afraid, be prohibitory


of the working of a great number of those recently discovered.
Still, the produce of such as can be worked will doubtless, in no
long time, sensibly affect the tin-markets of the world ; in fact, it
seems not unlikely that the production of tin ore in this part of
Australia will reach, if not surpass, that of all the old tin-mining
countries combined.”
These two papers are very important, as giving the settled
opinions of persons whose word may be taken. No guarantee is
required ; but I may add that some of the facts stated were
notified by me in 1853, especially the way Wolfram occurred at
Dundee, from which locality and for many miles northward on
the eastern side of the great granite platform I have a collection
of rocks and ores that enables me to confirm of that side what
Messrs. Alpin and Ulrich say of the western side.
(3.) Let me conclude these selections by a reference to another
of the officers of the staff of the late Victorian Survey, who is
now attached to this Colony, and whose experience will make him
of great service in the district between the Murray and the Mur-
rumbidgee, where he is at present employed. I mean Mr. C. S.
Wilkinson, who some time since published an excellent Eeport
on the Inverell and Cope’s Creek country.
Mr. Wilkinson’s Eeport is in close agreement with those before
quoted, and with my own explorations in the vicinity of his
researches made in the year 1853 ; but he has, however, made
some advances in the development of the structure of the tin
country. He points out variations in the composition of the
granite, its change from ternary to binary character; and shows
how it becomes porphyritic from the admission of orthoclase
felspar, just as Mr. Ulrich found it at Elsmore. Eadiating
crystals of schorl were also observed by him, and smoky quartz
in the geodic hollows of the granite.
Greenstone of a somewhat peculiar kind, with epidote, also
occurs on Cope’s Creek, where it is traversed in places by dykes
of entire granite running N.W. These are split up by vertical
joints parallel with those in the main granite, striking E. 5° N.
In the greenstone occur quartz veins which are believed to be


auriferous, as alluvial gold was found hard by. The veins and
joints seem to be faulted by successive slips, so as to give the rock
a resemblance to a sedimentary deposit. Bex’s ground on Middle
Creek, Cope- ITardinge mine near Tiengha, and a still wider area,
exhibit the same phenomena. Where the strike of the veins and
joints is meridional, no minerals have been found; only in the
newer, or E, 5° N. and N.E. direction, tin lodes occur near Cope’s
Creek.
In the Boundary tin mines, veins of quartz in the granite,
striking E. 20° N., with a very high angle of dip, carry tin as well
as the walls of granite. Eelspathic dykes traversing porphyritic
granite, E. 15° to E. 20° N., near Sutherland’s Water, carry
quartz veins with tin. Solid lodes of tin occur also in other
localities, in the centre of euritic dykes, going E.N.E., and nearly
vertical. Similar cases present themselves to the south-westward,
bearing E.N.E. Eleven thin seams of cassiterite have been
found here in a width of 5 feet. Iron pyrites, galena, and
copper in a quartz dyke, are found on Darby’s Creek in the
granite, going E. 20° N,
These examples are sufficient to point out the character of the
country and the main features of the lodes.
Loose tin occurs in places of considerable size, rounded some-
times as by water, like the drift quartz with gold, which much
resembles the Yictorian Tertiary drifts. I have no doubt myself
that those drifts, especially when between granite and the over-
lying basalt, which also occur in the same neighbourhood, as well
as the quartz veins in the greenstone, are auriferous, and that
much of the loose tin is of the same age as distributed with the
other drift. I have before mentioned that I found Cassiterite in
various places of the granite region in New England, with gold
and gems.* And in a letter not long ago received from Mr.
Wilkinson, he gives me a drawing of some curious diamonds from
Cope’s Creek; and some were brought to me long before from
Boro, having exact resemblance to those from Suttor’s Bar, on
the Macquarie.
* See Trans. Eoy. See. N.S.W., 1872, p. 67.


Limestone occurs near Elsinore, and not far from Barraba, and
elsewhere also to the eastward ; and there is a possibility of find-
ing near Elsmore outliers of wdiat may be considered the Car-
boniferous beds that are in force to the westward.
(4.) I now desire to express my opinion that the region in
which this tin country occurs is Devonian, and that there is
nothing that is usually called primary about the granite which
twenty years ago I traversed in various directions, and of which
I gave a full account to our Government in the reports of my
northern explorations. The slates flanking the granites are seen
to be older than the latter in many places ; and this view is sup-
ported by Mr. Wilkinson’s opinion of a transmutation of the
slates, besides other data which cannot now be mentioned.
Cinnabar.
As an addition to the above discussion in relation to tin, I may
notice here that I have received samples of tin from the granite
highlands of Tasmania, this year discovered; and also last year I
had placed in my hands tin drift from Elinder’s Island, in Bass’s
Strait, where topaz abounds, brought by Mr. Gould, the late head
of the Geological Survey there, who is now added to the staff of
the Topographical Survey of New South Wales. I have also
recently received from a New Zealand friend some excellent
samples of cinnabar. It occurs in a swampy locality, not far
from the Bay of Islands, and under circumstances that fully
justify the opinion I have previously expressed respecting the
agency of hot springs in the production of this ore of mercury
as it has been found in this Colony and in Queensland. It is a new
find, but owes its first discovery to a lady now resident on the
North Shore, who noticed it lying exposed on the surface.
The only occurrence of colonial cinnabar in solid siliceous rock
that I am acquainted with is at Wide Bay Creek, near Kilkivan,
in Queensland. Specimens from both of these new habitats
have been placed by me on the table, for comparison of the modes
of occurrence.


Conclusion.
In bringing before you, gentlemen, at sucb a length the
various topics touched on to-night, my desire has been to state
some of the discoveries that have taken place since the last
Anniversary, and to continue the connected series of reviews of
matters most interesting to ourselves, which I have considered
the fittest way of addressing you in the discursive range allowed
on these occasions.
Other subjects of perhaps equal importance have been passed
by; and even as it is, I must offer an apology for detaining you
so long. It is said, as men grow older they sometimes become
more garrulous. Should I ever grow young again, I will try to
be more concise, and pack my articles in a smaller compass.
Note. —This Address was illustrated bj numerous geological and mineralo-
gical specimens, a coloured map, and sections of Cainozoic, Mesozoic, and
Palaeozoic formations, as they occur in Queensland.
I have read a second Report to the Surveyor General, from Mr. C. S.
Wilkinson, on the Inverell Tin District, which has not yet been published, but
which deals more minutely with the subject discussed in the first Report
mentioned at p. 36. It is a most valuable document.


APPENDIX.
A. (p. 11.)
Since the text was in print three or four small pieces of shale
were found, which had been brought down by the Expedition and
were forwarded to me from Brisbane for inspection ; and on one of
them is a portion of a frond which has the characters of Glossop-
teris. ( L9th August, 1873.)
B. (p. 26.)
In alluding to surveys and mining investigations, I' had in view
all mineral inquiries, including that for coal, because I considered
that if the surveyors and searchers for metals had come across
any coal deposits or associated strata, in places not included in
any special search, we should have heard of them.
No one who has read the Address can doubt that I scrupulously
avoided all exaggerations, and kept in view the sensible remark I
quoted from Mr. Wariugton Sm} T th respecting “elements for
subtraction.”
It is, however, difficult to find out what precise sums Victoria
has expended in her most useful and inimitable surveys and
mining operations ; nor do I know exactly how much ought to be
set apart for coal search alone, seeing'that private operations
have left but few traces capable of being expressed in figures.
But the particulars which I will now mention will be sufficient
to show that no charge of exaggeration can justly be brought
against me.
In Mr. Selwyn’s return as to total cost of his surveys from
1852 to 1861 (inclusive) [Report of 1861], I find (at page 27)
an amount of £32,516 Os. 5d., or at an average of £3,612 per
annum. This, in the approximate estimate of Mr. Brache
(Selwyn’s Report, 1863, p. 41) from 1852 to 1861 inclusive,
comes up to £41,116 9s. lOd.; and in the introduction to the first
volume of the Memoirs of the Geological Society of Italy,
according to information derived from Victoria, it is stated that
Mr. Selwyn’s survey for thirteen years, including salaries, cost
2,500,000 Italian lire, which, at the value of B|-d to the lira, is
£84,635. The introduction is by the President of the Society,
Igino Cocchi, and is entitled, “Brevi Cenni sui Principali Instituti
e Comitati Geologici e sul R. Comitato Geologico dTtalia.”
(Pirenze, 1871.)
In addition to these estimates is one made by Mr. Brache for
Mining Surveys, from 1858 to 1862, which seems to be indepen-


dent of the Geological Survey, as it occurs in the same report
quoted above (from Mr. Selwyn, 24th June, 1863), as to a cost
of £24,300.
On searching the <£ Votes and Proceedings” of the Parliament
of Victoria from 1863 to 1872, it is found that the united annual
expenditures under the head of “ Minister for Mines” for that
period come to no less a sum than £197,983 14s. sd,
Selecting out of these amounts only Mr. Brache’s estimates,
Mr. Selwyn’s own return, and the figures given in the Votes and
1 roceedings, we have an acknowledged expenditui’e for Surveys
and Mining establishments, from 1852 to 1872 inclusive, not
merely £IOO,OOO, but of no less a sum than £263,400 4s. 3d.
sterling.
Such an example of faith and perseverance is not deserving of
censure, but of praise and imitation; and it would be well for us
of this Colony if we could quote from among our many specula-
tive operations a similar instance of devotion to the" cause of
development of natural resources.
As the above data are taken from official sources, they are
probably correct, although there may be others which have not
yet fallen in my way.
Of this great amount, some was, I presume, expended on
“ search for coal ’; but there are items of expenditure for coal
only which deserve consideration, and which were incurred either
by the Government, or by private individuals and companies.
Thus, in the district of Bellerine and Paywit, including
Queensclixf, the Government cost of sinking and boring through
4,688 feet of strata was, up to 1863, £3,557 11s. 3d., but without
any practical result.
The Government expenditure on account of the Griffiths
Point Company, up to 19th January, 1866, was £BBB 10s. 6d.
They “ reached a dej)th ot 822 feet 2 inches, without any coal
having been cut.’—(Selwyn’s Eeport, 1865, p. 21.)
I do not know the full cost ot Government coal search about
Cape Patterson, but the coal company of that name had, in 1860,
expended £3,oso.—(Selwyn, May, 1860.) The same author tells
us that, “ during the last ten or twelve years, probably more than
double that amount has been expended in the district, while
about 100 tons of coal is all that has been brought to market.”
—(Selwyn’s Catalogue of Victorian Exhibition, 1861, p. 185.)
Mr. Brough Smyth (Official Eecord, 1872-3) admits that
“ during the period from 1854 to 1868 many thousands of pounds
were expended in boring and sinking shafts in the Cape Patterson
Coal Field ” and (p. 101-3) up to 31st December, 1871, there had
been raised in the Colony 2,033 tons of coal, and 1,992 tons of
lignite, whilst at Lai Lai, in 1871, there were raised 995 tons of
brown coal, about half of which was saleable.
Mr. H. Levi says (Minutes of Evidence, 23rd April, 1872.
Eeport of Board, p. 28) that “ the Victorian Coal Company


expended between £12,000 and £14,000 in improving their boat
harbour, in boats, shipping coal, and proving the seams, but the
impossibility of transporting the coals at any reasonable cost
put success out of the question.”
At Barrabool Hills, near Geelong, Mr. Thomas spent £B,OOO
in sinking and boring. This spot was examined by myself in
1856 ; the depth reached was 600 feet, and all that had been
discovered was a 6-inch layer of coal.
The Newton and Chilwell Prospecting Association (as I am
informed by a proprietor) expended at least £2,000 in their
operations, reaching a depth of 1,150 feet.
The Griffiths Point Company expended, in addition to the
Government grant of £BBB 10s. 6d., the sum of £444 ss. 3d.,
making for that adventure £1,332 15s. 9d.
Collating these statements, we have the sum of nearly £31,000
sterling, as the cost, up to the times fixed, of the particular
localities enumerated. What may have been the expenditure in
other places does not appear.
As to some of the researches, I may mention, as a proof that
I have not spoken of the Yictorian coal simply from what I have
read, that the directors of the Newton and Chilwell Association
placed in my hands sections of the borings, together with the
materials brought up, so that I was enabled to judge for myself.
The company working on the Bass River also consulted me, and
furnished me with plans and charts, &c.; and the same opportunity
was afforded me by the company at work in the Glenelg district,
near Coleraine.
I may say here, briefly, in each case I was compelled to state
that I recognized nothing approaching to the data that could be
furnished by the coal seams of Newcastle or the Illawarra, and
that I concluded no such strata would be reached except at very
great depths, and then only if not cut out by intrusive or bed
rocks of other formations.
In all these beds from Victoria I saw no trace of our distinguish-
ed plant Glossopteris, nor has it ever been recognized by any
geologist or paloeontologist in that Colony. But it exists in New
South Wales in the Hunter River beds, both below and above
the marine fossiliferous beds among the workable coal seams;
and also in the sandstone at Muree, abounding in the marine
fossils of Lower carboniferous age, in which a Conularia and a
variety of fossils are seen with the remains of a Glossopteris that
must have been washed into the sea when the marine beds were
being deposited.
The marine fossils of that locality were figured by Professor
M c Coy, from the collection sent by me to the late Professor Sedgwick
of Cambridge. (Annals of Natural History, vol. xx., 1847, Ist
Series. See also 2nd Series, September 1848, and 3rd Series,
August, 1862.)


C. (p. 28.)
THE VICTOEIAN COAL-FIELDS.
The following is the first Eeport of Mr. John Mackenzie, F.G.S.
Government Examiner of Coal-fields, New South Wales, on
the Coal-fields of the south-eastern district of Victoria:—
To the Honorable Angus Mackay, M.L.A., Minister for Mines.
Sir, Melbourne, July 28, 1873.
In accordance with your request, and with the permission
of the Honorable the Minister for Lands, I have visited and exa-
mined the coal and strata at The Bass, Griffith’s Point, Blue
Mountains, Sandy Waterholes,Kilcunda, Cape Patterson, Strelezki
near Anderson’s Inlet, Stockyard Creek at Corner Inlet, Traralgon,
and Crossover. I have now the honor to submit the following
report thereon.
THE BASS.
A shaft has been sunk on the river bank (see A on plan), and
some coal said to have been found in it, but owing to its being
half full of water, I was unable to see the strata sunk through.
I examined both sides of the river near the shaft, and could
observe uo trace of coal. Several days’ rain prevented my seeing
the rock in the bed of the creek, where Mr. Krause informed me
there was a small vein or patch of coal, and I could not hear of
any regular seam of coal having been discovered.
gbifpith’s point.
In this district I examined the cliff sections and position of
the old shafts sunk for coal. The carboniferous strata, where the
shaft lettered B on plan has been sunk and a small vein of coal
found, are lying at an angle of 75°, and no workable seam of
coal exists there. It is, in my opinion, only a waste of money to
sink or bore further in this locality.
At C on plan the strata dip north-east, and have been bored
through to a depth of 850 ft. below the sea level, and no coal
seam found. From here to the Sandy Waterholes (see letter D
on plan), a distance of about two and a half miles, a constantly
ascending series of beds, consisting of conglomerates, sandstones,
and shales, with drifted pieces of fossil wood, junks and streaks
of coal and carbonaceous matter, are exposed in natural sections
in the cliffs, but in which there are no regular seams of coal.
It is, therefore, useless to look for, or to expect to find, any
workable seams below those exposed in the cliffs at the Sandy
Waterholes and Griffith’s Point, as the cliff sections and borings
show us that there are none.


Melbourne market. The following is
a section of this
mine : —
Yellow sandstone.
ft.
in.
Grey and blue shale
10
0
Coal (average of six measurements)
1
8
SANDY WATEEHOLES.
On Mr. Turnbull’s land (see letter D on plan) there are seams
of coal exposed in natural cliff sections as shown on section I.
These are regular seams of coal extending over a considerable
area, and I believe them to be identical in geological position
with those commonly called the Hock and Queen veins at Cape
Patterson, and that it is here where they first make their ap-
pearance above the sea-level again on the coast west of I on
plan, near Cape Patterson.
The coal is of very good quality, but it is very much disturbed
by faults, and dips at an inclination of 21° towards the north-east.
The only workable portion of the No. 1 seam is 11 in. of good
coal (see section No. I) and this is too thin to be of any
commercial value.
No. 2 measures 13f in. of good coal (see section) ; and if it
had been formed with a better roof, and had been lying at a less
angle, it might possibly have been w r orked by holing in the 3 in.
of coal lying about 2 ft. below.
KILCUNDA,
I was accompanied in my inspection of this mine by Messrs.
Krause, Watson and Thomas. Six different measurements taken
in the main heading gave 20 in. as the average thickness of the
seam of coal at Eon plan. At Fon plan, about one quarter of
a mile south-west of the main heading, it is 2 ft. in thickness.
The dip is about 8 deg. to the north-east, and two faults have
been proved, one of 120 ft. and another of 20 ft.
The coal produced is bright, bituminous, and non-caking, and
the Coal Board’s estimate of 15 in. of good or round coal is, I
consider, a very liberal one, and quite as much as it will yield.
The seam extends over a large area, and I believe it to be
identical with the one found at the Blue Mountain and Strzelecki
Eanges, and on the sea coast west of the Eock and Queen veins
(see letter H). It has a bad roof, is disturbed by faults, and
near the latter, as is usually the case, the greater paid of the coal
is very soft, and has an irregular cleavage, and when exposed to
the weather decrepitates. In my opinion, it will be impossible to
mine it at such a price as will enable the proprietors to compete
with the New South Wales or other intercolonial coal in the
Floor —Indurated clay.
i annex drawings showing how this coal is worked, and the
Newcastle coal in New South Wales. (See sketch section, page
11.)


BLUE MOUNTAIN.
At a height of about 3LO feet above the sea-level a 17-inch
seam of coal (see Gr on plan) is to be seen outcropping in the
side of a creek. It lies at an inclination of 28°, dips north 25°
west, has brown sandstones and shales above it, similar to those
at Kilcunda, and is, I believe, identical in geological position with
the 20-inch coal at that place. I consequently infer that no
other thicker seam of coal is likely to be found at a workable
depth in this locality. (See general section, Ho. 2.)
It is too thin to be of any commercial value in such a position.
The following is its section :—Alluvial, 2 feet; sandstone, 4 feet;
brown shale, 1 foot; good coal, 1 foot 5 inches.
CAPE PATTETtSON.
Here I find the coal measures intersected by numerous basaltic
dykes and faults, and the dip changing in inclination and direc-
tion at very short distances.
The undulating or folding nature of the strata exposes the
basset edges of two seams of coal, exceeding 1 foot in thickness,
in three different places, at short distances apart. These might
make it appear to a casual observer that they were the outcrops of
three others, although they are really only the same again appear-
ing at the surface of the ground.
Their measurements are shown in vertical section Ho. 3.
I believe the Rock and Queen veins are identical in geological
position with those before mentioned, exposed in natural cliff
sections on Mr. Turnbull’s land at the Sandy AVaterholcs.
The quality of the coal is good, but the faulty nature of the
ground, the irregular and constantly changing dip, the thinness
of the beds of coal, and distance from a shipping port, prevent
its being worked at a profit.
The average of three different measurements of the Rock vein
only gives 2 feet 4 inches of coal, which is divided by two bands
of clay, &c.; and the average of three measurements of the
Queen vein gives 2 feet 2f inches of coal, intersected by no less
than three bands of shale, &c., although the Rock vein has been
called and reported to be a 4-feet coal, and the Queen vein a
3 feet 6 in. seam of coal.
The numerous boreholes put down in this locality have proved
beyond doubt that there are no other payable seams of coal likely
to be found at a workable depth here.
STEZELECKI (m‘CALL AND GO’S LEASE).
In a creek on these ranges, and at a height of about 660 feet
above the level of the sea, a seam of good coal is to be seen
exposed.. The sandstones and shales lying over it are similar to
those at Kilcunda and the Blue Mountain, and I believe it to be
the same coal as is found there.


The following is a section of it at L on plan : —Alluvial, 2 feet;
shale, 2 feet; coal, 8 inches ; indurated clay, 8 inches ; coal, 1
foot 3 inches ; band, 1 inch ; coal, 5 inches ; total of coal, 2 feet
4 inches.
The coal and strata are lying nearly horizontal, having only a
very slight inclination or dip towards the north-west. This coal
has a friable shale roof, which would make it expensive and
difficult to work, and as the owners of the lease have never
attempted to work it, but are boring below, in hopes of finding a
more workable seam, 1 presume that they, like myself, do not
consider that it could be worked to a profit.
On the 28th ultimo, the lessees had bored a distance of 256 feet
below the above-mentioned coal, and the borer told me that the
strata gone through consisted of sandstones with grey and blue
shales, and no coal.
My opinion is that they will have to bore at least 1,200 feet
before any other regular seams of coal will be met with, and that
they would then intersect those identical with the Eock and
Queen veins at Cape Patterson. (See general section, No. 2.)
The rocks now being bored through at this place will probably
have junks and pieces of coal in them similar to those seen on the
coast between Sandy W aterholes and Kilcunda, and if any should
be found, a seam of coal will appear to have been struck, and will
no doubt be recorded as such.
STOCKYARD CREEK (HILT/S PROSPECTING LEASE.)
A very thin and inferior coal is oxitcropping in one place on a
creek on this lease, and a thin stratum of bituminous shale in
another.
The latter was described to me by those interested in it as a
valuable seam of coal. The deposits lie at an angle of 18 deg. to
24 deg., and rest on Silurian rocks, which are to be seen about a
quarter of a mile lower down the creek. The following is their
measurement. (A sketch is here given of the first deposit,
showing a layer of sandstone, followed by inferior coal 9 in. to 1 ft.,
after which is a stratum of very hard shale. In the case of the
second deposit, the strata came in the following order: —Very
hard shale 6 ft. in thickness, indurated clay and black bituminous
shale 3 in., black bituminous shale 2 in., stone 2 in., black shale.)
How any one having the slightest pretensions to a knowledge
of coal-mining could ever look upon these as workable seams of
coal I am at a loss to understand ; for of all the reported dis-
coveries of coal I have ever seen, here or elsewhere, during the
last twenty-five years, I never saw one of less promise.
TRARALGON (N ON PLAN.)
I was accompanied in my examination of the coal discoveries
here by Mr. Krause, Dr. Simmons (one of the Coal Committee),


and Mr. Duncan Campbell. At the time of my inspection, and
previous to it, there was heavy rain, which made my examination
rather difficult,
I looked at the place where the coal had been found, and on
proceeding a short distance higher up the creek I saw the same
strata and coal exposed in a natural section above the bed of the
creek.
There was one layer of coal 2 in. in thickness, and another 10 in.
of shale and coal.
This appears to be the north-easterly edge of the Western
Port and Cape Patterson coal basin, and the shales here contain
similar fossil flora.
Thick beds of conglomerates, sandstones, and shales, with no
workable coal seams in them, are to be seen rising from under
this coal as you ascend the creek, and they rest on Silurian rocks.
Therefore, no workable coal seams will be found by boring or
sinking below the bed of the creek where the shaft was sunk.
Whether the 300 ft. or 400 ft. of sandstones and shales, &c., in
the ranges over where the shaft was sunk contain any workable
coal, it is impossible to say for certain without provings being
made.
But I think that, if they did contain any thick or workable
seams of coal, we should have seen some pieces or trace of it in
walking round the ranges. We discovered none.
CROSSOVER (o ON PLAN).
Having given my knee-joint a very severe wrench through a
buggy accident, whilst proceeding on my journey here, I was
unable to examine all the different outcrops of lignite and brown
coal in this locality, as it was impossible to go to two of them
without walking several miles through a scrubby country, which
I was then unable to do.
I therefore left instructions for specimens and sections to be
procured me from the two places I was unable to visit, and
engaged two men to further test the nature of the brown coal in
the drive I inspected.
After receiving the specimens and measurements, I hope to be
able to form an opinion as to the value of these deposits.
To summarize the remarks made in the foregoing report, I may
briefly state that, having given the whole subject my very best
consideration, I have arrived at the following conclusions: —
1. That it is useless to expend any further sums of money in
searching for payable seams of coal in The Bass, Griffith’s Point,
Western Port, Cape Patterson, Strzelecki, or Stockyard Creek
districts.


2. That the Kilcunda, Blue Mountain, or Strzelecki seam of
coal might he sought for and opened out in the ranges east and
north of Messrs. M'Call and Co.’s lease at Strzelecki, proving it
at intervals of a few miles apart to determine the thickness.
3. That the country might he examined between the above-
mentioned ranges and the river Latrohe, or north-easterly and
north-Avesterly edge of the coal basin, to see whether the Bock or
Queen veins, or their equivalents, rise to the surface again in this
direction, and are of any value. Such an exploration can only be
properly and efficiently carried out by your Mining Department,
and under a responsible person. The very excellent and valuable
geological maps prepared by the late Director-General of the
Geological Survey, and the more recent maps published by your
present Secretary for Mines —Mr. E. Brough Smyth, F.G.S.—
are proofs beyond dispute that you will, by this means, have the
work done in the best and most efficient manner possible.
I cannot conclude this report without expressing my thanks to
Mr. Krause for his valuable assistance in conducting me to many
of the places herein referred to, which were very difficult of
access ; and also for his kind attention to me personally when I
met with the accident at Moe; also to Mr. Murray, for his kind
attention and assistance at Cape Patterson and the neighbour-
hood.
[The above Report was laid before the Victorian Parliament
Tuesday, 12 August, 1873, and is reprinted here in justice to my
own opinion previously expressed.]
The following is a second Report of subsequent date, also laid
before the Parliament of Victoria :—•
To the Hon. Angus Mackay, M.P., Minister for Mines.
Melbourne, August 19, 1873,
Sir,
I have the honour to submit my Report upon the coal and
lignite you desired me to examine in the Crossover, Barrabool
Hills, AVinchelsea, and Loutit Bay districts.
CROSSOVER —LIGNITE DEPOSIT.
In my previous Report I mentioned that, owing to an accident,
I was unable to examine two other alleged discoveries in this
locality, and before expressing any opinion I thought it advisable
to have measurements and samples sent me from all the different
places, the alleged discoveries being represented as of a much
superior quality to that being worked in the drive I inspected.
After putting on men for a fortnight to procure specimens, I
have only received some from the original drive.


Surface soil
1
0
White clay and grit
2
6
Black clay, with, imperfectly carbonized pieces of
wood
1
6
Lignite or brown coal
3
4
Brown coal (conchoidal fracture)
1
7
Brown bituminous shale
0
2*
Brown shale
2
10
Yellow clay, with fossil resin
1
10
Brown coal or lignite
4
4
Brown clay
1
0
Yellowish-white plastic clay
0
6
No reference being made to the new ground, I am inclined to
think that its productions are either inferior in quality or that no
lignite exists therein.
The following is an account of the strata proved in the cutting
and drive opened out: —
ft. in.
Greenish sandstone.
The lignite in the drive is of a very fair quality, hut is at the
present time of no commercial value in such a position, as it could
not compete with firewood for house-fire purposes in any of your
large cities, and is not suitable for locomotive engines.
BAEEABOOL HILLS, GEELOHG, AND BELLEEINE.
The lithological character of the Barrabool Hills sandstone is
the same as that which lies over the 17-inches to 2-feet coal in
the Western Port district.
I inspected the 1,200 feet shaft and borehole made by Mrs.
Thomas and others at Barrabool Hills, in which 6 inches of coal
were said to be found. I also carefully looked over the accounts
of the strata sunk and bored through in numerous places in the
Bellerine district, where a vertical thickness of over 4,000 feet of
strata has been tested, and no workable seam discovered.
I am of opinion that the above-mentioned shafts and boreholes
have proved that there are no payable coal seams at a workable
depth in either of these districts, or in the intervening country
at Drysdale, Geelong, &c.
WOEMBETE, NEAE WIN CHELSEA.
I was accompanied, in my examination of the coal worked here,
by Messrs. Stirling, Krause, and Moran.
At a height of about 750 feet above the level of the sea, near
the head of Wormbete Creek, a 3|-inch to 4-inch layer of coal is
to be seen in several places.


The following is a section of it, and the overlying and under-
lying strata: —
ft. in.
Brown sandstones, a great thickness.
Blue shale, about 12 0
Coal, inches to 0 4
Blue sandy shale.
Sandstone.
The strata and coal dip about 7\° to the east, 20° south.
No other seam of coal has been seen, either higher up or
lower down the creek, although there are excellent natural sec-
tions exposed to view in several places here, as well as in other
parts of the district; it is therefore useless to expect to find a
payable seam of coal in this locality.
The place is one of those described by people inexperienced in
such matters as giving “ good indications,” and money has been
uselessly expended in driving in a 3|-inch coal, with the hope of
its becoming thicker when further developed. It was also sup-
posed to be a “ good indication” of finding a thick and payable
coal below, although they could see no coal underneath it in the
natural exposed sections of strata lower down the creek, and
consequently will find none by sinking or boring.
LOITTIT BAT TO STONY CREEK, ALONG THE COAST.
Excellent natural exposed cliff sections are to be seen here, and
they show us that there are considerably more than 1,000 feet of
sandstones, with shale very similar to those at Barrabool Hills,
and on the Blue Mountain and Strzelecki Ranges, in Western
Port, in which there is no coal of any value, the thickest being
about 5 inches.
A shaft has been sunk and a borehole put down by the Colac
Company to the depth of about 120 feet, on “ good indications,”
and money expended in piercing strata similar to that exposed
to view in natural cliff sections adjacent to where the borehole
was made.
Thin irregular patches of coal, called “ good indications,” are
to be seen in the cliff sections, and also, at low water, in the rocks
outcropping on the beach, the shaft and borehole only going
through the same strata as are seen in the cliffs.
STONY GREEK, NEAR AIRET’s INLET.
I went down a shaft 45 feet deep, at the bottom of which a
place has been driven about five yards in an inferior bed of lignite
18 inches in thickness. Other shafts have been sunk through
the upper portion of the lignite deposit, and in one of them 4
feet of inferior lignite and sandy shale have been cut through.
I was unable to measure a section of the different strata be-
tween the upper 4-feet bed of lignite and sandy shale, and the


lower 18-inch seam, on account of the main shaft being
timbered; but the two beds examined were considered to be the
best.
The extent of these lignite deposits is very limited, and they
hare now been sufficiently tested to show us that their quality is
not likely to improve by any further sinking or driving; and they
may therefore be regarded as of no commercial value, so long as
there is any quantity of cheap firewood to be obtained.
In conclusion, it may be as well for me to state my reasons for
recommending, in a previous Report, that any future provings
should be carried out under the direction of your department.
They are as follows :
Because I found that large sums of money had been expended
by the Government in supplementing sinkings and borings in
different districts, at the recommendation of private individuals,
who had their own more or less crude ideas as to “good indications,”
and where coal was likely to be found.
Thus, some one in the AVestern Port District, not qualified to
give an opinion, but who happens to have lived in a mining town-
ship in AVales or Lancashire, imagines that the surface of the
ground here reminds him of a spot he knew there where coal was
found, and reports it as “ good indications,” where money should
be expended by the Government.
Another —in Cape Otway or AVincheslea—who by chance may
have been born in a coal-mining district in Scotland, sees a place
which reminds him of his native country, and forthwith proclaims
its “ good indications,” and a consequent appeal is made for
Government funds.
A third imagines that if there are a few inches of coal in any
rock in his district, a “ good indication” exists to justify sinking
through it in the expectation of finding a thicker seam below.
I have already pointed out the fallacy of such reasoning.
In another case, a borer or sinker passes through some black
shale which reminds him of a similar deposit over a 6- or 10-
foot coal in England, and therefore concludes that a like seam
will be found under the black shale here.
I have, &c.,
JOHN MACKENZIE, E.G.S.,
Government Examiner of Coal Eields, N.S.W.
D. (p. 38.)
The extension of coal in this direction is rendered probable by
the fact that a seam of coal crosses the Macintyre, about nine miles
below Inverell, and is doubtless connected with the AVarialda and
Gragin country.


*
#




