

pern p \
RtLiaious
eon ti fr|{
ADDRESS
JAMES MOORHOUSE, D.D.
BISHOP OF MELBOURNE
TO THE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND ASSEMBLY
MELBOURNE
TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 16, 1879
PRICE THREEPENCE
MELBOURNE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND BOOK DEPOT
53 WILLIAM STREET
1879


J
. i


THE PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS
Cbc Cliurcb of OBaglantr Kssemblir.
My Brethren of the Clergy and the Laity,
We are met together at a time of great trouble and per-
plexity, not only to the colony of Victoria, but to the whole
civilised world. There is great unsettlement of belief, wide
spreading distress, and deep social discontent in almost every
considerable nation. Fear is on every hand that the near
future may bring with it desolating wars, social upheavals, and
far-reaching misery. To some it almost appears as if we were
to enter upon a reign of chaos. We Christians, however, have
better hopes for the future of our race. We believe that the
future is in the hands of an all-merciful Father; that He is
ordering all things (even things evil and threatening) for the
accomplishment of a definite design, of a design of salvation, of
which we have the best pledge and assurance in that life ot
Christ which dwells within our heart. This faith gives to us
the consciousness of a great mission; of a mission not only to
the faithful, but also to that great world of unbelievers which,
in some instances most unwillingly, stands aloof from the
Church of God. , ~ „ ,
In the prosecution of that mission I believe we shall find
more friends than we are wont to recognise. In all true science
we should welcome a friend and an ally. It is not science it
is a presumptuous metaphysic abusing the conclusions of science
and pressing its hazardous speculations into a region beyond
that of science—which is our real enemy. (Applause.) JNot,
however, in the direction of such speculations are we to seek
the movement of the really fruitful and influential thought ot
our ace. This, for the most part, advances to the investigation
of its proper object, verifiable fact. The human soul, tor
instance, is a fact, and in the investigation of its faculties,
intuitions, and processes, psychology has a large and truittul
field of labour. , . , .
Human history, again, is a record of facts, and in the analysis
of those great moral and social forces which have guided our


life, in tlie determination of the true relation and interdepen-
dence of those critical events which have marked the successive
stages of human progress, historical science has its proper and
most instructive study. Whatever has influential relation to
the soul, with its sorrows and hopes, to history with its cheer-
ing or tragic lessons, is of eternal importance to humanity, is
of especial importance in this most critical age. (Applause.)
For now men are exploring every corner of the kingdom of
nature, and more especially of that spiritual arcanum and
sanctuary of nature, the soul of man. In every mind the great
question is forcing itself to be heard, Is God here; and if so,
where most evidently, where most divinely 1 Man has been
brooding over this problem more or less consciously ever since
the lifted veil of history has permitted us to behold Him, He
is asking it now more eagerly and more solemnly than ever—
more eagerly because in the daring Promethean speculations of
science he almost seems to touch the hidden reality of being;
and more solemnly, for upon the answer to that question it
depends, and is seen to depend, whether our human life is
worth living.
Brethren and fathers of the Church of God, I have no fear;
I dread no light. I rejoice in every advance of real knowledge,
for although the future formal solution of our difficulties may
perhaps be different from mine, yet most firmly do I believe
that we hold in our hand the key of the great mystery. I
believe that in the life of Christ we have at once the ideal and
the inspiration of all time—that in the Christian Church, with
all its mistakes and its triumphs, its sins and its services, we
have the organ and minister of that life, the divinely-appointed
home of the weary and refuge of the fallen, (Applause.)
But, my brethren, if we are to accomplish this our divine
mission to humanity, if we are to convince it that Christ is at
once the life of man and the light of his history, we must
possess no common zeal and no common qualities. We must
learn what the soul is, and what history is, and what Christ is.
And the effort to gain that knowledge alone is a task which
may well occupy the highest powers and the longest life.
There can be no place in these days for idle, or ignorant, or
fanatical Christians. If the crown of all the world is to be
placed upon those sacred brows which are eternally destined
to wear it, it must be by a Church as diligent as it is faithful,
as large-hearted as it is true.
Of course, my brethren of the clergy, very much will depend
upon us, and more even upon our life than our knowledge. If
we show men that we are filled with the love of Christ, that
we are lofty and spiritual in our aims, that we are unselfish
and unworldly, content with plain living and little notice, eager


to spend all our energy of mind and body for the spiritual
welfare of our neighbours, patient under provocation, perse-
vering, industrious, considerate for the feelings of others, as
gentle in applying truth as we are faithful in declaring it ; as
ready to succour the poor, the sick, and the sorry as we are to
resist the seducer and wrong-doer—then will men come to
respect and to love us ; yea, and to seek that heavenly grace of
which they have seen the power in our lives.
Easy to require, you will say; but who is sufficient to achieve
such things? Ah ! who, indeed, my brethren? Poor I know
will be our performance, and scanty our achievement, at the
best. But, at least, we can recognise what we ought to be; at
least, we can do our best to attain it—that thus, by pitching
our aim so high, we may feel a divine discontent with our
shortcomings, and be moved to the more earnest prayer and
the more strenuous effort in the daily discharge of our task.
Miserably insufficient will be our best; but, at least, if we
strive, and watch, and pray, we shall “ have done all that lieth
in us,” to use the words of our Church, “to bring all such as
are committed to our charge into that agreement in the faith
and knowledge of God, and to that ripeness and perfectness of
age in Christ, that there be no place left among us either for
error in religion or for viciousness in life.”
It is a hard task, my brethren, which is set before us in these
-colonies—to work without ceasing, to watch without fainting,
to take no counsel of fear when the board is bare, or of weak-
ness when worry and opposition and conflicting duties well-nigh
overtax the brain ; but, then, the work is great and the crown
is bright, and there is unbroken rest when the day’s work is
accomplished.
I have spoken strongly to the clergy, because I believe that
it is generally true that as the clergyman is, so will his congre-
gation be. Still, it is not to be forgotten that the clergy alone
are not the Church, and that they can do nothing to any good
purpose unless the laity will combine to help them with means
and work and sympathy. Everywhere the complaint is made
that, with a few noble exceptions, the laity of our Church
exhibit but little interest in its labours. They come to public
worship. They give the amount of subscriptions which is
prescribed by the practice of their neighbours. Some of them
will attend vestry meetings and other business gatherings, but
there their interest ends. There is no enthusiasm—there is
little self-sacrifice. Too often they can bear to see their clergy
struggling with poverty, or toiling in vain to extend the minis-
trations of the Church to those nominally committed to them,
without stretching out a finger to help them.
I am not unmindful of the present distress, and that if the


clergy of some districts suffer through, lack of means, they
are only sharing the poverty of their people. Still, however,
I fear that the tokens are too plain everywhere that our
people lack that interest in their Church and its work which
they show in their business and even their amusements.
Were I asked the reason of this, I am afraid that honesty
would compel me to answer, the want of any deep conviction
of the use and necessity of the Gospel. I know that it is
the business of us of the clergy to produce this conviction,
and that for its absence we cannot perhaps be entirely
acquitted of blame. At the same time, everyone must
recognise that circumstances make our task a peculiarly
difficult one. I do not now refer to the size of our districts,
or to the distance of many of our churches from the homes
of the worshippers, but rather to that general unsettlement
of belief which is characteristic of the age. It might perhaps
be too much to say that there is positive unbelief amongst
our people. Rather is it the absence of any belief strong
and quick enough to serve as a stimulus to self-sacrifice.
And for this state of feeling the clergy alone are not to be
held responsible. It depends very greatly upon influences
over which they have little control.
Although, as I have said, I believe that the main current
of the age’s thought is in a healthy direction, it cannot be
denied that many of the favourite studies of the day, much
of its higher literature, and many of its strongest sympathies,
lean powerfully towards a godless materialism. And this
spreads its deadening influence over large classes who know
nothing of it as a theory. The earth-bound nature of man
needs little persuasion to follow its instinctive bent. And
thus it comes about that the waves of materialistic thought
reach shores which are far indeed removed from the centre
of their propagation. What is seen is believed, and what
can be made intelligible to the understanding is received.
But as to other things, things which belong to the ideal and
unseen world, which make their appeal less to the senses and
intellect than to the conscience and religious feeling—these
are suffered to drop out of sight. They do not jump with
the humour of the time, they are out of harmony with what
is called the sphit of the age; and so men pass them by.
It will not be so long. For the instincts which are stifled
are among the strongest in our nature, the interests which are
neglected are those upon which human goodness and happiness
principally depend. There will come a day of reaction, when
the lazy agnosticism and heartless materialism of our time will
be thought no more useful or respectable than the unbelief of
the eighteenth century.


Do not, then, my brethren of the laity, suffer yourselves to
be disheartened or enervated by the insipid indifference of
ordinary life. Gird up the loins of your mind, call back the
memory of those better days when the water of life in your
souls was a running stream. Ask God to restore to you some
of the warmth, the impulse, the self-devoting energy of your
first-love, and then nothing shall be impossible to you. We do
not want great numbers. We want the true fire of Christ’s
love in those whom we have. Twelve heaven-sent missionaries
converted the world, and fewer even than that, if only their
hearts were kindled by the spark from on high, might fill our
Church in this diocese with strong and fruitful life.
Let me ask you to begin, then, by living such a life as shall
be answerable to your name. Let every one of us be
determined to give a public continuous witness to our faith
by regular attendance at the House of God and the table of
our Lord. Let us establish (if unhappily that still remains to
be done) family prayer in our dwelling, so making of our home
not only a shrine of the affections, but alsp a temple of the
living God. And thus worshipping God in public and in
private, let us give evidence of the reality of our faith by
strenuous endeavours to bless our neighbours, and to extend
the boundaries of our Master’s kingdom.
The love that will not make sacrifices for its object is not
worthy of the name. And of what avail, then, is it to profess
love to Christ, if we refuse to spend any portion of our time,
energy, and means, in attempting to compass that object which
lies nearest His heart, the redemption and regeneration of
souls. What a lesson has been read us on this subject by the
modern Mussulmans. Fifty years ago everybody said that
Islam was dead, its faith vanished, and its strength outworn.
And what does Dr. Dollinger tell us of it now ? “ If,” he says
( Contemporary Review , June, 1879), “we look simply at the
strong expansive force of the Arabian religion, which is ex-
tending itself now almost as rapidly and as vigorously by the
peaceful methods of persuasion as formerly by the sword, we
are in presence of an historical enigma. In Africa it advances
like a torrent; whole tribes in the interior which yesterday
were idolaters or fetish worshippers being to-day believers in
the Koran. In Sierra Leone, on the north-western coast of
■Guinea, there is a Moslem high-school with 1,000 pupils. In
China the Mussulmans have already become so numerous that
they were able to recently venture on an insurrection. Among
the Malays in the islands of the Eastern Archipelago they
have, for the first time in our day, made hosts of proselytes.
From Sumatra, Islam has spread to Java, and the whole popu-
lation (nearly 8,000,000) have now for the first time become


Mahometan. Wherever in the Indian Archipelago a formerly
heathen population is under the Dutch rule Islam makes
gigantic strides, while Christianity, in spite of the missonaries
and missionary societies, advances very little, if it does not
actually lose ground.”
Truly, as Dr. Dollinger says, this is an historical enigma.
How is it that this imperfect faith, said long ago to be dead,
and buried in the grave of its prophet, has started up before
us all at once in the possession of strong and growing life ?
The answer which Dollinger gives from the writing of De Tassy
is one which we ought never to forget. “The chief cause of
this astonishing advance is said to be the facility offered by
steam navigation for the pilgrimage to Mecca ; for the
numerous pilgrims or Hadjis who return fx’om thence become,
as a rule, zealous missionaries of the prophet. Moreover, in
Eastern Asia and Africa, as elsewhere, Islam has one important
advantage over the Christian Churches, from its knowing
nothing of any sharp distinction between the clergy and
laity ; so that eveiy Moslem feels bound to take part in the
conversion of unbelievers, while Christians ax*e accustomed'
to treat mission work as an affair of the clergy.”
Could words be more emphatic or instructive. The new
energy of Islam arises from two causes. First, from a more
real belief (gained no matter how) in their religion, and
secondly, by the strenuous effort of every Moslem layman to
make others the sharers of his faith. There was no need of
any new revolution, no need of any crusade of the sword ; all
that was wanted, all that is gained, is this—the turning formal
into real belief, and the recognition of the duty of every lay-
man possessing that belief to propagate it.
Taught, then, by this example, what shall we say is our
present greatest necessity 1 We want laymen who believe
something, who, having made the pilgrimage to Calvary, have
found thei’e the remedy for their sin. We do not want what
ax’e called sound men, men who can say their creeds without
missing a syllable, but men with the life of Christ glowing in
their hearts—men who must tell out the love they feel, and
who will take the grand comprehensiveness of our Church as
their waxTant for telling it in the first words of affection which
find their way to the lips.
I would xxot be thought to undexwalue the form of sound
words, but I desire to state as emphatically as I can that the
thing of first importance is not formal accux'acy, but abounding
life—an enthusiastic purpose to fight against the kingdom of
darkness and advance the boundaries of the kingdom of light.
To this end every Christiaxx man should determine to contx-ibute
not only money, but also some kind of labour. If Islam can


furnish its missionaries by myriads, shall the love of Christ
remain unknown amongst us because there are no hearts
■warm enough or bold enough to tell it 1 It is not mere
organisation that we want, but the touch of a kindling
purpose, the spur of a quickening faith. Where that is it
will make its way, and where that is not, the creation of mere
machinery is vain. (Applause.)
I would suggest, then, to the clergy, that from time to time
they summon their church-workers, and as many others of their
communicants as can be got together, for the purpose of stii i ing
up this feeling of missionary responsibility. Such conferences
might begin with a solemn celebration of the Lord s Supper, so
calling to remembrance the lessons and inspirations of our
Master’s dying love in the way of his own appointment. Then,
out of God’s holy word the clergyman might enlarge on the duty
of self-devoting labour; then, in earnest mutual prayer—prayer
not only of the clergyman, but of all who in a few plain words
can utter the breathing of devout desire —they might ask God
to stir them to the performance of this duty, and to show them
the best way of discharging it. Let prayer and holy service
then be followed by consultation upon the special subject of the
meeting, and I feel confident not only that the sense of respon-
sibility will be deepened amongst Christ’s people, but that also
there will be quickened in not a few the spirit of self-dedication
and the purpose to labour for Christ.
It should be our fixed aim and our constant endeavour to
enlarge the circle of our workers. No clergyman should be
satisfied till every person confirmed in his parish is a regular
communicant, and every communicant a labourer. Work
should be the aim of all teaching, the bond of all association.
Till every congregation is a hive of labourers —till every
communicant is in some sort a missionary for Chi'ist, our Church
will never either move the world or realise the communion of
saints.
It cannot be necessary that I should suggest to you forms ot
labour. The ordinary forms are well known to you all. It
may not, however, be out of place to remind those of you who
live in towns, that there are many days when neither church
nor schools are opened for any useful purpose. I think that
we should be jealous of this waste. I have said befoi'e, axxd I
repeat it, that I see no valid reason against the use of our
churches for such services of song as I recently attended at
St. James’s Church in this city ; or for the delivery of such
lectures xxpon Chxxi’ch heroes, or Chixrch history, or sxxbjects
illustrative of Bible literature, as are not unfrequently to be
heard in the chapter-house of St. Paul’s Cathedral. lam not
suggesting that the burden of such lectures should be laid


exclusively on the clergy. In such a city as Melbourne, there
should be hundreds of men, who, if they would give the time
and pains, could prepare lectures on such subjects which would
command the attention of their neighbours. What educated
man would find it difficult to create an interesting lecture out
of such volumes as those which constitute Macmillan’s Sunday
Library. Let him take the life of Anselm, for instance, and
on the plan of Dean Church, lay down the outlines of his
scheme. Then let him go to the Melbourne Library and consult
as many books on the subject as lie within his reach. Having
thus gathered a fund of rich materials, let him carefully arrange
them, and taking out of his stock whatever is most important
and interesting, in a plain, clear, vigorous way, let him write
down his narrative and conclusions. It is hard work, and the
more pains you take to make your lecture clear and simple, the
less credit you are likely to get for your trouble. But what of
that ? You won’t do it to get credit, but to make people love
Christ, and for your own reward you will have the interest of
your labour and the enriching of your own soul. Some,
perhaps, may tell me that even if they could write such a
lecture they would not be able to read it. The more reason
then why parochial societies should be formed for the practise of
such writing and reading. Do you love Christ ? Do you want
to make other people love Him ? Then you will take the
necessary means and delight in taking them, thinking no labour
too great, and no trouble a task, if only it contributes to
this end.
I would venture to suggest again to town incumbents that
though the state schools have robbed us of our children, they
do not compete with us for them after a certain age. Speaking
from my own experience, I do not think that boys get sufficient
stability of purpose to come to evening institutions before the
age of eighteen. But what parish is there in Melbourne that
ought not to have its evening institute for men above that age?
Places should be built for the purpose. There ought to be
rooms where the less studious can read the papers, and have
harmless amusements and unintoxicating refreshments. There
ought to be rooms where classes are held for the more thought-
ful, not in the common school drudgery of reading, writing, and
arithmetic, but in history, political economy, English literature,
and the Bible —subjects of the most vital interest, and which
would come with ail the freshness of novelty upon the minds of
our youth, being actually excluded from the state school curri-
culum. “ Oh,” but you will say, “ all this means money and
labour, and where are they to be found ?” Where I have asked
you to seek them —in the love of hearts which, kindled by the
spirit of Christ, count it all joy to spend their best in His


service. That Church is no Church which cannot create such
members as these, nor ought any of us to rest from our labour,
and pains, and care, till, by God’s blessing on our efforts, results
like these are making themselves seen.
In country districts it may be more difficult to carry out such
schemes. But how sad is it there to see the clergyman left to
struggle round his district on a Sunday, not able even to give
one service a day in all his churches, while there are intelligent
communicants spending their time idly at home. Every man
whom Christ has blessed is bound to be a missionary. If that
obligation were felt, there would be two services every Sunday
in every country church in this colony, the laity supplying the
clergy’s lack of service, and labouring as one man for the
common Master. I have asked the laity before, and I urge
them earnestly and affectionately again, to let their clergymen
procure for them my licence, and so to go forth as the Church’s
authorised ministers to work for her Divine Master. (Ap-
plause.)
This brings me to the consideration of a subject of some
importance, which also has attracted attention at home.
I mean the possibility of conferring deacon’s orders on those
who still pursue a secular calling. We have at present, as
you know, an order of stipendary readers. But since the
requirement has been made that, as a rule, our candidates
for orders shall reside three years at the University, and
take a University degree, some difficulty has been felt in
obtaining as readers men who by their freedom from matri-
monal ties and their possession of so much natural ability
as shall make up for the lack of early training, can pass
successfully through such an ordeal. For a time at least,
until, as we hope, we obtain a larger supply of duly trained
candidates from the high schools (especially the Church of
England Grammar Schools) of the colony, it would greatly
help to diminish the present difficulty if men of high Christian
character, who had no present purpose of leaving their secular
calling, were admitted to the diaconate. Incidentally, too,
this might gain for us, in some instances a very excellent
class of clergy. For although, as a rule, secular deacons
would never proceed beyond that degree, yet cases might
occur (and I am disposed to think they would be more
numerous than most of us anticipate) in which the exercise
of the office of a deacon would develope ministerial powers
so considerable, and a taste for spiritual work so decided,
that, by the call of God, the secular deacon might pass to
the office of the priesthood. I am sure that for want of
some such provision we lose at times most valuable ministers.
And we cannot afford this.


The one great need of our Church in this hemisphere is
to raise up a native ministry so adequate in number, and so
approved in qualification, that we shall become independent
of assistance from home. No Church can be said to have
permanently struck its roots into the spiritual soil till it
has made adequate provision for securing and training its
own ministry. And any measure which, like the establish-
ment of a secular diaconate, promises to contribute materially
to such a result is so far powerfully recommended. Of course
there are objections—some of them, perhaps, serious—to such
a step as this. I think but little of the common remark,
that it would be inconvenient to have two classes of deacons,
one permanent and the other not. For what young minister
whose heart was in his work would think it a degradation
to share the first degree of his sacred office with men approved
for their general intelligence and lofty Christian character ?
Of a much more serious nature is another objection which
might be made on the part of the laity. These, it is alleged,
could never be brought to tolerate as ministers persons who
were their colleagues or competitors in worldly business.
Prudence or enterprise in a lay deacon would be apt, it is
feared, to go by the ugly name of meanness or sharp dealing,
to say nothing of the discredit which might be brought upon
the ministry by the inevitable casualties of business, leading to
insolvency and the like. I confess that this is an objection of
weight sufficient to make us pause upon such a step before
taking it ; and yet I see not that it should prevent us, even
now, from offering the office of deacon to such members of the
learned professions, as, having made for themselves an assured
position, are willing to devote a portion of their trained
energy to the service of the Church of God. (Applause.)
In respect of another reform which has been proposed at
home, I entertain a much more decided opinion. In order to
secure a better training of candidates for the priesthood, the
Bishop of Peterborough proposed in a late charge that the
Church should revert “ to what was its rule for 100 years after
the Reformation, by fixing the minimum limit of age for
ordination to the diaconate at 21, instead of, as it is at present,
23 years j leaving that for the priesthood as it is now, 24
years.” He would utilise the lengthened period of the
diaconate by requiring the young clergyman to pursue a fixed
course of study under the direction of the bishop’s chaplain,
and by further requiring him to submit to periodic examina-
tions, which should serve as a test of progress. It cannot be
denied that by founding a theological school at Trinity College,
we have so far conformed our practice to that of the Church at
home, that this suggestion has attained for us a very consider-


able degree of importance. So long as our candidates for
orders were required to pass through the preliminary office of
the readership, they did receive a training, both practical and
theoretical, of a certain degree of efficiency. Many thought that
degree a low one, and it is certain that, to take full advantage
of the slender opportunities of study left possible by a reader’s
life, a far higher degree of mental discipline was x*equired than
any with which the reader’s career had ordinarily furnished him.
Still, the readership was to some extent—and in the practical
direction it might have been to a very considerable extent—a
training for the special duties of the ministry. By requiring
our candidates to take a University degree, we secure to them
great, and in the present day necessary, advantages. We
develope their natural faculties. We give them the habit of
patient and exact study. We teach them, or hope to teach
them, that modesty of statement which comes from a perception
of real difficulties, and, although this perhaps is a less impor-
tant matter, we place them on the same intellectual level as
the best instructed members of other professions. But then,
to counterbalance all these advantages, we deprive them, and
shall do to a still greater extent in the future (if we realise our
hope of attracting boys from the grammar schools to the
ministry), of any practical training for their ministerial work.
How, then, is this to be supplied, unless, by extending the
period of the diaconate, we furnish at the end of the University
course what we used to bestow before ordination 1
One other great advantage would be secured by this arrange-
ment to students themselves. At present, if a student leaves
one of the grammar schools for Trinity College at the age of
eighteen, although he would have finished his University course
at twenty-one, he could not be ordained deacon till two years
later, and must spend the intervening time either in some
secular work which might draw him away from his calling, or
in the position of a reader, to which his friends perhaps might
object.
I do most earnestly hope that the faithful members of the
Church will give to the service of their divine Master, not only
of their wealth and labour, but also the very best and brightest
of their children. Not for money, not for position, but for the
noblest and grandest office which man can discharge unto man;
for the labour of making men better and happier; for the
creation of influences which will take their place among the forces
of eternity ; for the production of results which shall only then
be coming to their perfection when this life of sense, with the
wealth that fed it, and the sword that defended it, and the law
that defined it, and the statesmanship that guided it, shall be
among the unconsidered trifles of the past. (Applause.)


I know the difficulties, the dangers, the remorses, the labours,
the disappointments of a pastor’s life, but I know also its joy
and its glory, the fulness of interest with which it engages the
mind, the power of impulse with which it stimulates the heart;
and I testify solemnly before you to-day, that I would not
exchange its lofty aims and elevating labours (even though like
St. Paul I had to win the privilege of pursuing them with the
labour of my own hands) for the highest office which the world
can offer. I ask you, then, with a clear and honest mind, to
give of your best unto Christ; and it is just that I may make
it easier for you to do so, and that I may provide the best
possible training for those of your sons whom you may entrust
to us, that thus early in the history of our theological school I
propose that its alumni shall receive deacon’s orders at the age
when they ordinarily leave it.
I am aware that this suggestion will need careful considera-
tion, but I make it in order that it may be considered.
I have spoken separately to the clergy and the laity. I pass
on now to subjects which concern them both. I felt it necessary,
a short time ago, for the better ordering of certain matters in
the diocese, to divide my charge into rural deaneries, and to
appoint rural deans over them. And I would venture to
recommend now to the chapters that they associate with them-
selves, wherever practicable, lay representatives of the several
parishes. We find the great advantage of clerical and lay
co-operation in this Assembly; and I think that most of those
advantages might be secured by a mixed constitution of the
rural deaneries. It is the object of the foundation of these
chapters—l. To gather up and help in developing the thought
and plans of the district. 2. To provide an official organ
authorised to speak the mind of the Churchmen of that particular
district. 3. To furnish an opportunity which mere voluntary
associations seldom seek, of drawing together men of differing
practical and theological views, so promoting brotherly feeling
and dispelling those misunderstandings which are the fruitful
cause of bitterness and estrangement. 4. To aid in removing
that sense of isolation and helplessness which so chills the
heart and paralyses the energy of sensitive men left alone in
the solitude of our large towns and country districts.
All these are important objects, the last of them especially
so. For what greater help can a man get than may be furnished
by spending a few hours with brethren who have the same
cares and interests as himself, by opening his heart to those
who can best understand him, and by gaining the feeling that
he is no longer a solitary scout, keeping watch over a distant
post, but the member of a great army, pledged and able to
support and succour him. It seems to me, I must say, that all


these objects will be more effectually attained, if, in our ruri-
diaconal chapters, the faithful laity be associated with their
clergy.
Recent events, and especially the need of coming to some
understanding on the education question, have induced my
brother, the Bishop of Ballarat, to propose the appointment of
a committee, to consist of members of the two dioceses, for the
purpose of considering questions of inter-diocesan interest.
The need for something of the kind is obvious. For while the
synod of Australia may very well determine questions of a
more general kind, that synod can evidently give us little help
when the question to be considered depends upon the special
civil legislation of the colony of Victoria. This may be, and
no doubt is, an argument for the constitution of a province of
Victoria at the earliest possible moment. But meanwhile it
would seem to be very desirable to create some body of a less
formal character than a provincial synod, for the consideration
of common questions. In forming such a body it is obvious
that great care will be required. Of provincial synods, such
assemblies as that I am now addressing need feel no fear, seeing
that the authority of such synods is strictly limited by usage or
prescription. In the case of committees it is not so. It was
proposed at first that the two assemblies should appoint a joint
standing committee to take charge of the matters I am referring
to. But I served for many years upon the standing committees
of the two great Church societies at home, and I am too well
acquainted with the action of such committees to entrust them
with powers so extensive. Nothing in theory seems more
complete than the subordination of a standing committee to
the board which appoints it; nothing, in fact, is more unreal.
The standing committee consists of the ablest and most popular
members of the board. It enjoys the privilege of initiating
whatever measures it pleases. And if afterwards any unfor-
tunate member of the board dares to call in question one of its
resolutions, none will be more ready to rebuke his presumption
than those other members of the board who look reverently to
the standing committee as the embodiment of all wisdom. It
has resulted from such circumstances as these that the boards
of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel and the Society
for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge have become little
better than corporations for registering the decrees of the
standing committees. And hence, as might have been expected
(except upon the occasion of some fierce battle between opposite
parties in the Church) nobody, or scarcely anybody, deems it
worth his while to attend the meetings of the board.
It would be a very insufficient check upon a joint standing
committee of the two dioceses, that it was appointed to consider


only matters of common interest, for what matters may not be
declared to be of common interest by a committee anxious to
consider them 1 Besides, in this case there would be the addi-
tional danger that a standing committee appointed for both
dioceses would have an authority which it would be difficult
for either of them separately to resist.
After correspondence, then, with the Bishop of Ballarat, I
have agreed to recommend a measure for your adoption, which,
I think, will be surrounded by the necessary safeguards. It
will provide—first, that the committee be appointed, not by
the Assembly, but by the Council ; secondly, that it make its
reports to the Council; and thirdly, that it consider only such
matters as are submitted to it by the two bishops. So consti-
tuted, it will be perfectly competent to express the mind of the
two dioceses upon mattei's of common concern, while it is to be
hoped that it will neither overshadow the two Assemblies nor
x’ob their debates of their wonted interest.
A separate statement is to be made of the work and wants
of the Bishop of Melbourne’s fund, and at the annual meeting
—which I hope all the members of the Assembly will be good
enough to attend—the Church will be appealed to to give this
most important auxiliaxy to our work an earnest and sustained
support. I would simply now ask you to bear in mind, that
it is the Church’s only fund for general purposes; that every
penny of it is spent either in the tuition and maintenance of
poor theological students, or in sustaining our work in poor
and scattered parishes ; and that any failure in its resources
means instant abandonment of our work, where work most needs
to be done, and will hex*eafter best repay the doing. Evexy mem-
ber of the Church of England should feel himself called upon
to give an annual subscription to this fund. He is asked to
help the work of the Church outside his own parish in no other
way, and to refuse to listen to this claim upon his benevolence
is to cut himself off fx-om sympathy with his brethren, to forget
that he has a great Church to support and be proud of, and to
shut himself up in parochial selfishness.
The Statistics of the Diocese will also be laid before you in a
separate form. We have to thank God that within the three
last years there has been a considerable increase in the number
of attendants at our places of worship. But I love not to
dwell xipon triumphs. Such as they are, they are due to the
blessing of God; and while not forgetting to thank Him for
His mercy, it is our part to call to mind the faults which have
made them so small.
I will barely mention two things in which, as it seems to me,
there is great room for improvement. First, I would point to
the listlessness and apparent want of reverence in many of our


congregations. Our prayers are common prayers. Being
accordingly intended for the people, provision is made in them
for popular response and co-operation, and when, as so often
happens, the congregation is silent, a chill passes over the
service which freezes the breath of devotion. Ah! what an
impulse and an inspiration we might all receive from the
consciousness of sympathy in worship, if we would only try to
realise more fully, in this particular, the communion of saints.
Then, again, I am almost ashamed to mention the lightness
of manner of so many of our young people at the most solemn
parts of the service ; the indolent postures in which so many
indulge; and the genei’al buzz of conversation befoi’e the service
begins, and the moment it is ovei’. What preparation is that
for worshipping God which cannot bear to yield even two or
three miixutes for private prayer and meditation; or what hope
can there be of permanent good from worship and teaching,
when the organ breaks in upon private devotion ere the
clergyman’s benediction is well off his lips, and the people are
engaged in trivial talk ere they are clear of the courts of the
sanctuary 1
I note also with grief that the proportion of communicants
to worshippers in our congregations is not greater than it was
in England 30 years ago. Of late a vast improvement has
takexx place at home. I believe that it is principally due to
the fidelity with which the clergy have reminded their people
that in thus disregarding the distinct command of their Master
they are dishonouring their profession and grievously injuring
themselves. The celebration of the Lord’s Supper weekly,
accoi’ding to the universal custom of the primitive ages, has
also contributed no little (by its confirmation of grace in the
faithful and its constant appeal to the negligent) to produce
a better state of things. We imitate the home Church in
many of its faults, let us also strive, my brethren, to follow it
in the way of impx’ovement.
There only remains one other subject upon which I desire at
present to address you, but it is one which in existing circum-
stances has no small importance. A series of resolutions on the
question of religious education, agreed upon at a meeting of
delegates appointed by the bishops of the two Victorian dioceses,
will be submitted to you during the present session, and it is
therefore the more necessary that I should avail myself of the
present opportunity of speaking my mind. Last year there was
a dead silence on this question ; at present it is involved in a
confused whirl of talk. Many seem to me to be trying to make
up their mind on the subject by saying whatever they happen
to think at the moment, to see how it takes. Others are
storming about public opinion, declaring that it is made up, and


demanding that every one shall submit to it, whether it is right
or wrong, wise or foolish. Most are fastening upon a supposed
common enemy, the Roman Catholics, and speaking about them
(as men in a passion will speak) fiercely, unjitstly, and so as to
beget in the objects of their wrath an answering fierceness and
obstinacy. All, as it seems to me, which can be profitably done
in such a condition of things is to endeavour to make a calm and
clear statement of the present state of the question.
First, no one objects to the free and compulsory principles of
the act. Objection is only made to its secular principle. In
reference to that principle, a deputation from a meeting of the
Protestant ministers of Melbourne waited lately on the Minister
of Education, and submitted the following proposals :
“ 1. That a selection of lessons from the Bible, based upon one already
made by a committee of Protestant ministers, should be used as a text-
book in the state schools.
“2. That out of this text-book the children should be taught by the
schoolmaster in school hours.
“ 3. That the schoolmaster should be forbidden to teach any dogma
which was distinctive of any denomination, the effect being to banish
dogma altogether.
“4. That if any parent objected to having his child taught such
subjects, the said child should receive instruction in some secular subject
while the Bible lesson was being given.”
One might have imagined that these propositions were easy
enough to understand, and the more as they merely represented
a plan which is being successfully carried out in England. And
yet, ever since they have been made public, people have been
professing to oppose them by talking about something else.
“ How can the Government teach dogma in the schools T it has
been asked by speakers and newspapers. The answer is, that
we ask them to do nothing of the kind ; on the contrary, we
pray them to forbid dogma. “ Why, then, do you object,” it is
demanded, “to the secular principle of the act 1 We mean by
‘secular’ only undogmatic,” Then you put an unnatural
meaning on the word, which means—and as soon as this
agitation shall have blown by (if it should blow by) will be held
to mean—not non-dogmatic, but non-religious.
Again, it is asked, how can the Government be requested to
endow religion in the school when it has refused to endow it in
the church 1 Who has asked them to endow religion anywhere 1
Can that plan involve an endowment of religion which proposes
to turn both ministers and dogma out of the school 1 The case
of the Roman Catholics I will consider presently. Oh, but
say others, you can’t exclude dogma. If the Bible be taught,
you must suggest some dogmatic form for teaching it. How
so, when it is taught without any such form and with universal
satisfaction at home ? Yes, at home, others exclaim; but then,


at home teachers have been trained to do the work, whereas
in Victoria many of the teachers are too bad or too sceptical to
impart such instruction.
Now, although these representations have been publicly
made, I cannot bring myself to believe that they are true. If,
indeed, any of us could persuade ourselves to believe such a
thing, would it not be necessary to denounce an act which left
the employment of such men possible in far stronger language
than has yet been employed. (Great applause.)
At the tenth annual conference of elementary teachers in
England, Mr. Grove, the president (himself a teacher), made
the following observations : —“ lam about to suggest an im-
possibility which may not, however, be without its use. Suppose
a country to be cursed with an army of intemperate, thriftless,
disloyal, or seditious teachers, breathing poisonous principles
into the minds of their pupils, instead of training them in the
right paths. Their labour would be easy, and tell with tenfold
force, because they would work with the lowest natural disposi-
tion instead of against it. Such a body, which it fills me with
horror to imagine even, would, despite the many counteracting
agencies surrounding each individual, poison the springs of
national life at their source.” (Applause.) There can be as
little doubt of the justice as of the gravity of that observation.
Although certain schoolmasters at Geelong did what they could
to degrade their noble profession by putting forward as its
object, not the formation of the character, nor even the develop-
ment of the intellect, but only the dreary, mechanical grinding
of what are called the three R’s, yet still it remains true that
no bad man can associate with children in a position of influence
for four hours of every day without poisoning their minds.
(Hear, hear.) Is it true, then, that the present act facilitates
the employment of such teachers ? Is it true that when clever
rascals are excused from teaching the Bible, they seek and
obtain the opportunity of corrupting the minds of our children 1
True or false ? If false, then let it not be alleged again as a
reason why schoolmasters cannot teach the Bible. But if true,
then in the name of God sweep away the secular clauses of the
Act before they have produced the national blight and curse
described by Mr. Grove. (Great applause.)
Oh! but say others, we don’t so much accuse the teachers of
being bad as of being sceptical 3 and how can a sceptic teach
the Bible?
Well now, observe what we ask the schoolmaster to do.
We have made a selection of Bible lessons suitable, as we
think, to be taught to the young. We ask that the masters
shall teach the moral lessons suggested by those biblical
selections. Suppose, for instance, that the lesson for the day


were the account of the death of our Saviour, we should
expect the master to point out to the children that after the
example of Christ they ought rather to die than knowingly
say what was false or do what was wrong. About the dogma
of the atonement which the Churches have built on that fact
he would be forbidden to say a word. Now, if this kind of
teaching be too much for our sceptical schoolmasters, of what
kind or complexion must their scepticism be 1 I can tinder-
stand a demand being made for the omission of the miraculous
in our biblical selections. No one could experience more
regret at hearing such a demand than I should. I believe
that compliance with it would rob our selection of some of
its most precious portions. But still, thinking as I do, that
all the essential ethico-religious teaching of the Bible could
be imparted without any reference to miracle, I should be
prepared to give to such a demand a careful consideration.
But no such demand is made. There seems to be a positive
horror of the Bible, as though it contained something magically
pernicious.
Now with reference to this feeling, let me cite the opinion
of one whose scepticism is perhaps as distinctly pronounced as.
that of any distinguished teacher of our race. I mean
Professor Huxley. He says [Critiques and Addresses, p.
51) : —“ I have always been strongly in favour of secular
education in the sense of education without theology, but I
must confess I have been no less seriously perplexed to know
by what practical measures the religious feeling, which is the
essential basis of conduct, was to be kept up, in the present
utterly chaotic state of opinion on these matters without the
Bible. Take the Bible as a whole, make the severest deduc-
tions which fair criticism can dictate for shortcomings and
positive errors; eliminate all which it is not desirable for
children to occupy themselves with, and there still remains in
this old literature a vast residuum of moral beauty and
grandeur. And then consider the great historical fact that for
three centuries this book has been woven into the life of all
that is best and noblest in English history, that it has become
the national epic of Britain, and is as familiar to noble and
simple from John o’ Groat’s House to Land’s End as Dante
and Tasso once were to the Italians; that it is written in the
noblest and purest English, and abounds in exquisite beauties
of mere literary form ; and finally, that it forbids the veriest
hind who never left his village, to be ignorant of the existence
of other countries and other civilizations and of a great past,
stretching back to the furthest limits of the oldest nations in
the world.” (Applause.) “By the study of what other book
could children be so humanised, and be made to feel that each


figure in that vast historical procession fills, like themselves,
but a momentary space in the interval between two eternities,
and earns the blessings or curses of all time according to its
efforts to do good and hate evil, even as they also are earning
their payment for their work.” Does Mr. Patterson imagine
that Professor Huxley would have uttered burning words like
these of the few commonplace extracts which he quoted the other
day at Castlemaine, passages which any Minister of Education
could at any moment strike his pen through, just as, on the
plea of the act’s secularity, a former Minister of Education
struck his pen through all the Christian hymns which existed
in the state reading books 1 What shall we say then 1 Is it the
fact that while Professor Huxley thinks that children could be
so humanised by no other book, our teachers, or any large
section of them, are so sublimely sceptical that they are above
even looking at it ? Aye or no 1 If no, then let us hear no
more of the objection that the teachers cannot teach the Bible.
But if aye, what can the operation of that act be which
commits the children of Christian parents to the tuition of men
who look on Professor Huxley as a reactionary 1 If this be the
state of things already, what will it become in ten or a dozen
years, when the present leaven of religiously-trained teachers
is removed 1
I am told in one breath that many of the teachers are
sceptical or bad, and in the next I am asked, what have I to
complain of 1 Do men think me an idiot ? I see very clearly
that if the secular provisions of our Education Act be suffered
to remain, one-half of our children will never receive any
religious instruction at all; that of the other half, more than
a moiety will receive little better than none ; while the
remainder, seeing all reference to religion banished from the
schools, must inevitably come to look upon the subject with
indifference, if not with contempt.
When I am told that religion should be taught at the
mother’s knee, I ask whether the people who make that state-
ment are wholly ignorant of the habits of our people; or,,
whether, knowing them, they are laughing in my face 1 What
is an honest man to make of such statements 1
It is now clearly recognised that ministers of religion cannot
add the religious teaching of our children to their other duties.
They have far too hard work, and they are far too small a body
of men. While the ministers of religion of all denominations
amounted only in 1877 to 684, the teachers in public schools,
amounted to 2056, whose whole time was devoted to education.
Sometimes under favourable circumstances ministers have tried
to do this work, but in every instance, except one, they have
failed. The one alleged instance of success is in the school at


St. Kilcla. But, now, of what nature is that success, and under
what conditions has it been achieved ? The success amounts to
this, that a clergyman has been able to give one gallery lesson
of half an hour each week to the greater part of the scholars.
But how can one man teach effectually hundreds of children
at once 1 He can lecture them, and they will pay what
attention they please.
Again, who would be satisfied to have his child taught
arithmetic, in the company of hundreds of others, by one
teacher, for half an hour a week 1 This is what is called a
success. And to achieve this magnificent result, what conditions
needed to be satisfied 1 First, in consequence of the goodwill
of the excellent master, the teachers of the school, instead of
dismissing the children (the common rule), brought them to be
taught, and sat with them throughout the lesson to keep order.
How many schoolmasters would do that 1 or how many boards
of advice would suffer them to do it, if they were willing 1
Secondly, owing to the wealth of the neighbourhood, seven
ministers of religion were available for teaching in that one
school. Now, it is well known that in our country districts
the proportion is far more nearly seven schools to one
minister. That plan, then, may be looked upon as hopelessly
impracticable.
But the Protestant Churches have been asked to undertake
the religious teaching of the children by means of paid laymen. I
do not know the present number of public schools, but it must
be near two thousand. Now, if religious education is to be more
than a sham, no one man could undertake to be responsible for
more than four schools. Such teachers must be highly trained.
It would be wrong for the Government, who are dismissing all
their incompetent teachers, to suffer ignorant or unskilful men
to waste the time of the children. Again, the religious teachers
would have to devote their whole time to the work, especially
in the country districts, and must be paid an average salary of
not less than £l5O a year. Men must live, and to suggest that
religious zeal shall induce people to work hard and starve, is to
suggest what only a few enthusiasts will consent to do. It
results from these considerations that, to carry out this plan,
the Protestant Churches would have to raise, train, and support
a body of about five hundred teachers, nearly as numerous a
body of men as their ministers, and to raise for their main-
tenance (apart from training) no less a sum than £75,000 a
year. Was ever wilder dream conceived 1 Men are allowed
to talk vaguely in letters to newspapers, but that practical men
can repeat such folly is indeed astonishing. (Applause.)
One thing is perfectly clear to me. Either the biblical educa-
tion of the children must be undertaken by the Government,


or it must be left alone. The Churches will do what they can,
but with their staff and their means they simply cannot give
efficient biblical instruction in those fragments of time, and
under those paralysing disabilities which the act prescribes. I
believe they could not do it under any circumstances. But
how hopeless the task becomes when this small body of men,
with their heavy daily tasks, are bidden to go to the State
schools to recall the children after they have been dismissed
to play, and then, when they are weary with their day’s studies,
to interest them and keep them in order while delivering a
biblical lesson. All this seems to me so plain that I can only
account for the apparent blindness which seems to prevail in
some quarters by assuming that objection is taken, not so much
to this part of the scheme as to its foreseen consequence, the
necessity of dealing with the Homan Catholic claim for a
separate grant on account of secular instruction. I admit that
you must take account of that claim. It is the key of the
whole position. If it be not equitably satisfied, we may as
well abandon the attempt to introduce biblical teaching into
our State schools.
And, again, upon this subject it seems to me that many
unreasonable things are being said. It is urged that to give
the Roman Catholics a state grant for approved secular know-
ledge is to establish the Roman Catholic Church, If so, then
there are more established churches in Great Britain than I
could count upon the fingers of my hand. For not only the
Church of England, the Roman Catholics, and the Wesleyans,
but also several other of the Nonconformist bodies, receive
grants on the same plan. (Applause.) Again, it has been
urged that to make a separate grant to the Roman Catholics
would be to insure the building of duplicate schools throughout
the colony. Surely those who make such an allegation have
never taken the trouble to think what it nieans. For before
the Roman Catholics could claim a grant for secular instruction,
they must have built a school, paid a master, and made the
teaching so good that it will be approved by the Government
inspector. Now, can anybody imagine that in communities
where the Roman Catholics number some half dozen, they
could afford to go to such an expense for such a return 1 Their
schools already exist; in spite of all efforts to extinguish them,
they are slowly increasing. Ido not believe that they would
be materially augmented in number by a separate grant. Only
you would relieve them from a burden of expense which excites
bitter discontent, because they believe they are not justly called
upon to bear it. You know their argument —“We have
proved by maintaining our schools side by side with your
educational palaces that we cannot conscientiously send our


children to your establishments. And thus, having first taxed
us to build schools which we cannot \ise, you compel us to build
and maintain a second set of schools which we can. The
Protestants have no such grievance, and they have proved it by
letting their schools pass into the hands of Government.”
What good answer has ever been made to that argument ?
In all the excited talk upon the subject I have not heard one.
(Applause.) The answer commonly given is this : the Roman
Catholics are unreasonable in their scruples, and therefore it
will be good for themselves and for their children to disregard
such scruples. Well, I have heard that argument before, but
it was not in the lips of secularists. I remember when I was a
very young man hearing the report of a church-rate contest
from a fellow-Churchman. He was very indignant with the
Nonconformists for their resistance. I, who was esteemed a
Radical in those days, justified in this particular the opponents
of my own Church. I said it was unfair to take, by force of
law, the money of Nonconformists, and apply it to an object of
which they disapproved. He brought forward the hackneyed
instance of the Quaker who was forced against his conscience
to pay war-taxes. I answered that it always made me blush
to hear of Quakers, who deemed it their duty to God to refuse
to pay, being so plundered, and that I thought a deduction
should be made on the Quaker’s assessment, in proportion
to the amount of the war-tax. Well ; but, he said, the
objection of Nonconformists was unreasonable. Was not
the Church open for them if they liked to use it, and were not
the services of so catholic a character that none but bigots could
object to them 1 “ But who are you,” I replied, “to sit in
judgment on their conscience 1 If they be bigots, have they not
the right to be ; and being such, to object to having their money
spent on an object which they disapprove?” Now, how does
this case differ from that of the Roman Catholic 1 Grant, if
you like, that they are superstitious, bigoted, arbitrary, or
anything else which their enemies call them. What is that to
you ? What right have you to take a bigot’s money and apply
it to a purpose which he hates all the more bitterly for his
bigotry 1 (Applause.)
So long as the Nonconformists of England objected to state
education of any kind, alleging that since no education was
worth anything which was not religious, therefore Government
should not interfere in the matter, I understood their position.
But now some of our Victorian Nonconformists, while agreeing
that Government shall give education, and by the power of
the purse drive out of the field all competitors, yet think it
right that those who look upon a purely secular education
as a sure means of demoralising the nation should pay their


money and hold their peace. That position I cannot under-
stand. (Applause.) Nor can I look upon the endeavour to
starve the Roman Catholic into the acceptance of what his
soul abhors as a measure of real expediency. That method
was tried in Ireland, and we all know with what measure of
success.
If anyone thinks it an extremely clever and politic thing
to try to injure the Roman Church by indirect means I
would advise him to read Mr. Lecky’s enlightened account
of the course and consequences of such attempts in the
eighteenth century. Nothing will prevail to detach men
from error but a candid, yea, and I will say a charitable,
method of proclaiming the truth. As the most formidable
diplomist is the man who never lies, so the most formidable
preacher is the man who tells the truth in love. Blow upon
an iceberg with the breath of the north wind, and you do
but stiffen its fibre and add to its weight. But bring it into
the warm water of the tropics, and it will melt and unite
with the parent sea. So will it be with the Church of Rome,
Blow on it with the cold breath of bigotry, and you will but
increase its bulk and massiveness. But treat it with justice—
let it feel around it the warm breath of truth and brotherly-
kindness, and you will do all that men can do to bring the
Church of 100,000,000 of human beings into harmony with
modern life, to melt the icy fetters of superstition, and to
re-kindle the glorious beacon of the west. (Great applause.)
I will not join in the howl against Rome. There are few
Protestants further removed from its opinions than I am. But
can I forget that so enlightened a Protestant as Pressens6
declared quite recently that only a reformed Romanism could
have any real hold upon the Latin race ? Can I forget that
Roman Catholics, with all their errors, love my Redeemer, and
that having such love they are nearer to my heart than the
most enlightened secularist who reviles or disavows Him?
There were heretics in St. Paul’s days in the Chui’ch of Corinth
who said that there was no resurrection. In this particular
the Pharisees held a faith more orthodox. But, who was
nearer to the apostle’s heart—the erring Corinthian who loved
Christ, or the orthodox Pharisee who hated him ? Let others
do as they please, I will never unite with secularists against
Rome to keep Christ out of the schools of this colony. I still
advocate, therefore, the making, in some form, a grant to the
Roman Catholics for secular results. This will make it possible
to adopt the English board school system in our common
schools, and will do more, I verily believe, to promote the social
and temporal welfare of this colony than any other possible
reform could. I seek this change, not as a Churchman (my


Church will get no special benefit from it), but as a Christian
and a citizen.
“My belief is,” says Professor Huxley (Critiques and
Addresses, p. 51), “that no human being, and no society composed
of human beings, ever did or ever will come to much, unless
their conduct was governed and guided by the love of some
ethical ideal.” What is the great problem then? Not merely
to set such an ideal before men, but to make them love it.
The philosophers of Greece and Rome discovered lofty ethical
ideals; but although they embodied these ideals in wise and
beautiful words (with the exception of a loftier nature here and
there), they were powerless to make any man love them.
Christ came, and the human heart melted before the pathos and
the tenderness of his His love. I may be thought a bigot or
an enthusiast, but I record it as my deliberate conviction that
nothing, in our days, will make the common heart of the
world love any high moral ideal but the exhibition of the love
of Christ. People speak much of the need for union of feeling
among our countrymen; but how long can union last, if we
agree to shut out the love of the Divine, its only eternally
sufficient bond ? Others are angry because of the trouble
which this education agitation is giving to politicians; but
which is better, to give trouble in trying to set wrong things
right, or to be quiet and let them get daily worse, with the
knowledge that by and by they must end in general unbelief,
discontent, and social disintegration ? It may be troublesome
now to have to content the Christian conscience, but what will
it be to govern a herd of discontented and idle people, who
know no bond but that of selfish sensuality ? This question is
now in the hands of the colony, and it is for the people to deal
with it. I only hope they will not forget that though they can
choose their course, they cannot choose its consequences, but
must reap hereafter what now they elect to sow. (Applause.)
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.


' ■. '-Y .V ■■■* ■ ' 'l, ■ • - ■ . ';'■ rt, ■
.
mm-t ■ *
• *■ . t~v. ~


