

ADDRESS
TO THE
(F railcs k 'Calmin' {iDiiiicil.
QEORG-E ~Sj. DIBBS.
OCTOBER 12, 1882.
£ljtowil :
Samuel E. Lees, Printer, Lees Court, off King Street,




PREFACE.
9] OFFER the following pages, at this crisis of the Colony’s
* history, for the careful perusal and consideration of those of
my fellow-citizens who earn their bread by the labour of
their hands and the sweat of their brow.
In the common interest of the whole country there must be
created some means of settling disputes and grievances as between
employers and employees, and between employees and employers,
other than by the clumsy, disastrous, barbarous, and distress-
causing methods of strikes and locks-out.
With this end in view, I have asked the Parliament to give
me leave to introduce a measure of legislation to effect this desir-
able end, and I believe that I shall have the support of every
patriotic member of both Chambers of the Legislature in my
humble effort; to provide an honest means for the prevention of
future conflicts between Capital and Labour, and to secure to
both these important and necessary classes a just and equitable
solution of Labour troubles.
' It is a matter of extreme regret to me that the suggestions
contained in the address which I delivered to the Trades and
Labour Council on the 12th October, 1882 (a copy of which
follows), was not adopted, and the loss, consequent on strikes,
which has accrued since that period, in wages to labour, of fully
two millions sterling, avoided ; while, by the exercise of the
principle of conciliation, the disastrous strike of to-day could not
have occurred.
GEORGE R. DIBBS.
Legislative Assembly,
Sydney, 9th September, 1890.




ADDRESS
TO THE
Trades and Labour Council
By GEORGE R. BIBBS.
-.0^,0.
October 12th, 1882.
■ -«o4o»
a;N responding to the invitation of your Council,
• that I should meet its members for the purpose
of discussing the important question raised in my
letter of last week, I may first be permitted to say
—although the statement may be unnecessary—
that, in my endeavour to establish a sound footing
upon which Labour and Capital in this Colony may
in future work, I am actuated by no desire to serve
any particular class or section ; I am not working in
the interest of the employer more than of the
employee, but solely in the interests and well-being
of the whole community.
It is not an arguable question,— in fact, at this
stage of our discussion, it is useless to waste time
pointing out, what every thinking man among you
must admit, that strikes and issues between
employer and employee which result in a stoppage
of work, cause an infinity of mischief and loss, and
that it is hard to follow the mischief to its ramifi
cations, so deeply does it affect every man, woman,
and child in the country.


From a study of the question of strikes, and
from my own personal experience in dealing with
masses of men, I have formed the opinion that the
difficulty of arranging a cause of disagreement
between employer and employee is magnified to an
intense degree, so soon as the actual severance of
employment takes place. When the employee
throws down his tools, and the employer closes his
workshop, the question of issue between the parties
is frequently lost sight of in the angry feeling and
the bitter resentment which follow. Questions of*
dignity and of a personal character are imported,
until at last, when the necessities of either or of both
have compelled the exercise of reason, and when the
mediator steps upon the field, he finds his greatest
obstacle to be the setting at rest the ill-feeling
which the strike has engendered.
All the writers upon this subject agree upon
this point; one writer in particular condenses this
subject to a few lines, and these, as there is no
gainsaying their truth, I will quote from a small
work written by the late Stanley Jevons, entitled,
“ The State in relation to Labour : The English
Citizen, his rights and responsibilities,”
“ It would appear, then, that even on the grounds of pure
economic theory, there are reasons why a conciliator
might be properly called in to resolve an industrial
dead-lock. Far more expedient still must this course
appear when we remember that in trade disputes the
economic question is often the smallest part of the
matter. Masters and men belong to such different classes
of society, that the least difference of opinion is soon
complicated with sentiments of social dislike. Ideas of
so-called fairness, justice, generosity, good faith, etc., are
complicated. If no mode of allaying the dispute be
quickly discovered, it becomes a question of surrender
or no surrender. A strike, says Mr. Newmarch, is the
end of discussion and the beginning of war, As Mr.
Bevan remarks, a casus belli no sooner arises, than all
prudence is thrown to the winds. Pecuniary losses are
of Iktle account to those who are prepared to endure


starvation rather than submit to what they esteem
“injustice.” It is obvious, then, that a trade dispute,
especially when it has reached the acute phrase of a
strike, has little or nothing to do with economics. It
is not a question of science, and there is no theoretic
reason why conciliators should not be called in, if
experience shows that they are usually able to compro-
mise matters.”
As I said in my letter to your Council, the plan
which I would venture to propose is based upon no
new idea. In France, this principle has been prac-
tically carried out for many years. The first appli-
cation of the principle of reference to “Prudhommes”
(wise men) was to settle trifling disputes at fairs
arising between merchants and manufacturers—an
antiquated kind of rough-and-ready justice, which I
do not doubt answered the purpose of its creation.
Coming down to the days of the first Napoleon, the
necessity for something of a more formal character
was realized for the City of Lyons; there proving a
success, it gradually spread all over France, until
annually the cases submitted to the Councils of
“Prudhommes” exceed 45,000 !
These courts, for such they ultimately became,
are divided into a minor court, presided over by a
master and an operative, with a chairman appointed
by the State.
If the case before such minor court cannot be
reconciled—and the experience of France proves
that (70) seventy per cent, of the cases brought
forward are thus disposed of—the cases are taken
to the Grand Tribunal, and to this court, the decision
of which is final,the litigants submit.
In dealing with so large a number of cases, it
must be borne in mind that the bulk of these figures
is made up by petty cases as between master and
servant for wages, apprenticeship cases, and cases of


dispute arising from alleged improper dismissal, etc.
What I propose to the Trades and Labour
Council is not so much the formation of Courts for
the settlement of minor differences of the character
of the bulk of the cases adjudicated by the French
Courts, but the creation of a council of wise men,
with whom shall rest the adjudication of all disputes
which may arise, and which if not so dealt with,
would be likely to result in what we understand in
our language as a strike, or lock-out.
I believe the day will come, and that it
is not far distant, when all minor matters of
wages, and small cases arising from labour, will be
settled not as we do now by summons, constable,
warrant, and the expensive formula of our Courts of
Justice, but by appeal to the decision of a council of
wise men, primarily to the minor court of conciliation.
For the present, I desire to confine my remarks to
dealing with a remedy for the evil known as strikes
and locks-out.
Before offering my suggestions to the Council,
I desire to say that if this body, after hearing my
remarks and considering them, should see its
way to resolve that the principles I am endeavour-
ing to advocate are sound, and that their
application will be to the interests of society
at large, and especially to the operative; and
if the Council think it desirable that I should at
greater length address the operatives in support of
my view, I shall be glad to place my services at your
disposal, conditionally that any meeting called for
this purpose be arranged by the Trades and Labour
Council and under its direction. At such meeting
I think I should be able more fully than to-night to
give satisfactory reasons for the creation of such a
Council as I propose, and to ensure the co-operation


of the important classes which your Council
represents.
I take it that to-night I am expected, more in
a conversational form, to submit an outline of my
proposals for the approval of the Council. It will
be for the Council, as representing Labour, and for
the operatives, as a whole, to elect a Committee, to
work in connection and harmony with a like num-
ber of employers, to frame rules, to more closely
and carefully consider the scheme and submit a code
of regulations for the formation of a Council to
carry out what we have undertaken.
To that Committee I should feel bound to give
every assistance in my power, until the foundations
had been securely laid for the superstructure, from
which the difficulties of the future shall be decided,
with the light of reason, upon principles of Truth,
Equity, and Justice.
The chief difficulty in my path in pro-
pounding a scheme is to avoid the necessity
for introducing machinery of a legal character
—to avoid appeals to Justices of the Peace
and constables, warrants, levy and distress,
and such like, in enforcing the decisions of the
Council. In England an Act was passed in 1867
which is known as “The Equitable Councils of Con-
ciliation Act,” having for its object that which I
am advocating to-night,—an important feature of
which Act is that no counsel at law or attorney is
permitted to be heard before the Council wfithout
the consent of both sides. As the Act was passed by
a distinguished lawyer, and carried by him through
the Parliament, the adoption of this peace principle
is a proof that he at least did not have much confi-
dence in the gentlemen of the long robe in the way
of adjusting differences, when conciliation and not law
was necessary to heal a breach. There is in this


Act what a writer speaks of as the taint of the
Justice of the Peace ; and in spite of the peaceable
nature of the measure, there is a large amount of
pains and penalties.
I apprehend that it is possible to provide a
scheme, in our small community, by which under
carefully drawn rules it will be possible to prevent
strikes, or to minimise, even if it does not wholly
prevent them, and upon principles that shall be
entirely outside the taint of the law—upon the
unwritten law of a common interest ratified by
mutual consent I believe, with the aid of the
several labour organisations of this city there can
be arrived at a code of regulations laws and there can
be created a court, from whose decisions no body of
workmen, no employer, or body of employees, could
depart without dishonour ; and that the pains and
penalties which would be the deterrent, would be
the voice of public opinion, and public exposure of
the wrong-doer through the Press.
I will not enlarge at this stage further,' but
submit to you what I conceive to be the leading
features for the carrying out of my scheme. I
propose by way of preamble, to say that it is
desirable to appoint and elect a council of wise and
experienced men, who shall deal with all disputes and
questions arising between employers and employees,
the unfavourable outcome to which, otherwise, and
but for the operation of the Council, would result in
a strike upon the part of the workmen, or a lock-out
on the part of the employers.
1, That a joint committee of employers and workmen be
elected for the purpose of drawing up a Constitution.
2. That such Constitution be adopted by the various trade
organisations and by the various employers.
3. That upon the adoption of the Constitution, and under a
franchise to be therein provided for, a council of wise
men be elected, to consist of twelve members and a
chairman ; six to form a quorum, with the chairman.


4. That six of such members be elected by the employees
from the employers, such employers to possess a quali-
fication of having not less than ten operatives in their
employ.
5. That the other six members be elected by the employers
from the ranks of the employees, the latter to be
qualified by reason, first, of their being not less than 30
years of age ; to have resided and worked in this colony
not less than three years ; and that they are full members
of a trade organization recognised by the Trades and
Labour Council of Sydney.
6. The Chairman to be elected by the 12 members, and to be
a citizen of Sydney, not engaged in trade or manufacture,
or the employer of labour other than domestic.
7. That such Council shall meet for the dispatch of business,
once in each month, unless in the case of special hard-
pressing circumstances, of which 48 hours’ notice shall
be given to the members.
8. That in the event of any dispute or disagreement occur-
ring, by which, unless adjudicated upon by the Council,
a strike or lock-out would result, the employer shall
continue his works, and the employees their labour,
pending the decision of the Council.
9. If the question in dispute be one of wages, the amount
involved one way or other, shall be paid in to the credit
of Trustees selected from the Council, to a suspense
account, pending the decision of the Council.
10. To this Council shall be relegated every dispute or
disagreement, for decision and award, such award or
decision to be final.
11. That the parties to such dispute may appear before the
Council in support or defence of their claims: In the
case of an individual employer, in person ; of a partner-
ship or limited Company, or otherwise, where there are
several partners, by any members of such Company or
partnership, not exceeding three.
12. In the case of an individual employee, in person; of
several employees, or in the case of an establishment, by
not more than three members of such establishment, as
representatives of the whole.
13. The parties before the Council shall not be restricted to
the ordinary rules of formal debate, but the facts may
be elicited by questions from members of the Council, or
by either party, due care being taken to maintain the


dignity of the Council. In all cases submitted, the
Council to effect a conciliation, compromise, concession,
or adjustment, without recourse, except as a dernier
resort, to a formal award or decision.
I may be asked, and naturally so, how can the
decisions of the Council be enforced ? I may be told
that it will be easy to create a Council of wise men.
The proceedings before the Council may have been
conducted in accordance with the rules and the
constitution under which it would sit. But suppose
a decision given, how could it be enforced without
the aid of the Law ? I admit the difficulty ; and I
further admit that upon the first consideration of
this subject, this question pressed itself upon my
mind as a difficult problem to be solved, and I have
endeavoured to meet it.
The great lever by which to secure due enforce-
ment of the Council’s decision is the bond of mutual
interest, and the necessity for litigants to yield a
modicum of their individual liberty to secure
harmony and to maintain unity for the good of the
whole.
But it is possible to induce the various Trade
Organisations to agree separately, and in the case of
each organisation, to add to their rules, and to
embody with their constitutions, the whole scheme
of conciliation and arbitration, thus rendering any
refusal on the part of a trade to accept the Council’s
decision an infraction of one of their cardinal
principles.
In illustration of my meaning, let me explain
that, inasmuch as now, in the event of a strike in
any branch of trade, the strikers receive cordial
sympathy, and even pecuniary support, from the
other branches, the refusal of such strikers to abide
by the decision of a court of its own election would


sever them for the time being from alliance with the
grand body.
So far, then, I think there would be a strong
moral force and pressure upon any section of trade,
and that so far as the likelihood of the workmen
refusing to obey is concerned, the chances of such
refusal would, by virtue of this restraint, be reduced
to a minimum.
On the other hand, can the employer be induced
to obey ? It appears to me that an equally strong
moral force could be brought to bear upon an
employer attempting to refuse compliance to the
decision of a Court to the creation of which he was
a consenting party, and before whose tribunal he
wis willing to submit his case. If all other induce-
ments failed, if the wholesome expression of public
opinion failed, if the censure of the public Press
failed to enforce obedience, there would remain the
unpleasant alternative, justifiable in this extreme
case, of allowing such employer to be the victim of
his own wrong, and in his individual case, to permit
him to remain on strike.
If moral suasion and the exercise of such moral
force as I have explained wall not restrain such an
one, legal remedies, if practicable, would be useless.
A recourse to law would but embitter the strife, but
I have much confidence in the effect of moral force,
reason, and argument, applied in the manner I have
suggested, and I do not hesitate to say that in 9
cases out of 10, where now a strike or lock-out
would take place, the evil would be prevented by an
appeal to the decision of a Council of prudent men.
A word or two as to the men from whom the
Council of wise men would be chosen.
I do not doubt, but from the ranks of the many
hundreds of the operatives of this community, there


are to be found very many men fitted by their in-
telligence, study, and thinking powers, and, moreover,
governed by a desire for true English fair play, from
whom the employees could select their six representa-
tives. On the other side, from the ranks of the
employers, although fewer in number, there are to
be found many in whom for fairness and justness in
their dealing the operatives would have full confi-
dence. And I should have but a very poor estimate
of my fellow-man if I thought a difficulty could arise
in practically working this scheme, by the absence
of the material necessary to construct a Council, a
body whose decisions, having almost all the force
and weight of law, would be looked up to by the
whole community, the office of Councillor in such
cases being one of the greatest honour.
Such is the proposal which, with some little mis-
giving as to my powers to make it clear, I venture
to submit to your Council in its representative
character. I have thought it best to commit my
views to paper, in the shape of a short address, in
the hope that by so doing I shall best enable the
Council to deliberate upon it, and with the desire,
as far as possible, to prevent myself from being mis-
understood, either as to intention or meaning. I
shall be glad to offer any further explanation which
your members may desire.
I shall have a few words in due season to offer
to the employers, after your Council has decided to
approve of the principles I have herein laid down.
Perhaps the most fitting course would be an address
to employers and employees alike. In the present
remarks I have endeavoured to avoid touching upon
debateable ground outside the question of the
scheme for dealing with or the prevention of strikes.
The principles I have attempted to advocate are


embodied in the following, which I take from the
work already quoted from :
“In all probability, success will best be obtained in the
settlement of trade disputes by keeping lawyers and
laws as much at a distance as possible. There must be
spontaneous, or, at least, voluntary approximation of
the parties concerned. It is a question not of litigation,
but of shaking of hands in a friendly manner, and
sitting down to a table to talk the matter over. The
great evil of the present day is the entire disunion of
the labourer and the capitalist. If we ever get the
hostile bodies to meet by delegates round the same
table on a purely voluntary and equal footing, the first
great evil of disunion is in a fair way of being over-
come.”
My experience and reflection teach me that
Labour and Capital are inseparable in their common
interests ; that the owner of labour, as a saleable
commodity, is entitled to the recognition, respect, and
confidence of the owner of capital, who buys the
merchandise of labour. And I admit that the owner
of labour has a perfect right to dispose of the wealth
he possesses for the highest price, and upon the best
terms he can obtain for it; and further, if necessary
to accomplish his object, he has a perfect right,
moral and divine, to combine with his fellow work-
man, provided that no restraint or compulsion be
put upon others of his class who may see fit to stand
aloof.
When this principle is conceded freely and
openly by the capitalist, there will be fewer strikes,
there will arise mutual confidence and respect; and
these two commodities, Labour and the fruit of
Labour—Capital-will be realised to their highest
advantage, to the good of their respective owners,
and greatly to the advantage of society at large.
To this end I have appeared before this Council


to-night. If my sanguine hopes be fulfilled, it will
be indeed to me a source of unbounded pleasure. If
I fail—but why use the the word ; I have a strong
feeling within I shall not fail —then my consolation
will be that to the extent of my powers I have
endeavoured to fulfil the duties of a good citizen.
S. E. Lsks, Printer, Lees Court, off King Street, Sydney.




