





ADDRESS
DELIVERED AT THE
OPENING OF THE THIRD SESSION
THE SIXTH SYNOD
OP THE
DIOCESE OF SYDNEY
ALFEED BARRY, D.D.,
Lord Bishop op Sydney, Metropolitan of New South Wales,
and Primate of Australia and Tasmania.
SglJneg:
JOSEPH COOK & CO,, PRINTERS, 190, KENT STREET.
close to the cathedral.




ADDRESS.
Speak unto the Children of Israel, that they go
FORWARD. ExOD. XIV. 15.
My reverend brethren and my brethren of the laity, —
Since I last addressed you in this place I have endeavoured to
gain something of the practical knowledge and experience, in
which I then felt myself deficient. I have been able to visit
almost every parish in the diocese, to make myself acquainted
with the working of our various religious organisations, and so
to form some idea of the actual resources and needs of our
Church at the present time. Last year it seemed to be my duty,
on first entering upon my episcopal charge, to suggest to your
thoughts some leading principles of Church faith and life. On
this occasion I have a more directly practical object. I desire
to lay before you as comprehensive a survey as my time and
knowledge permit of our actual position—what has been done,
what is now doing, what still remains to do —in carrying out
the great duty which our Master has entrusted to us. This line
of address seems to be dictated to me almost by the necessity of
the case ; for a glance at the papers already submitted to you
will show you that we have a large, perhaps an unusual, amount
of work to be done in this session of Synod, and that we shall
hardly do it without a wise economy of time, and a certain
practical direction of thought and speech. It is perhaps well
that we are thus by necessity forced to view our principles in the
light of practice. If we are wise, we shall value our Synods as
true ecclesiastical parliaments, as assemblies (that is) of full and
free speech; and yet never forget that they are also assemblies
of definite legislation, and, in many points, of actual government.


All that is necessary is to beware of the inherent vices of what
calls itself the spirit of practical thought and common sense
the tendency to rely too much on machinery and too little on
the moving spirit—the disregard of those realities, which are too
deep and too spiritual to be manifested in visible form and fruit
—the haphazard and piecemeal legislation, aiming only at narrow
and immediate results, unguided by large and thoughtful views
of principle. It is well to take heed to our steps ; but it is also
well to have our eyes fixed on the true goal, though it may be
high above us and far away.
(I.) Of these higher realities we are always reminded, even by
this—that at each gathering of Synod we miss certain familiar
faces of those who have passed from among us, from the work of
earth (as we trust) to the rest of heaven. Three of our clergy
are gone—the Eev. Canon Stephen, the Rev. Thomas Wilson, the
Rev. W. F. B. Uzzeil—all, as far as personal intercourse goes,
almost strangers to me, though all, I doubt not, familiarly known,
esteemed, loved, by many of those whom I now address. It
would be hard for me to speak of them from mere second-hand
knowledge to you who have known personally their character
and their work. I am content to say, “ they rest in the Lord,
and their works do follow them.” One of our lay representatives,
Mr. T. K. Abbott, who had resigned his seat before proceeding
to England, there very suddenly passed away. You may
remember last year his anxiety for the establishment of the
parish of Wallerawang round the beautiful church built by Mrs.
Abbott —an establishment made possible only by their liberal
contributions. I have to announce that in his will he has left
the sum of £'2ooo for the establishment of two memorial scholar-
ships, for students preparing for Holy Orders at St. Paul’s and
Moore Colleges. He again must have been far better known to
many here than to myself; but even my intercourse was enough
to show me how much his heart was set on the progress of God’s
truth and grace among us—on that which, after all, will seem
to us the only thing worth caring for, when we come to die.
Other names have been removed from oiir roll by resignation;
among which I would first mention regretfully the revered name
of Canon Allwood, whose increasing infirmities induced him to
resign the charge of St. James’ parish after the faithful and
invaluable service of some 40 years—to resign it, I am glad to
know, into younger, and not less able and earnest hands; and
next, with even deeper regret, the name of the Rev. A, L.
2


Williams, whom ill-health has driven from the principalship of
Moore College, in which, as many here will know far better than
I, he has rendered to the Church singularly able and devoted
service. I trust that comparative rest in England may enable
him still to continue in a different sphere some labour in the
work of the Master.
As I have said, these inevitable separations year after year
bring with them the sense alike of the changeful and the change-
less. The “ memento mori ”is also the “ memento vivere ”
the warning not merely of the power of death, but of the greater
power of the life, which is to endure in itself and its results, when
death itself is trampled under the feet of our ascended Lord.
Under the seriousness of thoughts like these, we enter on our
consultations. May God bless them, according to the solemn
prayer which we have uttered, by the gift of the Spirit—who is
at once the Spirit of Truth and of Love—who gives the deep
knowledge of the Truth of God, and teaches the loving self-
sacrifice, which is the true spring of Christian action !
Before I enter upon matters specially concerning the diocese Oonsiitu-
as such, I wish briefly to allude to the Ordinance, which willvincial Synod,
be laid before you for the acceptance of the Constitution, drawn
up, under the order of the General Synod, for the Synod of the
Province of New South Wales. Ido not now attempt any
consideration of the details of this Constitution, of the relation in
which the Synod regulated by it will stand to the Provincial
Synod as recognised in our old Constitutions, or of the means which
it may be advisable to take for amalgamating the two. Into
these I entered at some length in my address to the Provincial
Synod; and they will, no doubt, come before you when the
Ordinance is proposed. I need only say that the Constitution
was drawn up after very careful discussion, and modified in
some important points, in deference largely to the ideas of your
own representatives in the Provincial Synod. I trust that it
will commend itself to your acceptance, and that in this way a
step of no inconsiderable importance will be taken towards the
fuller ecclesiastical unity of the province of New South Wales.
I pass now to speak of the Church in this diocese itself; and Ordinary ex-
lam glad to tell you that the survey of the past year is full of past year ,° f the
distinct signs of Church progress —in the sight of which we may
well thank God and take courage. There has been the regular
unceasing progress of Church expansion, which has to be re-
corded here year after year. Four new parishes, formed at the


last session of Synod, are now in independent work ; four more
formations of new parishes—at Redmyre, Five Dock, Granville,
Eookwood—are ready to be submitted to you this year ; and
one or two others are not far from readiness. It has been my
privilege to license ten new churches, or mission-churches, for
Divine worship, at Guildford, Clifton, Narellan, Riverstone,
Macdonaldtown, Harris Park, St. Luke’s Parramatta, Broughton
Creek, Five Dock, and Redmyre ; to consecrate six churches,
old and new or enlarged, at Dural, Jamberoo, Bulli, Dapto,
Blackheath, and Picton; and three burial grounds at Dural,
Lithgow, and Bulli; to lay the foundation stones of new or en-
larged churches at Gladesville and Hunter’s Hill, and of a church
for the Chinese—the first, I believe, in the colony—at Botany ;
and to open the completed nave of a church—St. Thomas’s
Church, on the North Shore—which marks very nobly the
realisation of a higher standard of church building, in the offer-
ing of our best to the service of God, and the recognition of the
value of beauty and dignity in our worship of Him. So the ex-
pansion of our Church goes steadily on, striving to keep pace
with the increase of our population, and its extension over the
great territory which is our possession.
But there are other indications of progress, by which the year
just passed leaves a more special mark on our history. When I
last addressed you, I felt it my duty to lay stress on certain
works, which, as it seemed to me, called upon us with some
peculiar urgency. lam able to announce, with deep thankful-
ness to God and hearty acknowledgment of the willing mind
which He has given to His people, that every one of these is now
in course of accomplishment. I reminded you of the Chapter
House, providing not only a new Synod-hall, but a new home
for the Church Society and Registry, which was to be a memorial
of respect and esteem for your late Bishop. I am glad to say
that fresh exertions have been made to carry it out. The fund
has been so far increased, that it is thought safe to have plans
drawn out and tenders called for. The first stone will, I hope,
ere long be laid; it will only need one more decisive effort,
which I trust will be made during this session of Synod, and the
work will be virtually done. The delay of it has, I think, been
unfortunate, and not quite becoming ; that delay should surely
be allowed no longer. I urged, next, the speedy extension of
St. Paul’s College, so that it might keep pace with the growth
of the University. I rejoice to know that here, also, the needful
4


funds have been very nearly raised; and this work also will, I
trust, be almost at once commenced. I ventured to ask for a
large increase of the free fund of our Church Society, on which
the possibility of Church expansion and sustentation of our
poorer parishes so largely depends. The fund has not been, as
I had hoped, doubled; but it has increased from £3,600 to
£5,800, and the Society has accordingly been free for extended
operations of usefulness. I commended to your support and
sympathy the fund devoted to the all-important work of religious
•education in Public schools. This fund has been more than
doubled, and the committee has been able to make most cheer-
ing progress in the necessary development of this work. I laid
before you some ideas on the right position of our Cathedral, as a
model of the worship of God in frequency and beauty, and as a
centre of diocesan help to all Church work. By the liberality of
•a few churchmen we have been enabled to organise a regular
choir for daily choral Service, and establish a Cathedral School
for our choristers and others. By a grant from the Church
Society we have support for two clergy to be attached to the
Cathedral, who may be at the disposal of the bishop for diocesan
work, and may specially help in emergency our overburdened
parochial clergy. The ideal is far from being realised, but we
have at least made an important step towards it.
True it is that none of these works is as yet absolutely com-
plete. We shall need in the coming year to continue and in-
crease our exertions for them all. But it is no slight matter that
every one of them has been so vigorously taken in hand that
their success is, I think, assured. It would be ingratitude to
God and man not to acknowledge what has been done with hearty
thankfulness. It would argue dulness and despondency not to
see in it a proof of Christian earnestness, fraught with even
greater hope for the future. True it is, again, that all these are
but outward and visible indications of progress. Of the inner
progress which alone has any spiritual value—whether in the in-
dividual soul, or in the Church of Christ, or in the community,
which it can leaven for good—God, and only God, can absolutely
judge. But these outward tokens are, I believe, signs—imper-
fect, indeed, but unmistakable signs—of the inner reality which
we cannot see. For wherever I have gone through the diocese,
on Confirmation tours or otherwise, I have, with but few excep-
tions, seen on all sides evidence of earnest spiritual work done,
not through the clergy only, but through faithful lay ministers
5


of Christ—tokens, moreover, of a gladness, even an anxiety, to
receive truth, if it be solidly, thoughtfully, earnestly set forth—
tokens among those who believe of a desire for a higher standard
of life, a fuller unity, a deeper and larger faith—tokens, if I mis-
take not, even among those who have not yet taken any religious
profession, of the sense of a need of God, a desire to search after
His truth, a readiness, at least, to examine and to try the revela-
tion of Him through our Lord Jesus Christ. In the Mission
just concluded in so many churches in Sydney, all these tokens
seemed to me to be brought out with an especial clearness. In
face of perhaps increasing difficulty and antagonism from without
—in spite of very many shortcomings, much of pettiness and
unreality among ourselves—still I trust and believe that we are
going forward in the way of God.
(II.) It is for that very reason that I ask your earnest attention
to what seem the great needs of our Church, as always, so especially
at this present time. lam inclined to sum them up under three
heads : Fuller and truer education ; larger development of work-
ing power ; higher, broader, and deeper conception of work and
life. Each of these needs I now proceed very plainly and directly
to set before you. You will not, I trust, think that my words are
the words either of exaggerated urgency or exaggerated authority.
But what can be the use of a Bishop’s address to the Assembly
which is the representation of the working thought and power of
our Church, if he does not endeavour to submit to the minds and
hearts and consciences of his hearers what are borne in upon his
own soul as the leadings and calls of God’s Providence, addressed
not to a few, but to all—not to those called in different degrees
to the heavy responsibilities of leadership, but all ranks and
orders in the great army of God ?
I would speak first of educational advance ; for I hold, more
firmly, if possible, than I held last year, that in the growth of
true education—the education of the whole man, in body, mind,
heart, and spirit—the education by contact with Nature, Human-
ity, God —lies the master-key of the future, both for our own
Church and for the whole community. In every sphere of edu-
cation we should strive and pray for this advance.
In what is called the higher education through University and
College life of those who should be the leaders of the future, I
earnestly hope that our Church will be true to its old traditions
of welcoming and fostering all progress of knowledge, all advance
in culture, all stimulation of intellectual and aesthetic activity—
6


as an obedience to the Divine law of education, and as destined
to subserve the higher spiritual progress of the soul and the
world. I trust to see each year the influence of our University
extend more widely, not only over the few who embrace what are
called the learned professions, but over all who have leisure and
opportunity for advanced study—all who in any way will occupy
leading places of influence here. We, who cannot but feel pain-
fully the defect in its system in the exclusion from its curriculum
of the Queen of Sciences, the one great moral teaching which
moves the world, yet (I think) should hold it a sin to sur-
render it to the domain of Secularism, to look coldly or jealously
on the great work which it can still do, to fail to leaven it in-
directly, through Christian teachers and Christian students, with
that high spiritual influence which directly it cannot recognise.
But over and above this, I trust that we shall endeavour to do
more than has yet been done, to advance in it that element of
common Collegiate life, which, as yet, is comparatively in-
significant, and yet in which, as all members of the old Uni-
versities know, are bound up some of the highest educational
influences of a University career. Were our Colleges mere
secular institutions, I should plead for them as of priceless value
to the whole community. But it is remarkable that, so far as I
know, here and elsewhere, this collegiate life has never risen and
flourished, except under the inspiration of religious faith, and the
uniting force of common Christian worship. In our own St.
Paul’s College we can supply that close corporate unity which a
University of non-resident students so greatly lacks, and that
supreme religious training which has been ignored in our uni-
versity system. As I have already informed you, it will be, be-
fore we meet again, almost doubled in its accommodation for
students. Let me earnestly commend it to your sympathy and
your support, that it may enter on a career of wider and deeper
usefulness.
But in respect of this higher education one special object of Moore College,
desire is its influence on the training of our future clergy. For lydneyf™ 06 t 0
although we may draw, as we have drawn, valuable aid from
home, yet we must ultimately rely, in this as in other things,
upon our own resources. That training ought again, in accord-
ance with our old traditions, to have both the basis of a broad
liberal education, received by our clergy side by side with the lay
members of our community, and the special study and prepar-
ation which belong to the sacred vocation of the ministry. For


both we have a provision, which I am anxious to see increased
in efficiency year by year, in our two colleges—St. Paul’s and.
Moore Colleges—which should, I think, be brought as closely as
possible within the range of mutual fellowship and mutual in-
fluence. Each can supply what necessarily the other lacks.
United or amalgamated I see clearly that they cannot be. The-
differences of the constitutions under which they are governed,,
and the tenure by which they are held, forbid it. Even were
this otherwise, a far-sighted policy would hesitate to attempt
what might injure the work of both. But that they might greatly
help each other is not my own opinion only, but the judgment of
many leading churchmen, with whom I have had free conference
on this subject during the past year. With a view to this inter-
change of support, and for the benefit especially of Moore-
College, I am most anxious to obtain the requisite power for-
moving it into Sydney, and placing it in close proximity to the
University and St. Paul’s College. By such change, I believe
with the late respected principal of Moore College
that it would enter on a far larger and freer career of use-
fulness than it has ever yet attained. The position at
Liverpool has, so far as I can see, the advantage neither
of town nor of country. Never would it have been chosen
for a theological college, had it not chanced that Mr. Moore’s
own house and land were situated there. Even under the sin-
gularly able and earnest direction of the late principal, the College
has not advanced in numbers or in popularity to anything like-
what was naturally hoped for it. Let it be moved into Sydney,
and it will be invigorated by the enlarging and inspiring
influences of the civil and religious life of a great city. Its
students can have the advantages of the teaching of the Univer-
sity and the St. Paul’s College lectures, whether they matriculate
or not —of the Cathedral services and sermons, and the lectures-
which I hope soon to establish there—of all such religious
gatherings as may bear usefully on their future life—of a range
of parochial experience and spiritual influences, infinitely larger
and better than can be supplied at Holsworthy. Their whole
education will be freer and more varied, open to larger and
deeper forces of teaching and influence, more likely to train
them to sympathy with and understanding of men. Eor myself,,
it would be a great happiness, that I might personally have far
closer knowledge of the College, and be able from time to time
to take part in its teaching. But it would give as well as
receive. It would be able to supply to students of St.. Paul’s-


College, who desired it, more systematic theological teaching
than is now provided for them ; it would form a nucleus for
similar teaching of lay members of our Church, especially those
engaged in lay ministrations ; it might, like my own College in
London, organise a system of Evening Classes, which could be-
gin the training for the ministry of those not able to give up their
professional earnings for the whole period of the college course.
Almost every w 7 ay I believe that the transference would give it
new life. Whatever drawbacks there might be—as, of course,
there are sure to be—would be infinitely outweighed. These
views I have ventured to submit to my co-trustees, the Dean and
Sir A. Stuart; they are of opinion that the scheme should be
submitted to the Synod. It will be brought before you in due
course, and I venture to ask for it your thoughtful and earnest
consideration.
I must here say in passing, that for the purpose of this educa-
tion of the clerg3 7 we need—what has, I believe, been more
freely given at Melbourne—greater provision of endowed scholar-
ships for the help of those who need it. At St. Paul’s College we
have already three such scholarships, two given by the lay fellows
of ,£25 a year, one recently founded by Mr. Priddle, of about £4O ;
and we shall soon have one of the Abbott scholarships of which
I have already spoken. At Moore College, to a scholarship of £BO
from the venerable Society for the Promotion of Christian Know-
ledge in England, and the Ex-students’ bursary of £25, will
speedily be added the other Abbott Scholarship of £5O, and a
Barker Scholarship of similar value, founded by the liberality of
Mrs. Barker. But I feel that we should have more than these,
and I feel this so strongly that during my tenure of office here I
am ready to give a scholarship of £5O a year, if not less than six
others will be ready to guarantee a like scholarship permanently,
or for a term of years.
But I would not confine our thoughts to this highest sphere of
education. We want schools of the type of our English Public
Schools, to train our boys of the upper and middle classes and to
be feeders for the more advanced education of the colleges. We
have a school designed on this type in the old King’s School at
Parramatta. It has done excellent service ; but, like all other
educational institutions, it may need new developments to meet
the growing requirements of our times. I have the great satis-
faction of informing you that all difficulties are now removed as
to carrying out a scheme of my predecessor for the creation of a
9


governing body appointed by tbe Synod, and the placing the
school on a recognised public basis. I have no doubt that this
will help the school to attain an even higher standard of excel-
lence and usefulness than that which it has already attained. I
trust that this synod at its present session will signify its ap-
proval of this change, and proceed to elect the first governing
body.
But in the original scheme of education sketched out by
Bishop Broughton there was not only a King's School at Parra-
matta, as a great boarding-school, but a King’s School in Sydney,
to be a still larger day school. The time and opportunity are
now come for the realisation of this latter part of the original
plan. The body of Corporate Trustees have received from the
Government the sum of 1:38,000 for the buildings known as the
St. James’ Schools, .although not, I believe, either in their foun-
dation or their working, restricted to St. James’ parish. It is
proposed out of this to devote a considerable sum to the purchase
of the Church Society’s House and Diocesan Eegistry for the
use of the parish ; with the rest (about 1*30,000) to found a great
school of the highest character, having various departments for
the needs of the various classes of the community—open, of
course, to all, but under full religious teaching on the principles
of the Church of England. For such a school there is, we be-
lieve, ample room in Sydney without anything beyond honour-
able rivalry with existing schools; and I am confident that it
will command —perhaps even beyond the limits of our own Com-
munion—the confidence of those who value systematic religious
teaching and devotion, as an integral part of the education of
school, as well as the education of the home and the Church.
For this scheme the general approval of the Synod will be at
once asked, with the proposal to leave the carrying out of details
to the Trustees, assisted by some gentlemen to be ap-
pointed by the Synod at this session. Should that approval, as
I trust, be given, we hope next year to have the school ready
for opening, and to ask the Synod to elect (as at the King’s
School) its governing body.
A smaller scheme, yet one tending in the same direction—and
one, moreover, which, I trust, will be of solid practical value—
is the establishment of our Cathedral School—an institution
which, as, I need hardly tell you, has always formed from old
times part of a right Cathedral system. It has, moreover, two
special characteristics of its own —first, the acknowledgment of
10


the need of careful moral and religions training for the lads, who
are set apart for the trying and responsible work of a choir of
Daily Service ; next, that recognition of the study of music, as
not merely a technical training, but an educational influence,
which is daily gaining ground in all thoughtful minds. It is yet
in its humble infancy. I trust that it may grow, perhaps to a
school of residence, in due time ; meanwhile I am sure that,
under our devoted Precentor, it will do much immediate good.
But while we hope thus in various ways to advance the Education of
right education of our boys, let me remind you that this is but Glrls-
half of our duty. No educational advance in England is more
remarkable than that which has taken place of late for the sound
and thorough education of girls, mainly through the action o
the “Girls’ High School Company.” I hope ere long to see
some corresponding movement here. That it is needed, I cannot
doubt; that it would be easily self-supporting, I have full confi-
dence ; that it is a proper complement to all that is proper to do
for the high religious education of our boys is obvious. Till
recently the duty had been comparatively neglected in England.
The success which has attended the attempt to repair that
neglect may well encourage us here. By next year I trust I
may be able to submit to you the announcement of the initiation
of some definite scheme.
But, over and above these phases of educational need, there Religious in-
remains the question of popular religious education, on which I i,v s Pub “
dwelt in full in the last Synod. Here the position remains
unchanged, except that the ventilation of the whole subject has
drawn attention and interest to the true character of our Public
School law ; which has also, I observe, been dwelt upon with
praise again and again in the evidence before the Eoyal Com-
mission in the neighbouring colony of Victoria. For myself, I
need only say that the convictions which I ventured to express to
you last year have only been strengthened by experience. lam
still most firmly of the opinion, in which I have never varied,
that the old dual system, reformed where necessary, is the best
in the abstract for education itself, best for needful economy,
best in consideration for religious liberty. In the thinly popu-
lated country districts, indeed, I doubt whether it could ever
work satisfactorily; in the towns I am convinced that it could
work, and work for good. The Roman Catholic Communion,
with singular resolution and self-sacrifice, has maintained it
against all difficulty and grievance ; in time, I can hardly doubt


chat its demands must meet with some measure of success. The-
majority of the laity of the Church of England—not (I think)
its clergy—decided against a like effort, and acquiesced in great
degree in the Public school system.. While I honour and thank
the minority who have struggled to keep< up their schools, and
will help them to the utmost of my power —while, in view of
present needs and future possibilities, I value these schools most
highly as undisputed strongholds of religious education —yet I
have to recognise and to accept the position ; and. accordingly I
have, as you know, devoted myself, as far as possible, to the
maintenance and advance of religious instruction under the-
Public School system. Nay, so convinced, am I that it must
always take the chief place in educational work, that I would
never purchase the revival of the dual system at the price of a
thorough secularisation of the Public Schools. I would still
urge upon the public mind and conscience the paramount
importance of not allowing the remarkable enactments of the
law, as to general religious instruction through the teachers, to-
become a dead letter. I rejoice to know that our own free
religious teaching under the seventeenth clause has wonderfully
advanced—has more than doubled its resources and its work
and, with some slight further increase of support, will fairly cover
all the schools in this diocese, except some of the smaller country
schools. lam happy also to tell you that, as I find through the
Joint Board of Religious Instruction,, other Christian bodies have
been stirred to increased activity, and that the Board, which has
hitherto waited (according to its original idea) to ascertain what
work is thus being done, will now, as soon as it can get full
returns, endeavour to supplement it on a general religious basis.
Every way this needful work advances under many difficulties.
It is impossible to exaggerate its importance to the religious
future of our community. Pardon me, if, under a, deep sense
of this importance, I have dwelt at large on this progress of
education, as perhaps the most important element of Church,
progress.
(III.) I proceed more briefly, but not less earnestly, to speak of
the other needs. I have said that we need a larger development
of working power in the ministry of the Church. Who can doubt
this, when he looks around him, to see what is being, done, and
what still remains perforce undone 2 As to the clergy, I must
repeat here what I said in another place not long ago,, that your
clergy are overworked, and your parishes are underworked—in
12


the country from excess of size, in the city from excess of
population. There are few parishes in the diocese—hardly one
in the city and suburbs—which would not in England have at
least one curate. How can the right standard, even of the
regular pastoral work, be kept up ? And yet beyond this regular
ministration there is distinct mission work to he done, chiefly in
the densely populated parts of our city—such as we are already
attempting in some quarters—work not unlike that of the Salvation
Army, on a sounder basis, in a graver and more reverent spirit,
and as an avowed preparation for pastoral work of edification.
As a matter of fact, the clergy, chiefly for want of power of
occasional rest, break down again and again. Parishes at this
moment are without their regular pastors, simply because, from
excessive and too incessant work, they are laid aside. And yet,
even so, the clergy feel—l am sure I rightly express then-
feelings—that they cannot overtake the work which they know
should be done. If the full duty of the Church —not to her own
professed children only, but to those who are as sheep having no
shepherd—is to he discharged, the numbers in the ministry
must be increased, and that forthwith.
And here I must touch on another subject, which will, as I
hope, be brought formally before the Synod. I mean the press-
ing need of some provision to meet cases of incapacity in the
discharge of ministerial duty. There is an incapacity of neglect
and inefficiency, which is at least as dangerous to the spiritual
interests of a parish as doctrinal unsoundness —almost as danger-
ous as moral offence and scandal. There is an incapacity of age
and infirmity, through which, though of course not so dangerous
in its effect, the whole spiritual life of a parish equally languishes,
and its people are drawn away. At this moment the bishop can
deal with neither. He cannot enforce retirement; he cannot
facilitate willing retirement by provision of a suitable allowance,
on which to live, however simply. The parish is helpless,
except by the rough and oppressive method of refusal of contri-
bution, to which no one would desire to have recourse, who
values the right independence and dignity, essential to the true
spiritual efficiency, of the clergy. Even my short experience tells
me of parishes in this diocese, where the want of some
such provision is at this moment most sorely felt. The
hands of the Bishop must be strengthened—with whatever
safeguards you will against his hasty or arbitrary action. It
will be for the wisdom of the Synod to consider how this shall be
13


done—how by extension of a superannuation scheme, with pro-
vision for infirmity as well as old age, some maintenance for re-
tiring clergy can he secured. But, believe me, the need is really
as great ; it must not be set aside by exaggerated tenderness for
personal feeling and individual independence : it must not be put
off by fear of an expenditure, which need not be very large, and
which would indeed be well bestowed.
But let there be any possible increase in the number of the
clergy, the work of the Church cannot be done, ought, not to be
done, through their hands alone. The times call loudly not only for
help, but for organised help, from the ministry of all members
of the Church. In connection with this need, let me glance here
by anticipation at the report of the committee on Deaconesses
and Sisterhoods—as means of organizing the work of women in
the Church—which will be laid before you. They are means of
wholly distinct character, though of cognate action. My own
conviction is that there is room for both, without for a moment
superseding the less organised but most valuable work, which is
going on in our parishes already day by day. lam aware that,
like all other human things, they have their drawbacks. lam
aware especially that some form of Sisterhoods have taken
developments, unsound in doctrinal basis, irregular and insubordi-
nate in actual working. But in my judgment experience has
shown that the advantages infinitely outweigh the drawbacks,
and that there is no reason why these perverted developments
should not be guarded against, by such wise and simple pro-
visions as our committee have laid down. Let me also add my
reluctant but unhesitating conviction, that with our present
machinery we are very far from grappling adequately with the
evils and the difficulties which beset the word of God from the
misery and ignorance, the sin and unbelief, of this great city.
What Deaconesses and Sisterhoods can do within the lines of the
Church of England we have seen at home. Why should we
leave here to the Roman Catholic body the monopoly of this
great evangelistic and beneficent instrument of the service of
God?
But, even outside these closer organisations, we are obviously
called to strain every nerve for the increase of the effective power
of lay help in the Church. I hope during the present year to
unite in one great association all the lay helpers in our various
parishes, who are in any way at work —giving them thereby the
support of mission by the Bishop’s own authority—giving them
14


in occasional services and devotional or consultative meetings the
support of religious fellowship—giving them a higher conscious-
ness of the reality of the service to the Church of Christ at large,
which is rendered by even the humblest parochial agencies. The
value of such an institution I have seen in the great diocese of
London. I have little doubt that it will give increased vitality
and unity to our lay ministry here.
Let me say that in enlisting co-operation, I would find room
for earnest men of all classes, of all degrees of education and
refinement. lam ready to concede much freedom and variety of
action; I am not afraid of some irregularities and crudities,
some inevitable mistakes and even offences in the work. These
are, in this imperfect world, the penalty of free vitality ; they are
as nothing in comparison with the heavy weight of apathy and
dulness. There is, in evangelistic agency especially, work for all.
It is certain, as I have said, that in Sydney we need outdoor
work—such as a Church Army may well take up, in the streets
and in the Domain, in the house and in the mission-room—
rough and homely work which needs, of course, wise and
thoughtful direction, but which can be done —perhaps best done
—by rough and homely hands. It is certain, also, that we need
higher and more intellectual work, especially among the think-
ing men of our wage-earning classes, which will tax and reward
the service for God of the fullest learning and culture. Both
needs we have; both we have resources to supply. The one
question is, Shall there be among our lay members the spirit of
self-sacrifice and faith, which will lay the full wealth of these
resources at the feet of the Lord Jesus Christ ?
But, again, within the larger and looser organisation, I trust to
see a considerable development of that more definite ministerial
work, which our Lay-readers, few but earnest, have so long done.
lam calling, especially in the larger country parishes, for local
Lay readers, who will render service in their own parishes only.
lam calling also for an increase in the number of those Lay
readers or Lay-missioners—for whose labours I cannot sufficiently
express my admiration and gratitude—who are ready to do work
wherever they are sent in the diocese. For this office it is clear
that we must have a reasonable test-standard of knowledge and
education ; for who shall teach unless he has himself been taught ?
For those who undertake this office I should like to provide in
Sydney some centre or centres of teaching, which might help to
guide and equip them for the work. It is a work which comes
15


nearest to the duty of the ordained minister of God. In a
measure it needs preparation and qualification not wholly unlike
his.
Thus in many ways I desire to take this opportunity of calling
in the name of the Master for the lay help of work. When it
can he given, I value it infinitely beyond all other. For the Lord
seeks not yours, but you. When it cannot be given, there is still
other opportunity of service open. I am almost ashamed to be
always crying out for increase of contribution of money—increase
in the area and in the standard of that contribution. But money,
as we know, is dormant power, which may give scope for energy
of work; and it is true that on every side we are straitened for
need of it. The increase, to take but one example, in the free fund
of our Church Society gives us no superabundance ; it simply
enables us, still inadequately, to attempt more work. There is
a proposal before the Committee from myself to enlarge the scope
of the Society’s work, so that it may really deserve its name, by
covering the whole area of our Church activity. Those who are
experienced hesitate to adopt it, because they fear inadequacy of
support, and distrust the sense of obligation to the work of the
Church as a whole. I think they are wrong. I believe that to
attempt great things is the only way to achieve large results.
But I acknowledge, however reluctantly, that they have much
ground for their anxiety. Will the laity of the Church relieve
that anxiety, and rise to a larger measure and a higher concep-
tion of the duty of contribution ?
Nor think it a mere conventionality, if I add that, even beyond
the support of work and money, there is an infinite help in the
wider diffusion of the sympathy with the work of the Church,
which expresses itself especially in prayer. The atmosphere of a
sympathising public opinion is acknowledged in all departments
of human labour as a necessary condition for vigorous and effec-
tive action—a condition, I may add, more and more necessary, as
freedom and education advance. Most of all, I think, is this
true in the sphere which is most spiritual, and therefore fullest
of freedom—the sphere of the kingdom of God. Beyond all else
we need to get rid of a certain spiritual selfishness and narrow-
ness in religious life —to realise in act what we profess as to
“ the vocation and ministry ” of every member of the Church of
Christ. If we could only make the idlers, and not the workers,
the exception,—if we could only put down that prevalence among
ourselves in milder form of the conception taken for granted in
16


Trance, that vitality of Christian faith and energy is Clericalism
—if in every phase of thought and work, whether what men call
ecclesiastical work or other, we could guide life as a matter of
course by the law of Christ, which is the law of self-sacrifice for
God and man —there is literally nothing which we could
not do in a universal fellow-working with Christ.
(IY.) Let us have this fuller education, this increase of our work- IV.-Truer ideal
ing power, then we shall go on, I trust, to what I last design to speak of ChrlstianLlfe-
of,—a nobler and truer ideal of Christian life in the soul and the
Church. I often think in relation to this of what St. Paul says
•as to the mystery which underlies it—that we should pray to
know first “its length and breath;” then, “its depth and
Its length and breadth—the wide area of its power, as literally Growth in
-00-extensive with human life. In this century, by God’s grace, 1
two great revivals have passed over the Church of England—the
great Evangelical revival, which was the re-assertion of the
supernatural life of the in-dwelling of Christ in the individual
soul —the great High Church revival, which equally re-asserted
the supernatural life of the in-dwelling of Christ in the whole
body of the Church. Both have pervaded—thank God!—in
various degrees the whole fabric of our Christian life. I trust
that in ever-increasing degree we are learning to see that they
do not hinder, hut help, each other. Now, perhaps, the most
pressing duty which lies before us is the re-assertion of the
harmony of the Supernatural with the Natural—of the supreme
truth of Christ with all lower truths —of the supreme grace of
Christ with all other powers —of the religious life “ hid with
Him in God.” with the whole outer life of individual and social
activity. The duty lies on the Christian Churches, but for many
reasons especially on the Church of England. At home she has
some advantages in doing it which we possess not here, in the
natural leadership in religious work, as a representative of national
Christianity, which arises from what is called Establishment, and
which is to my mind of far more value than the richest endow-
ment. But we still, as I have already urged, inherit in great
degree her old traditions; and can support them, if we are in
earnest, by a certain leadership in resource and influence-
provided always that we do not affect that which we have not, or
seek obsolete privilege instead of present labour and sacrifice.
How far are we doing this ?
17


There is an impression in my own mind, which I would gladly
have corrected, if possible, that, while there is much religious
activity in our churches, there is a greater separation than at
home between the religious and the (so called) secular life—a less
frequent mingling of the clergy with ordinary society, and works
of great public interest —an excessive fear, on the one hand, of
what is called denominationalism, which, instead of including all
alike, is apt to exclude all who openly profess themselves ministers
or members of Christian churches from their right influence over
social, academical, political—in one word, public life'—perhaps
an excessive tendency, on the other, to assume that a definitely
religious life must hold itself largely aloof from the interests, the
amusements, the society of the world, after the old ascetic manner,
instead of claiming them, and purifying them, for God. Such
separation is fatal to the Church, still more fatal to the world.
We have to strive against it, as in all other ways, so especially
by bringing out more fully the universal moral force of true
Christianity.
Such work as we are doing—l would that I could say perfectly
—in our struggle with gross moral evils—the drunkenness, against
which our Church of England Temperance Society has long
been labouring—the Impurity, against which we have, in obedi-
ence to the resolution of last year’s Synod, inaugurated the new
crusade of the “ White Cross Union,” —such work as this is,
to my mind, a Christian work of infinitely greater importance,
than many works of a more professedly religious character. To
succeed in it is a witness for Christ, which will preach Him
to thousands averse to all other preaching ; for it is to rescue
the humanity, which He took on Himself, and for which He
died, from foul and hideous evil, defacing the image of God in
man, laughing to scorn the very conception of progress towards
perfection in human society. Yet how many members—how
many even of the ministers of our Church—faithful in their
direct ecclesiastical and spiritual ministration, —give to these
all-important works but a lukewarm and perfunctory support,
as though they were but of secondary importance in the progress
of the Kingdom of God !
But I speak not only of this conflict with direct moral evils.
I would plead for a truer and more vivid conception of the
bearing of Christianity on all forms of human life and progress.
Commercial activity in various forms fills a large part of our
life here. Should not Christianity teach more efficiently the
18


true character of Commerce, as an obedience to the natural laws
of God’s providence, and a means of binding together the whole
race of man, and protest more earnestly against the dishonesty,
the ruthless greed of gain, the selfishness of mere money-getting
at all hazards, which so often turn it from a blessing to a curse ?
Political activity—the inevitable advance of democratic prin-
ciples, the redress of social grievances and inequalities, the
improvement of the outward conditions of common life, the
future development of this colony in itself, and in relation to other
•colonies and to the British Empire —all these occupy a place
hardly less extensive, certainly higher and nobler, in men’s hearts
and minds. Has our Christianity nothing to say on all these
things ? Without descending into the arena of political or social
conflict, can it not preach its gospel of true brotherhood, of care
especially for the multitude, of continual progress toward an
ordained perfection ? Educational, scientific, artistic, literary
activity—these things, again, are at least as characteristic of the
spirit of the age, and at least as important to true human
progress. Is our Christianity to stand apart from these, in the
antagonism of fear or the apathy of unconcern ? Or is it to bless
and guide them, as expressions of the Divine impulse to know
and to create, which is—be it said reverently—an imitation of
God? Nay, even with regard to the lighter aspects of life in
rest, relaxation, amusement, which must again hold their right
secondary place as ordinances of God, should not our Christian
teaching claim them also boldly for the kingdom of the Master,
frankly acknowledge them as necessities and blessings of human
life, and by that acknowledgment help to keep them pure and
temperate and innocent, and bring them into right harmony of
subordination to the supreme call of work? Much popular
thought or sentiment accuses our Christianity of neglecting the
progress of the world, in its absorption in the hope of another.
God forbid that we should ever dethrone from its place of
primacy that sure and certain hope without which we could not
live ! But, “ Godliness,” says the Apostle, “ has the promise of
the life, which now is, as well of that which is to come.” Nay,
our higher life here is—mark the phrase well—the “ earnest ”
and pledge of that which shall be in the hereafter.
I have dwelt thus fully on the growth of our Christianity in
its length and breadth, because it seems to me in some degree a
needful lesson of our time. I need but touch with brief emphasis
on the growth in depth and height, because it is the lesson of
19


all times, of which no Christian can need to be more than
reminded. Better any amount of narrowness than the superfi-
ciality which goes not down to the ultimate basis, or the
earthliness which never soars to the heaven of high aspiration.
To go down deeper and deeper to the foundation of our indi-
vidual life, and the life of the Church, in the Lord Jesus Christ
Himself—this is the one secret of true vitality. It is to this
that we are being driven, I trust, more and more, by all the
questions and trials of this critical time. It is in this that we
find our central unity, deeper than all the divisions which so
unhappily rend our Christendom asunder. It is in this that we
can find our rest, even though some old developments of theolo-
gical thought, some old methods of Biblical interpretation,
some old forms of rite and ordinance, are found to have had
their day, and accordingly are now ceasing to be- It is this
which is the true centre of our Church teaching, whether in the
more evangelistic work of our Missions, or in the quiet, daily
edification of pastoral duty. It is this, personally realised, which
is the life of the individual Christian, so dear to us in its
inalienable freedom and responsibility. Only when our whole
being, personal and collective, is firmly based here, can it extend,
as I have urged, to cover all in height and breadth. An
abstract Christianity must eventually fail in elasticity and
enlargement. A living Christ alone can be “ all and in all.”
Yet, like some stately tree, the Christian life, in proportion as
it stretches its roots deeper, must be continually rising higher.
It must he so in the individual; for what is his ideal hut confor-
mity to the image of Christ ?—what his goal hut the perfection
of bliss and goodness which we call Heaven? But what we
thus acknowledge in personal Christianity he it ours to apply
also to the life of the Church itself. When we study the sub-
lime and glowing picture in Holy Scripture of what the Church
should he, and turn to what it is—what it is in the world at large
—what (for this is our true concern) it is for us here —there can
hardly, I think, be much danger of self-complacency. There is
rather the risk of a despondency, which is almost as deadly, in
its blank acquiescence in what is poor, and mean, and unworthy
—comforting itself, perhaps, with the glorious prospect of the
Church triumphant in heaven, but hopeless of advancing towards
any nearer approach to it on earth. Away, I would venture to
say—away with this despair, which is treason to the Divine
kingdom, or, rather, to the Divine King ! We can only live, if


we are growing to a greater height of aspiration—to a higher
ideal in the Church, of self-sacrificing work f6r Christ and for
the humanity which is His—a higher ideal of intensity and
reverence and solemnity in worship—a higher ideal of the holi-
ness, the true holiness of the mind of Christ Jesus, which is the
first attribute of the Church in our Creed, but which we seem
hardly even to conceive in practice.
As we meet year by year, may God grant us to see some pro-
gress, be it ever so inadequate, towards this growth, in length
and breadth of power, in depth and height of inner vitality ; and,
when our short time of thought and service is over, may He,
while He gathers us to His perfect rest, give us the sure and cer-
tain hope that the generations to come will be better than their
fathers, and go on under the banner of the Cross to conquests,
which we can as yet only grasp in prayer and hope!
21


