

ADDRESSES
TO THE
HUNTER RIVER
VINEYARD ASSOCIATION,
AT THEIR
ANNUAL MEETINGS in 1865 and 1866.
BY WILLIAM KEENE,
(F. GEOL. SOC., LONDON; M.A.8., BORDEAUX.)
PRESIDENT OF THE ASSOCIATION.
to fee printed
'Presented to the Association at their May Meeting , 1867.
MAITLAND, NEW SOUTH WALES:
HENRY THOMAS, PRINTER, HIGH-STREET.
MDCCCLXVII.




F KOo 7
ADDRESSES
TO THE
HUNTER RIVER
VINEYARD ASSOCIATION,
AT THEIE
ANNUAL MEETINGS in 1865 and 1866,
BY WILLIAM KEENE,
PRESIDENT OF THE ASSOCIATION.
to 6c printed
Presented to the Association at their May Meeting , 1867.
MAITLAND, NEW SOUTH WALES:
HENRY THOMAS, PRINTER, HIGH-STREET.
MDCCCLXVII.




2 7-5-77
HUNTER RIVER VINEYARD ASSOCIATION,
1865.
On Friday, May sth, the Annual General Meeting of the
members of the above named Association was held at the Nor-
thumberland Hotel, West Maitland.
At a quarter before two o’clock, the President, W. Keene, Esq.,
took the chair, and opened proceedings by reading the following
address:—
“ Gentlemen —When last year you honoured me with your
confidence, and elected me to the Presidency of your Association,
I concluded that you did so not from any title I possessed as a
Hunter Eiver wine grower, but rather as a recognition of the
services I may have rendered by the free communication to you,
whenever opportunity offered, of such knowledge as I had acquired
during frequent visits to the south of Europe in the vintage
season.
These visits were followed by a residence of some years at
the foot of the Pyrenees, where I had a few acres of vineyard,
and learnt the pruning of the vine, as well as the watchfulness
and care requisite in cellar management to insure the production
of a sound, palatable, and wholesome drink in a climate more
resembling that of New South Wales than any other part of
Europe known to me.
“The progress you have made since (in 1854) I first attended
the vintage meetings, is more than I could then have hoped for.
At that time the production of unsound wines was the rule ; a
sound wine was scarcely to be found in any cellar, but you have
succeeded in reversing the rule, and an unsound wine is now the
exception.
“ So far as I have been able to obtain information, and from
my own observations, I am justified in stating that the usual yield


per acre has not been generally obtained in the last vintage. I
attribute the deficiency to unfavourable weather at the time of
the setting of the blossom. The vines just began to show the first
buds bursting in the middle of September; the 13th of October
the first blossom was seen in one of our largest vineyards, and by
the 15th November the blossom had entirely set, I never saw
blossom more beautiful; but as the time of setting the fruit
approached, cold malignant winds prevailed, and when the
blossom had set, it was seen that at least one-half of the flowers
had melted away without forming theii fruit. This is of common
occurrence in the south of Europe. A late frost will cause the
blossom to couler, as it is termed, or run ; the promise of an abun-
dant yield is broken in a night; and the price ot wine is some-
times doubled from one market day to another. There is a pre-
caution taken in the French vineyards to which I would direct
attention—never to disturb by trimming, pruning, or even moving
amongst the vines whilst they are in blossom. The entry to the
vineyard is almost prohibited from the opening of the blossom
until the fruit is set; but here I have often seen moving about, to
tie up or prune the vines, to the great prejudice of the crop.
“ Notwithstanding the season was so unfavourable to the setting
of the fruit, and some of our vineyards suffered severely from hail;
as the grapes approached maturity these untoward circumstances
were greatly compensated by the fine weather during the time of
the gathering of the grapes. They have thus yielded musts of
qualities not equalled for some years past, so that 1865 will, I
expect, become remarkable in the vintage calendar, and in three
or four years hence will add to the growing reputation of Austra-
lian wines.
“ I have read much in the different Manuals published for your
instruction on the culture of the vine, but in none are you suffi-
ciently informed that the mode of pruning and training mainly
depends on climatic influences, circumstances purely local, and
the purpose to which the produce of the vineyard is to be applied.
In landing on the northern frontier of France, and going direct
to the southern frontier, in the summer season, every variety of
vine culture and climate comes under observation; and it is quite


evident to the observer that the culture varies with climate and
locality. Tor one hundred miles going south from Calais or
Boulogne the vine is trained against the houses only; and at
Beauvais the first open vineyards appear, hut the vine looks a low
stunted plant, is pruned low that it may be earthed up and almost
covered with soil in winter, to protect the stocks from frost; and
the product is so unpalatable that the Southrons pretend that of
the wine of Beauvais it requires three men to drink a glass—that
is, two to hold the one who drinks.
“As we go further south, in the vicinity of Paris, where the
standard peach tree just perfects its fruit, a careful espalier cul-
ture ripens the early sweet-water grape known as the chasselas
de Fontainebleau, but no wine is made ; and even as far south as
Orleans, the grape is more renowned for its vinegar than for its
wine. When we have reached the genial climate of Poitiers, the
vine is no longer a stunted bush, and is treated very differently
—trained up everywhere, and its growth encouraged instead of
being repressed. Arrived in the latitude of Bordeaux, if we pass
from the west along a south-east course to Toulouse and the
Mediterranean, we find the vine climbing the trees by the road-
side, and the vineyards are enclosed by hedges of wild vine. The
use of stakes or poles and rails to train the vine is here purely a
question of cost; no one hesitates to use them where they can be
had cheap, and they are of the greatest advantage in enabling the
vine to carry a larger quantity of fruit, as w T ell as influencing the
quality of the wine which the fruit will yield. The gooseberry-
bush mode of culture is only followed where stakes are not to be
procured, or where only a low quality of wine is grown for dis-
tillation. This latter is the kind of culture which has been
mainly introduced into this country, which is not adapted to its
climate, and which is always contemptuously looked at in the
south of Prance, and termed, in derision, the pique-pout culture.
I therefore recommend here, \vhere stakes and poles are abundant,
the espalier training—the extirpation or excision of all weak
shoots, leaving a sufficient length of strong shoots for the fruit
which the vine may be fairly expected to bear. Instead of the
stunted, warty-looking vine stocks now seen in our vineyards, we


shall have healthy, clean stems, throwing out branches strong
and vigorous, able to carry abundant fruit by the support afford-
ed them. The cultivator may exclaim with the poet—
‘ Behold Villario’a ten years’ toil complete,
‘ His vineyards prosper—his espaliers meet.’
“ On the great plain of Bagneres, to which our beautiful neigh-
bouring plain of Singleton bears some resemblance, the cherry
orchards are also vineyards. The cherries ripen and are gathered
early in the season; the tree serves for stakes, whilst the vine
throws out its festoons from tree to tree. I have often thought,
in looking at the many favorable situations which present them-
selves as I travel about, that much of our bush-tree land may be
enclosed, vines planted round the trees, and a vineyard formed at
little cost. I hope that some one will try the experiment.
“ It has been my good fortune, whilst exploring the most inter-
esting mineral and geological districts of the South of Europe, to
be hospitably entertained at the houses of eminent wine-growers.
I have tasted at their places of production the finest growths of
the Rhone and the G-aronne, the Burgundies and Bordeaux of the
greatest renown, as well the sweet wines of Lunel and Eroutignac.
“I know that New South Wales can and does produce wines
which will take rank with them. Some time ago I tasted a Hun-
ter River wine ten years old, which I should rank with wines of
the highest class, and value at a price which would be thought
exaggerated. This wine had the bouquet of Sauterne with the
body of Sherry, and of its kind, I never tasted its equal in Europe.
Two years afterwards I was passing this vineyard, and having my
pick-axe in hand, I examined the soil, which proved to be the
ferruginous shales of our coal measures, rich in fossil flora, cover-
ing a coal seam. I have found no other vineyard on a like soil,
and as we know how much the character of a wine is influenced by
the soil, I am of opinion that the superiority was mainly due to
this cause. The vineyard has, I regret to say, changed hands
and been neglected, and I am told that cattle now browse through
the broken fences. *
* Since this was written, I am glad to learn that the Vineyard is about to be
re-established by its new Proprietor.


“ Whilst on the subject of peculiarities in the quality and fla-
vour of wines, I may be permitted a few more observations on
the known iufluences of soil. In Europe there are vineyards
separated only by a road, a river, or even a hedge and ditch,
which on the one side shall produce wine of world-wide renown,
and on the other of most inferior quality. Nowhere is this fact
more exemplified (patent the modern phraseology would call it)
than in the neighbourhood of Bordeaux itself. There is the wine
of Talence, a suburban parish, which once, tasted would be
always recognised, and though good is not famous. Then
Haut-Brion is as unmistakeable; and Medoc is supreme in ad-
mired peculiarities over all others; whilst of the white wines—
Yin de Grave, 9t. Croix, Barsac, Sauterne—have each distinctly
recognisable flavours and qualities to which they owe their value,
varying from Is. to ss. the bottle at the vineyards. The Yin de
Grave is peculiarly characteristic of the gravelly soil which
produces it, on the north side of the river. But the red vines of
the north side of the river, between the Garonne and the Dor-
dogne, known as the entre-deux-mers y supplies the Erench navy
with a pure coarse wane at the rate perhaps of eighteen-pence a
gallon. I have heard, but I have no personal knowledge of the
fact, that there is a village in Spain where visitors are warned to
be cautious about drinking the wine; and this caution is no
more than we know to be needful with respect to the waters of
many localities, which derive from the soil effects only sup-
portable by those who are accustomed to their use.
“In New South Wales wdne-drinkers are likewise beginning
to distinguish the produce of the different vineyards. Csewarra,
Kinross, Dalwood, Bukkulla, Irrawang, Porphyry, Tomago, each
have their characteristics, and will each find favor in the public
taste. In a climate like this it is grateful to have a harmless
drink to compensate the perspiration from the body, and wines
which serve this purpose, when they can be produced of
sound quality, are really the most valuable. The Bordeaux
merchants know this, and often tell their stranger friends,
when they set wine before them of which they may drink
abundantly, that they cannot afford to give them such wine every


day. Now our own climate and soil are eminently favourable to
the production of these harmless wines, and we shall learn to ap-
preciate them, rather than despise them, as has been the fashion
hitherto. Experience will teach that strong drinks are not adapted
to our daily use, but rather those wines which may be partaken
of as a beverage to refresh and not inebriate.
“ Eed Hermitage ranks amongst the first-class wines of France.
I have paid five shillings a bottle for ordinary wine on the spot.
This wine is chiefly bought by the Bordeaux merchants for giving
both strength and bouquet to their first-class wines. Now a
cowpage, or addition of an inferior wine to add to the qualities of
another good wine, is not only permissable but advantageous.
Professor Mulder, of Utrecht, in his excellent treatise tells us :
‘ it ought not to be called adulteration if two or three wines of the
same kind are mixed together in order to represent a wine of a
general name without any other addition; for example, to an
aromatic wine, a second which is stronger, and a third which is
weaker. He who orders Bordeaux wine, and gets two or three
kinds mixed together in the manner mentioned above, is truly
and honestly dealt by. An acquaintance with the art of blending
is a capital method of satisfying the taste of consumers, and of
producing an article suited to exportation and cellaring. Claret
is such a mixture of wines of uncertain names. There are plenty
of wines which, though not themselves agreeable, mix very well.
When wines of the same kinds are mixed, and no new name given
to them, it cannot be called adulteration; but when the name is
altered, even supposing good wine be used, the person who uses it
is guilty of falsehood, and untruth is falsifying, and adulteration
is cheating, and he who cheats is an impostor.’
“ Let us hold to this creed, gentlemen, and we need not fear of
success in supplanting, in the course of time, the impostures palmed
upon us under names which give them currency. We have, how-
ever, been told that our wine-growers must and do lend themselves
to these impostures. There is no greater nor njore injurious
calumny. As one of the judges at a late exhibition of wines of
this district, where more than forty samples were tasted, neither
myself nor my colleagues had the slightest suspicion of adulter-


ation in the wines submitted to us. There were excellent, good,
bad, and indifferent, but they were pure.
“ Professor Brande, in his lecture on the phenomena and pro-
ducts of fermentation, sets forth the different effects of distilled
alcohol, taken as spirits, and the alcohol naturally existing in the
wine. He says— ‘ Alcohol, or brandy, whisky, and so forth,
diluted by water till of the same absolute strength as wine, will
generally be more hurtful. In wine the alcohol is in some pecu-
liar state of intimate combination with the water, acids, extractive
and other matters, which modify its character and effects.’
“In wine countries where red and white wines can be equally
produced, there is as much difference made between their effects
on the constitution as we have the habit of attributing to black
and green teas. The habitual use of white wine is said to act
injuriously on the nervous system, and I have often heard French-
men declare that they have been prevented from sleeping from
having been tempted to drink a glass or two of some famous white
wine before retiring to rest. These wines are generally drunk in
the day time for luncheon, and only sparingly at dinner. There
is no doubt that in vine countries where the red grape will flourish
(for there are districts and soils in which it will not flourish) the
red wine is used as the common beverage. I therefore advise that
the red grape should be planted wherever it will be productive,
and that the white should be consigned to the poorer soils, which
are generally more favorable to its growth and quality. Bed wine
refreshes —white has often a siccative property, and does not so
readily subdue thirst ; and when wine becomes the beverage of a
people, if they have a choice, the difference will in the long run
be so much appreciated as to ensure a decided preference for the
produce of the black grape.
“ Such wines as you can produce and deliver to the consumer,
au naturel, are the very milk of human kindness, and will, I believe
drive the turbulent alcohol from the position it now so promi-
nently occupies.
“ The abuse or excessive use of tea is more likely to degenerate
a people than the use of wine. I have been in countries where
thousands assemble on their fete dayei, and, with wine at three-


pence a bottle, drunkenness is unknown. Tea is there regarded
as a medicine, to be administered only to the sick. Tea, drunk
hot and strong, injures digestion; and strong alcoholic drinks
destroy appetite; whilst sound light wine excites a wholesome
desire for food. Temperance doctrines are good for those who
can only be intemperate, and total abstinence is a needful intem-
perance for those who cannot otherwise control their desires.
One of our most learned and popular lyric poets has sung :
‘The little fool enjoys too much—
The great fool not at all.’
“ Those of the temperate class, desirous that ‘their brother may
not offend,’ are, however, highly to be commended for the exam-
ple and sacrifice they are ready to make on behalf of the intem-
perate ; but let it not lessen their charity towards men who can
exercise self-control, and enjoy without excess the full catalogue
of the gifts of the earth. Let them cease to desire that because
they are virtuous there shall be no more cakes and ale.
“ The vine is the most helpless of plants. Providence intended
that we should get nothing from it but by intelligent culture —the
sweat of the brain as well as the sweat of the brow ; and that by its
culture we should get health and enjoyment. What Liebig tells
us of wine cannot be too often repeated—‘as a restorative, a
means of refreshment where the powers of life are exhausted, of
giving animation and energy where man has to struggle with days
of sorrow; as a means of correction and compensation when mis-
proportion occurs in nutrition, and the organism is deranged in
its operations, and as a means of protection against transient
organic disturbances, wine is surpassed by no product of nature
or of art.’
“It is to the wine-growers that the advocates of temperance
must look for their greatest help. In England the reduction of
the wine duties has caused in the year 1861 an increase in the
imports of a million of gallons over those of 1863, and like as in
England our increasing importation of spirits will be most effec-
tually checked by facilitating the sale of ordinary wines; and
when the licensed victuallers shall find it to their interest to en-
courage the consumption of these wines. Meanwhile, and as a


step in the right direction, the Act permitting confectioners and
wayside houses to retail wine is making its way. I repeat that,
for the cause of temperance, it is greatly to be desired that the
sale of colonial wine be encouraged, for in the year 1863 the value
of our importations of all kinds of beer and spirits amounted to
the sum of £752,685, against £625,457 in 1862 and only
£852,297 in 1861 —that is to say, since 1861 the importation has
more than doubled, and amounts to more than three-quarters of
a million of money, which is twice as much as we have paid for
all the wheat, flour, and every kind of grain imported in the same
year.
“ Then our importation of wine, notwithstanding it was less in
1863 by 115,388 gallons than the average importation of the
three years preceding, and which we must attribute to the in-
creasing popularity of our own production, amounted in the
whole to 320,933 gallons, of the estimated value of £130,432 —
making, for wine and spirits together, £883,117 !
“ Well may we exclaim with Prince Hal —
4 All this sack to one pennyworth of bread ! ’
“Of what we eat, we do grow something; but for that which
we drink, whether it be tea or wine, beer or spirits, nearly the
whole amount goes out of the country.
Of the brandy alone, the quantity imported in 1861 was
£9O, 782; in ’62, £150,521; and in ’63, £228,391. This latter
sum represents 453,992 gallons of brandy, to make which must
have required the product of 16,711 acres of vines, and which
area, if in culture here, would, I venture to say, tend greatly to
correct this inordinate taste for brandy. Where there is abun-
dance of wine the people are not brandy drinkers ; in the famous
Cognac they try to sell all they can make, and consume but
little —they produce it for sale, and not for their own use.
“We may fairly call upon those patriotic citizens who are
laudably endeavouring to render palatable, and reconcile the
public taste to the produce of our maize fields, to help us also in
our endeavour to keep at home some of the large amount of
money now sent abroad for drink ; and it may encourage them
when they learn from you that the demand for your wines is in-


creasing so fast, that it is already doubtful to those wine-growers
who are attaining to eminence from the care they have bestowed
of late years on their products, whether they can keep pace with
the increasing demand for mature wines. Now, if brandy must
be drunk, why should it not be made in Australia, and charged
with such an amount of duty as shall occasion no loss to the
revenue, and dispose the public taste to a more wholesome bever-
age ? Let the brandy be distilled from wine, and you may rival
the best product of France ; you have hitherto made it from the
marc or refuse of the wine press. Neither Cognac nor Armag-
* nac are made from any such offensive refuse —the marc is given
to the pigs, or is only used for making the noxious drink called
schnapps.
“ To turn from this not very pleasant subject, I will now re-
mind you that at our last year’s meeting you referred to my con-
sideration a letter from the Murray, Ovens, and Groulburu Vine-
Growers’ Association, suggesting that the vine-growers generally
should agree upon some instrument of common measure for their
use in appreciating the produce of the vintage. Now, the salt
manufacturer uses a per centage salinometer —an instrument by
which any, the most ignorant, of his workmen can at once mea-
sure the saline strength of the liquid on which he would operate.
I considered that a simple per centage saccharometer would be
equally applicable to the operations of the wine-grower. Like to
the saline waters which may be pumped up from different wells,
and of which the strength, like to the liquid of the grape, may be
varied under the influence of the rain-fall, a per centage saccha-
rometer will show the wine-grower at a glance the relative
strength of the must he obtains from the different sorts of grape,
or the gatherings of different days from the same grape, at first
sight, and without need of any calculation or recourse to an arith-
metical rule to obtain the specific gravity of the liquid—which
would again necessitate recourse to a table to know the saccha-
rine value of the specific gravity indicated. I sought in Sydney
amongst our most active and intelligent importers for such an in-
strument, but in vain; and I was considering how I could myself
make the instrument (and which I would have succeeded in pro-


ducing as a rough model), when stating my difficulties to Mr.
Wyndham, he showed me an instrument which he told me he had
persisted in using in his vineyard in spite of all objections made
to it, and in preference to all other instruments sent to him, since
1857; and this instrument which I hold in my hand, was exactly
what I wished to make, and could not find the like in Sydney.
To test its accuracy, I at once prepared with great care saccha-
rine solutions of different strengths, and found the instrument to
be invariably correct—having tested it from zero to fifty degrees,
a scale which I hold to be needful, for the must from difterent
vineyards has in the present year varied from 20 to 4o degrees.
There is a saccharine solution before you of 50 degrees, and which
you may see the instrument measures as correctly as those ol
lower strength. Although it bears no maker s name, Mr. Wynd-
ham informs me that it was obtained from the makers, Messrs.
John and Joseph Griffin, Baker-street, London, and cost only a few
shillings. I recommend it to your adoption, and I cannot appeal
to a better authority than Mr. Wyndham as to its usefullness
and value.
“ Having thus far fulfilled the duties entrusted to me, I now
take my leave, not doubting that some gentleman more personally
interested in wine culture, and equally desirous with myself ot
seeing it take the rank it deserves amongst the varied and
valuable products of our adopted land, will be ready and willing to
take the chair for the next year.
“William Keene,
“ President of the Hunter Liver Vineyard Association, 1864 5.
When the president had concluded his address, Mr. John
Wyndham proposed Mr. Tourle as President for the ensuing
year 1865-66.
Mr. Touele said he was only a beginner, and therefore it
would be better for some member more conversant with vine cul-
ture to be appointed. It was only two years ago that he com-
menced planting vines, and he wished to get a little more expe-
rience before he accepted the position proposed to be conferred
on him.


Mr. Wyndham then proposed, and Mr. Touele seconded, that
Mr. Keene be re-appointed President.
The motion was carried unanimously.
Mr. Keene expressed his thanks for the honor, and stated that
many of the opinions expressed in his address that day were
individual opinions, which might not be concurred in by all the
members. He would now have another year’s experience, but as
he had said so much already, he need not say more to-day.
The Peesident then produced the instruments he purchased
in Sydney. They were made for brewers, but were not sufficient
for wine-growers, who require instruments that will measure fifty
per cent, of sugar—as they had had must containing forty-five
per cent. He also produced the saccharometer, belonging to Mr.
Wyndham, and referred to in the address. He then showed the
relative merits of these instruments. A solution of sugar and
water (fifty per cent of each), made without any reference to the
instruments, was placed in a tube, and the saccharometer being
immersed in it at once marked fifty per cent. The four other
instruments were then placed in the same solution, and marked
only from twenty-four to thirty-two per cent., thus showing them
to be wholly unreliable for ascertaining the proportion of sugar
in must. Other solutions of various degrees of strength, from
five per cent, up to forty per cent., were then tested in a similar
manner, and in each case the saccharometer marked the saccha-
rine strength exactly, whilst the other instruments differed con-
siderably. He next tested the instruments in a saline solution,
and showed how the correctness of the instrument could be as-
certained by immersion in a solution containing twenty-seven per
cent, of boiled Salt. Having been an old salt manufacturer, his
knowledge of the matter served him in arriving at correct results
on this subject. He again expressed his strong approval of the
per centage saccharometer owned by Mr. Wyndham, thinking it
was the very instrument required by wine growers ; and all the
experiments made confirmed this opinion, and showed the advan-
tages of the instrument. The instrument would not tell the
amount of alcohol in a liquid—that they could only get at by dis-
tillation or evaporation. The testing of the instruments was


watched with much interest by the members present. [Subse-
quently the association resolved to adopt the per centage saccha-
rometer as the standard instrument for wine growers to ascertain
the saccharine strength of the must , and to recommend the same
to the “ Murray, Ovens, and Gouiburn Vine Growers’ Associa-
tion.”]
Mr. Wtndham said the matter referring to saccharometers
was of great importance to wine-growers ; and he proposed that
the Presidential Address be printed for circulation.
Mr. Tourle seconded the motion, which was put and carried.
Mr. Wtndham then said it might be interesting to some of
them to know the amounts of sugar in must obtained since 1857,
at Dalwood. They used this saccharometer to ascertain, and it
told exactly the per centage of sugar in the must that they were
to make wine of. In 1858, they would recollect that the
vintage was a very fine one; the per centage of sugar in the must
was at the lowest 24, and at the highest 27 ; it ranged from 25 to
26. In 1859, when they had the grapes nearly cleared off by
caterpillars, it ranged from 22 to 27. In 1860, their first must
gave 22 to 23 and 25 ; the chief quantity was 24 ; then followed
some heavy rains, and some of the must from the grapes cut after
the rain was as low as 19, but this produced a nice palatable
light wine; 24, 25, and 26 was the very best per centage of sugar
they could have in the must. In 1861 they had fearful rains,
and some of the must was as low as 15, 16, and 17 ; this, with
great care, made a palatable but poor wine; it was sound even to
this day, and though not well flavoured it was pure—it was never
labelled “ Dalwood.” Daring 1861, when the weather cleared up,
they got a fair quantity containing 18 and 20 per cent. In 1862
the season was favourable, but the musts were not high—some
containing only 21 per cent., but the grapes had a beautiful even
ripeness—in that respect they that year attained the height of
perfection; he meant even ripeness of the whole bunch; the
must of their Black Yerdot, in 1862, contained 24 per cent.
Their best whites, which received prizes, were of must containing
24 per cent sugar. In 1863 they had had beautiful weather at
the beginning of the vintage, the musts stood at 23 and 24


some as high as 32, which produced magnificent wine ; the rains
then came on, and the musts were only 18, 19, and 20; they
however made a good wine with great care. In 1864 they again
had fearful rains, and the must showed only 19 to 20 in the best
lots—some were as low as 15 to 18, yet made sound wines.
A small quantity stood at 21. In 1865 the musts ranged
between 22 and 26 at Dalwood. At Bukkulla they had musts
averaging 41. In 1860, at the same place, they had musts
that stood as high as 60. In 1863 the amount of saccharine
matter in the Bukkulla musts was from 38 to forty something.
In 1864 there was a little drop as low as 24, and others as high
as 38. In 1866 the lowest was 38, and much was as high as
45. The wines made from this had more point. Bukkulla
1863-4-5 had yet to go before the public—they proposed keeping
them in the nursery to give them age so long as the purse would
hold out.


HUNTER RIVER VINEYARD ASSOCIATION,
1866.
The Annual Meeting of the Association was held at the Northum-
berland Hotel, on Thursday, 10th May, 1866. The President,
Mr. W. Keene, occupied the chair; and after a few remarks,
congratulating the meeting on the number present, and ex-
pressing regret at the absence of Mr. J. Windeyer, of Kinross,
proceeded to read the following Address :
Genilemen, —At this, the close of the Vintage Season of
1866, and the Anniversary Meeting of the Hunter River Vine-
yard Association, I may congratulate you on having passed
through a period of more favourable weather for the gathering
in of the grapes, in short, a finer Vintage season than has been
known to us for many years. We cannot boast of a very abun*
dant yield —the great drought during the time of the blossom
was unfavourable to the setting of the fruit; but the timely rains,
after the fruit had formed and before the vintage came on, has
given us a good average. The splendid weather during the
whole time of the vintage, which began before middle of Feb-
ruary, permitted the fruit to be gathered in prime condition,
and in two or three years’ time we may fairly expect to be able
to offer, for home consumption, as well as for export, wines
which will add to the esteem with which the produce of our
well-known vineyards are now regarded both in the colonies and
in Europe.
Appeal was made to this Association two years ago to con-
sider what might be the best instrument for general use to serve
as a common measure of the value of the different musts at the
time of the vintage. You did me the honor of referring this
question to me, and after I had exhibited to you some experi-


merits bearing upon the subject, you were pleased to approve of
my proposal to adopt an instrument which should, at the same
time and on the same stem, indicate the specific gravity of a
fluid, the per centage in sugar, and the brine scale of Baume.
I immediately sent a drawing of such an instrument to one of
the most eminent manufacturers in London, with instructions to
make and send me five and twenty, which I received just pre-
vious to the vintage, and now beg to place before you. At the
moderate cost of 155., there is here an instrument which can be
understood by the simplest labourer at the wine press, and is
equally serviceable to those who can enter more scientifically
into the subject, and prefer specific gravity to the saccha-
rine scale, for it shows at the same time both the one and the
other.
A happy illustration of its value was afforded me as I was
passing Branxton during the time of the vintage. I hailed a
man who 1 knew to be employed in the Dalwood Vineyard, and
who I saw waiting at the station. “ How,” said I, “is the
vintage getting on V 3 “ Och ! sure sir, first rate •/* replied he,
in his rich Irish brogue, “We have got it at 25 \ ,} Now this
was exactly what I wanted to know, and conveyed to me as
much information as if he could have told me the specific gravity,
which, if told to him, he certainly would not have understood,
and probably Would not have remembered. The simple charac-
ter and value of the instrument is thus evident, and proves how
easy it will be for our workmen to understand and compare notes
on the quality of the produce of the grapes from day to day, or
even hour to hour.
I chanced to be at another Vineyard on the first day of their
vintage, and took some juice just pressed from the grapes. Now
the new instrument which I had with me was made for a tempera-
ture of 80 deg.—all the instruments which have come under mv
observation hitherto, and they are many, have been made for tem-
peratures of 65 and 70; but this the first grape juice I tried it
with, and the earliest day of the vintage (the 12th February),


shows how right it was to have made it for 80 deg.—the grape
juice was 83, a good bright, clear juice, no floculent matter float-
ing in it, and the degree of saccharine strength was or
U 095 specific gravity. The juice was then tested by a first class,
beautifully made, expensive metallic instrument for taking
separately saccharine strength and specific gravities, and it was
satisfactory to find that, allowing for differences of temperature,
the two instruments were in perfect agreement.
Whatever may be the excellence of the'juice of the grape at
this time, it does not follow that good wine will result, except
from good care; but we should not hesitate to say that if a good
must does not produce a good wine, great carelessness or gross
ignorance must be the cause; and this instrument will enable
the workmen to blend the musts of the different grapes as they
are obtained from the pre-s in certain proportions most likely to
insure certain results.
That there is now great encouragement to the production of
good wine is testified to, not only by the increased and increasing
colonial consumption, but by the export; for, in 1864 we ex-
ported 12,000 gallons, which was more than our total import of
wine from France, and I am assured that our export is rapidly
increasing. The wine-trade circular of the well known firm of
F. W. Cozens, dated from London, the 19th of January last,
has the following noteworthy passage: —
“ The extended cultivation of the vine throughout the Aus-
tralian colonies, producing wine suited to the taste of the people,
materially affects the demand for the lighter French and German
growths, as well as port and sherry : ” and they further state that
in the United Kingdom the consumption of wine increases
annually.
It was the Report of the Paris Exhibition judges in 1854,
which first awakened us to the appreciation of what could be
done in wine growing in Australia; for our wines, compared
with those of Europe, were ranked with the best growth of the
Austrian States, and received the same number for excellence as


was given to the wines of Hungary. lam sure that the eminent
consideration given to, and the honorable place occupied by our
wines at the Paris Exhibition of 1854, will dispose the members
of this Association to vie with each other in preparing their best
products for the New South Wales Commission now occupied in
the collection of specimens and samples for the approaching
Exhibition in Paris; and I have little doubt but that we shall be
there told that we have made great progress, and that a high
standing will be accorded to us as the reward of our labours.
The judges who will act at the Paris Exhibition may fairly claim
to be the best that the world can bring together, and to obtain
their approval will be a prize indeed, for the world will be our
competitors.
In a 20 years’ intimate knowledge of French habits in those
parts of Prance where the vine is one of the most ordinary cul-
tures of the soil—where distillation is free, and alcohol can be
had for tenpence a bottle, I never saw a Frenchman sit down to
drink brandy—and why ? Because he found a sufficient stimu-
lant in the wine which is his ordinary beverage. He uses
brandy as it were medicinally, or by the thimblefull, which he
calls a “ petit verre.” He exports much, but drinks little.
Where wine can be had abundantly it will displace the use of
spirits, and the more we encourage the growth of the vine the
more we shall be promoting a healthy sobriety in the population.
Every settler, every landowner with half an acre of garden
ground may grow vines sufficient for the fruit consumption of
his household, and with the surplus grapes make wine enough
for the yearly supply of his family as good as the sample I have
brought here to-day, made last year from my own surplus fruit
without wine press, and by means at the disposal of every
cottager. The vines are free and vigorous, raised on ground
which five years ago was little better than a swamp, and had not
a vine upon it. I know that this wine is equal to, if not better
than what is drank by nineteen-twentieths of the population of
France. It is a healthy beverage, provoking a wholesome appe-


tite for food, and cheering the heart without intoxicating. No-
thing can be more encouraging to the cultivation of such tastes
than the labours of this Association, and 1 believe that we are
working a great national benefit.
Since our last meeting a valuable work on the culture of the
vine, by Dr. Guyot, has been ably translated from the French
and published in Melbourne. Ihis work will, I have no doubt,
become popular, for it contains a great amount of interesting
original matter, and advocates the maintenance of the puiity of
wine against all attempts at manufacturing imitations. On the
cellar management needful for the production of champagne,
and which is ordinarily surrounded with much mystery, theie is
most precise information. He tells us that the fermentation
must be closely watched and checked at the right moment, for
if the saccharine strength of the wine is not equal to 13 pei cent,
at the time of bottling, it will not make champagne, or that is
to say effervescing wine. Now, if the production of such a wine
requires only a knowledge of the kind of grape which will pio-
duce the flavour, combined with the knowledge of the saccharine
strength necessary to ensure effervescence, and that if this
strength be not preserved the attempt will fail, the utility of our
instruments is most apparent, and if it will guide us in the pro-
duction of a wine, popular all the world over from its harmless
character, we shall not have introduced this instrument in vain.
In California, sparkling Catawba is said to be preferred to im-
ported champagne, and we may here, if we will give ourselves the
trouble, under guidance of the information now published, pro-
duce a sparkling wine which may have its own good and peculiar
characteristics, and we shall have the advantage of knowing that
we are really drinking the juice of the grape.
Upon Dr. GuyoCs system of pruning I cannot speak favour-
ably_at least, as applicable to our climate; and I will show you
that it does not sufficiently carry out the principles which he
himself lays down for guidance in pruning, with which I entirely
agree, having learnt it in that part of fhe south of France, where,


as Dr. Guyot himself states, the culture of the vine is most
intelligent “ and should serve for type in all points.”
In criticising a common mode of pruning, Dr. Guyot tells us
exactly what I have been earnestly teaching in vine culture at
every opportunity, since I have been in Australia:—“ The steril-
ization of the vine by short pruning, such as pollarding or
willow tree pruning, is easily understood. Would the most
simple gardener be surprised if he got no currants from a bush,
the branches of which he cut down every year to two or three
eyes; or nuts from a hazel bush; or cherries from a cherry tree
treated in like manner ? ” And then he goes on to describe his
new mode of pruning, by leaving one branch its whole length,
calling it a fruit-branch, and one other branch, cut down to two
eyes, and called a wood branch, so that each vine is to be re-
duced to only two branches. It is true, that in the picture both
these branches carry fruit at every eye, but I will venture to pre-
dict that the picture will not be realized. He advocates one
fruit branch, I advocate many ; that the vine should be encou-
raged to develope itself in every branch in which it shows
strength, and the suppression, as so many leakages of strength,
of all those branches which only show weakness. I maintain
that to leave but one fruit branch is still to pollard the vine, and
will in this climate render the stock of the vine warty, knotty,
and barren in a few years.
I do not say that Dr. Guyot's mode of pruning is not appli-
cable in his own locality. I know even pollarding is the best
mode of pruning for the culture of the vine in the open ground
in a cold climate, where it has to contend with severe winters,
and where the stock must be earthed over by ploughing to pre-
serve it from destruction by winter frosts; but here, where such
winters are unknown, and where the climate provokes the most
luxuriant vegetation, such pruning is an error—and the true
principle is that I have laid down as practised in the south of
France, and which is much more applicable to this climate than
the system which has hitherto prevailed, introduced here from,


and appropriate only to the culture of the vine in cold latitudes.
Sensible of the honour of the position I have occupied, and
thanking you for your kind attention and support, I now close
my second year’s Presidency of the Association, in the full con-
fidence that my successor will uphold as I have endeavoured to
do, the importance of an Institution remarkable for the unosten-
tatious and persevering industry of its members; and whose
labours are destined, as I believe, to exercise an influence for
good which may be felt in colonial life for all time to come.
“ William Keene,
“ President of the Hunter River Vineyard Association, 1865 —6.”
The President then read some figures to show the specific
gravity of the liquids according to the per centage of sugar.
The specific gravity of liquid having—
5 per cent, of sugar is 1,020; 10 per cent, 1,040;
20 per cent. 1,082; 25 per cent, 1,145;
30 per cent. 1,128; 35 per cent, 1,152;
40 per cent. 1,177; 50 per cent, 1,231; and
a reference to the saccharometer will show that it requires a solu-
tion of 45 lbs. of sugar in 55 lbs. of water to produce a fluid of
the same weight or specific gravity as is obtained by a solution
of only 27 lbs. of salt in 73 lbs. of water, which is marked Brine
on the scale. That is to say, 45 per cent, of sugar and 27 per
cent, of salt produce fluids of like weight or specific gravities.
And it will always be easy to test the accuracy of the saccha-
rometer by placing it in a saturated solution of common salt,
when it should float at the degree of Brine on the scale, the 0 or
zero being water.
During the meeting Mr. Wyndham showed a model of a
German stone bubble, made by his brother, and explained its
use and mode of operation. In form it was something like a
telegraph insulator, with a pipe rising a few inches in the con-


cave part of the model. The convex part is made to rest on the
cask, and a pipe rising through fits closely to the bunghole.
Water should be poured into the concave part, and a tumbler
placed over the pipe, and as the gas rises through the pipe it
disturbs the water and escapes. He also exhibited to the mem-
bers an oidium bellows, belonging to Mr. Terrier of Kaloudah,
and a contrivance for preserving wine on draft.
The samples of wine sent by the growers were then tasted,
and opinions upon them were expressed. It was a matter of
general comment that the wines sent were far superior to those
sent to any of the previous Meetings of the Association, and high
encomiums were passed upon them —especially upon the white
wines—by the members.
[Any further particulars as to the saccharometer and its use
may be obtained by letter addressed to Mr. Keene, Newcastle,
Hunter River, N. S. Wales.]
HENRY THOMAS, PRINTER, HIGH-STREET, WEST MAITLAND, N. S. WALES.




