

ADDRESS
ON THE PRESENT POSITION OF THE
EEEE PEESBYTEEIAN CHUECH
OE YICTOEIA,
DELIVERED AT THE CLOSE OF THE
MEETING OF SYNOD
ON THE 18th APRIL, 1865,
BY THE M O D E E A T O E;
WITH RELATIVE CORRESPONDENCE, &o.
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE SYNOD.
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY WALKER, MAY & CO., 99 BOURKE STREET WEST.
1805.
* ■
f'nlaJs
# r *
. •*,
1 - . v ■


p 7(9 0


£ 6
ADDRESS, &c.
Extract from the Records of Synod.
At the Free Presbyterian Church, St. Kilda, the 18th day of April, 1805, which day the
Synod of the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria met, pursuant to adjournment, at
p m., and was constituted with praise, reading of the word, and prayer.
Sederunt— The Moderator, Rev. A. Paul; and Revs. A. Maclntyre and P. MacPherson.
lHier The Moderator read an address on the present position of the Free Presbyterian Church
in the colony. After conversation, it was agreed that the address should be printed, to„etner
with the relative portion of the correspondence read at the morning meeting, and circulated tor
information of the adherents of this Church.
Dear Brethren, —Before bringing the business of this Synod of
the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria to a close, it may he proper to
review the circumstances which have emerged in our position during
the last year. They are, such as it is, painful to recall, and apt from
their nature to awaken resentment, as well as regret; but the feelings
with which we may contemplate them should be controlled by the
higher contemplation of that presiding wisdom which knows the end
from the beginning, and which can make all things turn to our salvation
through the supply of the spirit of Jesus Christ. The view itself will be
useful by recalling the principles which underlie our position and
justifying the steps which we have used to maintain it.
By recurring to the protest taken in April, 1857, it is an easy task
to demonstrate the soundness of the ground which we now occupy.
There are two things against which that protest was directed : — First
and primarily; the dereliction of Free Church principles involved in a
Union which embraced without reservation ministers holding and
avowing’ the principles of the Established Church of Scotland, hecond
and consequentially ; the tyrannical ecclesiasticism with which the then
Synod of the Free Presbyterian Church in this colony repressed the
utterance of any sentiments hostile to the Union so projected. These two
general heads comprize the substance and force of that important protest.
It testified against the admission of Ministers holding the principles of
the Established Church of Scotland into incorporate Union with a Free
Church Synod; and it denounced the antiquated andmedioeval oppression
which demanded assent to such an incorporation under pain of excom-
munication. On comparing with this clear and unequivocal protest the
situation lately adopted by Messrs. Miller, Maxwell, Bell, MacYean,
and MacLeod (all of whom acceded to and signed that document) it is
easy to see how great a change has come over their views. These
gentlemen still, indeed, take advantage of their former testimony so far
as to stigmatise the expulsion to which they were subjected in 1857, and
denounce the high-handed and unchristian tyranny to which that
extraordinary act g'ave ventj but with a singular inconsistency they


have abandoned the primary and material part of their former testimony
—(the protestation, viz., against admitting Erastian-minded ministers into
Union with a Free Church)— which constituted the permanent and
material element. So far have the gentlemen now named fallen from
sustaining this main point of their former protest, or holding fast their
solemn appellation against being amalgamated with Erastian ministers,
that they have been engaged during the last twelve months negotiating
for Union with just such a mixed body of Free Church and Established
Church ministers as their protest of 1857, solemnly and strenuously, as
before both God and man, denounced. It will not be easy to reconcile
so glaring a discordance. If that serious protestation in 1857 against
the formation of such a mixed Church was called for, consistency
demands that the witnessing should not cease after the obnoxious com-
bination has been formed. But, consistently or inconsistently, the
gentlemen named opened negotiations, in 1864, with just such a body as
they denounced in its very inception in 1857.
It is, unhappily, the usual course with such compromising testifiers
eagerly to deprecate from themselves every imputation of change, and
to exclaim at the very mention of abandoned principles as against a cruel,
almost a sacrilegious charge. The expulsionists of 1857—the same who
now constitute the Free Church element in the Presbyterian Church
united by law —when they were charged with unfaithfulness to Free
Church engagements, held the same language—uttered the same outcry
of injury and innocence. To cover the outrageous act of expulsion, they
felt it necessary to assert that no change was passing over their sentiments
or position, and that the expelled protesters were slanderers when they
alleged such a dereliction. But the facts now speak for themselves. The
Free Church party in the Presbyterian Union do not now pretend that
the Union is a Free Church, or that Free Churchism, as distinct from
Erastianism or Voluntaryism, forms any indispensable qualification for
the Unionist profession. They admit now—glory, indeed, in their shame
—that Established Church sentiments, and Voluntary sentiments, are as
admissible into the Union as their own. The time was, however, when
they strained with indignation because the course which they were pur-
suing was taxed with such a result. They expelled the Protesters
of 1857 as slanderers, because they held and said that the Union
would prove —just as it has done—a treachery against the Free Church
position. Identical with this protestation of perfect innocence and
unchanged Free Church integrity by the expulsionists in 1867, is
the present vociferous assertion by such of the expelled as have
compromised their testimony. It is instructive to mark the same
footsteps in the progress of the fallen Protesters which marked the
advances of the Elder Free Church negotiators towaids the Union
goal. The self-implicated Protesters flagrantly involved with their own
declarations and convicted by the act of negotiating with a body which
they had execrated in its very conception in 1857, yet hold themselves
forth as faithful to the letter and spirit of their past contendings; and it
may be supposed even persuade themselves, that they are so. But all
the more instructive it is to observe how the self-satisfaction of the fallen
protesters is traversed by the facts of the case, and how material is the


difference between that definite and grave delinquency which their
original protest charged upon the Union, and the faint and impalpable
blame which, for show of consistency, they still breathe and barely breathe
against it.
What is the demur which the self-involved Protesters now make
at the Union ? Is it (as by terms of their former declaration it should
be) that the Union admits of mixed ministerial supplies —accepts additions
to its ministers from pure and impure, from Erastian, and Voluntary, and
Free Church sources indifferently ? Not at all. The indiscriminate
mixture of Erastians and Free Churchmen in the Union ministr} r —the
flaw for which they reprobated the Union negotiations in 1857, is now,
with the compromised testifiers, a point which they have agreed to waive.
Markedly and declaredly they abandoned that point on the 19th day of
April, 1864. Ilut as the attitude in which their protest placed them in 1857
was that of hostility to the Union, they still feel bound to show cause for
not being in it, although the real cause which originally restrained them
has now been repudiated. The basis on which the Union Church now rests
has accordingly been pushed forward as the exclusive object of dissatis-
faction, and the defectiveness of that basis is now cunningly, but vaguely,
enlarged on, and constructively represented as being now, and having
ever been, the alpha and omega of the Protesters’ complaint and appeal.
The self-implicated protesters have now accordingly assumed a new
mission. Their calling, as they state it now, is to purge the standards of
the Union Church, and by this reform of the Union basis, —if they happily
effect it, —they would have all men believe (what is not the fact) that their
protest of 1857 will be satisfied and terminated.
It is remarkable that the protest of 1857 did not turn on the merits
or demerits of the basis of union, but on the practical effect that was to
be given to the basis in the subject of ministerial supply. In fact,
the basis proposed at that time was unobjectionable —a totally different
sort of basis from that on which the Union now stands. Nothing in the
basis, as it stood in 1867, impinged on Free Church conscientiousness.
The protesters of 1857 alleged neither excess nor defect against it. It
was the way in which the Church of Scotland sympathisers declared that
they would carry out its administration in the procuring of ministers
from home that excited first the fears, then the opposition of a minority,
and induced their protest against admitting Erastian-minded ministers
(as all the Church of Scotland ministers are) into union with a Free
Church. The whole position of 1857 was embraced in the question who
should be held admissible and who not admissible into the projected
Union; whether ministers from the Erastian Church of Scotland could,
consistently with the basis, be admitted as was claimed by one of the
uniting synods, or whether such ministers were not, by the logic of the
basis, excluded; as the Protesters, including Messrs. Miller, Maxwell, Bell,
&c., maintained. For, intimating that they would oppose the Union
until that point was settled, the Free Church minority were, at the insti-
gation of Messrs Tait and Cairns, expelled by their own brethren; and
(Messrs. Miller, Bell, Maxwell, &c. being of the number) the minority were
content to suffer thus far rather than waive the point. How foolishly such a
resistance compares with the advances made now by the self-compromise^


protesters to a body largely composed of Church of Scotland ministers is
evident. The very opening of negotiation degrades their testimony.
They protested against such a mixed body being constituted in 1857.
They opened negotiations—they sought union with just such a body so
constituted in 1864.
It is, indeed, conceivable in mere argument (and it may be thought
by some not versed in the subject) that a change of the existing union
basis might be contemplated by the negotiating Protesters, so wide as to
include any point on which they differed from the Unionists of 1857;
and, consequently, might be made to cover the question of supplies as
well. And it is readily granted that the gentlemen now compromised
by their recent negotiations might have asked for a re-cast of the Union
Articles in such form as would have secured their past consistency. For
example, they might have asked the Unionists categorically to grant in
1864 that exclusion of the Established-Church-of-Scotland element,
which, as Protesters, they contended for in 1857. Such an alteration of
the basis would have sustained their past contendings, and ended their
protest by crowning it with success. Had that been the reformation
which the negotiators flattered themselves to effect on the Union
Articles, no unfaithfulness would ever have been charged on them by us,
although there might have been a painful sense of their extreme sim-
plicity. But, however ingenuous such a demand might have been in
the abstract, none of the negotiating Protesters were so slow-witted as to
imagine that it would be even looked at by the Unionists. It would not
be a very hopeful way of prosecuting union with the Church, which
comprehends Messrs. Hetherington, Love, and others, to propose that
these gentlemen, sympathising as they do with the Established Church
of Scotland, and justifying all its present policy, should take guilt to
themselves for their Established Church preferences, and defer to the
consciences of the Protesters of 1857, and vacate their places in the
Presbyterian Church of Victoria, that Messrs. Miller, Maxwell, Bell, &c.
might get in with clean hands. That the protest of 1857 shut up
those who signed it to make such a demand was just the strong
reason which should have restrained all who took part in it from opening-
up any negotiations at all. Their protest impeached such an amal-
gamation of Free Churchmen with Erastians, when the promiscuous
confederacy was as yet only contemplated. How could they honor-
ably treat after the combination had been accomplished ? While,
however, this change—the expulsion, in fact, of Messrs. Hether-
ington, Love and other sympathisers with Erastianism—was the
only novelty which could have been introduced into the Union
negotiations, so as logically to justify the Protesters of 1867 in adhering,
and while that one consideration was sufficient to have barred all treaty,
Messrs. Miller, Maxwell, Bell, &c. were fully prepared to do without
any such concession. In fact they made no secret of a great change
which had come over their views. They had settled it with their own
consciences, to surrender the vital point of the protest of 1857.
Mr. Miller expressly stated that “ he was free to confess he had changed
his mind on the question of ministerial supplies. He did not think now
that that point should enter into a basis of Union.” Mr. Maxwell


referred with something’ like contempt to former contendings, and with
more ostentation of bravery than genuine discretion, declared “he was
not to be bound by any doings in times past.” He, too, hacked Mr.
Miller’s avowal of change. In short, the Protesters of 1867 now stood
divided, and that portion of them for whom Messrs. Miller, Maxwell, <fec.
were spokesmen, had come to be ashamed of the only point which
rendered their protest tenable; and were resolved, for the sake of brotherly
love, as they esteemed it, to waive the question as to pure and impure
supplies, and to embrace that fellowship with Erastian-minded ministers
in the Union which they formerly scouted.
Subsequent events have shown that this suppression of the one
practical point involved in the position of 1857 was not contemplated out
of mere haste or oversight. The compromised Protesters have followed
up the unhappy course which they initiated. They have negotiated their
articles of Union with the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. These
articles have come before you in the correspondence which has been
read.* No one who compares these articles with the existing basis of the
Presbyterian Church of Victoria will be sensible of the slightest practical
difference. No one who compares them with the protest of 1857 will
fail to observe the discrepancy. The articles negotiated by Messrs.
Miller, Maxwell, Bell, &c. with the Presbyterian Church, are
just so far varied from the basis now in force as to
allow the fallen Protesters to say that something was con-
ceded to them words, at least, if not things—by the Union
Church; while as little distinction is drawn between pure and impure
supplies, and as little provision made for Free Church conscience and
consistency in the newly-negotiated articles as in the Union standards
themselves. In fact the convener of the Preshyterian-Church-of-Vic-
toria-Commission officially intimated to Mr. Maxwell, (who conducted
the negotiation for the resiling Protesters), “that there is nothing in the
basis you have sent us contrary to the principles of our Church j” and
the negotiations were broken off, not from any difference of views
between the parties, hut only because the Presbyterian Church viewed
with coldness the feeble figure to which the negotiators had reduced
themselves by disruption from those of us who refused to be com-
promised. “As it is a grave thing,” said the Presbyterian Church
convener, “to alter our basis, the Commissioners desire to know what
Ministers and Congregations of your Church will unite with ours were the
proposed alterations adopted, and whether there is a probability of your
proposals embracing all those with whom we are negotiating for Union.”!
The humiliating proposals made by Messrs. Maxwell, Miller, Bell, &c.
were thus set aside by the Presbyterian Church, not out of any
repugnance at the terms proposed, but out of sheer contempt for the
crippled condition of the proposers.
The relinquishment of the main point (that, viz., of supplies) in the
protest of 1857, by Messrs. Miller, Maxwell, and Bell, opens a fresh
question as to the whole position which they have occupied since that
* See Correspondence (2) page 13.
t See Correspondence (4) page 15.


date. On the footing of that protest, and on the strength of the testimony
borne in it against mixed supplies from the Free and Established
Churches of Scotland alike, the Protesters claimed to be the true repre-
sentatives and the only ecclesiastical organization of the Free Church in
the colony. As such they acted together for seven years. But in 1864,
the gentlemen so often named, severally, in their places in Synod,
declared they had changed their views on one point only. Mr. Miller
was most explicit in this avowal, having least sense probably of the
tendency of his statements. “He was free to say he had changed.” He
requested the point in which he had changed to be marked. It was
only the point of ministerial supplies. He did not think now that such
a point should be introduced into a basis of Union. This change
seems to have struck Mr. Miller’s mind as a very small matter —a
remarkable fact, and only to be accounted for by the uncomfortable
supposition that Mr. Miller signed the protest of 1857 without
duly weighing its contents. On the importance of that question
of supplies, as the sine qua non of Free Chuch consistency in
the colonies, the protest of 1857 raised an issue between the
expelled ministers (including Messrs. Maxwell, Miller, Bell, &c.) and
those who expelled them. It challenged a decision as to which of the
parties, the expelling or the expelled, was the legitimate representative
of the Free Church position. Upon the strength of holding the negative
on the question of supplies from the Established Church of Scotland,
Mr. Miller, for himself and all those associated with him, claimed that
he, and not the promoters of Union, were the true Free Church Synod
of the colony, and entitled to all privileges and immunities of the same.
The claim stood so till 1864; and then Mr. Miller along with others, by
declaring a change just on that one point , weakly subverted his own
position, and yielded all the right and title which he could plead to the
Free Church name in favour of his opponents. To say that the question
of supplies was one on which he felt himself free to avow a change, was
simply to vacate the ground on which his claim to represent the Free
Church of the colony was built. It was a justification of his own
expulsion in 1857; a re-instatement of the expulsionists, with his
consent, in formal right and title to the Free Church name. What,
on Mr. Miller’s showing, was his situation between the years 1857 and
1864? What did the change on that one point of supplies, which he
felt free to confess leave him ? Is he not, by that confession, a self-
convicted schismatic ? Sinning in ignorance, it is presumed, but still
sinning publicly in that particular. The Synod which he was a means of
constituting in 1867, was the unchanged Free Church Synod of the
colony — if the question of ministerial supplies made it so; but, by
yielding just that one point to his adversaries late in the day, Mr.
Miller stamped his seven years previous career with the brand of divisive
courses. u Please to observe,” said Mr. Miller, when taxed with
inconsistency, “ the point on which I have changed.” Doubtless it
deserved to be attended to. Mr. Miller did well if he observed it very
carefully himself.
It may be as well to remark that this inconsistent manner of dealing
with the position of 1857 began when Mr. Miller was in Scotland in


1880-1, and seems to have been adopted by him under the advice of
friends who were willing 1 to serve the cause of the minority, (as the
protesters of 1857 were commonly called), but who were not in
circumstances and were not led by Mr. Miller rightly to estimate the
necessities of the Free Church position in the colonies. Mr. Miller’s first
appearance in the Free Church Assembly of 1860 was characterised by
a sedulous attention to the question of supplies. His colonial experience
(not to say tutoring) was then fresh, and we hear him protesting before
the Assembly as follows :
“If I could believe that a Presbyterian Church made up largely of Erastians
and others (Voluntaries ?) would be owned of the Spirit for good, I might rejoice
in their union ; but whatever others may do I cannot; and I believe it is an utter
delusion to fancy, that by coalitions founded on compromise, you can exhibit the unity of
the Spirit.'’*
But this point, so strongly rendered by Mr. Miller in the Assembly of
1860, was thrown into the back ground in the agitation of the year fol-
lowing; and the case, so far as the home discussion of it is concerned,
was sought to be rested solely on the character of the basis employed
in constructing the Presbyterian Church. No harm would have
resulted from that topic being dwelt upon had the character of the basis
(which had been much altered from the form in which it stood in 1857)
been urged as one apposite and cogent reason for condemning the Union,
but not to the exclusion or pretermission of the original point on which
the difference in 1857 exclusively turned. But due caution was not used
to associate the question of supplies with the discussion of the defective
basis, and whether by Mr. Miller’s looseness of management or by the
change which he avowed in 1864 having already infected him at home in
1861, he did not press the question of supplies into the discussion con-
jointly with the, question of the basis, and the case came before the
Assembly of 1861, narrowed (erroneously) to the subject of the basis
alone. This shifting of his ground by Mr. Miller, or vacillation in
keeping it, laid the cause of the protesting minority open to the only fair
and forcible assault which was made on it in the Assembly of 1861.
Whoever will examine the speech of Mr. Rainy in that Assembly will see
that the whole power of it comes out as against the vacillation of Mr.
Miller. Had the point of supplies been kept forward simultaneously with
the discussion of the basis, the only unanswerable speech (unanswerable
as against Mr. Miller’s management of the case) which that year of dis-
cussion produced would have been innocuous. Some may surmise that
in instancing Mr. Rainy’s speech instead of Dr. Cunningham’s, we pur-
posely pass over the most effective attack delivered against the protesting
minority. But we are not insensible to the deadly force of Dr. Cunning-
ham’s blows; we only urge that the object really demolished by his vin-
dictive animosity may be differently apprehended. Some think that the
cause of the Australian Protesters—others that the character of Dr. Cun-
ningham himself was then irreparably damaged. His speech was
undoubtedly a very powerful performance, like that of Ajax among the
* Report of Mr. Miller’s Speech in the General Assembly of the Free Church
of Scotland, 1860, published “with a prefatory note by Rev. William Miller, Mel-
bourne.”


sheep, energized, it might be believed, by a like cause, and tragical,
morally speaking, with the same conclusion. In 1861 the Free Church
of Scotland laid the foundations of her Jericho. It remains to be seen
at what sacrifice she will set up the gates thereof.
After this retrospect of the decline and fall of some of the Protesters
of 1857, it is time to review the step which we felt constrained to take
to vindicate our own consistency. Partly by abusive speeches, partly by
threats hinting at separation, the vacillating negotiators sought to
concuss us into the same compromises with themselves. It has been
alleged by some that the separation which we declared between them and
ourselves was premature. That view of the case, however, is one which
will not bear examination. The partisans of the new Union movement
were a majority among us, and they had the power, by virtue of their
numbers, of concussing any testimony which we could offer against them.
The only legitimate course to pursue, after the speeches made and
motion carried by the majority, was to libel each and all of them, and
convict them of schism by their own protest of 1857. They had
subverted their own claim, as determined by that document, to hold the
Free Church name, or to exercise a Free Church authority. It is easy to
see, however, where such a course, had it been adopted, would have
ended. The majority in a Church Court are practically exempt from
libel. As a matter of course they would not sustain a libel against
themselves, and those who managed the cause would be obliged
themselves to protest and withdraw. There was no avoiding the
separation. The only choice was as to the interposition or omission of
that single step of formal impeachment. If any one thinks that the
position assumed and sentiments expressed by Messrs. Miller, Maxwell,
MacVean, Ac., did not call for libel, it need only be stated that for like
courses indicative of indifference to the matters in dispute between the
Union Church and ourselves, Messrs. Dron and Murdoch were formally
cut off from their status in the Free Presbyterian Church by votes, in
which Messrs. Miller, Ac. concurred not many months before.
It is hard to say for what Messrs. Dron and Murdoch
were cut off, if Mr. Miller and his associates did not deserve
to be.* A serious consideration of the crisis around us led
* The following are the terms of the Minute of Presbytery in the case of Mr,
Murdoch :—“ Thereafter it was moved by Mr. Paul, seconded by Mr. MacVean, and
agreed to ; that,
“ The Presbytery, considering the Eighth Provision of the Fundamental Act, es-
pecially the words which follow, viz. : —Continued adherence to the principles here-
inbefore set forth, shall be held as a condition of the enjoyment of any status,
office, or privilege within the Free Presbyterian Church of Australia Felix ; and
further, considering the admission made by Mr. Murdoch to the Committee, that he
takes his present course in order to join the Communion of another body in this
colony, [the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, that is—the same with which Mr.
MacVean and Mr. Miller soon after sought incorporation] find:
“That Mr, Murdoch, by taking this course, has withdrawn his adherence to theprin-
ciples of this Church as set forth in the Fundamental Act, and he no longer holds the status
of an ordained Minister within this Church.'’
Mr. Miller was Moderator of Presbytery when the above motion was carried
unanimously.


us to vindicate our own consistency in the least obstrusive way, by
declaring ‘‘that Messrs. Miller, Maxwell, MacVean, Bell and MacLeod
no longer hold the principles and position of the Free Presbyterian
Church of Victoria, and claiming for ourselves continued liberty to meet
as heretofore as the Synod adhering to the Fundamental Act of the said
Church,” We could not do less than this to signalise our disapprobation
of the levity shown in casting aside the obligation of a solemn and
deliberate protest, and we did no more that we might offer the least
possible offence.
We claim to have undergone no change in our sentiments. We have
no new views to profess as regards our action in 1857 j all that we have
done has been to resist an attempt to concuss or drag us into a degraded
position. The value of those principles for which we have been con-
strained to suffer may not he appreciated at present. They are not the
less valuable in themselves that they have declined in popular estimation
Free Church principles are a birthright which it is now current custom
to negotiate for worldly considerations. The world is grateful for the
exchange; it loves to have all things negotiable in its own market. If
men will dispose of conscience, verily they have their reward. But the
two main principles of the Free Church position embody truths which
the world and the Church cannot want. Neither Erastianism nor
Voluntaryism solve the questions involved in the Kingdom of Christ; and
the Union scheme, so loudly vaunted at present, by symbolising with
both of these errors, misses the true road towards the Church’s unity.
Meanwhile we see our treasure hid in the field by God’s providence. Let
us labour that it be not laid up in a napkin, in so far as it is a talent
committed into our hands. u Blessed are they who sow beside all waters.
In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand,
for thou knowest not which shall prosper, whether this or that, or whether
they both shall be alike good. Until the Spirit be poured upon us from
on high, and the wilderness become a fruitful field, and the fruitful
field be counted for a forest. Then judgment shall dwell in the wilder-
ness, and righteousness remain in the fruitful field. And the work of
righteousness shall he peace, and the effect of peace quietness and
assurance for ever. And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation,
and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting-places.”*


CORRESPONDENCE, &o.
The Synod of the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria met in the ession-
house of John Knox’s Church, Melbourne, at 7 o’clock p.m., on the 19th April,
1864, and was duly constituted. Sederunt —Rev. A. Maxwell, Moderator ; Messrs.
Miller, MacVean, Paul, M‘lntyre, MTherson, and Gardiner, Ministers; and
Messrs. Thomson, M'Leod, and Munro, Elders,
The subject of the correspondence with Rev. A. D. Kininmont on Union
having been taken up, the Clerk was instructed to read the letters, which were to
the following effect* The first letter announced the appointment of a Commission
on Union of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria ; it set
forth the desirableness of Union with the Free and U. P. Churches of this colony ;
that while the basis of the Presbyterian Church cannot he altered, satisfactory
explanations will be given and embodied in a declaratory act; and proposed that
a conference should take place, with a view to arrive at the necessary explanations.
The second communication acknowledged receipt of a private letter from Mr.
Maxwell, in which it was stated, as appeared, that if the basis were to be con-
sidered as unalterable no negotiations would take place in connexion with the
proposal made; whereupon Mr. Kininmont enquired what alterations were required
by the Free Synod for the consideration of the General Assembly.
Rev. W. Miller moved—“ That the Synod go into committee to consider and
frame the reply to be given to these communications from the Presbyterian Church
of Victoria.”
This motion was seconded and carried, after discussion, by the casting vote of
the Moderator.
* These letters have hitherto been rigidly suppressed by Messrs. Maxwell, Miller, Bell,
&c. So also with the act by which these gentlemen expelled Messrs. MTntyre, M'Pherson,
Paul, and Thomson. For the accompanying copy of the articles, which the same gentlemen
proposed, with a view to incorporation with the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, we are
Indebted to the courtesy of Kev. A. Ramsay, Melbourne; while the information communicated
to the Weekly Review by the Kev. A. D. Kininmont, lets in the only light that we have on the
true course and sudden arrest of the new Union negotiation. These several documents, with
the existing basis of the Presbyterian Church, are brought together for the sake of the combined
information which they yield.


Comparative View of the Existing Articles of the Presbyterian Church of
Victoria, and of the Basis which Messrs. Maxwell, Miller, MacVean,
Gardiner, &c. submitted, with a View to incorporate Union with that
Church, pursuant to the above-recited (1) Motion of Mr. Miller.
Basis of Messrs. Maxwell, fyc.
1. That the Westminster Confession
of Faith, the Larger and Shorter
Catechisms, the Form of Presbyterian
Church Government, the Directory for
Public Worship, and the Second Book of
Discipline, be the Subordinate Standards
of this Church.
2. That in regard to the doctrine
contained in these standards relative to
the powers and duty of the civil magis-
trate in matters of religion, the office-
bearers of this Church, in subscribing
these Standards are not to be held as
professing or countenancing any views
in reference to the power and duty of
the Civil Magistrate inconsistent with
liberty of conscience.
3. That the Church asserts for itself
a jurisdiction independent of all other
Churches, and within its own sphere, in-
dependent of all civil authority, and that
it is responsible only to the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Supreme Head of the Church.
Existing Basis.
1. That the Westminster Confession
of Faith, the Larger and Shorter Cate-
chisms, the Form of Presbyterian Church
Government, the Directory for Public
Worship, and the Second Book of Dis-
cipline, be the Standards and Formularies
of this Church.
2. That inasmuch as there is a differ-
ence of opinion in regard to the doctrines
contained in these Standards, relative to
the power and duty of the Civil Magis-
trate in matters of religion, the Office-
bearers of this Church, in subscribing
these Standards and Formularies, are
not to be held as countenancing any per-
secuting or intolerant principles, or as
professing any views in reference to the
power and duty of the Civil Magistrate
inconsistent with the liberty of personal
conscience, or the right of private
judgment.
3. That this Synod asserts for itself a
separate and independent character and
position as a Church, possesses supreme
jurisdiction over its subordinate judica-
tories, congregations, and people ; and
will receive all Ministers and Preachers
from other Presbyterian Churches apply-
ing for admission on an equal footing, who
shall thereupon become subject to its
authority alone.
Result of the negotiations of Messrs. Maxwell, Miller, &c., for incorporated
Union with the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, as reported in the
Age of Bth December, 1864 :
The Synod of the Free Presbyterian Church met upon Tuesday. After other
business, the subject of Union was taken up, when the Convener of the Committee
appointed to communicate with the other Presbyterian Churches of Victoria,
reported that he had forwarded to Rev. A. D. Kiuinmont, on behalf of the Presby-


terian Church of Victoria, and the Rev. A. M. Ramsay, on behalf of the United
Presbyterian Church, copies of the articles of Union which had been approved by
this Synod ; that he had received a reply from Mr. Kininmont (which was read)’
and that, as these articles were not accepted by the Commission of the Presbyte-
rian Church, the Committee of this Church now requested to be relieved from
further duty in regard to Union with the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, The
Synod adjourned until the next day, when the consideration of this report was
resumed ; and, after discussion, the request of the Committee was adopted, and the
Committee was accordingly discharged.
View of the above-mentioned negotiations, furnished by Mr Kininmont, on
behalf of the Presbyterian Church, to the Weekly Review of 31st Decem-
ber, 1864 :
CONFERENCE ON UNION.
To the Editor of the Weekly Review and Messenger.
Dear Sir, —As the annexed paragraph, which appeared in your journal of
the 10th instant, has, I understand, led many to suppose that the Commission on
Union of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria had absolutely refused to entertain
the proposals of the Synod of the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria, you will
oblige by publishing it, and the letter to which it refers.—l am, yours sincerely,
A. D. Kininmont.
Hawke-street, East Melbourne, 24th December, 1864.
“ The Synod of the Free Presbyterian Church met on Tuesday (6th
December.) After other business the subject of Union was taken up,
when the Convener of the Committee appointed to communicate with
the other Churches of Victoria, reported that he had forwarded to the
Rev. A. D. Kininmont, on behalf of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria,
and the Rev. A. M. Ramsay, on behalf of the United Presbyterian Church,
copies of the Articles of Union, which had been approved of by this Synod;
that he had received a reply from Mr Kininmont (which was read), and that, as
these articles were not accepted by the Commission of the Presbyterian Church,
the Committee of this Church now requested to be relieved from further duty in
regard to union with the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. The Synod adjourned
until the next day, when the consideration of this report was resumed ; and, after
discussion, the request of the Committee was adopted, and the Committee was ac-
cordingly discharged.”
The following is a copy of the reply mentioned in the above paragraph :
«To the Rev, A. Maxwell, Convener of Committee on Union of the Free
Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
“ Rev. Sir,— Your letter of 25th ult., intimating ‘ That a Committee on Union
with the other Presbyterian Churches of Victoria has been appointed by the Free
Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and the accompanying copy of the basis on which
your Church would be willing to enter into a Corporate Union with our Church,
and with the other Presbyterian Churches in the colony,’ have been duly considered
by our Commission on Union.
“ I have to express to you the gratification of the Commission at the fraternal


spirit of your communication. lam also instructed to state that there is nothing
in the basis you have sent us contrary to the principles of our Church. As it is a
grave thing to alter our basis, the Commission desire to know what Ministers and
Congregations of your Church will unite with ours, were the proposed alterations
adopted, and whether there is a probability of your proposals embracing all those
with whom we are negotiating for Union. You will oblige by ascertaining this and
informing me.—l am, Rev. dear Sir, yours sincerely,
“ A. D. Kininmont, Convener.
“ Melbourne, 6th December, 1864.”
[ 5 1
PROTEST Against the Initiation of the Above Negotiations.
In consequence of recent proceedings affecting the integrity of the principles
of the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria, we, the undersigned, ministers and
elder of the said Church, hereby protest that the Rev. A. Maxwell, W. Miller, A.
MacVean, and J. Gardiner, and Messrs. W. M. Bell and R. MacLeod do not now
hold the principles of the Ifree Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and are not to be
held as constituting the Synod adhering to the Fundamental Act thereof. We also
claim for ourselves and others, who may adhere to us, the continued liberty to meet
as the Synod adhering to the said Fundamental Act, and to give forth such a statement
of the principles and present position of the Free Presbyterian Church as may be
necessary.
ALEX. MTNTYRE, Minister.
ARTHUR PAUL. Minister.
PETER MACPHERSON, Minister.
JOSEPH THOMSON, Elder.
Melbourne, 25th May, 1864.
[6l
(circular.)
Kilmore, 17th September, 1864.
The Rev. Arthur Paul, St. Hilda.
Rev. Sir, — I beg to intimate to you that a Meeting of the Synod of the
Presbyterian Church of Victoria will D.V. be held in the Session-house of John
Knox’s Church, Melbourne, on Tuesday the 11th October ensuing, at 12 o’clock
noon, to consider certain proceedings and acts of the Rev. Arthur Paul, Peter
M'Pherson, Alexander MTntyre, and Mr. Joseph Thomson ; and the steps to be
taken in consequence thereof, together with the present condition of the Bellerine
congregation.
Andrew Maxwell, Moderator.
[The like communication was sent to Rev. P. M'Pherson and Joseph Thomson, Esq.]
[7l
9 Hawke Street, Melbourne, Ist November, 1864.
Rev. Sir, —At a meeting of Synod, held on the 12th ult., a committee was
appointed to consider whether the differences between you and us can be amicably
adjusted, and if so in what way. I will be glad to know what your views are on
this subject, and whether you have any proposal to submit. I am, Rev. Sir, yours
very truly,
WM. MILLER, Convener of Committee.
To the Rev. A. Paul.
[B3
St. Hilda, 2nd November, 1864.
Rev. Sir, — I am in receipt of your communication of yesterday’s date, inti-
mating the appointment at a meeting of Synod, held on the 12th ult., of a
committee “ to consider whether the difference between you and us can be amicably
adjusted, and if so, in what way,” and expressing a desire to know “whatmy
views are on the subject, and whether I have any proposal to submit.”
I beg to say, in reply, that, in my opinion, the difference ought not to have
arisen, and ought not to be allowed to continue, if you and your friends are at
liberty to say that you accept the principles developed in the authorised documents
of the Free Presbyterian Church. I mention two of these documents, in subordi-
nation of course to the Fundamental Act, and as illustrative of its meaning, viz,,


* the Free Church Narrative,” published by authority of the Synod in 1857, and
the “Letter” dated 15th March, 1859, from the Free Presbyterian Church of
Victoria to the General Assembly of the Free Church of Scotland. Both of these
documents were given forth with the unanimous concurrence of the Synod, and
both were written to define and defend the Church’s position with reference to the
question of union. That there may be no mistake, I extract from each of these
documents an excerpt, embodying the principle more immediately in question.
Narrative, p. 35. —“ The course of events was thus bringing the negotiations
“ for union to converge upon the true point of difficulty. The whole Free Church
“ position in the Colony was wrapped up in the question of ministerial supplies.”
Letter, p. 130 of Colonial Committees Report, 1861.—“ We must therefore take the
“ liberty of saying again that this question of ministerial supplies was the sum
“and substance of the controversy between us and the majority of the late Synod ;
“ that for the views which we held on that subject, they expelled us from their
“ communion, and that this, as we consider, should have been treated as the central
“ knot of that difficulty with which the Assembly had to deal in mediating a
“ reconciliation between the majority and us.” I need not observe, after these
authoritative statements, that to throw loose the question of supplies is, in the
words of the same letter (which bears your signature), to suffer a point, “ which we
consider vital to Free Church consistency to be waived.”
A simple expression of your resolution to adhere, in common with us, to the
terms of the Fundamental Act, might, in some respects, have been preferable as a
means of adjustment. But this, when proposed on a former occasion, seems to
have been greatly disliked. I have therefore adduced these authoritative inter-
pretations of the position occupied by the Free Presbyterian Church, as offering a
basis on which good faith may be established between us in the maintenance of the
Act itself. Let me add that, if negotiations for union with the Presbyterian Church
of Victoria are still contemplated by you, we prefer that you should see these to a
conclusion before discussing a settlement with us. I am, Rev. Sir, yours very truly,
ARTHUR PAUL, Moderator.
The Rev. W. Miller.
• [9l
Melbourne, 3rd November, 1864.
Rev. Sir, —I have received your letter of yesterday’s date. I shall lay the
correspondence before the synod at its first meeting.—l am, yours very truly,
WM. MILLER.
To the Rev. A. Paul.
* The “ first meeting” of Synod referred to in this letter took place prior to the 22nd
November. Without any further communication it cut short the pursuit of an “ amicable
adjustment” by a summary act of expulsion against Messrs. Mclntyre, McPherson, Paul, and
Thomson. No notice, either of the intention or of the act, was given. The Registrar-
General’s letter immediately following conveyed the first intimation of th efact to Mr. Miller’s
correspondents. The same meeting adopted and forwarded, through Mr. Maxwell, articles of
Union to the Rev. A. D. Kininmont, on behalf of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria ;
and to the Rev. A. M. Ramsay, on behalf of the U. P. Church. See these articles above
(2) where they are exhibited in parallel columns along with the existing articles of the Presby-
terian Church. The manner in which Mr. Maxwell approached the Presbyterian Church, and
the reception which he met, appears from Mr. Kininmont’s reply, published in the Weekly
Review, inserted above f 4). The expedition with which Mr. Maxwell re-opened the “ amicable
adjustment” correspondence, after receiving that reply, is remarkable. See his letter (14).
[lo]
Registrar General’s Office,
Melbourne, 28th November, 1864
Reverend Sir, — I have the honour to inform you that your registration for
the Solemnization of Marriages in Victoria has this day been cancelled, and you
are therefore not in a position to celebrate marriages in this colony any longer.—l
have the honour to be, Reverend Sir, your obedient servant,
W. H. ARCHER, Registrar-General.
Rev. P. M‘Pherson, Meredith.
[The like communication was sent to Rev. A. MTntyre, and also to
Rev. A. Paul.J
[ll]
St. Kilda, 7th December, 1864.
Sir, —I have the honour to refer to the accompanying letter received by me
from the Rev. P. MacPherson, the Free Presbyterian minister of Meredith, and beg


your attention to the terms as given in that letter of a communication received by
Mr. MacPherson from the Registrar-General. [See above (10).J I have also to
state that a communication, similar to that of which Mr. MacPherson complains,
has been sent to me, and I believe also to the Rev. Alexander Maclntyre, Free
Presbyterian minister of Geelong.
I respectfully submit, as to the terras of the Registrar-General’s communication,
that the grounds on which the cancellation was based might have been stated with
advantage in the body of that document. For want of such express statement, I
am reduced to conjecture what the reasons were ; and am led to presume that some
information from the Rev. Andrew Maxwell, bearing to proceed from the Moderator
of the Free Presbyterian Church, has been acted on ; and that, upon the strength of
such information, the communications from the Registrar’s office have eome to
Messrs. Maclntyre and MacPherson, and myself.
If that be so, I have the honour to inform you that the Rev. Andrew Maxwell
has not since May last been in a position entitling him to represent himself as the
recognised head of the Free Presbyterian Church. That Church was divided, at the
period specified, into two nearly equal portions, and one one of them does not now
recognise Mr.'Maxwell, but recognises me, as Head, The ministers siding with Mr.
Maxwell at the period of the division were the Revs. Wm. Miller, Alexander Sinclair,
A. MacYean, and J. Gardiner; of whom the first two have since resigned their
charges, and have left or are preparing to leave the colony. The ministers siding
with me are Revs. A. Maclntyre and P. MacPherson. Of eight ministers whom
Mr. Maxwell represented at the beginning of the present year, three no longer
recognise him as Head, two have resigned, and only two remain with Mr. Maxwell
himself. In these circumstances I submit that Mr. Maxwell is not justified in
representing himself to the Government as though no change had happened in the
position which he occupies.
I have the honour further to inform you that in accordance with the Treasury
regulations, applicable in such circumstances, Mr. Maxwell and I have been dealt
with on an equal footing, as representatives of the two sections respectively ; and
no monies are at present paid on account of the Free Presbyterian grant in aid,
pending a settlement between Mr. Maxwell and me.
In consideration that so large a proportion of the ministers comprised in the
constituency of the Free Presbyterian Church, with their congregations, do not now
recognise Mr. Maxwell as Head, and that Mr. Maxwell’s former right to administer
Free Presbyterian claims has been suspended at the Treasury, I have the honour
to submit that the question of registration be left on the same footing as the grant
in aid, and that the Government leave it to be settled mutually by the two parties,
as in the similar case of division in the same Church in April, 1857. —I have the
honour to be, Sir, your most obedient servant,
ARTHUR PAUL, Moderator.
The Honorable The Chief Secretary, Melbourne.
[l2l
Registrar-General’s Office, Melbourne, Bth December, 1864.
Reverend Sir, — I have been favoured by the Hon. the Chief Secretary with
a perusal of your letter to him of yesterday’s date.
I should be glad to see you on the subject, and, if convenient to you, would
appoint to-morrow (Friday), at noon. Yours sincerely,
W. H. ARCHER.
The Reverend A. Paul, St. Kilda.
[l3l
Marriage Act, 22 Viet. No. 70,
Registrar-General’s Office, Melbourne, 16th December, 1864.
Reverend Sir,— l have the honour to inform you, that the provisions of the
3rd section of the above Act having in your case been duly complied with, your
name has been again recorded on the list of “Registered Clergy” in this office
(No. 592)
Rev. P. MacPherson, Minister of Synod of the
Free Presbyterian Church, Lethbridge.
[The like communication was sent to Rev. A. Mclntyre and Rev, A. Paul.]


. [ 14 ]
Kilmore, 9th December, 1864,
Rev. Sib:,— l inclose a copy of a finding of our Synod on Union Negotiations.*
The attitude therein assumed by the Synod towards the vexed question, will, I
trust, relieve you from any difficulty which you may have felt to lie in the way of
reconciliation between you and us.
I have to request that you would have the goodness to inform me whether the
stop thus put to Union negotiation disposes you to co-operate with me in
endeavouring to effect a healing of the breach now existing.
There is nothing, I believe, to prevent reconciliation save those difficulties
which may arise out of the demands which may be made on your side.—l am, Rev,
Sir, yours, &c. ANDW. MAXWELL,
Enclosure, with the above.
* The Convener of the Committee on Union with the other Presbyterian
Churches in Victoria reported :
“ That he had forwarded to the Rev. A. D. Kininmont, on behalf of the
Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and to Rev. A. M. Ramsay, on behalf of the
United Presbyterian Church of Victoria, copies of the Articles of Union approved
by this Synod ; that he had received a reply from Mr. Kininmont, and that as
these articles were not accepted by the Commission of the Presbyterian Church,
the Committee of which he is convener requested to be relieved from further
duty in regard to Union with the Presbyterian Church of Victoria.”
At a subsequent diet, this report was fully considered, which resulted thus—
“ The request of the Committee was unanimously agreed to, and the Committee
was accordingly discharged.”
[ls]
St. Kilda, 14th December, 1864.
Rev. Sir, —I have received your favour of date the 9th instant, with its accom-
panying “finding.”
In regard to the question of your re-union with us in Synod, which it reopens,
I beg to say that had that subject received the treatment which it deserved when
it was first raised between us, the circumstances in which your Synod now stands
would not have occurred. Mr. Miller, who in quality of Convener of a Committee
appointed by your Synod, first opened the subject on the Ist November last, received
from me next day a statement of the conditions on which a re-united action
between us might have been concerted. It was a very marked omission on your
side that neither your Committee nor its Convener in his official capacity, nor your
Synod, ever acknowledged receipt of that communication, and that the only
intimation of the way in Which you dealt with it was conveyed to us after your
next meeting of Synod, by an official notice from the Registrar General, from
which it could be inferred that you had adopted the final step of formal severance
from us. It is not a matter of reflection to us that that step was attended by none
of the usual forms which are indispensable to give validity to a deprivation, but
considering that the main points of your recent strictures against us were drawn
from the common places of “ gentlemanliness ” and “ courtesy,” it does appear that
in reopening the subject in your letter of the Bth, some reference to our proposal
for reconciliation might have been expected at your hands, and some explanation
of, or even apology, for the neglect hitherto extended to it.
At the same time I am not indifferent to the closing of an unseemly difference
which ought never to have occurred. If you do not object to inform me of the exact
terms in which your correspondence with the Presbyterian Church of Victoria has
been conducted, as well as the terms in which they answered you, these shall be
laid before my brethren without unnecessary delay. The very altered circum-
stances of the case now will induce me to take their deliberate advice. I do not
think that the bare fact of your advances towards the Presbyterian Church of
Victoria having been repulsed, offers in itself a ground of reconciliation. Every-
thing depends on the attitude assumed by you in that negotiation.
I beg to observe that my letter to you of the 7th instant* still awaits a reply.—
I am, Rev. Sir, yours truly,
ARTHUR PAUL.
The Rev. Andrew Maxwell, Kilmore.
* This letter was on a different subject.


[ 161 M
Kilmore, 95th Jspuary, 1865.
Rev. Sir,— Having consulted my brethren regarding your letter of the 14th
ult., I now, in accordance with instructions, enclose an extracttiopy of minute of
Synod respecting the subject of it.*
I observe that you remark upon an omission on the part of Mr. Millar as
convener of a committee to negotiate a reconciliation with you and your brethren.
Mr. Millar informed me very positively that he did answer the letter to which you
refer.
Though I have sought to obtain copies of that correspondence with a view of
ascertaining how this matter stood, and also to acquaint myself precisely with the
conditions upon which you say “ a reunited action between us might have been
concerted,” I have not yet been furnished with these copies.
I am not, therefore, in circumstances to explain further than I have above done
the omission you refer to. I can only say that if it were made, I much regret it.
From what I know of my brethren, and from the conversation I have had with them
on this matter, I am enabled to say that such an omission could not have been
intentional. I-am, Rev. Sir, yours, &c.,
ANDW. MAXWELL.
Rev. Arthur Paul, St. Kilda.
* Enclosure with the above.
At Melbourne, the fourth day of January, One thousand eight hundred and sixty-
five years, which day the Synod of the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria
met, pursuant to adjournment, in the Session House of John Knox Church,
Swanston-street, at two o’clock afternoon, and was constituted with devotional
exercises, the Moderator-Sederunt, Rev. A. Maxwell, Moderator ; Revs, Win.
Miller, J. Gardiner, &c.
Inter alia.
The Synod having under consideration correspondence with the Rev. Arthur
Paul, after anxious deliberation, unanimously Resolve that the Moderator be
instructed to intimate to him, and those acting with him, the willingness of the
Synod to receive them again into Synodical connection.
Extracted from the records of the Synod of the Free Presbyterian Church of
Victoria, this sixteenth day of January, 1865— by me
A. MacVEAN, Synod Clerk.
Cl 7 ]
St. Kilda, 28th March, 1865.
Rev. Sir,—l have waited until the correspondence between us on the subject of
the grant in aid were closed before replying to your communication of the 25th
January last, on the subject of a reunion. The long delay in settling that question
accounts for the interval during which your letter has not been attended to. It
would, however, have been more to be regretted that delay should have occurred on
a mere money question, had the purport of your communication regarding reunion
been different.
You profess, in that communication, to reply to mine of 14th December pre-
ceding, but you have passed over the most material part of it, and you take no
notice of the request made in it for information as to “ the terms in which your
correspondence’’ for union “ with the Presbyterian Church of Victoria has been
conducted.” That omission is the most significant feature of your present letter.
I have no claim to offer to the information referred to if you do not see fit to supply
it, but the withholding of it seriously compromises the sincerity of your professions
in the matter of reunion ; and your omission so much as to mention the subject is
incompatible with the slightest respect to me as a correspondent. Equally dis-
respectful as it now appears is the treatment which my letter to your convener Mr
Miller has received. In that letter, which was dated 2nd November last, I specified,
at Mr Miller’s express request, the grounds on which healing measures might be
concerted. The only notice which that communication received was, first, an un-
official and bare acknowledgment of receipt by Mr Miller ; and now, on my com-
plaining of this treatment, I have from you the information “ that you have sought
to obtain copies of that correspondence, and have not yet been furnished with them,”
and that you “are not in circumstances to explain further,” the fact that no official


BuSuo c
f U / (f>o b .%■
W Kftr 20
notice, either by your committee, or convener, or Church Court was ever taken of
that letter.* Yet that letter, so neglected, stated the way in which a reunited action
between us mightjiave oeen concerted. These facts I leave to suggest their proper
conclusions. You say, indeed, <( Mr. Millar informed me very positively that he did
answer the letter to which you refer.” I presume you mean the Rev, Wm. Miller,
as I have not corresponded with any Mr. Millar on this subject. I have only to say,
in that case,‘that Mr. Miller has been injudicious, or has had an injudicious friend.
No statement of Mr. Miller’s, however positively made, is entitled to be received in
the face of a fact. If Mr. Miller had attended to your request for copies of the
correspondence, and furnished you with them, as he was bound to do, it would not
.have been necessary for you to hazard that very positive but groundless statement
on his bare authority, I have such copies by me, and have reviewed them. The
complaint which I made, and which you seek to parry by Mr. Miller’s very positive
statement is well founded. The receipt of my letter was never even officially
acknowledged, much less was it ever answered.
I come now to the minute of your Court, which you have enclosed with your
letter. It also avoids a straightforward dealing with the subject of reunion. We
have always stated our difference with you upon your dereliction of the Funda-
mental Act of the Free Presbyterian Church, and particularly on your retreat from
the step taken in 1857 by solemn Protest to vindicate it. At any time since the
difference began you had but to say that you would not seek to vary from that Act
and the Protest sustaining it, and the disunion between us would have been at an
end. This was the point of my letter to Mr. Miller, which is in your hands still
unanswered. The avoidance of that point is conspicuous in the minute enclosed in
your letter. There is no mention in it of any standard of religious profession, and
you have been engaged in such negotiations for Union with other bodies as makes
a distinct statement of your intentions for the future on that point absolutely neces-
sary, It is far more for personal comfort and the unclouded confidence of brotherly
love that we should keep to our own Free Presbyterian Church Court, in which the
Fundamental Act of the body has never been sought to be altered or set aside, than
that we should make part of a body which keeps the name of Free Presbyterian as a
temporary convenience, and in which the Fundamental Standard abides merely as
of sufferance until a favourable opportunity for superseding it shall be found.
That the latter is the position now occupied by you is the sum of our difference, and
the reason of your separation from us ; and I repeat you had but to say at any time
since the division that you would respect the Fundamental Act still in its integrity
as the standard of the Free Presbyterian body, and the breach would have closed.
This, however, you have hitherto studiously avoided to say, and the sincerity of
your desires for reunion with us is to be judged accordingly.
Although you have not complied with, nor even noticed, my request for infor-
mation as to the terms in which you corresponded for union with the Presbyterian
Church, I have been favoured by the Rev. A. Ramsay, of Melbourne, with a copy
of the articles on which you negotiated. I append them for the sake of clearness,
and close with one or two observations on them.*
The entertaining of such a basis of union is the natural conclusion to that
abandonment of the Fundamental Standard of the Free Presbyterian Church, which
we charged on you, and for which you were separated from us.
The basis is but a slight variation from, and not an improvement upon the
basis of the Presbyterian Church, against which you have been protesting for years
past, and which Mr. Miller, on his mission to Scotland, industriously moved the
Free Church to condemn.
It appears from the published letter of the Rev. A. Kininmont, Convener of the
Presbyterian Church Committee, with whom you corresponded, that there was no
demur substance of these articles on the part of the Presbyterian Church.
Incorporation with that Church appears, therefore, to be the genuine conclusion to
the negotiation in which you have been engaged. The charge of schism will with
difficulty be avoided between two bodies that can agree on a common standard of
doctrine, discipline, and worship, if they stand apart on some plea of inconvenience
merely.—l am, Rev, Sir, yours truly,
ARTHUR PAUL.
The Rev. Andrew Maxwell, Kilmore.
* See above (2), page 13,
