

NEW SOUTH WALES
INSTITUTE OF SURVEYORS.
Established 1880.
ADDRESS
HEAD BY
T. S PARROTT, 0.E.,
VICE-PRESIDENT,
AT THE
FIRST ANNUAL MEETING,
1881
SYDNEY:
S. T. LEIGH & Co., GENERAL PRINTERS,
Pitt Street.




5733315/
i+ 't 77,
H* Males Institute of Snrtogors.
ESTABLISHED 1880.
ADDRESS
Read by T. S. PARROTT, C.E., Vice-President,
AT THE
EIEST ANNUAL MEETING-,
18 81.
Mr. President and Gentlemen, — The New South Wales
Institute of Surveyors has completed its first year of existence, and
as it is customary in Societies and Institutions that an Annual
Address should be presented by the President or other Officer to
its Members, I have considered such a course would be acceptable
in the present case, not because it is customary, but chiefly for the
reason that if the practice is carefully followed out in future years,
we shall always have a valuable record of the growth of our
Institute, and a chart of its progress to which we can always refer.
Before entering upon a review of our proceedings during the
first year, I must ask you to allow me to make an apparent
digression from what should form the subject of an address by
placing before you what I consider to be some of the causes which
have led to the formation of the Surveyors’ Institute.
A little more than a hundred years ago the continent of Aus-
tralia was taken possession of by England, the first settlement
being in the neighbourhood of Botany, A few years later Commodore
Philip came out with his first instalment of convicts, and shifted
the settlement to Port Jackson.
Australia, therefore, became a penal settlement and was
governed by martial law. A small population other than the
convict one existed even in Governor Philip’s time; but for a very
long period after the formation of the Colony, it was essentially a
penal state, and therefore required for its governing machinery
more of a military and less of a civil force.


Under these conditions, in the earlier days of the Colonies,
it became necessary, as the population increased, that the G-overnor,
for the time being, should exercise absolute power over the affairs
of the state, whether as regards freemen or convicts, so that the
earliest seeds of government that were sown in Australia were in
the nature of a sort of military dictatorship.
For many years the growth of the young Colony was very
slow, and the character of its governing machinery became,
therefore, all the more pronounced. In course of time other
settlements were established, and were governed as dependencies
of New South Wales. These included Norfolk Island, Van
Diemen’s Land, Port Philip, and New Zealand.
In each case, however, the settlement of a white population
on these distant southern lands was the act of the British Govern-
ment and not the result of private enterprise, as was the case in
the colonization of portions of North America, for instance, the
settlement of New England by the Pilgrim Fathers.
New South Wales, with her dependencies, together with the
Colonies of South Australia and Western Australia, all sprung
into existence under a power of the Imperial Parliament that was
essentially official; and it cannot, perhaps, be wondered at if some
of the more tenacious forms of officialism whose existence in the
earlier days of the Colonies under penal systems was rendered
absolutely necessary, should cling to the forms of government that
were afterwards developed under conditions of an entirely different
character.
The barrier of the Blue Mountains kept back the efforts at
colonization for many years; but when it was discovered that
this barrier was not insurmountable, and that thousands of square
miles of the most magnificent pasture land lie beyond it, an
impetus was given to the progress of settlement in Australia,
which some years afterwards was multiplied a thousandfold by
the discovery of gold and other valuable minerals.
Up to a time somewhat prior to this, no very great value
seemed to be attached to the fee-simple of Australian lands, as they
were then given away in large grants by the Government to
persons who had in any way done any special service for the
country, and in many cases for considerations of a minor character.
For a time I think, most of the departmental work of the
State was done in the office of the Colonial Secretary, and surveys
effected and public works carried out by the authority of the
Imperial Government, and under the immediate direction of the
officers and men of the Royal Corps of Engineers.
The discovery of gold in Australia, formed a new point of
departure in colonial history, and speedily brought about the rapid
settlement of all the Australian colonies which had hitherto
progressed but slowly. Responsible Government was established,
so that the local Parliaments of each colony secured the power of


organizing the State departments to deal with the surveys and
public works as well as other matters of the State.
Unfortunately for the future of this country, unrestrained
power was given to absolutely alienate any portion of land in any
of the colonies. And up to the present time this power has been
used to an extent that is perfectly appalling. In the adjoining
colony of Victoria, the greater portion of the land has actually
been sold, and when I was surveyor for the Melbourne district
in 1870, the Government sold a number of the reserves around the
city, and attempted to sell a large portion of the St. Kilda Park,
which however was prevented.
This political disease swept with the greatest fury over the
colony of Victoria many years ago, and resulted in most of the
valuable squatting properties coming absolutely into the owners
possession in fee-simple. This colony has passed through a similar
phase during the last ten years, in which time many millions of
acres have passed for ever from the hands of the government, and
a large portion of the heritage of the people has gone in this short
space of time, and the proceeds passed into the general revenue,
and probably the whole of it expended in governing three-quarters of
a million of people. Upon the dangers of this wholesale system of
quitting our birthright and its injurious effect on the future of the
colony I need not enlarge, my object being to direct your
attention to the circumstances which have called into existence one
of the most important and certainly the most numerous professional
classes in the British Colonies forming the Australian Group.
This enormous demand for Crown lands in the various colonies
led to the abnormal growth of the departments whose functions
consisted in dealing with all matters relating to the survey, alien-
ation and leasing of colonial lands, and the culminating point of
absurdity is reached in New South Wales by the erection of a
building in Sydney called the Survey Department, whose colossal
dimensions are sufficient to accommodate a staff entrusted with the
task of alienating the remainder of the unoccupied lands over the
whole surface of the globe. At the rate of alienation which has
prevailed during the last ten years, there would be no use for this
building for land purposes at the end of twenty or thirty years, and
this I think, brings me to the main point I wish to bring to your
notice.
As I have endeavoured to show, the colony was originally
moulded under a penal and military system. Under this system
departmental officialism naturally formed a conspicuous feature.
When the responsibility of self-government was assumed, and the
little colonies suddenly developed the proportions of nations by
the enormous influx of population, when the demand for the
alienation of crown lands was such that the sales reached two and
three million acres per year, when the discovery of gold, silver,


copper, tin, and other valuable minerals foreshadowed a great
future for Australia, it should have been the first aim of our
statesmen to remodel the departmental systems which had sprung
from the old stockade, and to inaugurate others more consistent
with a swiftly progressive condition of things.
That this was not done is one of the chief causes of the
present disorganization of the Survey Department, and I am as
convinced as that I stand here that within the limits of a very
short period a most complete reorganisation will have to be effected
to prevent an absolute collapse, just as it is now universally
admitted that a sweeping reform is necessary in our land laws.
It has always been my wish to avoid any conflict with the
Government departments, and I am only now making such
reference to them as is necessary to illustrate my point.
Everyone present here to-night knows that although the
relation of a licensed surveyor to the Survey Department is
nominally that of a contractor, it is practically the relation of
master and servant, in which the servant agrees on the one part to
do certain work which is indicated or implied by the written or
unwritten laws of the department, and the master of the other
part agrees to do absolutely nothing.
The water-mill of the old stockade machinery is clearly not
adapted to the work that has been imposed on it in modern times,
and all the efforts that are now being made to underpin its
foundations by the introduction of costly schemes for carrying out
national trigonometrical surveys, surveys for the alignment of
streets in municipalities, water frontage and reclamation surveys,
and surveys for sewerage purposes will be of little avail to the
system under the pressure of a thorough and complete regeneration
of our methods of dealing with the crown lands of the colony,
which, I think, will very shortly take place.
It is a function of the Survey Department to deal with the
leases and alienations of the crown lands of the colony under the
authority of the Parliament and in the interests of the public, and
in order that the process of alienation shall be carried out in an
effective manner so as to prevent litigation in the future on
questions of boundaries, it is necessary that an efficient staff of
inspecting surveyors should be retained, whose duty it would be to
see that surveys for alienation were carried out in accordance with
the requirements of the Government department.
At this point, I have always maintained, the departmental
function ceases. On behalf of the Government it has determined
the locality and site for alienation, it has determined the form, it
has determined the area, it has determined the method which shall
be adopted in marking the boundaries of the proposed alienation,
and it has finally certified that all this work has been properly
done.


Hitherto the departmental function has been extended far
beyond this point, in fact it has endeavoured to exercise the same
control over this large professional body as if it were actually in
its service, only perhaps in a much more arbitrary manner.
If it is considered by the Government that the alienation of
the Crown lands can be most economically effected by the employ-
ment on salary of all the professional men necessary for the work,
by all means let it be done, but if the work is to be done as it is
done now by members of the profession drawn from the civil
ranks, and not in any way as public servants, then I say after the
work has been well and faithfully done, let the profession still
cling to its right (which it has never legally forfeited) of taking its
proper place in the civil communities, exercising a due influence
in social matters, and what is of supreme importance control its
own affairs.
The Survey Department, is a department of the State, and
subject-to all the fluctuations which may result from the political
development of the great land question. It may rise and fall and
change its character from year to year, according as one class of
ideas prevails over another in the Legislature. For all we may
know, some government of the future may consider it in the
public interest, to abolish the department altogether. The
Department of Lands, is extremely unlike other departments in
this respect, for instance, the Post Office, the Custom House, the
Brigade Office, Law Offices and the like, are more strictly
speaking, permanent departments of the State, and are not subject
to the same fluctuations arising out of political changes as the
Survey Department.
For this reason alone, it is extremely undesirable that an
important professional body should attach itself in any way to a
State department. It is extremely undesirable that the technical
processes of carrying out work, and that the professional
government of a large body should be subject to the changes
which would be forced upon it at every turn of the political tide.
In short, gentlemen, it is extremely undesirable and altogether
contrary to the letter and spirit of the constitution of this great
country, that professional bodies should be in any way associated
with Government Institutions.
For the reasons I have barely indicated up to this point,
it was considered desirable by a number of professional men,
a little more than twelve months ago, to associate and bring
together in the form of an institute, the whole of the profession of
surveyors in the colony of New South Wales.
This object was accomplished, and a few weeks subsequently
to the preliminary meeting, which was held in my office, an
enthusiastic meeting was held at the Town Hall, Sydney, and the
founding of the Institute unanimously agreed upon.
This was on the sth November, 1880, and the year which has


now closed, constitutes the first year on the roll of the New South
Wales Institute of Surveyors, which I am confident will never
cease to unfold its records, and whose operations I am convinced,
will always prove of inestimable value to the public and a great
boon to the profession.
The year that is passed, has been a very laborious one, as my
brother officers can well testify, and no one has been more
prominent when work had to be done than our worthy president,
who, I regret very much to find, is unable to take office another
year.
For many weeks we were engaged almost exclusively on the
elaboration of rules and bye-laws, by which to govern the Institute,
and which only became law after the most mature deliberation.
The labours of the Council were then directed to various
professional matters and to secure the better carrying out the
objects of the Council, committees were formed to deal with each
matter separately.
One of the most important subjects with which the various
committees have to deal, is the one relating to the methods of
dividing urban and suburban land. No subject in this colony
requires more earnest attention, and the plan adopted by the
committee in dealing with this question will result in a very short
time in the committee placing before the Institute a most valuable
report illustrating the methods adopted in every civilised
portion of the globe.
The question of reciprocity and a uniform standard of
examinatioxr is being dealt with by another committee, and some
months ago I was authorized by the Council of our Institute to
make overtures to the profession in the adjoining colonies of
Victoria and Tasmania with a view to the Federation of the
profession in all the colonies.
The proposals I then made to the Council of the Victorian
Institute and to the representatives of the profession in Tasmania
were received in the most cordial manner, and the idea of founding
a large Australasian Institute upon a purely civil basis and with
reciprocal functions was supported with the greatest enthusiasm.
The Honorable Mr. Moore who was at that time Colonial
Secretary of the colony of Tasmania, entered warmly into my
views on this subject, and promised to do all in his power in
assisting to build up a professional Intercolonial Institute that
should have a distinctive civil character and separated from state
control.
The labors of this committee and in fact of all the committees
except the conversazione and Incorporation Committees, have been
recently almost suspended in consequence of the enormous amount
of work that has been imposed on the council in their effort to
secure the Incorporation of the Institute by Act of Parliament.
This has arisen from the action of a small minority of


the council who have adopted a most unconstitutional plan of
attempting to overthrow the labors of this Institution by a petition
to Parliament which was never submitted to this Institute for
deliberation and approval.
This action is a violation of the declaration contained in our 0
form, and aims a blow at the very root of the liberty of our Civil
Institutions, and points at once to the necessity of Incorporation.
During the month of August of the present year, a most
successful exhibition was held at the Garden Palace which was
kindly placed at the disposal of the Institute by Sir Henry Parkes.
The Exhibition was opened on Monday by a conversazione,
which was attended by about seven hundred people; during the
remainder of the week the Exhibition which included a most
valuable collection of professional instruments, maps, models, books,
etc., remained open to the public, and the interest taken in it may
be gathered from the fact that some five or six thousand people
attended during the time it was open.
A most valuable collection of trigonometrical, topographical
and geological maps, were recently presented to the Institute by
the Government of India, through their agent, Mr. Inglis. Some
valuable maps have also been presented by the Government of
South Australia, and as soon as it is in the power of the Institute
to secure the use of a commodious building, it is intended to
establish a library and museum, which I am sure will prove
extremely useful to members when visiting Sydney.
The remarkable progress which has been made in the arts
and sciences during the last twenty or thirty years, and which is
at the present moment sweeping over the whole civilized world
with an irresistible force, is largely due to the element of
co-operation.
In the United States of America where this progress has
been most conspicuous in every department of industrial science,
society is made up of one vast network of associations. From the
great Legislative and Representative Association at Washington,
to the Civil Pioneer Associations, whose operations extend to the
very borders of Mexico, and almost beyond the reach of
Legislative control, including every branch of the numerous
professions and trades and the departments of mining, agriculture,
and manufactures.
The most forcible proof of the progressive influence of this
Association of parts of civil communities, I think you will agree
with me, is to be found in the records of the Patent Office at
Washington.
I shall regard it as a sign of greater progress in this colony
when there is more vitality in our Patent Office at Sydney, and
that there is not now this vitality I look upon as a proof that our
colonial industries are too much under the influence of the State
or of the state departments, and have not yet learned to go alone.


And now, Mr. President and Gentlemen, I think I have
touched upon all the matters that have engaged our attention
during the year, except the subject relating to the Bill for
Incorporating our Institute by Act of Parliament.
Strange as it may appear, when this step assumed a serious
form, and it became evident that the society was formed with an
earnest determination that it should continue to exist, an effort
was made by a few to prevent the foundations of the Institute
being of a permanent character.
The objects of the Institute were clearly set forth in the
rules whith were passed in the early part of the year, and I hold it
is not only necesary that every member should agree to abide by
these rules, as he does by signing Form C, but that further it is
the duty of every member to assist in every way in seeing that the
rules are properly carried out.
Every member of the Institute must be aware of this, and at
the same time it must be known to a large number that we have no
power whatever to carry out any of our rules, unless the Society
is Incorporated, and that without Incorporation we are not legally
constituted.
This being the case, it must be plain to every one that incor-
poration by special Act, or registration under existing Acts, should
be one of the first steps in the organisation of an Association of
this sort.
I can only assume that those gentlemen who opposed the
incorporation have been labouring under some misconception of
the objects of the Institute.
It must have been supposed that the Society was to be a
sort of “Surveyors’ Musical Monday,” and that Meetings would
be held, say, on the first Monday evening in each month, at which
some specially skilled member would entertain the company by
performing a sort of professional sword dance around a number of
instruments indiscriminately placed on the floor.
I trust, gentlemen, that we shall very soon be able to enter
upon the discussion of every scientific and practical question that
is likely to influence the profession. No action, lam sure, would
be more in harmony with the feelings of the Council and members
of the Institute, and no action would more tend to promote the
objects for which the Institute was formed; but our first care
is certainly to see that our Institution is properly and legally
constituted, that we possess in a legal form all those powers which
are necessary to its good government, and that means be adopted
to enable members in the remotest parts of the colony to exercise
their influence in the control of its affairs.
To do this we must be incorporated. In England this point
is considered of such importance that both the Institute of Civil
Engineers and the Institution of Surveyors have been incorporated
by Royal Charter.


In the Royal Charter of the Institution of Surveyors in
England, provision is made for a system of examination for all
classes of members, including the class of students.
Fellows and Associates are under certain circumstances
submitted to the test of an examination, and their certificates of
membership are renewed by the Council each year. All adminis-
trative details are embodied in the by-laws, and all proposed
alterations of the by-laws must be submitted for approval to the
Lords of the Council.
The representative character of the Council of the Institution
will be seen from the following distribution of its members, elected
in May last-.—Westminster, 1 (President); Notts, 2; London and
Essex, 1; London and Wilts, 1 ; Glasgow, 1 , London, 11 ; Bir-
mingham, 1 ; Boston, 1 ; Darlington, 1 ; Bristol, 1; and 2
Associates of Council.
In conclusion gentlemen, I think the Institute may be congra-
tulated upon the progress it has made during the first year of its
existence. And I can only express a hope that in the time
that is to come, all personal feeling and every influence that is
antagonistic to the general welfare of the profession, will be laid
aside, and that every member will unite in the effort that is now
being made to build up an Institution which will undoubtedly
prove a great advantage to the general public, and at the same
time be the means of consolidating the interests and harmonising
the practice of a profession whose members have been too long
separated.
s 5
S. T. Leigh & Co., Printers, Pitt Street, Sydney.


