

2Sb2_
ic.l
ADDRESS
DELIVERED TO THE
ROYAL SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
AT THE
ANNIVERSARY MEETING,
22nd HAY, 1872,
WITH AN APPENDIX,
THE REV. W. B. CLARKE, M.A., F.G.S., F.R.G.S.,
"V. 3?.
SYDNEY ! THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
3x* 2—72




DELIVERED TO THE
ROYAL SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
AT THE
ANNIVERSARY MEETING,
22nd HAY, 1872,
WITH AN APPENDIX,
THE REV. W. B. CLARKE, M.A., F.G.S., F.R.G.S.,
V. X'.
SYDNEY : THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
Zx* 2—72




ANNIVERSARY ADDRESS,
Delivered 22 nd May, 1872, by the Eev. W. B. Clarke, M.A.,
F.G.S., fyc., Vice-President.
A new year brings with it new duties, or a repetition of the old.
Of this we are reminded on the present occasion, when we are
assembled for the business of another session.
Nothing can be more appropriate than to turn our first
thoughts to the past —to notice what we have lost or gained
during the year that has gone, and to anticipate what may be our
prospects in the future.
The Treasurer’s report has stated so much of the first as
belongs to the financial condition of our Society, and I wish it
had been more satisfactory than it appears to be.
The decrease in our receipts is understood to be occasioned by
the neglect of regular payments of subscriptions, as these,
together with entrance fees, amount to considerably more than
the Treasurer has received.
This is not altogether creditable to us, and the fault must
rest either with the collector or the members.
It is to be hoped that before the next meeting this defect will
be remedied.
But our retrospect and our anticipations should have a wider
range than the balance of a money account.
It is in a social and scientific view that we should charge
ourselves as debtors or creditors.
We have, however, sustained a loss which we may hardly
expect to see balanced for a long time to come.


In the year 1870 it was my duty to ask you, Gentlemen, to
record your sentiments on the death of my former colleague in
the office to which by your favour I have again been elected this
evening.
It is no disparagement to the memory of the late Astronomer
to say that we have sustained a loss of an equally serious kind in
the decease of the young and ardent philosopher whom we
followed to the grave towards the close of our last session. The
pupil and the teacher now lie together in the same Cemetery.
Although the regret of his personal friends and the respect of
the University in which Ee laboured so diligently have already
been testified, yet, considering his connection with ourselves, and
the contributions he gave to our Transactions, I could not, in
justice to my own feelings, nor to the esteem in which he was
held amongst yourselves, allow this occasion to pass without
expressing my hope that the name of Alexander M. Thomson
will not be erased from our list of members without a recorded
testimony to the value of his professional services and to the
many excellences of his private example.
Death has also taken from us another of our members, who,
though not a frequent participator in our gatherings, or a frequent
contributor to our proceedings, is entitled to our respectful
mention, for the many good social qualities of his character, the
blamelessness of his life, and the length of time in which he held
an office in connection with one of the great sources of our
Colonial wealth, and who contributed considerable aid in the
perfection of our Colonial wines, —a matter of great importance to
the masses, who are exposed to intemperance from recourse to
foreign drinks.
Mr. William Keene, as Keeper of Mining Records, must have
died in possession of valuable facts relating to our Collieries,
which it is expected will be made available to the public by the
Government hereafter.


It would be unseemly, when we are commemorating the services
of departed friends, to omit another name which deserves our
grateful remembrance —-I mean that of Sir William T. Denison,
who not only presided with ability over the Philosophical Society
to which we once belonged, but who, on all occasions, was fore-
most, during his government of this Colony, in advancing and
encouraging the advancement of science and learning, and who
did not disdain, amidst the cares of office, to be a fellow-worker
in all the useful associations with which he was connected.
It is to be desired that, so long as our Society retains its
present constitution, we may ever find our President as active
and considerate as was the last G-overnor-General of Australia.
I borrow from the obituary of the Astronomical Society of
England the following record of his career: —“ He was called
hence, after a brief illness, on the 19th January, 1871, in his 67th
year, in all the honours of deep and unfeigned attachment
amongst his personal friends; and amongst those who only knew
him in public life, with all the respect due to his unblemished
career, as ‘ a soldier, an officer, and a gentleman’; —such, at least,
is the testimony of a few brother officers who have been privileged
with his friendship during half a century.” (.Annual Report of
Council, R.A.S., 9th February, 1872.)
I now turn to the more immediate purport of this Address.
In comparison with some former sessions, the work of the last
was less profuse in contributed papers than usual.
It might, perhaps, be said by one in a playful mood, that the
quantity of “ cold water” imported into discussion the year
before,* however warmed up by party views, may have for a time
damped the ardour of some of our contributors ; but the absence
of one, and the illness of another, and the death of a third, may
have had something to do with meetings which lapsed for want of
matter to discuss.
* Alluding to a debate, in presence of the Society, on a paper in the last
volume, on the best source of Water Supply to Sydney.


But the following list will show that the topics brought forward
in 1871 were of an interesting kind, and sustained the Society’s
character: —
(1.) “ Anniversary Address,” by Professor Smith, M.D.,
Vice-President, “ Remarks on the Nebula around Eta
Argus,” by H. C. Eussell, Esq. (May.)
(2.) “Magnetic Variations at Sydney,” by H. C. Russell,
Esq. “On the Deviations of Compasses in Iron Ships,”
by Rev. "William Scott. (July.)
(3.) “On the Constitution of Matter,” by Professor Pell.
(September.)
(4.) “ Remarks on the Botany of Lord Howe’s Island,” by
Charles Moore, Esq. “ Remarks about the Spectrum
of the Nebula round Eta Argus,” by H. C. Russell, Esq.
(October.)
(5.) “ New Guinea —a highly promising field for Settlement
and Colonization —that such an object could be most
easily and successfully accomplished,” by Rev, J. D.
Lang, D.D. (December.)
EXPEDITION TO NEW OUINEA.
For a long time the idea of working rich deposits of gold in
New Guinea has occupied the minds of many of our fellow-
colonists. And the last paper on the preceding list, owing to
the reputation of its author, and the arguments employed, may
have influenced some in undertaking what, from unforeseen causes,
turned out a disastrous failure.
It would have been well had advice, given privately and publicly
by those who saw danger in such an undertaking, been allowed its
proper influence.
In a paper contributed by me to the publication on “ Industrial
Progress” —(On progress of gold discoveries from 1861 to 1870) —
I ventured to raise a warning voice, in these words: “It would be
folly for a band of prospectors to go out on any Quixotic expe-
dition without the preliminary arrangements which can only be
made and defended by public authority.”


Five Dionths after this was spoken, the late Sir Roderick Mur-
chison, in his last Address to the Royal Geographical Society of
London, delivered exactly this day twelve months (22nd May,
1871), speaking of the difficulties of negotiation with the natives
of New Guinea, used this language: —
“We learn from an official report of Lieutenant Chester, the
Government Resident at Somerset, Cape York, that he himself
visited a native settlement on the South Coast, in company with
Captain Banner.
“It appears that a display of armed force and great precau-
tion are necessary in these undertakings; and the native interpreter
brought from Warrior Island, in the Straits, was careful to recom-
mend to Lieutenant Chester to say to the Papuan chief of the
village that, although desirous of being on friendly terms with him,
he was prepared to fight, if the natives preferred it.
“No progress, in fact, has been made towards winning over
these formidable people to peaceful commercial relations with the
traders of the Australian Seas.” [ Proceed . vol. xv.,
No. iv., p. 302.]
It is with no unfeeling desire to comment unnecessarily on the
sad destiny of those who, in following out what they considered a
laudable enterprise, not only neglected preparation for possible
hostile encounter with the Papuans, but rashly intrusted lives
which were sacrificed and fortunes which were destroyed, to a too
ready confidence in the ignorance and incapacity which have
proved as formidable to the adventurers as the poisoned arrow or
the warlike ferocity of the savage.*
Had the conduct of the maritime part of the expedition been
intrusted to our fellow-member wbo so successfully searched out
the dead and the missing of the party, it would have been Avell;
and it is earnestly to be desired that men whose courage and zeal
might have made them, under proper protection, the pioneers of
civilization and moral advancement, will not be a second time
# See Forster's Journal of the Voyage ( Sydney, 1872.)


allowed to become the victims of a too-ready reliance on the mere
shadows of those qualifications which should alone justify sensible
men in committing themselves to the navigation of a dangerous
ocean.
Lieutenant Gowlland deserves great credit for the manner in
which he conducted his exploration. It was his second voyage
along the N.E. coast, the first having been unsuccessful and
disappointing in its results to our Colonial Astronomers, from
causes beyond the control of any Palinurus or Kepler of modern
times.*
Turning from the gloomy pictures represented in these refer-
ences to the past, let us glance at the prospects presented to
us in relation to the progress now being made in the investigation
of the mineral wealth of the Colonies.
Diamond Field of Bahia.
In my last Address I offered such information as I had obtained
as to the origin of, and search for, diamonds in Brazil, India,
Africa, and Borneo.
As new matter on the subject relating to Brazil and Africa has
been obtained, I would wish, so far as I am enabled, to supplement
what I have previously stated.
After that Address had been circulated beyond the Colony, I
received a letter from an eminent geological explorer in Brazil
(The Rev. C. G. Nicolay,) a communication on the occurrence of
diamonds in the province of Bahia, my former remarks extending
chiefly to the province of Minas Geraes, to the south of Bahia.
Mr. Nicolay was ten years travelling in Brazil, and has collected
a great amount of information respecting the diamond-bearing
rocks in the Chapada of Bahia. An abstract of a paper on the
subject, which had escaped my notice, was published by the British
Association ; and in the valuable account of the “ Geology and
Geography of Brazil,” by Professor Hartt, of Cornell University
published at Boston, in 1870, as part of the Scientific Results of
* In reference to the Expedition to watch the Eclipse of the Sun on 12th
December, 1872.


a Journey in Brazil, by Louis Agassiz and his travelling com-
panions, Mr. Nicolay’s reports are often quoted, and therefore his
accounts come before us with every claim to our reliance on their
accuracy and value.
In resuming a discussion on the subject of the diamond, I am
desirous only of throwing as much light upon it as recent dis-
coveries and investigations afford, especially as, since 1870, the
further development of the diamond fields in Africa has created
fresh excitement, and made it desirable to afford explorers in
Australia the fullest information.
Mr. Nicolay has ascertained certain facts which leave little
doubt that, however the diamond may have been formed, whether
according or not to any of the theories mentioned by me in 1870,
its matrix in Bahia is certainly a sandstone of Tertiary age *
This too is Mr. Hartt’s inference from Mr. Nicolay’s researches.
The sandstone it appears must once have overspread the whole
of the regions in question. It now forms the summits of flat-
topped ranges, which are designated by the word Chapada. In
1755 diamonds were discovered at Jacobina, in another portion of
the same sandstone on the strike of the diamond beds north-east
of St. Isabel do Paraguassu, as will be seen on the tracing which
I have had prepared from a sketch kindly lent to me by Mr.
Nicolay, on which has been shown the line of railway from
Cachoeira to Urubu. This tracing, together with Halfeld’s and
Wagner’s map of Minas Q-eraes (containing the geography of
that province up to 1862, the date of Tchudi’s Memoir), will
show you the course of the Eio Francisco, the great river
bordering the mineral districts of the two provinces named.
You will observe that the river Paraguassu rises in the central
part of a series of Serras, stretching from the Eio de Contas to
the neighbourhood of Pilao Arcado, on the Francisco, and runs
into the Bahia of Todos os Santos, on the Eeconcavo or border of
which, at the sea junction, San Salvador, or the City of Bahia, is
See Appendix (A.)


built. Whether these ranges do or do not form any outliers of
the long ridge of Soaves and Contendas, in Minas Heraes, those
that are depicted in Mr. Nicolay’s map of Bahia may be con-
sidered as partly forming the versed sine of an arc of which the
Paraguassu is the chord of a great segment formed by the lower
course of the Bio Prancisco.
The general strike of the ranges varies from N.W. to N.E.;
and the central portion occupied by the Districto Diamanto is
that which is sometimes known as the Chapada Diamantina.
The diamond region, which is traceable in other parts of the
territory between the great river and the sea, must have a wide
area. The country has not yet been thoroughly explored, and it
is partially covered by dense forests, as in the Mattas do Orobo.
Mr. Hartt confirms Mr. Nicolay’s statement as to the matrix
of the diamond in Bahia. He says, “ From Mr. Nicolay’s report,
as well as from what he has stated to me in conversation, there
can be no doubt that the diamonds of the interior of Bahia occur
in a sandstone bed, forming part of the great sheet which once
overspread the whole country, tying in with the sandstones and
clays of the Jequitinhonha basin ; and this sandstone, as we shall
see from Mr. Allen’s report, is found at Jacobina, at which place,
in 1755, diamonds were first discovered in the province of Bahia.
“ I saw specimens of the diamantiferous rock from the Chapada
in the hands of Mr. Nicolay. It was not Itacolumite, but it
seemed to me to bear a very close resemblance to the sandstone
bed overlying the clays in the Jequitinhonha basin. It also bore
a close resemblance to the tertiary sandstones on the Bahia
Railroad, near Pitanga, where diamonds also occur. The diaman-
tiferous sands I saw in the possession of Dr. de Lacerda, at
Bahia, appeared to have resulted from the disintegration of the
Chapada sandstones.” Mr. Hartt continues : “It is much to be
regretted that the diamond mines of the Chapada Diamantina
have never been critically examined, but I feel convinced that,
from their study, the mystery of the origin of the diamond is to
be solved.” (See Scientific Results hy Ayassiz, p. 307.)


I may add here that the minerals alluded to, in a note to the
above quotation by Mr. Hartt, as having been determined by
M. Damour, were previously referred to in my Address of 1870
(p. 17 and p. 19 of our Transactions), in connection with the
Cudgegong diamonds.
As to the amount of diamonds found up to 1870 in the pro-
vince of Bahia, Hartt tells us that in the Serra do Sincora they
were found over an extent of twenty leagues. “ A very rich
deposit,” he says, “ has been discovered within the last few years
at Sincora, and the city has grown to a large size. The City of
Lenses, the head quarters of a diamond district (to which the
map will show there is a branch railway) is a largo and important
place, and in the vicinity great quantities of diamonds are
washed.”
Castlenau says these diamonds occur amidst the vast detritus
of conglomerates cemented by black paste, and are regular in
shape, with exception of octahedrons. Burton, whose exhaustive
work on the Highlands of Brazil I have only recently perused,
states that at Chique Chique they occur in Itacolumite, but
Hartt marks this as doubtful. He considers the rock to be of
the same character as that of the diggings at the Chapada.
It appears that from 1862 to 1865, notwithstanding an enor-
mous amount of smuggling, there passed through the Custom-
house at Bahia diamonds to the value of 4,505,850 dollars ; and,
according to Burton, one Aveighing carats from the Chapada,
brought 80 contos, or nearly £30,000 sterling. The annual pro-
duction is set down by Hartt as Avorth 3,000,000 dollars.
I may mention here that the railway crosses the diamond
district near Lenses, and that a branch goes up from Bahia to
Alagoinhas, about 40 miles to the north ; so that any persons
from these Colonies who may happen to touch at Bahia may find
easy conveyance in a land that is otherwise very difficult and
inconvenient to traverse.


Mr. Nicolay shows that the principal bottom rocks are Palaeo-
zoic, chiefly gneiss; passing, on the one hand, into porphyry and
granite, and, on the other, into hornblende rock and quartzite.
They are surmounted near the coast by conglomerates and schists,
and in other parts by sandstones, a tertiary conglomerate, or
sandstone, forming the Chapada and other horizontal surfaces
to which that name is given. The general strike is N.N.E. to
S.S.W.
The area includes not only that of his map, hut also some
portion of the province of Piauhy, to which his explorations
extended.
The beds described all cross the province of Bahia.
The Chapada is 200 miles from the western edge of the Lagos
or bay, attaining an elevation of 3,000 feet, and carrying the
diamond workings to the summit.
The sandstones are more transmuted there than near the coast.
In the latter district they are rich in diamonds, but the works
have been abandoned.
In ascending order we have the following geological series: —
1. Primary rocks.
2. Schist.
3. Limestone.
4. Sandstone.
5. Quartzite (an altered rock).
6. Conglomerate.
These are traversed by dykes of trap and chert, with veins
filled in with earth, sand, and clay.
In the Cascalho or diamond beds are found the following
minerals: —
1. Crystals of iron pyrites, derived from quartzites—the
latter without diamonds.
2. Magnetic iron.
3. Oxide of iron (Pedra de ferrd) .


4. Black silica (Pedra defogd).
5. Hyaline quartz {Tingua d'agod). '
6. Hydrophosphate of alumina (Fabras and Cabocles).
7. Schorl (Fejoes or Feijad).
8. Tttria.
The colours of the diamonds are various, changing with the
distinctive localities, but the characteristic colour is green.
According to the published lists and the testimony of Mr,
Hartt and others, the gneissic rocks and older clay slates in
Brazil are of about the same age as the Laurentian formation of
North America, with a probability that some of the mica schists
are of Lower Silurian age. In Bahia province there are also some
dioritic gneiss and syenite.
Itacolumite, of which we have heard on a former occasion, is a
sort of bugbear to geologists; it seems to be, after all, only a
lower Palaeozoic rock.
In Bahia no Devonian rocks have been ascertained, nor is it
certain that carboniferous rocks exist in that province, if, indeed,
at all north of the tropic. But rocks referable to Cretaceous are
common a little south of Bahia (the bay), and are found at
intervals in the provinces to the north. The group at Bahia is
considered to be Neocomian. Of tertiary rocks there is a great
abundance in Bahia, and we have already seen that the diamonds
of that province belong to sandstones of that age.
There is also a vast amount of conglomerated drift, of which
the Cascalho often rests on gneiss, which when bare is found to
be pot-holed. Diamonds are often found in the holes. Mr.
Nicolay considers the Cascalho near the coast to be more silicious
than at the Chapada.
Combining his opinions with Mr. Hartt’s, we must conclude
that the diamond in Bahia does not belong to the Itacolumite,
but to the sandstones of the Chapada, which have lent their
detritus to the Cascalho.


Certainly, then, if there are no carboniferous rocks in Bahia,
the suggestion of Mr, Norman Taylor, referred to by me in 1870,
as to the possibility of the diamonds at Cudgegong resulting from
the carbon derived from such rocks, must go for little. Another
suggestion has been offered, viz., that carbonic acid gas of recent
times has been in requisition. But since Mr. Hartt rejects an
Itacolumite origin all through Brazil, we are driven nearer and
nearer to a tertiary source.
“I do not believe,” he says, “ that the diamond ever occurs in
true Itacolumite in Brazil, but that it is derived from tertiary
sandstones.” Capt. Burton, on the other hand, maintains the
opinion that Itacolumite is a matrix of diamond; and mentions
one sent by him to England imbedded in that rock.
It is probable, therefore, that in Australia, river-drifts, formed
from various deposits, may be the present derivative sources of
supply.
Since the question was first mooted, I have been on the look-
out for fresh localities in addition to those already known. I
can now add to our former scanty list of diamond sites, one near
the Horton River, having examined specimens collected there ;
and another from a portion of the Macquarie River, a long way
above Sutler’s Bar, and only a few miles below Bathurst, from
which spot diamonds were shown to me in that city in April last.
A third locality is near the head of the Eish River, which is, in
fact, the Macquarie ; so, that river is at intervals diamond-bearing
for many miles, as from the neighbourhood of Oberon to Burren-
dong it cannot be less (in crow-fly distance) than 90 miles. These
new sites raise the number of localities in Australia to twelve, of
which two belong to South Australia, and five each to New South
Wales and Victoria.
There may, doubtless, be many more; but of a tertiary sand-
stone, resembling that of Bahia, I have seen nothing in Australia,
where also Itacolumite is not known to exist. Such negative
testimony may not be worth very much, but it has its value not-
withstanding ; it may point to other sources than those yet known.


It may be asked, perchance, what is the use of diamonds if
found in such abundance as in Brazil and Africa ? Would they
not lose their commercial value if they were to become so common
that every person we met should possess a diamond ring ?
Such a condition of things is not likely, though in Brazil and
in the Union of North America many persons of inferior rank
make great displays of them. Looking at a valuable diamond
as always retaining its value, it is a far more convenient means of
transporting property than any other.*
Captain Burton has collected, in his “Notes on the Diamond,”
some interesting commercial facts as to the fluctuations in the
price of diamonds.
“ Castelnau” (11, 315), he says, predicts “ that at the end of
the present century the diamond will be worth only twenty per
cent, of its value in 1800” ; but he adds: —“ I venture to say
that, unless stone can bo manufactured, the reverse will approach
nearer the truth.”
We must not, however, regard the diamond as a mere article of
luxury. It is destined to come into active use when its multiplica-
tion by means of increased searchers for it shall have become a
hundredfold. It is even now employed in difficult engineering
operations. The tunnel through the hard rocks of Mont Cenis —■
one of the marvels of the present age—was greatly advanced by
the use of diamonds used as boring points on properly adjusted
tools, when set in motion by a very simple contrivance. The
originator of this diamond-drill was Monsieur B. Leschot, a civil
engineer of Genova, resident in Paris. His contrivance was first
employed by Prench engineers at Pistoia, in Italy, on the Bologna
Bailway. After the first expense, the renewal of the diamonds
constitutes the whole charge. It is clear, therefore, that not only
is a new method obtained of cutting hard rocks, but means are
found for the utilizing and disposal of a vast amount of small
* See Burton, “ Highlands of Brazil,” vol. 11, p. 149, and generally his
chapter X, from which I borrow a few notes in the Appendix (Bj.


and otherwise useless diamonds, such as constitute the by far
greater product of all diggings.
Afeican Diamond Fields.
Turning now to South Africa, we find that the diamond field
has become wonderfully prolific since 1870. The facts ascertained
up to November, 1871, have been collected by Professor Rupert
Jones, F.G.S., of the Royal Military and Staff Colleges, at
Sandhurst, in a reprint of his own paper in the Geological Mag-
azine for February, 1871, supplemented by fresh details of other
writers, and printed for private circulation only. These details
consist of “ Letters by Mr. Cooper , Government Surveyor, written on
the Diamond Fields, Vaal River," with foot-notes by Prof.
Jones, —of a paper read before the Society of Arts, “ On South
African Diamonds, by Professor Tennant, of King's College,
London ," —of some observations by the latter before the Royal
Geographical Society “ On the Discovery of Diamonds in the Cape
Colony ," —and of an abstract from the Times of the shipments of
diamonds during 1869 and 1870, together with a note from the
Proceedings of the Geological Society on the large size of
diamonds from the Cape, many out of 10,000 examples being
from 30 to 90 carats each.
Since that, he has communicated to the Geological Society,
with additional notes by himself, a paper “ On the Diamond Gravels
of the Vaal River, South Africa, by George W. Stow, Esq.," and
also “ Motes on the Fossils of the Devonian Roclcs of Witzenberg,
Cape Colony
Dr. Hooker also communicated a paper, in 1871, to the same
Society, by Dr. John Shaw, “ On the Geology of the Diamond Fields
of South Africa [See Q. J., Feb., 1872.]
In 1871 also, a pamphlet, with sections, was published at Cape
Town, entitled “ Notes on the Diamond Fields, by E. J. Dunn,"
formerly on the Geological Survey of Victoria,
A little book called the “ Digger's Practical Guide," went into
a second edition at Cape Town, in 1870.


The literature of the subject is, therefore, already considerable.
On this occasion remarks on the subject must be of a very
general character, but the titles given will enable inquirers to
seek information in the works themselves.
It is however satisfactory to myself to be enabled to introduce
here a copy of a note appended to Professor Jones’s paper. “ I
must add, that a great store of useful information about the
diamond and the geology of the diamond fields in Australia,
India, Brazil, and elsewhere, has been brought together by the
Eev. W. B. Clarke, &c., in his Anniversary Address, on May 25,
1870.”
The brief account which was given by me in that Address of
1870 was prepared at a time when the first opening of the
diamond field had been just reported. In the copy published
since, a note is added, making the paper exhaustive up to 18th
November, 1870. In that note is given a statement of the
amount of diamonds then shipped for England. Mr. Jones
differs a little in his abstract returns from the quotation I copied
from the only available source of information in my power. What
appears tolerably certain isthis, —that in 1869 the value of exported
diamonds was £7,405, and up to 29th December, 1870, the
value of such exported diamonds was £124,910 ; making the
produce upon which wharfage was paid, £132,315. Up to Feb-
ruary, 1871, it amounted to £146,765, all from Port Elizabeth
alone, whilst from all ports of South Africa the amount in 1870
was £220,000.
At present the area is limited, but diamonds have been found
on the Yaal Eiver over an extent of 370 miles.
Mr. Dunn says, the first diamond on the Yaal Eiver was found,
after three months preliminary search, on the 7th of January,
1870, and the first diamonds found at Du Toit’s Pan and
Bultfontein were picked out of the mud plaster covering the
walls of an outbuilding in the latter place in 1869.


It seems that the diamonds are now found either on the
surface or at a depth of from 3 to 7 feet, from which depth
all the large ones have been obtained.
At Du Toit’s Pan the most common depth is from 5 to 9 feet;
but diamonds occasionally, and rarely, occur at 30 feet. Some-
times they are broken from concussion, —sometimes with chipped
edges, —and in the river beds are water-worn and unabraded.
The average yield per cubic yard is difficult to assign; but in
one place 35 loads of surface sand yielded fifteen diamonds, of
average weight each 8 carats. Underneath this, a hole 1,280
cubic feet in extent produced nine diamonds, weighing in all
carats.
As affording some distinct idea of the geological character of
the country from Cape Town to Pniel, Mr. Dunn gives the
following order of succession: —
First, 70 miles Lower Silurian rocks ; 35 miles of sandstone —
Devonian or Upper Silurian —nexoer than Table Mountain. (I am
glad, in this statement, he confirms my view of the age of the
rocks about Table Mountain, as they appeared to me in my
exploration of them in 1839). Next, 5 miles of trap conglomerate
or breccia, filled with boulders of granite, gneiss, mica schist,
porphyry, sandstone, jasper, slate, &c. Then 65 miles of slaty
sandstone, with fresh-water and land plants, &c. Next, 115 miles
of lower dicynodon beds, with huge fossil saurians; 210 miles
upper dicynodon beds, full of igneous dykes and beds. These
also are full of fossil saurian and vegetable remains. “On these
are situated our present diamond fields of South Africa.”
It is nevertheless remarkable that, as in Bahia, a gueissic rock
appears to be the base of the diamond region, but it is by no
means clear that it is of the same class as the Brazilian rock.
Professor Jones demonstrates some agreement with what is
known of Bahia, and also some peculiarities of a different kind,
such as sandstone not tertiary, as I believe, underlying the trap
and resting on schists.


Agate gravel is very common, and forms a striking feature in
the upper sources of the Yaal. This has been held by some to
be indicative of diamonds.
My friend Mr. Daiutree, who, I am happy to say, is now
Agent-General in London for Queensland, was unfortunately
wrecked in the “ Queen of the Thames,” on the southern coast
of Africa; but he obtained, on his overland passage to Cape
Town, some local information respecting the structure of the
country, and had an opportunity, on arriving thereat, of inspecting
a good collection of rocks and minerals from the diamond region.
In it he noticed the prevalence of an agate conglomerate from
the drift of the Yaal, which reminded him of a similar conglo-
merate at Agate Creek, on the Gilbert Eiver, which he had been
exploring. This being considered b} r him as an indication of
diamond, he reported his opinion to the Government, and since
then a public reward has been offered for discovery of a diamond
field in Queensland ; and, strange enough, applications have been
made to me by persons anxious to claim that reward, asking me
to point out to them likely places in which to find the gems.
That agates may occur in a diamond field wherein are evidences
of the existence of vesicular traps is far from unlikely ; and
at Louee, not far from Cudgegong, such conglomerate also exists.
But agates are common enough in various places where no
suspicion of diamonds is acknowledged ; for instance, at the
back of Mount Wingen, in this Colony, is a mass of trap in
which agates abound ; so they exist at Kiunoul, near Perth, in
Scotland; at Oberstein, in Germany; and in the rock of the
Giant’s Causeway, in Ireland, as well as in many other parts of
Europe, and in America.
But, as it appears to me, it is an inference not very probable
to deduce from agates, which are a silicious deposit, a connection
with diamond, which is pure carbon, except so far as both may be
found in a district where trap eruptions have occurred. And
Weiss tells us that in Southern Brazil a chain of amygdaloidal
trap is the source of the great quantities of chalcedonies, agates,


carnelians, rock crystals, and amethyst that cover the banks of
Uruguay downwards below the Rio Negro. This amygdaloid has
on its slopes a sandstone, considered tertiary, as young as the
brown coal formation of Europe; but there is no mention by
any one of diamonds in that neighbourhood.
All that can be said with certainty is, that agates, which have
been dispersed by the destruction of amygdaloids in which they
were segregated, are found in Africa, where diamonds occur; but
as yet no diamonds are found amidst the multitudes of agates in
the drift of Uruguay. The drift is evidently due to causes of
posterior date to the age of the rocks to which the diamond has
been referred for its parentage ; and, therefore, in the present
state of the evidence no conclusion can be drawn as to the
positive indication of diamonds, because agates are present.
I may add that, from Dr. Comrie, of H.M.S. “ Dido,” and one
of his brother officers, I have received a small collection of agates,
carnelians, and chalcedonies, from Du Toit’s Pan; these are
mingled with beautifully clear crystals of quartz, opaque quartz,
rounded bits of jasper, spinelle-ruby, &c., all highly polished,
and in no respect differing from drifted mineral of the same kinds
in our New South Wales rivers, where no diamonds have been
found.
I will conclude this subject by reference to what I consider an
interesting fact bearing on a question of human history, which
cannot be further alluded to. In a limestone cave at Cape
Point, Dr. Comrie found, with bones and rude pottery, several flat
stones of hard rocks, and amongst them some rounded perforated
stones, such as are represented in Sir John Lubbock’s edition of
Sven Nilsson’s Primitive Inhabitants of Scandinavia. These
latter appeared to me to have been used as sinkers for fishing .
others consider them as hammers. (Plate I ,figs. 12, 34.)
Now, in Mr. Dunn’s report I find the following : “ There is a
tradition among the Booshmen that in former times their fore-
fathers made journeys to the banks of the Yaal River to procure a
small white stone, with which they bored holes in those perforated


stones used by them to add weight to their digging sticks, one
end of which was inserted in the hole. Possibly the white stones
referred to were diamonds, as the material out of which these
stones were formed is often intensely hard, and holes are drilled
through with great nicety. They (the perforated stones) were
handed down from father to son as heir-looms.” Supposing
these conjectures to be true, then the use of the diamond in
mechanical work dates in Africa long before the time of the
Bologna Railway (see p. and we have a satisfactory reason
assigned for the preservation of worked stones in caverns. But
it is hardly to be supposed that diamonds were used by the
Scandinavians of the “ Stone Age,” in working up their hammers
and other implements.
Gold Fields.
As gold is found generally in the drifts where diamonds occur,
we are naturally led to connect them in our minds.
It will, I hope, be considered not uncalled for if I pass from
one to the other, especially at a time when the subject is so
generally exciting public attention.
It would be needless to repeat here remarks that found their
appropriate place in the paper “ On the Progress of Gold Dis-
covery in Australasia, from 1860 to 1871,” which forms a part of
the work entitled “Industrial Progress of New South Wales.”
Since then, the attack of illness which kept me away from your
meetings during the year 1871 led to a visit to the Western
Mountains, and to an opportunity of inspecting some of the
gold fields previously examined by me, and of others that have
come of late into activity.
Here it may be right to explain that my attention has been
principally directed to gold mining and not so much to gold
digging; and that from the first I confined my studies chiefly to
the occurrence of gold in the matrix, and was the first person in
these Colonies to call attention to the value of quartz ( S.M.H. ,
8 July, 1851). It is upon that occurrence that I founded my
constant expectation of the great harvest of which we are now


reaping the first-fruits. This also has placed my endeavours to
work out the wide field of inquiry on independent examination;
although my deeply lamented friend Sir Eoderick Murchison was
oj>posed to its value, expressing his hope that our population
“ would not be so foolish as to mine in the rock for gold,” alleging
that gold was not found in depth, an opinion which, when
adopted by some leading Professor in a neighbouring Colony, led
to much hindrance in the progress of gold production.
As a rich reef has been recently struck at a depth of 800 feet,
in Victoria, the views of the shallow-reefing theorists will have to
give way.
It was very strange that so talented and practical an authority,
and who so thoroughly understood the value of indications offered
by certain rocks, should have undervalued the working in rock
formations in comparison with alluvial deposits, of which ho
foresaw and foretold the evanescent character.
Now and then we hear of fresh alluvial diggings, such, for
instance, as those at Gulgong, which are in an extension of a
field proclaimed many years since ; but experience has shown
that an increased and increasing resort to the crushing-mill is
influencing the minds of the mining community.
That gold production is on the increase no one can doubt; and
if prospectors will but go out into districts that abound not far
from the vicinity even of gold fields, where no pick or spade has
been employed, new ground will assuredly be found where
“ reefs,” as they are called, meet the eye of the traveller at almost
every turn, and where there is every legitimate reason to infer
that some will be productive.
It is not too much to say that, no sooner are we off the Carbon-
iferous areas rich in coal and its associated minerals, than we are
in a region in which are tracts where gold and copper and lead
abound. And passing from the sedimentary to the plutonic
rocks, we can discover granites which, however barren externally,
are within frequently charged with the valuable ore of tin. So


that the three great geological divisions of our Colony are replete
with mineral treasures that are practically inexhaustible.
It is, perhaps, difficult to assign any strict measurement in
superficial area to the actual amount of land capable of furnishing
present proofs of this, because, as we well know, metals are
local, and not universal; and if they were not, what would
become of our pastoral interests, which, by the blessing of
Providence, are just now in as prosperous a condition as our
minerals are ?
During my last visits to different parts of the Western District,
I not only saw the operations that are going on, but passed over
many miles of country in which the rocks that belong to a golden
area yet remain in their original condition, and will so remain till
some fortunate adventurer stumbles by accident on a tangible
encouragement.
It is not necessary to make special mention of the rich shaft
from which was derived that crown of gold which was the sur-
prise of so many during the late Exhibition of the Agricultural
Society.* Put when the excitement that is now rife shall have
subsided, and we shall have less dread than some exhibit of
spelling speculation without the initial letter, there will be found
inducements to study the structure of the country more than the
market price of its products.
Already miners have begun to realize one of the lessons which
I have endeavoured to inculcate, —that many of the theoretical
views relating to the nature of gold-bearing rocks are only par-
tially reliable.
During my visit to what is oddly enough known as Ophir, I
was very much pleased with an illustration of the way in which
two respectable young men were acting on a principle that
proved they had turned their , former observations to account.
On the Uralla Elver the miners made shafts through the basaltic
# The production of nearly 8,000 ounces (in addition to the previous great
result) in the space of a few months is a wonderful fact, confirmatory of the
value of mining and crushing.


covering, at least 100 feet thick, which concealed the auriferous
deposits overlying granite. At Ophir, where quartziferous soft
slates are overlain by basalt, of about the same thickness, these
enterprising men had driven into the soft slate, and had then
mined upwards from the drive to the bottom of the basalt,
between which and the top of the slate they had found drift and
sand and pebbly cement with gold, proving that in their case, at
least, mining was not an unintelligible guess-work.
Such persons deserve encouragement, and it would gratify me
much if the mention of their undertaking could induce assistance
towards its completion. This is clearly a case in which alluvial
gold is itself procured by ingenuity in mining.
The notion that available gold is only to be found in quartz -
veins running through the lower Silurian rocks must be abandoned.
It was pretended, at one time, that the Californian rocks were
the clue to those rocks in New South Wales that led to the
opening up of the first worked gold field at this very Ophir.
That field is, at any rate, in a Palaeozoic area. And yet we have
the published official statement of the State Greologist of Cali-
fornia, Mr. Whitney, that not a single fossil of Middle or Lower
Palaeozoic age has ever been discovered in California, or anywhere
west of the 116th meridian ; proving that any true geological com-
parison of the two regions must have resulted, at the time, in
disappointment. Again it is doubted by those who have the best
right to doubt, whether any Silurian deposits exist in Queensland.
The gold of Eavenswood, for instance, and Charter’s Towers
also, is all from granite, or deposits of brown ironstone —not only
from quartz in the former, but also from solid granite. The rich
gold field of G-ympie appears to be not^ older than the Carboni-
ferous formation. In New Zealand the wonderfully rich finds on
the Thames occurred in rocks not older than the Trias ; whilst in
California a large portion of the auriferous rocks are as recent as
Trias and Jurassic, and no inconsiderable portion is as recent as
transmuted Cretaceous rocks. The great secret is there, as at
Gympie, in transmutation.
jj o^(~


Such was the effect that produced much of the gold at Hill
End and Tambaroora, as well as elsewhere in the Western districts
of this Colony.
The transmuted rocks at Hawkins’s Hill, in which the lodes
occur, are so much like those that have made G-ympie so cele-
brated that I can see on actual comparison no essential difference,
except that the latter contain fossils which are yet wanting in the
former.
Then, if we look to the lodes themselves, many of them contain
quartz only as an adventitious substance, or as mixed up with
mica, calc spar, and mundic, amongst which the gold is indis-
criminately sprinkled. I pointed out, some time since, to a gen-
tleman engaged in mineral surveys at Hill End, that some of these
lodes, so far from being true quartz-veins are clearly derivative
from the action of a transmuting agency, and have their nearest
resemblance to that variety of mica-trap which the Hermans call
Eraidronite. The casing, which has sometimes been mistaken for
chlorite slate, appears to me to be often the result of the influence
of lime on the materials of the transmuting rock, and is of similar
character to what may be observed on the faces of columns in
quarries of basalt. The slates and shale, which are the main
rocks of the region in question, are, I presume, very much younger
than any true chlorite slates, and are, so far as my experience
goes, not older than Silurian. But no fossils have yet been
detected in them nearer than Louisa Creek and the Meroo. The
Hill End country is occasionally to the westward traversed by
porphyritic and syenitic intrusions. A rock resembling Phonolite
may be traced all through the Tambaroora series exposed in the
old workings of the diggers, and ranging side by side with the
quartz reefs towards the Turon. The trappean schists are, like
those of Q-ympie, charged with carbonate of lime, and effervesce
with acids. An overflow of vesicular basalt crests Bald Hill and
some of its slopes; and at Frederick’s Valley Creek (Ophir) is
strongly developed, covering auriferous deposits over slates of
the same age as those of the country from Hill End to Sofala and


Meroo, whilst on the south of the Turon, granite occupies a
tract some miles in extent. Eventually the whole of this large
tract will be found productive.
At Canoona and Mount Wheeler, in Queensland, the mother
rock is serpentine. At Wentworth, near Orange, the gold was
found in abundance between serpentine and basalt. I can only
express astonishment that no wider area has been taken up in that
district, for there is every reason to suppose that the whole of
Erederick’s Valley is auriferous, and the operations have not been
extended to the hills on the east of the valley.*
The first gold I ever saw in Australia I procured from granite
in 1841, and within the last four months, I have had the opportu-
nity of ascertaining that fine gold is procurable from granite for
several miles in that region.
Bathurst Plains are a wide area of granite, and yet, after rain,
gold may be, and has been, collected from the surface within the
bounds of the city itself.
At the Junction Mine, on the Belubula, the gold is found in
teds of ferruginous reticulated quartz and in the midst of altered
slates, sometimes prismatized, and in decomposed diorite, which
is traversed by hard dykes and diorite bands.
At Brown’s Creek, not far from the granites of Cowriga Creek,
a still more remarkable case occurs, where, I think, there is little
doubt the chief agent has been a hot mineral spring, in conjunction
with diorite eruptions. Such springs have also operated at the
Forest Beefs, —a gold field about midway between the Canobolas
and Mount Lachlan, at the back of Carcoar, in the very heart of
a country occupied by igneous formations. There, and in other
fields along the same auriferous band, following for many miles
# As appears by a letter in the Sydney Herald of June 7, 1872, this expres-
sion of my convictions led to a search for reefs at the head of the valley, as
stated by the writer, Mr. Newman, who thus, in four days time, discovered
auriferous indications of some promise, realizing on the first trials, gold at the
rate of from 112 to 672 ounces per ton.
At Sally’s Flat also, between Sofala and Tambaroora, a reef was opened in a
similar way, and another at Wiagdon Hill, between Sofala and Bathurst.


the direction of the 149th meridian (which in the year 1851 I
pointed out to the Government as deserving of search), inter-
ferences with what has been held by some distinguished geologists
as the normal condition of gold veins may be detected, in which
some of the ordinary trappean rocks exhibit a wonderful decom-
position, and in the detritus of which halloysite, chert, resinite,
and chalcedony, and other minerals which probably point to
springs, occur as veins, though not to the exclusion in the neigh-
bourhood of more ordinary quartz reefs. In all the instances
named, mispickel, marcasite, or common pyrites, sometimes galena
and indications of copper ore, are present, and in many cases the
gold is held in the sulphides of iron. This is especially the case
with the granites, one variety of which on Cox’s Eiver is often
sprinkled with galena.
Persons are often confused when they see auriferous stone
suddenly, as it were, losing the gold and becoming charged with
the sulphides of iron. But it is a fact, established by close
observation, that where these sulphides abound, the gold generally
becomes invisible. That, however, is no sign of its actual dis-
appearance. Nevertheless, the experience of miners in other
countries shows plainly that an excess of pyrites is as unfavourable
to the presence of gold as the absence of it; and “ when either is
too much in excess, the auriferous property of the lode is impover-
ished.” [Treloar. Reports of St. John d’el Rey Company.]
When twenty-one years ago I announced the fact that invisible
gold was oftentimes held in quartz, the late Mr. Stutchbury
appended a note to one of his reports, calling the fact in question
as incomprehensible to him. But it is now almost universally
acknowledged as a fact.
Similarly, persons may doubt the truth of the above statement
relating to the sulphides; yet, on looking through the work on
Brazil, to which I have made so many previous references, I find
Mr. Hartt stating the same fact in relation to auriferous quartz
in Minas Geraes, Brazil. Where the vein rock is rich in sulphides,
the gold is, as a rule, not visible, but intimately mixed with the


rock. This is the case at Morro Yelho. The sulphides consist of
magnetic iron pyrites, which is most abundant, and yields a little
gold ; common pyrites, which is less abundant, and gives more
gold; and mispickel, or arsenical iron pyrites, which is the
principal gold-bearer.
A similar change from gold to the sulphides (holding gold) was
reported to me by the late energetic Giold Commissioner at
Bavenswood, in Queensland, Mr. Hacket, and in fact it is a
universal law from which there is no exemption, even at Hawkins’s
Hill.
Mr. Arthur Phillips also points out the same fact in Brazil.
Mr. Hockin, the director of the Morro Yelho mine, stated to Mr.
Phillips that the composition of the pure ore may be taken at
about 43 per cent, of silica and 57 per cent, of pyritous matter.
Such ore yields by assay from 4to 6 ozs. of gold per ton; and
where crystals of this mineral make their appearance the yield
of the precious metal is large. Cubical pyrites is of more
frequent occurrence, but is far less rich in gold. Solid specimens
of this substance, but slightly mixed with quartz, yield about an
ounce and a half of gold per ton. Magnetic pyrites yields rather
less than 4 dwts. per ton. Bunches of clay slate are often found
in the principal veins, and this rock, by assay, affords from 5 to
7£ dwts. per ton.
“ Quartz without any admixture of sulphides,” he says, “ has
never been found to be auriferous, and it is a remarkable fact
that the smallest speck of gold is rarely seen previous to the
concentration of any of the ore in the mine.”
Mr. Weddell says that the old miners at Gongo Soco once took
out £IOO in three hours —(Hartt, p. 541) —a feat which certainly
beats most of our Australian gold-doings ; though, perhaps, it
did not take even so long to knock to pieces the famous hundred-
weight of 1851. Prom that mine the annual income for three
years was £1,888,416, of which £375,163 was profit. I would
repeat here, that where certain igneous rocks are present, such


as diorite or greenstone, or felspathic elvans, or felstones in
company withpyritous minerals, the conclusion is almost irresistible
that gold will he present also.
Mr. Hartt refutes the generally received idea that the gold
mines of Brazil are exhausted. This is a great mistake. He
says: “ There are still surface deposits of great extent which,
with modern appliances, could be successfully worked. The
underground wealth of the country is almost untouched, and if
the mining public of America knew Brazil better, I am persuaded
that the gold fields of that country would not be neglected by
American capitalists.”
We may re-echo these encouraging words, substituting New
South Wales for Brazil, and British for American capitalists.
In concluding this division of my subject, 1 recommend to all
who wish to become acquainted with Brazil to read Mr. Hartt’s
work, in which will be found quotations from Mr. Nicolay, to
whom he confesses his obligations.
I may add that Mr. Nicolay is at present in Western
Australia, from which Colony I have lately received, collected by
himself, a useful contribution to my cabinet, settling at the same
time the position of a fossiliferous locality of which I was in
doubt.
But I must not omit to state that, in addition to Mr. Hartt’s
work, Captain Burton’s volumes on the Highlands of Brazil
should be consulted. The greatest amount of statistical know-
ledge of all kinds in connection with Minas Geraes is, however,
to be found in the most valuable contribution “ On the Gold
Mines” of that province, contributed by that accurate observer
and expounder, W. J. Henwood, F.R.S., F.G.8., to the eighth
volume of the Transactions of the Geological Society of Cornwall,
published in 1871,—a volume filled by that author’s most clear
and wonderfully elaborate papers on mineral districts in South
America, North America, India, Spain, France, England, Ireland,
and Scotland.


Tin and Coepee,
Tlierc are two other sources of mineral wealth now being
drawn upon, to which it is needful to refer.
In the course of my explorations in 1851-2-3 tin ore was dis-
covered by me in various places, and mentioned in my reports
to the Government.
It had been already named by me as a product of this Colony
so early as 1849 ; and on various occasions since, to the present
time, I have kept up the mention of my discovery of tin in
1851-2-3, with a view of inducing operations for its develop-
ment, and I have every reason to believe this has assisted in the
present search for and working of the ore.
I have introduced some extracts from my Eeports and other
public documents in the Appendix (C), which will justify the
assertion that, notwithstanding the claims of any other person,
the first mention and first discovery of tin , as a product of New
South Wales, were made by myself.
Many of the facts were also specially mentioned in my
Researches in the Southern Gold Fields (p. 128) in 1860. More-
over, I exhibited stream-tin at Paris in 1855.
Tin ore was discovered in Victoria, in March, 1853, the date of
my explorations in the Maclntyre tin districts, but not till 1866
was it wrought as an article of commerce.
The journals of that Colony, between those periods, contain
correspondence and other contributions on the subject; amongst
others, Mr. Milner Stephen wrote about it in 1853, and Mr. Storer,
of the U.S. Navy, in 1854.
At the preliminary display in Sydney of the articles forwarded
to the International Exhibition at Paris, in 1867, four samples of
stream tin, averaging by Mint assay 49 - 625 per cent., and four
bars produced from the same quantities of the ore, were exhibited
by Messrs. Lamb, Morris, E. Hill, and Milson. Stanniferous
sand was also exhibited by Mr. Hill, from the Rocky River.


The present yields of stream and tin ore and matrix tin have
thus grown out of these various introductions of the new industry ;
but in neither Colony is the “ discovery" so “ very recent" as has
been represented.
In the course of a discussion on the letter in which the words
italicized occur, Mr. David Forbes said, at the Geological So-
ciety’s meeting in December, 1871, that he had received specimens
of the granite from the New South “Wales tin region, in the year
1859, and that he found them to be perfectly identical with the
stanniferous granites of Cornwall, Spain, Portugal, Bolivia, Peru,
and Malacca.
I may add that in the gigantic elements of the granite in various
parts of New England, and the association with the tin found in
the granite, of certain minerals, such as molybdenite, wolfram
antimony, and iron of various kinds, and with schist, the identity
is much closer than would appear from the species of the granite
composition themselves.
Some of the largest and longest crystals of quartz and felspar
that were ever seen occur at Oban and Bolivia and in some other
localities.
Mr. E. Gregory has reported to the Queensland Government,
and the account has been forwarded to England, that having
measured 170 miles of creeks and river-beds in that part of
Queensland which touches the northern boundary of New South
Wales, he found, on calculating the value on a fair assumption of
the average amount of stream tin (irrespective of vein or matrix
tin) that it amounted to tMrteen million pounds sterling.
I would remark here, that tin seems subject to a similar law to
that which affects gold. The metal, whether gold or tin, is
generally found in alluvial deposits, richer in quality than in
the matrix, at small depths. As affects gold, this has been
proved in Bolivia, New Granada, Chili, and Russia, as well as in
parts of Australia; and as relates to tin, the statement rests on
the testimony of Mr. Henwood. (0. T. Cornwall, IV, p. 65.)


Geologists at Home have settled it that the stanniferous granites
are Palseozoic, pre-Permian, and post-Silurian.
The stream tin must, of course, be quaternary or recent in its
present position. Tin stone has been found loose in the bed of
the Shoalhaveu, but the actual lode has never been discovered.
In several other localities tin is known to me as having been
found, either as stream tin, or wood tin, in the ordinary gold
drifts with other loose minerals, —indications, as I consider such
instances, of future discoveries in parts of the Colony not yet
searched.
In more than one case the tin reduced fi’om the peroxide,
either by accidental fires, or by miners who did not know what
they were doing, has been found by me. In one instance silver
was stated to me to have been found; but on inquiring on the
spot I was led to the conclusion and reported my conviction that
it was tin which had occasioned the mistake.* Tin ore is, therefore,
far more common in our granite country than has been suspected.
The great granite masses in this Colony are not, probably, all
so richly endowed as some particular spots which are now found
so prolific ; but having seen the greater part of them, I am im-
pressed with the opinion that for centuries to come the industry
now commenced will continue to occupy a prominent position
among the producers of Colonial wealth, just as the mines of
Tenasserim, Merghui, and Malacca have not decreased in value
since the commencement of their working. In Malacca many
of the lodes are horizontal. The average produce of the above-
named mines is from 60 to 80 per cent., and its value is reckoned
at nearly millions per annum.
The Island of Banca has mines, first discovered in 1799, which
some years since supplied an annual amount of 3 millions sterling.
The tin there is associated with iron in veins at the junction of
granite and sandstone.
In all these countries to the north of us the tin is always in
the state of peroxide.
* See my Report of 14th February, 1863.


Tin in Cornwall has been wrought from the time of Augustus,
the Roman Emperor, nor are its supplies yet exhausted. It may,
however, be doubtful whether the produce of Australia will not
have hereafter some effect upon the English market.
Several very curious facts relating to the influence of tin on
the world are mentioned by Mr. Hawkins in the third volume
of the Transactions of the Greological Society of Cornwall, and
in other works referred to by Sir H. de la Beche, in his Report
on Cornwall, Devon, and Somerset (1839). Amongst other
anecdotes respecting the use of tin, it is mentioned that the
London merchants in the beginning of the seventeenth century
advanced money on tin to the Cornish gentry who came to the
metropolis, and by which the tinners were losers. It is not im-
probable that the word “tin,” sometimes used for money, may
have thus obtained currency. There is little novelty in the
affairs of commerce ; and Sydney merchants are now obtaining
profits by tin, as their predecessors in London did in the days of
Queen Elizabeth. The Survey Office leases will, in many cases,
have the same effect as the advances to the Cornish tin men had
two centuries and a half ago. Those will grow rich by tin who
profit by the labours of the working miners, —speculating on
probabilities in lieu of labour.
In the time of Diodorus Siculus the trade in Cornish tin was
with Haul and the Phoenician Colonies in Spain, being carried
overland through France to Marseilles.
In the 6th and 7th centuries Western Europe had the trade,
church bells, and instruments of warfare requiring bronze, of
which tin is an ingredient. Bruges in Flanders was the emporium
in the 13th century. In the 14th, the Levant countries became
consumers.
In the time of King John the mines were farmed from the
Crown by Jews, and after that people were banished in the reign
of Edward I the mines were neglected. Other curious records
of the history of Cornish tin may be found in the writings of
Carew and Borlase.


Copper.
There are certain cases in which tin becomes an indication of
copper. In Cornwall it is found that copper is seldom abundant
in a lode, unless gossan forms the back of the lode ; and oxide of
tin very frequently occurs in the gossan. Formerly many copper
lodes have been worked for tin. Mr. Came, an author well
known among Cornishmen, states that gossan was worked for
tin as recently as 1827. Tin occurs as well as copper in bunches ;
and as much of the copper in New South Wales occurs in
bunches or “blows,” it would be well if some experiments were
made to ascertain whether tin may not occur in onr copper mines.
Copper and tin appear to be as abundant metals here as in
Cornwall; and if any reliance is to be placed on indications,
persons looking for the former in a granite country should search
at the junction of granite and the slates that often adjoin it.
Formerly granite was not considered a likely rock for copper;
but it has been found that, in one of the richest copper lodes in
Cornwall, where the lode left the granite the copper ceased.
A contrary fact relating to granite and gold is shown in Vic-
toria, as I have seen myself. The rich gold reefs of Castlemaine
and Bendigo stop at the junction of the slates and the granite.
Another fact which I have observed is, that copper often occurs
in a wash of inconsiderable value, though deceiving to the eye,
on what is really a gold lode. Such is the case at Kilkivan, in
Queensland, and in other places.
It is a pity we have no public record kept of the peculiarities
observable in the occurrence of our Colonial ores. It would be
very useful hereafter.
I would invite particular attention to the condition of hardness
or of decomposition of our granites and traps; inasmuch as
(especially of late) I have noticed the occurrence of elvans in
soft granite, and gold in decomposed trap, under circumstances
of great interest and importance.


It is remarkable how at this juncture the eastern Colonies of
Australia exhibit, contemporaneously, a great development both
of tin and copper. Surely this, and the revival of our auriferous
wealth (mostly, be it noticed, by mining in the rock) is not with-
out a very significant design on the part of Providence.
Errors in the practical management of these deep-seated trea-
sures, whether by the Giovernment or by the community, may
lead to difficulties of immense importance, bringing with them
corresponding inconveniences to all.
Respecting the development of copper, its appearance has been
made known in great abundance within the last year in the far
western interior, which was generally considered to be a flat
uninteresting desert between the Lachlan, Bogan, and Darling.
Coba, about 90 miles S.E. of Port Bourke, is now a mining
district; and having examined them, I can speak favourably of
the value of its ores. Some gold has been detected in another
quarter nearer the Darling, and iron, which also occurs at Coba,
is found on the New Year’s Range, S.E. of the junction of the
Bogan. Copper is expected also from that Range. The cha-
racter of that then waste country given by Sir T. L. Mitchell —
“ low, bare ridges, scanty vegetation, water very scarce, and vast
level plains”—will shortly deserve to be exchanged for one of a
more valuable kind.
Beyond the Darling, too, in the very region where Captain
Sturt found “an inhospitable desert,” and met with great priva-
tions, copper has since been found and indicated to me by the
excellent and enterprising Commissioner of Crown Lands for the
far distant Albert District, one locality of which is not far from
the vast hill of magnetic iron ore mentioned by Sturt, at Peisse’s
Knob, of which he gives a figure in Central Australia (11., 127),
and another is close to Mount Lyell.
The ranges and veins of metallic ores running N. and S., parallel
with other ranges east and west of them, are either parallel with,
or on the strike of, the great copper and iron mines of the Clon-
curry in Queensland.


The Courtundie and Malia, and the Coonharalba Ranges of the
Barrier will, it is to be presumed, some day furnish their quota
to the general fund of mineral wealth.
Some years since, in compliance with a suggestion of my own,
a search for gold was instituted in the Barrier, but the season
was unfavourable, and it was not successful. I am, nevertheless,
of opinion that there are indications of metallic wealth in that
rocky region which will be hereafter turned to good account.
Recently, copper lodes have been taken up near the head of
the Bogan,—at Buckenba, at Burrawang, and not many miles
from the dividing ridge between the Little River and Lachlan
Waters. Nine years since I examined those lodes, and found
them exhibiting the usual indications of copper as observed in
New South Wales, and I have since been impressed with the
great value of the whole area between Molong, Croker’s Range,
and the head of the Bogan River. On Buckenba Creek gold
also exists in various localities.
Similai’ly we may notice the development of copper to the
south of Bathurst, in the Great Cow Flat Mine, which I visited
two months ago, and which is not far from another mine visited by
me in 1863—and the extension of copper-mining in Queensland
as at Peak Downs, Mount Perry, Rawbelle, and Gladstone—
which are realizing some of the expectations before expressed by
me to this Society in relation to Queensland.
Some excitement has been occasioned by discoveries of a con-
glomerate ore of gold, silver, and copper, near Gympie. It is
ascertained to be very rich. This is not however a solitary case.
In Maneero too there has been found copper alloyed with
antimony ; and I have a specimen from near Bathurst, in which
no less than eighteen ores and other minerals are combined
together. Silver and gold, silver and lead, silver and copper, are
common. But in general such combinations as three or more
are not considered encouraging.
It is time-to conclude. But before Idoso I must not omit a
further allusion to that great Colony.


Expectations in Queensland.
Having been honoured by the confidence of the Grovernment
in- relation to their endeavours to provide for the mineral explo-
ration of that Colony, I may mention, as I do with satisfaction,
that my friend Mr. Daintree, whose name has often been by me
introduced to this Society, and whose wreck in the “ Queen of the
Thames” I have mentioned in a former part of this Address, has
been occupied in bringing before the British public the claims to
the notice of capitalists of that Colony of which he is now the
accredited representative.
On his voyage home with a very large and well-assorted collec-
tion of the rocks, fossils, and minerals of Queensland, these, of
course, went to the bottom. But he lost no time in writing to
me and our friend, the late Professor Thomson, requesting us to
send him for the Exhibition such fossils as we possessed that
would serve his purpose. Such were despatched by each of us.
He had made a sketch map of the Colony, which was supposed
to be lost also; and as this was a desideratum in Queensland, an
application was made to me by one of the Ministers for a copy
of it. But as no copy was left with me, I promised, if time were
allowed, that so far as our personal knowledge went, a substitute
should be produced; and by the aid of Mr. Norman Taylor, in
Melbourne, who saw more of it than Professor Thomson or myself
had seen, a blank map was coloured here, and one of the only
three copies in existence I have exhibited to-night, in order to
point out not only what is going on to the north of us, and what
unpaid geologists have been doing in this Colony, but for the
higher object of showing how very probable it is that, as copper
and tin are now bringing us into parallelism with Cornwall and
Devon, so Queensland offers in a large portion of her eastern area
similar geological resemblances.
It is now considered that there is very little, if any, of the
Silurian formations in Queensland, and therefore all the slaty
country represented on the map is held to be of Devonian age.
The patches marked metamorphic may, however, be transmuted


Silurian. But I confess to have seen no fossils from Queensland
older tlian Devonian or Upper Silurian.
Mr. Daintree has published in England a corrected map, but
when it reaches us I do not believe that there will be detected
many alterations on the Avhole between it and the substitute
which is now exhibited.
In looking at this map it will be seen that the York Peninsula
is not coloured. But the western part along the Gulf is partially
known from Mr. Jardine’s journeys ; the northern portion from
Dr. Rattray’s researches about Cape York (a paper by him
respecting which I formerly read to you), and part of the eastern
coast border is known from Kennedy’s fatal wanderings.
Immediately to the north of the Lynd River of Leichhardt,
there is a tract of country which, at the end of last year, was
traversed by Mr. Hackett, of Lolworth Station, and a party of
explorers, whose private journals have been kindly submitted to
me. And the remaining portion, in which I have long anticipated
an extension of the gold region, is now entrusted by the Govern-
ment to Mr. Norman Taylor, who has, ere this, I believe, set out
on his arduous adventure. We shall, therefore, be shortly able
to complete the filling in of the whole map. On the west part
of the southern part of the Gulf of Carpentaria, some geological
facts of interest are known to me ; and I have sent home
specimens of a Trilobite (also of a Devonian genus), from a
district not included in the present sketch.
I will now, with your leave, quote a passage from Mr. Daintree’s
last letter to me from England. It may be of more use than any
other argument I could devise on its subject:—
“ Queensland Government Offices,
“ 32, Charing Cross, London,
“ 16 March, 1872.
“ I have received instructions from the Queensland Government
to build an Annexe for the forthcoming Exhibition, so am busy
preparing for the adornment and getting a catalogue ready for
the opening day, the Ist May.


“ I have tried to rouse the Australian Colonies, through their
Agents here, to combine and build a permanent Annexe, worthy
of our place in the scale of Nations, but 1 no instructions' is the
universal reply.
“ Oh, for a ‘forty-parson power’ to revive the inert mass of
slumbering politicians in Australia. However, plucky little
Queensland, in the meantime, goes in for an Annexe of her
own. # # # * Where there’s a will there’s a way, and it
shall go hard with me if I do not make it a success.*
“ As soon as those specimens of yours, which are being figured,
are completed, I will send them back.
“ This applies to the Don River series especially.”
OPALS.
My final reference to Queensland will be a mere mention of
the discovery in 1870 of the Precious Opal, of which some speci-
mens were shown in the Exhibition just closed. They have been
collected from a hill in Secondary rock, near the head of Bulla
Creek —a water running to and losing itself in the flat country
south of the Barcoo, and on the dividing ridge separating the
Langlo and Paroo Rivers from the heads of the Hope, Woroolah,
and Gwen Creeks, which flow towards the Barcoo.
The opal is distributed in thin veins and plates through a
brownish and partly calcareous shale (much hardened), and under
conditions that lead mo to suppose it was originated in silicious
waters, probably warm ; and not far from that district there now
occur numerous water cones, or springs, forming a deposit at the
lips of the openings from which they rise. As opal only differs from
ordinary quartz by the presence of water of composition, it is not
strange that the opal should simulate in this instance the mode
of quartz-veins of a certain class. Whether this mineral will
become a profitable affair is at present doubtful ; but it
deserves notice on the present occasion. Two specimens of
# This pledge has been, according to late English journals, well redeemed.
It will, it is hoped, have a good effect on this and the other Colonies.
(August, 1872.)


Precious Opals, found by me at Jutaba, in Maneero, in 1852,
were reported by me at the time, and were shown at Paris in my
collection at the Exhibition in 1855,
I have entered thus fully into the matters discussed, not knowing
whether another, or so good an opportunity will be ever again
afforded me of addressing you on these few of the many topics I
could easily have discovered worthy of your, notice.
CONCLUSION.
The result is this:—
We have now evidence that Eastern Australia is what I have
often stated, one vast field of mineral wealth. Erom north to
south, and from the coast to the 141st meridian, the western
boundary of New South Wales, we know that coal, gold, copper,
tin, and, in many places, lead, and other minerals of less local
importance, are found in abundance.
It is to us, as emigrants from Britain, who are destined to see
a British population and British institutions established in these
Southern regions which have even now less than a century
of history or tradition, that all this wealth has been allotted for a
wise and providential purpose.
May it be the aim and study of ourselves, our fellow-colonists,
and our descendants, to use it aright, as responsible to Him who
has given us this “ good land,” this “ large land,”—“ a land that
the Lord our God careth for.”


APPENDIX.
[,Extracts from the Author's Anniversary Address, 25 May, 1870.]
DISCOVERY OP DIAMONDS IN NEW SOUTH WALES OPINIONS AS
TO THEIR ORIGIN.
Connected with coal plants in transmuted deposits, there has
arisen another enquiry amongst ourselves as to the probable
origin of the Diamond. How has the Diamond been produced,
and to what geological formation does it belong, are questions
which have had various replies. Although we may not be able
to solve the mystery, it may, perchance, be not uninteresting to
review the statements that have been put forth by different
authorities, now the public mind in Australia is excited by
accounts of increasing discoveries of the precious gem in New
South Wales.
It appears that I did not miscalculate, when, in 1860, I headed
a notice of five diamonds that had come into my hands, New
South Wales a Diamond Country (“ Southern Hold Fields,” p. 272) ;
for, up to the present time, several thousands have been brought
to light. In some valuable papers by Mr. Norman Taylor,
and in a report of similar character by Prof. Thomson of our
University, may be found a clear exposition of the phenomena
presented in the diamond field at Two-mile Elat, on the Cudge-
gong Eiver, which these gentlemen have recently explored and
described.*
The opinions expressed by them are to the effect that the
diamond district is limited to the presence of an ancient drift
deposit, covered generally by basaltic rocks, and that when found
in the river bed, or in alluvial soil, the diamonds are frequently
scratched and broken, ivhilst in the drift alluded to they are
found intact. And, at the points where they are thus found in
the river bed, they are so found in consequence of the tailings of
the miners having been washed thereto.
The river having changed its course, the area referred to is
merely an alluvial space at one of those points.
The general formations of more ancient date in the vicinity
are considered to be Upper Silurian, traversed by greenstone,
with overlying Carboniferous beds as outliers of more extended
strata. Mr. Norman Taylor has suggested that the diamonds
* A paper subsequently read before the Royal Society will be found in the
Transactions for 1870.


have been in some way derived from the carbon in the Coal
measures. Opinions a s to the derivation of diamond from vegetable
matter by a process of distillation, somewhat like that to which
coal is due, and even from animal matter capable of supplying
carbon, have been long held by certain philosophers.
Considering the facts glanced at before,* relating to the trans-
mutation of rocks by heat and other agencies, the formation of
diamond in the humid way does not appear to me an extravagant
supposition. But, on examining the sand or deposit in which
the Cudgegong diamonds are found, I was struck with the amount
of minute gems, such as zircon, topaz, sapphire, corundum, spinel,
pleonaste, &c., Avhich compose the finely sifted material in which
gold is also found; and Mr. Norman Taylor dwells on the cir-
cumstance that the diamond is not only associated with the gold
(as in most other foreign localities), but with those gems which
are held to have had an igneous origin, occurring as they do in
rocks which are so denominated ; and in some cases (I may add)
in true lava of modern volcanos.
But before I go further into this question I must digress, in
order to explain that, though diamond is thus associated, on the
Cudgegong and on the Macquarie, as at Suttor’s Bar, yet there
are in my knowledge hundreds of spots throughout the length
and breadth of Australia where the same gems are found in as
great abundance, often of much larger proportions, with or
without gold, and without a trace of the existence of diamond.
I have found them myself in this way in a variety of places in
this and the neighbouring Colonies, in an area which I do not
exaggerate, when I call it a hundred thousand square miles ; and
within the last year I have received thousands of such gems
from correspondents and visitors who have consulted me, without
finding among them more than a few diamonds, and but ten
independent of the present produce from Two-mile Plat and
Suttor’s Bar.
Those ten were found not far from Bingera, and are the first-
fruits of a new locality. They were accompanied by zircon,
larger than any found with diamonds on the Cudgegong, but also
with very small crystallizations of the same mineral and quartz.
The friend to whom I am indebted for the examination of these
diamonds is encouraging a search for more. I may add, that I
have seen no diamond from Cudgegong exactly resembling those
from Bingera.
I have received also two diamonds, said to be found near Kan-
galoon, on the Mittagong Range ; but as many other minerals,
* “On the Transmutation of Rocks in Australasia,” by Rev. W. B.
Clarke, M.A.; ’ read before the Philosophical Society of N.S.W., 10th May,
1865 (T. P. 8., p. 266).


which are probably not indigenous there, have also been forwarded
from the same neighbourhood, I have much hesitation in accepting
the statements made.
A further announcement was made to me in 1870, of diamonds
on the Darling, a few miles from Fort Bourke, but on examining
a large collection of the pebbles consigned to the Commercial
Banking Company as “diamonds” and “precious stones,” I
found that they were all varieties of silica (quartz, jasper, agate,
chalcedony), with small highly polished fragments of fossil wood
and other drift.
Probably no other person has had more experience of this kind
than myself, for I have at times been almost overwhelmed with
applications, personally or in writing, upon the subject. Dr.
Thomson has also had his own experience of similar occupation,
and in many instances is well able to confirm my statement.
One might almost fancy that colonists were going mad in the
search for diamonds ; and yet one digger confessed to me that,
from the labour of six men employed for six years, he had only
obtained three diamonds, which were of small size.
Without wishing, then, to dishearten any diligent man who is,
whilst anxious to serve himself, doing his utmost to develop the
resources of the Country, it is surely only right to warn any who
have only their personal labour and privations to look to, against
embarking*in a search which, to be successful, requires ample
means, union of energies, and machinery.
Moreover, the diamonds hitherto found have been but of little
commercial value ; and as to the other gems, I believe they have
realized scarcely any sale at all. Capital and time and con-
trivances may, however, hereafter meet with a successful find.
Some of the inquirers as to diamonds have deserved a less
encouraging reception than this. It is with no unkind feeling
that I mention (merely to show the speculative character of the
present furore) that, amongst the stones forwarded for examina-
tion have been found pieces of common glass,* portions of
chandeliers or bottle-stoppers, and some of these have been
disguised by grinding and colouring by paint.
With what object persons supposed to hold respectable posi-
tions in life could have condescended to such a device, merely to
give trouble to those who have voluntarily given their time and
experience to oblige them, is difficult to imagine. It seems to
me to be an unworthy reward for wasted patience, and not
unfrequently unreturued postage stamps and other expenses.
# Professor Thomson and myself were often puzzled by finding bits of a
Hue glass in collections of drift, till we traced them to the blue bottles in
which castor oil is sold.


Many times have pebbles of quartz —such as the one rendered
famous by the Townsend imposture —been forwarded, in the
hope that they would be pronounced diamonds; but I am
persuaded, that, save in the Townsend case, there has been no
intention to deceive in that way, and that the senders were
merely under wrong impressions. A real digger has no object in
imposture. Such cannot be said for the glass-grinders, who were
sometimes more transparent than the material they had manipu-
lated.
So much for this episode. Let us now go back to the diamond,
and endeavour to ascertain some particulars relating to its history.
On the Cudgegong there are live principal places where the
mineral is found. They occur at various depths from the sur-
face, greenstone in some instances having caused the formation
of unequal hollows for the collection of drift. The intrusive
rock follows the strike of the older rocks, which is about N,
25° W.
The older drift has been since covered by a basaltic flow, which
in turn has suffered from the denudation that has spread the
drift, so producing a younger drift, to which Mr. Norman Taylor
assigns the term Newer Pliocene in contrast with the older.
This designation is, no doubt, due to his Victorian practice.
The basalt he compares with that of the Coliban River in Victoria,
which from my own personal knowledge of that locality I can
confirm.
The Carboniferous rocks have not furnished much detritus to
the older drifts; but such occurs abundantly in the river bed.
A still more recent wash of drift occurs on the present surface.
Mr. Taylor very properly presents to notice a difficulty which
has been hinted at already.
If the diamonds were derived from the Carboniferous rocks,
why are they not found in the river bed, except where the tailings
of the miners have been washed in? From all the evidence
arrived at, the newer drift is derived from the older, and with
them is associated a cement of quartz and altered rock held by a
yellowish green silicate of iron and hydroxide of iron, from hand
specimens of which I have myself taken gold. Mr. Taylor says
it contains diamonds also.
Many of the pebbles, which are of quartz and very hard flinty
altered rock, have long attracted my attention, on account
of the glaze or polish which they wear. They have exactly
the outward coating which distinguishes so many of the surface
pebbles found in the very heart of the interior of Australia,
traversed by Sturt, M'Kinlay, and Burke and Wills. What may
have been the way in which these pebbles have been polished is
not easy to be discovered. Iron sand, or, better still, perhaps gem
sand, in violent motion, may have been the agent, since we know


granite rocks in sandy deserts are polished by sand-flows far from
water. It has been suggested that the polish arises from the
action of silicated water, as the hollows in the pebbles are as
smooth as the general surface. But they are only in the condition
of the greatest part of the surface drift all over the interior of
New Holland. Unless therefore we assume that a flood of
silicated water has covered the greater part of New Holland we
cannot so explain the phenomenon.* If, on the other hand, the
gems and the iron belong to the basaltic rocks, and if these are
younger than the cement, such an explanation can only be
accepted in connection with a much more distant origin for the
pebbles than any local strata. The older drift therefore cannot
have a local origin.
It is certain, moreover, that if the other gems have been
derived from basaltic rocks, and not from the greenstone, of
which there is no evidence, the basalt was of an older period than
that which now covers the drift, and such older basalt is not
traceable. All therefore favours the belief that the term drift,
implying a driving of material from a distance, is a correct term
to apply to the diamond-bearing deposits; but a question of
another kind immediately suggests itself : Was the motive power
of this drift, and of necessity of the gold drifts, Jluviatile or
glacial ? A marine accumulation is not suggested ; and no fossil
remains, favouring such a solution of the question, have been
found. Silicified wood of the Carboniferous age occurs abund-
antly in the drift; but it must have been silicified long before
any diamond could have been formed from the carbon which the
original wood contained, unless diamonds claim an antiquity as
high as that of the coal measures themselves, or even one higher
than theirs. In that case they must also be drifted, as well as
the minerals and rocks that are associated Avith them.
This may be the final result of our inquiries, but there are
many who (as Mr. Taylor does) think the diamond is a product of
* On comparing some specimens of cetacean remains and teeth of Carchar-
odon, brought more than forty years ago from the beach at Felixstow, in the
County of Suffolk (which fossils are certainly older than those in the crag
cliffs above, and appear not to have fallen but to have been drifted up from a
probably miocene submarine bed to the eastward), I recognize the identical
kind and degree of polish on these tertiary relics as distinguishes the Cudge-
gong pebbles. This, at any rate, is an interesting fact, and may have some
bearing on geological inferences beyond the present use of it. In the super-
ficial local drift above the ferruginous sandstone beds about Sydney are
numerous polished pebbles and fragments of the rock, which exhibit an
oxidized surface, but the polish in that case is probably due to very different
agency to that of a deposit upon the pebbles, which is the theory of those who
regard the Cudgegong pebbles as coated by an infiltration of silica. The
miocene fossils on Felixstow Beach have, in the presence of iron, more relation
to the Sydney fragments than to the drift pebbles of Cudgegong and the
interior—but there, for the present, the comparison rests.


chemical forces now in operation, and therefore it is a strictly
local and limited product, not necessarily connected with any
Carboniferous beds of comparatively high antiquity. As magnesite
exists in the vicinity, and that is certainly a recent product,
arising from the decomposition of the exposed igneous rocks, so
infiltration, decomposition, and reconstruction of carbonaceous
materials, of whatever age, under the influence of chemical trans-
formation, may be producing diamonds at this moment, wherever
the needful conditions exist.
An author of some distinction, M. Favre, Professor of Geology
at Geneva, has turned his attention to this very subject, and as
his paper on “ Artificial Minerals” may not be generally known, I
will refer to it. [lt is to be found in the Bulletin of the “ Societe
Oeologique de France ,” vol. xiii., 2nd series.] He therein
reviews the experiments which, up to 1855, had been made in the
production of artificial diamonds, and refers to the experiments
of M. Jaquelain, who had procured from the diamond a carbon-
aceous matter having the aspect of coke, and those of M. Despretz,
who had proved that melted carbon and melted diamond are
nothing but graphite. This is akin to the idea of Glocker, of
Breslau, and of others before him, that diamond is an altered
coal. Petzholdt also found in different diamonds—especially the
brown —traces of similar organization to that of silicified vegetable
matter; but Dufrenoy rejects the opinion of Liebeg, that they
can have a vegetable origin.
M. Favre shows that, of thirty-four minerals found with diamond
(according to the catalogue of M. Denis), consisting of sulphurets,
carbonates, oxides, silicates, and native metals, thirty have been
artificially produced; and of the thirty, twenty-nine were produced
by the aid of volatile chlorides.
If this be the case, though one of the conditions is heat, the
argument as to an igneous origin for diamond, because it is found
in association with minerals of igneous origin, must be abandoned
or modified.
Ten years later, Professor Goppert, in his work “On the
Organic Nature of the Diamond,” pointed out, as Jacquclain had
done, that it may be turned into coke. He says, that some must
have been soft, as they are superficially impressed by sand and
crystals; that others contain crystals of other minerals, germs
of plants, and fragments of vegetation. Hence, it would certainly
appear that the origin of such diamonds cannot have been
igneous, and, I may add, assuredly not more so than those granitic
rocks I have already mentioned, that contain coal-measure plants.
He states further, in 1868, that he had a diamond which contained
dendrites , such as occurs on minerals of various origin ; that there
are at Berlin one which contains bodies resembling Protococcus
pluvialis, and another green corpuscles linked together, closely


resembling Palmogleea macrococca. To these supposed algre the
names have been given of P. adamantinus and Falmogleites
adamantinus. As illustrating the views he takes of these diamonds,
he says, the metamorphic rocks in which they occur also contain
evidences of vegetable fossils, such as JEozoon canadense; and that
even in some topazes there are traces of organic substances.
A very interesting lecture was delivered by Dr. Percy, on
Chemical Geology , on 12th December, 1863, before the School of
Mines, in which he treats of the formation of Silicaof “ that
glorious mineral Corundum ;” of Spinel, and of other gem-stones ;
showing the influence of water, moderate heat, and salts of
chromium, and he then adds: “ The diamond will come ultimately,
no doubt.” There is nothing to show that an igneous origin is
attributed to them.
As an item in this inquiry, we may refer to a notice in Silliman's
American Journal (VI., 110), 1848, by Professors E. and "W. B.
Rogers, referring to a previous paper, on “A new method of
determining the Carbon in Graphite” (Y. 392), in which the
authors show that “ the diamond may be converted into carbonic
acid in the liquid way, and at a moderate heat, by the re-action
of a mixture of bi-chromate of potassa and sulphuric acid ; in
other words, by the oxydating power of chromic acid.” The
method is much the same as in the process of oxydating graphite.
By this method they obtained from half a grain of diamond an
evolution of as much carbon as was nearly equal to what was
due to the entire weight of the diamond.
On the other hand, Sir J. Herschel (Physical Geography)
quotes the case of a Bahia diamond, mentioned by Harting, which
contained well-formed filaments of iron pyrites, and he infers
from the combination of iron and carbon at high temperatures
the possibility of an igneous origin for diamond.
A paper by Messrs. Sorby and Baker was read in 1869, before
the Royal Society of London, on the structure of certain minerals,
among them ruby, sapphire, and diamond, showing that these
gems contain cavities entirely or partially filled with a liquid,
probably condensed carbonic acid, as well as with crystals—that
some emeralds contain a strong saline solution with cubic crystals,
probably of chloride of potassium, and that the black specks in
diamonds (such e.g., as those seen in our Cudgegong mineral)
are really crystals, which are sometimes surrounded by contrac-
tion cracks, a black cross appearing under polarized light. The
authors conclude that the diamond does not afford positive
evidence of a high temperature, though not opposed to it.
That its structure has great peculiarities has been shown by
the changes produced in a yellow diamond by heat. This stone
was exhibited by M. Eremy to the Academic des Sciences at


Paris in 1866, when it was seen to become rose-coloured by the
application of heat, returning to its proper tint on cooling. It
is said to be the first instance of such a phenomenon. But, on
turning to the 7th Report of the British Association, it will be
seen. that, in 1837, Sir David Brewster pointed out that the
diamond possesses strata of different refractive powers; and he
uses this as a strong argument for its vegetable origin—the
changes of refraction, and, consequently, the density in parts
and hardness in the same crystal, being due to the action of the
gases imprisoned in an expansive mass.
If we now consider the relations of the diamond to the rocks
in which it is found, we shall see how great or how little is the
dependence upon them for its origin.
A statement was made in “ Nature,” February, 1870, p. 363,
respecting the finding of a diamond in granite in the neighbour-
hood of Prague. It is described as exceeding in hardness the
Brazilian diamonds. It was suggested to be Zircon, but this
Dlaschkowitz stone appears to be a veritable diamond. Its
occurrence in granite was also mentioned in the Chemical Journal.
The statement came from Professor Schafarik, who sent it to the
Bohemian paper Folitik. On such authority it was received,
but not believed as authentic.
It was not till I found mention of it in an Italian publication
that I discovered the mistake that had been committed. In a
notice, under the head “Scoperta di Diamanti in Foemia,” in No.
6 of the Bollettino of the lie ale Comitato Geologico d' Italia, pub-
lished in June, 1870, p. 175, we read “ Pecesi questa scoperta sul
finire dello scorso anno nelle vicinanze di Dlazkovic, villaggio
posto tra Bilin e Lobositz, in Boemia, dove existe un giacimento
di sabbie Qranatifere lavorate per T estrazione dei piropi, varieta
di granato di uu bel color rosso. Commista al prodotto della
lavatura di queste sabbie, rimarcossi dai lavoratori una piccola
pietra sconosciuta, durissima, e di color giallo-verdastro, che sot-
toposta ad esame si riconobbe essere un piccolissimo diamante
del peso di 57 milligrammi ed in forma di esaedro a spigoli ro-
tundati. I)opo di quest’ epoca altri diamanti di simil fatta si ri-
trovarono, benche assai di rado in quelle sahbiegranatifere. Quan-
tunque sia questa scoperta di ben poca importanza, pure crediamo
bene di segnalarla, essendo indubbiamente questo il prime
giacimento diamantifero che in Europa siasi trovato."
From this we learn that these diamonds were not found in
granite but in a garnetiferous sand, which is a new fact for Europe,
but not for the supposed origin of diamond in a plutonic rock. I
have quoted the original words, to prevent mistakes as to the
meaning.


Diamonds in Brazil.
Brazil seems naturally to claim our first attention. It has
been found that in a certain Brazilian rock called Itacolumite,
diamonds have been found in situ, and therefore all diamonds
are assumed to have been derived in a similar way, wherever a
rock imagined to be Itacolumite exists.
In 1846, Professor Shepherd, of South Carolina (A. S. J, 11.,
253), announced the extensive development of the rock in that
State, and he gives a figure and description of a diamond from
gold washings in that formation.
In Brazil, however, they occur in great numbers in the lower
Itacolumite beds.
According to Humboldt this rock belongs to the very oldest
sedimentary deposits.
So far as my own observation has gone this rock does not occur
in New South Wales, and even in Brazil, as I will show, diamonds
are not confined to it. My friend Mr. Ulrich, late of the Victo-
rian Survey, says the same of the sister Colony, and assures me
he had very good opportunities of satisfying himself by examin-
ing the Brazilian specimens at the last International Exhibition at
Paris. Humboldt (JEssai Geognostique, Paris, 1820, p. 89,)
includes Itacolumite in the quartz rock series parallel with his
primitive clay slate.
Von Cotta places it among the crystalline schists, and
describes it as a fine-grained micaceous talcose or chloritic schist,
sometimes flexible, holding occasional quartz pebbles with magnetic
iron and gold, as well as diamond. According to Eschwege, it
passes into Itabirite, which belongs to the Bed Hsematitic group.
Other writers include it with “ micha schist,” “ quartz of the
mica slate,” and “ elastic sandstone.” Heusser and Claraz con-
sider it a “ granular quartz,” sometimes bearing quartz-veins with
pyrophillite lime ; others consider it an iron schist.
Eschwege says it attains in Brazil a thickness of many thousand
feet, ranging for hundreds of miles.
The North Carolina species lies between limestone and clay
slate. It is said that it occurs in Portugal, Spain, and on the
Shine ; but this is doubtful. On the whole, it may be held to be
a transmuted sedimentary rock —a friable quartz or sandstone.
M. Damour (Bull. S. G. de France, xm, 2nd ser., p. 543)
mentions the occurrence in Brazil of diamond-bearing sand, near
Bahia, containing numerous minerals and ores, and states that
the diamonds often contain spangles of gold in their cavities.
He enumerates thirty-two mineral species,—among them very
minute rhombohedral dodecahedrons of garnet of a topaz yellow
colour; a similar occurrence to that of Two-mile Elat, noticed
by Mr. Norman Taylor, where brown garnets of the same form
occur.


M. Damour suggests, in relation to the statements of M. Favre
(referred to above), that the occurrence of the same minerals
with diamond in different countries would throw some light on
the formation. I may add that this is the principal reason which
induces me now to enter so fully into this discussion.
Mr. Taylor instances as many varieties as M. Damour; hut
the so called gems in the list given by the latter are confined to
quartz, zircon, garnet, and tourmaline; ruby, sapphire, and
corundum being absent, and euclase having been since added.
The metals seem to predominate.
There is, according to M. Claussen, another solid matrix
of diamond in Brazil, which he calls Itacolumite sandstone (a
secondary red sandstone), which overlies the crystalline beds,
and once had an enormous development; to its denudation he
attributes a considerable portion of the materials forming the
mixed erratic diamond-bearing deposits ; but in this he finds
neither gold nor platinum. M. d’Archiac gives a very clear
abstract of Claussen’s remarks in his Progres de Geoloqie (u,
379-383).
In the province of Matto Grosso, at the water-parting of the
basins of the Amazon and Parana Kivers, a little south of 14° S.
latitude, and at an elevation of some 1,200 feet above the sea, is
the diamond field of the Sierra Diamantina.
But the most important field, in a geological if not commercial
view, is that which, ranging at a distance full 900 miles S.E. of
the former, stretches through the province of Minas Geraes,
between 16° and 26° S. latitude, and even comes down to the coast
at San Joao do Barro, where, in 1850, a chance washing of the
underlying schist disclosed the presence of many diamonds. The
deposit is not confined to the beds of rivers or ravines, but covers
the slopes and tops of the hills. This deposit ceases exactly at
the boundary of the bituminous beds of the coal measures of St.
Catherine.
Is this, then, I would ask, any indication of the origin of
diamond in carboniferous rocks ? If so, ought not those rocks
to contain diamond ?
In the north part of Minas Geraes, Jurassic calcareous forma-
tions cover the red sandstone, and these are in turn subordinate
to gypseous marls and rock salt. Yet, in the ravines, cut down
to the sandstone, through the overlying beds, diamonds are
found, i.e., above the Carboniferous formation.
Moreover, in 1839, diamonds were discovered in the Psammite
of Serro de Santo-Antonio de Grammagoa imbedded in the rock,
whereas in the preceding Itacolumite sandstone they occur
between the plates of mica, just as garnets occur in mica-schist.
The edges of these are rounded , whilst in the Psammite the
angles are uninjured, proving that the transmutation of the


sandstone into Itacolumite has also affected the diamond crystal-
lisation. For a long period the red Psammite and the secondary
Itacolumite sandstone have been regarded as the sole matrices
of diamond, whence it has- been derived by the detrital erratic
deposits; but since then it has been found in the true Itacol-
umite, subordinate to the talc schists with quartz.
The diamonds in the derived deposits are more numerous the
nearer the deposits are to the solid rocks.
The detrital beds are classified according to their character.
Thus Gh'oupiao'a is a drift not due to the present system of
drainages. Burgalho or Gurgalho consists of superficial frag-
ments of underlying rock. The decomposed schist of the latter
is called Barro. A sandy mass between these is spoken of
as Terra. Another bed of granular Itacolumite is known as
Bizarro ; but all belong to the decomposed rocks.
Cascalho represents the sand, clay, and pebbles in the beds of
rivers, torrents, lakes, and of the hollows in their courses through
the solid rocks. Taho-canga or Tapahan-canga is what we call in
Australia cement.
The Cascalho of the old watercourses goes by the name of Gui-
para; that at the heads of rivers, Tahuleira; and the partly
rounded pebbles of the present streams are denominated Corrida.
The assemblage of all the minerals associated with the diamond
is, according to Heusser and Claraz, from Avhom the last four
terms are taken, called “ the formation .”
We learn further from these authors that though diamond
belongs undoubtedly in Brazil to Itacolumite and Metamorphic
schist, yet it is not so necessarily ; for the Itacolumite mountains
do not always contain diamond, and in that of Itacolumi itself
none are found.
The minerals seem to follow a choice as to their matrix and
associations. Thus anatase occurs with sub-oxide of iron—
rutile and brookite. Euclase is found with topaz, in a whitish
clay of decomposed rock.
Specular iron ore, rutile, black tourmaline, hyaline and smoky
quartz are associated. Topaz (sometimes “rotten”) is abundant,
but is no longer, in comparison with euclase, an object of search.
Ores of tellurium, as well as sulphur, occur in some localities.
In the crystalline schists, crystals of lime, arragonite, magnetic
iron pyrites, copper pyrites, manganese ores, and chromate of
lead are met with. Scorodite and pseudomorphs of the same
also occur in the schists and in the “ tapahan-canga .” Amethyst is
found in veins in schists and gneiss, whilst chrysolite, cymophane,
and green tourmaline collect in the Cascalho of the crystalline
schist rivers.


Mr. Heuland, in 1823, exhibited to the Geological Society of
London ( Transactions , Second Series 1, p. 119) a diamond in
Cascalho surrounded by scorodite (a cupreous arseniate of iron),
which I do not see in M. Damour’s Jjsts, but which was found
by Eschwege ; and Dana says it encrusts quartz and beryl, and
is found in Victoria with gold and arseno-pyrites. Of the latter
mineral Mr. Ulrich gives three localities. It has not yet been
found on the Cudgegong. But Schorl rock does occur there,
and in the sands of Bahia, at Diamantina, in Minas Geraes ; and
this mineral, there called Feijao, as well as hydrophosphate of
alumina, is considered an indication of diamond.
It is stated by Mawe ( Travels in Brazil ) that the mines of
% Cerro-do-Trio annually produced, between 1801 and 1806, to the
' amount oi from 20,000 to 25,000 carats, and that the -weight of
those sent to the Treasury in Eio Janeiro was 115,675 carats.
As an encouragement to diamond seekers in this Colony may be
mentioned that numbers of the Brazilian crystals are so small
that four or five make only a grain, so that it takes sometimes
seventeen to twenty to weigh a carat. There are rarely in the
course of the year more than two or three of the latter weight,
and it takes two years to find one of 30 carats ; so that when a
1 4 / ne g ro workman found one of 17f carats, called an octavo, he was
crowned with flowers, conducted in triumph to the manager, fresh
' clad, and set at liberty. This is reported by Malte Bruu ( Precis
in. p. 293). Dr. Thompson has ascertained that up to 12th
January, 1870, 9-10ths of the diamonds at the Two-mile Elat
weighed less than a carat, and that 497 together weighed 120
carats; but as they were different in size, the average is assumed
at one carat each, the largest being If carat. One, however,
had been found weighing 5f carats.
These facts are interesting as correlating, so far as is known,
the prospects of this Colony and those of Brazil.
To prevent reference to it hereafter, I may mention now that a
new and valuable work on precious stones (“ Handhuch der
Fdelstein"') was published in Vienna last year by Dr. Albrecht
Schrauf. I find a notice of it in the Quarterly Jov/rnal of Science, for
January, 1870. In it is given a formula for calculating the value
of diamonds, which tested by the price actually paid for the Sancy
stone (£20,000), taking the weight at 53 carats, and the price of
the first carat at £l5, and which is near to the theoretical result
(£21,862 10s. Od.), appears to be tolerably correct. It is this :
—(m +2) a~ value,
2
where m is the number of carats, and a the value of one.
I have already noticed some of the facts stated by Messrs.
Heusser and Claraz.


There are one or two others which may be quoted by way of
relieving the dryness of these details. But I would mention
that much compact information is given by these authors, in
relation to their physical and geological researches in the interior
of Brazil, in Dr. Petermann’s Mittheilungen (1859, Heft, xi.)
The substance of the previous and following quotation are taken
from a paper read before the Geological Society of Berlin.
Herodotus, we remember, tells (111., 102) a ridiculous story,
repeated by authors as late as the sixteenth century, of gold
being brought up by ants as big as dogs that guarded it when
obtained, and pursued the man that took it from them ; but
Messrs. Heusser and Claraz tell a far more probable story of
diamonds having been found among the little pebbles with which
some “worm-like insects” cover their tubular coverings—a fact
quite paralleled by the phryganea of Auvergne, which covered
their indusiae with the shells of Bulimus atomus or a small Palu-
dina, forming strata which cover nearly 800 square miles, and are
from eight to ten feet thick 1 . ( Scrape , Central France, p. 11.)
There is, however, another statement of even greater interest.
In the Cascalho are found fragments of quartz shaped like an
anvil. These were used as earrings by the ancient inhabitants of
Brazil. One of these ornaments was found in Cascalho that had
never been disturbed, in a dry watercourse, covered by 18 feet of
vegetable soil, on which many fine palm trees were growing.
Arrow-heads and bones were also found with it. This Cascalho
must, therefore, be comparatively recent, or the race to whom
such implements belonged must have been very ancient.
According to M. Hockeder the first diamond in Minas Geraes
was discovered in the year 1827. But I believe Brazil w r as known
to possess diamond just a century before. The effect was much
like that which takes place in Australia when a new lead is
discovered. The gold workings were all deserted by what is
called here “ a rush,” and the greatest excitement followed. Mr.
Hockeder’s memoir, though now little known, made also a stir at
the time. \JJeber des Vorkom/men der diamantem .] There are
other documents referred to in the Bull: Soc. Oe'ol. de France.
(xiv. 232; i. 19 ; ii. 659.)
Further particulars relating to the diamond beds of Brazil may
be found in a paper by M. Pissis in the journal just cited (Tom.
xiii.)
One passage seems to bear upon certain facts observable in
Australia. He says, “to these stratified rocks we must add
compact diorites, which show themselves abundantly distributed
on the surface, sometimes forming long lines of hills, sometimes
simple mamelons in which the matter appears to have been poured
out in the manner of basalts, producing long sheets which cover
the last beds of the limestones, whether silicious or schistose.”


He then goes on to speak of the sandstones which underlie the
limestones, and which are to be regarded as the true matrix of
the diamond. “ Thus, of all the rivers of the province of St.
Paul, those only which flow over the sandstones are diamond-
bearing.” And instancing the Eio Guarahi, he says it leaps over
the escarpment, where it forms several cataracts, cutting through
the various beds of sandstones and psammites, and it is only
below the cascades that you begin to find diamonds, a similar
remark to that of M. Claussen in relation to the coal measures.
Other facts worthy of mention may occur in Captain Burton’s
work on the “ Highlands of Brazil ,” but as I have never yet seen
a copy of that work I have not referred to it.
Diamonds in India.
We may now turn to another quarter. India was renowned
as a diamond country long before Brazil ; Tavernier mentions
diamonds in 1642.
In 1814, Dr. Heyne published some tracts on India, in which
he described the diamond mines of Southern India, showing that
a conglomerate caps the Cuddapah Hills; and he adds, wherever
diamonds are found they are in alluvia and recent deposits in
which the rounded pebbles are so numerous as to produce the
conglomerate character.
In 1832, Mr. Cullinger published in a Calcutta periodical—
“ Gleanings in Science”—some notes on the geology of the
country between Saugor and Mirzapore, in which he mentions
the occurrence of diamonds in solid sandstone underlying chlorite
slate, and also in a ferruginous agglomerate, of which he gives
several localities.
Mr. Newbold, in a paper that may be found in the Athenceum of
11th of June, 1843, has described the diamond-bearing gravel of
Cuddapah, in Bundelcund, a little south of Golconda.
It holds rounded pebbles of trap, granite, schists derived from
beds twenty to forty miles distant, quartz, jasper, silex, sandstone,
and limestone of the vicinity. In it are broken or rolled
diamonds ; and as the diamond beds are occasionally covered by
Begur, or black cotton soil (which is also not uncommon in
Australia), I consider they are of the same age as the older
drift of the Cudgegong. But when these materials arc cemented
at the upper part by Kunhur, which is a tufaceous carbonate of
lime (very common in some parts of Australia), diamonds are
never found. In the Nizam’s territory such cemented beds
contain bones of the Mastodon.
In the fifth volume of the second series of “ Transactions of the
Geological Society of London ” is a valuable memoir “On the
fossils of the Eastern portion of the great Basaltic district of
India,” by the late Mr. Malcomson, which was read in November


and December, 1887. In it be alludes to the Cuddapah diamond
mines, in the neighbourhood of which is abundance of basalt.
He gives also a sketch of the position of the diamond sandstone
of Bangnapilly, which is horizontal, vertically jointed, resting on
schistose beds, underlain by stratified limestone, and surmounted
by a diamond-bearing breccia, Avhich is not interstratified, but is
a mixture of sandstone and other rocks, rounded and angular.
On the opposite side of the valley, according to Colonel Cullen,
the sandstone is replaced by a sharp ridge of trap, and on the
descent the schist and limestone were found to be capped by a
quartzose sandstone. Besides the diamond conglomerate, seams
of rock crystal occur, and fine white quartz charged with galena
and with specular, micaceous, and pyritous iron. The slates are
occasionally flinty or jaspideous. The base of the whole is the
granite of the Carnatic, and this rock is penetrated by many
dykes of greenstone. In the diamond sandstone, magnetic iron
and corundum are met with. The fossils in the argillaceous
limestone are of fresh water origin.
Mr. Malcomson opposes the idea of Major Franklin, that the
diamond rocks belong to the saliferous deposits of England. In
this part of Bundelcund, greenstone follows the strike of the
so-called grauwacke in the bed of the Nerbudda River, and
basalt forms the overlying strata, another analogy with the
Cudgegong diamond district.
Mr. Broderip considered the rocks to be Jurassic, and scarcely
distinguishable from the white Lias of Bath,
As to the saliferous beds, Mr. Malcomson says, there is not a
rock formation in India from granite to recent alluvium in which
salt does not exist; and he further states, that the sandstone,
covering 800 miles of latitude and 400 of longitude, is everywhere
above the limestone which Captain Franklin calls lias.
In 1853, Mr. Carter, in his “Summary of the Geology of
India” (Bombay Asiat. Soc., 1854), also adopts the view that
these Bundelcund diamond rocks are Jurassic.
D’Archiac ( Progres , vii., 644) repeats Carter’s statements,
and puts the diamond-bearing conglomerate with a note of
interrogation above ibhe Punnah sandstone, and much above the
Carbonaceous shales of Kuttra.
I would here wish to remark that these beds must be
distinguished from those which hold Glossopteris , and which
paralleled with the African Karoo beds, Mr. Tate (Q. J. XXIII.)
in 1867, considered Triassic, whilst Dr. Oldham, the experienced
and able Superintendent of the Geological Survey of India,
agrees with me in assigning them to a Palaeozoic epoch.
But inasmuch as coal may exist in the J urassic or Triassic, as
well as Upper Pateozoic formations, the proximity of a coaL


bearing formation to tbe diamond rock leaves the question as to
the origin of diamond in such a formation just where it was.
Since the establishment of the Indian Survey, under its present
enlightened Superintendent, the Messrs. Blandford and Mr.
Theobald have explored large tracts of India, and have given their
opinion, in which Dr. Oldham concurs, that the Nagpur, Damoodah,
and Talcheer, as well as other Bengal coal-fields, cannot be
younger than Permian. {Mem. Ind. Surv., i., 82.) These beds
in the Damoodah group hold many species identical with those
of our New South Wales coal districts, including the outlying
patches on the Cudgegong.
The Indian surveyors show that the Mahadeva sandstone (or
Bangnapilly rock) surmounts the Damoodah beds, believed to be
Permian, and that the Talcheer group, which underlies them,
rest on gneiss, hornblendic gneiss, schist, and quartz schist; and
in the Mahanuddi Eiver, to the southward of the Talcheer coal-
field, which runs through the basic formations, a small amount of
diamonds has been found. Where the Talcheer beds meet the horn-
blendic rocks by a fault on the Takiria Eiver and the Ouli which
flows to it from the Mahadeva rocks, gold is occasionally found.
North of this region the great Yindhyan rocks stretch across
the country north-north-easterly, being the upper of three
groups resting on gneiss and granite. These are described in
the second volume of the “ Memoirs of the Survey,” by Professor
H. B. Medlicott; and both he and Dr. Oldham give good reasons
for placing the Yindhyan series in connection with the Damoodah,
or Coal measures of the Talcheer field, and therefore they are far
removed from the Bangnapilly beds, belonging to the Mahadeva
group to the southward.
Mr. Medlicott shows that the diamond beds are not all of one
age, and instances the mines at Punnah, 600 or 700 miles north
of Cuddapah, which he places close to the junction of the lower
and middle groups of the Yindhyan series, at the northern edge
of the Eewah tableland, in the shales, to which latter group they
belong. This at once places them far below any possible Jurassic
or even Triassic strata.
The Punnah diamond diggings occupy not- more than twenty
acres. The diamonds are found in a conglomerate belonging to
relics of old spurs and outliers of the tableland. Fine grits
among red and green shales, and a few beds of sandstone, consti-
tute the strata.
At Kumerea (another field) the diamond bed is in an incoherent
ferruginous sandy earth of variable thickness and undecided
position. To the east it is modified, and near Bridjepur it consists
of 2 feet of conglomeratic sandstone, resting on strong beds
of sandstone, and is worked at the surface. The “ kukra,” or
diamond bed, is sometimes an incoherent ferruginous and sandy


earth, variable in thickness and position as are the beds with
which it is associated. It appeared to Mr. Medlicott to be
somewhat of a puzzle where to place the conglomerate among
the regular beds, and he considers the ferruginous element to
be subseqent to the deposition. The beds thin out and thicken
remarkably. The natives seem to have ascertained the limits of
the diamond area, owing probably to the beds dying out. The
base of the hills has not been tried.
As to the origin of the diamond, he does not think the
stratum in which it is found is its native bed. He saw no
diamonds in situ , but, from what he learned of the labourers/' the
diamonds came aspebbles with the rest .” Quartz pebbles ol any
kind are rare. The most prominent pebbles are sub-angular red
and white shale, and of what Franklin calls “ green quartz,” which
is elsewhere described by Mr. Medlicott as “ glazed or semi-
vitrified sandstone.” Pieces of the calcareo-silicious bottom
rock, of the size of boulders, occur also. One of the workmen
confirmed his opinion, that the occurrence of these pebbles
indicated the presence of the gem, and that “ they themselves
contained diamonds and were broken up ” as ore, or, rather, as
gangue.
In a section just north of the mines, 20 feet of regular beds
of cherty and compact limestone rest on 50 feet of alternating
sandstone and shale, based on rich syenite; the cherty and jaspery
condition of some of the more vitrified beds is shown by another
section to be due to a “ modifying influence.” It is supposed
that these beds are the sources of the boulders in the diamond
conglomerate. _
Besides these diggings the great majority are said to be alluvial.
On the Rewa escarpment, in the Yindhyan region, they are at
the heads of valleys descending from the plateau, where kunkery
and lateritic clays pass into a mixture of clay, gravel, and boulders,
increasing to great angular blocks of sandstone, between which
the diamonds are found. Diggings occur also on the slopes. In
one place men were seen removing 12 feet of dark brown clayey
sand to get at the boulder bed, the base of which is richest.
“The limited distribution of the transported diamonds was
more puzzling” to Mr. Medlicott than that of the rock. He
thinks there are indications beyond the area that is worked.
The conclusion is that the open valleys of Rewah are not
altogether due to atmospheric and river action ; the whole must
have been under water when these diamonds were washed into
their position. “ If,” says the author, “ the diamond is but a
pebble in the conglomerate,” then, on the other hand, there is
every chance of further discoveries, “ since quartz grains of
similar size with the diamonds are abundant, and there are other
sufficient proofs of the recent submergence of the country.”
(p. 75.)


In the above references there is not as clear a relation as was
given in connection with Brazil; but the geology of the region
is not in some respects so settled as to determine exactly where,
in relation to other countries, the Yindhyau rocks of India
belong. Enough, however, has been produced to show that the
Mahadeva beds are younger than the Damoodah, which clearly
correspond with our own Upper Coal-measures, and that the
Yindhyan beds were faulted and elevated and denuded before the
deposition of the Talcheer beds that are still lower than the
Damoodah.
Under such circumstances it follows that there is probably no
very close connection between diamond beds in India at distant
localities, and very little to justify the supposition that all, if any,
of the Indian diamond deposits can be exactly synchronous with
older Pliocene.
I have not yet mentioned two very important and interesting
memoirs, by Messrs. Hislop and Hunter, published in the 10th
and 11th volumes of the Quarterly Journal of the Geological
Society, on the Geology of the Nagpur territory. Differing in
opinion from them as to the age to which they assign what they
term the great Jurassic formation, which extends over enormous
areas and comprises the Coal Fields of Central India and Bengal,
I would still accept their statements with the greatest respect.
They regard the base of the Peninsula as formed of gneiss, granite,
syenite, pegmatite, mica-schist, and quartz ; but these are not all
of anterior date to the sedimentary formations.
Over these occur the Coal-bearing rocks, the upper part of
which are the sandstones, partly transmuted, which have been
already alluded to, and which other authorities regard as the
source of the diamond.
Over these beds comes the lower trap rock, which is compact
beneath and vesicular at the top, with cresting patches of nodular
trap. These traps enclose in places a thin sedimentary formation
of Tertiary age, which has an uninterrupted range of 1,050 miles
in one direction, and of 600 miles in the other. Its age has
relations with the Eocene of Europe. Notwithstanding the order
presented in various parts of this large region, the authors con-
sider the various trap rocks as all younger than these beds, the
lower having in fact been the younger. The trap they hold to
have flowed into and over and to have altered the lowest of these
Tertiary beds, which were deposited in a series of great lakes of
no great depth.
Above the trap another series of beds occurs, the lowest of
which is Laterite, a well-known term to those who are conversant
with Eastern Asiatic geology. In this, the authors state, occur
the diamond mines east of Nagpur. They dispute the assertion
that the diamonds belong to the transmuted sandstones below the


trap ; and say that at Weiragad (about 80 miles S.E. of Nagpur)
there is no sandstone, but quartzose metamorphic rocks only.
At that place the diamonds occur in a lateritic conglomerate which
overlies the sandstone in other places, and in which ferruginous
cements occur formed from the detritus and boulders of adjoining
formations ; and this they hold to be the diamond conglomerate.
It is therefore assumed to be younger than the overlying trap
formation. Above comes in a series of deposits, the lowest of
which is brown, the middle red, with existing fluviatile shells, land
shells, and bones of mammalia (which Professor Owen has since
determined to be those of buffalo and antelope) ; tusks of a
large animal were also found in the brown clay. The uppermost
deposit of all is the regur or black cotton soil, in which kunkur
is mixed. Bones of oxen and sheep are found in it.
Messrs. Hislop and Hunter consider these black and red clay
beds to belong to the Post-pliocene formations ; the brown clay to
the newer Pliocene.
Assuming these Nagpur deposits to be correctly placed,
diamonds of India are still, according to evidence collected from
other authorities, and already considered, traced to a conglomerate
which may be more recent than our basalts on the Cudgegong,
but may not be more recent than some of those at Ballarat, but
which seems to have derived its pebbles and boulders from
Palaeozoic and Metamorphic and ordinary igneous rocks ; laterite
itself covers rocks alike of every older epoch. Occurring as
this detrital covering does all over India, and having the same
relative position to all kinds of rocks, and at all heights up to
that of at least 8,000 feet above the sea, the idea of diamond
belonging to it as its actual source is not sustainable.
In a subsequent paper (Q.J.Gr.S., vol. xvi.) the Eev. S. Hislop,
one of the authors, considers the Intertrappean Tertiary bed as
Lower Eocene, producing good fossiliferous evidence for this
opinion ; and shows that the Mahadeva or Bangnapilly sandstone
is of about the same age, in which Dr. Oldham seems to coincide.
(Memoirs of India , vol. 1, 171.) Hislop’s views have not been
thoroughly received by other geologists ; and doubts have been
expressed as to whether the trap and basaltic formations of India
are not all of one age.
If we compare the Indian with the Cudgegong diamond
deposits, the older of which, and from which the younger is
derived, underlies the trap (basalt), it will be seen there is a
difficulty to be reconciled with respect to each; and if the
diamond conglomerate of India be Lower Eocene, that difficulty
is complicated by assuming that the Cudgegong deposit is Pliocene.
On reviewing the whole evidence I am inclined to believe that
unless they are much younger than the Pliocene or Pleistocene
epochs, in fact of recent origin, they must be considered as drifted


from rocks older than the Carboniferous. As they everywhere
exist in limited areas, it would also be a fair inference that as
there is no want of carbon, and similar agencies must operate
over enormous regions, the limited range of diamond is a strong
argument against its recent production. If the facts advanced
by several of the authorities whom I have quoted are received,
then diamond must have undergone processes similar to those
that have resulted in the formation of gems of which there is no
dispute as to probable age.
It is remarkable how silent observers in general in India are as
to the multiplicity of such gems and other extraneous minerals
in the Indian diamond regions. Yet Mr. Carter names quartz,
jasper, lydian stone, epidote, micaceous iron, garnets, and
corundum, derived from rocks of different ages.
There is another interesting locality near Gungpur, on the
northern frontier of Orissa, on a river running to the Bay of
Bengal, north of Kuttak ; but I have no accurate knowledge of
its history.
To these remarks on Indian diamond beds, I have only to add
that in 1867 I had the honor of a visit from an officer of the
Bengal Army, whose official position gave him great opportunities
of acquaintance with the country, and who came to this Colony
on a tour of inspection to examine our railways and coal-beds ;
and from him I learned that the Yindyhyan conglomerate is
chiefly made up of jasper, chalcedony, specular iron, and a green
rock, which latter lies en masse on granite; that the diamonds
are of all colours —rose, yellow, brown, black, and pale green —
which last, being the favourite or national colour of the followers
of Mahomet, causes the green diamond to find a ready sale, whilst
the others are neglected. In size they are that of a hazel nut or
larger. But, he added, that in the diamond districts the people
are wretched ; they think and talk of little but diamonds, which
they often swallow if not watched.
DIAMONDS IN RUSSIA.
Russia is a country in which diamonds are also found, but
sparingly, as near Bissersk and Chrestovodsvingensk, in the Ural
chain ; the detritus in which they occur being made up of angular
fragments of chloritic, talcose, and quartzose rocks. The former of
these places was mentioned in 1831 in the “ Gornoi” Journal of
Petersburg ; and in 1839 Baron von Meyendorf stated to the
Geological Society of France that diamonds had been discovered
in two different localities, and that they had been found in a
microscopic form in native iridium, which had been brought to
Paris. {Bull, 11. , 314.)


The first Ural diamond was found at Bissersk in 1829, after
Humboldt’s visit to Count Polier ; three others were found
afterwards in that year. In 1830 other three were found. M.
Karpoff, a mining officer, was shortly after deputed to carry on
the search, and four were discovered, which are described as
colourless, diaphanous, smooth, and very bright, with forty-two
triangular facets. One was broken in two.
Thirty-seven others were taken, the last in July, 1833, from the
Adolphskoi Mine, and were used by the Countess Polier in deco-
ration of her church images. One weighed fof a carat. Their
forms showed from 12 to 42 curved facets, smooth and sparkling.
In 1831, however, a few were found in the gold land of M. Medjer,
near Ekatherinburg. One was given to the Institute of Mines
by his son, after the father’s death. It was a rhombhoidal dode-
cahedron, with rounded edges and translucent, weighing f of a
carat, {Bull. Oeol. Soe. de France, IV, p. 100, 1833.) The
information here given was received from Count de Cancrine,
Russian Minister of Einance.
Sir Roderick Murchison, in 1841, saw forty diamonds from the
Adolphskoi rivulet; but as the. gold found with them did not pay,
no further search was made for diamonds. Three other localities
have also been named (“ Oeol. of Russia and the Ural, 1845,” p.
641), in two of which one diamond and in the third two diamonds
were found.
Sir Roderick considered that the Itacolumite of Brazil occurs
in various parts of the Ural, where it was detected by Colonel
Helmersen, and adds what seems to bear upon certain conjectures
previously mentioned. He says ; —“ We may add that as Carbon-
aceous grits of the Devonian and Carboniferous periods exist,
it is very easy to conceive how these masses, like other sediments
to which we Lave previously alluded, have been transmuted into
the quartzose micaceous schists which occur in the Chain, and
how the diamonds have been derived from them, and deposited in
the auriferous gravel.” (p. 482.)
Finally, I may remark that osm-iridium, found on the Cudge-
gong, occurs in three places near the Ural, as well as in South
America and in Canada, in gold diggings with which diamonds are,
as we have seen, generally associated. Moreover, cinnabar found
on the Cudgegong is also associated with the diamond detritus of
Brazil; and as the mode of its occurrence is precisely that in
which it presents itself in the Hilbert Hold Field of North Queens-
land (as I learn from Mr. Daintree), and also in that most
wonderful Hold Field on the River Thames in New Zealand (as
Dr. Hector has stated), as well as in Otago, i.e., not in lodes but
as a member of drift deposits, there is a sort of union between


these and other regions in which the diamond is found. Drift
or alluvial cinnabar is not less remarkable than drift diamonds;
and I believe at present no lode has been detected.
In California cinnabar is said to bo brought up by Solfatara
action. ( Phillips , in Phil. Mag., Dec. 1868, p. 431.) It may,
therefore, be that the Cudgegong mineral is due to the action of
former hot springs. The account given by Mr. A. Phillips re-
specting the “ Chemical Geology of the Gold Fields of California”
in the paper cited above, justifies the further inference that
silicated waters may also have operated in coating and cementing
pebbles and fragments of rocks at Cudgegong as they have done
in California. He even shows that quartz veins holding gold,
and coloured by pyrites, as well as auriferous pyrites itself, have
been formed in recent times by the action of aqueous solutions.
Diamonds in Boeneo and Aeeica.
There arc but two other countries to which I need refer, —■
Borneo and Africa.
In the southern ravines of the Eotos Borneo chain, which is
composed of serpentine, diorite, and gabbro, which run north
and south, there is a deposit of red clay, with fragments of quartz,
in which spangles of gold, magnetic iron, platinum, and also
osmium and iridium , arc met with, the whole reposing on serpen-
tine. In this clay, on the western slopes, diamonds are found over
fragments of syenite and diorite, and with the ores above named.
Black quartz with pyrites and plates of platinum are there the
indications of diamond, and, according to M. Louis Horner, this
quartz belongs to the serpentine.- (See d' Archiac, n, 333.)
So varied, yet to some extent so consistent with each other,
are facts connected with the history of the diamond. That its
mode of production in all countries may have been the same is
very probable; but that origin, it must be said, obtains little
illustration from the various geological conditions with which it
is associated. Perhaps this very variety, whilst setting dogmatism
at defiance, may serve as encouragement to the close observation
of practical prospectors.
Of African diamonds we have only heard much of late.
Knowing that they are generally found with gold, and that
Africa, contains numerous auriferous regions, it might have been
anticipated that diamonds would have had a greater celebrity in
that vast country, forming a quarter of the globe, than they
have had in modern times.
But though Heeren has shown that there was a considerable
trade among the ancient Carthaginians in diamonds brought
from the interior of Africa, the only record I can find in modern
times of the existence of diamonds in that part of Africa, is of


three shown at the Exhibition of the produce of Algiers. They
were found in the Goumcl 'River, in the province of Constantine,
and were given up in payment to M. Peluzo, the Sardinian Consul
at Algiers, by an Arab who wished to know their value, stating
that they were found in the sand of the Goumel Eiver with gold.
One of these is deposited in the School of Mines at Paris; the
second was purchased by M. Brongniart for the Museum of
Natural History ; and the third by M. de Dree. The Arab had
several others. M. Eozet says, however, that he had acquaintance
with the jewellers of Algiers, and had never heard of
found in the province. The facts stated are on the authority of
M. Dufreuoy and the Secretary of the Geological Society of
Prance. (IV. 164, YI. xv.)
In Southern Africa diamonds were reported to have been
discovered in 1867. After the announcement of the new find,
Mr. Gregory, a well-known London mineralogist, who went to
Africa on behalf of the great diamond merchant, Mr. Emanuel,
sent to the Editor of the Geological Magazine (December, 1868)
an article denying the statement, and declaring it a “ hoax,”
“ imposture,” or a “bubble scheme.” To this Dr. W. G. Ather-
stone, P.G.S., a resident of Graham’s Town, Cape of Good Hope,
replied (May, 1869), refuting the charge, and declaring that
twenty-one diamonds were known to have been found either on
private or Government land, and thirteen of these were bought
by persons of credibility, one of them the Governor of the Colony,
and another by a lapidary. Dr. Atherstone contradicts Mr,
Gregory’s account of the geology of the district, the latter
asserting that all the rocks are igneous or their derivatives,
and the former declaring that the rocks are fossiliferous, of the
dicynodon beds (which by the way brings them into relation with
some of our Australian rocks) ; and that Mr. Wyley (an accepted
geological authority) had, years before this controversy, shown
that there was an intimate relationship with the Indian diamond
region of Bangnapilly, and that Dr. Shaw had described the African
district in the Graham's Town Journal of the 20th January, 1869,
pointing out also the same resemblance.
In the “ Journal of the Society of Arts,” of the 18th February,
1869, is a list of the diamonds by Mr. Chalmers ; who, as well as
Mr. Eadeloff, a Missionary, asserts that one of them was found
near Pniel (No. 7 of the list), by a Griqua.
Mr. Gregory, in answer to this reply, explains some personal
remarks of his own, and admits the existence of dicynodon relics
but south of the district alleged by Dr. Atherstone. And thus
stood the matter till 1870. It now appears that diamonds have
been found in vast quantities, and that many magnificent and
valuable stones have been disinterred. They are found on the
surface of a calcareous conglomerate, near the frontier of the


Sept. 14th.
—Per E. M.
S.
“Eoman”
496
£15,000
„ 29th.
—Per E. M.
S.
“ Norseman”
387
15,500
Octr. 15th.
—Per E. M.
s.
“ Northam”
67
8,850
„ 31st.
—Per E. M.
s.
“Saxon”
110
4,230
Noyr. 13th.
—Per E. M.
s.
“Celt”
1,240
22,255
Per post...
26
1,300
2,326
£64,135
Orange River territory, and are said to vary in weight from 6 to
13 carats ; some of them reach 150 carats. The diamonds are
accompanied by garnet, topaz, and other hard minerals.*
* The locality is at Pniel, on the Yaal River, opposite Klipdrift (the terri-
tory of the chief Waterboer), distant about 800 miles from Cape Town, where
the weather is fiercely hot from all December to all March. It is much
nearer to Port Elizabeth eastward of Cape Town, the distance being about
496 miles. But the difficulties in travelling are great. In November, 1870,
about 10,000 men were employed. Without mentioning an opinion as to the
alleged value of the diamonds found, I may append here an extract from the
Mauritius Commercial Gazette of 18th November, which is not without
interest.
“ The latest telegraphic advices from the diamond-fields are that *at Hebron
they are picking them up at the rate of sixty diamonds per week.’ And at
Q-onggong, or a little below that place, one man has found two diamonds, one
valued at £40,000, and the other at £BO,OOO. Of ordinary sized diamonds
reports come in daily. A man has just found a ten-carat one on an abandoned
kopje (hillock.) Another, Mr. H. S. Jones, son of an auctioneer of Cape
Town, has unearthed one of 26 carats, worth about £B,OOO. This he obtained
after ten days’ work. He is on his way back to town to dispose of his find,
while a man who worked with him, named Lance, who came here from St.
Helena, remains, and continues working the claim in his partner’s absence.
The territory which is ascertained to be diamondiferous now fully extends
over 100 miles. As to the possibility of its exhaustion, to speak of that, com-
petent judges say is to speak of an event which may occur next century, or
perhaps a century hence.”
“ The following is a resume of the known shipments since the beginning of
September last:—
NUMBER AND VALUE OF DIAMONDS SENT FROM THIS PORT.
1870. Diamonds. Value.
Last week we had intelligence by telegraph of some very large “ finds,”
The report was that one of 150 carats had been found, one of 117 carats, and
several others ranging from 12 to 18 and 25 carats. With regard to the two
very large ones I prefer to take the announcement with caution, but as to
the smaller ones Ido not for a moment doubt they were really obtained. A
personal friend of mine found one of them weighing 15 carats. At the same
time there need be no unnecessary scepticism about the matter. Large finds are
kept very close ; but it is very well known for all that, diamonds of immense
size have been found. When I say “of immense size,” I mean above 100
carats up to nearly double that weight. The 88 carat one, found by Wheeler,
arrived yesterday in town. It is in the keeping of the Standard Bank, which
institution has made a large advance upon it, and to which it is entrusted for
disposal in Europe. Irrespective of this monster, the mail steamer “ Celt” will
take home on Saturday nearly 2,000 diamonds, valued at a large amount.”


It may be as well to state here that diamonds have occasionally
been found in our sister Colony of Victoria, and have been
recorded by my friends, the Rev. Dr. Bleasdale, Mr. Ulrich, and
Mr. Broughh Smith, the latter of whom, in his recently published
valuable official work on the “ Gold Fields of Victoria,” mentions
sixty small diamonds of little value from Beechworth, taken out
of, or near to, the usual “ wash dirt” of the diggers, varying in
weight from one-eighth to two carats and a half.
In 1865 fifteen more diamonds were also procured from the
Woolshed diggings.
It is said also, that some small diamonds have been found at
the Echunga Gold Field, S.E. of Adelaide, in South Australia.
At the present time, therefore, New South Wales is the
diamond Colony of Australia. .
I have been anxious to collect from every available source, in
the course of my own reading and observation, all that bears
upon our new colonial industry, that the matters thus brought
together may be an assistance to persons anxious to investigate
the curious circumstances connected with the most mysterious of
our minerals.
Extracts from “ Explorations of the Highlands of the Brazil ,” ly Captain
Bichard E. Burton , F.R.G.S., Sfc. Vol. 11, p. 147-8.
“ The diamond merchant in the Brazil still cleaves to the old
system of money-weights introduced by the Portuguese in the
days of colonial ignorance.
“ The Brazil has, like ourselves, an especial diamond-weight;
but practically, and amongst miners, one hears of nothing but
‘ grain’ and 4 oitava’ — 4 quilate’ or 4 carat’ is not popular.
44 The old French lapidaries said, for instance, 4 eighty grains,’
not twenty carats.
44 The following is a complete list of weights ;
44 The Brazilian measures (found in books) are —
4 grains rr 1 quilate (carat) ~ 0 203 grammes.
6 quilates =r 1 escrupulo (scruple) = F2lB grammes.
4 Our diamond rule is—
16 parts = 1 grain 0-8 grains troy.
4 grains = 1 carat 3'2 grains troy.
151 50 carats nz 1 ounce troy (oitavas or 256 vintems).
16 ounces =z 1 pound.
[The Brazilian measure above allows 233 81 grammes to
the Lisbon pound. The Brazilian Custom House makes the
pound 458 - 92 grammes, which reduces the carat to 0*199
and the scruple to 1*195,]


Dezreis =r 1 grain (0'892 grains troy).
Yintem 2 grains.
Oitava = 64 grains (72 grains Portuguese).
„ ~ 17’44 carats.
„ 32 vintems.
„ “ 16 carats.
‘•The Hindu equivalent of the carat is the rati (ruttee), which
Tavernier makes % carat grains.
I may add to the above that Dr. Kelly, in “ The Universal
Cambist” (vol. 1, p. 220) gives the carat = 3‘£ grains troy, or
205 i French decigrammes. This is less than Burton’s value
by 0 034.
“ Pearls are weighed by the troy standard, but the pennyweight
is divided into 30 grains instead of 24, and therefore an ounce
contains 600 pearl grains ; hence 4 troy grains r= 5 pearl grains.
“ Hold and silver are weighed by the troy standard.
In valuing quartz by the ton avoirdupois, and gold by the ounce
troy, mistakes may occur. It should be remembered that a pound
of the former is equal to 7,000 grains troy, and an ounce of the
latter to 480.
Extracts from Reports and Evidence by Rev. W. B. Clarke, in
reference to the discovery of Tin in Hew South Wales,
1. Extract from an article on Mining, in Sydney Morning Herald of
1 Qth August, 1849 :
“ Here, for the sake of usefulness, we suggest that, though tin
has not yet been found in this Colony, it may hereafter be dis-
covered. It is not improbable that it will be found along parts
of the Murrumbidgee, where granite occurs with abundance of
schorl; since, in granitic districts of Cornwall, oxide of tin bears
a marked connection with schorl, which latter mineral is a principal
ingredient in tin lodes. The writer of this suspects, however,
that he has found crystals of tin in granite from the locality
mentioned, though he did not pay particular attention to the fact.
The abundance of copper in this Colony would naturally suggest
the probable occurrence of tin, though it is equally probable that
the abundance of our copper is mainly due not to the existence
of true granites, but to the occurrence of the trap rocks of the
more usual varieties.”


2. Extract from Report to the Colonial Secretary, dated Jindebine, County of
Wallace, 24 th December, 1851: —
“ I found the summits of the Muniong to he composed of coarse
syenitic granite, partly concretionary, much jointed, and rising in
denticulated masses and rounded bosses, so as to present, in con-
nection with the slopes of snow, the outline of a true Sierra
Nevada.
“ The tourmaline places the granite not far from that of Dart-
moor, and one might expect tin in the vicinity. I obtained one
small specimen from the granite. None was, however, found
amidst the detritus.”
3. Extract from Report to the Colonial Secretary, dated Ranger's Valley,
Secern River, Ith May, 1853 :
“ Of metals, besides gold, I have met with sulphuret of anti-
mony ; molybdenite, in radiating masses, occurs in the granite
east of Dundee, and in more plentiful quantity near New Valley ;
wolfram and oxide of tin, with tourmaline, occur near Dundee
and in Paradise Creek, and it is probable that this ore of tin is
plentifully distributed in the alluvia of other tracts, as I have
found it amidst the spinelle rubies, Oriental emeralds, sapphires,
and other gems of the detritus from granite.”
“ Mr. Fox obtained oxide of tin in the form of crystals of
felspar (De la Beche, Report p. 390) ; it is in similar form that I
have seen oxide of tin in New England.”
4. Extract from Evidence before the Select Committee on the Gold Fields
Management Bill, 1 Qth August, 1853 :
“In sixteen of these counties (Northern G-old Fields) gold
has been found to exist. Besides gold, there are lead, copper,
antimony, molybdenite, iron, and tin, and various gems.”
5. Extract from Report to the Colonial Secretary, dated 14 th October, 1853,
on the Geology of the Basin of the Condamine River : —
“ I may, however, remark that there are gems and tin ore in
many localities, of which little account was taken, but which may
one day prove as valuable as gold. Respecting the tin ore, I may
state that I found it in almost every mass of drift in every portion
of the country I have explored for gold, and that it is frequently
abundant where gold is wanting. It exists in all the western
streams from the Peel to the Condamine, and it was equally
common in the southern districts.”
6. Extract from a letter to the Editor of the Herald, dated 13 th January,
1854
“ Sir, —Observing in your impression this morning a notice of tin
ore like the ‘ stream tin ’ of Cornwall, by Mr. Storer, of the U. S.
Ex. Ex., in the alluvia of the Ovens, I take occasion to state that


this valuable ore is not confined to the Ovens, but exists, as I have
found during my late exploration of this Colony, as well as of
Victoria, in a vast number of localities, always with gold derived
from granite, and frequently where no gold has been discovered
I found it abundantly in the southern country, and all through
New England and its flanks. I was first led to anticipate tin from
observing the presence of tourmaline granite, and the indication
has not deceived me. It is from precisely such granite that it has
been derived in Cornwall; and coupling this fact with another,
viz., that tin exists in great abundance at Banca, and gold also in
others of the islands of the Indian Archipelago, we have every
reason to conclude that both these metals (since the geological
formations are persistent) will be found in certain localities all
through the range of the Australian Cordillera up to Torres
Strait.”
7. Extract from Evidence before the Select Committee on Claims, 12 th April,
1861
“ 147. With regard to tin, I consider I was the first to find tin
in the Colony.”
“ 148. I did not find it on the Ovens —it was on the Murrum-
bidgee, on the Alps, and in New England.”
“ 149. With regard to the black sand of New England, I had
some correspondence respecting it. I have placed some of it
under the microscope, and I find it is a mass of pure crystals.”
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lB72.


00247899
1508


■■ ■*
■I
