





Address
By Rev. J. Bryant, at the Funeral Service of
Mrs. C. J. Prescott, 9 th February, 1931
WE are gathered here, first, to affirm and proclaim our
Christian faith, to give thanks for its great and endless
comfort. “Christ hath abolished death and brought life
and immortality to light.” His mighty words, gracious as they
are mighty, are in our ears and in our hearts, “I am the
Resurrection and the Life: He that believeth in Me though he
were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever liveth and believeth
in Me shall never die.” “Let not your heart be troubled—ln my
Father’s house are many mansions—l go to prepare a place for
you that where I am there ye may be also.” “Because I live
ye shall live also.” Such are some of the radiant terms of the
charter under which we gather here to-day. “Blessed be the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ Who hath begotten us again
unto a living hope by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the
dead, to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that
fadeth not away.”
“Forever with the Lord.—Amen ! so let it be;
Life from the dead is in that word—’Tis Immortality”
It is no abatement of this faith, no intrusion of un-Christian
thought and feeling,, when we confess that death smites our human
hearts with poignant wounds and breaks them down in sorrow
and tears. Faith does not freeze the fountain of our natural, God-
given emotions. St. Paul who could taunt death with its impotence
—“O death where is thy sting?”—did not forbid the sorrow
of his bereaved converts. He charged them that they “sorrow
not as those without hope.” Death separates: one is taken, the
other left: it tears apart with ruthless hand. Even so. Yet
those who share the deathless life that Christ gives can say,
though it be with tears: —
“Only good-night, beloved, not farewell;
A little while and all His saints shall dwell
In hallowed union indivisible.
Good-night.”
It is with such a faith that we meet here to-day.


We gather also to pay tribute to one honoured and beloved
in an exceedingly wide circle, through many years. It is fitting
that I should speak briefly of Mrs. Prescott’s early days. She
came of an old family established for generations in the city
of Cardiff. In addition to a prominent place in the life of the
city, the family was closely associated with its religious life,
conspicuously in connection with the Wesleyan Church. She
inherited high traditions of religious profession and loyalty. In
such a home it might be said that the first, plastic years were
“bound each to each by natural piety.” Her personal surrender
to the call of Christ was definite and life-long. In the worship
and activities of the Church she found a great delight, her special
musical gift being one of her glad contributions. So do her
early years present the happy golden first-fruits of a Christian
home.
In speaking of Mrs. Prescott later, it is not possible for me
to forbid myself a certain intimate note —nor would I if I could.
I first met her as a young bride with her husband, who was
already known to me as a friend, one of a considerable party
from the English Wesleyan Theological Colleges, bound for Aus-
tralia to reinforce the ranks of the Ministry in Hew South Wales.
That is long ago. The last time I saw her was as she lay calm,
frail, waiting the Heavenly call. Between these two points, far
apart, lies a close unbroken friendship with her and her husband
which I count among the first of my very dearest possessions.
Well may I value such a friendship, completest, over-flowing when
I have needed it most.
The immediate thought that comes to me with such a retrospect
(no new thought) is that the radiance of that bridal voyage never
faded into the light of common day. It was a marriage which
answered to the sublime ideal set forth in the Marriage Service
“signifying the mystical union that is between Christ and His
Church.” The years did but add their perpetual benedictions.
In natural sequence her home was her inner world, blessed with
the life and love of her children, a world in which her interests
and affections could be abundantly satisfied in service which was
perfect freedom; while the devotion that was returned to her was
her exceeding great reward. Yet she had a heart and an
outlook wide enough to take in with enthusiasm the wide sphere
which collegiate life opened up to her. Her joy in living was
intense; with mind alert she found life vital and fresh each day,
and saw in common things new aspects and significances. The
human side of life was to her a continuous and kindly revelation;
life was rich, and richest to those who gave most to it. At Bur-
wood College, and later at Newington College, she was brought
into touch with a long continued succession of young lives. It was
a strenuous position—unceasing in its impact. At Burwood her


constant aim was to create an atmosphere in which ideals of
noble, Christian womanhood would be inbreathed. Far and wide
her passing will roll back the years in a multitude of lives, and
hearts will warm with remembrances of her constant interest
and her understanding sympathy in times when most required.
Throughout Australia old boys of Newington will recall her bright
hospitality and personal kindness, and will pay their tribute;
later boys will honour the gentle figure, framed against the
massive lines of the College. All will think of their revered
Headmaster in his sorrow. Notably will the Masters of Newing-
ton College pay their heartfelt tribute to one whose ready friend-
ship was so greatly valued.
To this inadequate delineation let me add two brief notes.
Mrs. Prescott’s life was one of high courage. Not infrequently
she might have surrendered her self-imposed tasks on the ground
of ill-health. But she had a brave heart, not willing to be turned
aside. So it was to the end—a gallant soul!
She delighted to do kindnesses quietly in her personal
capacity. Not a few, to-day, know how tenderly sympathetic and
practically helpful she could be.
Thus has the life of one so widely known run its earthly
course. Our sympathy and prayers are given to those who will
miss her most, who gave to her so much and received from her
so much —her husband, ever her staff and stay—her daughters,
whose sweet ministries blest and gladdened her —her sons, whose
love was her pride and joy. But with her all is well. Death
came with gentle touch and lo! it became the touch of life
immortal, and she passed with no moaning of the bar to meet her
Pilot face to face. She did not doubt that coming vision—she knew
her Lord and Saviour —and now she beholds Him with eyes
unveiled. That vivid soul lives as never, never before!
Do we, too, desire to learn that blessed secret? It is offered
to us, to all who earnestly seek it. Jesus has said, “I am the
Way, the Truth, and the Life.”
It is fitting to-day to recall the petitions of the prayer of the
Communion Service in which she so often joined in this Church,
receiving frequently from the hands of her husband, hands for
her most fitted to dispense the Holy Symbols, the Sacramental
seals—“We most humbly beseech Thee of Thy Goodness, O Lord,
to comfort and succour all them who in this transitory life are
in trouble, sorrow, need, sickness, or any other adversity. And
we also bless Thy Holy Name for all Thy servants departed this
life in Thy faith and fear; beseeching Thee to give us grace so
to follow their good examples, that with them we may be par-
takers of Thy Heavenly Kingdom: Grant this, O Father, for
Jesus Christ’s sake, our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.”


5n /IDemortam:
HDrs. C. 5. Prescott.
By REV. F. V. PRATT, M.A.
No earth-born spirit she, who like a flower
Shed beanty, fragrance, peace upon our path;
Whose memory leaves no bitter aftermath,
But only thoughts refreshing as a shower
That gently falls with vivifying power,
Giving to drooping plants a welcome bath,
Or warming like a fire upon the hearth
That draws us homeward in the evening hour:
Bor her the morning, though for us the night,
Her native Heaven she hath reached at last;
She is not dead; nay, rather with delight
Within the harbour she hath anchor cast;
Her loved ones greet her in the land of light,
Her Saviour evermore will hold her fast.




