

K.DELAIDE WILL SEE THAT JUSTICE
IS DONE TO
PERCY
BRUNTON
THE PEREGRINATING POLITICIAN
FREE-LANCE, PHILOSOPHER, FIGHTER FOR FREE-SPEECH AN
MAN OF MANY PARTS
CONDUCTED BY PERCY BRUNTON. August, 1917
No. 6
HOW MANY TIMES WOULD
YOU CO TO GAOL FOR
PERCY BRUNTON’S FIGHT usp bj , M r A DMCCT
for free speech. IfICW IN tnnliElO I.
PERSEVERING
PERCY BRUNTON.
HIS FIGHT IS OUR FIGHT.
PRINCIPLE?
“Men 'in earnest have no time Ito waste
WHAT ABOUT THE LIBERTY
OF THE AUDIENCE?
fig leaves lor the naked
ORATOR AND ACTOR.
truth.” —Lowell
“M E. M
(By .PERCY BRUNTON).
DEFIER OF CONVENTION
Perhaps you think I am a
AND INDIVIDUALIST. Because of.self I here dp
Wise and foolish some say I am,
What they think not matters a —.
In politics I sometimes meddle,
... ru\r<’’\ Though peanuts and chew-gum pay best
(By BULL-DUO ). to peddle,
. , , , Oi skimmed (milk and plate!.er-o’-parts
“With a smile and a good pair of boots r m no#l ma< je,
you can easily walk ftrouna tue But af villjle flesh wiith red bipod in i aM ,
world.” Touch not I of alluring booze,
~ When the wine is in your wits you lose.
Just as the giant oak springs iron t Among slow horses I do not ramble,
tmy acorn, Percy Brunton declares, with with toe books have no wash to
a religious fervour, that bis little news- scramble.
paper will develop into a mighty Nicotine, no, I do not smoke,
of public. opinion, and champion of the Burning money I think a joke
rights of the people, without teal or Even pretty faces can’t turn my head,
favor. The old saying that many a true to beauty my soul is not dead,
word is said in jest can well be kept m gtlill wlth aU virtue I’m not level,
mind when you, dear reader, shall smile Por in me there is a dash of devil,
at what Percy promises to prov.de lor High my name I am going to chalk,
the entertainment and enlightenment oi By mu<jh hard work and honest talk;
the citizens of this paradise tor poiui- Xhen a fair girl to share my fame,
ciante. Shall look I for but what’s her
fice for everybody. We Britons proudly much sense to want to conduct them
challenge the world. We proclaim that J n of traffic. He has no need
the most ignorant in our midst shall U K et s o close to the throng and mul-
have the same justice as the most v.tude of humanity. They will go to the
learned. .We say that the humblest of- sule street or vacant lo* ito hear them
(tizen should enjoy the sarnie liberies se iT e? le ®l young again. They
as the most “exalted.” We Australians wrii ®° erto y-
must see to it that all are entitled to, ~ , , , , „ ,
and get, justice. Percy Brunton has nolt, d er ° v Brunton s only crime is that he
for ten years a; least, had justice at amuses a crowd. The man who can
our hands. We are responsible if we make the people laugh .is worth a thou-
permilt the police to persecute him with- sand, doctors. Percy creates a laugh that
oult a protest. reverberates right through one. True is
Percy advocates, nothing illegal, he ;*> O' 00 ’ !*•* ¥ so j mds - man y
does nothing to hurt us, he amuses us .ruths spreads wheat m his chaff. 1 ercy
in the side streets of an evening with *2 a , T° hew him is to cry hijn.
his mixed metaphors, his acrobatic feats . lo ltry I 1 I s 'betoome one o: lias mi-
with words, he makes an audience known friends. Percy Brunton will win
'curious, he makes some say he is mad, »?riw S , call ?P al S? free speech. Even
makes others say he is clever, compels NO t W . lle ¥ w-mnmg. Percy Bruniton’s
some to think that the world mst optimism gives him joy. His, undaunted
missed a genius of a comedian, others energy and unrelenting couiage will
to argue that this mundane scheme cf crown hlm wlth success.
'things just miss ed a heaven-sent sltates-
i i jj nan
Percy Brunton is the only platform
man in Australia who wan make the
people laugh, as well as seriously dis-
cuss the doings of plutocrats and pie- s( ._ w ni|| n NOT RF lOVF ”
brans. Thousands ot men and women, *1 WUULU Nil I DC S.OVC.
after a hard and dreary, day’s toil, have
passed many a pleasant and informative
hour alt one of Percy Brunton’s street If she should come Ito me some day,
corner meetings, or "big-show,” as be And I to her should sadly say,
himself describes it. Before I planted my first warm kiss,
i have done this, and that, and this.
Confucius has been credited with hav- Confessing sins of human clay,
ing said—“ That words should not be And she from me should turn away,
accepted because uititered by the loljty, j -would not sigh, nor weep, nor moan,
nor rejected because uttered s>y the Nor worship grief on a lonely (throne,
lowly ” Surely, then, such -wise words ’Tig better so, adieu! we would part,
(wise’ in their COMM'ONSBNISE) will be For that thing she, would nurture in
pondered over by those who think, in her heart
their ignorance and stupidity, that the Would not be love, for love forgives,
unconventional Percy Brunton is not a And understands, forbears, and lives,
man to be reckoned with. Attend bis So onward would Igo my way
meetings, and you will not regret it. From such love as came that day.
Ait one minute Percy will have a crowd
breathless, and have them awe-inspiring oh man i thou feeb le teimant of an hour,
and reverent, as he did the night he
bared his head to the memory of Wil- Debased by slavery, eorrupt by power,
liam Redmond, the man who was. (tru» Who knows thee well must quit thee
to both Ireland and England, and the with disgust,
next moment had the same udience „ . . .. . . , , ,
holding their sides with pains—with Degraded mass ot animated dust.
glorious pains of laughter ! —Byron.
BULL-DOG (Brand) SALVE, for Catarrh and Piles
READ “THE DAILY HERALD.” THE WORKERS' ADVOCATE


Inspector Beare conducted the prosecution,
tiAUNT made by the (JTTJZENB.
and the defendant, who was unrepresented
will REQUEST itnajc you will, in the
discharge of your nigh and responsible
Sergeant James Byrne said that about 8
uttice, instruct tlie omcers. of your De-
partmeuit, that ALL citizens must re-
fendant addressing a crowd in Victoria
square. He asked him if he had permis-
sion to speak in the street, and he replied,
“I have permission verbally but not in
writing.” Witness then requested the de-
fendant to move on, as he was causing a
block to the traffic. Witness said that
he had advertised his meeting, and he
eeive the same treatment, as is the
P-ttOCJD 'claim of .blUXiSHERb the
world, over, and that Mr, Brunton be
permitted to speak in the streets, away
irom tramlines, at such times of the
day, and at such places where and when
pedestrian and vehicular traffic shall not
ue interfered with or the rights of oiti-
would not disappoint his audience. De-
fendant then remarked, ‘‘My name is Percy
Brunton, and I live at 217 King William
street. The best thing for you to do is
to take a summons out, and we will have
the matter thrashed out. We will see
whether the City Council supports you.”
The lefendant ■ n< some time ad-
dressing the crowd.
zens violated.
WE URGE that if Mr. Brunton does
or says anything illegal he should be
dealt with in open court BY the OON-
bllTUXED Courts of the country.
Mr. Brunton, early in the days of the
present war for EREEDOM, offered Ins
services to his country, surely then he
■will receive the justice that ALL are
ENTITLED to.
sue did 1 not tell you that the council did
We are,
not grant permits to speak in the streets?
Yours for CITIZEN EIGHTS.
verbal permission from a certain person.
(Names, and Addresses here follow) —
Were you sent to the meeting on in-
structions? —I refuse to say.
Do you on oath say that the crowd were
obstructing traffic? —Yes.
Defendant (to witness) —Did you notice
asked for a permit to lio.d meetings-
any other crowds about?
He received a reply to the effect that
W itness —3 do not desire to say.
no permits were issued. On May Zs
W hen you asked me to move I asked
he was attempting to arouse public
where the obstruction was, didn't i i —Yes;
spirit, in carrying tue war to a success-
and I said, “the crowd.”
lul conclusion, p v addressing a crowd
Were you on duty on the Thursday?
in the street. He had o-ot the crowd
—Yes; I was on a different part of the
and had sent over to the recruiting
town.
office to get a corporal and a sergeant
Have you since July 24 noticed any
to come across to make an appeal to
other meetings ?—Yes; X have seen Mr. '
the gathering for recruits. lie had
Price, who lias .permission to speak.
offered his services for his country, but
You have seen me before, but never
had been rejected, and he did not feel
challenged me?—I saw you one Sunday
inclined to ask anyone else to enlist.
and stopped you.
He had the “gift of the gaib,” which
On another occasion didn’t you stop me,
was a nuisance—(laughter)—and he tried
and I got up again later?—I don’t know.
to get the crowd for the recruiting offl-
You stopped when I requested you to do
cers. The police sergeant came up to
so.
him and told him to move, as he could
On the Sunday night was I the only
not produce a permit. The fact that
one you spoke to? —I can’t say.
the citizens were present at his meet-
Was it not a fact that there were
mg in large numbers showed that they
three other meetings being held?—I can’t
had consented to the meeting being held
say.
and Parliament ought not to pass legis-
Was it not a fact that the crowd grew
lation which was -against the will of its
thicker when I stopped speaking?—I can’t
citizens- The crowd at his meeting
say. I moved on, and trusted to your
was not a congregation of loafers and
honesty.
other undesirables.
I am ‘ sorry. I can understand that
Edward John Trice, accountant, said
policemen have other duties to perform
that he heard the defendant speaking
than interfering with men like me who
on Tuesday near the post office. The
...eeting was orderly. After some time
assist recruiting.
he heard the defendant send for a re-
How many people were present at my
eruitin s officer.
The defendant said that as long as he
And do you say seriously that they
had breath in his bodv he was going
to continue holding meetings, provided
ne d-d not oihstrucit- traffic. He con-
tended that the case should be dis-
fendant had been standing in the sereet
missed as the charge was wrongly laid.
He would not call any further wit-
requested to do so by the police he would
be liable under the charge laid.
Defendant-Then I am prepared to let
this witness stand down and discuss the
question whether I am charged under the
wrong Act.
Mr. Hall—That is a question for the
nesses as the court evidently did not
wish to hear them on the question of
obstruction. If the court did not see
fit to dismiss the case he would take
the case to another court. He would
like to point out that he was not a
millionaire, and if a fine were imposed
bench to consider later. Von better stick
Bulb-inspector Beare said that the pro-
to the point. We can’t waste our time
here all day.
Defendant—I understand that according
secution did n°t ask for a heav v pen-
alty, but wanted street speakers to un-
derstand that when the police ordered
to British law I am entitled to justice, if
the ease takes three weeks or three years?
Mr. Hall—That is so; but you
do so or suffer the consequences.
The defendant stated that he should
are entitled only to cross-examine wfthi n
not be single,q out. If his meeting
Defendant—This Act under which I am
was suppressed others, such as religious
and temperance gatherings, should also
charged was passed by Parliament to
be suppressed. He had made applica-
suppress loafers at the street corners,
tion to the council to speak, but the
and not for the purpose of interfering
with men such as myself, who are carry-
could not speak as some years ago a
mg out a public duty.
man named Percy Kelso had got into
UonstabLe "W arner • corroborated Ser-
trouble in Adelaide, and he (the speaker)
leant, Byrne’s statement-
had got the blame for it-
Sue defendant, in a statement to
Mr Hall said that the idea of the Legis
“ court, said:—When he came to
lature in passim- the Act referred to
BYOaol Sri dc
AIDE ASTIR.
DAILY HERALD.”
T THE WORKERS’ PAPER
Reported August 1, 1917.
PERCY BRUNTON
“MOVED ON.”
“SINGLED OUT” FOR
PROSECUTION.
WHY?
Attend the Free Speech Meeting
at Victoria Square every evening
There was a large crowd of spectators
at the Adelaide Police Court yesterday, at Victoria SqU
when a charge against Percy Bruntor a .
well-known street orator of a rather witty anu olgll
and pertinacious type, was charged with _
having, at Victoria square on July 24, re- p 0 yie Honorable,
fused to move on when requested to do
and sign the Petition.
UlScll I/O lIIUVc wll W Bell icqucsjunu rpi pi • r o i
so by Sergeant James Byrne. The crowd Secretary,
was eagerly waiting for admission to the State of South Australia.
main courtroom, and when the doors were u ,
opened the courtroom became packed. The *"
court list was heavy, and Mr. S. J. Mit- vvE, the undersigned CITIZENS, for
chell, SiM., found it impossible to hear warn this memorandum ito you as a corn-
all the cases set down, and the clerk of timed lii-Oir.ii and REQ UJlibi'.
the court intimated that the case against vie, ruui iv' i firmly agamslt, the UN-
Percy Brunton would be taken in the Jiusx treatment tnat has ueen meted cut
justices’ room —a small apartment adjacent l ° Mf -Percy Brunton, because ve, as
to the courtroom. The spectators immedi- li li 111 Sil men ana women, believe that
ately left the court to seek a position of me lowest in me land is entitled io,
vantage in the justices’ room, but they and must iIA v it at ail costs, tne i AiVllt
were disappointed, as they were prevented treatment as the mw. “exalted.”
from entering, and had to remain in an Mr Brunton has been nwenered w.tb
outer room, where they eagerly peered into bv the omo-ers ot your Department, at
the room where Brunton was vigorously victoria square, wnen engagea in the
conducting his defence. The bench was peacetui conduct oi a puouc meeting,
occupied by Mr. W. Hall, jun. (presiding), ' vllerl iNO pedestrian or vehicular trai-
C. A. Campbell, and J. E. Sdver. Sub- • /las been inconvenienced ox COM-
—.— 7 , , i ■ 1 i • pi iI IV marld ,hv fho < ITI ElXi>4
FREE SPEECH MEETINGS
VICTORIA SQUARE,
EVERY NIGHT,
AND PARK ON SUNDAYS.
BE COURTEOUS TO ALL MEN;
HONOR ALL GOOD MEN
BUT BOW DOWN TO NONE,
The following is waiting for your
signature, if you believe in the
British idea of justice.
ADELAIDE ARRIVAL,
ANTICS AND ADVENTURES
OF BUOYANT BRUNTON
THE PUSHFUL PERCY.
(By E.J.P.)
(Smile, and the world smiles with you,
Growl, and you growl on your own,
With a cheerful grin, you will get in
Where the growier is never known.
Tne month oi May, 1911, witnessed the
arrival oi the evergreen PERCY
BRUNTON in Adelaide.
The city of churches, hotels, squares,
and Bulldog (Brand) (Salve received its
most pleasant surprise on the Sunnay
that that perambulating philosopher and
politician, Percy Brunton, invaded its
people’s parliament—tne Botanic Park.
When the periscope oi Percy, popped up
tne bewildered citizens wonaerea what
uad struck them. The Laborites, Na-
tionalists, Single-Taxers, Bfowoialists,
i. w.W. wobblers, ana ‘the Salvation
Army all for tne, first time had the
etiagrin of seeing their audiences flee-
mg from them to the rostrum occupied
by the champion dope dispenser and
police-persecuted Percy—fleeing Irani the
tearful tales of the usual Sunday stump
spouters as fast as tneir legs coma
carry tnem, running to near the uncon-
ventional and rip-saw briskness of Brun-
ton as rapidly as tne. politician rushes
trie State tart-shop on salary day.
rhe Highfalutin, perorating patriots at
the national ring ana tne embryonic
members or Parliament, whose hearts
bleed lor the workers every Sunday at
me Labor circle, were a pitiful spec-
tacle as (they saw their cynical and
scampering crowds disappearing like the
cash of a drunk vanishes when the
“oops” cop him —and his coppers.
As usual, Percy had hardly shrugged
his shoulders when the arm of the
"law” reached out its voracious paw to
persecute him, while little girls were be-
ing assoulted in lonely, streets and parks
by another species oi “human” reptile,
or while burglars were elsewhere busy
tagging boodle uninterruptedly. The
sleuths, with the valor oi the Raiser kid
killer, gruffed; “Have you permission
to speak here?” Percy posea, as only
Percy can, by striking his characiterrs-
i-ie indignant attitude, and replied with
a tone of injured innocence, “Yes I”
Those who have not heard Percy, the
pereginating politician and providore of
vVrigley’s Spearmint Chewing Gum, say
either “Yes I” or “No!” have lived in
vain.
This writer has heard the unabashed
and humorous pedlar of political dope
from the perambulating platform of line
“cheer-up car” in Perth, Brisbane, Syd-
ney, ana Melbourne hundreds of times
during the past ten years, and Ihe can-
not understand what devilish delight
and Germanic game the police get out
of moving on Percy.
For (the cause of free speech, the
sacred cause of liberty, to champion the
rights or freedom, in the otherwise un-
used city streets, before vast audiences
anxious to hear him, Percy, the wittiest
and “whitest” of istreet speakers, has
suffered imprisonment in eleven N. S.
Wales and Victorian gaols. Here be it
recorded that Percy Brunton two years
ago off ered to enlist ,but the doctor s,aid
TNo.” One could travel the world
and search it with a fine-tooth comb,
and the quest for another Percy Brun-
ton would be fruitless. His unique
comb’ina.ion of oratorical gifts, salesman-
ship, exhortation, voice modulation,
shrewd humor, invective, satire, and ka-
leidoscopic and gyroscopic capabilities
Aa mp Him as one withou t a peer.
When you hear Percy Brunton on'ce,
you forget all about the capers of Char-
lie Chaplin, yon smile at the alleged
wit and repartee of the late Mark Twain,
you dismiss the reputation of Bernard
Shaw for satire with contempt, you
shake your head when the alleged ora-
tory of Demosthenes is mentioned, you
have a vague idea that the world once
heard ol the logic of the late Herbert
Spencer, you bite your lip when the
names of Adam Smith and John Stuart
Mill are quoted as political economists,
you get tired when Henry Irving, Wil-
son Barrett, and Os'ca. Asche are brand-
ed as having been actors, and, by hea-
vens ! you get angry when Disraeli,
Gladstone, Abraham Lincoln, Woodrow
Wilson, Lloyd George, and the High*
Honorable William Morris Hughes are
labelled statesmen; but by all than, is true
true you want to fight when anything
from Rockefeller to Sir John Forrest is
held up as a financier. Hear and see
Percy, the only one that countless cen-
turies of evolution has produced, and
judge for yourselves.
was to give the police power to prevent
obstruction caused bv street speakers.
The Act did not refer to (bookmakers or
any other class particularly. Others
might be also prosecuted, and the de-
fendant might he the first of such offen-
ders. A small (fine would be imposed
and the defendant would be given the
opportunity of appealing. A fine of £2
with £1 costs would he ordered.
Defendant—What is the alternative?
Bow much olive picking will I have to
do?
Mr Half—l n default 14 days. You will
be given seven days in which to pay
or to appeal,
appeal.
Defendant —I have consulted solicitors
but their fees are so exorbitant that I
could not manage it. I was thinking
about bringing over my Melbourne soli-
citor (Mr. Ridgway) as the Government
has plenty of money, and could
my -expenses. (Laughter.)
Bubbling irunton s
Sydney Domain
Doings
AND ADELAIDE
BOTANIC PARK PRANKS.
(By the LITTLE DOCTOR).
In Sydney; Percy Brunton was. known
to a nunretf tor every one the eloquent
premier Holman was. Over in the Ha,
oor Oijiy the Domain wore a mantle of
uesponuenoy and gloom on the Sundays
mat Percy Brunton was not adorning
Ure landscape. Much merriment couiu
ue gained in the crowd at “Percy’s big
show’’ by listening to the tales that
were told to one another about the hun-
dred pounds per week that Percy was
leaning pecidtmg polities and chewing
g am, on the one hand; and, on the
viler, you would hear that he was
hungry —not making enough to buy his
tea.
Some would say that he had the best
hwii at Uie Hotel Australia, witn a bal-
cony room engagea for every wee K-end
at me Hotel vaouie at manly Beac.n;
owners, wouiu be cocKsure that he Slept
in tne uomain, with toe “Byaney Morn-
mg i ieralu as a DianKet. jjevonees of
r-ci-ey would assert mat he would be
me nrst Presiaent of me Australian Re-
public, if not its, next Prune Minister
m idle meantime., unkind critics would
say mat he was a member of the I. VV. Vv.
in. aisguise. Tins tneory was given cre-
aenee to in certain quarters by the
plausible ‘contention that Percy was
practising sabotage on the Labor politi-
cians and plunderers of me people,
wnen he would commence a meeting
and taxe their audience. Those who
were convinced mat Percy was .making
a pile were positive he was a ‘criminal
at large; the others, who asserted he
was sunering from temporary financial
embarrassment by being “siopney
broxe," were just as certain that he
was a member of the Y.M.U.A.
It has even been said by -some that
he is made of “skimed milk and plaster
oi Pans," and yet by others tliat he is
a real pirate, Don juan, and beauty-
actox-breaker of feminine hearts. This
scribe, tnough, solemnly and sincerely
swears that, already in Adelaide, he has
heard a dainty, fair, blue-eyed admirer
exclaim, iu the vast crowd behind uhe
Adelaide Post Office, while Percy was
pouring forth his eloquence, “Oh, T
would like a .young man like him I X
thunk he is lovely!”
Percy Brunton gave, a demonairation
of his monopolistic talents —should he
decide to so use them fie could create
Havoc—in the Adelaide Botanic Park on
the Sunday chat tne Labor paper much
advertised a meeting on behalf of its
cvvn support, the “Daily Herald.” At
3 p.m. tne Labor “orators ' were pain-
fully and vainly trying to draw an au-
dience to hear their woeful wail, but
x'ercy’is perorations were too magnetic,
lie nad only, been “performing” a few
minutes, but that was sufficient to pre-
vent any mediocre mob in age man. from
successfully competing. Then he triujn-
pliantiy marched oil to the deserted La-
bor ring, with his audience of a thou-
sand following him (as. the Right Hon-
orable William Morris Hughes careered
after the duchesses in Uld England,
wdien he was. gallivanting around “win-
mng-the-war-by-jaw), and halted at the
side, of a Queensland M.L.A., with the
much-needed army of listeners. An
hour later Percy was again mareheu,
with the audience in hot pursuit, hack
to his former pedestal, leaving tne
much-mentioned Labor meeting, and
also a near-by National “saviour” of the
people, with the proverbial three men
and a dog, to listen to their pitiful
pleading to be put into Parliamentary
place and pay, and then to where the
good things, go gaily, and the enemy, of
cakes and custards are attacked with
knives, forks, spoons, and champagne
glasses at the banquet board, where the
toe is pelted with the hot-air bellows
of blowhards while hundreds of thou-
sands are shedding tneir blood, giving
tneir health, and risking their all for
the freedom that the police will not per-
mit Percy Brunton to enjoy right here.
Milton’s words remind us, “Give us tu<=
freedom to speak according to conscience
above all other liberties!’
“I WILL SPEAK OUT,”
(By RUSSELL LOWELL).
I will speak out I will be heard.
Though all earth’s l systems ‘crack;
1 will not hate a single word,
Nor take a letter back.
Let liars fear, let cowards shrink,
Let traitors turn away;
Whatever I have dared to think.
That dare I also say.
“The Daily Herald” Print, Adelaide.
mRIGLEY’S SPEARMINT CHEWING GUM. Made in Australia for Australians
