

ADELAIDE
de la THO REZA
BY REV. J. CAMERON, M.A.




ADELAIDE DE LA THOREZA.
A Chequered Dareer.
BY
REV. JAMES CAMERON, M.A.,
RICHMOND, NEW SOUTH WALES.
SYDNEY:
FOSTER & FAIRFAX, GENERAL PRINTERS,
13 Bridge Street.
1878.




EARLY DAYS.
Oh, enviable, early days,
When dancing thoughtless pleasureś maze,
To care, to guilt, unknown !
How ill exchanged for riper times,
To feel the follies, or the crimes,
Of others, or my own !
CHAPTER I.
it has been said, is stranger than fiction.
Many a life there has been, whose history if
faithfully recorded, would be found to surpass in
romantic interest those stories that constitute the
staple of our works of fiction. In new lands especially,
peopled like our own under peculiar circumstances,
one may frequently meet with individuals with a
strange tale to tell of the things that have happened
to them in their course through this world. A pastor,
in mingling with people of all classes, has many
opportunities of listening to strange experiences. In
the course of pastoral visitation in the pretty little
town of Richmond, I, several years ago, found in an
humble cottage an elderly female who received me
courteously. Her bent, as if from spinal
injury, her face wrinkled, and her teeth gone, render


ing her utterance somewhat indistinct.' Her appear-
ance was, altogether, by no means very attractive to a
stranger. There was, however, a gleam of intelligence
in the smile with which she received me, and a courtesy
of manner, which led me to conclude, that, in her case,
to look upon the outward appearance would probably
be the surest way to misjudge her. We were soon in
familiar converse. She was not a widow, I learned ; as
I had thought she might be. She had a husband ; but
was living apart from him. She had, moreover, a son and
daughter living in Richmond, both married ; and also
an unmarried son for whom she was keeping house,
and who maintained himself and her by droving. In
speaking of some of the facts and experiences of her
past life, as well as in describing her present views and
feelings, she expressed herself with a propriety and
even eloquence which surprised me not a little, more
especially as I learned from her that she was not an
English woman but a Spaniard. Not only could she
express herself in elegant English, but apt quotations
from our standard poets were sometimes brought in
with great effect; and when she got a little excited,
there was a gleam in her eye, an emphasis in her
tone, coupled with a grace of gesture, that gave me
the impression that she must at one time have been
connected with the stage. I could not help wondering
and enquiring within myself, whence hath this woman
these things 1 Succeeding visits served but to deepen
the interest and the mystery. In the meantime the


son married; and this brought a change in her position,
not wholly congenial to her feelings. She still con-
tinued to reside under her son’s roof ; being obliged to
make shift with such limited accommodation as he
could afford. She felt pleasure in attending Church,
as often as circumstances would permit, worshipping
sometimes with the Wesleyans and sometimes with
the Presbyterians, attaching little importance to
denominational distinctions. On one occasion, haying
been seized with a sudden and alarming attack of
illness, I was sent for to visit her. While speaking
of her state and feelings, there were incidental allusions
to circumstances in her past life, which only increased
my curiosity to know something more regarding her
previous career than she had yet unfolded to me. I
expressed to her the desire I felt to get a full account
of her history, and asked if she would at some con-
venient time give me a sketch of it. At first she
hesitated. She said her life had been a fated one, and
that hitherto she had not divulged the secrets of it to
any. At length, however, she agreed to accede to my
request, and on subsequent visits she gave me the sketch
I asked for; and what follows is the substance thereof.
Her father, Julian de la Thoreza, was a Spanish
nobleman, and occupied a distinguished position in the
Government of his country. His father, grandfather,
and great grandfather had all, in their day, been
Ministers of State. The family name of her mother
was de la Yega. This also was an ancient and


honourable house. She was the only child of her
mother, and, strange to tell, for four generations her
descent had been through an only daughter and only
child. She was born in Madrid, in the year 1808,
and received the name of Adelaide. During the first
seven years of her life she was with her parents,
enjoying in full measure that undivided interest and
affection, which an only child is ever sure to obtain.
One incident we give belonging to this period, which,
strikingly enough, indicates the kind of spirit that
was in her. When about four years old, she got an
invitation to a cousin’s birth-day party; and, of course,
felt a keen desire to go. As, however, she had been
suffering from a severe cold, her father, fearing injury
might result, refused to let her go. The veto thus
put on her fondly cherished wish was peculiarly galling
to her, and roused into lively exercise the natural
heat and vehemence of the Spanish temperament.
Her father was busy shaving himself, his foot resting
on a stool. Suddenly she sprang on this, snatched
the razor from her father’s hand, and with it inflicted
a wound on her arm, from which the blood spurted
over both him and her. “ Will you now let me go 1 ”
she exclaimed. Struck with the courageous energy
which the deed displayed, her father, instead of chas-
tising her, held her aloft in his arms, and, with a
smile of parental satisfaction and pride, exclaimed
“Julian de la Thoreza’s own daughter.” The mother
expostulated with her husband on the folly and peril


of such procedure, saying “O Julian, Julian, spare,
pity, compassionate our child. Think of the future,
and of what may be in the future for her.”
The nursery continued to be for several years the
school where the business of her education was carried
on. Pampered and caressed with doating fondness,
her every wish anticipated, her every whim humoured,
she stood in great danger of being irretrievably spoiled.
But, already, the sky of her fortunes was beginning to
lower. Her father beheld with profound concern
dark and ominous clouds gathering over his unhappy
country. He clearly perceived that such as loved
their country, and were animated with a true patriotic
spirit, were almost certain to become involved in peril,
on account of the principles they held and sought to
maintain. Influenced by these anticipations, and
yielding to the solicitations of friends, he made up his
mind to place his daughter in a convent. In the
prospect of troublous times, that, he thought, would
probably be the best sanctuary for her.
In the convent, accordingly, she was placed, and
there she soon became a general favourite. The
lady abbess in particular became greatly attached to
her. There were special reasons for this fondness.
The abbess in her younger days had a lover, to whom
she had been betrothed. The young couple loved
with all the fervour of youthful hearts. The
nuptials had been arranged, but in the meantime
her betrothed became involved in political troubles,


was impeached, and condemned to suffer an igno-
minious and cruel death. With a barbarity worthy of
such a country, his affianced bride was compelled to
be present at the execution, to witness the expiring
struggles of the object of her affections. To a
sensitive nature, the shock, as we may well conceive,
was overwhelming. Life was no longer life to her.
To take the veil, and devote herself to convent life,
was the natural course for one in her position. In
the heroine of our story, the abbess discovered a
striking likeness to her deceased lover. So marked
was their resemblance, that she kept constantly
fancying she must surely be a sister. Having this
impression, it is easy to understand the special
fondness she manifested for the new entrant. She
took her to sleep in her own room, and accorded to
her certain special indulgences. The number of
young ladies boarded in the convent was not large
—eleven in all. The education imparted seems to
have been of a very liberal description. Among
other branches, much attention was given to the
study of English. The pupils gave long recitations
from our standard authors in prose and poetry.
This will account for the command of English, to
which I have previously referred as having caused me
surprise. The discipline of the convent appears to
have been of a very rigid sort, in some respects at
least. At meal times especially, the repression
appears to have been extreme. They entered the


dining-room with a low curtsey, and with down-turned
eyes; and they were not allowed to lift them until
they went out again. Not a word was spoken.
Perfect silence was the imperative rule. Such was
the effect, she said, of this habit, ingrained in early
years, that even in her old age it cost her an effort to'
raise her eyes and engage in conversation at meals.
One incident of her convent life may be given.
Among her schoolmates was a cousin of her own, a
beautiful and engaging girl of seventeen years. She
had been affianced to a young man, and was about to
leave the convent to prepare for her approaching
nuptials. Her father’s carriage was at the door
waiting to convey her home. When on the point of
taking leave, she suddenly fainted and fell down, and
in a few minutes she was dead. As her death had
been so sudden, and to all appearance unaccountable, a
post mortem was considered necessary. The examin-
ation brought to light a large ball found in the
stomach, having for its core an orange pip, around
which an accretion had been formed. The event
made a deep impression on all her schoolmates.
Circumstances now occurred to necessitate Adelaide’s
withdrawal from the convent. Her father had become,
in the eyes of the Government, a suspected man.
His sympathies with the Liberal cause he had not
been able to conceal, and his ability and influence
made him formidable. There was a growing feeling
that it would be requisite to get rid of him, somehow.


Feeling Ms life to be no longer safe, and yielding to
the solicitations of friends, he resolved to quit the
country, for a time, and seek an asylum at a distance.
Having travelled through France, he passed into
Italy, and took up his residence in one of the Italian
towns. During his stay there, an intimacy sprang up
between Adelaide and a young Italian gentleman.
Being of engaging manners and of good family, he
was approved by the parents, and an engagement
was the result. In two months more she would be
fourteen, and then her marriage was to be consum-
mated. I must not omit to mention, that while yet
a child, she had, according to a vile custom of the
country, been betrothed to another child. The usual
formalities had been gone through, and she was
taught to look upon him as the destined partner of
her life. But as she grew up, instead of feeling any
affection for him, she hated him, and wished to escape
from him ; and now that she had quitted the country,
she hoped and expected that her wish had been
attained. She could not, however, thus easily throw
him off; for although she detested him, he had an
ardent affection for her. Unknown to the family, he.
had followed them into Italy, and there could see
without being seen. One evening Adelaide and her
lover were having a moonlight walk, in the public-
gardens of the town in which she resided. It was
the evening before their marriage day, and their
thoughts were on the happy event that was to make


them one. They talked of the ceremony, of the
arrangements connected therewith, and the part to
be played by the different actors ; and when they came
to the putting on the ring, the enthusiastic bridegroom
pulled it from his pocket to place it by anticipation
on the finger of his betrothed. But lo ! when in the
act of putting it on, a gleam as of lightning dazzled
her sight. It was the gleam of glittering steel, and
that steel was being plunged by a vengeful hand
into her lover’s bosom.
‘ ‘ He kneeled—hia lipa her hand had pressed—
Just then he felt the stern arrest:
Lower and lower sank his head;
They raised him, but the life was fled.”
Her own hand had been wounded by the weapon
in its passage. The ring even had been severed, and
the mark of the wound received on that memorable
night, she bore about with her through life, and carried
to her grave. She remembered her blood besmeared
fingers becoming entangled in the curly looks of her
lover, as they both fell together; he to rise no more,
and she to sink into a profound stupor from which she
did not soon recover. What followed on that
eventful night she knew not. All that remained to
her, was a faint recollection of the moonlight, the
lamps, the gathering crowd, and the confused hum of
voices dying away upon her ear into the silence of
utter unconsciousness.
Although the assassin was never brought to justice,
there had been seen hurrying away from the


neighbourhood of the gardens a youth, so described
as to leave little doubt that the perpetrator of the
deed was none other than the disappointed lover, to
whom, in the days of her childhood, she had been
betrothed. After she had sufficiently recovered from
the shock produced by this tragic deed, she was taken
to visit the tomb in which her fallen lover had been
laid ; and there she saw a veiled figure of herself,
sculptured in marble, in a reclining attitude, and with
tearful eye looking down on the place where her
youthful affections and blighted hopes were buried.
At length, after an absence of three years, letters
were received by her father from influential members
of the Spanish Government, urging him to return,
and expressing regret that he had deemed it necessary
to withdraw from his country. Yielding to these
solicitations, he returned to Madrid, and was soon
settled again in his own house. For some time after
his return, he was occupied chiefly in receiving the
visits and congratulations of friends, prior to
embarking again in public life.
The condition of Spain at this time, as sketched by
historians, was just such as would fully harmonize
with the references to it contained in our narrative.
The period from 1820 to 1823 was a memorable one
in the history of Spain ; and it would be during this
period, or about this period, that the events here
spoken of took place. The conflict between the
Liberals and the Royalists, which had been raging


■with, more or less violence ever since the restoration
of Ferdinand VII., in 1814, had now reached its
highest pitch of intensity. To this period belong the
revolt of the army under Eiego ; the establishment of
the democratic constitution in 1822, to be followed by
its overthrow in the following year; and the restora-
tion of the old regime, through the intervention of the
French. The struggle, as the history of the time
abundantly testifies, was maintained with unrelenting
rancour and animosity on both sides. The country
had become reduced to a state of bankruptcy, and was
everywhere in the most distracted and deplorable
condition. Insurrections and tumults were the order
of the day, and the fierce conflict which raged through
the land was marked by all the usual frightful excesses
and revolting deeds, that are characteristic of civil
war. The country was, in short, just in that state
which prepares us for hearing of such like acts of
violence and deeds of cruelty, as the narrative makes
mention of.
The Bth of December was at hand, and as that
would be his daughter’s fifteenth birth-day, it was
determined to celebrate it with festivities befitting the
occasion. She was allowed to invite a large number
of her friends and schoolmates to a supper and ball;
and lively anticipations were entertained of a joyous
meeting. Her father had, however, returned to
public life, and his voice had again been heard in
the Senate House, giving bold expression to those


patriotic sentiments that had caused uneasiness for
his safety before. That morning he seemed to be,
somehow, not himself. There was a restlessness in
his manner, and a shade of sadness on his counte-
nance, which seemed to indicate a foreboding of
impending evil. He had presented his daughter with
a beautiful book, as a birth-day present, and with a
crown of flowers, which he placed on her head, and
called her “Queen Adelaide.” But his joy flowed
less freely than was wont. It seemed as if some
burden was on his spirit. Three times he returned
to kiss his wife, ere taking his departure to the Senate
House. Meantime the preparations for the evening
entertainment went forward. There had been an
exciting debate in the Cortes that afternoon, and the
excitement had extended to the crowd without. Cries
were heard among the people—“ Write his speech in
letters of gold. Down with Parmfe.” No danger,
however, was apprehended. The evening came; the
guests had assembled; the music had begun; and
Adelaide was waiting for her father’s arrival, to open
the ball. Of a sudden, a confused noise was heard in
the great square. Her mother rushed to the window
to ascertain the cause. A sorrowful sight burst upon
her view. A bleeding corpse was being borne toward
her house. It was her beloved husband, struck down
by the hand of an assassin. The hand that smote was
that of one whom he had befriended—one high in
office—one whom pure political rancour had goaded


on to perpetrate the base and cowardly act. The
shock was more than his devoted wife could bear.
She fainted, and lay unconscious for many days. She
recovered, however, sufficient consciousness before she
died, to enable her to give some directions as to the
future custody of her orphan child. What a change
had thus come over Adelaide’s earthly condition and
prospects. In a moment her joy had been turned into
sorrow—her dancing into mourning. Her bright
visions of the future had sustained a complete eclipse.
Hot only had she been bereft in one day of father and
mother, but of means as well; for all the family
property was confiscated, and she was cast a forlorn
orphan on the care of others.
The following lines, composed by her in after years,
give touching expression to the feelings with which
she looked back on that eventful day which had
wrought such a change in her lot and prospects :
‘ ‘ In this life of uncertainty
It oft-times appears,
Those who smile in the morn
In the even shed tears.
O’er my fifteenth birthday
Cruel fate cast its frown,
Tho’ in smiles it arose
It in sorrow went down.”
There stood by the death bed of her mother an
Indian lady of rank, and of English extraction. She
was the widow of a military officer who had been


killed in the Peninsular -war. To her, the dying
mother committed the care of her only child. Being
a lady of rank and of wealth, and having no children
of her own, this arrangement appeared one likely to
ho advantageous for both parties. In her present
circumstances, Adelaide stood greatly in need of such
a protector; for her relatives had all been obliged to
seek safety in flight. The fate of her father, and of
her uncles, warned them that their lives were no longer
safe. Her uncle Adolphus, like her father, had been
basely assassinated. Her uncle Alonso had been
immured in a dungeon, and on one occasion when he
wanted water to quench his thirst, blood was brought
to him instead, while the skull of his murdered
brother was made to serve the purpose of a drinking
cup. It was time to leave a land where political
rancour was making blood to flow like water.
Accordingly the Countess Coutts Trotter, the lady to
whose guardianship Adelaide had been consigned,
passed over to England, taking her charge with her.


LIFE IN LONDON.
“Frail man, how various is thy lot below,
To-day tho’ gales propitious blow,
And peace soft gliding down the sky,
Lead love along and harmony,
To-morrow the gay scene deforms.”
CHAPTER II.
SHORTLY after her arrival in England,
Adelaide was visited with an attack of
cholera, which nearly carried her off. Having
sufficiently recovered health and strength, she found
herself in a new world. Fashionable life in London
was a wholly new life to her. For five years she
lived with the Countess in an elegant house in
Grosvenor Square, and became initiated into all the
ways of high life, tasting both of its pleasures and its
pains. The Countess would seem to have possessed
but few of the qualities calculated to influence a
youthful mind for good. She was a Protestant, and
attended to the proprieties of religion. Family prayer
was duly observed ; but she was withal a woman of
the world, haughty, imperious and specially desirous of
cutting a respectable figure in fashionable society.
Both she and her charge were dressed in the highest


style of fashion : while halls, parties, the opera, the
theatre, and all the accessories of high life formed
the atmosphere in which they lived and moved. Snch
a life, we might suppose, must have had great
attractions for a young lady like Adelaide—hut it was
not so. She had no heart for those things. Her tastes
lay in an opposite direction; and frequently did she
heg herself off from entertainments, which were hut a
weariness to her, however much relished hy others.
After two and a half years, an event occurred
which was destined to bring with it consequences
of a very important kind to our heroine. An
Indian nahoh arrived in London, accompanied hy
an English tutor. The Press announced his arrival,
as that of one whose wealth was so vast that he could
pay off the National Deht. With this gentleman the
Countess, during her sojourn in India, had heen
acquainted, and soon after his arrival he became a
frequent visitor at her house. The fact was not
concealed that one, at least, of the objects of his
visit, was to secure the hand of some lady, who might
be deemed worthy to share his heart and fortune.
Aware of his object the idea at once occurred to the
Countess, that her ward might find favour in his sight;
and it was not long till she communicated the idea to
Adelaide. “ There,” she said, “is a chance for you—
a lover you might be proud to win.” Every effort
was made by the Countess, by means of social
meetings and visits to public entertainments, to throw


them together. An intimacy thus sprang up, which
ripened in the desired direction ; and in due time the
nabob declared his passion, and made offer to her of
his hand and fortune. With true oriental fervour he
expressed his attachment, vowing and declaring that
if ever he should place the wedding ring on any one’s
hand, it would be hers. We can easily conceive that
the heart of a young girl might have been captivated
by such a prize. Older, indeed, he was than she; yet
not so much older that this could be regarded as any
serious obstacle. He was but thirty-eight, and so,
still in his prime ; and, besides this, he was tall and
handsome, and as attractive as we can imagine an
Indian to be. But withal, Adelaide’s heart, somehow,
did not respond to his advances. She had not yet
forgotten the dead, and could not transfer her
affections to this admirer, notwithstanding the
brilliant prospect which such an alliance opened
before her. Her decision was promptly, made; but
knowing the desire of the Countess, and having the
dread of her condign displeasure before her eyes, it
cost her, as we can easily imagine, no small effort to
intimate to her wealthy suitor that she felt constrained
to decline his proposal. The Countess, when she
learned the result, was, as might have been anticipated,
very wroth. “So you have positively refused the
handsome offer made to you,” she said to Adelaide,
“then must you seek for yourself another home.”
This announcement, uttered with a tone and look


which left no doubt that her determination was final,
fell like a thunderclap on Adelaide’s heart, and filled
her with profound concern. A stranger she was in a
strange land, and knew not what to do or where to
turn.
Among the acquaintances of the Countess was a
certain Lady Kirkwall. To her Adelaide and the
facts of her previous history had become more or less
known. She knew enough to excite her interest in
the young stranger ; and when she learnt the sad
plight to which Adelaide had been reduced, she
generously invited her to her house, and offered her a
home. Adelaide’s mother had executed no bond; and,
in the absence of any documentary evidence, the
Countess Trotter had no legal hold upon her, and
could not prevent her transferring herself to the care
of another. Now that Adelaide had found a home,
she could with the more spirit speak out her mind,
when rated by the Countess for daring to act in
opposition to her wishes. The Countess felt chagrined
that she could not punish her rebellious ward as
effectually as she desired. “ I hoped,” she said, “to
have cast you forth friendless upon the wide world,
that you might learn from bitter experience the folly
of rejecting good advice.” These words, spoken in
such a bitter vengeful spirit, effectually broke the
spell of the Countess’ influence over our heroine.
Calmly but firmly she replied—“ lam duly sensible
of all that I owe to you. In all things reasonable it


would have been a pleasure to gratify you ; but the
disposal of myself for life is a matter too sacred for me
to surrender to the will of another—farewell.”
The new home in which Adelaide now found herself,
was, in many respects, very different from the one she
had quitted. Lady Kirkwall was not merely in-
tellectual and accomplished, but also pious. Adelaide
soon felt that in her new home there was something
more than the form of religion —that there was here
the reality. There was a cheerful, healthful tone in
thg household, that made her feel consciously happy ;
and she soon began to forget the trials of the past.
Adelaide was now within six months of twenty-one.
The summer was at hand, and Lady Kirkwall was
about to proceed to Scotland. She offered to take
Adelaide with her; but for various reasons she did not
desire to go, preferring to live in London. To this
Lady Kirkwall kindly consented, and, with a view to
provide company for her, it was arranged that a cousin
of Lady Kirkwall should come and stay in the house
with Adelaide, during the temporary absence of the
others. Lady Kirkwall had a brother—Major de
Blatchford—who was a frequent visitor at the house.
The cousin, it soon appeared, was much in love with
him ; but his affections were drawn towards Adelaide.
Those who had seen the subject of our narrative only
in later life, and after the devastating hand of time
had shorn her of all her comeliness, might well wonder
how she should have been able to make such conquests


in early life. I have been told, however, by those who
knew her in former years, that, in the early portion of
her life, she was very handsome and attractive. The
Major’s preference for Adelaide could not be hid. The
cousin clearly discerned it, and a bitter feeling was in
consequence engendered in her heart. Adelaide
became to her now a hated rival. In the mean
time Adelaide was laid prostrate by an attack
of typhus fever. As the fever advanced, her case
became critical. Two physicians were in constant
attendance, and strong measures had to be resorted
to. For a time her life hung in the balance;
but by and bye the fever began to abate, and she
became convalescent. Scarcely, however, had she
fully recovered, when an event took place, which was
destined to cast a dismal gloom over the whole of her
earthly future. A lottery had been announced in the
newspapers, and so glowing were the terms in which
the chances of success were set forth, that large
numbers of foolish people became smitten with a
desire to make trial of this short road to fortune.
The amount required was £IOO, and if this could be
advanced, it would be sure to secure £SOO, at least.
The servants of Lady Kirkwall caught the infection,
and forthwith the butler, the upper housemaid, and
the housekeeper were in consultation about it. How
best to raise £IOO, this was the problem. “ Why
not,” said one, “get hold of the plate or such
valuables as could easily be carried away. By


depositing them with .the pawnbroker the money
could easily be procured.” It was a bright idea and
no time was lost in carrying it into execution. If
their expectations from the lottery should he realized,
they would be able to redeem the articles, and would,
besides this, be enriched themselves; while the mode
in which the money had been made might remain
undiscovered. Well has the apostle said “ The love
of money is the root of all eviland lotteries, even
though patronized by some Christian churches, tend
unquestionably to help on and develop the evil. The
drawing day at last arrived, and, unfortunately for
those concerned, the result proved adverse, and
forthwith the whole fabric of their sanguine hopes
vanished away. Great was their distress of mind
when they saw the snare into which they had fallen.
The money was gone. They had nothing wherewith
to redeem the pawned goods, and it was not long till
they were missed. The cousin discovered the loss,
and suspicion at once fell on the guilty parties. But
now a thought struck the cousin, a diabolic one no
doubt, but one that might avail to remove out of the
way a hated rival. If Adelaide could be brought in
as an accomplice, the object might be gained. In her
charge the valuables had been left, and she was
responsible for their safe custody. The cousin
accordingly went and laid information against
Adelaide, affirming that she had overheard her
conversing with the servants about the pawning of


the goods, and was prepared to bear testimony on
oath to this effect. The culprits were accordingly
arrested. Adelaide, though still weak from the
effects of the fever, had no alternative but to go into
confinement, and there await her trial. As she was
leaving the house the cousin, with a fiendish grin of
triumph, whispered in her ear the caustic words
“What will Major de Blatchford think of you now i”
In due time the trial came on, and, in consequence of
the high social position of the chief of the prisoners,
the event excited a more than ordinary amount of
interest. The court was crowded. Major de
Blatchford was there, and Lady Kirkwall, having
returned to town, was also present to witness the
proceedings. Her sympathies, as may be imagined,
had been deeply stirred, and when a verdict of guilty
was returned against the prisoners, Adelaide included,
such a shock did this give to Lady Kirkwall, that she
fainted, and shortly thereafter expired. The sentence
was transportation to Botany Bay. The judge
expressed the deep regret he felt at being constrained
to pronounce such a sentence on one so young, so
engaging, and moving in such a circle as Adelaide
did. She was now to quit the shores of Britain,
where she had lived for a good many years,
surrounded with elegance, and enjoying all the
privileges and comforts she could well desire, and to
go forth to face a prospect bleak and dismal in the
extreme.


LIFE IN THE COLONY.
Earth is an island ported round with fears,
Thy way to Heaven is through the sea of tears;
It is a stormy passage, where is found
The wreck of many a ship, but no man drowned.
CHAPTER III.
SEjffhVERY consideration was shown her on board the
vessel that brought her to these shores. In-
fluential parties at home had furnished her with letters
of introduction to Governor Darling and others in this
colony. This secured for her as much regard for her
comfort as was compatible with the position she
occupied. She was assigned to an old Spanish gentle-
man, Arietta by name, who lived at the Cow-pastures.
It was thought that this would be a congenial home
for her ; but in her countryman’s household she did
not, by any means, find things wholly to her mind.
Her next place was in the family of Commissary
Birch. To the members of this family she felt much
attached, and was always eager to hear how it had
fared with them in the world. A daughter of the late
Commissary Birch, Mrs. Henry Lumsdaine, of Bur-
wood, in answer to my enquiries writes to me to say :


“ Although only two years and three months old when
the “ Governor Ready” arrived here, in January, 1829,
with troops and prisoners, strange to say, I do
remember an assigned servant that we called Theresa.
She was very quiet and in delicate health. My
remembrance of her is very distinct. She was very
kind to me and spoke very gently. I was very fond
of her and often wished to see her again.”
The altered circumstances in which she found
herself in the colony—a servant among servants, and
smarting day by day under a sense of the degradation
that had come upon her, had the effect, as usually
happens in such cases, of relaxing the restraints of
virtue, and of rendering her an easier prey to
temptation. A cloud accordingly came over her which
rendered this, in moral respects at least, the darkest
period of her history. About this time it was that
she became the mother of a son—Alfred by name,
still sojourning among us, and well known, as an
energetic and trustworthy drover, both here and
throughout the interior of the colony. The father of
this child was a certain George Smith, a fellow servant
who, I understand, was afterwards drowned. He, it
is said, was ready and willing to marry her, and
efforts were made to get them united; but she
declined, determined rather to bear the reproach than
enter into a union from which her feelings recoiled.
Her next situation was at Hobartville, near
Richmond, where the Cox family lived in these days


in considerable style. In consequence of her education
and attainments, her position in the family was that
of companion rather than of servant. The party who
at that time occupied the position of butler, at
Hobartville, was a person who, like the subject of our
story, had once occupied a different position. His
name was John Masters. He was born in 1807, a
year before Adelaide, and arrived in this colony from
London in 1830, about six months after her arrival.
He had been apprenticed in his youth to a solicitor, and
had acquired great proficiency in the use of his pen. In
an evil hour, he had been tempted to make an unlawful
use of it. He had committed forgery, and having been
convicted, he, with many others at that time, was sent
to Botany Bay, where he would have time and
opportunity to repent of his folly. It was natural to
suppose that two parties, handsome and cultivated
both of them, when brought as they now were into
close contact, should feel an interest in each other.
The interest gradually deepened into mutual attach-
ment. The tender passion had been awakened ; but
great caution and circumspection were requisite to
guard against any visible manifestations. There was
no lack, however, of ingenuity, to find methods and
opportunities for carrying on negotiations with a view
to an ultimate union between them.
The day of freedom was evidently looked forward to
by both parties with eager longing. The following
lines by Masters furnish an indication as to their state
of feeling in regard to this matter :


“ Would you be free? ’Tis your chief wish you say,
Come on, I’ll show thee Adelaide the certain way,
If to no feasts abroad thou lov’st to go,
Whilst bounteous God does bread at home bestow,
If thou the goodness of thy clothes dost prize,
By thine own use, and not by other’s eyes,
If (only safe from weathers) thou can’st dwell
In a small house, but a convenient shell,
If thou, without a sigh or golden wish,
Oan’st look upon thy beechen bowl or dish,
If in thy mind such power and greatness lie,
The Persian queen’s a slave compared with thee. ”
The Cox family endeavoured to hinder Adelaide
from stooping to an alliance which, they believed, held
out but little prospect of future happiness. Their
dissuasives, however, proved in vain. She left
Hobartville and went to live with a friend in a
cottage near the Presbyterian church, and now owned
by the writer, or rather the site on which it stood ; the
structure itself being in process of demolition.
On the 12th of June, 1836, a few months before the
marriage, Masters wrote to her as follows :
“ My dearest Adelaide,
“ This is the first money that I have claimed
since I have been in bondage. ’Tis the first fruits of
my labour, and it is you, on the day of freedom,
that shall receive it. This small trifle gives me more
pleasure than all I ever felt in the course of my life.
Your own dear child was first to call me father; in


me he shall find a father; in me you shall find a kind
and loving partner. My dearest Adelaide when I
serve you ’tis joy—joy above all earthly pleasure.
“ Your affectionate and loving
“John Masters.”
The preparations for the important event being
completed, the marriage was solemnized in due form
by Rev. H. T. Stiles, in the old church at Richmond,
on the Bth of September, 1836. There were, it is
said, various emphatic demonstrations of popular-
interest in connection with the event. It made quite
a stir in the community, and was, for the time being,
the leading topic of conversation.
Surviving members of those families above referred
to, in which Adelaide served, may be able to recall
her, and could, it may be, furnish particulars of
interest regarding her which have not come to our
knowledge.
Masters was a man of varied talent. He could
not only handle the pen effectively, but also the
brush. He excelled in painting. Some specimens of
his work remain unto this day. After their marriage
they set up a small shop in Richmond, in which
confectionery and other wares were sold. In this
line of business they prospered fairly. After a time
they removed to Windsor, where he followed the
trade of a painter. In the meantime a daughter was
born to them, Adelaide by name, now Mrs. Etherden,


and subsequently a son, Thomas (previously referred
to), who, with Ms family, is still sojourning among us.
For a period of seventeen years she continued to live
with her husband; though not by any means in such
a comfortable manner as was desirable. Drink, to
which he had throughout been more or less addicted,
gained such a mastery over him, and drove him to
such acts of violence and ill-usage, as constrained her
to conclude that it was no longer safe for her to live
with him. A separation appeared to her the only
thing likely to secure for her some measure of peace
and comfort. A separation accordingly took place.
After a time he went to Maitland, and maintained
himself by painting, She maintained herself, as she
best could, by the work of her hands. She did a
good deal of work, I understand, in connection with
the Hawkesbury Benevolent Asylum, washing and
such like work. Ultimately she returned to
Richmond, and kept house for her son Thomas, while
he continued single. After his marriage she continued
to live for several years under his roof, receiving from
her daughter-in-law such measure of attention and
kindness as she was in circumstances to bestow.
During the period of their separation they appear to
have found vent for their wounded feelings in poetic
compositions, containing passages of no small pathos
and beauty. Some one, his wife probably, had alleged
that Masters was devoid of feeling, that he did not,
and could not, feel for one in distress. He indignantly
repels the charge in the following lines ;


Do I not feel ? The charge is keen as steel.
Yea do I feel, most exquisitely feel.
My heart'can weep, when from my downcast eye
I chase the tear and stem the rising sigh.
Deep buried there I close the rankling dart,
And smile the most, when heaviest is my heart.
On this I act, whatever pangs surround,
’Tis magnanimity to hide the wound.
When all was new, and life was in its spring,
I lived an unloved solitary thing.
Even then I learned to bury deep from day,
The piercing cares that wore my youth away.
Even then I learned for others’ woes to feel :
Even then I wept, I had not power to heal;
Even then, deep sounding through the nightly gloom,
I heard the wretcheds’groan and mourned the wretoheds’ doom.
Who were my friends in youth ? The midnight fire,
The silent moonbeam, or the starry choir ;
To these I ’plained or turned from outer sight
To bless my lonely taper’s friendly light.
I never yet could ask, howe’er forlorn,
For vulgar pity mixed with vulgar scorn.
The sacred source of woe I never ope,
My breast’s my coffer, and my God’s my hope.
But that I do feel, time my love will show ;
Though the cold world the secret never know.
With them I laugh, yet, when no eye can see,
I weep for nature, and I weep for thee.
Yes, thou didst wrong me, A .... I fondly thought
In thee I’d find the love, my heart had sought;
I fondly thought that thou would’st pierce the guise
And read the truth that in my bosom lies;
I fondly thought, ere time’s last days were gone,
Thy heart and mine had mingled into one.


Yes—and they yet will mingle—days and years
Will fly, and leave us partners in our tears ;
We then shall feel that love has power,
To soothe affliction in her darkest hour ;
Time’s trials o’er, shall clasp each other’s hand,
And wait the passport to a better land.
While, in such pathetic and tender strains, we find
him giving expression to his feelings with regard to
her, the following verses, believed to be her compo-
sition, give equally touching expression to the
sentiments that from time to time stirred in her heart
as she bewailed her estrangement from him in whose
affection she had hoped to find a solace amid the trials
of life:—
“ If I should die to-night,
My friends would look upon my quiet face
Before they laid it in its resting place ;
And deem that death had left it almost fair ;
And laying snow-white flowers against my hair
Would smooth it down with tearful tenderness ;
And fold my hands with lingering caresses :
Poor hands so empty and so cold to-night.
If I should die to-night,
My friends would call to mind with loving thought
Some kindly deed the icy hand had wrought ;
Some gentle words the frozen lips had said ;
Errands in which the willing feet had sped.
The memory of my selfishness and pride,
My hasty words, would all be put aside ;
And so I shall be lov’d and mourned to-night.


If I should die to-night ,
Even hearts estranged would turn once more to me,
Recalling other days remorsefully ;
The eyes that chid me, with averted glance,
Would look upon me as of yore, perchance,
And soften in the old familiar way ;
For who could war with dumb unconscious clay ;
So I might rest forgiven of all to-night.
Oh, friends, I pray to night,
Keep not your kisses for my dead cold brow,
The way is lonely, let me feel them now.
Think gently of me, I am travel-worn,
My faltering feet are pierced with many a thorn ;
Forgive, oh hearts estranged, forgive I plead,
When dreamless rest is mine, I shall not need
The tenderness for which I long to-night. ”
One day, unexpectedly, an old man made his
appearance in Richmond, bowed down with infir-
mities and sorrows. It was Masters. He had
come back he said to die, and die he did, in a
brief time after his arrival. After a long separa-
tion, husband and wife met once more, and in the
few interviews that took place between them, both
of them, no doubt, felt that there was much to be both
forgiven and forgotten. For several years while
she lived in the east end of the town, she was a
frequent worshipper in the Presbyterian church, and
was one of my most intelligent and appreciative
hearers; but having subsequently removed to the
other end of the town, to live with her daughter, Mrs.


Etlierden, she was in the way of going with her
daughter’s family, when health and strength permitted,
ho worship in St. Peter’s Episcopal church, from the
worthy incumbent of which she received much
attention and kindness ; and he, equally with myself,
felt assured that the tossings and trials of her
eventful life had, through the grace of God, been the
means of leading her to the true centre of rest. On
the 26th of December, 1877, she breathed her last; and
in her last illness gave every indication of being at
peace with God. Though, in her declining years, her
circumstances were so different from what they had
been in her youth, she murmured not. Her hope
was anchored within the veil, and her countenance
beamed with joy, while her tongue waxed eloquent, as
she spoke of the glory that was soon to be revealed.
Strange oftimes is the path along which the
•children of the Kingdom are led to their inheritance.
How wonderful will be the disclosures that will one
day take place on the shores of eternity, when the
course of many a hidden life is at last revealed to
view. What a strangely chequered career was that
of this disciple. She felt, throughout, that an unseen
hand was shaping her course. She had tasted both of
life’s highest joys and deepest sorrows. A bright
morning was followed by a dark and cloudy day ; but
her sun went down at last with a radiance brighter
even than that amid which it rose. The words, her
own words, in which she summed up her experience
of this earthly life, were oftimes on her lips :


I’ve lived to prove
There’s darkness in the brightest dream,
And sorrow in the deepest joy.
These words she desired to have inscribed on her
tombstone, that passers by might read and ponder.
She had indeed lived to prove, that there is darkness
in the brightest dream, if that dream be one of mere
earthly bliss; and that there is sorrow in the sweetest
joy, if that joy be a mere worldly joy. But she had
lived to prove something more than this. She had
lived to prove—her life, with its inward peace amid
outward trouble, proved it—her death, hopeful,
happy and triumphant, proved it ; —that, for all them
that have been savingly united to Christ, there is a
celestial brightness amid life’s darkest hours, and a
sweet ineffable joy amid earth’s sorest tribulations.
She has gone from this scene of toils and tears;
and from her troubled life there seems as if to come
an echo, saying :
“ Thus let my memory be with you, my friends,
Thus ever think of me,
Kindly and gently ; but as of one
For whom ’tis well to be fled and gone ;
As a bird from a chain unbound,
As of a wanderer whose home is found.
So let it be.”
Foster & Fairfax, Printers, 13 Bridge-street, Sydney.
