

AUSTRALIA.
SOUTH
ADELAIDE
Jubilee International Exhibition,
1887
Centeñial Echibition,
SYDNEY (N.S.W.,) 1888.
ALBERT S. MANDERS & Co.,
30 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE,
*
ADELAIDE (5.A.,) & SYDNEY (N.S.W.)
.
EXPERT EXHIBITION REPRESENTATIVE. •#-
ESTABLISHED 1878. s - /.Y--, />
• . v vv '*'>■■ y -' -on s- is*
■». V ' k / / /
Melboui ne :
,
Albert S. Handers, Printer.
MDCCCLXXXYI.


THE FOLLOWING IS COPY OF AN
INSCRIPTION OF TESTIMONIAL,
PRESENTED TO
ALBERT S. MANDERS.
Presented to A. S. Handers, by James Smith, New-street, Nelson, New Zealand, in
testimony of his prompt and very able attention as agent for my Wine Exhibits at the
International Exhibition, Christchurch, New Zealand, 1882.
EXTRACT FROM LETTER,
of Mr. SMITH, to
ALBERT S. MANDERS.
“ I shall be writing to you on some other business matters. Trusting that the testimonial
will give you the satisfaction which you are justly entitled to for your able and prompt
manner in which you performed your zealous duty relative to my Wine Exhibits at the
Christchurch International Exhibition, and wishing you the compliments of the season.
I am, Dear Sir, yours truly,
JAMES SMITH.
-kt , ,
Nelson, 14/12/82.


SOUTH
AUSTRALIA.
ADELAIDE
Jubilee International Exhibition,
1887.
Centennial Exhibition,
SYDNEY (N.S.W.,) 1888.
ALBERT S. MANDERS & Co.
v 5
30 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE,
ADELAIDE (5.A.,) S' SYDNEY (N.S.W.J
EXPERT EXHIBITION
\
v -• •• ’> « w • V .. .
ESTABLISHED 1878.
Melbourne ;
Albert S. Manders, Printer,
mdccclxxxvi,
—-*>• ♦ i ..
y


Adelaide, South Australia,
Dear Sir,
You are no doubt aware of the fact that the Jubilee Exhibition,
commemorative of the establishment of the Colony of South Australia, is to
be held in Adelaide, the Capital City of that Colony, in June }< 1887 ; and
that it is to be followed, at its close, by a Centennial Exhibition of New
South Wales, to be held in Sydney.
V
In reference to these two important Exhibitions, we desire to bring under
your notice a matter which we venture to say you will find of no little
advantage to yourself in connection with them. Briefly, we should be glad
to be empowered to act as your representatives at the two Exhibitions named ;
and beg to call your attention to the vast saving, both of trouble and expense,
your adoption of the course indicated will afford you, and the advantage you
will gain by having your interests looked after by persons thoroughly and
practically acquainted with the minutice, and the peculiarities of Exhibition
work.
We would point out that ours is an established firm, having our head
offices in Melbourne, with branches in all the colonies, and that our Mr.
Manders, who would act as your representative, is essentially au courant with
all matters appertaining to Exhibitions, having already represented several
firms at those held in Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, Perth, and New Zealand,
with unvarying success, the exhibits under his charge having gained far more
awards than those of any other representative. Nor is the reason of this far
to seek. It consists simply in the fact that he was at touch with his work,
and knew how and where to place his goods to show them to advantage, and
to explain their merits to the judges.
Besides the saving in expense, it is quite apparent that a local
representative of acknowledged standing and reputation must have a great
advantage over a stranger to the colonies, whether special and sole agent or
otherwise, inasmuch as he knows every place and every person whom it is
necessary to know, and is familiar with all the rules and regulations of the
establishment, while at the same time his experience teaches him what a
novice can never know —namely, the most suitable spot to look for, how to
obtain space there, and how, having obtained it, to utilise it to the best
advantage.
Even now we have been met with the objection on the part of Exhibitors,
that they had their own agents in Adelaide or elsewhere, as the case might be,
and that consequently they had no need for the services of a professed
representative. A moment’s reflection will show, however, that this line of
argument is untenable, inasmuch as it is clear that if the agents have to be
adequately remunerated for devoting so much of his attention as is absolutely
necessary to the interests of his client, the cost will be immeasurably in excess
1887.


of our charges. Nor can the exhibits possibly receive the same amount of
attention at the hands of a rovice as they could in those of an expert in
Exhibition matters, whose whole time, skill, knowledge, and energy are
devoted thereto. An agent, or perhaps a sub-agent engaged by him, might
take your exhibits, and might place them before the public carefully or care-
lessly, properly or improperly, as the case might be, and as space might permit,
in the background, or in some out-of-the-way corner possibly, whereas a repre-
sentative such as we suggest would attend personally to every detail, and, from
the fact of his having a number of exhibits, could claim, and would obtain
the preference, both as regards amount of space and position, and would
receive much more attention from the Commissioners and employes than an
inexperienced person.
Besides this, the agent having other avocations, could not possibly always
be on the spot to show and explain the merits of the exhibits, and this might,
and probably would, not only the general public, but even the judges, pass
them by comparatively unnoticed, and thus do you material injury. No doubt
the agent would, at first, attend daily, dust and arrange the exhibits, and so
on ; but after a time other arrangements would intervene, and they would
necessarily be to a great extent neglected.
Nor are these statements groundless, for our own experience has taught
us that it is so frequent a state of things as to be the rule, not the
exception.
We are,
Yours faithfully,
ALBERT S. MANDERS & Co.
Melbourne, Australia , Established 1878.
Adelaide , 1880. Sydney, 1880.
Should you wish to see our representative, kindly write to
Hr. A. S. HANDERS,
Care of Messrs. PITT Sf SCOTT,
23 Cannon Street,
Near St. Paul’s Buildings,
LONDON, E.C.


SOUTH
AUSTRALIA:
PROCLAMATION.
As f-'outh Australia will attain its fiftieth year as a colony, December
28th, 1886, a desire has naturally arisen among the colonists to mark that
event by some suitable public demonstration ; and no way of gratifying this
desire seems so appropriate or will be so beneficial as that of holding an
International Exhibition.
Parliament has dedicated land for the purposes of the Exhibition, and
sanctioned the expenditure of money in erecting the main building and
laying out the grounds. The Exhibition will be conducted by the Promoters,
whose names are appended, and such other gentlemen as they may appoint to
assist in the management.
The age of the colony being co-eval with the reign of Her Most
Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria, the day for the opening of the Jubilee
Exhibition has been fixed for 20th June, iBB7 (the completion of the fiftieth
year of Her Majesty’s reign).
Steps have already been taken for the construction of buildings of an
appropriate character, with a minimum risk of fire ; and these will be erected
on the Adelaide Park Lands, a site which for beauty and convenience can
scarcely be surpassed.
A direct line of railway, seven miles in length, delivering goods on the
ground, will connect the Exhibition Buildings with the wharves at Port
Adelaide, alongside which vessels drawing 2.2 ft. of water may quietly lie and
discharge cargo into the railway trucks.
To ensure success requires the free and full support of other countries ;
and it is hoped that Foreign Nations and British Colonies will co-operate
with our Mother Country, and accept our invitations and be represented at
this Jubilee Exhibition, where their productions, manufactures, and machinery
may appear in juxtaposition with Australasian products and manufactures,
and prove of mutual benefit.
JjHetdle jutnlee s#l(ihtixx
1887.
* \


The Government has appointed an influential and representative
Commission in London to facilitate arrangements of European and American
exhibitors.
The year 1887 will be memorable throughout the British Empire, and
will be of special local interest to these Australasian Colonies, from the fact
that that year will witness the union of the Capitals of South Australia,
Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland by a continuous line of railway,
1,760 miles in length, viz. :
From Adelaide to Melbourne . 508 miles
“ Melbourne to >ydney 574 “
“ Sydney to Brisbane 678 “
■■ ■ ——— wmm—mm
Total ... 1,760 miles.
The Import and Export trade of the Australasian Colonies in 1884
amounted to a total of the population being 3,074,503.
The Government will secure free Customs regulations for exhibits, and
the due protection of the interests of all exhibitors.
Diagrams of buildings and grounds, and all necessary information, will
be published and distributed to the various countries and colonies.
ALBERT S. MANDERS,
EXPERT EXHIBITION AGENT,
(Albert S. Handers Sf C 0.,)
■ \
MELBOURNE, ADELAIDE, AND SYDNEY.
»■
Care PITT & SCOTT, 23 Canon-street,
Near St. Paul’s Buildings, London.
August j 1886 .


LIST OF OFFICERS, &c.
1 >atrans:
His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, K.G.
His Royal Highness Prince Albert Victor Christian Edward of
Wales, K.G.
His Royal Highness Prince George Frederick Ernest Albert of
Wales, K.G.
*
Sir W. C. F. Robinson, K.C.M.G., Governor of South Australia. '
V
Right Hon. Charles Robert, Baron Carrington, G.C. M.G., Governor
of New South Wales.
Sir H. B. Logh, K.C.8., Governor of Victoria.
Lieutenant-General Sir W. F. D. Jervois, R.E., G.C.M.G., C. 8.,
Governor of New Zealand.
Sir F. N. Broome, Governor of Western Australia.
Sir A. H. Palmer, K.C.M.G., Acting-Governor of Queensland.
i ' «
His Excellency the Governor (Sir W. C. F. Robinson, K.C.M.G.)
✓
E. T. Smith, Esq., M.P.
<STommissions:
Sir Samuel Davenport.
trustees:
Sir Samuel Davenport.
Honorable J. C. Bray, M.P. '
E. T. Smith, Esq, M.P.
J. H. Angas, Esq., J.P
F. Rymill, Esq.


Cifxtfcutiu# (STAirirrutttfe :
(Quorum, Five Members.)
His Excellency the Governor (President).
The Honorable the Chief Secretary.
The Honorable the Treasurer,
The Honorable the Attorney-General.
The Honorable the Commissioner of Crown Lands.
The Honorable the Commissioner of Public Works.
The Honorable the Minister of Education.
His Honor the Chief Justice (Honorable S. J. Way).
Sir Samuel Davenport (Chairman of the Jurors and Awards Committee)
Sir Thomas Elder (Chairman of the Mining and Metallurgy Committee).
Hon. J. C. Bray, M.P. (Chairman of the British, Foreign, and
Intercolonial Committee).
The Honorable R. D. Ross, M.P. (Chairman of the Agriculture
Committee).
E. T. Smith, Esq., M.P. (Chairman of the Buildings and Grounds
Committee).
The Right Worshipful the Mayor of Adelaide.
J. H. Angi-s, Esq., J.P. (Chairman of the Pastoral Committee).
A. W. Meeks, Esq. (Chairman of the Finance Committee).
J* C. F. Johnson, Esq., M P, (Chairman of the Regulations, Catalogue,
and Printing Committee).
T. Rhodes, Esq. (Chairman of the Hardware, Armaments, and
Furnishings Committee).
T. Johnson, Esq., J.P. (Chairman of the General Manufactures
Committee).
R. Searle, Esq., J.P. (Chairman of the Textile Fabrics Committee).
A. Adamson, J.P. (Chairman of the Machinery Committee).
L. A. Jessop, Esq., J.P. (Chairman of the Fine Arts Committee).
T. Hardy, Esq. (Chairman of ihe Wine Committee).
Professor Rennie, M.A., D.Sc. (Chairman of the Education and Science
Committee).
Frank Rymill, Esq.
7


The Following are the Most Important
Regulations for Exhibitors.
1. Early application for space is requested to be made to the Secretary, in
Adelaide, or to the Secretary to the London Commission. Applications
must be made through the Commission or other official representative of
the country or colony to which the applicant belongs ; but in the event
of no such representative existing, intending Exhibitors can communicate
direct as above. No applications for space will be received later than the
ist January, 1887.
2. All space exceeding twenty square feet will be charged for at the rate of
one shilling per foot for floor space, and sixpence per foot for wall space,
excepting sculpture and paintings approved by the Fine Arts Committee,
which will be admitted free. Special arrangements may be made by the
Executive Committee for the charge for space for machinery, agricultural
implements, and other bulky goods.
3. intending to take part in this Exhibition are requested to
forward an intimation to that effect not later than the ist January, 1887.
4. The Exhibition Buildings will be constituted a Bonded Store; but exhibits
sold will be subject to duty.
3. Articles manufactured in the Exhibition Buildings may be sold and
removed, with the consent of the Executive Commissioners. Exhibits
may be sold during the Exhibition, but may not be removed until its
close, unless by special written permission of the Executive Com-
missioner.
6. An Act of the Legislature protects inventors, provided that application for
a patent is lodged within six months of first exhibition. 4
7. The Commission may refuse entry to articles they consider of a dangerous
or offensive character.
8. Articles intended for exhibition will be received on and after the first day
of March, 1887, and not later than the twentieth day of May. 1887,
unless further lime be allowed by the Executive Committee.
p. Space allotted to countries and_colonies, and not occupied bv the twentieth
day of May, 1887, will revert to the Commission for re-assignment.
10. The Commission will take precautions for the due protection of all objects
in the Exhibition, but will in no way be responsible for damage or loss of
any kind.
11. Subject to the approval of the Executive Commissioner, Exhibitors may
appoint their own watchmen during the hours the Exhibition is open to
the public.
12. Arrangements will be made for the supply of steam power, by the
Executive Committee, at the expense of the Exhibitors, but Exhibitors
must make application for the power required, and will be charged in
proportion for the power used.
13. If Exhibits are not intended for competition, such fact should be
distinctly stated when making the entry. •


14. Exhibitors will be required to furnish and decorate tfeeir
own courts or lesser constructions at their own costs,
in conformity with the general plans adopted by the
Executive Committee. (This is done by A. 8. M. & Go., if
you are represented by them.)
15. Special constructions may be made by Exhibitors, in the building or on
the grounds, after receiving the approval, in writing, of the Executive
Commissioner. *
16. Exhibitors or their agents shall be responsible for the receiving, unpacking,
and arrangement of objects, as well as for their removal at the close of
the Exhibition.
17. The transportation, unpacking, and the arrangement of the Exhibits will
be at the expense of the Exhibitor.
18. If no authorised person be at hand to receive goods
sent to the Exhibition, they will be removed and stored
by the Executive Commissioner, at the cost and risk ot
the Exhibitor.
19. Immediately after the close of the Exhibition, Exhibitors must remove
their Exhibits, and complete such removal within one month from the
close of the Exhibition, unless further time be allowed by the Executive
Committee.
20. Goods not removed in accordance with Regulation No. 20 may be
removed by the Executive Committee and sold to defray expenses, or be
otherwise disposed of as they may think fit.
21. An Official Catalogue will be published in English, the sale of which is
reserved by the Executive Committee.
22. No work of art or any article whatever exhibited in the buildings or on
the ground of the Exhibition may be drawn, copied, or reproduced in
any manner whatever without the joint consent of the Exhibitor and the
Executive Commissioner.
23. The Executive Committee reserves the right to explain, amend, or extend
these regulations whenever it may be deemed necessary in the interests
of the Exhibition.
24. The right is reserved of keeping the Exhibition open till 10 o’clock p.m.
should the Executive Committee deem it desirable, and arrangements
are being made to light the Exhibition by electricity.
25. The Exhibition will be opened on 20th June, 1887, and will be closed
on 7th January, 1888.
Awards shall consist of three classes, viz.:—
ISt Class. —Diploma of First Order of Merit and Medal.
2nd Class. —Diploma of Second Order of Merit.
3rd Class. —-Diploma of Third Order of Merit.


EXHIBITION TESTIMONIALS.
Aerated Waters, Cordials, &c., Manufactory,
116 Collins StreeLWest, Melbourne.
Albert S. Manders & Co., ~ . , ... ~
Gentlemen, —I have much pleasure in saying that lam veiy well pleased wit e
manner in which you represented me and looked after my exhibits and interests at t e
Adelaide Exhibition, and should I decide upon exhibiting at the New Zealand Exhibition
I shall certainly entrust you with my exhibit.
Yours faithfully,
E. ROWLANDS.
23/1 1/81.
87 Collins Street East Melbourne.
Messrs. Albert S. Manders & Co., .... ,
Dear Sirs, —I have pleasure in acknowledging your tact and energy in obtaining and.
displaying my exhibition, and representing my interests at the Adelaide International
Exhibition. In the absence of the exhibitor himself, I consider a local representative of
the greatest importance.
Faithfully yours.
S. CALVERT.
22/11/81.
Fairfield Vineyards, Brown’s Plains.
Albert S. Manders & Co.,
91 Little Collins Street East.
Dear Sirs, —I have much pleasure in testifying to the energy and attention manifested
by in promoting my interest at the Adelaide Exhibition, and shall in future avail
myself of any opportunity that may occur to claim your services at other Exhibitions.
Enter me for Perth on stated.
Yours truly,
GEO. F. MORRIS.
73 Elizabeth Street.
Albert S. Manders & Co., .
Dear Sirs, —I have much pleasure in thanking you for the care and attention you
have given to my exhibits and interests during the continuance of the Adelaide Exhibition,
and h.ve already requested your representatives in Adelaide to take charge of my exhibit
in Western Australia, and would like you to represent me in New Zealand.
Yours truly,
H. W. HOLLOWAY.
2i/it/Bi.
Bankside Vineyards, Adelaide.
Messrs. Albert S. Manders & Co., , .... „ ,
From what I saw as an exhibitor and juror of your management ot exhibits, &c., at
the Adelaide Exhibition, I can confidently recommend any intending exhibitors at future
shows to place their interests in your hands.
Yours truly,
THOMAS HARDY.
26/11/81.
25 Little Collins Street East.
Albert S. Manders & Co., . .. , ,
Gentlemen,—l beg to tender my most sincere thanks for the way m which you have
attended to my exhibits during the Adelaide Exhibition.
I remain, yours truly,
PETER YOUNG
22/11/81.
Australian F. Land and Produce Co., Limited,
85 Little Collins Street West, Melbourne,
Albert S. Manders & Co.,
Dear Sirs, —I have much pleasure in testifying to your careful attention to the interests
of this company while acting as their agent at the recent Adelaide Exhibition, and shall
always avail myself of your services (if obtainable) for similar occasions.
Yours faithfully,
ARTHUR H. L. BROWNE, Sec.
22/11/81.


Auldana Vineyards, Adelaide.
From the energetic business-like way Messrs. Albert S. Manders & Co. conducted
their agencies at the Adelaide Exhibition, I have every confidence they do their utmost for
one and all of their clients, t hey are entrusted with the care, &c., of the Auldana Vineyard
Proprietors’ Wines, at Perth, and will, I have no doubt, see that these wines are placed to
the best advantage before the judges and the public.
24/11/81.
Wm. PATRICK AULD, Manager, Auldana.
33 Collins Street East.
Albert S. Manders & Co.,
Dear Sirs, —I have great pleasure in testifying to the able and efficient way in which you
represented me at the Adelaide Exhibition, and feel confident that I shall find in you
excellent representation at the Perth Exhibition. You are at liberty to use my name as a
reference should you desire to do so.
Yours faithfully,
22/11/81.
W. T. CLARK.
Telephone Manufactory, 133 Little Collins Street.
Albert S. Manders & Co.,
Gentlemen, —I wish to ex >ress my thanks for the manner in which you arranged and the
trouble you took in displaying my exhibits at the Adelaide Exhibition ; also for the constant
watch you kept over my interest in that city, and shall be happy to support you in any
future undertaking. Wishing you every success.
I am, yours truly,
23/11/81.
J. E. EDWARDS.
Royal Arcade.
Albert S. Manders & Co.,
Gentlemen,—lt affords me great pleasure in having to testify to your good management
of my exhibits at the Adelaide Exhibition. 1881, and the fact that I obtained first order of
merit is no doubt owing partly to your care and watchfulness as agents acting for my interests.
Wishing you every success in future,
I remain, yours, &c..
N. J. CAIRR.
23/11/81.
Engineering Works, Franklin Street.
Messrs. Albert S. Manders & Co.,
Gentlemen, —In reply to your note I beg to state that I am well pleased with the way
you acted as my representative at the Adelaide Exhibition, and fully believe that it was
through your energy in carefully pointing but to the judges the different points in my exhibit
that I obtained first degree of merit. Your charges were reasonable.
Yours respectfully,
PRICE WILLIAMS.
21/1 !/Bi.
11




/
(iTcntcnuial (fctjjibiti mi, Jiirk cn , ESciE.
ALBERT S. MANDERS & CO.,
#•
EXHIBITION AGENTS,
KING WILLIAM ST., ADELAIDE. 120 KING ST., SYDNEY.
30 COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE.


SOOTH AUSTRALIA. |
ADELAIDE I
1887. •£&- |
•"» m m m m m m m m m m m m m m mt m ••••-- - • - - - - - -
waliiiM »*|iiilwi,
SYDNEY (N.S.W.) 1888.
ALBERT S. MANDERS & Co.,
30 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE,
ADELAIDE (S.A.J fi- SYDNEY (N.S.W.) f
EXPERT EXHIBITION REPRESENTATIVE.^
ESTABLISHED 1878. C
Melbourne : |
Albert S. Manders, Printer. _ ,
MDCCCLXXXYI.
•*ar~ ' i
\ -sr
A .. • i
