

-f t ff p., l
ADELAIDE COINS.
c Jt
ON VIEW AT NATIONAL ART GALLERY.
Outline of Old History.
[Reprinted from The Register, June I, 1909
A curious exhibit is to be placed to-day
in the Public Art Gallery. It is a re-
minder of a time when money was scarce
in South Australia, although gold was
plentiful—one of the most curious para-
doxes in history. The display indicated is
a collection of Adelaide “sovereigns,” or
£1 tokens, coined in 1852, with the dies
used in striking these and the £5 tokens
authorized under the Bullion Act. The
fact of their being on view is the outcome
of an intimation made to the Public Li-
brary Board at its last monthly meeting
by the President (Air. W. J. Sowden).
That gentleman mentioned that June 1
would be the jubilee anniversary of the
day when the late Air. Robert Kay began
iiis duties as secretary of the South Aus-
tralian Institute, on which the Public Li-
brary Board was founded. Mr. Sowden
likewise alluded to the fact that Mr. Kay,
whose death occurred on April 24, 1904,
had, when a young man, been engaged as
assistant at the Government Assay Office
at the time when the South Australian
“sovereigns” and tokens were coined, and
that the deceased gentleman (who died
about five years ago) used to explain that
the convexity of the South Australian
sovereigns was due to the fact that, for
want of the proper stamping machinery, a
heavy road roller had to be used in their
production. Sir Samuel Way (ex-Presi-
dent) suggested at the meeting that it
would be interesting if on the jubilee an-
niversary to which the President had al-
luded two or three of the gold tokens men-
tioned and bars of stamped bullion which
had passed as currency could be placed on
exhibition in the Art Gallery with an ex-
planatory notice. The idea" was unani-
mously supported, and to-day the public
will have the opportunity of inspecting
these old mementoes.
—A Glance Backward. —
It is not easy, in our times of subma-
rine cables, telegraphs, locomotive and
electric railways, and turbine steamships,
to imagine the difficulties which had to be
overcome by the pioneers of Australia in
many of the sudden emergencies that oc-
curred. The quickest return communica-
tion with the homeland-—with favourable
winds both ways—made it a matter of six
months before help could be sought and
obtained from England. Probably it was
largely that very fact that imbued the first
settlers with the resourceful mind for
which their following generations have be-
come noted.
—Foreign Coins Legally Current in
Australia
New South Wales, or Botany Bay
—as it was then best known —
had not long been settled before a
financial problem had to be settled in a
remarkable way. There were many sorts
of foreign money in circulation, owing to
the ships of various nations calling at Port
Jackson, and traders tound great difficulty
in calculating change owing to the diverse
values recognised for the same coins. To
bring to an end the chaos that thus
reigned, Governor King in 1800 issued a
proclamation announcing that the following
coins were to be legal tender for ( the
amounts set opposite to them: —Guinea,
22/; Johanna, £4; half-Johanna, £2; ducat,
9/6; gold mohur, 37/6; pagoda, 8/; Spanish
dollar, 5/; rupee, 2/6; Dutch guilder, 2/;
English shilling, 1/1 ; new copper coin of
1 oz., 2d.
—South Australia’s Financial Panic. —
Towards the close of 1851 the exciting
news of gold discoveries in Victoria caused
a large exodus from South Australia to the
new diggings, which increased during the
earlier part of 1852. All the coasting ves-
sels bound for Melbourne were crowded
with passengers, and thousands trudged
with wheelbarrows or swags, or travelled
in carts overland to the goldfields. Men of
all classes joined in the wild rush for
wealth, and those who took part in the
overland trip say that along the roads
through the Ade a de Hits impedimenta o.
all kinds —stores, flour, tools, and other
things—were dropped on the way lest the
travellers should be outstripped by their
fellows. Trade was paralysed, and houses
were deserted; and a local versifier of the
day wrote a topical skit on “The last man
in Thebarton,” whom the women, so the
story went, chained to a table to preserve
one male protector in the district! There
was a run on the banks early in 1852, and
the gold in nuggets, dust, or bullion was
not a legal tender. It was bought on the
diggings as low as £2 16/ an oz. and sent
to London to be sold at about £4. In
this crisis unusual steps were needed to
avert financial disaster. On January 13,
1852, the Colonial Secretary (Hon. B. T.
Finnis) asked the managers of the Bank of
South Australia, Bank of Australasia, and
the Union Bank for their opinions on the
proposal indicated in a memorial from local
traders, for the establishment of an assay
office in Adelaide to receive, assay, melt,
and coin or stamp the gold brought in.
Mr. George Tinline, then acting manager
of the Bank of South Australia, supported
the scheme, and recommended a temporary
mint in connection with the assay office.
Mr. MacDermott, of the Bank of Austral-
asia, also supported the proposal, but Mr.
A. McDonald, of the Union Bank, con-
demned it. The Chamber of Commerce
stepped in with a request for the imme-
diate summoning ot the Legislative Coun-
cil (then the only House) to deal with the
subject. The Council met on January 28,
and on the same day passed the historic
Bullion Act (No. 1 of 1852), entitled “An
Act to provide for the assaying of uncoined
gold, and to make banknotes under certain
conditions a legal tender.” On February
4 a notice was issued that the Treasury
would receive gold dust in larcels of not
less than 20 oz. On the first day it re-
ceived 2,910 oz., and on the second 951 oz.
—First Australian-made Gold Coin. —
Air. C. P. Hyman, in his “Catalogue of
Coins, Coinage, and Currency of Austra-
lasia” (1893), says:—“Even by the. latest
instructions to Governors of British colo-
nies, those Imperial officials are prohibited
against assenting in the royal name to any
Bill affecting the currency of the colony,
though a proviso is added, ‘unless urgent
necessity exists requiring such to be
brought into immediate operation/ Irre-
spective of the irregular communication be-
tween the mother country and Australia at
the period under review, there can be no
doubt that the necessity did then exist,
and as a consequence the first gold pieces
struck for currency purposes in these co-
lonies were those issued in South Aus-
tralia.” Under the Bullion Act, the Go-
vernment Assayer was empowered to re-
ceive all uncoined gold, not less than 20
oz-, and to give a receipt which expressed
that the same gold, when assayed, was to
be delivered at one of the banks, to or to
the order of the owner of such gold. In-
structions were also included for the con-
version of the gold into ingots, and the
assayer was allowed to deduct one part in
100 for the expenses of assay. The public
was empowered to demand banknotes as
against the bullion at £3 11/ per oz. stan-
dard.”
—The Tokens Authorized.—
The Bullion Act was partially repealed
by another, assented to on November 23,
1852. That statute—the outcome of a peti-
tion signed by Mr. J. B. Neales and 113
others—said that persons were no longer
to be entitled to demand from the banks
notes in exchange for bullion as before; but
the Government Assayer, after he had as-
sayed any gold brought to him, was to re-
duce it to the fineness of standard gold,
and cause it to be divided into convenient
portions, of the value, at the rate of £3
11/ per oz. of standard gold, of £5, £2,
£l, or 10/ . . . and stamp upon each
such portion the precise weight and value
thereof, “with such device as, being ap-
proved by the Governor, shall be published
in The South Australian Government Ga-
zette.” If at any time after January 28,
1853, the gold brought to the assay office
should amount to less than 4,000 oz., the
Governor was empowered to issue a pro-


« ■ *1 *.KMbK^
clamation closing the office after 14 days* Some of the tokens will be exhibited brows of the busy workers. At
notice. at the Public Art Gallery to-day, to mark o ne time notes of 10/ each were issued.
—The Coins/ —■
The first issue of £1 tokens was made on
November 26, 1852, and the coinage ceased
in the following February. In that time
24,648 of this value were coined. It is said
that_ the £5 dies were used for the pro-
duction of only six .tokens. No dies
made for the other values authorized. The
following reproductions will give a better
idea of the coins than can be conveyed by
words: —
—Five Pound and Pound Tokens Struck in
Adelaide after the Passing of the Bullion
Acts in 1852.
the jubilee of the appointment of the late
Mr. Robert Kay as secretary of the South
Australian Institute. Mr. Kay was en-
gaged at the Government Assay Office as
assistant assayer when the tokens were
struck. The original die for one side of
the “sovereigns” having been cracked, was
soon withdrawn, and that fact has made
the earlier specimens of the tokens more
uncommon. Upon their face a stroke in
relief is seen before the “d” in “dwt.”;
but, irrespective of this, the designs of
the inner circles on the reverse are diffe-
rent, the size and type of the lettering
also differs, and there are minor variations.
To ascertain the intrinsic value of each
token four were sent for assay to the Lon-
don Mint, with the result that at £3 17/9
an ounce for standard gold they were
worth £1 1/11 each.
The “ingots” issued were in the form
of oblong plates of gold. They were
stamped with a crown over “S.A.” in shield
on one side, and also stamped inscrip-
tions, of which the following is one speci-
men:—ln Circle —“Weight of ingot, oz. 0:
dwt. 5: qrs. 5. Equivalent weight of 22
carats, oz. 0: dwt. 5: qrs. 11”; “23 carats,”
and other numerals.
—Sovereigns as Viceregal Mementoes. —
Mr. Hyman, in the work already men-
tioned, says:—“The successive Governors of
South Australia up to date (1898) and their
wives have each been presented with a spe-
cimen, of this interesting gold token. Some
years ago two Adelaide whist clubs capri-
ciously employed a few as whist markers.
Many of the ingots were shipped to Eng-
land, India, and other places.”
—Early Adelaide Banknotes. —
The following occurred in an article on
the history of the Bank of South iWs-
tralia, published in The Register in April,
1902:—“In the ‘diggings times’ the demand
for notes was so great that they had to be
printed in ordinary type in South Austra-
lia. For additional security against forgery
the directors, as well as the manager and
accountant, signed the notes, which were
issued to the tellers with the ink scarcely
dry. Unfortunately they were numbered
in red ink, and this gave great trouble in
passing them for cancellation through the
books, as the ink was obliterated by per-
spiration dropping from the furrowed
The Bank of South Australia began busi-
ness in Adelaide in 1837 in a primitive
building. On one occasion three quarter-
casks of pennies came out from England,
and these were placed outside the back
door for want of room. An idea got abroad
that the casks contained silver, and some
person or persons rolled one around the
corner into King William street, where it
was broken open, or rather scuttled, in a
part of the scrub. The result was disap-
pointment dire and bitter, as the pennies
were old and heavy, and could not be poc-
keted in sufficient quantity to pay the dis-
honest prospectors. The scattered contents
of the casks were abandoned, and when the
robbery w~as discovered and the broached
cask found the head clerk had to under-
take the tedious task of counting the
pennies—about £5O worth.”
—Other South Australian Tokens.—
“South Australia (says Hyman) was not
without several other peculiar expedients
to supply circulating media. In 1855 Tilley
Cooke had a number of small copper pieces
struck, about the size of a farthing. Their
inscription, on one side only, is brief:
Hindmarsh Hotel, Pirie st., 4d.’ No
doubt, as people were probably then as
thirsty as now, customers were not long
in liquidating their change in a manner sa-
tisfactOT.y to the innkeeper. Another no-
velty was the issue by a firm of uphol-
sterers (Congrave) of the little round
pieces of leather (used in the trade) as
pence and halfpence, the values being
stamped on the pieces. Besides these,
currency notes were issued for 2d. by a
few persons in 1852 and other years.” An
old col mist once said that even at such a
well-known grocery establishment as that
of Mr. P. Mcßostie, in Bundle street, a
customer purchasing a small article would
tender a note for a few pence issued by
(say) a leading draper, and receive in ex-
change another written note for the
amount on its face less the purchase of
i he moment, and signed by the shopkeeper,
no coin passing in the transaction.
104 b\> * DE
\tr
6 W
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street.
