

fq *2 /
° ->d/a
/ /
ADMIRAL
ARTHUR PHILLIP, R.N.
Founder and First Governor
of
Australia
ADDRESSES
given at
FOURTH ANNUAL
SERVICE
THANKSGIVING
and RECEPTION
on October 1 3th
1936






The complete memorial in position on the front of
St. Mildred’s Church, Bread Street, City of London


Admiral
ARTHUR PHILLIP, R.N
Founder and
First Governor
of Australia
ADDRESSES
given on the
occasion of
Fourth Annual Service
of Thanksgiving
Reception
Tuesday,
October 13th, 1936


ojhr &PioisCeep^
Sh\ l]SB Bap tain J4rt£ur {PTitlip \° eprorcetGJ,Jrrmv &otatvy sta\j t(\ iPcrt fjaepgvn . ancTjxnuuGtf tfu Oily of' Sydney
OsnyM'r&nxrrun-g* rwraC(us fvrtitucU aruL humanity sustained the lures cuuCsteutxtC the cut^tirK
cf theJirst settlers m Ofeur Soutfx GWcUlx
By courtesy of “ The City Press ”


Admiral Arthur Phillip Memorial
PATRON.
H.R.H. The Duke of Kent, K.G., G.C.V.0., R.N.
PRESIDENT.
Colonel and Alderman The Rt. Hon. Viscount Wakefield
of Hythe, G.C.V.0., C.B.E.
VICE-PRESIDENTS.
The Rt. Hon. The Lord Mayor of London.
The Rt. Rev. The Lord Bishop of London, P.C., K.C.V.0., D.D.
The Primate of Australia.
The Prime Minister of Australia.
The Rt. Hon. The Secretary of State for the Dominions.
His Excellency The Governor-General of Australia.
The High Commissioner for Australia.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Denman, P.C., G.C.M.G., K.C.V.O.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Forster of Lepe, P.C., G.C.M.G., D.L.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Stonehaven, P.C., G.C.M.G., D.S.O.
Admiral Sir Dudley De Chair, K.C.8., K.C.M.G.
Sir Archibald Weigall, K.C.M.G.
The Chief Justice of Australia.
The Chairman of the Royal Empire Society.
The Master of the Cordwainers’ Company.
The Master of the Curriers’ Company.
The President of the Australasian Pioneers’ Club.
The President of the London Australian Society.
COMMITTEE.
Colonel and Alderman The Rt. Hon. Viscount Wakefield of
Hythe, Chairman.
Rev. J. Richardson-Eyre, M.A., Rector.
Mr. T. G. Devas. j
Mr. W. L. Taylor. > Churchwardens.
Mr. Herbert E. Hill, C.C.
Mr. Deputy J. H. White, C.C. Mr. A. Mackenzie Hay, C.C
Mr. J. Northcott, C.C.
Mr. E. F. Donne, C.C.
Mr. F. B. Coates, C.C.
Mr. H. Meldrum, C.C.
Mr. S. Parkes, C.C.
The Official Secretary of Australia House.
The Master of the Cordwainers’ Company,
The Master of the Curriers’ Company.
Mr. Hanbury Davies.
Mr. D. Hope Johnston, M.A., F.R.Hist.S.
Mrs. D. Hope Johnston.
SECRETARIES.
Mr. F. W. Mander, M.A., Ward and Vestry Clerk, 7, Cannon
Street, E.C.4.
The Official Secretary, Australia House, Strand, W.C.2.
The Secretary, The Royal Empire Society, Northumberland
Avenue, W.C.2.


THE FOURTH
COMMEMORATION SERVICE
N Tuesday, 13th October, for the fourth year in
succession, the great services of Admiral Arthur
Phillip, R.N., to the Empire in founding what is
now the great Dominion of Australia were solemnly remembered
in the City of his birth.
Admiral Phillip first saw the light in one of the streets close by
the beautiful Church of St. Mildred, Bread Street, and there
worshipped with his parents.
Some years ago this almost forgotten fact was brought to the
notice of Viscount Wakefield, Alderman of the Ward. Appre-
ciating the importance of the matter, he erected a memorial of
Phillip on the outer wall of the little church, and, to the great joy
of Australians, it was unveiled in due course by the Duke of Kent.
An Annual Commemoration
Later Lord Wakefield founded a Trust to provide for the upkeep
of the memorial, and for an annual service to be held in the church,
with the delivery of an address on the life and work of a man who,
in the face of almost unprecedented difficulties, founded a Colony
which has grown into one of the great Dominions of the Common-
wealth.
In conformity with the terms of the Trust, the service was held
in the presence of a large gathering in which Australia and New
Zealand were well represented.
The service was followed by a reception, at Cordwainers' Hall,
where Lord Wakefield presented to the Master, Sir Austen
Chamberlain, a fine mezzotint portrait of Admiral Phillip,
At the church, Lord Wakefield, who is the President of the
Page Six


Admiral Phillip Commemoration Council, welcomed the dis-
tinguished members of the congregation, who included the Lord
Mayor, the Lady Mayoress, Mr. Alderman and Sheriff Pollitzer,
Mr. Sheriff Mcßea, C.C., Sir Austen Chamberlain (Master of the
Cordwainers' Company) and Lady Chamberlain, Mr. Bruce
(High Commissioner of the Commonwealth of Australia), Lady
(Hal) Colebatch, Mr. and Mrs. D. Hope-Johnston, and many
others.
The members of the Court of Common Council for the Ward
were present in their robes.
The Rev. J. Richardson Eyre, the Rector, officiated, and Lord
Wakefield, who wore his Aldermanic robe and Chain of Office,
read the Lesson.
There were special prayers for the King, for the British Empire,
for Australia, and for the City of London.
Page Seven


AN ADDRESS
Sir ARCHIBALD WEIGALL, K.C.M.G.
Formerly Governor of South Australia
(Chairman of the Royal Empire Society.)
O-DAY we are honouring the memory of one of the
greatest of our Empire builders —Admiral Arthur
Phillip—founder and first governor of Australia, who
before the days of wide vision and glorious anticipation, carved
out an empire by means of peaceful penetration rather than
by the sword. He was, therefore, in every sense of the word,
a pioneer colonist.
The great achievement of Phillip in laying the foundations
of Australia as a nation was crowded into five years of intense
activity. In the year 1787, when he sailed from Portsmouth, his
work was just beginning; but by the year 1792, when he returned
to England from Sydney, he had accomplished what must know
be regarded as a miracle of organisation. It is not necessary to
dwell upon the difficulties he had to overcome, as they are known
to everyone but it may be stated briefly that he accomplished a
stupendous task with very inadequate means.
When Phillip was chosen by Lord Sydney to lead the proposed
expedition to found a new colony in the Southern Hemisphere, he
was a comparatively unknown man with no great record behind
him. So far as we know, he had not previously shown any special
Page Eight


ability* Someone, however, had noticed his quality and suggested
Phillip as the best man for the job.
The occasion had produced the man. Lord Sydney showed
sound judgment in choosing Arthur Phillip, for the latter proved
himself not only a man of action, but a man of wide vision and
sterling integrity.
He had three essentials for creative and organising work —and
the founding of a colony is essentially creative. He had faith in
its mission and its vast possibilities ; organising ability of a very
high order ; and courage and determination to go on with a task
that would have daunted a less conscientious man and probably
have discouraged a man whose temperament was less stable.
He was one of the few men who foresaw that the colony he was
about to establish would not remain a tiny settlement on a practic-
ally unknown and far distant shore, but was destined to endure.
As we now know, the miniature and apparently helpless and
dependent State carved out of the wilderness was in the course of
time to become an ordered and progressive government.
Phillip himself could hardly have foreseen the formation and
growth of the great Commonwealth of to-day, with its vast
potentialities and great centres of population and trade ; but he
did foresee that his small State would be something greater than
was considered possible by those who were responsible for its
foundation. He formulated plans for a capital city which would
give ample room for development and become the nucleus of a
great community —an act of foresight that, unfortunately, was not
sufficiently followed by his successors in office. In fact, as I
have indicated, Phillip was a man of vision as well as a man of
affairs.
Imagine the situation that confronted this intrepid pioneer of
empire during the critical days of the foundation of the settle-
Page Nine


ment. Communication between Sydney and London was slow
and precarious ; ships of supply failed to arrive or when they did
come they were often badly provisioned. Everything had to be
provided from the home country —seeds, animals, tools, and all
the necessary food to support a population that was as yet unable
to supply itself from the land. The colonists had to be put upon
rations. Starvation was not a distant possibility but a real menace
until the soil could be properly cultivated. Above all, few of
Phillip's staff shared his belief in the future possibilities of a region
that they regarded as almost beyond the pale of civilisation.
Before Phillip relinquished his arduous task, this man, with his
driving force and indomitable will, had firmly and courageously,
established a colony, that was destined to become the chief centre
of British interests in the Southern Hemisphere and the home of
many millions of our kinsmen overseas.
I have said that Phillip did not emerge upon the stage of history
until the year 1787. His life's work was crowded into a single
act and then the curtain was rung down and he virtually dis-
appeared from the pages of history.
Now why is it that the memory of Phillip—a man of intense
activity and enthusiasm —remained until recently, comparatively
unknown except to a select few ; and why was his name almost
buried in oblivion ?
It is, I think, because practical work quietly and efficiently
performed is often overlooked by the powers that be and is not
recognised until future generations are able to enjoy and appreciate
its results. No one at the time realised that a new nation and a
new civilisation were being established on the shores of Port
Jackson. The seed had not ripened and it lay in the ground
unperceived.
Page Ten


On the other hand, a great navigator like Captain Cook went
forth with the attention of the world focussed upon him and
when his work was successful and crowned with triumph, his
name immediately became a household word. Both Cook and
Phillip were men of action, but the actions of one were in the
limelight and the work of the other was only dimly perceived.
u Time/* said Phillip, referring to the tribulations at Sydney,
44 will remove all difficulties.” Cautious but confident, cheerful
but silent, cold and perhaps unlovable, but always industrious and
at times almost heroic in his steadfastness, he was constantly
urging upon the colonists the need for will and determination to
overcome their difficulties. By his very lack, perhaps, of those
brilliant qualities that might have earned him the applause of his
contemporaries and by his solid and stolid determination to
evolve order out of chaos, he has won the admiration of posterity,
and the due recognition of his great qualities as a leader that was
denied to him in his own time.
To-day we are assembled to do honour to one who may be con-
sidered in a very real and vital sense, the father of Australia—for
he was the pioneer planter of a new nation, and his task was
only ended when he had planted the seed and made it bud and
sprout and begin to grow.
Those who have lived in the Australia of to-day amongst that
virile and self-reliant people who see life from their own angle,
thrilled by the enormous progress that has been made in but a
hundred years after Admiral Phillip's work, realise that the
progress in social and economic life has never been excelled.
No one can deny the active and intelligent interest of that com-
munity in the forms of government under which they live. Is it
enough that once a year we should attend a service and remember
Admiral Phillip ? It would be presumptuous and impertinent
Page Eleven


if I attempted to draw any moral, but, perhaps, I may suggest
that, if we are really sincere in wanting to preserve the memory
of Admiral Phillip and all he did there, there is a lesson for us.
Lord Rosebery once said that the British Empire was the greatest
secular agency for good ever known to mankind. If that be so,
what a responsibility it places on us at the present time.
Close Association
I believe that the close association of British peoples spread
over the seven seas is the only rock of sanity and stability upon
which the world has to lean for its future peace and prosperity.
We have a remarkable heritage, and, side by side with all the
adventurous spirit that Admiral Phillip showed, we, perhaps
illogically, have always had an intense love of law and order, and a
determination to have law and order and good government and
organisation. The mutual support and the co-operation which
flow from the fact of a common Crown constitute a common law of
Empire, enforced not by a central authority, but by the free action
of all who live under that Crown.
For those privileged to belong to it, our Empire is a partnership
in sentiment, in memories, in ideals, and in habits of life —a soul
housed in a mighty frame. The achievement of unity amongst
the peoples of our Empire to-day demands a personal devotion and
faith, almost a religion, to give purpose to our lives, if we mean
what we say on these matters. This does not mean a displace-
ment of our Christian faith by an Imperial paganism. It means
that we must link ourselves together for practical purposes, for
duties and for sympathies amongst those who are scattered over
the seven seas in the British Empire.
Page Twelve


RECEPTION AT CORDWAINERS’ HALL
IR AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN, as Master of
the Cordwainers' Company assisted by Lady
Chamberlain, afterwards gave a reception at
Cordwainers' Hall.
Lord Wakefield read the following letter from Sir Kelso King,
President of the Australasian Pioneers' Club of Sydney
Dear Viscount Wakefield,
I wish to send you a message from the members
of this Club, and to express their appreciation of
the example set in honouring the memory of Admiral
Phillip, the Founder and First Governor of Australia,
as you have done on his anniversary birthdays. It
has been decided by the Committee that we shall
endeavour to follow your good example, and arrange-
ments have been made to hold a special service in St.
Andrew's Cathedral, Sydney, on Sunday afternoon,
11 th October, for that purpose. The Women's Pioneer
Society and the Royal Australian Historical Society will
co-operate, and His Grace the Archbishop will give the
address, and will dwell upon the high ideals of Governor
Phillip, and the debt due to him by the Empire.
Wishing you continued success in the important
national work you have undertaken.
Lord Wakefield's Gift
Continuing, Lord Wakefield, said : At this quite informal
reunion, I merely wish to perform three very pleasant duties.
First of all, I am sure that we shall all join in expressing apprecia-
tion of the splendid and thought-provoking address by Sir
Archibald Weigall, to which we have just listened. It has struck
the right note at this the fourth of our annual commemorations,
and we who are interested in the perpetuation of Phillip's memory
as a grand Empire figure are immensely grateful to Sir Archibald.
Page Thirteen


Bread Street’s Famous Son ,
You will support me with equal warmth in expressing also our
sincere thanks to the Worshipful Master, Wardens, and Court of
Assistants of the Cordwainers' Company for their hospitality
here this afternoon. The impressive service at St. Mildred's
Church is a fitting way in which to pay honour to Bread Street's
famous son, but this friendly gathering afterwards helps im-
mensely to unite all of us, who so greatly admire Phillip and his
work, in bonds of friendship.
Worshipful Master, in token of the appreciation which we of the
Admiral Phillip Trust have for the continued hospitality of the
Cordwainers Company, I ask you to accept this engraving by
Mr. Macbeth Raeburn, R.A., after the portrait of Phillip by
Wheatley. I trust that a place may be found for it on these walls,
thus serving to establish the close link between the Cordwainers'
Company and this splendid hero of the Ward of Bread Street.
Sir Austen’s Appreciation .
Sir Austen Chamberlain in accepting the gift, said: Lord
Wakefield, let me first say, on behalf of the Cordwainers' Com-
pany, how very glad we are to welcome you here to-day, and to be
associated with this celebration of the commemoration of the
deeds of a great man.
We thank you for the beautiful portrait which you have presented
to us, and which will certainly find a place in this Hall.
To one with my traditions, you will not be surprised to
know it is a particular pleasure to me to accept this gift in
my year as Master of the Cordwainers' Company, with which
my family has been so long connected.
Page Fourteen




.. '■
- : ■
.
-
■
'


Bbmtral Hrtbur pbUltp nftemortal.
(St. Mildred’s Church, Bread Street, E.C.4)
Commemoration Service.
Tuesday, October 13th, 1936.
NOTE that the Service at St. Mildred’s Church, Bread Street,
will be attended by The Rt. Hon. Sir Percy Vincent, The Lord Mayor
of London, accompanied by The Lady Mayoress and The Sheriffs, and
Alderman The Rt. Hon. The Viscount Wakefield of Hythe, g.g.v.0., c.b.e.
THE ADDRESS
will be given by
Lt-Col. Sir Archibald Weigall, k.g.m.g.
and there will be a Reception at Cordwainers Hall, 7, Gannon Street, after the
Service at the Invitation of The Master of the Cordwainers Company,
The Rt. Hon, Sir Austen Chamberlain, k.g., m.p.
