

ADRIFT SEA
s , v
A BOY’S BOOK OF ADVENTURE
~’7 ~ - /"
/
/ / / iii
\ I /
\ \ 1
v ; ;
■ <
ALEXANDER STEWART JOLLY


K X? „
„/£> . LA.
V A «
w)


ADRIFT AT SEA
I I


Wholly set up and printed in Australia
by Geo. B. Philip & Son,
451 Pitt Street, Sydney.
Registered at the General Post Office,
Sydney, for transmission through the
post as a book.


ADRIFT AT SEA
A BOY’S BOOK OF ADVENTURE
ALEXANDER STEWART JOLLY
Copyright
Sydney :
GEORGE B. PHILIP & SON,
451 Pitt Street.




n f ; CCQ
CONTENTS
I. A Day’s Fishing 9
11. The Dawn 13
111. The Derelict Ship 17
IV. The Fight with the Bears 24
V. Terror Island 29
VI. The Whale 33
VII. Building the Cabin 39
VIII. Lost 42
IX. The Attack of the Bears .... .... .... .... 47
X. Climbing the Mountain 51
XI. Finding Captain McKenzie .... .... .... 57
XII. The Fight 62
XIII. Home 67




Chapter I
A Day’s Fishing
said Father, to the boys and girls, “we will sail
the yacht through the heads, and spend the day
fishing.”
They all hurried off to prepare for the day’s outing, while
Mother busied herself packing the hampers.
“May we invite the Browns to come with us?” asked one
of the boys.
“Yes,” said father, “I don’t mind, there is room for all.”
The Browns were delighted with the suggestion, and soon
the whole party, consisting of the Smiths—Father, Mother,
Mavis, Lois, Kathleen, Jean, Jessie, Mac, Douglas, Colin, lan,
Owen and Teddy; and the Browns —Father, Mother, Noreen,
Betty, Fay, Lex, Bobby, Jock, Arthur, Allan and Gordon, set
off on the cruise.
The yacht was 60 feet in length, fitted for long cruising,
with ample cabin space and galley. She was always kept
stocked with flour, biscuits, sugar, tea, coffee, for, as Mr. Smith
remarked, should they at any time be blown out to sea, he
liked to feel that they could last out some months on the rations
in store.
“We have chosen a lovely day, Mrs, Brown.”
“Yes, Mrs. Smith, it is a perfect morning.”
The wind was blowing just strong enough to carry them
along at a seven knot pace.
The yacht passed through the heads at 9.30 a.m., then
turned north. Here Mr. Smith handed over the steering wheel
to Colin, telling him to steer for Broken Bay, where he thought
the fish would be biting well and a good haul secured.
Mr. Brown had never been to sea before, so Mac told him
the names of the headlands and beaches along the coast.


Manly, of course, was familiar to all and was soon left behind.
The boys knew Dee Why, as they had often surfed there, and
Bobby told a tale of how he had been carried out to sea and
been saved by the life savers, Narrabeen was passed, then
Newport, and a shout of excitement went up when abreast of
Avalon. Mac turned the telescope on to the bathing pool to
see if he could recognise any of the bathers, but all looked alike
in their bathing suits. Avalon was a favourite beach of the
families.
When opposite Palm Beach, Mr. Smith decided to anchor
the yacht.
“Now, before commencing your sport, boys, we shall have
lunch, and then you can throw out your lines,” said Mrs.
Smith.
“Gee! I could eat you, mum,” said Douglas, and certainly
all the children had good sea appetites.
Luncheon over, Mr. Smith and Mr. Brown declared they
would try for schnapper, and the rest could please themselves.
So in a few minutes every one was busy with lines.
“I will give a shilling to the one who catches the first
fish,” said Mr. Brown, as he cast his line out.
In a few minutes, Teddy called excitedly, “I’ve got him,”
and sure enough up came a lovely bream; so Teddy won the
shilling.
The fishing was great sport, and soon there were dozens
of jumping fish in the boat. Everyone agreed it was the best
day they had had.
Owen seemed very excited and Douglas was helping him
to haul in his line but they had to call on Allan and Mac for
assistance. Owen thought he had a whale on the hook, and
as the end came up he leaned over, but, quickly fell back as
the ugly nose of a grey nurse shark broke the surface of the
water.
Then began a struggle! Mr. Smith hurried to them to
direct operations. The children were wildly excited as the
shark was played, and whenever he was brought near the boat,
he thrashed the water into foam. After a long struggle they


succeeded in drowning- him, and Mr. Grey Nurse was no more.
Cutting the line he was allowed to drift away on the waves.
The best fish of the day was caught by Arthur, a schnapper
weighing 30 lbs.
“Now, boys, I think we’ll call it a day. We will set sail
for home, and perhaps mother will cook us some fish as
we sail.”
The smell of the fish cooking made them all feel very
hungry, and schnapper and bream were soon on hot plates
being enjoyed.
Not a word was spoken until Mr. Smith, with an anxious
face, turned to Mr. Brown, and asked him to watch the clouds
gathering on the horizon. Mr. Brown said he did not like it,
and when the wind began to blow and the sky to grow black,
all felt that they would be lucky to reach port before the storm
broke, excepting the children who had been too busy talking
of the fish that weighed more than 30 lbs. which, unfortunately,
they had lost.
Then the storm broke in all its fury. The ladies felt
anxious, but knew there was nothing they could do, and Mrs.
Smith felt confidence in Mr. Smith who was an experienced
sailor.
Night came on before they could reach port, so the anchor
was dropped, the men praying that it would hold and the boat
ride out the storm. The beds were made in the bunks for the
children. As their voices were drowned by the storm, it was
no use trying to hold any conversation.
The wind rose to hurricane force, and, with a snap, the
cable parted, leaving the yacht helpless, so she drifted before
the wind, with Mr. Smith clinging on to the wheel.
Now, Mr. Brown,’ said he, “this boat is very staunch,
and if we don’t spring a leak we may pull through. See if the
v omen and children are all right, you can’t do anything here,
and will only be washed overboard, so, please, stay down below,
and I will do my best to keep the ship right.”
The children were feeling sick, but the mothers were
cheerful and ready for anything that might happen.


So the weary night passed, with the boat riding the waves
splendidly, and Mr. Smith hanging on to the wheel. Fortun-
ately. the storm was blowing them away from the land, so there
was no danger of being wrecked on the rocks.
Mr. Smith confessed afterwards that he did not know how
they managed to keep afloat so great were the waves that
tossed the boat about like a cork, and Mrs. Smith said she liked
the sea in a less angry mood.
The gale abated, and the strain was relieved, everyone
feeling that they would now only have to await the dawn to
find their bearings. The children slept peacefully until the
day dawned.


Chapter 11.
The Dawn
THE new day arrived, with Mr. Smith on deck, very tired
and haggard. He saw the grey streaks shooting from
the horizon and noted with thankful heart, that the sky was
clear and all signs of the dread night ’s storm had disappeared.
Mr. Brown joined him, and as the light grew brighter, they
watched to see how far from the coast the yacht had been
blown, but there was not a sign of land; on every side was
ocean.
“The compass has been washed overboard; I don’t know
where we are,’’ said Mr. Smith, “we will have to sail on and
trust to providence to lead us to some vessel making for port.
I don’t think we can be very far from the coast, probably about
40 miles at the most. Yes, it is bad luck about the compass.’’
The children began to troop up on deck, and soon all
were seated, watching the wonderful sky, as the sun began to
spread his rays over the ocean.
Everything was peaceful and calm, and as the sun rose
higher he shed his warming brightness over all. “Such a
wonderful day I am going to give you,” he seemed to say,
and for the moment all troubles were banished, and nothing
but admiration for his majestic presence remained.
Thou soul-stirring dawn, thou noble sun that bringest the
day anew, what thoughts are inspired in our breasts as we
watch the soft grey light spreading itself in. ever widening
circles showing in dim outline the clouds that rest as silent
sentinels on the horizon. Then piercing rays shoot to the sky
as heralds of his coming majesty. We need thy life-giving
stream, our faithful friend, to cheer us as we rest on the bosom
of this lonely ocean. Silently the party watched as the ever
increasing circles of light spread over the world.


It was indeed a wonderful sight!
Then Mr. Smith offered up a prayer for their safe deliver-
ance from the storm.
Jock thought he could see a sail in the distance, so eager
eyes were on the watch. Yes, it’s a ship, they all agreed, but
it soon vanished. The smoke of several steamers was seen
but they passed too far distant for it to be of any use
signalling.
“I’m afraid our luck’s out this morning,’’ remarked Mr.
Brown.
Breakfast was prepared and eaten, sails set, and the good
boat “Jane” scrubbed and polished.
“Now, boys and girls,” said Mr. Smith, “we have no com-
pass and must sail on and trust that we shall fall into the
track of some steamer; if we don’t it is possible that we may
sail on until we strike some place unknown to us. That means
perhaps months on the water, and, maybe, years on some lonely
land where we will have to live on whatever is growing or
procurable there. I want you all to realise the position. The
girls will, of course, help their mothers, and the boys I will
divide into two parties, with Allan as chief of one and Mae
chief of the other. Each party will be responsible to its chief,
and must do whatever it is ordered, and any insubordination
will be punished very severely.
“Allan, stand forward, and you also, Mac. Now each
one call his crew, Allan, go ahead.”
“Douglas,” called Allan.
“Lex” called Mac, and so on until all the boys were
enrolled as crews of either Mac or Allan,
The crews were as follows:
Allan, Chief Mae, Chief
Douglas Lex
Owen Bobby
Arthur Jock
Teddy Colin
Gordon lan


“Now that you have your crews, you two chiefs will
consult together, and if any difficulties arise you will refer
them to me.”
“Allan, you take an inventory of all stores on board, and
Mac, see that your crew secure a good haul of fish,”
They were soon at work on their tasks. Mrs. Smith,
Mrs. Brown and the girls commenced curing the fish that had
already been caught; whilst Mr. Smith and Mr. Brown sat in
the cabin with charts and pencils, trying to work out just
where the position of the boat might be.
Mac took the wheel and sent the rest of his crew to work
fishing. They did not mind how often the task of provisioning
the larder might fall to their lot.
Allan and his boys began overhauling the stores, and they
found the boat very well stocked with provisions and materials.
The following are the main items that were noted.—
1 bag Flour Several kegs of sea biscuits
1 bag Sugar Kerosene
1 bag Salt Oil
1 chest Tea Tobacco
I chest Coffee Blankets
1 ease Soap Linen
Very fortunately they also found three shot guns, three
revolvers, and a large quantity of ammunition. There were,
too, tools for a blacksmith’s shop and a carpenter’s shop.
Mr. Smith was quite right when he said the boat was prepared
for any emergency.
Lunch interrupted the work and was eaten on deck.
There was a feeling of optimism over all, as Mr. Smith
said the boat had weathered the first storm so well that it
would probably weather anything they might encounter until
some land was found, or a vessel that could take them home
again.
Mac sent Jock to climb the mast to watch for any chance
ship that might be in their path. About 3 o’clock in the
afternoon Jock called, “Steamer ahead,” so excitement ran
high. Jock waved a sheet, “I think they have seen us,” he


cried, but in his excitement, as the boat rolled, he fell off his
perch into the sea. The girls screamed, but Jock could swim,
and soon his head was seen bobbing up on the waves. Allan
had thrown a life belt and ordered the dinghy out with Owen
and Teddy, The vessel was forgotten in the excitement, and
when Mac sent Arthur up, there was only a tiny trail of
smoke visible.
Jock had fallen into the sea with his sheet; so probably
they thought it was a bird, the distance being too great to see
clearly. Owen and Teddy soon reached Jock, and hauled him
into the boat, and nearly upset the three of them in their hurry.
And there was need to hurry, for, no sooner had they hauled
him into the boat than a 14 ft. shark swam alongside the
dinghy, which, was only a frail thing, and the huge monster
with one swish of his tail could upset them; so pulling with all
their strength, the boys soon had the dinghy alongside the
yacht. It was a narrow escape for Jock. He felt a bit of a fool
falling off the mast, but his Chief did not say anything further
to him, and sent Lex and Colin to construct a basket seat to
attach to the mast, and Jock was again installed as lookout for
the day.
Nothing further was seen that day, the setting sun sink-
ing and leaving them a tiny lonely speck on the mighty ocean.
After tea the children rolled into their bunks, with thanks
to the storm that made possible this great adventure.


Chapter 111
The Derelict Ship
MONDAY morning found the yacht becalmed. There was
not a breath of Avind.
Allan had been busy looking at the Avater barrel. It Avas
essential to have Avater. Everyone knew that if the weather
kept fine for weeks there Avould be none left.
Kathleen had a bright idea, namely, to make a tank of
one of the sails. This suggestion was adopted, and the girls
Avere soon preparing the tank to hold Avater when it should
rain. It was easy to arrange a spare sail to form a catchment
area.
Mrs. Smith and Mrs. BroAAm had been greatly taken Avith
the idea of the boys having chiefs, so it Avas decided to appoint
Jean as chief of the girls, with the others sworn to obedience
to her. Jean said she felt the responsibility very much, and
would do her best to carry out her duties in fairness to
everyone.
“If we are to be cooped up on this yacht for months,”
she said, “we Avill need to haA r e some exercise; so every morn-
ing avc will have an hour’s drill, including skipping, at 10
o’clock.” There were plenty of ropes for the purpose, so
Jessie and Fay Avere immediately sent to make the skipping
ropes.
The boys, not to be outdone, arranged for their exercises
to be performed at 11 a.m., after the girls had finished.
Next a bathing pool Avas needed, so Mr. Smith said he
Avould stop the yacht each day from 11 until 12.30, when
the girls and boys could have their sAvim, and the parents join
in and ha\ r e a morning dip.


Two spars were secured to the deck, hanging 8 feet out
from the side over the water, to which was lashed a cross piece.
Then lacing a tarpaulin over, they formed a splendid pool
12 feet by 8 feet wide, which, when filled with water through
a hole at water level, was 3 feet deep. A plug was arranged
at the bottom so that when the tank was hauled up the water
would gradually run away.
It was a great treat, that first swim, and Douglas
christened the pool by diving in first.
Colin and Teddy were appointed to arrange the tank
every morning, and when the swimming was over, to empty it
and bring in the tarpaulin.
The physical welfare of the families being properly cared
for, it was thought that mental exercise would be good for all,
so Allan and Mac arranged for a sports hour, an educational
hour, and an hour devoted to reading. Jean also arranged
for the girls a programme including mental exercise and
sports.
Quoits was a favourite game in which all could join, and
teams were arranged so that regular matches could be played.
Fortunately there were several pairs of boxing gloves in
the locker, so these were brought out and the boys were paired
off, so as to make the weights as even as possible.
This all helped to pass away the time, and to keep the
boys and girls in health and strength.
Then for evenings, there were chess, draughts, cards, and
books on navigation to study, for those who felt inclined. In
fact Mr. Smith thought it would be a good idea to lecture to
the boys each evening, for 20 minutes, on the rudiments of
handling a yacht.
Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Brown arranged that two girls
should do the cooking each day under their supervision. Of
course they had to be careful with the food, but there were
many dishes to be made from fish and the birds which were
sometimes caught in snares when they settled on the boat.
The parents would not allow any guns to be used unless abo-
lutely necessary for defence, or to fill the larder, and the latter


would not be until they reached land. The guns were, there-
fore, carefully cleaned, oiled and put away until required.
During the evenings, Mr. Brown taught the boys much
about astronomy, and on clear nights, with the heavens gleam-
ing with myriads of lights, the boys learnt many things, of
the heavens that were to prove useful to them before they
reached home.
The ship was kept in splendid order, decks scrubbed, brass
work polished, and everything shining and gleaming in the
sunlight.
Meanwhile fish were caught and cured, some being stored
for a time when they might be needed. Fresh meat was badly
needed, also the rain still held off.
They had been drifting at sea for a fortnight; it was
hopeless to conjecture where they were for they had not
sighted land since the day of the storm, and Mr. Smith was
afraid they might now be a thousand miles from home, but
the boys did not care if they -were ten thousand miles away.
Everyone had put on weight, and if an argument arose
between the boys, Allan and Mac sent for the gloves, a ring
was formed, and many a lusty fight settled the disputes.
Gordon proved a tough customer, and he often started a dis-
pute with someone just to have a go at them with the gloves;
but Bobby was also learning to use his fists well, and it was
decided to let the two boys have a ding dong battle.
Mac was referee, Lex “second” to Bobby, and Colin
“second” to Gordon.
“Ready” said Mac, and the two boys shook hands, and
then, what a great display they gave! After ten rounds
Gordon managed to make a nice upper cut which outed Bobby
for the required time.
And so the days passed with everyone happy and con-
tented. The parents became resigned, and knew that they
were perhaps in for months or more of this life.
On the morning of the sixteenth day after leaving Port
Jackson, Arthur, whose turn it was on the lookout, shouted
“There is something on the horizon.” Glasses were brought


out and soon there could be seen a hulk, and gradually as
the yacht drew closer, the outline of some vessel without masts
or any sign of life was plainly visible.
The yacht was sailed right up to the old vessel and made
fast. From his perch Arthur could look down on the deck,
and he told those below that there was no one to be seen.
Mr. Smith was very dubious about letting any of the boys
board the stranger, but so eager were they that Allan and Mac
were allowed each to take one boy and explore, but Mr. Smith
said they were to be very careful and let two boys wait on
deck while the other two explored.
They were very proud when they were handed the guns.
A rope ladder was thrown over and the four boys climbed
up the side. They were a little bit frightened, but, of course,
neither Avould admit such a thing to the other. All wanted
to go to the cabin, but lots had to be drawn, and Mac and
Douglas were the pair to explore first, and if everything were
alright, they were to come back and tell the others.
“The first thing, Doug, is to find the Captain’s cabin.”
“There it is,” said Douglas, and opening the door they
walked into the cabin, fearful of what they might find.
“Look, Chief, said Doug,“ here is a book.”
Everyone wanted to know what ship it could be.
“Oh, that is the log,” said Mac, “we will take that with
us, but let us explore further first, and then let Chief Allan
and Owen know that everything is alright.”
The ship had been abandoned, that was quite apparent,
for there was not a sign of life anywhere. It was very gloomy
walking along the corridor on the lower deck, and rats scurried
in front of them. Douglas was not sure if he had been wise
in coming, but the feeling of adventure was there, so, bucking
up, the two boys looked into the Dining Saloon, Crew’s
Quarters and everywhere else, searching for some indication
of the reason for the ship’s abandonment.
“I think, Chief,” said Doug, “we may as well tell the
others that there is nothing to stop them coming down. ”
Just as he spoke a big rat ran up his leg and with an


“Oh, what was that,” Douglas, in his excitement, pulled the
trigger of his gun, and bang went the weapon .
“What are you firing at, Doug?” asked Mac.
“I’m not firing at anything, the old gun went off, and so
would yours if a big rat ran up your trousers.”
The noise of the gun brought Allan and Owen rushing
down, breathless, expecting that the boys had been attacked;
they laughed at Douglas being frightened by a rat, but Owen
soon changed his tune when Doug, proposed that he should
be stationed there on his own.
“No you don’t,” he said, “two’s company in this gloomy
place.”
Allan went back to the deck, and saw a sight that made
him laugh heartily. There were all the boys, headed by Mr.
Smith and Mr. Brown, four had guns and revolvers and the
rest had boat hooks and anything they could lay hands on,
even the girls were clambering up the side. The gun shot had
made them think the boys were in danger. When Allan
explained what had happened, the girls shrieked, “rats” and
turned back to the yacht as fast as they could.
The derelict ship was searched thoroughly, but it was
evident that weeks had passed since her crew r had abandoned
her. Mr. Smith looked through the log and found that a
terrific hurricane had washed all masts and deck gear over-
board, the rudder was smashed and the ship helpless, and after
waiting for some weeks they forced the Captain to abandon
the ship and take to the boats. There was nothing to be done.
The date showed that this had happened six weeks before.
“Now,” said Mr. Smith, “we will investigate the store
room. There they found much flour, brown sugar, a keg of
rum and a quantity of tinned foods. This was a great find.
There were also spare sails and innumerable articles which
would be useful to them. The girls were summoned to help
carry some of the things down. The ship had evidently been
on a whaling expedition, but had not reached her destination.
There were sea chests filled with thick woollen clothing,
and a great quantity of these were taken to the yacht. A com-


pass was also found. “It will not be of much use,” remarked
Mr. Brown, “as we don’t know where we are, but we will
take it.”
Allan was rummaging through the things in the Captain’s
cabin when he discovered a case of brandy and whisky. These
would be invaluable in case of sickness, so they were lowered
with the other things into the yacht.
“Now,” said Mr. Smith, “this derelict is a danger to
shipping, so we will set fire to her before leaving.”
Lan found some fine bamboo rods which he said would
make good bows, and also some very good sticks with which
to make arrows.
Another thing they discovered before leaving was a keg
of powder and a quantity of shot and bullet moulds and lead,
also half a dozen rifles. These were sent over, with a number
of cutlasses found in the crew’s quarters.
“Hurry up, boys,” called Allan, “let us get a move on.”
Mr. Smith said he would set fire to the ship and follow.
He did this, but on hurrying to the side of the vessel he slipped
and fell, and with a groan lay where he had fallen. He could
see the flames leaping where he had set the light. Allan and
Mac were anxiously standing by the ladder waiting for Mr.
Smith to come down. As he did not appear they became wor-
ried, and rushing up the ladder, were horrified to find that
the flames had raced in front of Mr. Smith who lay helpless
and unconscious where he had fallen. Every moment the
flames were reaching nearer and nearer.
Mac and Allan without any hesitation, rushed through the
flames, but Mr. Smith was a heavy man, and the boys could
not lift him. At this moment Douglas and Owen came up the
ladder, and, seeing the plight of the boys, screamed for help,
and they too rushed into the furnace. The flames were licking
Mr. Smith’s hair and the boys were suffocating with the smoke
and heat. Then began a tussle! the boys against the fire!
“Altogether now, one lift,” and the lads, with grim deter-
mination lifted Mr. Smith and struggled through the fire with
him. By this time Mr. Brown had come up the ladder with


the other boys, and it was well they did, for the others
clothes had caught alight, and they were suffering agony.
“Jump into the sea,” cried Mr. Brown. This the boys
did, and many hands grabbed them when they came up.
Mr. Smith was lowered down the ladder, and the yacht
pushed from the side, a strong breeze soon carrying her out
of danger.
The spactacle of the ship burning was an awesome one,
but there was so much anxiety on board the yacht that few
bothered about it. Mr. Smith had hit his head against a piece
of iron when he fell. It had made a nasty cut but not a
dangerous wound, just sufficient to keep him unconscious for a
few hours. The four boys were put into their bunks and their
burns dressed, the mothers looking with pride on their heroic
sons. Mr. Brown said it was a most wonderful thing to have
done, and it was all carried out as if the boys were drilling,
indeed, for four boys to rush through the flames and carry a
wounded man to safety through such a furnace, needed great
courage, and the calmness displayed by Chiefs Allan and Mae
was wonderful. They were heroes to the boys, and the smaller
chaps, Doug, and Owen, were equally brave.
Mr. Smith recovered consciousness, and was told the tale,
and all he could do was to go to the bunks and clasp each boy
by the hand, for a lump was in his throat, and strong man as
he was, he could hardly keep the tears from his eyes when he
thought of the lads calmly risking their lives for him.
A tragedy had been narrowly averted. Everything was
made snug for the night and the tale had to be told over and
over again to Mr. Smith, the women, and girls.


Chapter IV
The Fight with the Bears
THE following day the elonds banked np, and resulted in a
squall with rain. Sails were lowered, the catchment can-
vas spread, and soon the cheerful sound of running water,
banished, for a time, any thought of a water shortage. The
party stood in the open, heedless of the wet. The water tanks
had become very low, and Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Brown realised
that the rain had come just in time to save them.
The days passed; but so carefully had everything been
planned, that no one felt any monotony, something new in
games or exercise kept them all amused when the day’s work
was finished.
“Three wrecks from home to-day,” said Allan.
The ship was becalmed, and the boys were fishing and
playing when lan suggested that as he had made a number of
bows and arrows they should commence practice with them.
The dingy was lowered and rowed to a distance from the
yacht, where a target was rigged on a board; then shooting
began. Jessie had had some experience of Archery at a girl’s
club in Sydney, so wms easily the winner at the first shoot.
It was a great sport, and Mr. Smith encouraged them all to
practice as much as possible as he foresaw in lan’s scheme a
means of saving ammunition when they reached land.
The weather was beginning to turn colder, and the men
feared they were drawing near the polar regions. This proved
to be a fact for soon they saw an iceberg floating.
The yacht was hove to, and the dinghy lowered, and Allan
took three boys with him to explore at close quarters. There
were many strange birds on the berg, but they flew away
screeching when the dinghy approached. Allan and Lex had
guns, while Gordon and Jock had bows and arrows. Gordon


succeeded in bringing down a bird which fell into the water
and was picked up. It was new to the boys, but they thought
they would see if it were good for eating. Jock, after a few
attempts, also managed to shoot one.
“There is a bear,” said Lex, and sure enough, lying asleep
in the sunshine was a huge bear.
“I wonder if we could shoot him,” said Allan, “we will
have a try anyhow, some fresh meat would be very nice. ’
“He is just like the big one at the Zoo,” said Jock, “only
much bigger.”
The boys carefully secured the dinghy to the ice with a
boat hook wedged into a crevice, and then clambered on to
the berg. It was very slippery walking, but going carefully
they were able to make fair headway.
“Now,” said Allan, “we will have to get round to the
lee side of him, or he will scent us and chase us before we
can fire a shot. I have read that bears are very nasty cus-
tomers, and they can outrun a man on the ice.
The boys on the yacht could see all that was going on,
and felt very envious of those on shore.
Allan succeeded in leading his party to a safe position
without disturbing the bear; then, telling Lex to aim at the
bear’s eye, he did the same —“Now fire!” The guns roared
and the bear rose with a mighty grunt, apparently unhurt.
This was not so, however, one bullet had entered his head,
but did not inflict a mortal wound, and the other had grazed
him only. The bear looked at the strange creatures, who
had so rudely awakened him, then, with an ambling run, he
charged straight for the boys.
Gordon and Jock w T ere shaking in their shoes, but
manfully stood their ground, and sent two arrows into the
bear, which only further maddened him. Allan and Lex again
fired, one bullet shattering a forepaw, the other going wide.
It looked pretty serious for the boys as the bear, although
crippled, was still making a good pace.
“Up the cliff, boys” shouted Allan, but the ledge was
very high and one boy had to climb on the shoulders of the


other; this left Allan who was last, standing only a few yards
away from the onrnshing animal. He dropped his rifle, took
off his coat, and throwing one end to the boys, was hauled up
to safety, but not before the bear had made a grab at his
foot and succeeded in making a nasty wound. Then the boys
found that the ice Avas so slippery near the edge that they
could not get close enough to fire, and, to make matters worse,
Lex’s spare cartridges had fallen from his pocket as he climbed
on to the ledge. This left them with only the bows and arrows
to fight off the infuriated animal.
The bear, mad with pain, heaved himself up to his full
height, and the boys feared that he would soon reach them.
They could not retreat further, as the wall at their back was
too steep to climb, and should the bear succeed in reaching
their ledge, they would most likely be killed.
The great beast, while trying to get a foothold in the ice,
dislodged a large block, and. standing on this, it looked as
though he Avould be able to climb up.
Those on board the yacht were in a fever of anxiety, but
could not give the boys any help; to fire from so great a dis-
tance was to risk hitting the boys instead of the animal.
“Look out, Lex,” called Allan. “I think he is getting up,
be prepared to jump when he reaches the ledge, then race for
the dinghy.”
The bear was up! Gordon and Jock let fly with both
their arrows right in his face, but the beast came on. All
jumped, and began to race for the dinghy. Allan was
hampered by his wounded leg, and before he reached half
way, cried “Bad luck, I have sprained my good ankle.” Lex
and Jock helped him to hobble along, while Gordon brought
up the rear.
The bear had clambered down the ledge, and was now
slowly making his way after the boys. Could they reach the
dinghy in time with Allan hurt? They hurried over the
jagged ice, and over crevices with the danger of falling down
many feet; and the worst happened when Gordon, bringing
up the rear, slipped as he was jumping over a crevice, and


fell with a cry, down the chasm. There he lay half stunned
by the fall, not seriously hurt. He shouted to the boys to go
on with Allan to the dinghy and leave him. “The bear can’t
reach me here, and if you can get safely aboard you can bring
a rescue party for me.” It was the only thing to be done,
and proved the saving of them all, for the bear would certainly
have caught them, but seeing Gordon down the crevice he
stopped to investigate. Poor Gordon tried to get a shot wdth
his bow, but found it had been broken in the fall.
Meanwhile the dinghy was reached, and Allan in great
pain, was placed in the bottom of the boat.
Then it was that Lex did a very daring thing. While the
bear’s attention was taken up with Gordon, he raced back
for his cartridges. He simply flew over the ice, and reaching
the spot where they had climbed the ledge, found his ammuni-
tion. He then carefully made his way to the bear, but it had
disappeared.
The bear, finding that he could not reach Gordon, with a
wonderful instinct had ambled aw r ay to the far end of the
crevice where it was much shallower. Here he found he could
almost climb down, and when Lex rushed up with the gun
and looked down at Gordon, it wms to find the bear only a few
yards away from him. He very carefully took aim, knowing
that if he missed he would not have time for another shot,
then he fired. The ball struck the bear near the eye and
entered the brain, and he rolled over dead, his hot head falling
on Gordon as he died.
Lex called to Gordon, “Are you all right?” and was not
ashamed of the tears that fell as he heard Gordon’s voice say-
ing, “Gee, Lex, that was a good shot.”
Great was the rejoicing on board the dinghy when they
heard the good news.
Gordon was sitting on the bear when the others came up.
Knives were quickly brought and soon they were at work on
Mr. Bear’s carcass. The skin was given to Lex. Great steaks
were cut and sent to the yacht. Those not required for present
use were dried and hung up for the future.


At dinner fresh meat was greatly appreciated, Colin
remarking, “Old bear, yon tried to eat the boys, but we are
eating you instead.”
Lex was congratulated on his daring act, and also for the
calm way he had shot the bear. The first shot and arrows
had, of course, weakened him, otherwise the boys would have
been overtaken, burdened as they were with Allan.
Allan was badly hurt and had to rest for a week on his
bunk.
Mr. Smith and Mr. Brown sat far into the night, talking
over their position and felt that to be cast away on the ocean,
if only to find out the wonderful mettle of their boys, was
worth while.
“We don’t know what is before us,” said Mr. Brown,
“but if we do not pull through the dangers that threaten us,
it will not be for the want of courage in our families.


Chapter V.
Terror Island
THE nights now grew very chilly, and the families were
thankful for the extra clothing they had found on the
derelict ship.
Several icebergs were passed, and it was necessary to
keep a good look out for them, especially during the night.
The Chiefs arranged to take charge of the night watch in
turns, each party having one week on and one off. The party
doing night duty were free during the day. The Chiefs
arranged for each of the boys to stay up on the look-out for
two hours at a time, it was thought that that would be quite
long enough, especially as some of them were only little fellows.
Allan was progressing well. Fortunately there seemed to
be no poison from the bear’s claws, but he was very lucky to
get off so lightly.
The yacht had been out for thirty days. All hope of
finding an island with any vegetation had long passed, and it
was feared that any land encountered now would be of a
barren nature.
It was about t o’clock and quite dark, on the evening of
the thirty-first day from land, that there was a jarring and
grinding felt under the boat. The Look-out shouted ‘ ‘ Breakers
ahead,” although it was too dark to see anything but a dark
mass. Chief Mac had charge of the Look-out, and it was
Bobby who had the watch hour.
Mr. Smith looked very anxious, but as there were no more
sounds, he hoped that whatever it was, the yacht had suffered
no harm. The boat had been turned, and the sails lowered.
Soon, however, to his dismay, he found water leaking through
the bottom. Quickly calling Mr. Brown, the two made a sur-
vey of the damage and found that the yacht was taking in a
quantity of water. Chief Mac was given charge of the bailing


operations. It was too dark to see anything ahead, so nothing
could be done, but bail out as fast as possible. Mac soon bad
his band at work with buckets, but. work as hard as they were
able, they could not make any headway against the rapidly
rising water. Jean was called, and she divided her girls into
two parties, one to rest while the other bailed—Billy cans, pots,
and everything that would hold water were pressed into the
bailing operations, and with every one working with a will
they were just able to keep pace with the leak.
This was very tiring -work, and as the long night was
ahead, the shifts were worked half an hour bailing and half an
hour spell. Songs were sung to cheer up the workers, and as
soon as one shift stopped, the other immediately rushed to
their duty.
It was a terrible night for all, and to make matters worse,
the boat kept bumping some hidden object. Mr. Smith and
Mr. Brown lowered the dinghy and pulled the yacht a hundred
yards away from where the danger seemed to be, and they
had to stop in the boat all night to keep the yacht from drift-
ing back to the unseen peril. Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Brown
kept great quantities of coffee in readiness for the now weary
workers. The girls behaved wonderfully, and it was realised
what a good scheme had been the drill and exercise, as they
would never have kept up had they not been feeling very well.
So the long night dragged on, and the grey dawn found a
very tired and haggard crew still bailing away with a will
although they were almost dropping with fatigue.
As soon as it was light enough there could be seen a barren
island, without life or vegetation. The two men rowed the
dinghy nearer, and found, to their delight, a little harbour
about 100 yards long, with a shelving beach of pebbles. It
was a welcome sight, and rowing back to the yacht, they towed
her through the tiny headlands to the beach. The tide was
high, judging by the marks on the rocks, so the boat was
secured in position and as the tide receded she was left
stranded on the pebbles. The boys had prepared shores and
she was thus kept on an even keel.


The damage was not extensive, but it was realised that
they would have to hurry with the repairs if they were to have
the work done before the tide turned.
The whole party set to work, and soon a plank had been
removed and another prepared; this was fitted into position.
The work had just been finished, when there was a scramble
for the deck, for some one had noticed the approach of several
huge lizard-like animals, fully eight feet long with dragon-
like head and teeth. The boys ran for the rifles, and aiming
at the ugly monsters’ heads fired. This had no effect on them,
so Mae told everyone to fire below the head, where the only
tender spot would be found. The reptiles were now clamber-
ing up the sides of the yacht, when another volley was fired.
The girls had armed themselves with bows and arrows, and
Noreen had the satisfaction of seeing a monster drop with an
arrow through his eye. The second volley took great toll of
the animals, and only three were left; but one of them had
succeeded in reaching the deck, and made after Lois who hap-
pened to be nearest. It was difficult to fire at the beast, so
Mae, running in with a cutlass, was just in time to slash at the
animal as it, with open jaws, was about to grab Lois.
The cutlass made a cut on the animal’s throat, but, before
Mac could do more, the animal was upon him. Here Colin,
who by this time had reached Mac, shoved the muzzle of his
gun into the reptile’s mouth and fired. It rolled over and
over, tried to rise, and lashed about with its tail, but the gun
had dealt it a mortal blow, and soon its struggles ceased.
Meanwhile the remaining ones had been shot. The tide
"was rising, and it was well for the party, for over the crest of
the hill could be seen, like an army on the march, hundreds
of these weird monsters, coming to investigate the noise. The
yacht was not quite afloat, but the dinghy was manned, and
h\ dint of hauling and pushing, the boat gradually moved into
deep water, just as the reptiles reached the shore. Some of
them plunged into the sea, but the yacht, gathering way, was
soon safe.
Then an examination was made of the strange monster


that had been shot on the boat. It was not exactly a reptile,
but had a close fur over it something like a seal. Not even
Mac, who was an authority on reptilian life, could tell what
the strange creature was.
“We will have to keep his skin and find out when we get
home,” said he. It was decided that the animal was half seal
and half reptile.
Everyone went off to bed as they were very weary, and
the yacht was hove to.
“Rest, rest,” said the boys and girls, and the bunks were
a very welcome place.
They slept the clock round, and although feeling stiff the
next day, were none the worse for their adventure; the repairs
had been successful, and the yacht was once again a safe home
for them.
They named the harbour “Little Port Jackson,” and the
island, “Terror Island.”


Chapter VI
The Whale
THE next four weeks passed without any great excitement.
A number of whales were seen, and they all seemed to
be making in the same direction as the yacht and the crew
thought they were going to some favourite feeding ground,
and that if the yacht followed them, they would probably come
to some land. It was wonderful to see the whales in great
schools, diving and blowing, and sometimes as many as twenty
could be seen at the same time. One great fellow always,
swam round the yacht every night and morning, and seemed
to be directing them on their journey. The families thought
he was an old fellow, and probably he was, as whales live to
a great age.
It was interesting to see him when passing the icebergs
rubbing the barnacles off his sides; this was done frequently
and no doubt it was necessary for the whale to keep himself
as free as possible so that he would not be hampered in
swimming.
Sometimes when he swam near the yacht, he looked so
enormous that the girls were frightened he would roll over
on to them or lash with his tail, and one such blow would be
enough to smash the yacht. But, although he came right up
to the ship, and the children could touch his sides, he always
took care to swim quietly when near. The children looked for
their friend every morning and evening, and the whale became
a familiar sight to them.
One morning the animal was missing at the usual time
he made his appearance, which was about 9 o’clock. What
could have happened to him! Even the parents had grown to
look for his familiar appearance. It was about 10 o’clock


when there was a great commotion in the water, and there was
their friend, some hundreds of yards away, and clinging to him
was an enormous octopus, with great tentacles fully 40 feet
long, and the two of them seemed to be in mortal combat.
“Oh!” cried the children, “our poor whale, he may he
hilled.” Lois and Jessie were in tears, and the others watched
with tears not far away, as the two struggled for mastery.
The whale lashed his tail, then dived for a long time, and
returning on the surface leaped into the air, but the deadly
octopus clung to him. Once when a tentacle was moved into
the whale’s jaws he immediately closed them and on the surface
of the sea floated an object like a sea serpent.
“Good on you, Whale,” cried the children, “If only he
could bite some more off he would soon win.”
It -was a thrilling fight, the octopus seemed to be trying
to get his tentacles round the whale’s head, but the lesson he
had learned from losing one of them, made him more careful,
and he would not risk moving them too close to those enormous
smashing jaws. The whale seemed to be tiring and feeling the
strain of the octopus’ stranglehold, and lay quiet for a little
while, but soon it was seen that he was far from beaten, for
suddenly darting ahead at a terrific pace he almost dragged
his enemy off, and a cry went up from those on the boat, as
the octopus seemed to loose his hold, but the children’s spirits
sank again when the creature gradually drew himself close.
He seemed to be trying to keep the whale under water and
drown him.
The fight had now lasted for an hour, and the whale kept
in line with the yacht, he seemed to get comfort from the
children’s voices as they shouted encouragement to him.
It was then that the whale, who seemed very tired, again
had a new lease of life. Looming up in the distance was an
iceberg and he made for this as fast as he could in his tired
state.
I wonder where he is going thought the crew, as the
whale made directly for the iceberg.


“I know,” said Arthur, “he is going to rub him off the
same as he does the barnacles.”
The yacht could not keep pace with the animal, and they
could just see the whale reach the iceberg, and with a sound
that reached them, strike a blow at the ice just where the
octopus’ head was. They soon came up with the fighters,
however, and watched with bated breath, the fight go on.
The octopus, sensing the new danger, moved his body
under the whale so that he could not be smashed to pulp. This
seemed to puzzle the whale for a while, and he stopped as if
thinking out some scheme, then, apparently, decided his only
way was to smash each tentacle separately. This he immedi-
ately carried out, and one by one the octopus’ tentacles were
cut off or smashed against the edge of the ice, until they were
all gone. Then for a moment the children saw two horrible,
staring eyes, that would haunt them in their sleep, slowly sink
beneath the waves, leaving the ocean stained crimson with the
blood of the dead fish. Then a great cheer went up from those
watching as the whale slowly swam towards the yacht.
“He’s hurt,” said Mavis, “look at the jagged wounds on
his body,” and, indeed, the whale had won the fight, but at a
great cost to himself, for every time he had struck the ice it
was to deliver a blow to himself as well as the octopus, and
the sharp edges had inflicted cruel wounds.
“Our poor, poor, whale,” said the girls, and the tears
flowed freely as he came alongside the yacht with great gaping
wounds in his side. Nothing could be done to help him, and
after a few minutes he slowly sank beneath the waves. Ido
hope he won’t die, was the wish of everyone. “I don’t think
we will see him any more,” said Mavis. But during the even-
ing he appeared again for a few minutes as if to assure them
that he was all right.
That evening the girls voiced the opinion that icebergs
were nice, although so cold, for had not one been the means of
saving their friend.
The whale did not put in an appearance for about a week,
and everyone felt very sad, but at the end of seven days,


there he was again swimming alongside with his wounds nearly
healed.
The icebergs were now met with every hour of the day
and the look-out had to be very watchful, especially as some-
times there would be several together and skilful manoeuvring
of the yacht was necessary to avoid a collision.
The boys were not so sure of the friendliness of the ice-
bergs, especially when the yacht only missed one by a few feet.
Then they appeared in greater numbers, and Mr. Smith looked
very worried, and decided that it was impossible to sail at
night any longer, the danger being too great. They saw an
occasional bear on the ice, but after the first experience of these
animals, they decided to let them alone, unless it was
impossible to avoid them.
The days were drawing in as they sailed nearer and nearer
to the polar regions, and Mr. Smith was very anxious as the
ice became so thick that at times it was impossible to find a
passage. The only thing to do was to follow the whale, as he
seemed to be making for some destination familiar to him, and
it was so. He kept just ahead of the yacht, and had most
likely grown accustomed to the strange sight of the boat. He
was certainly great company and often when the parents felt
that they would never see their beloved harbour again, the
sight of this animal inspired them with confidence, and Mrs.
Smith said, “I think he has been sent to guide us safely,”
for by following his course they always found the water more
free from ice.
They had now been away for ninety days, and had not for
two months seen a single ship.
The mothers and the girls were hard at work altering the
seamen’s clothing to fit the crew. Several seals were seen and
some killed, the skins being taken on board to make into
clothing.
It was realised that they would have to spend the winter
amongst the ice, and all efforts were made to prepare for the
intense cold that would be felt.
The boys, for the first time, began to fear that the voyage


into the cold region was more than they had bargained for,
hut all grew accustomed to the change of climate, and the
discipline of the chiefs was strict, so that there were no
grumblers, only a murmur at the coldness of the morning.
The weather had so far been wonderfully kind to them,
but ominous clouds were banking up, and it was feared that
they were in for a blow, and blow it did with hurricane force,
and miraculously the boat missed being smashed up.
They hove to for the night under the lee of a giant iceberg
and the hours passed slowly with the din of smashing ice as
the smaller bergs ground against each other making awesome
sounds. There was no sleep for anyone, and the men thought
that any hour they might be dashed to death. Blinding
flashes of lightning illuminated the sky, and so frequent were
they that night was turned into day. The children were very
frightened, and the parents dreaded to think what might
happen to the yacht.
They found the berg sheltered them from the worst of
the storm, but it was intensely cold and the rain drops as they
fell made it dangerous to venture to deck.
There was a tremendous boom above the roar of the storm,
and another great iceberg, about half a mile from them,
toppled over, sending a great wave over the yacht.
The shrieking of the wind, the grinding of the ice, the
vivid lightning and terrible thunder, will live always in the
memory of the children.
On the third day the storm abated and the sun crept out.
The family were in a quandary to know what to do, as it
seemed like certain death to venture further into the ice, but
the men knew that their only hope was to reach land, and
there prepare for the winter.
Seals, bears, walrusses, penguins, and smaller birds, were
now seen every day, and much to the delight of everyone,
there was the whale again moving in front of the yacht, sure
of where he was going.
“We will follow this good fellow,” said Mr. Smith, “for
so far he has led us safely through the ice.”


So, keeping clear of danger, they steered their craft
through the floating mass until they came to a narrow opening
in the solid mass of ice. There was just room to sail the yacht
through this opening, nothing could be seen of the whale, but
on proceeding for another half mile, the ice opened until they
sailed into a splendid ice locked harbour. There the whale
sported with some of his fellows; he had dived under the ice
and now seemed to be at home, his task of safely piloting the
ship to a good harbour completed.
They sailed on for another mile, then brought the boat to
anchor and the two chiefs rowed to the shelving ice where
there was a good landing place.
The party were all landed after an inspection had been
made by the boys, and Father Smith asked them all to stand
round and bare their heads, and there on the ice 120 days
from when they had been blown to sea, he gave thanks for
their safe journey. The voyage had been full of perils, but
they had been providentially kept free from harm, and they
now trusted that whatever the future held in store for them
they would face it like true Australians.
So ended the outward voyage of the good ship “Jane.”
The Harbour was named “Refuge Bay.”


Chapter VII
Building the Cabin
Mr. SMITH thought they were on some large island, hut
where he could not tell.
The first thing to be done was to build a temporary shelter
in case of a sudden storm. Pieces of drift wood from some old
wreck were gathered, and placed into position, the timbers
were covered with tarpaulins from the yacht, and bunks built
for the women and girls. The boys decided that they would
sleep on the yacht until a permanent camp had been erected.
Allan was despatched with a party to explore the sur-
rounding ice, and see from a nearby hill wdiat lay around the
camp. It was a treat marching through the clear air, after
being so long cooped up on the yacht, and the boys
filled their lungs and sang at the top of their voices as they
made for a low mountain of ice rising about 1,000 feet from
the harbour.
It was rough work climbing over the slippery ice boulders,
and they had to be careful they did not fall into a crevasse.
It took the party two hours to reach the top of the mountain,
and all were glad to rest and regain their breath.
The sight that met their gaze was one that they would all
remember. In front was the harbour with the yacht and the
hut looking very tiny against the vastness of the surrounding
ice; they could see the narrow inlet reaching to the open sea,
and great icebergs stretching in endless confusion. On the
eastern side the ice stretched out in one vast plateau, and in
the distance could be seen mountain peaks, all covered with
their white mantle. Allan was particular to note any land-
marks that might be of use to them when exploring at a later
date, intending on his return to the hut to make a map as a


guide to any parties who may wish to venture into the white
unknown.
Lunch was eaten on top of the mountain, and a pole
which had been carried by two of the boys was erected and a
flag attached to it. The days were now very short, and the
Chief gave the order to return to the hut, so scrambling down
the mountain side they were soon again walking briskly over
the smooth ice, and it was nearly dark when they reached the
hut.
That evening a council was held to draw up a programme
for the future. There was much work to be done in a short
time if they were to be comfortable for the winter, and at any
time it might commence to blow and snow them under before
they had completed their winter quarters.
The building of the cabin was the most important work
to be done, and here it was found that lan proved himself a
born designer and constructor. They all submitted plans and
ideas for the work, but the parents decided to build according
to lan’s plans. He was given a number of boys, and the girls
were also pressed into service for carrying materials.
On investigating the bay, it was found that there was a
half submerged wreck, most likely some old whaler which had
used the bay as a base for operations and had been blown on
to the ice. There was not very much of the boat left, but
plenty of planking was strewn about the shore to build the
cabin.
lan’s plans included one large central living room, with a
fireplace, and at each comer was a smaller room, one for the
women and girls, one for the men and boys, one for stores and
the other for the fuel.
Planks were prised from the ice and the wreck, and
hauled to the building site. The girls were wonderful at haul-
ing planks with ropes, and although the work was tiring and
the night found them ready for bed, they enjoyed it all.
In three weeks the huts wmre built. The cracks of the
walls w r ere caulked with oakum. The roof was constructed
of slats and covered with tarpaulins.


Now commenced the task of removing everything from
the yacht—stores, tools, the oil stove and oil fuel, sufficient to
last six months. Then tons of driftwood and all that remained
of the wreck was cut up and carried to the fuel store.
Meanwhile, Chiefs Allan and Mac with four boys, left
early each morning with guns to seek fresh meat. Bears were
encountered and shot, and there were many hairbreadth
escapes from these dangerous animals. The boys became very
expert in skinning them and cutting steaks that could easily
be carried to the huts where they were hung and dried.
Seals were shot and the fat was boiled down for the oil,
and candles.
The little settlement was a hive of industry. Extra storm
anchors were let go from the yacht. She was stripped of all
gear and made as snug as possible for her long wait over the
winter months.
The boys and girls who were not out hunting, now that
the cabin was finished, caught as many fish as possible.
There were only a few hours of daylight each day, so that
a great deal of the work had to be finished in the twilight, or
with artificial lights.
The women had made the families warm, heavy fur cloth-
ing for the bad weather as the cold was becoming more
intense, and it was impossible to move outside the cabin with-
out covering the hands and face; a head-dress with only the
eyes showing was worn by everyone when they left the cabin.
An inventory of everything was taken, and great care
was exercised in calculating how much food would be required
for the long months of confinement.


Chapter VIII.
Lost
C 1 VERYTHING within the cabin was as snug as it was
*— l possible to make it; lan with his assistants had done his
work well, and felt very proud as he surveyed the cabin, walk-
ing from one room to another. Great strength was the keynote
of the construction, the roof having to support heavy weights
of snow and to stand against the fierce wintry blasts that
would sweep over the ice. During the afternoon the wind
began to blow and snow to fall in great flakes. The parents
looked out anxiously into the gloom for any sign of the party
who had been out hunting. Mac, Allan, Arthur, Colin and
Lois, had taken the guns earlier in the day intending to shoot
a final supply of fresh meat. Arthur and Lois had been
included in the party as they did not think they would go too
far for these young ones.
After travelling for some time, the party had not found
anything to shoot, so they decided to leave Arthur and Lois
near a big ice rock, and hurry some distance further on. They
took particular notice of the spot, and the young children
promised not to move from the ice rock on any account. When
the others left them they only expected to be away about half
an hour. A short distance from the rock, Colin shot a mother
bear with her young cub. They skinned the bear and took
the skin and the cub back to the children until they should
return.
Starting off again they were soon some distance from the
young folk. The children played about the ice with the bear;
he was such a warm furry little thing that Lois said she would
take him back to Sydney with her.
The shooting party continued on, but, suddenly noticing


the darkening sky, became anxious, and when the snow began
to fall they realised that the position was serious. The sky
became black, and they were able to see only a few yards
ahead of them. The thought in the boys’ minds was of the
children they had left at the ice rock. They felt they could
keep in the right direction, but their progress was very slow.
They had no snow shoes, and as the snow became deeper, it
was very hard to walk.
“I think we must be near the spot now,” said Allan, “we
must be careful not to separate, for if we once do that it will
be difficult to find each other in this storm.”
The wind reached great violence, and threatened to blow
them off their feet, but fighting their way they kept on,
trusting that they would find the place where they had left
the children.
Arthur and Lois meanwhile, had noticed the storm coming
and decided to make for the cabin thinking they would be
able to reach safety before the storm broke; but the wind and
snow made walking very difficult, and they moved forward
but slowly; Arthur dragging the skin of the bear and Lois
carrying the baby bear in her arms.
The older boys managed to reach the ice rock, and finding
the young folk gone, decided that they must have gone home
before the storm broke, so they started off for the cabin. It
was a terrible ordeal, and Colin, the youngest of the party,
gradually became so tired that he could barely drag one foot
after the other. Allan and Mac kept him between them and
forced themselves over the snow. A light could be seen in the
distance, so gathering their remaining strength, they fought
their way to the cabin.
The anxious parents were overjoyed when they saw the
boys. “But where are Arthur and Lois,” they cried, and the
boys told them they had left them at an ice rock while they
went further on, and as the children were not there when they
got back, they thought they had returned home. But they
had not returned, and were out in the terrible storm. They
could never stand a night in that wilderness, something would


have to be done. The other children were past helping them
until they had rested. They were given food and hot coffee.
It was necessary for them to accompany the rescue party to
show them the direction of the ice rock.
Allan and Mac, accompanied by Mr. Smith and Mr.
Brown, and Lex. set out on their almost hopeless journey.
Lois and Arthur had wandered on, losing their direction,
and had circled unknowingly and found themselves again at
the ice rock. Here Arthur said they would wrap themselves
up in the bear’s skin, and the two children, Lois carefully
holding the bear, wrapped themselves in the most sheltered
spot they could find. They were both very cold, but the bear’s
skin helped to shelter them, and the baby bear, snuggled close
to Lois, kept her from freezing. They were very frightened,
but Arthur manfully cheered Lois who had begun to cry, and
told her that they would soon be found, and if they were not,
he would make an attempt to reach the cabin. Poor Arthur
did not know what a desperate task it was, but he decided it
was the only way, so wrapping the bear skin closely round
Lois, who had fallen asleep, he started out for the cabin alone.
It was impossible for him to keep his feet against the wind,
so, getting down on his hands and knees, he crawled through
the snow. But his strength was not equal to the task. Strive
as he would he could not make more than a few feet headway
at each attempt, and blinded by the snow, and wearied by his
exertions, he felt that he must rest, and the little chap lay
down in the snow thinking that presently he would be able
to crawl along again. But the heavily falling snow quickly
covered him.
The rescue party, keeping together with ropes round their
waists, fought their way forward. Mr. Smith and Mr. Brown
each carried a rifle. They all wore snow shoes and therefore
were able to get along more easily.
It was Lex who first noticed in front of them a bear
scraping with his forepaws in the snow. A shot from a rifle
hit the bear in a fatal spot, and he rolled over dead. The


party wondered what he had been digging for, and looking,
found that he had scraped the snow from Arthur. Quickly
lifting him out, Mr. Brown and Mr. Smith made for the cabin
with the unconscious boy, while the remaining members of the
party, after satisfying themselves that Lois was not with
Arthur, proceeded on their way. The storm had now abated,
and the stars gleamed and twinkled in the sky, so it was not
difficult for them to reach the ice rock. Here, after a search,
they found Lois still sleeping under the snow, with the bear
hugged tightly to her. The baby bear, with the thick covering
of the bear skin, had saved Lois from freezing.
Quickly awakening her, the party moved off: for home,
very thankful for their success in finding the children, but
anxious to know how serious was Arthur’s condition.
They reached the cabin to find the women working on
the apparently lifeless body of Arthur, and the girls and boys
anxiously waiting for any signs of life. Lois told the tale of
Arthur’s heroism, and said she was going to marry him when
she grew up. Hours passed, and at last, just when they were
all giving up hope, Arthur opened his eyes for a few seconds,
and then seemed to go oft’ into a deep sleep. His nurses had
managed to get him to swallow a little coffee. His breathing
wns now regular. Everyone set about reading or talking in
subdued tones, then after hours of refreshing sleep, Arthur
awakened and suddenly sat up asking for Lois. He was told
of the party finding him just as the bear was digging in the
snow for him, and that it was through the animal that the
search party were able to find him. Arthur said he was very
tired, but happy, so, with an affectionate kiss from his mother,
he was soon comfortably asleep again.
The tension was broken and the babble of voices sounded
through the cabin.
The winter is properly with us now, they all agreed, and
the long months of confinement had commenced. It was
decided that no one should go far from the cabin without the
special permission of Mr. Smith or Mr. Brown.


The next morning, Arthur had great difficulty to avoid
being hugged by the girls, but allowed Lois to put her arms
round him and kiss him as she thanked him for his efforts in
trying to save her, “and the bear can be half yours, Arthur.”
Snowballing was the order of the morning, and the
children thoroughly enjoyed their short time in the open.


Chapter IX.
The Attack of the Bears
F^ 1 OR the next three weeks it snowed and blew continuously,
1 the doors had to be kept barred, and no one was allowed
to venture outside for a moment.
This was the testing time of the discipline of the Chiefs.
The difficulty was to keep all the children occupied and pre-
vent the cry of “What can I do?” from the younger members.
More snow shoes were required, so some of the boys were
set to this task. The boxing gloves were again brought out,
and the boys encouraged to fight good battles. Mr. Brown
gave them special tuition, he having at one time been an
amateur champion at this sport. The boys stripped well and
were very hard after their months of rough living, and
exposure to the storms.
There was nothing like being cooped up together for a
long time to try the tempers of the boys, and when they were
feeling a bit out of sorts, a good fight with the gloves always
helped to put them in good fettle again.
Owen gradually established a supremacy over the younger
boys with the gloves, and the parents could see him in the
future boxing his way to championship class.
Allan’s calm disposition and quiet strength was always at
hand to keep the younger members in order. Mac, his co-chief,
became immersed in the study of animal books, and often
speculated on the nature of the ferocious animal they had
captured on Terror Island.
The baby bear proved a great source of amusement, and
Lois and Arthur taught him many tricks that never failed to
entertain the party.
Jean kept her girls busy all day, sometimes one reading
aloud, at others playing quoits, sewing or helping their


mothers with the cooking. Making toffee was a favourite
pastime, and the girls always kept the boys well supplied with
sweets.
The storm abated after three weeks, and everyone looked
expectantly towards the door, bnt, when it was opened,
nothing but a wall of snow could be seen. Shovels were
procured and a tunnel began to the upper air. The snow was
temporarily brought into the cabin until the air was reached,
when it could be carried outside again.
This was great fun, but care had to be exercised after
Bobby had been dragged out of a snow fall when part of the
tunnel fell in.
“Hurrah!” shouted Jock, “I’m out,” and he was quickly
followed by the others. But before commencing to play the
tunnel had to be widened and made safe for the women to climb
out to the fresh air. Then for a romp; and the boys, like a
lot of cats let loose, ran wild over the snow. A ball was pro-
cured and games started. Several of the girls were on the
outskirts of the party when a bear came ambling up. A
scream and then a rush for the tunnel. All reached safety
except Betty and Mavis, who were farthest from the tunnel,
and the bear was between them. The rest of the party had
clambered down the tunnel and shut the door. The bear,
being very inquisitive, had clambered down and sniffed at the
door. No one could get out and Betty and Mavis could not
get in.
“This is all right for a while,” said Mavis to Betty, “but
we can’t stay here for ever, we must try and get Mr. Bear to
leave the tunnel. I will go to the edge and let him see me,
and then run round to the other side of the cabin, and when
he comes out and follows, we will race for the opening, if only
they will be quick in opening the door.”
“Right, Mavis,” said Betty, “but be careful.”
Mavis ran to the mouth of the tunnel, and soon by a grunt
from the bear she knew she had been seen, and waiting until
his ugly head appeared, she ran with all her speed to
Betty waiting for her. The bear followed, but just as he was


nearing them, they both dashed round the cabin on the
opposite side and jumped into the tunnel calling at the same
time, “Open the door.”
This was done and both girls fell into the cabin. The
door was hardly closed again before the body of the bear was
hurled at it.
“A near thing, Mavis and Betty,” said Mother
The bear stayed in his position near the door all day and
night, making mighty noises and eventually attracting a num-
ber of his fellows, so that the family estimated there were
fully a dozen bears surrounding the cabin. Some of them began
to dig through the snow on the roof until they came to the
tarpaulin and an ugly nose could be seen sniffing through the
slats.
This would never do, everyone in the cabin was scared
of what might happen should the bears succeed in breaking
loose one of the planks. The best thing to do would be to
stand on the table and shoot the animal. Teddy had proved
himself a wonderful shot, and was given a rifle, so taking aim,
he fired at the bear. There was a grunt and the bear climbed
out of the hole he had made, but no sooner had he done this
than another animal took his place. Jock was given the rifle
this time and taking aim he fired it. The animal fell on the
planks, and he commenced a dreadful death struggle. All the
time his blood was flowing from the wound into the cabin.
The animals outside the door began a furious pounding when
they smelt the blood of the dead bear. Mr. Smith thought the
door would not withstand the tremendous blows of the blood
mad bears, but lan was very satisfied with his work and
smiled at the attempts of the animals to batter down the door.
Eventually the bears gave up the task, and all that could be
heard was a crunching sound. This was the animals feeding
on Jock’s victim. It was horrible, and the girls felt quite sick,
but there was no help for it and they would have to wait until
the bears were satisfied and had taken themselves away from
the cabin. It was another forty-eight hours before the bears
finally disappeared. The one Teddy had shot had apparently


been mortally wounded and died after leaving the cabin roof
so that there were two dead animals to be eaten before the
bears moved away.
On the third day Allan was given permission to open the
door. This he did carefully, and looking out into the half
light, opened the door wider and crept out through the tunnel.
There was no sign of any life, only the bones of those animals
that had been eaten. The parents would not let any of the
girls go out again until the two chiefs were satisfied that there
was no danger, so scouts were sent out and every little
hummock of snow investigated to see if any animal lay hidden
under it.
When all was clear the rest of the party clambered out
and gazed with loathing at the bones.


Chapter X
Climbing the Mountain
MAC had been asking ever since their arrival on the ice
to be allowed to go on an exploring expedition. He
was particularly keen on reaching the mountains in the dis-
tance and climbing the highest peak, and to lead a small party
of the boys on such an undertaking would make him feel very
proud indeed.
Mr. Smith knew Mac to be possessed of courage and
resource, but was loath to give him the necessary permission,
and it was here that Mr. Brown intervened on Mac’s behalf
and persuaded Mr. Smith to let him go. Mac was overjoyed
when he was told that he could go, and to choose his party
from the boys. He said he would take the party of which he
had been Chief, as he had trained them and thought they
understood each other. This party included Lex, Bobby, Jock,
Colin and lan.
It was decided to wait until after the next storm before
leaving the cabin. It was again snowing very heavily, and the
boys were impatient at the delay.
Chief Mac was 17 years old; he Avas of medium build, of
great intelligence, and very wiry, capable of great endurance
and a born leader and disciplinarian. He had always been of
an inquiring turn of mind. Lex, his lieutenant, Avas 16, tall.
Avell built, strong and of a very genial disposition, and of great
determination. Bobby Avas short of stature for his age, but
very intelligent, and able to stand hard knocks, a great boxer
and an enthusiastic folloAver of Chief Mac. Jock Avas a big
lad, very strong, even tempered, capable and A'ery loyal, lan
Avas also a big lad, poAverfully built, and full of useful infor-
mation, also he was very loyal to his Chief. Colin, the
youngest of Chief Mac’s party, Avas groAving every day, and


becoming hard as nails. He was quick, loyal to the backbone,
and full of enthusiasm, and proud that he was to be one of
the party.
While the storm raged outside, the exploring party went
into strict training. Hours of skipping each day, wrestling,
boxing, the bodies being rubbed with snow until the boys were
in such good trim they felt they could jump over the moon.
Then the weather cleared, the great day arrived, and Mac,
leading his party, crept through the new tunnel and stood
looking at the vast white plain they had to traverse. Everyone
came out to see them off.
Each boy carried a rifle with sufficient ammunition, and
in their haversacks was a quantity of dried meat, special
biscuits, raisins and dates. They would not be able to cook
anything on the journey.
With one last look at the yacht, now shrouded in snow,
they turned their back on the cabin and the rest of the party,
and strode out into the white world.
“Now, boys,” said Mac, “we must be very careful of the
provisions, we will ration ourselves and count on a little extra
food when we shoot some animal.”
The long march had begun, to the lusty tune of a song.
The snow shoes took some time to get used to, but gradually
the strangeness wore off and they felt comfortable. They did
not know how far the mountain peaks were, and in the dim
light nothing could be seen, but as they marched all day,
towards evening they could see the rugged ice, presenting a
worthy obstacle to overcome. They could not tramp more
than two miles an hour over the snow, so that the day’s travel
found them about twenty miles from home.
Each boy, besides his heavy seal skin clothing, had a heavy
coat with a detachable cape, that could be wrapped round him
during the night.
Their evening meal was eaten, and after excavating a cave
in the snow one boy was told off to watch for two hours, and
then each in turn would do the same. Lying together with
waterproof sheeting on the snow, coats buttoned up and capes


used as blankets, the boys found they could sleep comfortably.
The mouth of the snow cave had been almost closed, just
leaving room for the body of a boy to pass through.
Soon the sentinel knew by the heavy breathing that the
boys were asleep, and his short, tramp, tramp, on the snow
was the only sound that disturbed the stillness of the night.
All went well and everyone was ready after breakfast for the
second day’s march.
“All ready?” from the Chief, and away again into the
unknown.
It was found at the end of the second day’s march that
they had reached the foot of the mountains.
Here they camped as before, and the following morning
began the difficult ascent. There were, in addition to the perils
of the cold, great fissures in the ice and avalanches of snow,
to be guarded against. The boys realised that it would be only
by good luck and careful watching that they would succeed
without accident. The testing time was at hand, slowly they
crept up the slippery slopes. The wind at times threatened to
blow them over some crevice, but, sticking together, they
made good progress. It was Mac’s intention to reach the top
within four days, and then take three days for the return
journey.
The fourth day found them struggling over the last part
of their climb, and then at 3 o’clock they reached the top. A
cheer went up from the boys as they fastened a flag to a staff,
and named the mountain “Mount Sydney.”
In the distance they could see the coast and there were
the masts of some vessel riding at anchor. The land they
were on was an island.
All had gone so far according to programme, but, on
descending to a lower level for the night, Bobby slipped and
fell with a sickening thud into a chasm. He is gone, thought
the boys, but Bobby’s voice came to them thinly from the
depths, telling them that he was alive, but thought his leg
was broken.
They were now in a fix. How were they to get Bobby


up to the top again. Bobby explained that he could not move,
he had fallen on a patch of snow, but with his leg under him.
He heard it snap and was in great pain.
“The situation looks desperate to me,” said Mac, “can
anyone suggest how we are going to get our mate up to the
top?”
“How much rope have we?” said lan.
Each boy took the coil from round his waist. This made
about 250 feet and with this lan commenced to bind the rifles
together to form a stretcher, two rifles at the sides and three
across them, and over this a rug tied at the four corners. Then
fastening a length of rope to each corner, he asked them to
lower him down the chasm, but Jock said he wanted to go, and
Chief Mac ruled that it was his turn. So, sitting on the frame,
Jock was lowered down, but unfortunately, the ropes were not
long enough, there still wanted 25 feet to reach the fallen boy.
Bobby seemed to have fallen into a swoon, as at first he
did not answer Jock’s call, but eventually called out feebly
that he was in great pain, and to hurry if they had a chance
of helping him out.
“Now the only thing to do is to cut up one of our skin
coats,” said lan.
In no time they had a number of strips ready for him and
they found these were just long enough and Jock soon had
Bobby on the stretcher, then, calling to the others to haul,
they lifted the wounded lad to the top, lowering the stretcher
again for Jock.
Bobby’s leg was examined and Lex given the task of
binding it. The break was on the thigh. Lex asked them to
cut up the stock of Bobby’s rifle for splints, and with this he
set the leg. The Chief said he thought Lex had made a very
good job.
Poor Bobby was in great agony, and looked forward with
fear to the long rough descent dowm the mountain.
They commenced the gruelling task. There were five boys
to carry the stretcher, and some of the places they had to
negotiate were very rough, four boys carrying and one in the


lead ready to take his turn and relieve his mates, and also to
find the best tracks.
Colin had the lead first. They had travelled for some
time when he called, “Back, back, boys, for your lives.” The
stretcher-bearers immediately scrambled up the slope again
some distance when they heard a thunderous noise, and could
see Colin climbing like a madman to them. It was an
avalanche of snow. Would Colin miss it? Could he reach
safety in time? Thousands of tons of snow crashed and passed
them, but, where was Colin? Bobby had fainted and lay un-
conscious on the stretcher. Chief Mac was the first to regain
his presence of mind, and springing down the slope, he could
hear Colin’s voice calling, “Are you all right?”
“Yes,” called Mac, “but where are you?”
“I don’t know yet,” said Colin, “I’m buried up to the
neck in snow, but not hurt.”
Mac hurried to his assistance, and soon had him clear of
his grave. Colin said the avalanche just caught him on the
edge and swept him into the snow, almost burying him alive.
“By gee, Chief, I did some beautiful somersaults.”
They revived Bobby, who thought the world had come to
an end. The poor boy was very weak and inclined to be
delirious.
They camped for the night, and next morning began the
same painful task as yesterday.
“I’m afraid,” said the Chief, “if we don’t get to the
cabin quickly, we will have a dead body to carry.” “Now
that we are clear of the mountains we will have to travel
continuously, we have 40 miles to go and every minute will
count. ’ ’
It was a gruelling trip. After the first 20 miles they could
only just drag themselves along, their feet were like lead and
their hands powerless to grip the stretcher, only the impro-
vised slings keeping it in place. They struggled on and on.
Would they never reach the cabin? Bobby was again uncon-
scious, and the boys feared at times that he had ceased to
breathe.


The Chief was wonderful, cheering the boys with his
indomitable pluck and smile, and often when they felt they
could go no further, he would spur them to greater effort and
the miles were counted off slowly but surely. Colin surprised
them all with his endurance and you read on each boy’s face
the determination to win through.
The last five miles! Oh, agony, how they ached at each
step. The Chief cried, “On boys, only a little way, now a bit
more, now again.” The weight was like a ton bearing them
down.
They were done, they could hold on no longer, hacks began
to double and hands almost to touch the snow.
“Crawl,” cried the Chief, “and pull the stretcher.”
The boys crawled along, it seemed only inches at a time,
but still going, eyes were beginning to close as weariness
fought for mastery over minds and bodies.
“Only a little way, keep going,” the voice of the Chief
kept them moving.
“There is the cabin in the distance,” cried Lex, and with
renewed strength the boys made one last gallant effort.
“Here’s the tunnel,” but there were four more uncon-
scious bodies beside the stretcher, while the Chief crawled to
the tunnel and yelled.
“Help, everyone,” called Douglas, as he emerged from
the tunnel.
Mac could only gasp, “Bobby, broken leg, careful, rest
only tired.” M T ith that he dropped on his face in the snow.


Chapter XI
Finding Captain McKenzie
THE boys were all carried into the cabin and put to bed.
They were all right, but sheer exhaustion had done its
work and they were soon asleep under warm blankets.
Bobby was laid gently on his bunk, and an examination
made of the leg. Mr. Smith could see at once that whoever
had set it had made a good job, and they could not improve
on the setting, so, making Bobby as comfortable as they could
the family prayed that he would pull through all right.
Bobby opened his eyes, and gradually the look of terror
that leaped into them, disappeared as he saw the familiar
faces and knew that he was in the cabin again.
The tired boys slept the clock round, and then asked for
some food. They felt better after they had eaten, and all
tried at once to tell the news of the accident.
The men were much interested in the news that there was
a ship on the other side of the Island. No doubt a whaler
waiting until the season should come round when they would
commence their work of harpooning more whales.
Allan asked if he could take the boys across to where
the ship lay at anchor, and was told that he could do so when
the weather was again calm. The wind had risen and another
gale threatened to try and blow the cabin away, so fierce
were the gusts that beat against the roof.
Bobby was a wonderful patient and soon was his jovial
self, although to have to stay on his back for so many weeks
while the other boys explored, was hard to bear. He was a
great reader and the books helped him to pass away the time,
and there were always some of the girls to talk to him when
he felt inclined.
The storm continued until the end of the month, and then


commenced the now familiar task of clearing the snow from
the tunnel.
Allan was anxious to be off and interview the men on
board the strange vessel. His boys had been in training for
their long journey. The party was to consist of Allan as Chief,
Douglas, Owen, Arthur, Teddy and Gordon.
Allan was a born leader, and was very’ proud of his team,
and knew he could trust every one of them to do his utmost
in an emergency.
Early next morning after the tunnel had been cleared,
they started off They had about 60 miles to travel if Mac
was right in his calculations of the distance to the ship, Allan
proposed they should avoid the mountains by keeping to the
left of them. The journey would be longer, but the danger
of being buried alive was not so great. After the last heavy
fall of snow there would almost certainly be many addi-
tional death traps on the mountains, and avalanches would be
more numerous.
The first night they did as the previous party had done,
excavated a cave in the snow and kept watch at two hour
intervals. It was thought they would reach the ship in four
days.
The second evening they were at the base of the moun-
tains, and keeping to the left, the following morning they had
passed them and were well on their way without any excite-
ment. On the evening of the fourth day they could see plainly
the masts of the ship and in the foreground, a rude cabin of
small dimensions.
Allan called a halt, and decided to camp some distance
from the cabin. He had read many tales of pirates, and did
not wish to run into the hands of any unscrupulous men.
Before starting next morning, each boy looked to his rifle
and ammunition, and felt ready for any emergency.
Gordon was sent on ahead of the boys to see if he could
find out any information regarding the ship. He proceeded
carefully until within about a hundred yards of the cabin, and
was in the act of calling out when a bullet from a rifle ploughed


up the snow at his feet. He immediately dropped full length
in the snow and aiming his rifle at the cabin waited to see if
there were any signs of life. After waiting for some time the
door of the cabin opened and a figure came out, followed by
another. They looked at the spot where Gordon fell, and
then came towards him.
Gordon did not know what to do, and was loath to fire
at the men thus exposed. They thought Gordon had been hit
and lay wounded or dead in the snow. When the men were
within ten feet, he called to them that he had them covered
and to put up their hands, and the men, on seeing Gordon
rise from the ground with a rifle at his shoulder, dropped their
weapons and threw up their hands.
“Who are you?” they asked of Gordon, and he explained
that they had seen the ship from a distance, and wanted to
find out who was sheltering there.
Allan and his party came running up by this time. They
had heard the report of the rifle, and feared for Gordon.
Allan asked the men who they were, and the taller of the two
said he was Captain McKenzie and Mr. Dennis was his first
mate. There were the second mate and four others in the
cabin who were loyal to him. The crew had mutinied and
stolen the ship which was full of a very valuable cargo of oil.
They had placed the Captain on shore, with provisions and
materials for building a cabin, but, instead of being able to
sail away as they intended, the mutineers had been driven
back into the bay for shelter, and as the winter storms con-
tinued to blow they were prisoners on the ship. There were
ten men on board the vessel, but the Captain thought there
were only the ringleader and four others who were at the
bottom of the plot, and he thought that if they could capture
Rufus, as the leader was known, the others would hand over
the vessel again to his command.
“Our trouble is that we have no rifles. This weapon is
the only one we have in the cabin.”
“Come inside and join us in a cup of coffee, and we can
talk better.”


The Captain introduced them to the other men, and then
they sat down to eat and chat over the position.
Allan asked the Captain if he could recapture the ship if
he had enough rifles and ammunition, and he replied that he
was certain he could do so.
Then Chief Allan explained that they had a number of
rifles to spare at their cabin, and he thought if the weather
held they could make the journey there and back in six or
sevea days, and bring the rest of their party with all the
spare rifles.
Captain McKenzie was very grateful for the proffered
help, and gave the boys a quantity of chocolate which was
very sustaining on marches.
So the boys, feeling that they were in for another great
adventure, marched with great enthusiasm to their own cabin.
Late on the third evening they reached home, and the
shouting of the boys from a distance brought lights from
the huts, and Allan, with his hardy boys, were soon comfortably
seated at a hot meal in the cabin.
Such excitement when the news was told that Allan had
promised to help Captain McKenzie to regain his stolen ship!
There was a rush for rifles and cutlasses by the boys, but
Mr. Smith told them not to get excited, and to wait for orders
from their chiefs.
Bobby’s leg was mending well, but he had no hope of
accompanying the rescue party.
Several of the boys were sent to build a sledge, while
others cleaned and oiled the spare rifles and proceeded with
other preparations for the journey.
Mr. Smith said he would accompany the boys if Mr. Brown
would stay behind with the women. “I can’t leave a boy
behind when all his mates are going, and we must leave one
man in charge.
The girls thought this rot, as they could shoot and fight
if necessary, and were not afraid of bears or pirates, and their
mothers said they really believed the girls could protect them
as well as the boys.


“Well, in that case,” said Mr. Smith, “Mr. Brown had
better come with us.”
The next morning all were ready, the sledge packed with
half a dozen extra rifles and plenty of ammunition, also suffi-
cient cutlasses for a boarding party. The order to march was
given and the men and boys stepped out together.
There was no excitement on the journey, and on the even-
ing of the sixth day since leaving the Captain, Allan gave the
signal prearranged, and the door of the hut was thrown open,
and Captain McKenzie came running out, followed by his
men, to greet the party.
Captain McKenzie was told that he had better take charge
of operations and all would obey his orders.
“Come, let us have a meal first, and then I will explain
how I propose to recapture my ship, and I will be pleased to
receive any suggestions from your party, Mr. Smith.”


Chapter XII
The Fight
I T will be necessary for the readers to understand the posi-
* tion of the ship and cabin so that they can visualise the
attack. The Bay was about one mile across and the ship
about a quarter of a mile from the shore, where the Captain’s
cabin was built.
“My plan,” said Captain McKenzie, “is to take ten
fighters with me in the boat before dawn and follow the line
of the bay with muffled oars, and when we reach the opposite
side of the bay from here we will row slowly and silently to
the ship and wait under her shadows until it is light enough
for you to open fire from here.
Then when you have opened fire from the shore and
attracted the attention of the mutineers they will naturally
rush to the side of the ship and return fire. You will have
ten fighters firing from different positions and should certainly
kill or wound some of those on the ship. When the battle is
in full swing, we will climb the side of the ship and attack
the men in the rear, and should with one rush take those still
alive prisoners, for they will immediately think that we have
an unlimited number of men, and I will tell those who were
not leaders that they will be forgiven if they throw down
their arms.
“There are two small fishing boats that the boys can
man and row into the bay. This will give the appearance of
great numbers of fighters, and help to over-awe those on
board.”
“What do you think of the plan, Mr. Smith?”
Mr. Smith thought it a very excellent one, and so did
all the party.
“Of course, should anything go wrong with the scheme,
those in the first boat will stand a good chance of being shot


down without much hope of retaliating. However, we must
take some risks, and the fact that those on board the ship
do not know that we have rifles and ammunition, in addition
to cutlasses, will leave them no reason to suspect any surprise
visit from us.”
The guns were carefully looked over and cutlass edges
felt. These were to be handled by the boarding party. Then
the hour being late, they lay down to rest.
The boys were so wildly excited that they could not sleep,
and could hardly be prevailed upon to keep quiet, but absolute
silence was essential for the successful carrying out of the
scheme.
Then before dawn, the chosen ten drank some coffee, and
crept down to the boat. Everyone was in position, and the
oars muffled so that not a sound was heard even at the cabin.
There was the risk of striking some floating pieces of ice, and
so knocking a hole in the boat, but something had to be risked.
They followed the edge of the shore until directly opposite
the ship, and then crept up to the boat. Captain McKenzie
was certain to a fraction of the position of the ship, and each
member of his crew gave a sigh of relief when they felt the
sides of the boat touch the ship. Hardly any sound had been
made and no one moved above so that all looked well.
"Now,” said the Captain, “we must wait until the signal
comes from the shore, which will be the boys opening fire.”
Three of those on shore, Teddy, Gordon and Arthur, were
to station themselves in front of the cabin behind a slight
snow bank. Allan, Douglas and Owen, were to move some
hundred yards to the right and there make a trench in the
snow for themselves; while Mac, Colin and Jock’s position was
the same distance to the left of the cabin. So that on shore
there would be three separate firing parties. This would tend
to confuse the sailors, and make them think there were a great
number of attackers.
N °w, boys,” said Mae, “it’s time to take up our posi-
tions. Good-bye and good luck.” Each boy shook hands and
hoped they would all be at the meeting after the fight.


Rufus, the ringleader of the mutineers, was a very
desperate character, and from the tales told by the Captain,
better dead than alive.
Mac and Allan soon had a trench dug, and then when
all were ready the order was given to fire, and from three
different positions a hail of lead poured on to the ship.
There was a rush to the deck, and a volley was fired at
the cabin. Rufus had not had time to realise that the firing
was from three different points, and had no idea of the strong
reinforcements of the Captain.
The three parties kept up a continuous firing. They could
see clearly the men returning their fire. Their positions had
now been located, and bullets were hitting the snow with a
plonk or flying overhead. The boys were all good shots and
most of them had lately had a lot of practice. They had also
become used to danger, and felt quite calm as the bullets filled
the air.
One passed through Douglas’ head dress, grazing his scalp.
He dropped his rifle, but immediately felt himself again. “It
was a very close go” thought Douglas, as a trickle of blood
ran down his face.
In Mac’s party, Colin had been hit in the left shoulder and
could not fire his rifle. Jock bound the wound which proved
to be only a flesh one, and Colin helped to reload the other
rifles, and could even fire his own by fixing it in the snow.
The centre party had Gordon slightly wounded, and Arthur
with a smashed finger.
It was now time for the boys on the right and left of
the cabin to get into the boats, and pull into the bay, as if
they intended to attempt to board the ship. This was done
without further mishap, and the boys started pulling in the
direction of the ship. This was the most hazardous part of
the battle, for there was no protection from the mutineers, and
a bullet through the boats would soon sink them in the icy
water, and it would be impossible to swim with their heavy
clothing.


The boys had been shooting very well. Two of the
mutineers had been killed outright and several had been
wounded.
This was the opportunity for Captain McKenzie and his
party to clamber up to the ship, and they had barely reached
the deck when Rufus saw them, and with a wild yell, ran with
upraised rifle to club the Captain, but he dodged the blow
and struck with his cutlass, cutting through the base of his
opponent’s neck, and Rufus fell to the deck mortally wounded.
The other men, seeing their leader dying and nearly a dozen
rifles raised, threw down their arms and begged for quarter.
Rufus being dead and two of the ringleader’s lieutenants
having been shot by the boys, there remained only one whom
the Captain feared might cause trouble on the ship, and he
was wounded in the leg. So collecting the arms the Captain
immediately took command of the ship. Signals had been
sent to those on shore and when the boys realised that the
Captain was once more in command they cheered again and
again, and those on deck answered them.
The Captain said he would not leave the deck again and
sent the boat to bring the rest of the boys aboard. The boys
were soon clambering up the side of the ship. Colin could not
climb with his wound so was helped to the deck. There the
Captain thanked them all for their help. He had given up
hope of ever getting possession of his ship again, and was
overcome with emotion when he found himself again in com-
mand, and could not find words to thank the boys.
The plan of attack had been very successful, and now the
Captain wondered how he could reward his friends.
He proposed that when the spring had come, he should
sail his ship round to the entrance of Refuge Bay, and wait
until they were ready to sail, then the two ships could proceed
to Sydney together. Captain McKenzie presented the boys
with a large piece of Ambergris, worth many thousands of
pounds.
The party then returned to the shore, and waving to the
ship, started on their return journey to Refuge Bay. The


wounded boys, Colin, Arthur and Gordon, had been left with
the Captain.
They reached their cabin after three days’ travelling.
There was great cheering when they sighted it, which caused
the girls to race to meet them. Bobby was able to hobble
about and listened eagerly to the doings of the boys.


Chapter XIII
Home
THE winter was nearly over and preparations were begun
for the return to Sydney.
Captain McKenzie sent two sailors to the cabin to tell the
party that he would sail for their Bay in a few weeks’ time
and for them to be prepared fpr him. So stores were got
ready, and the “Jane” was brought close to the shore, where
the bottom was scraped, ropes tested and everything made
ready for the homeward journey.
They felt a sadness at the thought of leaving the cabin
which had been their home for so many months and sheltered
them from storms and dangers.
One morning on looking out, the boys saw a boat being
rowed through the narrow opening leading to their harbour.
This was the mate of the whaling ship with a crew to tell them
that Captain McKenzie was waiting for them. The sailors
helped them to pack and by evening everything was ready,
and an early start was to be made in the morning.
The family sat round the cabin as Mr. Smith gave thanks
for their safety. The cabin was to be left for someone else
to use should they reach the harbour.
The boys were too excited to sleep and talked so much
that the rest of the family could not rest. It was time to
dress! A last meal, when everyone was silent, filled with
strange emotions!
The “Jane” was ready, the stores on board, and soon all
were on deck, the anchors raised, sails set, and the family
stood on deck watching the cabin receding as the yacht
gathered way. “Good-bye, dear old cabin,” they called.
“Good-bye, our little home, good-bye harbour,” were called
by the children.
Then through the headlands and into the open water.


There was the whaler waiting and cheers rang out from the
sailors as they caught sight of the “Jane,” which the
children lustily answered.
Captain McKenzie thought it would be a good thing to
take some of the boys on to the whaler and let the “Jane”
have the experience of two sailors. This arrangement was
approved of by the parents, so four of the boys clambered
aboard the whaler. This was a great treat for them, and they
were soon at home. They had grown very fond of Captain
McKenzie who allotted them a cabin to themselves and
arranged that they should have their meals with him.
Then away the two boats sailed, carefully picking their
way through the bergs. Messages were exchanged between
the two vessels and the days passed without incident. The
weather gradually grew warmer until it was necessary to pack
away their heavy garments.
The days passed with the two ships with a full spread of
canvas, keeping as near as possible to each other. The wind
was favourable for a quick voyage and the ships made
wonderful headway.
The discipline was still strict and games and exercises
were indulged in as on their outward voyage.
Ships were seen, one passing close enough for the party
on board the “Jane” to hail her.
The excitement on the “Jane” was intense as the boat
neared Port Jackson. Then, one afternoon, a great glad cry
rang out over the water as land was sighted. “Was it North
Head?” was the question. This proved to be right, there was
Manly, just the same. The lighthouse, and headlands, every-
thing just as they had left them.
They passed through the heads. “Dear old Sydney, we
are home again.”
The pilot came out for the whaler, but the “Jane” sailed
to her own tiny jetty.
The news quickly spread that the Browns and Smiths had
returned, and their friends gathered to meet them. Some
had given up hope and thought they had perished at sea, but


others believed that they would return and had kept their
homes in readiness for them.
What a reunion! The story of their adventures took many
nights to tell. The papers published the story, and a public
meeting was called to give them and Captain McKenzie a
fitting welcome. The boys were heroes at school and the girls
the envy of their friends.
Thus ended the adventures of the Brown and the Smith
Families.
[AUTHOR’S NOTE. —It is a well known fact that there are no
bears in the South Polar Regions, but for the purpose of this story
they have been introduced.]




3 1508 021 1 2344 8


*
I
YwiUlWWlWBy
nnrTT
'juimrr
