

$0 .,»>•' /'■
t ,,.-' y
''
f'439 ,._*flrrT
■ T.^JSfc'
UNITED EVER DIVIDED NEVER


!. c
i


■■M—— II HI MMMMMMM—i M llll—flUHH-Hill klTO—IB——H
— ' — — —
f ■. • %
, - ♦- l§p !
Mrs. RITA DENNISTOUN FISKE,
Hostess to over 12,000 Wounded Soldiers.
I
7
:: :: A SHORT ACCOUNT OF :: ::
Mrs. RITA DENNISTOUN FISKE'S
WORK AMONGST WOUNDED
SOLDIERS AND SAILORS
— ILLUSTRATED WITH PHOTOGRAPHS
Advance Australia


AUSTRALIAN GIFTS
For Wounded Soldiers and Sailors. 7
Mr. CHRISTOPHER E. TOWN, the well-known Assistant
Secretary of the London Chamber of Commerce, has during
the past eighteen months acted as Hon. Secretary to the
Sydney Consignments' Committee, the work of which is
considerable when it is understood that 200 Hospitals are
receiving weekly supplies in addition to Belgian Refugees
and Hostels and Municipal and other relief bodies, which
extend as far North as Elgin, in Scotland, Limerick in the
West, Cromer in the East, and Bournemouth in the South.
Foodstuffs comprised amongst other things Mutton, Flour,
Rabbits, Preserved Meats, Jams, Sugar, Syrups and Butter.
That these goods were of excellent character is testified by
the many letters of thanks and appreciation which have
been and are constantly being received from recipients,
and which have been transmitted to Sydney. With all
this good work to his credit, we are justified in claiming
for the subject of our portrait a high place among those
who have laboured with whole-hearted zeal in the cause of
the Empire, which is the cause of Right.
Mr. CHRISTOPHER E. TOWN.
A GREAT WORK IN NORTH LONDON
has been carried on by Mrs. RITA DENNISTOUN FISKE, from the same consignment, who, at the commencement
of the War established a depot at Mare Street, N., for the distribution of Australian Foodstuffs, which were
given for allocation to the distressed poor by the State of Sydney. Much could be written, but we will be
content with reproducing an Extract from a letter which appeared in the Hackney " SPECTATOR," dated
May 29th, 1916 :
" SIR,
Pray pardon my writing you, but in your weekly paper, in mentioning Mrs Fiske's kind generosity,
etc., to the soldiers weekly, nothing is said of her kind bounty to hundreds of poor men (and women
especially) who have partaken of her bounty for the past year. One of her pensioners (if I may so put it),
I should like to publically thank her for all the kindness shown to me—and I may say with dozens of
others, time and time again for months past, she has indeed provided us with a meal and many things we
should have lacked .... There is a class of person sadly overlooked (generally), but more so now, viz.,
the respectable woman of from fifty to seventy. There are many often superior, careful, temperate, and
making no complaint, making the very best of things, earning by domestic work, needle, etc., perpaps 5/-
to 6/- weekly, and trying to keep up on it! To these, kind Mrs. Fiske has been a real friend and
provided them with many a little joint, etc., etc., and they bless her for her goodness. It seems that
4 the powers that be ' do not take any interest in people like us ; we are of no consequence, and what we
lack we go without, but our good Mrs. Fiske has done her best for us and tried in every way to help us
along at this time, and indeed 1 am sure I speak for hundreds of poor women in Hackney, Stoke
Newington, and Homerton, who could say precisely what I state, and are grateful to her. I ask that you
will withold name and address, lest I might be accused of 4 currying ' favour."


■ - . ' • \ • ' . . , * . ' 7' ■ ;* ■" ' ■ .. , • ;> \
I Iffy w%& ■
ENTERTAINMENT at HAREFIELD PARK
ON Saturday, July 3rd, an Australian tea and enter-
tainment was given by Mrs. Rita Fiske to 300 wounded
Australians at the Ist Australian Auxiliary Hospital, Hare-
field Park, Harefield. The affair was a most successful one,
and was greatly appreciated by the soldiers.
A number of Australian ladies very kindly assisted in
dispensing tea, amongst them were the Hon. Mrs. Mackenzie,
who was accompanied
by Mr. and Mrs.
Buchanan, Mrs. lies,
Mrs. Toohey, Miss
Popplewell, Mrs.
Dalton, Mrs. Stoddart
Mrs. Allan, the Misses
Lewin, Miss D.Burgh,
Miss Chaman, Mr.
and Mrs. Lane, Miss
Morgan, and Miss
Nicholson. Mrs.
Fiske's party included
the Misses Richardson
Miss Freda Church,
Miss Dolly Clarke,
Miss Campion, the
Misses Baines Hall,
Mr. and Mrs. Smart,
Mr. Leslie Quinton,
Mr. Manders, Miss
Fulton, Mr. EricDen-
nistoun Fiske, and
Private Harmer. Sir
John McCall was also
present.
Miss Tansly took a
concert party and gave
an entertainment on
the lawn previous to
the tea The Misses Lakin, Heatherly, Freedmai and Foster,
and Messrs. Hill and David Evans were contributors to a
a very enjoyable programme. Harefield Park belongs to
Mr. and Mrs, Billyard Leake, who are at present visiting
their station in New South Wales. They have always been
Soldiers entertained by Mrs. Fiske,
IN THE GROUNDS AT HAREFIEI D.
noted for their generous hospitality, but have probably never
done a greater kindness than this, in opening such a lovely
home to the Government as a convalescent hospital during
the war.
Visitors to the hospital on Saturday were, specially asked
by a number of the soldiers to convey their thanks to Mr.
and Mrs. Billyard Leake for their great kindness.
Harefield Park is
now wholly an Aus-
tralian Hospital for
Australians,and to em-
phasise this Mrs. Rita
Fiske, who already
has done yeoman ser-
vice in adding to the
comforts of the in-
mates. saw to it that
the tea she provided
was an Australian one.
The bread for the
sandwiches was made
of Austialian flour, so
was the pastry for the
tarts, and the meat
and the jam came
from Australia also.
As for the butter, there
was so much enthus-
iasm over the fact
that it also was Aus-
tralian that many
visitors asked why the
commissariat of an
Australian hospital
could not be almost
entirely Australian.
The quantities of
strawberries, though necessarily English, that Mrs. Fiske
took down were also greatly enjoyed, in fact, this great
'' house warming,'' for such it was, was an overwhelming suc-
cess, and on hearing that Mrs. Fiske is arranging to have
other teas there the inmates warmly congratulated one another
Photo by "British Australasian
PARTY AT HAREFIELD SOLDIERS AND OTHER GUESTS.
Reprinted from '* THE BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN," July Bth, 1915.


■ V; - :' ; \ 7.-,-. '
\} "' |y £ - l 7"
Mrs. FISKE'S WAR TEAS An Anniversary Party
Mrs. Rita Fiske who is well-known for her philanthropy
and hospitality, not only in North London—Hackney, in
particular—but also in Victoria, her native State, on Wed-
nesday, February 23, celebrated the first anniversay of the
teas which she has given weekly to wounded soldiers, and
on the occasion referred to she entertained 300 wounded and
convalescent Australian, New Zealand, Canadian and
English soldiers. With this tea, the total number of
wounded soldiers who have participated in Mrs. Fiske's
generosity reached the large total of 6,970, and when it has
to be borne in mind that the cost of these weekly entertain-
ments is defrayed entirely by Mrs. Fiske, we can realise
something of the great work which that lady voluntarily
undertook a year ago.
In connection with the anniversary, wounded and
convalescent soldiers from the King's College Hospital and
the Wandsworth Hospital were
conveyed to the Lecture
Hall Devonshire-sq., Stoke
Newington, the arrangements
in connection with which were i
in the capable hands of Cap-
tain Mrs. Bright and Lieut.
Miss Bright and Col. Miss
Swan, of the British Service
Corps. The men began to
arrive at about 2 p.m., and
enjoyed a special cinemato-
graph performance until four
o'clock, when a special guard
of honour of Naval Scouts,
under the command of Capt.
Trader (who subsequently
acted as Master of Cere-
monies in connection with the
entertainment which followed
the tea),welcomed Mrs. Fiske,
and the Countess of Darnley,
Sir John McCall, and other
distinguished guests.
On entering the hall, which fc JHv
was beautifully and tastefully g. jHHK
decorated with bunting repre- f J|MB| w
senting various parts of the i-
Empire, and particularly the
Antipodes, Mrs. Fiske was
presented with a bouquet,
while Baby Smith presented
a similarly beautiful one to
the Countess of Darnley, who,
in acknowledgment, kissed
the tiny mite.
Sir John McCall (Agent-
General for Tasmania, pre-
sided, and in welcoming the
guests said that he had been
asked to do so by Mrs. Fiske, - * 1
on account of that lady's
modesty, and, in introducing
Lady Darnley, referred to her THE COU
ladyship's connection with the
great island continent. He (Sir John said he was
delighted to be present at such a gathering as
that, which had only been made possible by the
generosity of Mrs. Fiske and the hard work which was
cheerfully undertaken by the ladies who had assisted her.
On many occasions she had won battles on behalf of
Australians in a forcible manner, which were not always
appreciated by those in authority. He was not only glad
to see his own countrymen there, but had been proud of
their doings. He then introduced/ Lady Darnley, who
corrobated the expressions of welcome madfe by Sir John,
and said she was astounded at the great work which had
been carried out by Mrs. Fiske every week during the past
year, and expressed the hope that Mrs. Fiske would be
able to continue her beneficent self-imposed task until the
end of the war. (Cheers).
Mrs. Fiske, who was received with loud and continued
applause and cheering, said that, as a Colonial, she was
naturally proud of her own countrymen, and thanked those
present for the appreciation which they had shown of her
work, which was self-evident, although she considered that
what she had done for them, even if it had been ten tiipes
as great, would never repay what they had done for her.
There was only one thing she wished the men to remember,
which was that, while they were on furlough or anywhere
within 44 coo-ee " of Stoke Newington, on every Wednesday
there would be an Australian tea and welcome for them.
(Cheers). She wished them all the good! luck they could
wish themselves, and a safe return home. (Cheers).
An excellent tea was then provided, and thoroughly en-
joyed by all, none the less because all the articles were
Australian produce, and therefore unsurpassed of their kind.
This was served by Mrs.
„ Fiske and ladies who kindly
* CLA> volunteered their services.
After the tea an excellent
entertainment was contributed
to by Miss Hilda Mulligan,
Miss Roma May, Miss Freda
Church, Mrs. Graddon, Mrs.
xA. E. Stoddart (widow of the
well-known cricketer), Mrs.
Rawlings, Mrs. Lillyman,
Miss Ivy Holly, Mr. George
Morgan, and Mr. Charles
Bryant.
During the entertainment,
Mrs. Walter Thompson pre-
' IT | sented to Mrs. Fiske a brooch
..jilH ()i simple design, set in
diamonds, as a token of the
l ""** high appreciation in which
' she was held by the poorer
■ people of North London,
w hose needs during the war
1| I WgL .. she had very materially
V \ ||IL 4 9 assisted. Mrs. Fiske, in ac-
H 1 t 1 knowiedging the unexpected
\ - 1 gift, stated that she was
k v pleased to receive such a mark
J|l • \ of appreciation. It had not
W f occurred to her that she had
done very much. Although
jMMre the labour was onerous, she
M felt that she must be made
of cast-iron, or, as had been
expressed, of granite, and as
Ml MsJm 3 vet she was not wounded or
9k , *5 jD! mm 3 even winged. (Applause).
'9k % t a IV* IJ9 jjjl On their leaving the hall
JHk ik 1 iiuß SS thc men P resented . a ver 7
• lj| f' nlfli JN pretty spectacle with their
.999 ■ kirge bouquets of wattle
Hk ', ; 918 blossom and daffodils, while
their 44 coo-ee's " resounded for
THE COUNTESS OF DARNLEY. a lon g wa ? ° n their return
journey.
he was Amongst those present were Sir Thomas Mackenzie (High
ering as Commissioner for New Zealand and Lady Mackenzie,
by the Miss Campion, Mrs. Cox-Roper, Mrs. Baines-Hall, Mr.
vhich was and Mrs. A. T. Sharp, Mr. A. Staines-Manders, Miss D.
fisted her. Fulton, Miss Richardson and others, whilst letters regret-
behalf of ing inability to be present were read from Lady Henmker-
ot always Heaton, the Hon. B. R. Wise, Sir Thomas and Lady
only glad Robinson, Sir Peter and Lady Mcßride, Capt. R. Muirhead
proud of Collins, Mr. H. Kneebone, Mr. H. G. W. Neale, Mrs.
nley, who Gamble, Mr. C. E. Town (Secretary to the Sydney Consign-
Sir' John, ments Committee), of the London Chamber of Commerce
which had who was represented by Mr. W. Strood, Col. Flashman,
the oast and Mr. W. H. Pratten.
The arrangements for tea were made by Mrs. F. W.
Church, Miss Ivy Church and Mrs. Bradford, senr.
Reprinted from "THE BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN," March 2nd, 1916,


Mrs. RITA FISKE'S CHRISTMAS TREE.
Successful Party for the Wounded. Mrs. Fiske's splendid work.
Mrs. RITA FISKE'S Christmas Party for the wounded
was a huge success. The Christmas Tree (which was used
on the 18th December at the Australian Military Head-
quarters, Westminster) was ioft. high and 6ft. in diameter ;
it was laden with valuable gifts for the wounded, and had
been decorated by Miss Freda Church, who, with her sisters,
Miss Ivy Church and Mrs. Rawlings, distributed the gifts ;
every soldier received a gift and the value was not under
3s. 6d. Mrs. Church had charge of the refreshments, and
war, ably assisted by her daughters, Mrs. Bradford, Sen.,
Mrs. J. Bradford, Mrs. S. H. Bradford, Mrs. Lily man, Mrs.
George, Miss Fulfon, Miss Campion, Miss Hall, Mrs.
Chimley, Mrs. Stoddart, and many others. Captain Trador
ably executed his duties as M.C. ; he also brought a number
of boys of the Naval Brigade, who sang beautifully, Amongst
the artistes were Mrs. Graddon, Mrs. Rawlings, Mrs. Freda
Church, Mrs. Lilyman. Mrs. Stoddart, Mrs. Thompson, etc.
I he room was beautifully decorated, the most prominent
being a large Australian flag which was presented to Mrs.
Rita Fiske some time ago by the Victorian Government. On
responding to a hearty vote of thanks, with three cheers,
Mrs. Fiske said how delighted she was to entertain so many,
although she had been a weekly hostess to wounded soldiers
since February last, the total number of guests up to date,
being four thousand and seventy-seven wounded, and she
hoped those present would give a cheer for the ladies who so
ably assisted in dispensing the good things,
The wounded soldiers entertained were brought from the
City of London Red Cross Military Hospital, Finsbury-
square, Bethnal Green Military Hospital ; Metropolitan
and Enfield-road ; and City of London, Clapton.
Mrs. Fiske was presented during the evening, with a
large blue diamond ring, from Mrs. A. E. Stoddart (widow
of the famous Australian cricketer), also a beautiful set of
Mole Musquash from Mrs. Richardson. A set of cut glass
scent bottles, in case, filled, was also presented. There were
present two Australian V.C.'s and one D.C.M. Smart
business was done under the mistletoe.
Photo by " Daily Mirror
WEEKLY TEA PARTY
MINISTERING ANGELS* —Letters from the Wounded*
To the Editor of " The British Australasian.
DEAR SIR, — Kindly permit me a little space in your
valuable paper to express the high appreciation of the good
work being done by some of those good folks who are taking
such a lively interest in the wounded from Australia. On
arrival in England from the Dardanelles, one is favourably
impressed with the activity and untiring energy of those
engaged in conveying the wounded to the various hospitals.
The transit is quick, and the attention everything to be
desired. On arriving in hospital, the strain of war, which
our lads have so gallantly stood, is relieved by all the com-
forts imaginable. Anything that 1 could say for the staff
attending in the various hospitals would but poorly express
the high appreciation of their magnificent work. One is not
inside long before he is aware that the womenfolk from the
Antipodes have been hard at work to ensure the speedy
recovery of the " boys " from the front. Motor drives are
things looked forward to by almost any convalescent, and in
England the Australian ladies have made amp 1 e provision
for these enjoyable outings. Particularly would I like to
mention Mrs. Rita Fiske, who is the youngest sister of Lady
Hoad' (widow of the late Commander of the Australian
Forces). She has been doing a work for us " lads " that is
worthy of the highest admiration in taking us to teas, motor
drives and entertainments of all kinds, and in this she is
being ably supported by a strong body of Australian workers.
By the way, when in the trenches I happened to see a
photo of Mrs. Fiske, entertaining the wounded Australians
at Harefield. Little did we dream then that so soon we
should be the recipients of her generosity. In conclusion,
let us hope that Mrs. Fiske and her " ministering angels "
may still be spared in good health to continue their great
and noble work.
Thank you, Mr. Editor.
I am, yours faithfully,
Pte. N. C. PARKER, 836, 9th A.I.F.
Bethnal Green Military Hospital, London, N.
Reprinted fiom " THE BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN," December 30th, 1915.


ENTERTAINMENT TO 2,000 ANZACS.
Mrs. RITA FISKE'S FAREWELL RECEPTION.
" I think it is only right that I, in my position as Agent-
-44 General for Tasmania, should take this opportunity of
" publiclv acknowledging the very great services that have
44 been rendered to Australian, Tasmanian and New Zealand
44 soldiers in England by Mrs. Rita Fiske, our hostess of
44 this afternoon. Her hospitality has been lavish and those
44 for whom I speak are fully aware of all that Mrs. Fiske
44 has done, and how she has not spared either time or money
44 in entertaining week by week over now quite a long
44 period those who have left their own shores to fight for
44 the Mother Country. (Applause). Moreover, I am quite
44 sure also that the men of Australia and of those other
44 lands for whom I am proud to speak have also personally
44 appreciated her weekly gatherings. (Applause). For all
under the supervision of nurses, and hundreds more in
khaki, erect, bubbling over with enthusiasm, and not one
whit the worse for their baptism of tire. They were the
Anzac heroes. Men who had fearlessly faced death and
now came along the main thoroughfare of Stoke Newington
with faces wreathed in smiles to the accompaniment of the
ringing cheers of admiring crowds. Those who had come
through battle unscathed will fight in another sphere. They
were Australians and New Zcalanders, some on the eve
of departure for home; others about to take their stand
in another theatre of war. No matter to what section they
belonged, it was obvious that they were in the happiest
of moods.
The inhabitants extended a warm welcome to the heroes.
Photo by '' Daily Mirror
A VIEW OF THE STAGE OF ALEXANDRA THEATRE.
The following were amongst those on the Platform : -
Mr. and Mrs. S. J. RYAN, Premier of Queensland.
Capt, MUIRHEAD COLLINS, C.M.G-. and Mrs. COLLINS.
General Sir NEWTON MOORE
Lady TURING and Mrs. PARKER (Lord Kitchener's Sister).
—MCDERMOTT, Under Secretary for State.
Mrs. RITA FISKE (Hostess), and Mr. ERIC DENNISTOUN FISKE
Mrs. Cox ROPER and Lady BIRDWOOD.
Sir JOHN MCCALL, Agent General for Tasmania.
C. H. CHOMLT, Esq., A. STAINES MANDERS, J.P., Miss DAISY FULTON, Mrs. RAWLINGS, C. E. TOWN, Esq.
44 she has done, I again publicly thank her on behalf of the
44 peoples for whom I speak and of the men themselves."
(Applause).
The are the precise terms in which Sir John
McCall, the Agent-General for Tasmania, spoke of the
generous hospitality of Mrs. Rita Fiske, when addressing
the Anzacs present at the reception held by that lady at
the Alexandra Theatre, Stoke Newington, on Friday after-
noon last. The gathering at the Alexandra was unique
for this part of London, when, as the guests of the lady
named, there assembled, in the words of a disinterested
critic, 44 men broken in war, attired, in hospital garb and
Flags floated in the breeze from business establishments,
patriotic emblems were suspended from windows, and men
women and children of all ages joined in cheering the men
who have given such a magnificent account of themselves
in less peaceful surroundings.
Some thousandls of people who had desired to participate
in North London's welcome, however were doomed to a little
disappointment by a change of route. It was generally
expected that the troops would march from Liverpool Street
Station via Kingsland Road to the Theatre, but the men
arrived by train at Stoke Newington Station. This was
due to a well-intentioned act on the part of the Railway


3
■ e
HH <
tu
■fp E
§® H
■g <
u
HH a
HH z
HI <
HH x
Pf 3
r:;
A o
V'*'' ©
5
ifeiy u
BSSS&i *-
Hz
£U
H
u.
j||Sr o
" if * # ■
Jig U
I
<
o
o


It
m x ■ ■ ■ ■
>*$? ■ ft*
MHBBI
f'Jiw'
lit '
, -< / > "
: ? ' * .. ' ' C^M&i
.
raKfe
ih
Hs!l— >:v&t&
Entertainment to 2,000 Anzacs (continued).
Company, but it unhappily was not in accord with either
pre-arranged plans or Mrs. Rita Fiske's desires. It was the
first opportunity Stoke Newington had had of cheering the
heroes of Anzac. Men lifted their hats, women waved
handkerchiefs, and boys and girls gave voluble expression
to their feelings of enthusiasm. The troops responded with
long-drawn shouts of " Coo-ee."
At the theatre the men soon comfortably esconced them-
selves, and were regaled with apples, cigarettes, and
chocolates. Mr. W. M. Hughes, the Prime Minister of
Australia, had been expected to attend, but owing to
attendance at a meeting of the Privy Council, was prevented
at the last moment from putting in an appearance. The
platform, however, was a very influential and thoroughly
representative one. The Hon. Sir John McCall (Agent-
General for Tasmania) presided, and was supported by the
Hon. J. Ryan (the Prime Minister of Queensland) and Mrs.
Ryan, Mrs. Rita Fiske, Lady Turing, General Sir Newton
Moore, Mrs. Parker (Lord Kitcheners' sister), Captain
Photo by C. Vandyke, Ltd., Buckingham Palace Rd., S.TL.
The Hon. T. J. RYAN.
Muirhead Collins, C.M.G., and Mrs. Collins, Mrs. Cox-
Roper, Lady Bird wood, Mrs. Walter Thomson, Mrs. Hall,
Mr. C. E. Town and Mr. Stroud (both of the London
Chamber of Commerce), Mr. and Mrs. Chumley, Mr. and
Mrs. Wray, Mrs. Minns, Mr. Eric Dennistoun Fiske, Miss
Fulton, Mr. Staines-Mander, J.P., Councillor Evans (of
Stoke Newington), Capt. Trader, Mrs. Baines Hall, Mrs,
Hall and family, and Miss Richardson.
At the outset the Chairman read a message from Lady
Darnley, who he said, had retained her intimate relations
with Australians since she had come to this country, in
which she wished the visitors " God-speed 1 and Good Luck,"
Sir John adding, that her ladyship had on more than one
occasion expressed her warm appreciation of the splendid
work Mrs. Rita Fiske had been carrying on week by week
for many months in entertaining Australian and other
wounded soldiers. (Applause). Sir Thomas MacKenzie,
High Commissioner for New Zealand, had also expressed
his regret at being unable to attend, and' wished the Anzacs
the best of good luck and l " Kia Ora." (Applause). The
gathering, the Chairman went on to say, was one of
Australian soldiers who had done so much to bring the
dominions of Australia and New Zealand into their proper
place in the Empire, and one which he was sure Mr.
Hughes, the Prime Minister of Australia, would regret
having missed. He himself well remembered the time when
he first joined the Forces in Tasmania thirty years ago,
when one required a very considerable amount of pluck
to present himself in public in uniform. Their friends would
laugh at them, and picture them running into the bush
at the first sight of the enemy. (Laughter). Thanks were
due to the present-day troops for demonstrating to the
world that the Australian soldier was as good as any other
soldier in the (Applause). That gathering he under-
stood, was to take the form of a farewell to two sets of
The Hon. Mrs. RYAN, wife of the Prime Minister of Queensland.
men—those who had recovered sufficiently to return to fight
in France, and, he hoped, in Germany. (Applause). To
those he wished '' Good Luck and a safe return." The
others were those who had been spared their lives in the
terrible onslaught in Gallipoli, and who, on account of
wounds or sickness, wouldl be returning to their homes in
the Sunny South, where they would have the warmest of
welcomes. Australia would not forget the services they
had rendered. (Applause). Sir John then bore the public
testimony to the work of Mrs. Rita Fiske with which our
report opens.
Mr. Ryan later addressed the gathering. He was greeted
with resounding cheers. When these had subsided, a flash-
light photograph was taken, causing not only Mr. Ryan,
but the audience, obvious consternation.
" Get in your dug-out," exclaimed one New Zealander,


: ■: ■.;;•■? .■ ,: -v = ; v'.,-■:;=■' ."-.; -: :.." : -".f ;"■ ■ v "-> - " '
Entertainment to 2,000 Anzacs (continued)
and Mr. Ryan facetiously remarked, " I cannot escape
being shot at myself! "
They were the men said Mr. Ryan, who realising the
great life and death struggle which was going on for
civilisation willingly came forward to make, if necessary,
the last sacrifice in the great cause for which we were
fighting.
He was proud that they had come out of it so well.
He was sure it would be a gratification to them to know
the joy and pride with which the news of the doings of the
Australasians at Anzac reached Australia. They felt that
the race from which they had sprung had not degenerated.
They felt that they possessed those qualities which had
think Australasian men may well claim it as some recom-
pense for the great deeds you accomplished there. (Cheers).
He had heard that they were about to be given an
opportunity of pitting their great strength and courage
against, perhaps, an enemy they would be more pleased to
fight. He could assure them that Australia would watch
with the deepest interest the course of events, and would
look to them to do further deed's of glory and bravery.
You have done a great service to the whole of civilisation,
said Mr. Ryan in conclusion, and you will have the satis-
faction of knowing that not only the present generation, but
future generations, will admire the great deeds you have
done for humanity. (Cheers).
Major Sir JOHN McCALL (Agent-General for Tasmania)
made their forefathers famous in these islands and that
they had accomplished things that would take their place
among the great military achievements of the British
Empire. (Cheers).
You gave Australia a password, added Mr. Ryan, and the
25th of April will be a great Australian day throughout
the years that are to come. (Cheers). I am one of those
who hoped that, when this great world-struggle is over—
and I trust it may be speedily over—Gallipoli will be one
of the places that will remain British soil. (Cheers). I
Mrs. Fiske, requested by the Chairman to say a few
words, then said: This is the happiest day in my life. I
never expected to see so many of our own boys together
in England. They heard a lot about what the Australian
soldiers had done, but they had done no more that
Australians knew they would, as Australians knew them
and other people did not. You have not come over to help
a strange country, for England belonged to our ancestors,
and it is naturally ours. You have simply come across to


WILL YOU HELP OUR
BOYS IN KHAKI
AND
BOYS IN BLUE
WHO FIGHT FOR YOU
AN APPEAL
FOR TRANSPORT ONLY
the War commenced no public monies have been asked for or
accepted towards this great work, and all expenses of Cartage Duties,
Delivering and incidental expenses (which are considerable), have been
defrayed by Mrs* Fiske. The time has, however, now arrived when in order
to continue to carry out this work, an Appeal must be made to benevolent
friends for help. During the coming Summer I wish to take batches
of two or three hundred wounded into the country, twice a week, and
in order to do this it will be absolutely necessary to raise funds for the
purpose of transport, and the work will be sadly hampered unless money is
forthcoming, more especially as many kind friends have disposed of their
Motors. I might here mention that I have already received an invitation
from Lady Darnley to take 200 wounded to Cobham Hall in July. This
is only the forerunner of many similar invitations, A great privilege,
therefore, presents itself to all Australians in Great Britain and to all
business firms associated with the Commonwealth to contribute generously
to this object, We have helped the Motherland ; we have given liberally to
the National Fund ; we have helped the unfortunate and oppressed Belgians
and others; but now is our opportunity to repay in a slight measure the
great sacrifices our men are making for us. Let your response be prompt
and hearty.
Yours truly,
RITA FISKE.
All contributions will be gratefully acknowledged', and should be addressed—
Mrs. RITA FISKE, 350, Mare Sreet, London, N.E.; or clo "The British
Australasian Offices," 115, High Holborn, London, W.C.
Cheques (or Order) crossed The London City and Midland Bank, Ltd., London.


a
CJ
W
For return to
MRS. RITA DENNISTOUN FJSKE,
350, MARE STREET, LONDON, N.E
TRANSPORT FUND.
SPECIAL APPEAL.
DEAR SIR (OR MADAM),
In response to the above appeal I beg to enclose a contribution of £
towards the above fund.
Name
A ddress
Cheques (or Orders) should be crossed The London City & Midland Bank, Limited.
ore |o "THE BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN OFFICES," 115, HIGH HOLBORN, LONDON, W.C.


c
It
S •
o
U rS
—r Co
r3 *"- 4
X >-
° a
SJ o
.rl »>-j
*£2 C/ 3
Go
o
aj °
CJ
H
1 -J-»
b/5 u
c o
.tS
>
<3 d
2/3
u
S
C -0
<
£
o cj
c
"£ *-
« r5
Oh Q
<-+-i
.o o
c T:
.a «3
Ph W
. w J5
w ■**
1 w "3
»(/)+;
H-H CS
3 %
- i
1 fc
1 05
