

ADVENTURES
IN
QUEENSLAND.
BY AUSTRALIAN.
[All Rights Reserved.]
Tasmania:
J. WALCH AND SONS, HOBART TOWN;
WALCH BROTHERS AND BIRCHALL, LAUNCESTON.
MELBOURNE AND SYDNEY : GEORGE ROBERTSON.
DAVIES BROTHERS, PRINTERS, “MERCURY” OFFICE, HOBART TOWN.
Price: 2s. 6d.


To ,
Mt Hobse,
Dog,
Revolver,
AND
Stockwhip.
I DEDICATE THE FOLLOWING PAGES (WITHOUT PERMISSION) IN
GRATEFUL REMEMBRANCE OP THEIR EVER BEADT ASSISTANCE IN
TIMER OF NEED.
AUSTRALIAN.


PREFACE.
By the advice of a few literary friends, and with fear and trembling,
I fling this, my first book, at the heads of that portion of the public
who are hardy enough to read it.
It is very certain that to please everybody, one should write a
book ; for has not the most patient of men exclaimed “ Oh that mine
adversary had written a book.” The most superficial reader will perceive
the ferocious anticipatory pleasure lurking in the quotation. That
closes the case for the enemy.
Then we know that friends are pleased to have an author in their
family, or circle —except, perhaps, the few who exclaim “ What a fool
to rush into print! ” Of course they are rarely correct, and when so
only by a fluke. So much for friends.
Now for a class of a totally different mould from either friends
or enemies. They are —but I shake as I softly whisper their name —
critics! Nevertheless, if they deign to notice this little volume, they
will no doubt do it the justice to say, that the scenes depicted in it
are either original or ab-original.
It has been said “ That a lie which is half a truth is ever the
blackest of lies.” That granted, this volume nqjst be a monstrous
falsehood, for it is more than half true.
In conclusion, I now launch my little Moses on the—who knows
how troubled? —waters of public approval, hoping that the “pitch
and slime ” of criticism will not defile it so thoroughly as to render
invisible any little attractions it may possess.
AUSTRALIAN.


ADVENTURES IN QUEENSLAND.
CHAPTER I.
CNS2TD
V yHE pioneer squatters had to work and rough it with the meanest
f. A of their men. There was no kind of toil in which they did not
T B A tek o 311 active P art —bullock-driving, splitting, building, fencing,
shepherding, shearing, wool-pressing, sheep-washing, stock-riding,
(([■?) droving, and a multitude of other things inseparable from a life
A\V> * n the bush. Besides which, their lives, and those of their men,
y 'Oj/ mainly depended on their own personal precautions and vigilance,
((j) (0) hacked up by indomitable pluck. They were truly stout-hearted
v men to face what they did. Dangers and difficulties ahead;
bankruptcy in the background, if overwhelmed by a series of insurmountable
misfortunes.
The squatters were, as a rule, gentlemen by birth and education. There
were no kid-glove gentlemen among them, though. Being men of great
energy, they often worked off any surplus of that indispensable commodity
in wild excesses when opportunity offered. Without wishing to defend the
course, it was at least to be expected of men of their temperament ; for it
must be borne in mind that the softening influence of the society of ladies
was left far behind them. Life in a new country was so risky for the pioneers
that ladies were not often taken out to share it. It was no place for ladies,
so society was composed solely of rough men, and not less rough women.
The men lost much of their civilization in their endeavours to civilize their
enemies. Well, those who pulled safely through were generally rewarded
by some fair one, who felt proud of being the mistress qf a station formed
by her husband, who had so nobly overcome all the many difficulties of
his position.
How much of that beautiful and rich country—rich in pasture, gold, and
other valuable metals and minerals—would now be settled 2 And how many
merchants and trades-people would be fattening in that favoured portion
of Australia, now called Queensland, but for those men who pushed out at
the risk of life and property—both of which were frequently sacrificed in
the too often unequal struggle between the blacks and themselves 1 In reply,
I say—Very little of the former, and very few of the latter. Yet the hard-
earned leaseholds of the squatters are being wrested from them bit by bit, till
there will be nothing left for them but to clear out, and begin the world again
further north, or be content with what they have been able to scrape together.
The Government show them no more consideration than they do those who.
stepped in with capital after the country was subdued! Is tins Justice 2
The squatters pushed out' further and further, taming the natives, and!
B


stocking the country ; forming townships at convenient places inland, and
on the coast, and as they got too distant from the last port they quickly
found another, taking their wool and other produce, and driving their fat stock
there to be boiled down, returning with their next six or twelve months’
supplies.
In Queensland, the squatters have been the means of opening up that
magnificent line of sea-board stretching from Moreton Bay to Cape York
about 1,500 miles—and are now opening up the country far into the interior.
In the year 184—, Maryborough was a border town in the northern portion
of the colony of New South Wales—but now part of Queensland. By
border town is meant an outside settlement, composed of a few scattered
wooden houses or huts. The inhabitants numbered about two hundred ; and
were, for the most part, very strange people indeed. At the taking of
the census, a man entered himself in the “ religion ” column as a publican ;
another as a bullock-driver ; another, whose mother-in-law was living in the
house, put that lady down as “head of the family.” Doubtless the latter
statement -was correct, but the collector took exception to it as well as to
the others, pointing out the note at the foot of the census-paper, showing
the liability of those who made wilfully incorrect statements to a heavy
penalty. There were many entries in the columns, headed “female” and “ age
last birth-day,” very considerably under the truth. There were three public-
houses or inns, as they were called. Two of these were moderately good
where the squatters, and- others of their class put up when they visited
the town. Both, of course, had separate quarters for the men also; but the
place most of the latter resorted to was a large slab hut with bark roof, kept by
Old Rickets. There was no accommodation to speak of; but then men who
resorted to the Lambing-down Inn, required nothing so effeminate as accom-
modation. They were bullock-drivers, shepherds, shearers, sawyers, and
bushmen of all sorts—men who were accustomed to rough it; who had the
constitutions of horses, and could work in earnest when they did work—
which was nearly all the year through—denying themselves almost the neces-
saries of life, to save every farthing of their wages for months and months
together; then to pay a flying visit to Old Rickets, and ‘ ‘ swamp their cheques
like men.”
When a number of these slaves met to drink at the Lambing-down Inn,
they soon took possession of the place. They began by treating the land-
lord, who only had one head, and that one by no means of equal liquor-
power with the twenty around him, each of whom insisted on his having
a friendly glass, till the old fellow leant for support against the bar shelving,
and gradually slid down amongst the bottles on the floor—“toes up.” Then
began the orgies—cask-heads were smashed in, and buckets filled and handed
about for all hands to dip their pannikins and quart pots into—the fiery liquor
being poured down those fire-proof throats like water. Dozens of champagne
were broken into buckets and washtubs, and shared the same fate. Nothing
was too hot or too expensive for those fellows when they were “on for a
spree. ” What were the police doing ? Why, all that is ever expected of them
—they kept out of the way, like sensible fellows. There were only three
policemen and a chief constable, and, on occasions like these, only two courses
were open to them—either to keep aloof, or to join the company on friendly
terms. The latter course was not resorted to, very likely because the old
Chief was a rigid teetotaller.
Old Rickets had no objection to the heads of his casks being smashed in.
It saved him a deal of trouble, and the expense of brass taps. He knew that
the men would pay him handsomely for what they drank, broke, and wasted ;
neither had he any objection to procuring a few hours’ oblivion at their


expense, for the old fox knew that when he again arrived at an average state
of sobriety, he would have the “ whip-hand ” of them. Besides the three
inns, were several stores, which received the wool, tallow, and hides from
stations, and supplied the latter with all the necessaries of life, or, at least,
were the medium through which those necessaries were supplied in many
eases. They, however, often did receive considerable orders from the
squatting community, and, as they contained everything from a pearl button
to a forty-gallon pot, they could furnish the multitudinous items in a station
order with tolerable accuracy. The uninitiated may form some idea of the
numerous articles required for a station, and the difficulty of obtaining them
at times, when it is stated that a station might be considerably over two
hundred miles from the nearest township, and entirely dependent on the
arrival of a schooner with supplies. There were no steamers to Maryborough
then, and only small schooners visited it once in two or three months. In
consequence, stock-owners there were often put to the greatest straits in spite
of the best management, though they usually laid in a six or twelve months’
supply. But what with the borrowing propensities of less prudent neighbours ;
a dry or a wet season during which the teams could not travel; or from one
or more of the many causes with which bushmen are so familiar, the squatter
and his men were sometimes reduced to mutton or beef, with a scant allowance
of damper made of musty old flour ; when the latter was finished, to meat alone.
Some years ago it was said that, on the Barcoo, all hands on the stations
could be seen running about on hands and knees, devouring grass like sheep.
There was more or less truth in the statement, for grass and weeds were
often boiled to satisfy the cravings of hunger. Boiled mutton and pig-
weed, and other weeds, with perhaps a pannikin of tea without sugar or milk,
sometimes formed a meal for the pioneer.
There was no church, and besides the public-houses, stores, and two black-
smiths’ forges, there were no other places worth mentioning, except the
building used as a lock-up. It was a very insecure slab building, with a
bark roof, and was the lock-up keeper’s residence. The latter individual,
and any stray prisoners that were placed in his charge, formed a happy-family
circle, for they all had to mess and sleep in the same apartment. The fact
of their remaining in such a very insecure place, was almost positive proof
of the prisoners’ innocence ; taken, also, in connection with the fact that
the poor constable was dying of consumption. An old fellow, who had the
contract for building the new look-up, jestingly selected a cell for his own
use, and he was actually the first man confined in it on its completion.
The second constable was a fine fellow, who was subsequently lost in the
bush in a state of delirium tremens, and was never found. He had formerly
been in the Coldstream Guards.
The third constable was a tall, thin, cadaverous-looking man, whose
name clearly proved his nationality—Paddy Gaynor. He lived in a little hut
at the back of the town, in a gully. It was rather a solitary place, and he
eventually left it, and moved into town, for the following reason : —One day,
his Chief ordered him to take charge of a black, who was to guide him to the
spot where another black-boy was reported to be lying, frightfullyspeared,and
otherwise wounded, by some of his own colour. Paddy had strict injunctions
not to let his guide escape, there being some suspicion attaching to him, though
the poor fellow was really innocent of any part in the outrage. No doubt
he knew that he was suspected, and to evade any of the terrible punishment
which his fears conjured up as awaiting him, the first chance he got he
bolted. The constable, knowing that pursuit would be vain, and fearful lest
the wrath of his Chief would fall on him, in the event of the black escaping,
raisedhis rifle and shouted “ Stand, in the name of the Queen, three times !”


T3ie black did not stand “threetimes.” The constable took good aim, and fired
at the flying native. The ball entered the back, and passed out through th&
liver. The black was taken back to town, and laid on the lock-up floor, where
he died in great agony some hours after, cursing Paddy with his last breath.
This circumstance did not tend to make Paddy more temperate quite the
reverse. As.he never went to bed sober, he had all sorts of unpleasant ex-
periences, both waking and sleeping. One was that the black he had shot used
to pull him out of bed every night, drag him about the floor and ill-use him.
He was so satisfied of the reality of the thing, that nothing could drive
the idea out of his head, so he moved into town. He at last became too ill
to get up. During his last hours, which were in the night, he felt his end
approaching, and asked for liquor, that he might die drunk ! In those few
hours, he drank the contents of a large case-bottle of gin—over a quart ! It
had not the desired effect, so the boon of leaving this world in a state of
intoxication was denied him, and he remained quite sensible up to the last
minute or two of his life. He feebly rose to a sitting posture, stretching
out his arms, with hands spread as though to repel something. A look of
horror overspread his countenance, terrifying all who beheld him. He was
indeed an awful spectacle, his long lean face, on which was the stubble of a
week’s growth, was drawn to its fullest extent by the hand of Death. His
mouth open, exposing his almost toothless gums ; his thin grey hair stream-
ing about, and his bloodshot eyes almost forced from their sockets by the
awful dread that possessed him. He cried, “ There he is again ' Hold his
arm!—quick!—quick ! Oh! by the Blessed Virgin ! The spear has gone clean
through my hver !
For a moment, he seemed to be convulsed, and the horror on his features
was intensified. Those who looked on were paralyzed with fear. The wretched
man rose to his knees, clasped both hands over the region of the hver, as
though endeavouring to draw something out, and then fell forward on his
face—dead. His friends and attendants all ran out, so frightened were they
spreading the news of his horrible end. When he was lifted up to be laid
out, his long bony fingers were tightly clenched, and the look of horror
still distorted his features. There was a wake the next night, at which the
•poor fellow’s favourite drink—gin—formed no inconsiderable feature. Also,
pipes, tobacco, and two or three broken heads.
Of the stores, one had for a short time been kept by Robert Barrett, who,
having been accustomed to a bush life for some years previously, did not
take kindly to storekeeping in town. At the time this sketch commences,
he had sold out, and was preparing for a start on his own account in the
squatting line. Young Frank Willis, who had been sent from Sydney to
acquire experience on a sheep station some distance beyond Gayndah—a
township about one hundred miles west of Maryborough—had remained
with Barrett, because the gentleman to whose station he was going, was lrillo/1
by the blacks in his own verandah before Frank reached his iWinatim,
Between Barrett and Frank a mutual attachment had grown, and they made
an agreement to start together in life, under the “ title and firm” of Barrett
and Co., squatters. It was settled that Barrett should go to Sydney, for the
purpose of arranging with an agent for an oyer-draft for the purchase of
three or four thousand sheep ; to order supplies ; to select the various articles
and tools required for the forming of a new station ; and, in short, to transact
all other business connected with their contemplated start in the new country
While Barrett was away south, Frank was to proceed north by lanfl till
he got beyond all the other settlers who had taken up runs ; and, as soon as
he found a suitable piece of country, was to mark off as many blocks as would
be sufficient for their purpose.


At that time, the system was to mark the selected country off into square
each having an area of twenty-five square miles ; and send the appli-
cation, or “tender,” to the Crown Lands Office, Sydney, with a description
of the country. Then, the Commissioner of the district went round the boun-
daries, marking them definitely ; and, if there were no previous tenders in for
the same blocks, the application was granted, and a lease for eight or fourteen
years given, according to the rules then in force.


CHAPTER II.
Prank engaged a good black-boy—the same who had been with him oa
previous expeditions and, with a pack-horse to carry the necessaries for the
journey, started for the “Never Never” country.
Travellers were always welcomed, and hospitably entertained by the kind
dwellers at stations; and though one’s quarters were at times necessarily
rough, they were always made as comfortable as circumstances and warm
hearts could make them. But then the absence of comfort was always sub-
mitted to with a good grace ; for the bushman—or anyone who aspired to be-
coming one—prided himself on being able to rough it, with the least possible-
outward indication that he was living in any other state than the extreme
of luxury.
The weather was hot and dry, for it was summer. Bush fires had passed
over the country, and left it black and dreary for many miles ; so that there
was no grass to be seen, except a thin margin here and there, that was too
green to bum, on the banks of the creeks. To ride over many miles of burnt
country has a most depressing effect on the traveller. Wherever he goe&
there is nothing but blackness. The black ashes of the burnt grass and the
dust, rise m clouds from under the hoofs of the horses ; old decayed logs and
stumps smoulder and smoke ; dead trees fall here and there, burnt through
at the roots, smashing and rending their green neighbours in their downward
course, and, as they reach the earth, produce a mighty noise, the ground
trembling for a long distance around with the concussion. They are very
dangerous, too, as they begin to fall so noiselessly—not with the sharp cracks
and grinding sound with which trees start from their stumps when cut with axe
or saw, but quietly till they reach the branches of their forest mates. Then
comes the crashing and rattling, and, in a few seconds, the confused wreck is
afcm, and a cloud of dust and smoke rolls lazily away before the sultry breeze.
These fallen trees frequently smoulder for weeks, burning away to the last
and deep holes where the roots were burnt out, into which the unwary
stockman—horse and all—may fall, while hunting cattle when the grass again
becomes long. ®
-Having a journey before them, Frank and the boy, Tommy, did not travel
at a very rapid pace. A half-civilised black-boy is by no means a bad com-
panion on a journey, if of a lively disposition, which is the rule rather than the
exception. Tommy was one of the cheerful sort, and knew a good deal of
Mglish. His master, also, had picked up the language of the aborigines,
and could speak it pretty fluently; so they chatted away as they rode on, and
were consequently less affected by the miserable appearance the country pre-
sented, than they would otherwise have been.
About noon they reached a fine creek, and close to it, on a large flat, was
an abundance of beautiful grass, which had escaped the devouring fire on
account of its greenness. There were several bullock-drivers, with their teams,
m camp there for their mid-day meal, and to spell and feed their bullocks
+ i Ul> or ,^ wo * The bullocks were mostly in yokes, some standing up
to then* knees in the water, to cool their weary legs after their hot march
°yer the hard uneven road. Others were cropping the rich green grass ;
while the rest took up positions under the shadiest of the trees, brushing off


the tormenting flies and mosquitoes with their long tails. A few of the freest)
or fattest of the poor brutes, still had their tongues out, and panted from their
recent exertions in the heat.
The drivers had just made fires, and were putting on the quart pots and
billies full of water, for the inevitable tea. It matters not how much drink
of other kinds a bushman has, he must still have his tea. Smoking is not
more general than tea-drinking.
Kipper Tommy—one of the best bullock-drivers in the district —recognised
Frank, and gave him a kindly greeting, and invited him to stay and take a
pot of tea with them. Frank and his boy dismounted, took off their saddles,
watered and hobbled their horses, and let them go to feed.
Kipper Tommy was a little fellow, but as tough as nails, and acknowledged
by his mates to be the crack driver of the district, which was a compliment
not to be despised. Whenever a man becomes excellent above his fellows,
in any particular branch of bush-craft, he is looked up to with a certain amount
of respect by his rough mates, and attains a decided standing and authority.
Kipper is a native word signifying young. It was prefixed to his Christian
name, on account of his youthful appearance and size. He was not a youth
though, being then about thirty ; but if alive now, and he lives to be a
hundred, he will still be called Kipper Tommy. The nick-names given to
those men were always well chosen, and illustrative of some peculiarity or
quality possessed by them ; sticking to them through life, in the majority of
instances, to the entire obliteration of their own proper names. The practice
of giving nick-names was so common that few were without them, which
rendered it somewhat difficult to find out a man’s real name. No doubt the
recipients were only too glad to allow the old names to be forgotten, for, that
being an outside district, was naturally a shelter for some of the most reckless
characters whom Southern society had rejected ; or who had left in fear of
that valuable prerogative being exercised. Well, perhaps, the very qualities
that rendered them unfit for a settled life, made them the more valuable for
the rough-and-tumble life with which they finally identified themselves. It
is hard to believe that “every man has his price,” but there can be no doubt
that every man has his place, though so many go through the world without
dropping into it. It must be a sorry case, indeed, if one cannot find a
fitting niche in one of the many occupations involved in the sum of bush-
craft.
“Now, Mr. Frank, out with your ‘dover’ and pitch in, sir. Im sorry
we have nothing better to offer you than some ‘New England tongue,’ a
bit of damper, and Johnny-cake. The fact is, we’ve been a few days longer
on the road than we expected. Flash Jack there (pointing to one of his
companions) lost one of his polers, and we didn’t like to come on without
him. Then Knowledgable Bob’s ti'gers split three yokes, when he was a
double-banking on the Cow-boy’s dray—that one with sixteen bales of wool
on—in Baramba Creek. That’s a buster—that creek is—my oath ! Cow-boy s
boss always puts on such ’nation loads, and takes care that he shall chum with
fellows as can double-bank him at a pinch—but my word, it costs him some-
thing for dray-mending, and straightening his axle ! He gets more chains
and yokes broke than any cove on the road. It ain’t right, no ways so it
ain’t,” said the Kipper, who, during the conversation; emptied’out of a large
flour bag, on to a square piece of bark used as a damper-board, a quantity of
damper, Johnny-cakes, and some gristly salt-beef. The latter was the
“ tongue” mentioned by the Kipper. The whole was covered with fine hairs
and flour from the bag, and to one not accustomed to seeing food shot out
of such a receptacle, it would have appeared uneatable. The party in camp
were not so squeamish ; they knew how to appreciate good fare, but could set


to with the relish of hunger, when only coarse food, not artistically served up,
was obtainable.
Frank took a piece of beef in his fingers, cut off a lump, and placed it on a
slice of damper, holding both in one hand, and plying his lmif« with the other.
A. quart or two of post-and-rail tea, sweetened with black sugar, accompanied
the beef and damper. Then out came the pipes and tobacco.
Lumps of beef and damper were severed for the black-boys who were with
the drays, which, with gallons of tea, quickly disappeared. Each boy was
repeatedly asked if he could not “ stow another junk of beef and damper, or
a quart of tea,” for there was no stint with men of that sort, and if black-
boys were not satisfied— i.e., fed to repletion—they usually became sulky,
and little good could be got out of them. J
Mash Jack said, “I hope we’ll get in to-morrow, lads, for I’m getting
awful weak on this here salt-horse and stick-jaw damper—it’s dreadful hard
tack. By Jingo ! It’s a ruinin’ of my degestion, as Old Pills says. Won’t
I have the run of my dover when we gets to Old Rickets’ ? ”
“Not you,” replied Kipper Tommy. “ You’ll more likes to go in for the
run of a five-gallon keg of lush—or be ‘lambed down’ by Old Rickets,
and be kicked out when you’ve swamped your cheque. How much have you
got, Bob 1”
“Oh ! That’s good, my little Kipper. When did you turn parson ? It
must have been since we was at Power’s, in Gayndah—coming down last
mp vnth the Cockatod wool. Why, Tommy, my child, you went in a perisher
that there spree. We all thought you was a-going to croak. Ha !—ha ! ha ! ”
They all joined in the laugh at poor Tommy—principally at the idea of his
™ T? n orders, and, though he joined in the merriment, he said—
-111 tell you what it is, lads. I don’t intend to go in for that sort any more, •
I know I went m a caulker that bust—Oh, very well, you’ll see, lads ”
“AH right, Kipper—l’ll bet you ‘glasses round,’ you’ll be tight before
the yokes is off of your bullocks, and the load off your dray at the township
Is it a bet—eh ? ” *
“ Done, with you, Knowledgable, for glasses twice round,” said Kipper.
“Good! Then we’ll take our first two drinks at that child’s expense, so
sure as eggs is eggs, lads,” Knowledgable Bob said—and added in a solemn
tone—“ Kipper Thomas, you’re only a fabricating of one more stone for the
paving of the Old Gentleman’s stock-yard down below. You should not give
way to such good intentions too soon ; leastways, not until you get near
enough to snuff the bar —my breezes from Rickets.’ ”
Bob’s speech was highly applauded, especially the bad pun in the latter
poetical sentence. There was a great deal of truth in what he said. Many
such men went towards that township with the same good resolve as Tommy
had made—fully believing that it would be kept—but the “ good intention ”
almost invariably shared the fate of hundreds of its predecessors, and took
its place in tho encaustic tiling of the great “stock-yard” below, as soon as
that demon liquor spread its insidious aroma over the olfactory nerves of
its wretched victim.
Kipper Tommy turned the conversation as it was becoming rather personal,
and asked Frank if the schooner had arrived.
“ Yes, the Albion came in yesterday ; Black Johnson has her this trip. Mr.
Barrett is going to Sydney in her. ”
“What! Has he shut up the store, sir 1”
“ No, not exactly. He has sold the business to Mr, Thomas, and is going
to Sydney to make arrangements for a start with sheep ; and I am going out
to the new country to mark a run and take it up.”
“ Well, I’m sorry to hear Mr. Barrett has left the store, for we aint likely to


■get another gentleman the likes of him in his place. He’s the best cove I know
—he would always give a fellow tick for a few pounds worth of things, if he
was hard up ; and a fellow could always coax a stiff ball of the right sort of
stuff out of ■him. He always kept the best sorts on tap in town, and never
put no bluestone or tobacco, nor nothing else into it—like them other
vagabonds.”
They were all sorry that Barrett had given up the store, for his generous
disposition and obliging ways had made him a general favourite. In fact, he
was teo easy-going, and was consequently imposed upon by a great number
of his unprincipled customers, many of whom were pretty deep in his books.
The afternoon was getting on, and all having spelled long enough, the
black-boys were sent to collect the bullocks for a fresh start. Frank's boy.
Tommy, caught their three horses, and with a hearty “good bye ” from the
tnen, and a caution to keep his eyes skinned on account of the blacks, who had
been up to a good deal of mischief at the out-lying stations—Frank and Tommy
rode on. Twelve miles more brought their first day’s Journey to an end at
Yerilla station, owned by Mr. Thos. Brown, an Irishman. Frank being well
known there, was welcomed most cordially, Mr. Brown himself unstrapping
his valise, handed it to his son, who put it into one of the spare bedrooms.
It was—and still is—customary with bush people to accommodate travellers
for the night. Such hospitality was extended to utter strangers, in any
numbers, who might, from necessity or inclination, intimate their desire to
avail themselves of it—not for the night only, but for days consecutively. A
stranger was always expected to give his name if he wished to stay at a station,
either for a meal or for the night. If he did so, it was a sort of guarantee
that he was a fit and proper person to be entertained in the house. If he did
not go through that necessary form, and his general bearing indicated that
lie was not a “swell,” he was sent into the kitchen, or to one of the men’s
huts. This rule was the only safe one to go by, for many a gentleman “of
the first water” travelled in very questionable attire ; but however roughly
he may have been clothed, or however little clothing he may have worn,
the gentleman was sure to peep out, either in manner or address, sufficiently
to warrant one in asking him into his house—even though he may have
been so unacquainted with bush etiquette, as not to comply with the rule, and
allow his host to ask his name. Such instances were rare, and generally
resulted from youth and bashfulness. On the other hand, very questionable
characters, got up regardless of expense, often travelled ; but as a man of this
class seldom opened his mouth but he “ put his foot in it not dress, but
address, was the test by which a traveller’s fitness for the house was Judged.
Yerilla was a cattle station, and had been taken up by the proprietor some
years before. The walls and floors of the house were of split slabs, adzed
.smooth at the edges and insides, the outsides being left rough. Some of the
rooms, including the parlour, were lined with strong calico, which gave them
.a clean, comfortable, and even cool appearance. There was no ceiling of any
.kind, so that the shingles and rafters of the roof could be seen ; which, though
it may appear strange to dwellers in stone or brick houses, was never
looked upon by bush people as unsightly, or uncomfortable. On the contrary,
dwellers in these latitudes like all the ventilation they can get; and, therefore,
if a ceiling is put up, it is mostly of some light material such as calico, througfit
which the heated air can pass. The first question generally asked by the
proprietor when his visitor entered the house, wasj “ Will you take anything
to drink after your ride ? ” The next on the list, was “ Have you any letters
or papers for me i ” Those preliminaries settled, he was then shown to his
room to refresh himself with a wash, and, if he intended staying the nighty
lo change his dress ; if not, the latter ceremony was generally dispensed with.


Of course, at stations blessed with the presence of ladies, one would not think
of sitting down to meals now-a-days in shirt-sleeves ; but at that time it
was a recognized custom. Five or six often rode up a time, most of them,
totally innocent of any other clothing than the simplest riding costume, as.
per list below-: —
1 Pair of riding-breeches
1 Ditto boots
1 Shocking bad hat
1 Shirt (nearly destitute of buttons, and sleeves rolled above elbows)
1 Pair of socks (perhaps)
I Waist-belt, stuck round which would probably be—
-1 Revolver
1 Sheath-knife, and
3 or 4 pouches for tobacco, pipes, ammunition, etc.
It was no uncommon thing to see such a party drop in, and sit down to a meal
just as they entered, with the exception of a good wash, and perhaps the
wristbands and fronts of their shirts buttoned—if buttons there were. Such
a proceeding may be looked upon with horror by the majority of readers out
of the bush ; but, then, it was not thought anything of, even by ladies, who
were always ready to make every allowance for travellers in the hot weather
very sensibly and considerately, not insisting on their visitors making them-
selves excessively hot and uncomfortable, by forcing them to don coat, vest,
and tie.
The tea, as it was called, was in reality dinner; for Mr. Brown was very
frequently out on the run, hunting up the cattle for various purposes ; and,
on such occasions, his return during the early part of the day was extremely
problematical, he being one who never left his work uncompleted. Mrs. Brown,
therefore, always managed so as to afford her husband a thoroughly comfortable,
hot, solid meal in the evening. Considering all things, Frank sat down with
the Browns to a very good spread. It consisted of a fine piece of roast-beef ;
sweet and English potatoes, and boiled fat-hen. Also, cold salt beef, and pig-
weed salad ; home-made bread, fresh butter, and tea with milk and sugar.
“Fat-hen” is a tall weed that grows freely where sheep have been folded, and
along creek banks. The young tops, when boiled, make a most delicate
vegetable.
The above meal was prepared, cooked, and served by Mrs. Brown herself,
for she had been without a servant for some time, and had to do the whole
of the feminine work of the establishment. Bush ladies, sooner or later, have
to learn everything—how to wash, make and bake bread and pastry, cook
and serve a dinner, make butter, and a thousand other things.
An ex-Captain of the British army, who had also distinguished himself ini
the service of Spain, whose wife was in a similar plight to the lady of Yerilla
—and, by the way, at the same time, lived not fifty miles from that station
—was set by his wife to wash up the plates and dishes after dinner. She
tied on him one of her own rough aprons, and went about some other domestic;
duties. In the course of the afternoon she discovered the whole of the
dinner service in a tub of water, the grease not removed but smeared over it.
On asking the noble Captain to explain, he did so in the blandest manner,
saying that he could not get the grease off the plates and dishes, so he-
“put them in soak.” He believed he could rout a thousand rebels from a
Spanish fort in less time than he took vainly endeavouring to remove the-
grease from those pieces of china; he would sooner work in the trenches,
with a sapper’s and miner’s leather apron on, up to his knees in mud, with
shot and shell flying about him, than again put on his wife’s apron, and
attempt to overcome that grease ; he would sooner


“Why, you silly ! You have been trying to wash and soak grease offwitli
cold water ! ”
The embryo Colonel and General slunk away with down-cast look—his
flowing beard and moustache trembling with suppressed emotion. In plaim
English, he felt very like a fool.
Frank was doubly welcome, for he had brought a letter communicating the-
pleasing intelligence that a married couple had arrived in the Albion froim
Sydney. Mrs. Brown then began speculating as to the probable time of their -
appearance at Yerilla, and what sort of people they might be—good, bad, or-
indifferent.
“It is such a lottery getting people through agents all that distance off-
They are at times such dreadful creatures; and, whether they are good or bad,,
the cost of their passage and conveyance to the station is just the same, and.
comes to a great deal too. The last couple we had were just out from
Ireland. The woman was one of the roughest creatures I ever saw. She did
not know how to do a single thing in the kitchen, or about the house. The'
only kind of work she had been accustomed to was milking, and she went
into the yard to see Joe the black-boy milk, the first morning after she came.
Our cows had never been used to women, so they ran round and round the
yard with fear ; at last one of them charged her and nearly threw her over
the cap of the stock-yard. The poor woman said, ‘ Bad manners to them,
they’ve kilt me intirely. Shure, the likes of them critters were never seen,
in Auld Ireland. The bastes ! Och hone! ’ She never went there again.
Then, when I was in the kitchen superintending, or rather I should say,
cooking our first dinner after she came—for I could see she understood
nothing about it—l sent her in to lay the cloth, and put the dinner on the-
table, while I dished up. Shortly, 1 heard shouts of laughter from the parlour,
and came in to see what was the cause. Mr. Brown had been watching the
woman’s proceedings with some astonishment. She spread the cloth all
side-ways, one corner ever so much on the floor, and the other scarcely
covering the table. Then she laid all the hot plates round the table
separately ; the meat and vegetables she put all higgledy-piggledy in the
centre, with no mats. The knives and forks were put in a heap at one comer.
Then she turned to my husband, and said—‘Now I suppose yez wants the
tay 1 ’ This was the point at which Mr. Brown could keep his countenance
no longer. Oh, dear ! I was so vexed ! I could have sat down and cried,
but laughed instead, when I saw the absurdity of the thing. The woman was.
quite unteachable, and though the man did very well, we had to get rid of
them after a trial of three months, and have been now two months without
anyone. When do you think, Mr. Willis, that the drays will be up with
them 1 The weather is so dreadfully hot, and baby is so troublesome at
night, Ido not know how I shall last out if they do not come soon. I dread
to have new people, too.”
Frank explained that he had that day lunched with the men who would
probably bring the new servants on their return from the township; and that
they would most likely reach Maryborough with their teams the next evening,
if nothing happened to detain them.
Mr. Brown suggested by way of consolation for his wife, that the men
would be sure to spree in town for some time, as the whole lot were great
lushingtons ; and even if one kept sober enough to start out with his team, he
would not do so without the rest of his mates, it being a point of honour
amongst bullock-drivers not to desert any' they happened to travel in company
with, from the start to the finish of a trip.
After tea, all but Mrs. Brown adjourned to the verandah to recline in
those rough but comfortable contrivances called “squatters’ delights,” without.


which a bush verandah was incomplete. They are made thus. A frame of
two light saplings about eight feet long, with a cross-piece at top, and one at
the lower end about a foot from the floor, to which cross-pieces are fastened.
*h® en ds of a long strong piece of canvas or bagging, leaving it pretty loose!
The piece of furniture is then reared against the wall, at any angle that suits
the convenience of the occupier. If the lower part is drawn well from the
wall, it forms a lounge almost equal to a hammock, if pushed in closer, it
simply makes an easy chair, but at whatever angle it is placed, it is alwavs
comfortable.
Pip® B were produced, and the conversation turned on the, at that time,
all-absorbing topic—the blacks—who had been very troublesome at various
stations in the district, and from their general conduct and movements, a
more serious outbreak was anticipated. Mr. Brown said the cattle were very
mtrd to find, and when found, harder to do anything with, in consequence of
the treatment they had received at the hands of the blacks. Cattle' hate
and fear the blacks, and become very wild when they see them, or smell
their tracks on the run. They will run on such occasions for miles without
.stopping. Only a few days before, Mr. Brown had been looking his outside
■cattle up, and could find but few of them, though tracks where they had been
Tunning hard in single file were plainly visible here and there. It was out
a very rough part of the run, bounded on one side by a steep range. In
the course of his search, he came upon a place where a mob of cattle had
been rushed down a broken gully, leading from the top of the range to the
plain country below. Suspecting that the blacks had been the cause of the
stampede, he ran the gully up a bit, leading his mare, for it was terribly rocky
and precipitous. He had not proceeded far, before he saw traces of blood
m big drops. He stopped to consider a bit, looking about him at the «ama
1/ a^ove where he stood, he observed several trees with notches cut
xq the bark for some distance up, which explained the whole thing satisfac-
torily to his mind, his knowledge of the habits of the natives being extensive*
having been in the bush the greater part of his life. Let him now speak
lor himself.
“When I saw the notches in the trunks of the iron-barks, I knew at
once what was up. Some blacks had got up the trees with their heavy cattle-
spears, while another party had watched their opportunity till the cattle
fed that way, when they rushed from their hiding-places, and hunted them
pell-mell down the gully, for the fellows up the trees to spear as they passed
under, ■ That is an old dodge of the southern blacks, but I never knew
Hie niggers to do it here before, and I have good reason to believe that Jack
Campbell—the black-boy that came with me from the Richmond River~put
them up to it. He asked my leave to go into the bush for a short time, about
three weeks ago, for he has taken a wife from among the blacks of this part,
and is very friendly with them.
- 1 mounted my mare again and ran the* tracks, wishing I could pull
the black vagabonds, though I had not much hope of seeing them, I rode on
the tracks for about four miles, when I saw smoke ahead, which gave mo
fresh heart, and I pushed on faster. Just at the edge of a bit of scrub, I saw
.six blacks, one of whom I recognized as my boy Jack. They were too busy
“inning a dead beast to notice me, I drew one of my pistols from my
holster, settled myself in the saddle, put spurs to my mare, and was within
y ar ds of them before they saw me. I covered Jack with my pistol
■and fired, so enraged was lat the wretch's treachery. While in the act of
pulling the trigger, my mare jumped a log and threw my aim completely out,
~?o 1 missed him. To make matters worse I had never fired from her back
Jbefore, and she gave a tremendous buck, taking me unawares—for I was


intent on my aim—so she sent me flying over her head, with the empty-
pistol in my hand. I landed within four yards of the blacks, who made a
rush for their spears, which were sticking in the ground but a short distance from
them. Iwasupina jiffy, but the mare was off at a canter. The whole thing
was done in a few seconds, but I never lost my presence of mind, though I
thought Mrs. Brown would have been a widow in less than a minute. I
laughed and said 1 hallo, Jacky ! Baal mine been think it you, my boy—mine-
been think it myall (wild) black-fellow. You catch him yarraman belonging to
me!’ That neat little speech did the business. Jack Campbell said some-
thing to the others, and then went away after the mare. I did not catch
what he said, but they stood with their spears in their hands, eyeing me with
evident distrust, and an inclination to convert me into a porcupine. I never-
felt more uncomfortable in my life, but was determined not to show it
so with as much calmness as I could muster, I sat down on the dead beast,
took out my tobacco and pipe, and commenced operations for a smoke ; asking
one of the fellows to bring me a fire-stick, at the same time throwing him
a bit of tobacco to sweeten him up.' He picked up the bribe with his big
toe, and stuck it in his greasy hair; then stalking majestically towards the
fire, he brought me a light. I had plenty of matches and a tinder-box too,
but I just wanted to break up the party a bit, and divert their attention from
what I felt was working in their brains—a strong desire to use their spears
—for they were a horrid flerce-looking lot. I asked my friend, ‘ What name-
you V He shook his head and replied, ‘ iVa atu hrongum,’ which meant
‘I don’t understand.’ This proved that he had had no intercourse with the
whites, for the first thing a black does when he goes amongst the whites, is to
get some one to christen him, and whatever name he has given him, he
generally keeps, you know.
Just then Jack returned with the mare, and held her till I got on, for she
snorted like mad, and tried to bolt away from the dead beast. I gave Jack
what tobacco I had left, and he let go the bridle. The mare reared and made -
a plunge forward, then set to work bucking worse than she ever did before
—and she was always good at that. I was determined she should not shift
me that time unless the girths broke. When she had had her fill of that
amusement I looked round, and was greeted with a tremendous shout of
applause from the very fellows who would have taken my life five minutes
before with much pleasure. Jack sang out ‘My word, sir ! She did buck a
hurricane ! ’ The rest shouted 1 Gindee horan ! bndgeree yarraman go 1 ’ I’ll,
never take pistols in my holsters again ; but will carry a revolver in my belt
instead.”
Frank asked if that was the same Jack Campbell who had been taken to
Scotland when a child, and educated ?
“ The same fellow. And I fear he will be the means of stirring up a good
deal of trouble between the whites and blacks in this part before long, if he
is not shot ; because he will not be likely to come in to any of the stations
for a long time, after my bowling him out red-handed. I think he felt as
well-satisfied at his escape as I did. If ever I come across him again, under
similar circumstances, I’ll let daylight into him.”
“ Did you ever see anything more of the beast they killed, Mr. Brown ? ”
“ Yes, I rode out there the next morning, and found it just in the same
condition as when I left it the previous evening ; except that the native-
dogs had eaten all the inside, the ears, and tongue. The dingoes are very
bad in that part of the run, and kill a good many calves. I was out there
some time ago—-last winter—and saw three of the brutes trying to get a
young calf away from its mother. My attention was first drawn to them by
the bellowing of the mother, and as I was curious to see how they managed.


lualters, I kept quiet behind a tree, and watched. One of them made a sort
•of femt at the calf, and the heifer rushed at him with, her head down, and
tongue out, bellowing with fury. The dingo ran, of course, and when the
heifer got a httle way from the calf, the other two went at the little thing and
nearly caught it, then the mother turned back and charged them off. They
ran then, and the other returned to the calf and caught it by the ear. Didn’t
-the little fellow ba-a-a ? As soon as the heifer heard that, she turned back
and chased him off again. I don’t know how long they had been at it but
it must have been some time, for the poor heifer’s tongue hung out, the
saliva was streaming from her mouth, and she looked as fagged and tuoked-up
■as if she had been galloped for miles.” 1
“ Did you see the end of it ?”
“ No, but I saw the end of one of the dogs. I knew they would tire her
■out, or get her to run one of them so far away from the calf, that the others
would kill it before she got back ; so, as I was on a fresh horse I gave chase,
;and was upon them before they saw me. It is no easy matter to run an old
dog down. They went away in different directions, and I took after one
that went towards Emu Flat. After a mile of a gallop I overtook him, but
he dodged and doubled so in front of my horse, I could only get a good cut
at him now and then with my whip—it made him grin and gnash his teeth
though. At last I caught him a fair one over the head that half blinded him
and made him go a bit groggy ; then I pulled out my stirrup-leather, and gave
him, a crack on the head with the iron that stunned him. I jumped off, but
■before I could give him another, he was on his legs again. I was so deter-
mined to settle him, that I let go my horse, took up the chase on foot, and
pulled him up standing with the stirrup-iron. When I looked round, my
mag was off at a canter, and I had a six miles walk home.”


CHAPTER III.
Nest morning Frank resumed his journey. Tommy had heard so much
from the quiet blacks camped at Yerilla, about the doings of the wild blacks,
or myalls, in the district, that he was a bit nervous about the future, as black
boys are apt to be when travelling far from their own people. They had not
ridden far, when Tommy saw indications of a large mob of blacks haying
been about recently ; the trunks of many trees being notched where they had
gone up for the purpose of cutting out opossums, squirrels, or wild honey,
from the hollow branches ; and numerous tomahawk marks about the lower
parts from which the large grubs had been taken.
The natives get up the rough iron-bark trees with but little difficulty, with-
out cutting notches for the big toe to hold by. Their mode of climbing the
smooth gum trees, is as follows : —Each man has a piece of scrub cane, about
as thick as one’s little finger, and of sufficient length to go round the thickest
tree, and plenty to spare. Only one end is looped for a hand-hold, for the
reason that, as they walk through the bush they drag the cane after them ;
and if the trailed end were looped, it would be perpetually catching in sticks,
and tufts of grass.
When a black desires to go up a tree, he cuts a notch in the trunk with a
few blows of his tomahawk ; then passes the cane round the tree, holding the
looped end in tke left hand, and the other end in the right. He then puts his
toe in the notch, and gives the cane a hitch up the tree, resting safely on the
toe in the notch, the cane keeping him from falling backward. The end of
the cane held in the right hand, is then transferred to the left, or else to be
held by the toes of the unoccupied foot, till a notch is cut as high as he can
conveniently reach with the next step. The cane is again hitched up, and the
notch taken possession of by the other toe, and so on till the branches are
reached, when the fellow is as much at home as a ’possum or a squirrel. The
cane is sometimes passed round the tree and the body of the black, embracing
the two, the ends being held in one hand. During the few moments the
right hand is occupied with the cane, the tomahawk is either held in the teeth,
or pushed into the ’possum-hair belt round the waist. They run up the
rough-barked trees with the cane with astonishing celerity ; and very often
without any aid whatever, using their toes and fingers only.
Tommy went off the road a bit to examine the tracks, and pronounced them
io be quite fresh, and proceeding in the same direction as themselves—
northwards. They travelled on, and soon met two wool-teams, one driven by
Red Peter, and the other by Big Mick. These men reported having seen
the tracks of a large mob of blacks crossing the road about a mile behind
them, and not far from where they camped the night before. Their black-
boy—Diamond—who was driving some spare working-bullocks, told Tommy
that he thought the mob were up to mischief, as there was not a gin’s or
piccaniny’s track amongst them. Blacks never take their gins or piccaninies
when on mischief bent.
Big Mick and Red Peter were two celebrities, both being very powerful
men. The former was an Irishman, about middle height, but broad and deep,
who delighted in feats of strength, and had performed several prodigious
ones, which clearly established his claim to superiority in that respect, over


the majority of his fellows. One of these feats he performed for a wager. Two
drays were standing side by side a short distance apart, and he undertook to-
jump from one to the other with a two-hundred pound bag of flour under
each arm, and won the bet, injuring himself seriously in the performance.
Red Peter had the reputation of being able to hold a young bullock by the
horns while another man yoked it. He was tall and well proportioned, his
general appearance betokening vast strength. He was very much the colour
of a boiled lobster, with numerous sun freckles as big as a sixpence. His
hair, whiskers, and beard were red; and as much of his skin as could be seen.
—and that was a considerable area—was also red, freckled, and hairy. Bullock-
drivers wore but two garments in summer, the shirt being one of them, and
really, for all the use it was as a covering, it might reasonably have been
discarded altogether. The front was always open from the neck to the waist,
exposing the breast from one shoulder to the other, the sleeves being either-
rolled up above the elbows, or cut off altogether.
An apology is due to Mrs. Red Peter, who has not received the courtesy
usually accorded to the fair sex, of being first noticed. Our excuse for-
the omission should certainly mollify that lady—the fact is, she was almost,
above criticism. A shrill small voice was heard, apparently coming from
the clouds—“ Peter, yer red-headed bull yer—why don’t yer move them
bullocks on 2 I’m nigh a-roasted, yer brute. Gee up, Tiger and Bally—
Now then Spanker and Nelson—stand up yer varmints—gee up lads. Gently !”’
The bullocks knew her voice, and slowly moved on.
“Woi—wo back,” shouted Peter, who did not wish the team to move
on just then, but looking up with evident alarm at what he had done. He
was afraid of contradicting or offending that woman, small as she was, but
tried his best to disguise the fact, and show a stranger that he was master
of his own team.
“You brown-spangled son of a carroty thief ! You’d say I Wo back ’ when
Isay ‘Gee hup,’ would yer?” said the small but not “still” voice from
above, and a pole-pin whizzed close by Peter’s head, and hit a young bullock
on the horn with such violence, as to make the poor brute buck almost
out of his yoke, creating a general ruction amongst its eleven mates.
“Now then ! Gee along, I say, or by the piper I’ll brain yer with a
bullock-bow I’ve got up here. The idea of yer keeping yer lawful wife (Oh !
Mrs. Peter!) and child baking in this here sun, as would frizzle the hair off
yer bullocks if they was here, or any other animal but a boiled lobster like
yerself. If yer ain’t hot enough, jist take this—it’ll warm yer I guess, for
it’s burning my fingers and down came the promised bow, again missing
the mark, and bounding along the ground like a boomerang. “Now, look
alive, and chuck them things up again and move on, or ”
“ Good-day, Peter. Good-day, Mick,” said Frank, who did not care to
have a nearer introduction to the amiable fair one, who was perched up on top
of her lord’s load of twelve bales of wool, clasping her infant to her gentle
breast.
If “ Needs must when a certain old gentleman drives, ” how is it when an.
un-certain young woman drives 2
Mrs. Red Peter had several children by a former husband, or husbands,
and generally took them with her when she travelled with the team, which she
had done for years pretty regularly. On the present occasion, the load being
so high and the road rough, coupled with the fact that little Peter required
a good deal of attention, the fond mother deemed it unadvisable to add any
more weight to the “top-loading”; so the remainder of her darlings were
left at home on the station. She was very small indeed, and from repeated
accidents had been smashed out of all shape. The drays on which she rode


had so often capsized going down dangerous creeks and ranges, that she
was said to have had every bone broken in her body, except the right one-
in the neck. It is certain, she bore terrible evidences of such yet
she travelled fearlessly. She must have learnt self-reliance at a very early
age—or perhaps it was bom with her, which is more likely, for little women
generally have a fair measure of that commodity. She could rnA» that
gigantic man wince not with bullock-bows, pole-pins, or even yokes, which
she launched at him freely, for he never minded them a bit, and did not take
the trouble to dodge them. He was not afraid of black or white. He was
not afraid to yoke any young bullock that the pluckiest of his mates would
not tackle—not he ; but he was afraid of that small, weak, crippled woman •
and never, by any chance, irritated her, unless he had previously swallowed
at least five inches of strong rum out of a “ Jack Shea.” Not that that email
quantity (a good quart) of alcohol affected his brain ; no—it simply gave
him self-respect, and enabled him to look the little tyrant in the face without
quailing. Even then, she was too many for him, for when she had goaded
him to madness, and he was on the point of “laying on” a piece of green-'
hide rope, she would sit on the ground, and rock herself to and fro, apparently
in the deepest distress, and say “Oh ! Peter dear, and has it come to this, that
yer a-going to strike the poor faithful little wife that’s followed yer through
fire and water, and savages —and been smashed up to a jelly by the drays a-
rollmg over the top of me? Peter! Peter! Is it manly of the likes of a
great feller sioh as yer, to hit a poor little cripple that left father and mother
and all for the love of yer—and has druv the team many a times when yer
was too bad to carry the whip 2” *
Such a speech—though somewhat out with regard to dates and other, par-
ticulars, for she never left her father and mother for him—generally curbed
the strong man, for he could not bear to be thought a brute. He was rough
and untutored, but not unmanly, and really had a strong affection for the
little pickle, strange to say ; as indeed she had for him, if she had not at
times a pleasant way of showing it. It was said that, once when he displeased
her, she made him take her place on top of the load, and nurse the baby
while she drove the team. With all her eccentricity of temper, she yet often
showed him much real kindness, and nursed him tenderly in times of need
When attacked with fever and ague, or his strength had been laid low by a
terrible burst of drink, the little cat would make him as comfortable as circum-
stances would permit, on his dray ; and drive his team for him for days
together, carefully tending him the while. That is woman’s nature; let the man
be unable to help himself, and the virago who made him wince, and renderedhis
life all but unbearable with her vile tongue, at once melts into the woman.
Frank looked back just in time to see Peter meekly handing up the bow
and pole-pin, as he was commanded, after which the teams again proceeded.
Tommy fairly shouted with delight at the scene he had just witnessed, and
remarked that if the woman had been a black gin instead of a white woman,
she would have got “waddy like it cobra ” from her husband.
Without meeting with any other adventure, Frank rode up, a little after
sundown, to a station called Stancourt, the owner of which was away, but
ms superintendent, James Martin, was at home. George Martin—a brother of
the latter, arid an assistant on the station—was there also.
Stancourt was a sheep station, and there were several out-stations on the
run, at which separate flocks were kept. At one of the stations about six
miles from Stancourt, was a flock of a thousand fine wethers, which were
being fattened for the boiling pots. There was another flock there also. One
was shepherded by a Chinaman, and the other by a German. Both men lived
in the same hut—that is to say, they slept there, for they were out all day
C


with their flocks, and only returned about sundown to put them into their
large bough-yards. Shepherds often hire to watch at night also, and get extra
pay for so doing; at the same time becoming responsible for all losses amongst
the sheep, except, of course, such as are caused by accidents altogether beyond
their control —such as casualties by lightning; trees falling; a sudden rush in
the yard frem fright, and the consequent smothering of the- unfortunate
animals that happen to be undermost. Hundreds of sheep are sometimes
smothered, or crushed to death, in a rush in a strong yard; therefore
hurdles are preferable to any other description of fence for sheep-folds, being
more easily knocked down, and put up again. Sheep are very timid at night,
the least thing causing a rush ; sometimes attended with the most disastrous
results. A small branch falling; a ’possum running across the yard ; a
flash of lightning, or a thousand other things of the most trifling nature will
cause a rush ; and if in a strong yard that will not yield to the pressure,
the sheep at the tail of the rush force the leaders against the fence till they
get banked up to the top, and the bridge so formed of helpless animals is used
by the rest, who' by this means go flying over the fence, trampling all beneath
them to death. A stampede of that sort once fairly begun on a dark night,
cannot be arrested. Sheep are the silliest and most obstinate animals in
existence in such cases, and are very apt to blindly follow a leader. One
sheep taking a leap into a well, would be quite a sufficient reason for all the
rest to follow. At another time, if one wanted them to cross a rill a foot or two
wide, it might take two or three men and their dogs, a full hour to accomplish
the object. Once get them to start jumping, and the same number of men
and dogs eould not stop them.
The Martins and Frank were old friends, and they were very glad to see
him, for it was a dull place, and not many visitors found their way there,
it being some distance off the main road ; but in point of actual distance, it
was no further for Frank to go that way than by the road, for he took a
short cut, and could, do the same to regain the road on his next stage.
Inconsequence of the vessel’s arrival at Maryborough just prior to Frank’s
departure,and there being no mail-man at all through that part of the district,
he undertook to deliver all papers and letters at the different stations to which
they were addressed, and through which he passed. That was the only way,
indeed, by which people could get their letters ; and a very precarious one
too, in many instances, some travellers being so careless or forgetful as to not
deliver them at their address, leaving them at stations many miles away
—either beyond, or short of their destination, where they might lay for many
weeks, unknown to their unlucky owners.
Travellers who earned the mail were doubly welcome, for papers and letters
were always most anxiously looked for, by those who were as much out of the
world as the pioneers in a new country. When it was all New South Wales,
and a thousand miles north of Sydney to the outside settlements ; and again
a thousand miles further north of that, the colony was unwieldly—not from
excess of population, but from actual distance of some of its inhabitants from
the seat 'of Government. They got but little assistance, and had to help
themselves in almost every particular. Now, things are altered. Queensland
has a good Government; an impartial Press ; and a population that will not
tamely submit to neglect or imposition.
At the Stancourt station was a large flour-bag full of Sydney and Brisbane
papers, which had been left there by various self-constituted postmen, who
would' not, or could not, take them on to their destination, and the owners
were too far away to send for them. That bag of newspapers represented
an infinite amount of disappointment and privation at the various stations
where they should have been received. Papers were pretty well worn out,


passing from one to another, and going the rounds, very frequently, of all the
out-stations. News so conveyed—three or four months old—was then more
eagerly read and discussed than the daily telegrams of the present time.
When a batch of letters and papers arrived—unless the work at the time on
hand rendered it impossible—it was “ Spell, ho ! ” with all hands, until the
cream of the news was skimmed. It was a red-letter hour. Every face wore
its pleasantest expression, though perhaps begrimed with dust and perspira-
tion, fresh from its owner’s hard toil in the stook-yard, shearing-shed, or some
other bush work. Those who could not read took their letters to their
employers, or to their more learned mates to read for them. A knot of
men might be seen sitting in the shade of a tree, listening to one who was
reading aloud the events of months before, forgetting alike their hard toil,
and dangers in which they continually lived. Was it not hard, when they
knew all these pleasant things awaited them, and their work was of too
pressing a nature to allow of their knocking off? But those sun-bumt toilers
would not complain, and generally chaffed each other about letters from
sweethearts, and cracked other pleasant, if rough jokes, till the work was.
finished, and the mail distributed amongst those to whom it was addressed.
They who expected letters and did not get them, plainly showed their
disappointment, but were in a measure reconciled to their hard fate by the
softening influences of an old paper.
Frank’s black-boy, Tommy, soon found an old acquaintance at the camp
near the house —Bony, a black-boy belonging to James Martin. Bony was a
splendid tracker. His comrades boastingly said that he could track a bandi-
coot over bare rook at a canter —or a mosquito over a sand-flat. Blacks are
given to exaggeration, and the statement must be taken for what it is'worth.
But beyond a doubt, he was a very excellent tracker, even amongst his own
people, who are so wonderful in that way. An intelligent black who has
been accustomed to tracking on horseback, can unerringly follow the track of
a single beast, over rough country at a rapid pace, where a white man—not
altogether a novice at the work—could not do it with any degree of certainty
at a slow walk. There are instances, however, of white youngsters, brought
up in the bush, who attain the same, or even greater excellence in that useful
ait, than the aborigines. A certain amount of proficiency may be attained by
almost any white, by long practice, like other matters in bush-craft ; but
amongst both races some are pre-eminent among their fellows, without taking
much pains to place themselves in that exalted position. It is a gift.
Shortly after Frank’s arrival, another traveller rode up named Ford. About
ten o’clock that evening, when the party were intent on a game at whist, the
dogs set up a great barking, and a minute after, in rushed a Chinaman covered
with blood, and breathless from running. The party were on their feet, and
grasped their arms instantly, expecting, from the man’s appearance, that a
mob of blacks were about to follow him in. The poor fellow was the Chinese
shepherd from the out-station before mentioned. He shut the door and
fastened it, then sank on a rough couch—almost in a state of
from his wounds and rapid march, combined with fear. Martin seeing the,
state of affairs, administered a good stiff glass of grog, which had the effect of
reviving the fellow, and loosening his tongue.
“Marsa ! Marsa ! black-fellow him killee altogether my matee—Grosse (the
German) close up too —he killee me too,” said poor Pigtail. He had been
terribly knocked about with tomahawk and waddy, on the head and hands:
When sufficiently recovered to give an intelligible account of the affair, the
following was elicited from his curious jargon of English, Chinese, and,
aboriginal. After tea, he and Grosse —the other shepherd— : went down to the
yards to see that the sheep were all right for the night, and had just got back


to within a few yards of their hut, when, as if by magic, about 20 blacks>
appeared in threatening attitudes all around them. The German ran towards
the sheep-yards, a shower of spears and waddies following him. Being nearly
dark, many of the spears missed him, for the Chinaman only saw one sticking
in him as he fell and rolled under the boughs and logs, of which the yard
was composed. Almost simultaneously poor Pigtail was attacked, and
endeavoured to run for the hut, but three blacks out oif his retreat, and
battered him with tomahawks and waddies. While in the act of defending
his head, he received a tomahawk wound, which nearly split the thumb from
his right hand. That was the last he recollected. He must have lain some
considerable time in a state of insensibility, and when he came to his senses
again he ran for the head-station as hard as he was able. It was a dark night,
but he managed to keep the bridle-track, and arrived as above stated.
James Martin at once held a council of war. All agreed that the blacks
must be followed up and severely punished, but it was then too dark to find
the horses, and there were some preparations necessary to be made before
starting on a chase, the length of which no one could tell. It was no use
doing anything hot-headedly, so the party coolly set to work in a methodical
manner under Martin’s direction. He said—
“ Now, look here ; we must have plenty of ball cartridge for the darkies
and rations for ourselves. George, you go and make up a good big damper,
and put on a junk of beef to boil, and get the tea and sugar bags ready. Ford,
Frank, and I, will set to work and make up two or three hundred cartridges,
and put some other little matters straight. And, George, just tell that nigger.
Bony, that he had better roll up in his blanket and get a sleep, for he will
have to put the horses in the yard at the first peep of day, and then keep
his eyes skinned on the tracks of those black rascals. I’ll warrant
we will give an account of a few of them, for if they take wing straight
away from the hut, Bony will track them. It will be of no use our going on
foot to the hut to-night, as the German is killed. We can’t do the poor fellow
any good, and shall be losing valuable time.”
The above was delivered in a matter-of-fact way, but with an ugly gleam
in the speaker’s eye, that betokened his feelings on the subject to be very
much stronger than his expressions indicated. From the cool manner in
which that little party set to work, it was evident they were men not to be
trifled with ; and also, that it was not the first time they had made prepara-
tions for pursuit to redress similar bloody deeds committed by the blacks.
A large number of bullets were cast, and some bits of wood rounded to the
proper size, to wrap the paper round to form the cartridge cases. The candles
were placed on a shelf, to prevent the possibility of an explosion. A flask of
powder, some stout paper, and some strong thread, were placed on the table
round which they sat. One cut out squares of paper; rolled them round the
stick and the bullet, tying above and below the latter, then withdrew the stick ;
then the paper case with the bullet in it was handed to the next person to be
filled with powder. That done, it was handed to a third, who screwed up the
end, tied it, and cut off the surplus paper, leaving just enough at the powder
end to bite off before ramming into the rifle. When one got into arrears with
his part, he was assisted by one of the others ; and in course of time, they had
completed the requisite number. Then the fire-arms were thoroughly cleaned,
inside and out; the locks and other parts taken off to see that all was in good
order; and several old and doubtful nipples were taken out, and replaced with
new ones. The saddles were next overhauled, and where a stitch, or a strap,
or buckle wanted putting in, it was done ; for the bushman is a Jack-of-all-
trades, of necessity. The reason for all this carefulness was, that some horses
would not stand fire, and it was thus necessary to have everything in good


order, to prevent the rider being bucked off with the saddle, in case his horse
should attempt it when in close quarters with the savages. They were not all
Irishmen, and could not expect to come out of a similar scrape to Mr. Brown’s
with a whole skin, as that ready-witted fellow did. Blacks did fight manfully
when hard-pressed and unable to escape ; and if a pursuer was thrown within
reach, they were not often so foolish as to lose the chance thus afforded them.
Boring the progress of the preparations, the party were not silent, the blacks
of course forming the principal topic of conversation. Bony had often been
out as tracker to an avenging band of whites. He had also done a little on bill
own account in that way, not long before the events detailed. Martin said
“About two years ago, a semi-hostile party met a brother of Bony’s
in the bush, and killed him. The names of those who committed the
deed ultimately became known to Bony, and he there and then declared that
he would have the lives of all three. He said ‘ When that fellow cOme up
again, I bring him like it my camp ; give him flour plenty; altogether bwdgeree
patter (good food). Then mine ask him look out sugar-bag ’long a me— mine
kill him behind cobra. That bwdgeree— My word! ’ So he did. He met them
and invited them to his camp ; fed them well, and treated them kindly!
Suspicion was lulled, and they separately fell victims to his tomahawk and
revenge. He is a capital shot, too ; so you see he is not likely to fail us in
time of need. Some of the black-skinned vagabonds bolt and leave their
party in the lurch, when they think the blacks will make a stand.”
There was but little doubt that the blacks that attacked the shepherds were
a portion of the mob whose tracks had been seen by Prank crossing the road
that day. Sleep was not thought of that night, for, by the time the party had
completed their arrangements to their satisfaction, so short a time intervened
between then and daylight, as to render it not worth while to turn in. When,
it was deemed to be near daylight, Bony was roused up with some little
difficulty, for blacks are heavy sleepers, and hate to be disturbed early in the
morning. George Martin, however, stuck to the task, till the boy with many
grunts sat up, and rubbed his eyes till able to think and see for himself ; then
, he jumped to his feet and started down the paddock, a whip in one hand, and
a fire-stick in the other. Except when on marauding expeditions, when secrecy
is necessary, blacks carry fire-sticks perpetually, whenever they are afoot day
or night, summer and winter.
Shortly after the birds began to twitter, and while the boy was after the
horses, the party were at breakfast—a performance that does not take a
bushman long, when time is an object.
At dawn of day, the birds begin to sing. The “ shepherd’s companion” is
a sociable little black and white bird with a fantail. It is always on the move.
Now the tail is spread and erect—now closed and drooped ; then swinging
from side to side. It makes little runs with its long legs, suddenly rises into
the air, and down again twittering and trilling with a sweet canary-like note.
Such a merry, restless, pretty little thing it is, and it is the first bird awake in
the morning.
The horses were at last yarded, and Bony was sent to get his breakfast which
was already cut for him—while the Martins, Frank, and Ford, took the bridles
and caught the horses they were to ride. Of course, the two visitors were
■supplied with fresh horses belonging to the station. The horses that were
known to stand fire best were chosen ; but one or two of them were not alto-
gether to be trusted, and as time was precious, it was not wasted ; no one
being too particular as to his mount, all being good horsemen, and eager to
pull the savages as soon as possible. They knew that the blacks would travel
hard all night, being certain of an avenging party starting on their tracks, as
:soon as the outrage became known at the head-station. In addition to rifles


and pistols, each horseman had a blanket rolled up and strapped on the saddle
before him, in which was a supply of beef, damper, tea, and sugar, sufficient to-
last for a few days. Instructions were left with the men to keep a sharp look-
out while the party were away j not that it was likely the blacks would attack.
the place in their absence, for their blows were generally sharp and decisive
when they did strike, and they tried to get away as quickly as possible after-
their purpose was accomplished. But such affairs always impressed people
with a feeling of distrust, not easily shaken off—hence the caution.
The hope in the present case was, that the blacks thinking they had murdered
both the shepherds, and that there was a chance of the affair not becoming
known at the head-station for a day or two, they would have lots of time to
get out of reach, and scatter amongst their friends at different places.
Tommy was with the party, which made it up to six, all told. The track
was rough, but the six miles were soon got over at a smart canter, and the sun
had not been up long when they arrived at the scene of the previous night’s,
daughter.
The first thing was to search for the body of the German ; and as the China-
man had described the place where he had seen the poor fellow fall, the party
jumped off their horses and soon found it. It presented a horrible spectacle.
The face was white, except where the gore besmeared it. A frightful gash
from a tomahawk gaped open in the front part of the scalp, and down the
forehead. Three broken spears were lying by him, and as many more stuck
slanting in the ground not two yards off. They turned him over, preparatory
to carrying him into the hut, when the wretched man, who was not dead, gave
such a deep quivering groan, as to almost petrify them with horror.
Goo may look on the dead, however horribly mutilated, with comparative
indifference, without realizing the awfulness of the separation that has taken
place, or the violence that brought it about; but when it is known that the
soul is still within its habitation, and that a fellow-creature is suffering—who
knows what fearful pangs I —and is unable to make any sign beyond the groan
of agony ; it arouses all that is at once human and tigerish in the breasts of the
hearers. Frank was the youngest of the party, and the least accustomed to
such scenes, but the silent tears that coursed down his face were not alto-
gether unanswered by sterner hearts than his.
“ Let us carry the poor fellow,” said James Martin, “ into the hut, and put
him on his bunk —and, by Jove, if I don’t wash my hands in the heart’s blood
of some of those cruel wretches, I hope they may serve me the same wav ! ”
“ And I! ” “ And I, too ! ” they all cried.
. The man was carried quietly in, and laid upon his mattress—some coarse
bags stuffed with dried grass. Martin put his spirit-flask to the sufferer’s lips,
pouring a little of the contents into his mouth ; which was feebly swallowed-
He then said, “ Now, who volunteers to stay behind, and attend to poor Grosse„
and look for the sheep 1 for I see they are all out of the yards. ”
Not a voice was raised, nor a sign made by any one of the party. They
all looked, and really were, determined not to leave the tracks of the blacks..
“ Come now —speak some one, for one must stay. ”
“I won’t,” they all said—even the black-boys repeated, “Not me, sir.”'
“Well. I’ll tell you what. We cannot play and waste valuable time. Now,,
listen to me. lam the super’, and must exercise my authority in the interests
of my employer, and for the benefit of this poor fellow, who can’t be left like
this—George, you must stay, and—”
“ 111 be hanged if I do. Jemmy. That’s too much to ask of any man, with
a sight like this before him. No, no, I want my revenge the same as the rest
of you.”
“Look here, George,” said Martin slowly, with an expression onhis swarthy


features, and a gleam in his dark eyes, which had been seen by the closing
eyes of many a black murderer, “ you are the only man who knows the rmT
The sheep must be found, for I don’t suppose the blacks have taken them off
and I must leave some responsible person in charge of the station. Neither
Ford nor Frank know anything about the run, nor of the sheep, so you must
stay. The first thing is, to ride as quickly as possible in to the head-station,
and get help to take the German in on a litter. Then you send Jacky
(another black-boy) off to Gayndah for Dr. Brown, for he may be able to save
the man, though I don’t think there is much hope. Frank’s boy, Tommy,
will stay here till you come back, and help you to find the sheep.”
James Martin’s reasoning and commands were no longer opposed by his
crest-fallen brother, George, Who set about the work at once, but with a most
unwilling air. The avenging band was thus reduced to four—James Martin,
Ford, Frank, and Bony.
Martin then said, “ Nqw, Bony, you look out track belonging to black-fellow.
Mine look out sheep-yard and bush a little bit, till you find the tracks, then
you coo-e-e.”
“ All right, sir—mine find him track quick.”
He rode straight away without troubling himself with the confusion of
tracks of sheep, blacks, and whites, in the vicinity of the hut and yards.
.When about a quarter of a mile away, he began to make a circuit.
James Martin told Tommy to get some water In a pannikin, which he did.
He then poured some spirit into it, telling the boy to give Grosse a little now
and then; after which he rode off to examine the sheep-yards, and found several
sheep lying dead with tomahawk marks about their heads and bodies. Other
poor brutes were standing about, similarly treated. This did not improve his
temper, and he rode about the ridges where he found several small mobs of
sheep, with some of their number, both living and dead, also gashed most
brutally, evidently from sheer wantonness. When the blacks do get the chance
they always indulge in their thirst for blood to the fullest extent. So it was
on the present occasion. There could have been no other motive for ill-treating
the helpless -animals, except the pleasure of seeing the blood flow, and feasting
their eyes on the wounds they dealt out indiscriminately amongst the flock.
They could not stay to cook the meat, and, under the circumstances, could not
load themselves with it before their flight. It was not thought likely that they
had driven any sheep away, as it was not their custom in that part of the
country, there being no fastnesses wherein they could keep them if they did
do so. At places a hundred miles or so south of Stanoourt the blacks used to
take sheep away—a whole flock at a time —and drive them into scrubby ranges,
where they defied the whites.
While Martin was vowing vengeance against the cruel, wanton wretches, ha
heard a coo-e-e from Bony, who also was beckoning for him to follow him.
The three whites then rode towards the boy, who informed them that the blacks
had gone that way—pointing to the eastward, towards the coast; and if they
were not overtaken before they got among the mangrove swamps, there would
be a chance of losing them after all. The three whites looked somewhat
impatient at this discouraging piece of information, and urged the boy to
hasten on the tracks, and be sure not to lose them. A good reward was
promised him if he overtook them before they reached the swamps, where it
would be impossible to ride after them ; indeed, very unsafe for a man to
tread in many places. The mazes of these quagmires were easily enough
trended by the wily savages, who were quite at home amongst them.
Bony went away at a smart trot, closely followed in single file by the other
three ; that being the usual order of march on such occasions, it making less
noise and fewer tracks, than any other way. The latter is of importance,


because in the event of the tracker getting off the scent, and the party rambling
about out of line, it renders it much more difficult for him to pick it up again.
They had not proceeded far when Bony spied smoke curling up a little to the
left of their route, but far ahead. He exclaimed,
“My word ! Baal that bndgeree —black-fellow been burn him grass behind
him track. Never mind—mine mil mil mandoey ’long a burnt grass” (I can
see their feet-marks, though they have burnt the grass).
Just then the tracks went down the bank of a very steep creek
with water in it, Bony pushed down it, so did the rest, though at the
risk of a roll over; but bushmen and bush horses are not particular,
both being accustomed to rough-and-tumble in their ever-active life. The
water was clear and not deep, but Bony could not see the tracks more than two
or three yards further on ; he, however, crossed to the other side, telling the
others to stay quiet till he saw whether the blacks had crossed or not, for he
was suspicious of some ruse. They had not gone out on his side—just there,
a,t all events. So he ran down and up the creek for a considerable distance
each way. Still no tracks.
“ I believe that fellow been go ’long a water—then jump, jump, like it
kangaroo. Mine look out.”
He then turned up the bank of the creek whence they had gone down, and
ran along on that side till the country became rough and stony. When about
half a mile from his party, he jumped off his horse and led him, at the same
time carefully examining the ground as he went, for about a hundred yards,
and then stopped ; he again mounted and made signs for them to follow, him.
They did so, and he said, “All right, that way mine been think it. That
fellow go ’long a creek —cobborn jump, jump—then go ’long a water, walk,
walk, walk—come out here—then go ’long merry-micky (very quick). Come
on,” and he started off at a canter over the stony ground. The smoke was
getting denser as the day wore on, and it was evident that miles of grass were
on fire.
The country soon became rougher,and the grass-trees and wallum so thick, as
to render a slower pace absolutely necessary, though the eyes and judgment of
Bony never failed him. The blacks had tried several ’cute dodges to elude
pursuit—such as running backwards on their own tracks for a considerable
distance, and then making tremendous leaps clear off the line of march, and
starting off at an angle. These little deceptions, though expected by Bony,
could not be provided against, and caused a good deal of delay ; the boy being
obliged to follow the tracks wherever they went. It is never prudent to make
detours on mere spec, as thereby more time would probably be lost than by
strictly following the false tracks. Sometimes they jumped on fallen trees,
and walked on them as far as they could, then made a spring and set off in
another direction. Again, they would separate and keep apart for a long
distance. One circumstance that gave all the party great satisfaction, was,
the tracks became fresher as they proceeded, showing that they were gaining
on the savages.
They went on till they came to a large creek, on the bank of which the
tracks were suddenly lost. Bony looked puzzled and beat about the bush, but
could not solve the mystery. They had not gone back on their tracks this
time ; and eould not have jumped or crawled down the creek bank, it being too
steep—a perpendicular of about sixty feet. Where, then, had they gone ?
Bony narrowly scrutinized the ground several times all around, the result of
which was the same each time. The tracks led to the trunk of a fallen tree,
and there they certainly ended, so far as the ground was concerned. The butt
of the great log was as solid as rock, so they could not be inside it. He
inspected the trees, his attention being particularly directed to a tall guru


sapling growing close to the end of the log, and within a few yards of the
edge of the creek bank. Up that he climbed like a monkey. When near the
top, the sapling bent gracefully over with his weight, and they all expected
to see him slip off, and fall into the water below. Still he went up, and the
sapling bent lower and lower, till even Martin called out some warning words.
“ All right, sir, I got him track now,” said Bony.
“Is the boy mad 2” exclaimed Frank and Ford. “ How on earth can ho
find blacks’ tracks up a gum tree 2 ”
“He is not mad certainly, unless he has got so since he started up the
sapling. But I fear he will hurt himself,” said Martin.
Bony still went on, and the sapling bent over the creek so much, that they
feared it would break with the boy’s weight. His legs presently touched a
limb in the top of an immense gum tree, which grew from the foot of the
bank near the water. None of its great branches were near enough to be
reached from the bank, without the aid of the sapling the boy had made such
clever use of. As soon as he alighted on the head of the giant, he said,
“ All right now, track go down here. You take him yarraman (horses)
’long a crossing-place where you been come up—go ’nother side, down that
way. I directly find him track belonging to myall now.”
This was welcome news, and the party moved off as directed by the boy,
leading his horse with them. When they arrived opposite to the gum tree,
on the branch of which they left him, nothing was to be seen of him. They
dared not call out loudly—that was against all rules on black-hunting expedi-
tions—for the natives’ ears are sharp as well as their eyes. Martin told his
friends to stay where they were, and rode on to a bend in the creek, nearly
half a mile beyond which he saw the head and shoulders of Bony, who was
wading along at a good rate, straight down the centre of the creek. Suddenly
he went under, but quickly reappeared on the surface ; not being able to find
bottom with his feet, he struck out with arms and legs. Martin went back
and signed for his companions to follow. When Bony was again sighted, he
was climbing up the trunk of a tree which had fallen into the water from the
opposite bank, and then disappeared in the scrub. They rode on till they
were near the spot ; a low whistle sounded from near the end of the lagoon.
The boy was there beckoning them to follow. The weather having been dry
and hot for some time, the water-holes, or lagoons in the creek—some of which
were a mile long—were generally not very deep, and there were tolerably good
crossing-places at either end of them, so the three friends soon joined the boy
without much trouble, only having to cut a few branches with their tomahawks
from the tea-trees in the creek bed, that were too tough to push through.
“ How did you get down that big tree where we left you, Bony 2 ” asked
Martin. “ I did not see any notches in it for your feet, and it was too big for
you to put your arms and legs round.”
The boy explained that he had got down “all the same like it myall.”
When questioned as to how it was accomplished, he gave the substance of
what follows. The tree had a bit of a lean from the bank. After they had
made use of the branches and irregularities of it as far as they could, one man
then stretched himself flat on the trunk with head downwards, steadying him-
self principally by keeping his legs well apart, the insides of his feet gripping
the tree. He cut slight notches in the bark for the feet of his companions,
who descended more easily and expeditiously by that means than he had done.
When within about ten or twelve feet of the roots, they sprang into the water
like so many frogs, wading and swimming, and at last emerging by the same
log up which Bony had crawled before he disappeared in the scrub.
Bony had, indeed, vindicated his reputation for being able to track through
the air. The whole party were struck with admiration at the boy’s sagacity
25


and daring. Their fears of not coming up with the savages were dispelled, for
who could doubt, with such a bloodhound for a tracker, that anything less than
a supernatural being could elude them ? They praised him greatly for his per-
severance, and highly creditable performance of his duties as tracker, all of
which the boy received with stoical indifference, evidently thinking that he
had done nothing out of the common.
A considerable time had been taken up in unravelling the last dodge of the
blacks, and it was getting late in the afternoon, so they lost no time in idle
conversation, and pushed on. The tracks now led them straight away from
the creek, and towards the thick smoke, above which the eagle-hawk and
other birds of prey were majestically sailing, making occasional swoops at the
kangaroo-rats, bandicoots, snakes, and other small game, which were being
hunted out of their homes and nests in the long grass and hollow logs, by the
scorching heat of the fire. They pushed on pretty briskly, the tracks being
very distinct. The grass was very long, which was no doubt one reason why
they had set fire to it, as it must have impeded their flight considerably, and
they must have reckoned on its baffling pursuit. In the latter supposition they
reckoned without their host.
Presently the roar of the fire was heard, and as they neared it, the sharp, loud,
crackling sound peculiar to bush fires, reached their ears. It is a very remark-
able sound, resembling that of volleys of thousands of small pistols. The crows
were hopping about and cawing with great delight, picking up a rich harvest
of snails, mice, and other small vermin. The line of fire was unbroken, and
the party was brought to a standstill a hundred yards away to consult as to
the best means of getting through it. When the grass is not long and the
flames do not rise very high, the custom is for the rider to put his horse at it at
a gallop, and push through it quickly. If the animal balks, as some will, he
must be blindfolded with a handkerchief, then he will go through it. This
plan would not do in a case like the present, as the party were on an extensive
flat where the grass was very long and old. Martin, however, was not to be
beaten by a grass fire, even of these dimensions. Though young in years, he
was an old bushman, and had an expedient at hand, from old experience, to
meet more serious difficulties than that. He told them to dismount, tie up
their horses quickly, and cut some leafy boughs. He then unclasped his
tinder-box, which hung to his belt by a chain, and soon obtained fire by
Striking a flint on the back of his knife-blade—the sparks falling in showers
on the tinder. The grass was then lit in several places, and as it blazed
was quickly extinguished along the line nearest to them and their horses, but
was allowed to bum freely away in the direction from whence they had come.
The fire rolled along in great majesty, for the grass was of that long and blady
kind, peculiar to large flats near rivers and creeks in that part of the country.
It was, in fact, up to their knees when mounted. The great forked tongues
of flame curled and licked upwards at least twenty feet, scorching and withering
the young trees, and setting fire to the dead ones, and the fallen timber in its
path. The heads of the great forest trees swayed to and fro, as the heated air-
mid smoke rushed upwards amongst them, from the advancing line of fire-
below ; the parrots and cockatoos taking flight when the first breath of hot air
swept by them—screeching their wild harsh notes as they flew.
A fire such as this is a very grand sight, even in the light of a, tropical sun ;
but infinitely more so during the darkness and stillness of the night. The party
had exerted themselves to the utmost at first, to prevent the flames from
advancing in their direction ; otherwise they would have been placed in a very
dangerous predicament—literally “ between two fires.” It was hot work,
indeed, for each worked as though the safety of the whole party depended on
his individual exertions. Everyone knew the danger of relaxing his efforts.


for an instant, until the right time, and giving the fire a chance of getting the
mastery. As soon as the fire had swept along the flat to a sufficient distance
they untied their horses, and led them into the charred and blackened area
thus cleared. By the time their arrangements were completed, the fire against
which they had provided was pretty close, and the stifling smoke and heat
anything but pleasant; nevertheless, it was now powerless to hurt them, and
they stood watching its advance, till the narrow belt of tall grass that inter-
vened was at last swept away. They then mounted, and galloped over the still
smouldering remains of the burnt grass, Bony leading the way;
The burning of the grass by the blacks did not help them very much, for
Bony’s sharp sight detected their foot-prints almost as well as though they had
not done so. There being no wind beyond that created by the fire, the ashes of
the grass were not disturbed, and showed him plainly enough where they had
trodden it down. It is doubtful whether Martin could have followed the track,
though a very good tracker in a general way. To follow tracks which have
been made prior to the country being burnt, is certainly one of the higher
branches of tracking, which is attained by few whose food—and one may say,
whose very existence—does not mainly depend upon its acquirement.
As they rode on, the poor little bandicoots, kangaroo-rats, lizards, snakes,
and many other creeping, hopping, and swift-running creatures, fled before
them, or made up the trees ; these animals and reptiles being rendered
temporarily homeless, by the terrible fire which had swept over their little
world, burning the hollow logs and low bushes in which they had been bom
and bred ; and in which they, in their turn, had made comfortable nests for
their little ones. The great spotted iguanas clustered on the trunks and
branches of the large gum, iron-bark, or blood-wood trees, artfully crawling
round as the travellers went by, no doubt thinking they escaped detection ;
but their awkward movements and sharp claws revealed their whereabouts, by
sending down showers of loose bark. They were quite safe, however, for even
Bony thought not of hunting them ; and the men they feared would be content
with nothing short of human blood to satiate their savage thirst. It is a.
terrible thing to think of, but where settlers are constantly exposed to danger-
from the relentless savages, they must strike without mercy in cases like tha
present, or they and their servants and stock, would soon be overcome and
destroyed. Whatever feelings of humanity may arise in the breasts of tha,
survivors, they know they must not weakly give place to them, or the result,
is certain. “ Charity begins at home,” so does humanity. Let the blacks,
commit but one serious raid, unpunished, and another will quickly follow.
A temptation fell in Bony’s way that he would have been less than a black
to resist. However occupied a black’s eyes and thoughts may be on the ground
he still takes in other surroundings that would be lost to a whiteman. As he-
was passing under a limb of a tree, he suddenly pulled up his horse, drew his
tomahawk from his belt, and with its back dealt a sharp blow, which fell on the
head of a fine carpet-snake which was coiled round the limb. The beautiful
glossy skinned python immediately began to writhe in death struggles, when he
gave it two or three more blows along the back, which had the effect of lessen-
ing its convulsive movements ; then he coolly put the enormous reptile round',
the back of his neck, letting the head and tail fall over his breast, and dangle
each side of his horse. The tomahawk was replaced, and they moved on with
but little comment on so common-place an incident.
All was smoke and blackness around them. Of all the miserable things
experienced in bush life, riding over freshly-bumt country is the most,
depressing. Our friends were not exempt from this feeling, which was
enhanced by the constant recollection of the painful sights they had witnessed
that morning and the night before. The sun was sinking behind the ranges.


inland, and the day was drawing to a close. In those latitudes darkness soon
succeeds sunset, and it would have been useless to attempt to follow the
tracks much longer that day ; therefore the party began to t.binV 0 f looking
for a place to camp for the night. The prospect ahead was not promising for
the horses, all the grass being burnt apparently for many miles. Bony was
the first to speak, remarking that he knew of a large creek on which was a
dense vine scrub, about a mile to the right of their present position, to the
other side of which it was probable that the fire had not extended. The only
reply he received was from Martin, to whom the others looked for a decision
as to what was to be done.
“ All right, Bony, you look out grass for the horses, my boy. We can
;manage for ourselves anywhere.”
Bony Struck off and pushed on for the creek he had mentioned ; his estimate
of the distance from which proved very nearly correct. As soon as he saw the
-scrub he knew his exact position, and told Martin that there was a lagoon in
the creek a little further down, at the end of which was'a break in the scrub,
and a crossing-place. Any extent of country once travelled over byan aborigine
remains photographed in his wonderful memory for all time. If such a thing
as a doubt, or slight lapse of recollection crops up, it never remains long, for
he is sure to fall in with one of his innumerable land-marks which makes all
clear again, however distant the date of his last visit to that locality. A tree
out of which he had cut an opossum, or a sugar-bag ; a gully where he had
killed a kangaroo ; a ridge down which he had chased an emu ; a water-
hole that he had bathed or fished in—any one of these, or of other events of
even less consequence presenting itself, will as accurately determine his
position in a comparatively strange country, as will sextant, quadrant, and
chronometer, that of a vessel at sea. All is mapped out in the chart of his
gifted brain. How useful and in some respects talented, are these people—yet
all is spoiled by their ingrained wildness and treachery, which nothing but
the bullet can cure. Be stronger than they, and never give them a chance,
and you are safe. The boy who is your friend and tracker to-day, eating
your rations and taking the greatest interest in your work—may, a month
hence, lead a strong party of his own people to attack your station, where he
has so long been fed and kindly treated.
The crossing-place was found exactly as Bony had said. There was plenty
of water in the creek, and some good grass on the other side. As there was
so much smoke all around, they were enabled to make a fire to boil then-
quart pots of water for tea ; which necessary and luxury in one, to a bushman,
they would otherwise have had to do without, for hunted blacks always keep
a sharp look-out for smoke in their rear ; all such evidences of their approach
are therefore strictly avoided by the pursuers. The horses were unsaddled,
and short-hobbled, to prevent them rambling far during the night. As a
further precaution against their straying homeward, they were previously led
some distance up the creek, so that if they attempted it, they would have to
pass close to the camp to get to the crossing-place, where they would be
stopped by the man on watch. Bony said they could not cross higher up for
miles, the creek banks being too steep and the scrub too dense.
The party assembled round the camp-fire that evening were anything but
cheerful. They were all tired from their long and exciting journey, and want
of sleep the night before. Besides which, they felt the awful responsibility
of their probable bloody work on the morrow. They naturally shrank from
it inwardly, as men should—and let us hope that they generally do—when
they have had a few hours in which to weigh the seriousness of their position.
But then the thought of the poor German, and his groans of agony, rose up
fresh and strong, quenching all feelings of mercy in their breasts. Bony’s


appetite was not affected by the gloom that overspread his companions, if ones
may judge from the fact of his demolishing at least a yard of the ten foot
carpet-snake m a half-cooked state—quite ignoring the circumstance of that
reptile haying previously gorged itself with a large kangaroo-rat. The above
allowance of Morelia mriegata, tempered with a due proportion of damper
moistened with three quarts of tea, constituted the boy’s moderate meal. After-
which he threw himself on his back by the fire, very softly hummed a
favourite corrohboree, and fell into a deep slumber, which was evidently not
dreamless, for he kicked vigorously at intervals, and mumbled all sorts of
gibberish.
At length, all was still. The crows—the last birds to roost at night—had
given up their cawing. The dingo came out of his lair, uttering his melancholy
howl, with elevated nose. Attracted by the smell of Bony’s supper, many of
those cunning animals trotted up to within twenty yards of the camp, only to-
be scared away by a stick or a stone, flung at them by the watchman. In
the winter these animals go about in packs, and when pressed by hunger are-
very bold ; they play sad havoc amongst sheep and young calves ; and have
been known to eat a crupper, attached to a saddle on which the head of a
traveiler has been pillowed ; and to drag away his bridle which lay by his side,
while he slept. Instances have been given of the dingo attacking men on
horseback-but the writer is not prepared to endorse such statements. As
they were chased away from our friends’ camp, they trotted off in their-
peculiar and ungraceful manner, occasionally stopping and looking back, to-
see if there was any necessity for hurrying. Though they run so awkwardly,
they can often outstrip a good horse when hard pressed ; nevertheless, they
dislike a rapid pace, and never resort to it except as a necessity.
Martin took the first watch from eight till eleven ; Frank from eleven till
two ; and Ford from two till day-light. Bony was allowed to sleep, which
he did faithfully till about half an hour before dawn, when he was roused up
to help to catch the horses,which were not far from the camp. They had made-
several attempts to get to the crossing-place during the last watch, Ford having-
to head them back each time.


CHAPTER V.
They hastily ate their breakfast, Bony’s consisting of another yard of cold
carpet-snake, coiled up and cooked the night before ; it had also done duty
as a pillow, wrapped up in his saddle-cloth. Before mounting, he hastily pushed
the remainder of it in between his skin and the breast of his shirt; for dinner,
•or for a snack, if he should feel hungry before that time. Australian blacks,
like Englishmen, are averse to going hungry, and look very pitiful when
tightening their belts, instead of haying a meal.
There is even less time between dawn and sunrise, than between sunset
and dark ; but in the spring and summer months, the mornings are most
•delicious. There is a freshness about nature then, that invigorates the body
and elevates the mind—makes one feel good, in fact, however small his claims
to virtue may be. The light and clear atmosphere ; all nature around
refreshed, and sparkling with dew ; the glorious golden tinge of the rising sun,
spreading over the mountains and tree tops, leaving the deep glens and gullies
in dark relief for a while ; the sun itself appearing like an enormous ball of
fire, scarce dazzling the eyes till well above the horizon. The sweet clear note
of the magpie ; the merry laugh of the jackass ; the discordant screech of
the parrot and cockatoo ; and an infinite number of small songsters, join in
swelling the chorus of joy to welcome the new-born day.
The party rode back to where they left the tracks the evening before. For
five miles they kept in the same direction, and then turned suddenly towards
the creek. Bony shook his head at this move, and said that he wished they
had kept away from it, for it became more difficult to cross with horses, every
mile further down; the banks were steeper, and the lagoons deeper and more
continuous. He pointed out the reason for the alteration in the blacks’ course
as twofold. First, the grass was too green to bum, and they would be too
easily tracked if they continued, through it. The next reason was, that they
were becoming tired and wanted a rest, for they had only stopped twice, so far,
and then not to sleep. It was probable, therefore, that they would camp
where there was cover, in case of an attack ; so they made for the creek, down
the bank of which they could go—or else into the scrub.
“ How do you tell that they were getting tired, Bony 2” asked Frank.
“ When that fellow baal tired, that walk like it long fellow leg, and leave
him plenty track belonging to toe, like it emu. When that tired that go like it
short fellow leg, make him track ’long a heel, like-old man kangaroo.”
That is to say, when fresh, their strides were long and springy, bearing
more on the ball of the foot and toes. When tired, their steps were short
and stumpy, the heel of the foot-prints becoming more clearly discernible.
The tracks continued along the bank of the creek, and were comparatively
■easy to follow. Bony said they were very fresh—probably but a few hours
old ; and it was lucky the party had turned off where they did the evening
before to seek a camping place, or they might have spoiled all by getting
within sight of the wretches in the short twilight, when they would have
lad a better chance of escaping, than if caught in broad light of day.
Bony pulled his horse up, and jumped off, holding up his hand as a signal
ior silence; then pointing to a few sticks, the ends of which were lying together


and still smouldering, he said, “ That fellow been sit down here nerangy while
(a little while) —haal sleep —cohborn tired. I believe close up now.”
“ Let us all look to our arms,” said Martin, “in case we come upon them
unawares. When we pull them, don’t fire a volley ;it only wastes cartridges.
Each one single out his man, and take good aim before firing. Don’t letone
escape if it can be helped. Remember the German ! ”
They removed the caps from the nipples of their rifles and pistols ; put the
hammers down ; drove the steel ramrods home two or three times, to ensure
the powder being up in the nipples ; and, putting on fresh caps, were ready
for action at any moment.
Keeping along the bank of the creek for about twenty miles, during which
Bony had reduced his coil of cold snake to a remnant scarce two feet long,
they were at last brought to a stand-still, by the boy holding his hand up in a
warning way, and then putting it to his mouth, which meant silence. Martin,
who was immediately behind him, drew closer, looking anxiously ahead. The
boy pointed to a tree about a hundred yards away, against which, Martin’s
quick eye discerned the figure of a black in a sitting posture, apparently
asleep, but with his face in their direction. There were other figures just
beyond him, lying on the ground, doubtless asleep like their unfaithful
watchman. No doubt, the man who now leant slumbering against the tree,
had been deputed to watch while the rest slept ; and imprudently sitting down
instead of keeping on his feet, had fallen into a deep sleep from fatigue, brought
on by their long and forced march.
The other two drew up to Martin, who said, “ Look here—don’t you do
anything rash. All depends on our coolness. We will go on our horses at a
slow walk, and try to get within pistol shot before making a rush. If we can
use our pistols first, so much the better, we shall have our rifles ready for
long shots if any get away. But if they wake, and jump up before we get
near, blaze away with your rifles, and then gallop in with your pistols—and
mind, the watchman is mine. ”
They all ranged in line, a little distance apart, and advanced cautiously ;
guiding their horses so as not to touch logs, or tread on dry branches that would
make a noise and waken the sleeping murderers. Eighteen naked savages lay
there ; some with their heads pillowed on the spoils of the sheep-station, as
was afterwards discovered. All went well to within twenty yards of the blacks,
when the watchman made an uneasy motion and opened his eyes, for an
instant catching the eye of Martin—only for an instant. A small cloud of
blue smoke rose between them, and before the report of Martin’s large
“ Colt ” reached the ears of the savage, a red bead oozed from his breast,
and he was dead.
Further caution was now useless, for the rest of the blacks were on their feet
in a moment. Martin shouted,
“Gallop in between them and the creek. Remember the German ! Let
them have it hot! ”
Shot after shot was now fired in quick succession. Each one of the avengers
was determined to do his best to exterminate the band. Not one word was
said on either side—pursuers and pursued felt alike, that words would be
wasted during such deadly work. Being taken by surprise through the negli-
gence of their watchman, the blacks at first thought of nothing but escape.
Five of their number fell to the first five shots fired, never to rise again.
Several more were soon killed and wounded—some of the latter desperately.
Finding themselves cut off from the creek, and feeling that retreat into the
open forest would be the worst move they could make, they got behind the
trees for shelter. It is not an easy or a safe matter, for a single horseman to
attempt to dislodge an armed black from behind a tree ; but in the heat of


the chase when the blood is up, one does not always stop to calculate chances*
Nevertheless, the black does not like to pop out suddenly on the probability—
a very small one—of catching his opponent unawares, and then driving a spear
through him. He knows that bullets are quick. On the other hand, the
horseman does not fancy turning his back to the tree in the hope of coming
at the savage by some stratagem, for he knows that, at a short distance, spears
are as deadly as bullets.
Frank was precisely in that position, with a powerful black on the opposite
side of a large blood-wood tree. He had tried his best, but in vain, to out-wit
the fellow. He could never get sight of sufficient of his skin to make sure of
disabling him. Getting tired of a lengthened course of profitless dodging, he
began to ride slowly round the tree, widening his circle every turn, and
keeping a sharp look-out. The black still kept the tree between them, no
doubt in mortal dread, but certainly watching an opportunity to launch his
spear. When Frank had got about twenty yards away the black showed
himself slightly, and seemed to be running away. “ Now is my time,” thought
Frank, and putting spurs to his horse, galloped in the same direction. When
he was passing the blood-wood tree, a spear passed through the side of his
thigh, pinning him to the saddle. The horse made a plunge, which caused
the spear to break almost short off. The black had exposed himself a little,
and made a feint only of leaving the tree, when Frank saw him and turned
back, as he thought in chase. This was the result.
He had but one barrel loaded, and that was his rifle. He tugged at the
spear-end sticking from his thigh, but could not draw it out. He did not wish
to get off till he had slain his enemy, so he kept his seat with deadly intent,
revolving what he should do. None of his companions were in sight, and
from the sound of the few shots that were fired at intervals, it was certain
they were some distance off. It was no use riding round and round the tree.
H he did so for a week, he would be no nearer to his enemy.
“If I had but one of the others to drive the wretch round this way, I’d
make him pay dearly for that,” said Frank to himself. He turned over in his
mind all' sorts of plans, which were abandoned in turn as they presented them-
selves, as being useless to dislodge the savage. They all seemed to be as futile
for his purpose, as would be the attempt with one king to drive out that of an
opponent from the double comer of a draught-board. Necessity is the mother
of invention—so is revenge, especially when one is still smarting from a
wound such as Frank’s. It was getting extremely painful, and he was very
sore at being outwitted by a savage. At last he thought of a plan to destroy
the black. It was a desperate stratagem, and showed that he had the blood of
a true Briton flowing in his veins, when he determined to act upon it. He
c autiously retreated a little, and tried to get off, but found that performance
not so easy as he expected. When he did manage to draw his leg, together
with the spear, from his saddle, he found that from the length of the point
and the fresh blood adhering to it, it must have pierced the horse’s back,
which was the cause of the animal plunging. He unsheathed his knife, cut
the projecting point of the spear off, and tying his handkerchief tightly round
his thigh, very painfully raised himself to his seat again. He then made
straight for the tree where his enemy was, and got off close to it—rifle at full
cook. Unbuckling the near side of the rein from the bit, and holding it in
Lis left hand, he set his horse in motion ; staying where he was, and allowing
the long rein to slip through his hand, only letting the horse feel the strain
slightly, which kept the animal close to the tree as he moved round it. He at
last had the satisfaction of seeing the black sideling towards him, with his left
hand on the tree, feeling his way, his right arm raised with a nulla ready for
throwing. The black’s face was turned towards the horse, whose nose only he
32


wished to keep in sight, thinking, as he certainly did, that Frank was still in
the saddle. The horse was now at the full extent of the rein, and stopped.
The black stopped also. Frank dared not move. It was an awful moment
of suspense—not fear—for had he felt the latter, he would not have risked
placing himself in that predicament; but the black was not quite exposed
enough for him to fire with a certainty of hitting him in a vital place. The
fellow might turn his head. What then 1 Only that one or the other must
die—Then, which 1 Frank gave the rein a jerk and let it go. The horse
moved on suddenly, so did the darkey. Without taking aim, Frank pulled the
trigger, for the muzzle of the rifle nearly touched the savage, whose right arm
dropped ; the nulla falling to the ground, nearly followed by its owner, who
staggered a step or two, half turning to Frank with a stunned expression ; as
he did so, revealing a terrible ragged gash across the breast, ploughed by the
rifle bullet, from the left shoulder to the right arm, the bone of which was
shattered. His giddiness was but for a moment, but as his opponent raised
his clubbed rifle for the purpose of ending the struggle, it was caught by the
left hand of the nimble savage, who tried hard to wrest it from him. He held
on with an iron grip for some moments. Though strong, Frank would have
been no match for him had he not lost the use of his right arm, for those savages
are wiry and quick as tigers, and it is hardly possible to put them off their feet.
Frank’s leg was becoming numbed, and he felt he must end the struggle at
once, if at all. He was too intent on his own course of action to notice the
jets of arterial blood that spouted from the arm of the savage, or he would
perhaps have waited a few minutes longer before drawing his sheath-knife.
The black, seeing this action, suddenly let go the rifle barrel, picked up his
nulla, and before Frank could close with him, he raised it with a ferocious grin
of triumph. ' The blow was never struck, for he tottered and fell on his
destroyer, who waited for him knife in hand. Frank’s leg gave way, and he
fell underneath the savage, who gave one or two convulsive movements, and
then was still for ever, but not before Frank’s knife was buried in his ribs.
Frank endeavoured to push the body off him, but was unable to do so,
feeling very faint—not from loss of blood, for he had scarcely lost a drop, the
spear-end being too tightly enclosed in his flesh—but he had gone through a
good deal of mental excitement and bodily exertion within the last ten
minutes, which, coupled with the severe wound he had received, told on him
now the struggle for life was over, and he lost consciousness. When he came
to, he saw Martin bending over him with a spirit flask in his hand, a small
dose from which had revived him. His first words were,
“ What—what—where am 11 ” uttered with a bewildered look.
“ All right, old fellow. You are coming round now. Don’t talk, Frank,”
Martin said in his kindly tones. “ Thank heaven you are safe. We thought
you were as dead as the nigger that was on top of you.”
Just then Bony came up with a quart of water, some of which Frank
swallowed. It revived him sufficiently to be raised by Ford, who was sup-
porting his head on his knees, and fanning his face with his cabbage-tree hat.
He looked a ghastly spectacle ; his young, and now pale face, daubed with
the blood of the savage ; his clothes saturated and clotted with the crimson
fluid. He was but a boy, and had fought nobly, giving much promise for his
future as a settler.
“ Yes, I know now—Oh, my leg ! ’’
“ What’s the matter with your leg, Frank V’
“ Speared. Try to get it out. My leg is nearly dead.”
Martin tried, and failed, as it was too short to get a good hold of. He-
then notched it with his knife ; twisted his handkerchief, and hitched it on
over the notches. He gave the sufferer a little more spirits ; took a turn or
D
33


two of the end of the handkerchief round his hand ; gave a steady pull,
and out it came.
“ Is-it painful now, Frank 2 ”
“ Yes, and I think it is bleeding—tie it up, Martin. ”
“ It is all the better for bleeding a little, it will not be so stiff and inflamed,
you know.”
Martin bandaged the wound, which did not bleed much after all.
“ Where is my horse 2 ”
“ Bony caught him, and tied him up over there.”
“ Just take the saddle off, and look at his back, will you 2”
The poor animal’s back was examined, and a small puncture found just
over one of the ribs, the bone fortunately preventing the spear from penetrating
to. a dangerous depth. It must have been thrown with great force to go as far
as it did. Martin said,
“ If you can manage to come along with our help, Frank, we will go as far
as the creek, where we will have a snack ; you must want it, and it will set
you up a bit. ”
They helped him up, and into his saddle, where he sat very uncomfortably.
The creek was not far off, but they passed seven bodies of the murderers on
the way to it, showing that the rest of the party had not been idle while he
was engaged at the blood-wood tree. How long he had been in a state of
unconsciousness could not be exactly determined ; but it was supposed to have
been an hour at least, as his companions had had a good chase after the rest
of the blacks ; most of whom had made for the creek, as soon as their pursuers
were sufficiently scattered to admit of their doing so with comparative safety.
After the first discharge, the blacks kept dodging from one tree to another, and
round them so nimbly, that not very much progress was made for a little
while. Three of them were imprudent enough to climb up trees, whence
they were picked off like squirrels, falling with a dull thud. It was owing to
the latter circumstance that the rest of the, wretches got a chance to run for
the creek. In the attempt, one of them rather miscalculated his opportunity,
for Bony rode him down. He ducked under the horse’s belly before the boy
could get a steady shot at him ; he was wounded in two or three places, for
Bony was the possessor of a revolver. Turn his horse which way he would,
the lithe black dodged under the animal before he could be covered with the
boy’s pistol. Caution was necessary, for fear of shooting the horse in the legs.
“ Come out of that, you black nigger,” said Bony ; “ I baal shoot you now,
my boy,” at the same time doing his best to get a shot at him. It was a fib,
of course, only told to save himself any further trouble. It did not succeed,
however, for a most emphatic “ Gammon !” came from under the horse, which
showed that the fellow was neither a stranger to the English language, nor to
the unfulfilled promises of his own countrymen. When Bony put his pistol
down one side, the fellow ducked under to the other. It is hard to say how
or when it would have ended ; but, unfortunately for the black, Ford rode
up after another fugitive, and on seeing Bony’s predicament, pulled up to
assist. The wretched black saw the reinforcement, and Ford’s rifle pointed
at him ; and with a bound he was clear of the horse, and ran for the creek.
He reached the bank and was about to plunge down. The sharp ring of Ford’s
rifle sounded. The black threw pp his arms ; made a tremendous leap into
the air ; and rolled a corpse down to the water’s edge.
At this juncture, Martin made his appearance and hurriedly directing Bony
to find a crossing-place, the three rode down the creek together, reloading
their empty; barrels as they went. When they reached a crossing—which was
a very difficult one—Martin said to Ford, “ You and Bony go over and run
down the creek, while I go down this side ; and we will see if we can get a


few more of the niggers, for they went in that direction. Perhaps Frank will
join me soon —I don’t know where he is just now.”
None of them had seen Frank, since he followed the black who had. so
nearly succeeded in killing him with the spear ; but no one thought he was in
ajiy danger, as it is a common enough occurrence for members of a party to
get scattered for a considerable time during such melees.
They proceeded down the creek for some distance, when Bony noticed drops
of blood on the stones and leaves, and tracks of three blacks. The boy made
signs to Martin to that effect, and also to keep a sharp look-out. The creek
was about forty yards across, and the water deep. On Bony’s side there was
a patch of vine scrub into which the tracks led. The boy said to Ford “ I tie
my horse here, and go ’long a scrub. You go ’nother side scrub—look out
sharp when black-fellow come out.”
“ They will settle you, Bony, if you go by yourself ; I’ll go with you.”
“ Baal you go go messmate ’long a scrub—white-fellow no good like it scrub.
Baal mine gerrand (frightened) belonging to myall. Too much rope (vines) sit
down ’long a scrub—spear no good—pistol budgeree. You look out ’nother
side—mine hunt him black-fellow that way.”
It was but the work of a moment for Bony to strip off shirt and trousers,
which, with his rifle, he left at the edge of the scrub. With a gleam'of
ferocious joy, he plunged in and was lost to sight in an instant. Ford went
on to the opposite end of the scrub, taking up a position which commanded
one end and one side of it. He had not been there two minutes before three
shots were fired in quick succession. Shots fired in a scrub have a peculiar
dull and deadly sound, there being no echo. Directly after the firing, was a
confused noise of voices— then another shot, and a frightful yell ; and all was
still as death. Ford felt somewhat nervous, thinking the boy might be getting
the worst of it; but if he jumped off his horse and went in, he would be
relinquishing a most important post, should Bony be successful. Again, if he
shouted, he would be discovering his whereabouts, so he concluded that the
best course was to remain where he was. He had not long to wait. Presently
a stamping and rustling were heard, and a black emerged from the scrub,
limping so much as almost to fall at each step. It was an old man with white
hair, and a long grey beard, but whose body and limbs were stout and muscu-
lar. Ford raised his rifle. The old man saw the action and stopped. His
features wore an expression of pain and misery, but as the old fellow drew
himself up to his full height and calmly faced the deadly tube, nothing of fear
was noticeable in his demeanor. He stood firm on one leg, the other drooping
as though useless. The old man’s venerable appearance, fearless expression,
attitude, and his tall and noble figure, so worked on Ford’s sympathies, that
he turned soft-hearted, and took his rifle from his shoulder, determined to
spare his life. At that moment Bony pushed through the scrub immediately
behind the old warrior ; raised his pistol; and before Ford could make him
understand that he wished to save his life, he fired. The savage half turned
to look at his assailant, and raised his spear, which sped like lightning in the
boy’s direction. Bony slipped aside, caught it, and with two or three rapid
hybrid imprecations, transfixed the old warrior’s left breast with it. He stood
for an instant ; his eyes turned up till nought but the whites were visible ; a
strong tremor passed through his frame ; and the old savage dropped, no more
to rise.
One sharp report rung out from the other side of the creek. Ford went
round, and saw some circles in the water, widening as they rolled from beneath
the scrub. When they had subsided, bubbles rose and a red tinge overspread
the surface of the lagoon for some distance around.
Martin, who read Bony’s tactics at a glance, when he saw him take his


clothes off and dive into the scrub, and Ford’s subsequent appearance at the
other end of it, determined to stay where he was. His position commanded
the whole situation on the water side of the scrub, as Ford’s did the back and
end of it. After Bony’s last shot at the old man, Martin noticed a black head
pushing through the dense foliage of the thicket close to the water’s edge.
The owner looked cautiously round, and quietly slid into the water, striking
out for Martin’s side. Martin seldom missed his aim. The latter now
beckoned to the others to come over to his side.
Bony,not knowing what had taken place in the creek, rushed down and plunged
into the water, to refresh himself after the hot work he had been at. Down
he went out of sight, for a good long dive—for the natives delight in bathing
in the summer, though nothing would induce them to enter the water during the
winter. On coming to the surface again, he shot almost clean out of the water,
and called out that he had seen “ debble debble” at the bottom of the creek.
He had, in fact, dived close to the black that had been shot by Martin. He lost
no time in getting ashore, and scrambled up the bank like a hunted squirrel.
Without waiting to complete his toilet, he gathered up his scanty wardrobe and
rifle, jumped on his horse, and galloped up to Ford, who was then near the
crossing-place. The boy was dreadfully frightened, being quite under the
impression that he had seen a “ debble debble,” till he joined Martin, who
explained the matter to him, and was proportionably disgusted with himself
for having displayed so much needless alarm. Nevertheless, as he inherited
the fears and superstitions of his race, .nothing would have induced him to
enter that hole again, knowing that a corpse lay at the bottom. There are
large waterholes and lagoons into which blacks will never go, in consequence,
as tradition tells them, of some supernatural, evil-disposed being dwelling at
the bottom. It is said to have a body like a man, and a long beak and claws
like a bird ; and when it catches a black-fellow, it tears the flesh off his
breast and arms with beak and claws, and devours it. Who would brave such
a presence as that, in its own proper element ? ■
Martin said he thought it strange that Frank had not joined them ; and
now he had time to think, was afraid something might have happened to him.
They had better go back and run his track from where he was last seen ;
which was done, with what result is already known.
Frank’s clothes were removed and washed, to free them from the gore of
his antagonist. The whole process of washing and drying did not take long,
the day being extremely hot. During the short time he had to wait for his
things, he had on a suit of clothes belonging to one of the shepherds, which
had been recovered from the blacks. Their lunch was a late one, and they
determined not to pursue the blacks any further, as they must have shot
more than half their number, which would be a caution to the rest.
. Poor Frank’s leg was very painful, but he agreed with his comrades that it
was best to start homeward, and get as far as they could that night. Before
they started a general inspection of the battle-field was instituted, which
resulted in the discovery of what has already been told, that the blacks when
caught had their heads pillowed on the spoils of the hut. They had taken
the shepherds’ rations, clothes, and blankets, making them up into convenient-
sized “ swags ”'to travel with.
What gave the avengers most satisfaction, was the discovery of an old
enemy, in the person of the watchman. He was an old offender, and had been
“ wanted ” for some time, for his villainies committed on several stations.
He was the leader of a party who had killed a white shepherd and a hut-
keeper, about 18 months before, at another of the Stancourt out-stations,
called the Ten-mile Station. His name was Kooralla. The creeks and rivers
were all flooded, and the murderers could not be followed for more than a
36


month ; in the meantime they had got clear away beyond pursuit, their tracks
being quite obliterated by the heavy rains.
Kooralla’s constant delinquencies at last became intolerable. The men laid
traps for him and his party, by leaving in their huts, when they went out
dampers and flour mixed with strychnine. This terrible poison is largely
used on sheep stations for the destruction of native dogs. Several of the
blacks were thus poisoned, but the greatest rogue got off; and afterwards
was knowing enough to eschew any flour or other provisions left in conspic-
uous places in unprotected huts. It checked his robbing propensities m a
measure; but whenever he had an opportunity of “ rushing ” a station,
and murdering the men, he had no scruple in taking the rations that the
poor fellows had evidently been using themselves.
Kooralla’s murderous career was finished. His clenched teeth still held the
stem of the pipe which he had been smoking when he dropped off to sleep.
It was a wooden one, that Martin recognised as belonging to, and had been
made by the poor German,
“ I’ve settled up with you, anyhow,” said Martin. “You were the biggest
rascal out, and we may have a little peace now.”
The crows were hopping about, impatient for their anticipated feast, tfhe
eagle-hawks circled over head awaiting the departure of the horsemen ; then
both descended and pounced upon their prey.
. The party pulled up about sunset, some miles short of their camp of the
night before. It was thought most prudent to allow Frank all the rest it was
possible to afford him, as they wished to reach home the next day. Though
a long day’s ride, even as the crow flies, they had hopes of being able to
accomplish the journey. There would be no detentions such as were experi-
enced while tracking the blacks, and Bony said there was nothing to prevent
him from making a straight course back. The poor horses were somewhat
jaded, not having had much to eat since they were saddled in the morning—
only what they could pick up while the party were at lunch ; and none, except
Frank s horse, had been unsaddled till their arrival that evening in camp..
They were again short-hobbled, and after a good roll, lost no time in
cropping the tender green grass that grew along the margin of the water;
for the travellers had not yet reached the burnt country through which
they had travelled the day before. After tea Martin said,
“ How many niggers did you wipe out, Ford 2”
‘ ‘ Let me see —that big fellow behind the tree where the watchman was.
Then the little nuggety fellow up the tree —What a fool he was to throw that
spear at me! I should not have seen him only for that, for I was going after
the same one that Frank ran a-muck with, at the time. Then one that hid in
the big stump-hole. That’s three. And Bony’s friend that ducked under bis
horse so neatly. That’s four, all told. ”
“ Well, Bony—what did you do 2”
“ One fellow ’long a blanket—first time. One up gum tree. ’Nother one
in scrub. Old man outside scrub. That all, sir,” said Bony with a sigh.
He would have liked to have been in a position to add a few more. -
Ford said, “ Bony, you were a coward to fire at that old fellow. I was
going to let him off. ”
“ What you let him go for, sir ? Me know him that fellow—plenty kill him
white-fellow. ”
“ How do you know that he has killed plenty of white-fellows, Bony 1 ”
“ Why, that fellow brother belonging to mine father. Baal mine been see
him good while now. Only mine hear him plenty news.”
“Good gracious! Do you mean to say that the old man you killed was
your uncle 2 ”


_ “ Yes, sir,” replied the boy in a most matter-of-fact way, but looking a
little surprised at Ford’s palpable disgust; and not quite comprehending why
he should not kill his uncle, or any of his other relations, without being
called to account for it. He placed his pipe in his mouth, and threw
himself on to his back, relapsing into a merry corrobboree, into which he
introduced some of the principal events of the day, with a considerable
amount of self-laudation for his exploit in spearing his uncle.
- The conversation was resumed, and Martin reckoned up his shooting by
doubling a finger down for each one told—“ The watchman”—down went
the little finger. “ The long fellow up the iron-bark, that fell across the
branch”—the third finger was turned down. “ The one that ran between us,
for the creek”—the middle finger next. “ And the ‘ devil devil’ that Bony
dived into in the creek”—the first finger was turned down. “One—two—
three—four. Then Frank did for two. By George, Frank ! Take my advice
and be more careful with those big buck niggers in future. Never get
within hug of one again. They are just like cats ; and though you may be
, twice as strong as one of them, he is almost sure to get the whip-hand of you
with his activity. You see, you have no hold of their naked greasy carcases. ”
Frank saw plainly the force of this reasoning, and, though he had pluck
enough for any reasonable encounter, he had had an experience that day that
would be useful to him in future.
“ It’s all very fine, Martin. I know now that I did not act prudently, in
taking it for granted that the fellow was really bolting when I spurred after
him. But when I found how he had diddled me, and when I felt the spear
sticking in my thigh, I felt—well, I’m blest if I know how I felt; but I was
not amiable, I tell you. However, we are quits now.”
Bony having corrobboreed himself into a first-rate humour again, sat up and
had some more tea and damper, and mutton fat. Then reaching his rifle, and
wiping his greasy knife on his hair, he proceeded to cut four fresh notches on
the stock of his weapon, which already had an array of which he was very
proud. Each notch represented the extinction of a savage not a whit worse
than himself. “Save me from my friends! ”
“ Well,” said Martin, “we shall not have to keep watch to-night. There
is no danger from fourteen of our friends, and I’ll warrant the rest will not
trouble us—they are far enough off by this. Had the fellows been awake—
or even the watchman—the chances are we should not have caught half the
number. I never had such luck before, and I don’t believe that one party
in twenty—of our number—are favored as we have been. Fourteen to fall
to four men ! Then they were all very tired, and they knew their only safety
was in getting down the creek bank. When they were cut off from that,
they were bothered. I say, Bony, what did you do in the scrub 1 I heard a
good deal of yabbering. ”
Bony chuckled with delight. His memories were evidently pleasant, and
he replied, “Oh ! my word ! That budgeree ! Look here, sir. Old man,
father belonging to that fellow (the old man, Bony’s uncle, was the young
man’s father). Well, that been crammer (steal) my gin good while ago.
When that see me, that jump like it yam-hole. ' I say ‘ you more take him
my gin, Wogga 1 ’ That fellow woolla, ‘ Baal more, Bony— haal you tchoot
him me. Old man been kill him German— baal me.’ Then I tell him, 'What
for you momkoll Chow Chow? ’ ‘ Baal me, only Kooralla.’ My word ! that
fellow cobbom gerrand ! ”
The remainder of the conversation between Bony and his wretched cousin,
and rival in love of former years, is not presentable. He obtained what
hurried information he could from his victim—taunted him, and then shot
him !


Frank, who was interested in the conversation, felt a thrill of disgust, and
said, “ What inhuman wretches these blacks are ! Shooting and hanging are
too good for them. Can you imagine a boy committing such atrocities 1 He
hunts his cousin into a hole; gets what information he can out of him; taunts
and curses him for what happened years ago ; and then shoots him ! Worse
still, for he chases his uncle—the father of the man he has just killed-
shooting and spearing him to death ! Such animals are not fit to live.”
Martin replied, “ Now, look here, Frank. Don’t be too hard on the boy.
You must make allowances. Just think of the school he has been brought up
in. They imbibe the first principles of blood, murder, and cruelty from
their mother’s breasts. According to our code of morals, his cousin was a
sneaking rascal, for, though he was as much in the mud as the others were in
the mire, he tried to put the blame of the whole thing on the shoulders of
Kooralla, and his own father. And I daresay, if they were sifted, there
would be about six of one and half-a-dozen of the other. Concerning Bony,
there is this difference, though, that we should not lose sight of. He h#s
been of the greatest service to us. We could not have got on so well with any
other boy I know, for he is the best tracker out. That bit of tracking up
the sapling, and down the gum tree; through the creek, and then over the
burnt country; was as well carried out a piece of business as anything of the
sort I ever saw. And I have been with some good trackers in my time—
looking for lost cattle, sheep, horses, shepherds, children, and everything else
that a man has to depend on tracking to find. I’ll give him a new rig-out,
and a new blanket, when we get home.”
Bony comprehended a good deal of what was said, and eyed each speaker
in turn sharply. He understood more English than he could speak. He
spoke a curious jargon—a mixture of bad English and aborigine—freely
intermixed with snatches of profanity, of which he knew not the meaning.
He was certainly much attached to Martin, whose boy he had been for some
years, and who had always treated him very kindly. Notwithstanding his
blood-thirsty propensities, his countenance was open, intelligent, and pleasant.
He was kind and gentle towards his gin and piccaninies, and would share a
scanty meal with his dogs, which he never on any occasion ill-used. In
justice to the North Australian blacks, and to the shame of their white
brethren, it must be told that they never do ill-use their dogs. Altogether,
Bony was a very fair specimen of a half-civilized black. He looked very
gratified when he heard the concluding sentences of Martin’s speech, for he
knew the promise would be faithfully carried out. Native like, he could not
resist the impulse to try for an increase of the promised reward, by throwing
out in a suggestive way, ‘ ‘ My tomahawk old fellow, now, Mr. Martin.
“ All right, Bony, you shall have a new one, my boy.”
“ ’Merican tomahawk no good,” said Bony.
“Very well, I’ll get Charley Hickson to make you one, when I go to
Maryborough. I know your sort—long and narrow.”
Bony again threw himself on his back, and beating excellent time with lus
tomahawk-handle on the barrel of his rifle, started a brilliant corrobboree
tune, with extempore words in praise of ‘ ‘ budgeree fellow master belonging
to mine. ” Also about the innumerable ’possums and sugar-bags he would
cut out with the new tomahawk. Time and tune at last become slower, and
then ceased. The boy had glided into the calm repose of the innocent. ;
Binding up Frank’s thigh with wet bandages, they all followed Bonys
example, and turned into their blankets for the night; no watch being kept.
In the morning they were up very early, and made a good start. Frank s
wound not being so painful as might have been expected, they made good
progress. About dark that evening the avengers reached the sheep-station,


and found the hut occupied by two shepherds from the head-station. George
Martin had obeyed his brother’s instructions, and with the force he was able
to collect, managed to send the wounded German into the head-station; he
spying behind with Tommy and a shepherd, to collect the scattered sheep.
The bulk of the sheep were soon found in detached mobs, in various parts of
their own runs. The two flocks of course had “boxed”—that is, mixed—
aa soon as they had been let out of the yards by the savages. Independent
of the wanton cruelty of the blacks, considerable havoc had been made
amongst them by the native dogs, who were not at all likely to lose so
favorable an opportunity as that afforded them, by having about two
thousand five hundred sheep placed entirely at their mercy for a whole
night and part of the next day.
The dingo shows no mercy to the sheep, and consequently, none is extended
to him. He is a grinning, howling, and blood-loving brute, with a deal of
cunning ; and his watchful habits render him the greatest foe the sheep-owner
has, next to the aborigines. When amongst the flock, either in the yard or
on the run, he rushes from one sheep to another, snapping like a shark with
his strong jaws ; and with his tusks tearing the flesh off each animal he attacks.
One dog alone will bite and rend a dozen sheep, before finally dragging one
down to feed upon. The sheep thus bitten do not often recover.
When the sheep were counted into the yard, they were found to be fifty
short of the proper number, exclusive of what the blacks had killed ; and
from what George had seen, he thought it more than probable that they had
been destroyed by native dogs. This number would not cover the actual loss,
as there were fully a hundred that had been wounded by the blacks and the
dogs together, many of which would die. These were drafted out and put
into a separate pen, and were called the “hospital flock.” Their wounds
were properly attended to, some sewn up, and all dressed with tar to keep the
flies off.
George Martin had hot long started on his way to the head-station, when
the party arrived. The shepherds were delighted with the intelligence of
what they had done, and soon prepared some tea for them ; after which, they
again set out for home, and reached it about 10 o’clock. How much had
been done in those seventy-two hours intervening between the time the
Chinaman had arrived, cut and bleeding, and of their return ! Do not think
too harshly of those three bushmen, reader. Not one of them but would
have—aye, and often had—fed and clothed sick, and otherwise necessitous
blacks, in their hour of need. Nevertheless, they dared not spare, when the
blood of their men, and the property of their employers, demanded prompt
action. Why not have shot one or two, and let the others escape 1 No, it
could not be done that way—show any leniency, however slight, at such
times, and the murderers would surely return, or commit depredations on
other stations as soon as an opportunity offered. Take every precaution ;
treat them fairly and justly ; give them firmly to understand your rules, and
the consequences of infringement ; insist on your men letting them alone, and
there would not be one-tenth of the bloodshed on either side. They can
only be ruled by fear of consequences ; though kindness and justice are fully
understood, and fairly appreciated by them, yet they do not act as a deterrent.
A man may be ever so kmd and considerate to them, but that will not save
his life if he falls into their hands—a revolver or a rifle will.
Some squatters had a system of hunting and shooting the blacks, wherever
found on the run. Such men, thank heaven, were few. They would ride up
a high ridge ; look for smoke ; and then making straight to it shoot as manv
as they "could.
The first thing our friends did, after turning out their jaded horses, was to


enquire where and how poor Grosse was. George Martin led the way to a
little spare room at the back of the kitchen, where the man had been
as comfortable as possible. He was still alive, but it was evident he could
not last much longer. The poor fellow was sensible but very weak. The
principal wound was in the side—or rather, the back part of the ribs, about
three inches below the shoulder-blade. The surrounding parts were very
much puffed, and for some inches round the wound, it was red and blotchy.
His breathing was labored, and came in thick short sobs. Life was evidently
drawing to a painful close.
Before George Martin left the head-station, after going in from the sheep
station for hands to carry the man in on a litter, he left instructions with the
cook to attend fully to the man’s necessities on his arrival. The cook was an
old man named Walker, who had been a man-of-war sailor, and, having seen
some active service, was invaluable at a time like the present. He had
treated, without any professional assistance, many severe injuries most
successfully during his long career in the bush ; so young Martin had no
scruple in leaving the case in his hands till the Doctor arrived. Jacky had
been sent away at once for the Doctor, but was not expected back till the
night the party got home.
George was thus enabled to leave with a lighter heart than he could have
done, had Walker not been a man of such known experience in surgery, and
kindness of heart. Arrived at the sheep station, he saw to the making of the
litter ; putting the dying man on it ; and starting his bearers off; he then
proceeded to look for the sheep, with what result is already known. On his
return after the first day’s search, he found that Walker had done all that was
possible for the sufferer. He had first stripped him of his clothes, by cutting
them off him ; then examined the wounds, only one of which he pronounced
to be dangerous—the one in the back. He found that the spear had
splintered on a rib, one piece going round between the bone and skin, and
the other straight in, piercing the lung ; each splinter being five inches long.
The spear had broken off short, leaving but little to be taken hold of, and
Walker had to extract both with a pair of pincers. When the splinter was
removed from the lung, Walker expected to see the man sink from internal
hemorrhage ; and even when he found that his fears were not realised, he
had but little hope of an ultimate recovery ; having a vivid recollection of
the dire effects of splinters rent from the woodwork of ships he had served in,
by shot from the enemy’s guns.
Grosse remained unconscious for many hours after his arrival, and did not
improve in strength after his memory returned. He constantly craved for
water, which was supplied by his watchful attendant, who informed the
party on their arrival that the sufferer would not live through the night.
When the Doctor arrived, he felt the patient’s pulse and examined the wound,
and said—“ Mortification—dead man in two hours. Get me a wine-glass half
full of water.” No glass, however, was to be obtained in that primitive
establishment ; and a tea-cup without a handle was brought, as being the
nearest procurable to the required article. The Doctor then poured into it a
small quantity of liquid from a phial, and administered it to the man. It
revived him a little, and he said to Martin in very fair English—
“ Mr. Martin—l die—send ray wages to my poor wife—and my little child.
A letter is in—.”
The poor fellow was too overcome by emotion, and the shadow of death
that lay upon him, to finish the expression of his wishes, and never regained
sufficient strength to do so. Martin spoke kindly to him at intervals, trying
to soothe his last moments, and had the satisfaction of seeing, from the dying


man’s looks, that his efforts were appreciated. Within the time allotted by
the Doctor, he breathed his last.
Grosse was a young man. He had arrived at Brisbane in a German immi-
grant ship, about three years before his cruel death. He left a wife and one
little child a year old, at home. He was a steady, intelligent fellow, and
was employed at Stancourt from within a month after his arrival in the
colony, an agent in Brisbane having engaged him direct from the ship. He
had been proved to be so painstaking and trustworthy, that his wages had
been increased during his last term of twelve months, to one pound a week.
Twice he had got money from Martin to send home to Germany to his wife ;
and at those times had spoken hopefully of soon seeing her and his little one.
The morning succeeding the poor fellow’s death, Martin remembered his
unfinished sentence about the letter. Procuring the clothes that Walker had
cut off him, he examined the pockets, and in one he found a letter stained
with blood, and written in German characters, which he did not understand.
It had been much read and handled, apparently. There were two things
within the folds of the letter, which Martin did understand—and which every
one understands, of whatever nationality he or she may be —and those two
little things caused big swelling drops to course down his cheeks, and his
breast to heave —for that fine, handsome, dark man, who had within the last
few hours pitilessly shot and destroyed four of his fellow-creatures, had a
heart easily touched. There was one far away who loved him, and prayed
night and day for his safety. The sight of those little things struck a chord
in his breast. Like the letter, they were stained with blood —one was a long
tress of fine, glossy, fair hair ; the other was a tiny, silky, bright yellow curl
—the only representatives in that lonely bush, of the poor young German
widow, and her little orphan girl !
When Martin made the above discovery, Frank was present. Martin said,
“ I wonder if this is the letter the poor fellow meant 1 Perhaps he meant it
to be buried with him.”
“ Very likely that was it, Martin—but now I think of it, there was some-
thing in the pocket of the trousers I wore while my things were being washed,
after we pitched into the blacks. Did you not say they belonged to the
German ? ”
“ Yes, we will have a look. Pigtail sorted his things out from what we
recovered from the blacks, and I put the German’s things in the store.”
A search was made in the pockets of the clothing alluded to, and another
letter was found. It was in Grosse’s handwriting, and addressed to his wife,
but not closed. There was nothing visible in this letter to excite the sympa-
thies of those who saw it. Fritz, the bullock-driver, who was also a German,
was called in to read and interpret the letter. It was not a long one, nor
did it contain anything of interest till it concluded, much in the following
style :
“ And now my pretty wife, I must tell you that I am going to send money
in this letter, to enable you to join me by the next emigrant ship that leaves
our dear Fatherland, for this foreign but good country. I know you will be
glad of this, as you often wanted to come to me ; but you know it was better
to wait till I got more wages to keep you more comfortably. There is money
in this land, and I wanted to be rich for your sake ; and the blacks were so
bad, that it was not safe for you and my little lamb. They are quieter now,
and master says he will give me work at the head-station when you come to
me. I ever carry your letter with the hair of my pretty one, and your own;
and often kiss them and think of you both. Give your old mother some
money, she has been ever kind to you and to me, for taking care of you. I


have no mother—that is well—for she is happy, and I may, perhaps, never-
more see my native land. Wife, I pine for you and for my pretty dove.
“ Farewell,
“Cabl Gbossb.”
The next mail for Germany took a letter from Martin conveying the sad
news of Carl Grosse’s death to his widow. It also enclosed a draft for forty-
five pounds, the balance of the careful man’s savings, and his last letter.
43


CHAPTER VI.
In the course of a week, Frank was able to resume his journey. He met
with no adventures the first day, and stayed for the night at a station
called Wonga, on the opposite bank of the Burnett River, where lived the
proprietors—two bachelor brothers—Scotchmen, and as fine, free-hearted,
hospitable fellows as ever lived. There was a beautiful and extensive view
from the house, which was situated immediately on the North bank of the
river, fully one hundred feet above, and overlooking a noble sheet of water.
Like all Australian rivers it had an immense bed composed of rock, sand,
and shingle, on one or both sides, according to the situation of the channel
for the time being. It, however, possessed large and permanent lagoons at
intervals, such as the one above which the hbuse stood. It was subject to
very great floods at irregular intervals, but generally once a year, and during
their continuance, was indeed a noble river. The water would rise to the
height of twenty, and even forty feet above its ordinary level, in the course
of a few days, during the continuance of the heavy tropical rains which fell
there, covering the tea-trees and oaks, and rising far up the gigantic gum
trees, all of which, strange to say, grow thickly in the beds of the rivers in
that part of Australia. It was a fine sight to see the tall river-oaks bending
their stately heads to the force of the strong-current that swept past them,
threatening to uproot them from its bed. Some would be carried away
bodily, others unable to bear the strain, were broken off, and rushed down
with the swift resistless current, to break and rend others in their turn, and
to collect at some particular spot, together with hundreds of other trees and
logs, stones, and debris of all kinds, forming an enormous heap, sometimes
making an insurmountable barrier at a crossing-place. At times these floods
would wash a crossing away altogether, leaving deep water in its stead. At
other times they would improve a crossing-place. Now, a bank down which
a road went would be undermined, the whole slipping into the river, leaving
a precipice behind. Again, a heap of sand would be deposited many feet
deep, covering road and bushes for some distance, and stopping all traffic till
a new track was discovered. The giant gums on the banks were often toppled
into the river by the banks being washed away—thousands of tons of earth
and stones going with them. These, and many more obstacles, the squatters
had to contend with, and do still, for nothing but very expensive bridges—
too expensive to be undertaken at the cost of the country, perhaps for fifty
or a hundred years to come—will ever overcome the difficulty.
The crossing-place at Wonga was a little below the house, and the road
down the opposite bank, and as far as the north, or house side of the water,
could be plainly seen ; after which it was lost to view by the obstruction of
masses of tea-trees through which it was cut. It was a difficult and intricate
crossing at any time, even during a dry season. At the ford, the water with
great force rushed over large, round, slimy boulders and broken rocks, over
which a horseman had to guide his horse with care. A horse would some-
times slip, and the rider be drenched to the skin in an instant. It was a long
way from one bank to the other, as the road necessarily took a devious course.
First a long steep bank ; then a bed of loose deep sand, by no means even;


over the rushing ford ; round a bend at the end of the lagoon, over stumna
and stones a cutting in the bushes ; and, by a sudden turn, across
a nasty creek ; then up the bank through the scrub. Taking it altogether it
was one of the most formidable crossings in any river in that part of the?
colony, for a team of bullocks or for a horseman. As many as three teams
equal to thirty bullocks, were at times hooked on to one loaded dray to get it
from one side of the river to the other. Hooking on two or three teams of
bullocks—or “double-banking,” as it is technically called—to one dray is.
commonly resorted to in difficult places, such as steep banks, deep sand’ or
It sometimes happened, that a dray with a heavy load of wool stuck in a
river or creek, imbedded in soft sludge or deep sand, could not be moved by
the teams before the flood came down, and the dray and wool were lost. On
one such occasion, a bullock-driver heard the flood coming down, when he was
hi a rather bad creek with a load of wool. He had only just time enough to
free his bullocks from the polo, and get them up the bank, when the water
came down like a wall several feet high, and took the dray and its loading
away beyond recovery. 5
All floods do not rise so suddenly, but generally give timely notice by a
steady rise. When such unwelcome visitations do occur, it is mostly in the
summer, after heavy storms about the heads of the creeks or rivers in which
they happen. When a man sees that his attempts to move a dray so situated
are futile, it is his duty to place his team in safety; and then, if there is time
to fasten his load as securely as possible to the dray, and the dray to a tree
with chams.
There are many devices and expedients for moving a dray, which may be
stuck fast in bog or sand, or on a bank, without double banking ; and a good
bullock-driver is most fertile in such, some of which will be described in due
course.
icr^ he i nam ® s of the proprietors of Wonga, were Kenneth and Dunean
Malcolm. Kenneth, the oldest, had been a doctor, but had given up practis-
es m his profession, to settle down as a squatter. He looked after the
cattle, and the domestic arrangements. He was a tall, bony, powerfully
built man, with fierce whiskers and moustache of a we will say, chestnut
colour; and shaven chin. The Doctor was most particular and natty in all
he did. A facetious friend once said that “he put headings round his post
holes. He was very mechanical, and had a forge and workshop, and could
turn out a variety of work, both in wood and iron, in a style that would not.
disgrace a professional. As a stock-whip maker he stood unrivalled. The
hides for making them he took off the beasts himself, to ensure their having
no cuts in them, for he was as good at butchering as at any other trade. He
spread them in his workshop, and salted and dressed them. Stock-whip,
making is an art that few attain in its perfection. A whip to “fall” well
must have the “ belly in the right place, and of the exact thickness in pro-
portwn to its length. Some men made a good whip by chance—just now and.
then ibut the Doctor’s whips were always good, and happy and envied was.
the matt who could prevail on him to make him one. The whole of the wort
was done bjf. eye, not by rule ; the Doctor had a correct eye and a neat hand
hence his success. Then, did they not crack! Why, in the hands of an
experienced man they could be heard miles off. He could not only make a
whip, but use it. Often when sitting in the verandah of a calm evening, his
brother Duncan would say—“ Here comes Kenneth with the cattle. I can
hear his whip at the Three-mile Creek. ” He could generally tell how far the
cattle were off by the sound of his brother’s whip ; and could distinguish it
from that of the others.


The Doctor had a nick-name given him, on account of his hot temper. It
■was “ Fireaway.” He was invariably called by it—behind his back. While
his brother would be saying “ I hear Kenneth’s whip one of his friends, or
.one of the men in another part of the station would observe, “ That’s old
Fireaway’s whip ; someone had better shape quick, and clear the stock-yard
rails out of the way, or he will be laying into us with his whip, or riding
somebody down. Old Emperor (his horse) is just like the old man, and
likes the fun, Ido believe.” Yes, it was a caution to see the Doctor on old
Emperor, when anyone crossed or disobeyed him. Nevertheless, he was so
good-hearted that everyone liked him ; for to his credit be it said, he never
blamed, thrashed, or rode anyone down, who had not committed an error,
either intentionally or unintentionally. Most of the hands on a station would
rather be thrashed by a hasty-tempered man who liked them, and showed
them every consideration when they pleased him, than be shunned and treated
neglectfully by one who never studied their welfare. By high and low, he was
well liked, for he would exert himself in any way, day or night, to contribute
to their comfort or necessities.
At times it would happen that Wonga would be without a cook. The
Doctor would then take the whole of the domestic work on his own shoulders,
keeping all in apple-pie order. Big, rough, manly fellow as he was, he could
do the work as neatly and expeditiously as any woman. He was a universal
genius. It was a sight worth seeing, when the Doctor was cooking and dishing
up dinner ! Everything was done to a turn; the plates, dishes, knives and
forks, were polished till one could see his face in them. Then his coffee was
noffee. He roasted the berries, and ground them every morning, fresh ; and
served the delicious decoction with cream ! The aroma pervaded the-house.
The above work was not light at times, for Wonga was' situated on a main
road—or rather at the junction of two main roads ; one went towards the
new country, to the north ; and the other .to Gayndah, west. Thus, the
number of visitors calling there was considerable ; eight or ten would some-
times put up there for the night, and as many more might call during the
day, having a meal, and then passing on. A kindly welcome was extended 1
to all by the hospitable host. This state of affairs entailed a great deal of
work on whoever had to do it. During floods, when people were bailed up,
large numbers would stay for days consecutively. Experiences of that
nature were not peculiar to Wonga, but were shared by its neighbours, as
hospitality was the order of the day, in that part of the world. But stations
near large rivers, or where two roads' met, were necessarily more liable than
others to such inundations of visitors.
It may easily be imagined that the above state of affairs was not productive
of unmixed satisfaction to the residents, especially when the work devolved
entirely on themselves, as it occasionally did. For, through one of the many
causes that so often crop up —the fault of a servant, or master ; sickness, or
incompetency ; insolence ; or the termination of an agreement, and the non-
arrival of fresh servants to take the place of the old—stations were often
without those terrible plagues or comforts (domestic servants), as the case
might be, for weeks together. The smaller and less pretentious stations
generally had only a married couple in the kitchen; the woman to cook and
wash, and the man to make himself useful—getting wood and water, etc. No
one, after a short apprenticeship to the bush, ever expects to get a good
couple. If the man is good the woman is bad, and vice versa. Happy is he
or she, who can boast of having a really good couple in the kitchen. Nothing
can exceed the annoyance and discomfort those people, when so inclined,
can inflict on their employers. Some lay themselves out to annoy, wilfully
wasting and destroying as much of their property as they can, without


actually laying themselves open to indictment. For instance, a wommt adiio
is a first-rate bread-maker, will, in a fit of ill-humour, set ten orjißeen
pounds of flour, and intentionally omit or add something to ttfthereby
spoiling the whole hatch. Or she will scorch it so in the baking, as to render
it uneatable. Then she will bake the fresh meat to a cinder, and boil the
salt-beef to shreds at one time, and dish them up raw at another. The man
would do equally disagreeable things. Unpleasantnesses of no light nature,
often arise out of their own private squabbles. At such periods they give their
whole time and energies to pull one against the other, often breaking into
violence; then no good can be got out of either. It is impossible to enumerate
the troubles, great and small, caused by the “tantrums” of such people ;
they know their power, and wield it to perfection. A man may at times
miscalculate the forbearance of his master, and get a hiding such as he richly
deserves. One rascal who was in the habit of hammering the milking cows
when they were in the bail, and was repeatedly cautioned not to do it, was one
morning caught in the fact by his employer, who took the stick from him, and
laid it smartly over his back, at the same time asking him how he liked it.
It was, is, and ever will be, more difficult to deal with the women. If one
has the means or the tact, to curb them at one point, they break out in ten
fresh places with variations, only multiplying one’s trouble. If a man is
floored once or twice, and knows he deserves it, if he has any sense, it is
more than probable that he will “ cave in,” and do his work moderately well
after. But, floor a woman (metaphorically of course), as often as you can,
and she bounces up at a different angle, more buoyant than before.
There is a clause which is always inserted in agreements, by experienced
agents and employers at the time of engagement, that has more effect than
anything else in keeping refractory characters in trim, and runs thus :
“ Provided that this agreement be not faithfully acted up to, and the work
not satisfactorily performed, the said John and Ann Smith agree to forfeit
the cost of their conveyance to the station.” It has been said that an English-
man’s pockets are made of more sensitive material than any other country-
man’s. It is false—facts and experience will not bear it out. Married couples,
of whatever nationality, make a bold—nay, fierce—stand, against the tender
of anything less than the full pay stipulated for, whether they earn it or not.
All the above on the subject of married couples, must not be construed
as meaning that they are all wilful, spiteful, designing, wasteful, and every-
thing else that is bad. There are many who give their employers much
trouble, without having any one of those unenviable qualities, simply from
stupidity or want of experience ; they, of course, are blameable to a certain
degree, for engaging to do work that they are totally unfit for, or ignorant of.
There are many others who do their best, and though not by any means up
to the mark, are met half way by their employers, and manage to pull through
a twelve months’ agreement tolerably—they leave but little soreness behind,
on their departure. Then, of course, there are good and bad employers. In
fact, the matter is considerably mixed at times.
Duncan Malcolm, the younger of the two brothers, was about middle height,"
broad, and stout ; possessing great strength. He was of a more placid dis-
position than his brother, and cared little for mechanics. He superintended,
and took part in all matters connected with the sheep ; be was also a good
hand in the stook-yard at branding time, his great strength always carrying
the day against almost any young beast up to two years old, either at
hauling them up with the rope, or throwing them.
Frank and his boy left Wonga early next morning, and the road being good,
they reached Ohinchin, a large sheep and cattle station twelve miles on, and
stayed there to lunch. The head-station had nothing to recommend it in point


of view ;on the contrary, it was a very dingy look-out. The improvements
were pot of a very elaborate or expensive description at that time, and were
principally erected on the bank of a most unhappy-looking creek, full of snags,
sand, and trees, the opposite bank being covered with scrub, down to which
a high ridge sloped, completely shutting out all beyond. Many people had
been murdered by the blacks, both at the head-station and at the out-stations.
There were extensive patches of dense vine scrubs, on various parts of the
run, which, in connection with a good deal of rough and difficult country,
afforded good shelter for the blacks. It was an almost perpetual series of
mutual reprisals between blacks and whites there. A former proprietor,
George Blaxtone, had been killed not many months before Frank’s visit. One
of the half civilised boys employed on the place, decoyed the doomed man
into an ambush of savages down the creek bank, by telling him that there
were some ewes and lambs there that could not get up. Without suspicion,
he at once started away for them, and though he had his deadly double-barrel
gun with him, he was slaughtered without being allowed the opportunity of
using it, as he had so often done, with terrible effect on the savages. In the
course of time, the proprietors of Chinchin made extensive improvements on
the station, building a fine house at a greater elevation than the old one, and
clearing a good deal of the forest timber away, that formerly obstructed the
view from its site.
Chinchin, like Wonga, was a bachelors’ station, and owned by Alfred and
Oscar Foster. Neither of the brothers was at home at the time of Frank’s
visit. The younger, Oscar, with one of the stockmen, was out on the run
for the purpose of bringing in a beast to kill that evening, for station meat.
The other was away at a sheep station some miles off, and would not be back
till night.
A good stockman always knows where to find a beast suitable for killing.
The reader may fancy that amongst several thousand head of cattle, nothing
could be easier. Not so, at all times, for some proprietors are very particular
in that matter. One will only kill fat beasts ; another lean ones ; and in any
case there is a great deal of tact required in the selection. The general rule
is, not to kill one that is an average saleable beast, or a useful one. For
instance, a barren cow that is not fat enough for the butcher, is considered
a good sort to kill ; a coarsely bred cow that is not desirable to breed from ;
a fat one that is not able to travel, through some old injury ; a bullock that
is under-sized, or never lays on fat enough to please the butchers ; a wild one,
hard to manage on the run, or that has some confirmed bad habit; or a
“stag”—a coarse beast with thick horns like a bull, and which rarely fattens.
It must not be supposed that cattle stations are kept in beef of the very
worst quality that can be selected from the herds, though it might be inferred
so by an inexperienced reader, from the foregoing. Butchers like the very
fattest cattle they can get, because they are more profitable; and because,
when they have to travel them long distances, even though they may fall
away in condition, they will yet get through their journey with less loss of
flesh, if taken carefully, than lean ones. On the other hand, there is mostly
a certain amount of loss and waste in a very fat beast, when killed for station
use. Very few men like fat meat, and a fat beast is more difficult to cure in
summer time than an ordinary one, that will yield just as good beef. So a
good stockman always “ spots” a few beasts in advance, on different parts
of the run ; and if he fails to find a particular one when he wants it, he is
pretty sure to drop across one of the others. There are many other qualities,
the possession of any one of which will eventually cause a beast to be con-
signed to the “ round swamp ” — i.e., beef-cask.
Killing and salting are amongst the most particular jobs performed on a


station during hot weather. Therefore, the same amount of judgment should
be exercised in the selection of the day, as in that of the beast ; for, should
the meat and the salting be all that could be desired, and the air surcharged
with electricity during and after the killing, the chances are very much
against the meat keeping. Under such conditions, a whole beast will at times
go bad, in spite of all the skill brought to bear in the endeavour to preserve
it.
After lunch, or dinner, as the mid-day meal is indiscriminately called in.
the bush, Frank again saddled up, and proceeded to the next station, seven
miles further, staying there for the night. It was called Mundango, and the
house was- situated on the north bank of the Kromby River. The site was
very high, and somewhat after the style of Wonga, but the prospect was more
circumscribed. Here, again, were two brothers the owners—James and John
Patterson, the first and oldest of whom was married. He was a man of
considerable nerve and coolness, as may be gathered from the following
anecdote, which is somewhat typical of the Scotch character. A favorite
black-boy, named Koolaman, who was a good horseman, one day took one
of the children on his horse before him, to give it a ride down the paddock.
The horse was not a very quiet one, and set to bucking. The mother saw it,
and screamed —“ Oh ! James ! the child will be killed ! ” The father looked
on coolly for a few moments, surveying the position, and reckoning up the
chances for and against the child’s life. That settled in his mind, he delivered
the following summing up —“ Na, I don’t think’t.” He was right; the child
was held tightly by the black-boy, who stuck to his horse with the monkey
power possessed by his people, till the brute left off bucking ; then delivered
the child to its terrified mother.
There was a tame emu at Mundango, which was a nuisance alike to its owners
and their friends, as pets always are. Its name was Salamanca. It terrified
young horses ; and even old stagers that were supposed to have sown, or
eaten, all their “ wild oats ” years before, became restive when the strange-
looking bird went near them, or trotted across their path in its uncertain
course. The bird was also afflicted with kleptomania ; it stole everything it
could reach, and that was a considerable height. Nothing seemed too hot,
or too heavy for its mischievous beak, which was as powerful as a blacksmith’s
vice. It was a droll-looking creature too, with its beautiful, large, fierce,
liquid eyes, overshadowed by a fringe of dark hairy feathers. “Young
ladies of the period” are, perhaps, not aware how much they resemble an emu
when they come out with the Grecian fringe and bend. The mischievous
bird was always on the look-out at meal times, and if anything eatable was
left unprotected on the kitchen table, or in the pantry by the back door of
the house, its long insinuating neck would be thrust in, and something would
surely disappear or be dragged off the table. The blacks’ camps were not
exempt from its visits ; indeed it was particularly fond of overhauling their
effects, and was an adept at turning out their dilly- bags, partly for amusement,
and to gratify its curiosity, and partly because it liked to eat their bits of
tobacco, old crusts, and bones. Whether these birds have any sense of taste
is doubtful, for they swallow anything, from a bit of tobacco to a rich plum
cake. Salamanca plagued the poor-blacks terribly; their rations were served
out every evening, and if they put them down thoughtlessly in their camps,
and left them for a short time, it would take hold of the handkerchief in
which they were tied, and scatter them about the ground ; then devour the
tea and sugar, and run off with the meat. Though it was a source of much
annoyance, and they sometimes lost a meal through its curiosity or rapacity,
yet they never ill-used it. Indeed it is very doubtful whether they did
not make a good thing out of its known bad habits; for certain it was, that
E


e^ W ! 1 i t i 1 f P to o? he s . tor ® with whining requests for “more flour and
bullock that fellow S nxanker been patter altogether.”
Rossdalo was twenty-five miles from Mundango, and was the very outside
or most northerly station on the coast, or east side of the Main Range. It
had been taken up by Mr. John Liddle, about two years before. There was
a large family of the Liddles, most of whom were grown up The main
portion all took.an active part in the station work, and the ladies in the
domestic. The third son, Robert, volunteered to accompany Frank in the
search for a run. He was a first-class bushman, the bump of “locality”
being strongly developed in his cranium. A view of any piece of new
country from an eminence, was quite sufficient to reveal to his quick eye, most- ;
cfr^tl,+ 01 + Ut3 -i an + d W n e r he hacl been onoe to a particular spot, he could return
straight to it at will, from any other point, however distant. Mountains ‘
creeks, or scrubs, intervening, would not put him out, for that which he could 3
not go through or over, he would make his way round; and however much he I
1 , b ® en furoTO out °,f his course, he would again head straight for the ■
AT 6 f.fuich he was bound, as true as the magnet to the Pole.
Mr. piddle kindly supplied Frank and his boy with fresh horses, that his
own might be fresher for their return journey to Maryborough. The three
tnen started due wesc, and made good progress ; camping the first night under
a high mountain range, which they intended to cross next morning, and ,
ascei-tam what sort of country there was on the other side, for Mr. Liddle’a
country extended as far as the foot of the range where they camped. Bv •
dint of hard climbing, they reached the top of the range next day at noon.;
avmg led their horses nearly all the way up. It was toilsome work in the
hot sun and, they were very glad to take a spell, and inhale the fresh sea- ■
breeze which now blew over the mountain top. The horses were streaming
down with salty perspiration, and panted from their recent exertions They
seemed as glad as their leaders to rest awhile. Their bridles were made fast-
table lamT" lr ° nS ’ and cro PP e d the long green grass that grew on the
Robert Liddle, being of a restless disposition, did not sit long, hut started V
olt on foot for a peak not far away, to get a better view of the surrounding ■
country. In less than half an hour his companions heard a coo-e-e, which
Tommy answered after the fashion of his country. The blacks do not coo-e-e: i
they utter a piercing but musical sound composed of four notes, blending :
one into the other in such a way, as to necessitate a great deal of practice on -!
the part of the white man to imitate successfully. It can be heard at a much 1
greater distance than the coo-e-e. Tommy’s call soon brought another coo-e-e '
trom Liddle, and the boy s trained ear quickly directed his eyes to the very I
summit of the peak, where Liddle was standing waving a handkerchief for \
them to go to him. They did so, first taking the precaution to hobble the f
horses, in case they should take it into their heads to move off, which, how-
gter, they did not seem inclined to do. None know better than bushmen, ,1
6ie value of the old maxim “Fast bind, fast find.” They who neglect its 3
frequently repent of their want of forethought. It is tribulation, 1
indeed, to be compelled to walk behind your horse on a hot day, for many :
mdes, while he evades every attempt to catch him, and all through some i
silly oversight, or over-confidence in your horse. You try to coax him with ;
°f nl ce grass ;he lets you come close to him ; you stretch out your
arm at full length ; his head and neck also stretched out at full length. He
at , tb ® gra ? s hoM out, and curls his upper lip in contempt. You
th ° r 6m ’ he , IS . *°° and away he goes at a canter—you
y escape a parting kick. You then change your tactics and pretend
you do not want to catch him, sauntering about as though only but for a walk


for pleasure, but keeping your eye-on him, and drawing nearer and nearer,
bit by bit, while he crops the grass. The sagacious animal knows all about
it, and keeps an eye on you, too. As soon as he shows symptoms of moving
off, you stand still,' with your hands behind you, endeavoring to look
as though you took a most affectionate interest in his feeding, and did not
wish him to leave off, but privately harboring feelings of Hatred, Malice
and Co., pretty extensively. The least of your good wishes for the animal’s
welfare is, that he may have a severe attack of the gripes. All your dissimu-
lation, and talent in horse-taming and charming, fail. It is always a relief to
the mind to know the worst, and you know how to bring about the climax.
Human endurance and patience, are limited, and at him you throw a very
big stick, or give him a vicious cut over the hind legs. That is the climax';
for he goes off like a shot, straight away for home, followed by mental resolves
to “ take it out of him ” when you catch him. You wish that “ the old screw
may put his foot on the rein, and break his ugly neck ; ” but he takes cafe
not to do that. At the same time you know that he is not an “ old screw”
at all, but a young horse, full of life, and perfectly sound ; that has carried
you over the roughest country for many a day, without even stumbling ; arid
you always prided yourself on the possession of so much symmetry, arid
refused £4O for him not long since. Why are people so inconsistent—naji,
untruthful—at such times !
Frank and Tommy were rather hot by the time they reached Liddle, who
was seated on a rock at the summit of the peak. He said nothing, blit
pointed to the eastward. Though many miles away, the blue ocean could
be distinctly seen, and its fresh pure breeze was stronger than where they
had left their horses. There was a magnificent expanse of view, but with the
exception of the bit of blue sea, all was sombre-'looking in the extreme ;
nothing but dark-green forest overspreading mountain, hill, and valley.
Through the latter could be distinctly traced the snake-like course of the large
creek by which the station buildings stood, the dense vine scrubs along its
banks being so much darker than the surrounding forest foliage.
Every feature of the country upon which they were looking, was well
known to Liddle, who pointed out the exact locality of the station, and some
other places of note. Tommy affirmed that he could see the smoke rising
from the station chimneys, which might have been true enough, but neither
of his companions saw it. They now turned their gaze inland. There, was
stretched out a grand panorama of the “Never Never” Country,, in which
Frank expected to make his first start in life, and ultimately his fortune;
and a fire of impatience possessed him to go forward and explore it. The
view to the westward was bounded by a heavy range, which extended north
and south as far as the eye could see, and rose tier upon tier to a great
height. The valley between it and the peak on which they stood, seemed a
deep, dark dell, with here and there patches of what the run-hunters took to
be large plains uncovered by forest.
The little party of explorers made their way down to their horses, which
had not moved far from where they were left, and mounting, they searched
for a leading spur down which they could proceed to the valley below. They
tried one which looked like what they wanted. It was very steep, and they
had to go slowly and cautiously, for there was a deep chasm on either side,
and in places there was not more than room for a single horseman. They
had gone about a mile, when Liddle pulled up and said, “ We are sold—this,
is a broken spur.” Just in front was a precipice, sheer down for two hundred
feet. Ages before, it had perhaps been a leading spur connecting the
mountain with the valley, and by some mighty disruption had been reduced
to its present abrupt form. From it, however, they saw the very thing they


were in search of—a long ridge with an easy gradient, which they at once-
rode back to, and by which they ultimately reached the valley below. -
Their next want was water, and as it proved to be a splendidly watered]
country, they were not long discovering what they were in search of. About j
two miles from the foot of the range was a beautiful lagoon, of a half-moon I
shape, and fully two miles in length. It was situated about two miles from;
a main creek, which appeared to run right through the valley. On the lagoon j
were all kinds of water-fowl ; and also the gigantic water-lily, or lotus,,:
whose enormous round green leaves, with brown leathery lining underneath, i
floated flat on the surface of the water, connected with its roots by stems!
some fathoms long. Its flowers, too, were very numerous, and were the size of
a pudding plate. These flowers are very beautiful, are of a violet colour, and!
impart to the glassy surface of the lagoons of which they form the margins,
the appearance of immense mirrors most tastefully decorated. Smaller kinds
of water-lilies grow amongst those mentioned, the prettiest of which are the
pink ones. The blacks use the root of the lotus for food. It is somewhat
like a waxy potato in substance, when baked, but is of a purplish colour, and
tastes earthy. Besides its beauty, and the game on its surface, the lagoon
contained an abundance of fish—trout, mullet, perch, cat-fish, turtle, eels, ;
and many other kinds, down to the pretty minnow.
Liddle remarked that there could be no better place, he believed, within
miles, on which to erect station buildings. There was a fine long sloping.
ridge, with good hard ground for sheep-folds and stock-yards ; and on the :
other side of the lagoon, was a fine piece of country, which could easily be ■
converted into a large paddock, by running a line of fence from each end of i
the lagoon to the creek. To crown all, there was an abundance of good
splitting timber—iron-bark and box on the ridges, and blue gum on the flats.
The prospect, too, was extensive and picturesque.
They decided that they would camp where they were, and next day resume
their exploration up the creek, or southward. The horses had already done
a very fair day’s work, and it would not be prudent to take too much out of
them at the outset, as they did not know how severely they might have to
tax their energies, ere they returned to Rossdale.
After dinner, they fished, and shot ducks in the lagoon. Tommy would
not go in for the ducks, not knowing ■ whether the traditional “ debble
debble ” was in it or not; besides, he had not forgotten the fright he had in
the creek when he dived so close to the dead black-fellow. ” All things con-
sidered, he thought it was “ baal budgeree water belonging to black-fellow,
but it might not hurt a white-fellow.” However, as the water was covered
for some distance with water-weeds, the “ white-fellows ” did not take the
hint, for they knew the danger of getting into the embrace of those long-
armed slimy weeds, which clung about the limbs, and prevented the stoutest
swimmer from regaining the bank when once entangled. There was one of
the party though, who has not yet been introduced, and who was not afraid of
being entangled. A good-natured* lively individual, always ready to do
anyone a good turn, and was as fond of a bit of sport as any child ; her name
was Lassie, and she was of that intelligent breed called Scotch Collie. She
was black and tan. She was mild and gentle with sheep, just nipping their
hind legs sufficiently to let them know that she would not be played with,
but never leaving mark or bruise. Very different was she with cattle ; a
refractory beast might break away from the mob, but when Lassie was there,
it did not go far ; she would go after it, and keep up such a running fire of
bites about its heels, that it would turn round and charge her. That was a
very bad move, and just what Lassie wished, for she would then pin it by the
lip till it bellowed and came to a standstill, trying to shake her off, hom, op


stamp on her. All to no purpose, the little fury would evade all such attempts
with the agility of a tiger-cat ; then the obstinate beast, tom and bleeding,
with its tongue out, would trot savagely into the mob again—very glad to
get back. Lassie could wdrk hard all day without flinching ;or play, or sleep,
if she had no work to do. In fact, she could adapt herself to any circum-
stances, with the utmost good nature, or ferocity, as the occasion might
require. At the lagoon, she combined usefulness with pleasure ; being very
fond of the water, she brought out the ducks as they were shot, and laid them
at the feet of Liddle, her master.
As far as they had explored along the lagoon, and indeed everywhere else
on their course since they crossed the range, they noticed numerous traces
of blacks, both recent and old, which clearly indicated that the country was a
favorite place of resort for the savages. When the blacks have a predilec-
tion for any particular locality, it often costs the usurpers a great deal of
trouble ; for they will return again and again, doing or attempting some fell
mischief, till they drive the whites away, or are themselves thoroughly well
dressed down with the rifle, and conquered. Frank was well aware of this,
but was not at all dismayed. He knew the risk and was quite willing to
brave it. He had chosen a bush life, and was just the man for it. A town
life he would not live. The counter or desk were too distasteful to him,
he would sooner become a subject of the King of the Cannibal Islands, than
remain at one or the other. His father intended him for a profession ; but
dying before Frank was old enough to go to the University, and not leaving
his widow sufficiently well off to carry out his intentions, the matter feu
through. If he did not take up this fine country, some one else would—then
why should he not secure the first chance of making his fortune out of it 1
The evidences above alluded to, of the country being a constant home of
the blacks, consisted in the great number of trees that had been barked, and a
consequent number of camps that had been formed at different periods ; the
large quantities of mussel and snail shells, kangaroo and emu bones, and
debris of their food generally.
While shooting at the extreme upper end of the lagoon, Frank suddenly
came upon several comparatively new gunyahs in the long grass, close to
a considerable patch of scrub, which extended, as was afterwards found, to the
creek. The gunyahs were about a dozen in number, and pitched, as usual,
with a due regard to commanding a view of every point of the compass,
so that one ox the other of the watchful occupants would be sure to see any
hostile party approaching. Their camps are invariably pitched on that prin-
ciple ; each gunyah having but one entrance, it is built so as to command a dif-
ferent aspect to its neighbours. They neverdepartfromthatprinciple, but carry
it out even when they become half civilised, and pitch their camps on stations
where they know they have absolutely nothing to fear. Their mode of build-
ing their gunyahs is this :—They cut five or six forked sticks about six feet
long, point them at one end and drive them two or three inches into the
ground, the forked ends all slanting together. This forms a conical frame-
work, against and round which sheets of bark are placed on end ; a space
being left uncovered for a doorway, which is never filled up, except during
heavy rains or cold weather. They are very warm, cozy habitations, but there
is only room for the occupants to sit on the ground, or lie curled up. That is
the general shape and size, but some are more pretentious, being eight or nine
feet long, by five or six wide ; but such grand edifices are only erected by men
with large families.
Frank saw that the gunyahs had been tenanted not long since, and examined
their interior. In one or two only were some things stowed away in ditty- bags
of no great value even to the owners. Tommy was brought to the


fci^drtTf 7 l Y a COO - e - e / r0I « He turned the articles over, and
cks ’ glV ! n ?, lt as h l s °P lm °n that the owners had been gone
three days, and were probably not far off. Nothing was removed and some
td Wn Ef F* Sf of oouLe,know S
had been left by white people by the tracks, and would perceive that they
had come with no hostile intentions. f y
They kept a watch that night. Tommy was allowed to sleep, because black-
ceTaintefeuLlr.H'n “ t 0 keep * aithful at night almost
to risk a nio-kf n+fn V s ? a P ie y did not think it prudent
r Unprepare *‘ The 7 P ut out their fire after tea, as a further
asXe 0V 1 6 7 T d * urprl ?°- Here a S ain > Lassie was invaluable,
, '! watch-dog by night or day. Nothing transpired to cause
was made to m e^T lng mght ’ and t ? t an early hour in the morning, a start
ramble +b pl u PP er portlon of the valley. During that day’s
crS ’in that®™ 81 f recro . saed the mai n creek several times. Like all
i '+e ii, 1 ?!* B '* pa , rt of tPe Wol 'ld, it contained long water-holes, or lagoons
ith shMlow water, or altogether dry crossing-places between them.
Xe r.Sw 113 '* Piams—sitirti n g the creek, that were many feet above
dotCrt^mt ter i eVe - 1 ’ ° n whioh still retained old flood marks high
t™ A . r k , ’ Sh °7 m n g iba* tbcrc must have been seas of water miles in ex-
wnt i f spectacle ! That just depends on circumstances. The man
Sand T a s P eotat °r from a safe height, would probably think it very
grand. But let that man have two or three thousand sheep and their shen-
herds just within his sight, at the same time beyond his power to assist : the
ridte Xe I LX aU , rOUnd ’ a “ d drivin g th em higher and higher up the
W tIJ, n P ourln S down in sheets, and no hope of any cessation/ At
f y ff/ 611 , t 0 th ® top > and while they crowd densely together, the
Stream 68 The® f°° med °“ cle are s \ e P* off in scores, and dowii the swirl-
t a iJin f h6ep f® all g°ne ; the ridge is quite covered ; the shep-
-uncomSwe he if 68 ’- f n m Wlence ’ lf they are a ble to descend from their
morX f rXh bl P erches . ln three days they are lucky-and it may be as many
more ere they can regain the shelter of a hut, and the comfort of dry clothes.
With mutton, tea and damper ! Would it be a grand spectacle then 1
rWnLflfr’ w IK !’ thf i 3 " C f dike matters > both possible and probable, were
mvff d f y Frank and Liddic, but were not considered to be fatal to the
abundatrnl f,/ r ° m fl Tk ®, flata ™*re splendidly grassed, and there was an
abundance of magnificent ridgy country antiguous to them ; so by judiciously
S be g obvi 6 ated^ -stations, and with good management, all serious casualties
;, AB . tkey Proceeded, the country rose and became more ridgy. On a ridge
about ten miles from the lagoon Tommy pointed to a high stage. On nearing
it, it proved to be a platform, raised about seven feet from the ground on four
poles. It was composed of some crossed sticks overlaid with sheets of bark.
On the top lay the corpse of an old black-fellow. It was quite naked,'and every
feature was perfect-the long white beard and short curly hair still retaining
fheir piaces, m m life. The limbs were straight, and the hands crossed over
the stomach.. The body was untouched by hawk or crow, and even the voracious
iguana had respected the dead in this instance. The fierce heat of the sun,
and the dry state of the atmosphere, had perfectly dried the corpse, which was
as hard and apparently as well preserved, as a ham. Though considerably
over middle height, and of large frame, it was very light; and when Liddle
attempted to lift one leg, the whole body rose with it like a carved image, the
back of the head only resting on the stage. Liddle was aware of this strange cus-
tom, mthedisposal of their dead amongst the blacks in that part of the coun-
try. When the relatives of the dead found that the body had been exposed


long enough, they usually took it down, dismembered it, and distributed the ,
parts amongst them, which they tied up in strips of old shirts and bark, pushing
the saered parcels into hollow trees.
Many of the customs of the aborigines are very curious, superstition lying at
the root of most of them. When one is ill, another, who has the reputation
for being skilled in the healing art, will undertake to do what he can to pure
Mm. He examines the patient, and gives it as his opinion that the devil or
some enemy has bewitched him. Accordingly, about dark, he will commence
active operations. We will say the complaint affects the liver—the doctor
then proceeds to suck the part with the vigour of a steam-pump, occasionally
uttering short grunts, or ejaculations, which, to the ears of the by-standers,
conveys a feeling of awe, and throw around the operator the charming cloak
of a certain amount of professional prestige. At length, he will produce a
piece of glass bottle, averring that it came out of the patient si side. -Presently,
he will exhibit a good-sized stone, and so on, till he thinks he has gulled Ms
• companions and patient sufficiently, when he will to
bo better. Of course, the glass and stones are secreted about him previous to
~ » leg. «e 1.1, relieved .he JP-*-' j*
patient sit on the ground. A piece of string about a yard long is tied to the
affected limb ; the doctor puts a bowl of water m Ms lap, takes the string m
both hands, and draws it through his teeth, at each draw dipping the strmg
into the water. The constant friction on the gums of the operator causes them ,
to bleed freely, and the blood which is spit out is said to come from the patient
in some mysterious way. This is kept up for an hour sometimes. In either
case described, the operation seldom fails to have some slight good effect, so
strong is the superstitious faith of the patients. If their pains are n<d ; rcbevod
their minds are sure to be—a result that eminent physicians sometimes fail to
br ßlacks° U are very fond of keeping relics of their dead. S*®-
finger-nails, and the skin to which they are attached, from the back of the
fingers. They then wind the skin round the nails, and wrap the precious rehcs
in numerous pieces of dirty rag. Finger, toe, and other small bones are
treated in the same manner. These small parcels are very P rec “ u^ e ™ t^ .
sight—the most sacred of their possessions ; and are kept m J^ e
their dillies , with their tobacco and pipes, old shirts, scrajs
Supernatural powers are attributed to these sacred relics. If there w an alarm
in the camp at night, occasioned by some mysterious noise, an old gin. more
plucky than the rert/and who pins her faith to the bone, or finger-nail,
■draw the treasure from the ditty, stick it on the point of a spear, and .walk
away into the darkness with it stretched out before her asking it questions as
she goes. She will shortly return, and solemnly aver that it toM her that
Hie sound proceeded from some enemies who are going to attack them , or
that it was a “ devil devil.” The announcement causing fresh consternation
all through the camp, the men all standing to arms for the remainder of t e
the dead as they found it, they proceeded up the vaHey,
ally camped for the night on a creek not far from a high range. It was there
Frink marked his first tree, from which he would start next w “
measure off as much of the country as he would require. The way runs are
measured, is to start from a given point, and determine the, numberof mffes
-travelled over in any one direction, by the estimated speed
Indeed, the Commissioners themselves used to adopt that plan—rough though
it was-when measuring boundaries, and even when seb
early in the afternoon, and Frank and Liddle being fond of exploring, y


started on foot up a steep gully, turning over stones and logs, and bits of old
bark, to see what was underneath in theway of shells, reptiles, and insects. In
this pursuit they were beguiled much further from their camp than they intended,
and found themselves at last on pretty elevated ground. In that semi-tropical
land, everything teemed with life—the air, the water, and the earth. On the
trees were curious insects, that popped in and out of the crevices of the bark ;
some ran sideways, some backwards. There were spiders of every conceivable
shape, colour, and size. Some were covered with conical projections, hard
and horny. Others were three-cornered, square, or diamond-shaped, studded,
over with brilliant colours like jewels. Many of these were very large, and
made gigantic webs, stretching from one tree to another like nets. In texture
they resembled strong yellow silk, and were as sticky as honey. The resistance
of these webs could be sensibly felt by the horseman who unwittingly rode into
them ; and, from their gummy nature, were extremely hard to remove from
one’s clothes, face, and hands. There were streams of ants, of all sorts, sizes,
and colours, from the little slow-crawling brown one, to the hopping “soldier.”'
Bed, green, white, black, brown, purple, and orange. They pervaded every
place—under ground, above ground, on the trees, and in the air. There were 1
butterflies and beetles of gorgeous colours, and of great size. The birds chat-
tered and sang without ceasing. There was the kingly eagle-hawk, and a
multitude of the feathered tribe down to the tiny tomtit, with brilliant red
breast, and little black saddle. Then there were snakes, and their non-vene-
mous brothers—the lizards.
The two explorers at length reached the head of the gully, and sat down to l
rest. As soon as they had done so, they became aware of a confused sound
that seemed to come from beneath their feet. Frank got up to try and find
out the cause of it, and presently discovered at the back of a large rock, a hole
into which he could walk upright. He called his companion, and showed it
to him. They both agreed that it looked like the entrance to a cave ; but as
it was pitch dark at a distance of a few feet in, they determined to make a
torch of some bits of iron-bark, and see what it was. They did so, and found,
to their astonishment, an enormous cave, which increased in height as they
advanced, till it must have been twenty feet from floor to roof. There was a.
deafening noise, as of ten millions of parrots and cockatoos all screeching at
once, and a most pungent effluvia assailed their nostrils. Not knowing what
the noise proceeded from, they went cautiously forward. About sixty yards
from the entrance, the roof began to lower, and they came to three arches in
the solid rock. Entering one of them, they found themselves in an enormous
subterranean passage, more spacious than the first. As soon as they entered,
the noise was found to proceed from innumerable flying foxes ; and they
flapped their great fleshy wings as they clutched the rocky roof of the cave*
or were jostled off by their fellows. The torch caused great commotion amongst
them, and they loosened their hold of the rocks above in millions, and floated
and flapped about their disturbers’ heads in such numbers, as to render it im-
possible for them to pursue their way any further into the enormous chamber.
As they unwillingly retreated, they noticed what they had not before been
conscious of—the floor was covered with the dried bones of these strange
animals, which crunched under their feet like pipe-stems. Frank stopped
for a few moments, and scraped the dried bone pavement to a depth of two
feet, but did not find the rooky bottom of the cave. This, then, must have
been the abode of these creatures, by day, for ages. They left the densely
crowded chamber, and turned into the next. It was very similar in size and
shape, but the walls were not smooth, being composed of great columns of rock:
fully fifty feet high, supporting a roof which seemed to be made of gigantic
flagstones. The floor was composed of large waterworn boulders, difficult to


get over. They scrambled on for some considerable distance, till they reached-
what seemed to be the end of the cave. From the time they entered this
chamber, a dull, indistinct, rumbling sound was heard, resembling that of a ■
cataract. As they approached the end, the sound became louder. Though.
it was laborious work clambering over the boulders, they persevered in their -
search for the cause of the sound. It could not come from the foxes’ chamber,
for their sound could not be heard where the discoverers were. On the right-■
of where they stood, Liddle noticed afaint ray of light, Shining through a small
circular opening in the wall. They thought it must be an opening into the
forest. Liddle was the first to creep through the hole ; Frank, who was close
behind him, heard his shout of astonishment, and followed him as quickly as
possible. He, too, could not repress a cry of wonder. They were in an enor-
mous chamber of fully two hundred feet high, of the same formation as the -
last, but here and there were columns of bright white and red quartz, the roof’
•being studded with great blocks of the same. There was a sort of hazy twilight;
the source from whence it came they had not yet discovered. The whole scene
was like a dream. Hardly beautiful, but grand and solemn in the extreme,
and it struck the beholders with awe. In this chamber they could not hear
themselves speak. For at least two hundred yards to the left of where they
stood, and in a line parallel to the chamber they had just left, a great body of
water flowed down its steep bed, composed of immense jagged rocks, and
great boulders, almost the full width between the walls. They stood and gazed
in silent wonder. There came the water, thundering down its bed like a sea ;
but where it came from, or where it went to, who could tell 2 It disappeared,
down a perpendicular well, on the edge of which tjhey stood. It fell with a
mighty roar, and with a sullen force, evidently into deep waters below.
The two companions turned about, and observing a narrow ledge of rocks
to the right, in continuation of that on which they stood, they went along:
it till it took a sudden turn, when they saw the aperture through which the
light came. It was very small, but they hoped to be able to leave the chamber
by it, for the ledge apparently led direct to it. The little light it afforded was .
scarcely sufficient to enable them to determine with certainty whether they
Could do so or not, the ledge being very steep and narrow. They
the ascent, and found the path both narrow and slippery ; so much so in.
places, as scarcely to afford them foot-hold, and extreme caution had to be
exercised, more particularly as they were encumbered with their rifles and.
pistols. The roar of the mighty cataract drowned all human sounds, so that
they were unable to converse, but communicated with one another by making
signs. When they had reached within fifty yards of the hole through which
the light came, the ascent became easier, and the path somewhat wider. . At
this spot they found an opening in the perpendicular side wall of the gallery.
It was a large chamber, but the rocky roof dipped slantwise till it reached ;
the floor at the far side. They could not see the whole of it, as their torch -
was getting low, and they did not wish to make it burn too brightly, for fear
of its becoming exhausted before they were out; for, if they had to retrace
their steps, the journey, which was hazardous enough with the little light the
torch gave, would be infinitely more so without it.
By the faint light they had, they saw that the floor of the cave was strewn.,
with bones of different kinds of animals. Some were colossal bones —leg, rib,
skull, and vertebral. Some there were of enormous birds ; and, strange to
say, also of fish. The latter were of shapes entirely new to the two friends.,
There were other remains there that caused them some surprise—they - were-
bones and skulls of. aborigines. It was indeed a charnel-house ! All the
human, and many of the other bones were broken, as though by some mighty"
jaws. To say that the two explorers felt no alarm would not be quite correct


nevertheless they went on a few yards further. Frank, who led the way, fell
over, a dark object, and on examining it by the light of the torch, which Liddle
carried and caused to flare up for a moment, to their horror, they saw that it
was the mangled corpse of a young gin ! It was still fresh, and the breast-bone
was crushed in, bearing marks at regular intervals, as of the teeth ot an im-
mense alligator. They exchanged glances in mute horror and surprise, there
was no time for more. A fearful roar pealed through the cavern, unlike and
louder than anything they had ever heard before. It made the cave tr e m| Ae,
, and for a time overcame even the thunder of the cataract below. By the
increased light of the torch, they saw the open jaws of a mammoth object
within twenty yards of them. They turned and ran for the mouth of the den.
Just as they reached the path outside, the fearful thing was close upon them,
with jaws still open. In its mouth was a mass of dark-looking flesh and bone
in a half-masticated state. The two friends turned simultaneously and hred
their rifles at thehead of the beast, orreptile, or whatever it was, and then ran up
the p&th, expecting to meet the fate of the poor young gin. Frank, who was
behind, turned his head, and observed that the monster had gone down
the path. Putting forward his rifle, he touched his companion on the shoul-
der with the muzzle. Liddle made a tremendous spring, and faced about,
thinking that it was a tooth or claw of the monster fastening in his shoulder ;
at the same time he drew his revolver, with the determination to sell nis me
dearly. In spite of his recent feam, Frank could not repress a smile at the
-expression of mingled fear and determination depicted on Liddle s counten-
ance. The mind of the latter, however, was soon relieved when he saw the
creature rushing down the path directly away from them. Lassie stood a tew
yards in their rear, in an attitude of defiance, with bristles and tail erect.
The great thing seemed to glide down the dangerous path with the greatest
ease and rapidity, till it reached a part of the ledge immediately over the dark
well, where the waters of the cataract disappeared, which was fully seventy feet
below ; but how far it was from the vanishing point of the waters, to where
they fell into the sullen pool beneath, in the deep blackness, they could not
■ conjecture. The frightful creature lifted its head, opened its jaws, and from
them pealed again the terrible thunder which silenced all else. ihe amphib-
ian then trembled from head to tail; the latter curled till it reached the crea-
ture’s back in a compact coil, vibrating as it did so. It reared on its hind-legs,
and beat its sides with its fore-paws; then, suddenly uncoiling its tail with terri-
fic force against the rock behind it, it shot head first into the seething waters of the
black abyss, and disappeared. The noise of thewaters resumed its sway, and
the two friends made the best of their way up to the opening, through which
they thankfully emerged into the light of the now waning day. I hey did not
stay there long, but went back to their camp, the cold perspiration stiU
bedewing their brows. Frank said, “ That was a narrow escape, Liddle. 1
never expected to see this camp again, and I don t think you did either.
“ No. By Jove,- Frank ! When you touched my shoulder with your rifle,
I thought it was all up with me, and that the great brute was upon me ! bu "
I meant to have a parting crack at him all the same, though I must confess 1
never was so frightened in all my life. I know it was not an alligator, n
crocodile, for I have seen both. Besides it was too big for either. It must
have been sixty feet long at least.”
“ Did you notice the big scales, like the plates of a tortoise shell, all over
head and shoulders ? ” said Frank. “ All the rest of the body, down to the
hind legs, was covered with long black hair like a seal ; so were the lips. Itie
tail was scaly like the head.”
“I can’t say that I noticed so much of the beast as you seem to have done.


I know it was precious long and fat, and had awful teeth. Where could it
& to™ a 1 creature It Us, but believe it to he
an ichthyosaurus, which is now classed amongst the extinct
“ Well, I hope that may be classed as an extinct anniiahatall events a
T“Let us ask Tommy if he has ever heard of it, or of the caves.
S' then Tommy c^“iip y from the cree k. He had been washing his slurb
years ago, when the old man who told ta ™ *dd *t large party
of his tribe were camped in some high ranges, ]«» thair
were said to exish-and which must have been in convivial
camp, according to the direction he pomted m. The* had “firiM hone“
time of it for a few days proviousy T j ie bears fruit every
■outside, and is composed of nuts closely packed toget fl i s no t
them, and they look like a waxy potato in substance, iheir navour
talieAy « .om«tt.ng ft. aba.™. rf »«, btak.' te.ta or
ArK” Siu s- ; , ra< “
1 w "iCtW. are la?, ft h*,. £^"ftS-S
s.” Sola B«id, r SS
half a mile of the place without ; a company o jS°Wier s nyb _k Bha u
Talk of the blacks’ superstitions about I d ® j,l ’that there was a ‘devil
never laugh at them again ; and if one o e . There is one thing that
■devil ’ in a waterhole I’m blest if I would go into calr J rom .


kt7into o tte b St ClO T d S unnt r roach ' kee P «P till
2d knock them totntt he bllcks geUonfaticte
Sdarkies '7°^' 'l
» jsmSS® “
Smnge!t y ptrt th of it™® dlreotion ’ and Inever going baTthat ilthe
and twenty at one ,hnt S T % see thcm kill them > and have shot eighteen
do not know wCtho. year tk f y dro PP cd dead all over the bush. I
! whether there was an epidemic amongst them, or whether it waa
great feeder’^° rging S ° me food tllat was not good for them, for they are
in w! U m ," s * cauti .°n Jour shepherds not to feed their sheep
flock of sheen and n 'li, U '’“‘'I 31 ," tde run of them with that monster. A
P shepherd, would only make one good meal for him.”


CHAPTER VII.
• After a night’s sleep, sadly disturbed by nightmares of horrid monsters, in
•which the two friends were constantly on the eve of being “ chawed up, and
were sometimes actually swallowed whole, they got up their horses, and very
filadlv turned their backs on the camp. They struck away eastward. About
half an hour after they started, they came upon five blacks armed to the teeth.
The fellows were apparently in a very excited state, and no doubt, from that
cause, did not notice their close proximity to the travellers, till it was too late
for flight to be of any avail, but they all took to different trees for safety.
Tommy was told to try and induce them to come out and have a woolla— or
talk as no harm was intended. The boy was not at first successful, but per-
severed. The blacks of that part, and Tommy, did not speak exactly the same
language, but he at last made them understand, partly by signs, that his party
had no hostile intentions. This relieved their apprehensions sufficiently, to
allow of their coming somewhat timidly from their cover behind the trees.
When first seen, they were jabbering away at a great rate, pointing to the
ground, and then towards the mountain in the direction of the caves, and.ges-
tiqulating most energetically. An old man of their party was evidently op-
nosed to their wishes. Tommy recognised in him, the old man who had told
him the story of the caves and the monster. The boy interrogated him, and
gathered that a young black from a distant tribe had stolen a gin from their
camp at Rossdale—a granddaughter of the old man’s—and that they were m
pursuit, and had, so far, tracked them successfully. As the tracks ran m the
direction of the caves, a locality of which the old man had a great horror, he
said he would go no nearer ; but the young men, whose discretion and cre-
dulity were at a rather low ebb, consequent on their thirst for vengeance on
the stealer of their female relative, wanted to push on at all risks. This ardour
arose from not altogether disinterested motives on the part of more .than one
of the younger savages, who themselves had a sneaking regard for the girl,
and had long cherished hopes of one day becoming the pursued, instead of
pursuers, on her account. How circumstances alter cases ! Either of those
voung fellows would have considered himself perfectly justified in abducting
the young lady ; and would, if successful, have sung extempore words in his
own praise, to a most brilliant corrohhoree tune. But this enterprising spark,
who had come such a distance through hostile tribes, and had plucked the
much-coveted fruit so bravely, and as may be said, before their very eyes, was
a villain of the deepest dye. He should, if caught, not be killed outright. No,
indeed ! That would not be revenge—nothing worthy of the name even, ile
should be hacked with tomahawks and knives ; hammered with nutta nullas;
and prodded with spear-points—but not in vital places. Then, they would
tie him hand and foot, and throw him on to a red ant s nest .
Tommy explained what the two white-men had seen at the caves the evening
before They looked at one another in blank astonishment. Then, throwing
down their spears, they all at once began hammering their heads with nuUa
nullas in a most merciless manner, yelling all the while lustdy. drop
ping the waddies, they ran—ram-like—with heads down till
alnwst smashing their skulls in with the concussion. This part of
ance ended, thiy all sat down, and with their heads jammed between their


knees, and hands clasped over the back of their necks, they moaned most
dolefully, calling upon their mothers. This was their way of showing their
grief. Suddenly they all jumped up, picked up their spears with their toes,,
and resumed their travel homeward —quite composedly, and without taking-
the least notice of the explorers. Strange, incomprehensible people !
“ That, then,” said Liddle, “ was, no doubt, the remains of the happy
couple that we saw in the cave! The flesh the monster had in his mouth when
we saw it, was the body of the love-stricken black-fellow ; and the corpse
you stumbled over -was that of the old man’s granddaughter. I suppose the
young fellow had never heard the tradition about the caves, or he would
not have taken his bride home by that route.”
Frank and his companions kept on their course eastward, and marked a tree
just under the range they had crossed two days previously. The line they
had run from their last camp to it, formed the southern boundary of the new
run. From there they struck northward, keeping near the foot of the range.
On their way, they passed through some beautiful country, and several plots
of fine timber suitable for splitting, such as iron-bark, stringy-bark, blue gum
and box. Numerous creeks were crossed, showing that the country was well
watered even up to the range, which, in itself, was a circumstance of consider-
able value in a climate like that. In due time, they crossed their tracks at the
foot of the spur by which they had entered the valley in the first place. The
horses knew the spot instantly, and turned their heads homewards, but were
much disappointed at not being allowed to continue in that direction. Lassie,
too, ran a few yards along the track, frisking about and barking with delight
at the prospect of getting back to her puppies ; but when she saw that her
master had no intention of going home just then, she sat down for a moment
with her tongue out, looking just a little bit disappointed. A whistle from
her master brought her nimbly and contentedly to his horse’s heels again. She
was never out of humour long. Lassie was a very clever dog in many ways.
One of her accomplishments was, that Liddle could leave anything in her
charge, and she would keep guard most faithfully, never relinquishing her
post till relieved by him. He would show her a pair of hobbles, a saddle-cloth,
or even his dinner wrapped up in a piece of paper or a handkerchief, and then
leave it. When he had gone a considerable distance away, he would say,
“ Fetch it, Lassie then she would start off, and lose no time in bringing it
to him. He had tested her memory and intelligence in many ways, and both
developed in a wonderful degree in the course of his training. She would go
miles back for anything she was sent to fetch. She was invaluable at lambing
time, gathering the scattered ewes and lambs ; finding lost lambs, and bringing
them home to the yard, as carefully and kindly as the best shepherd. But
Lassie had one very naughty habit, that used to fill her master with alarm,
and of which, with all her teachableness in other respects, he could not break
her. She would attack and kill snakes, and as snakes were very numerous,
die had many chances against her life, for it could not be expected that she
would always come off victorious. That was the only' cat-like quality she
possessed ; in all else her nature was the very antithesis of pussy’s. Yet she
was very fond of the cats at Rossdale,. as they were of her ; it was a very usual
thing for Lassie and the cats, and her two pretty pups, to be seen playing and
sleeping together.
About a mile past the spot above mentioned, ran a reedy creek, into which
Lassie was going to have a swim, for it was a very hot day. As she was pushing
her way through the long green reeds, her progress was suddenly stopped by
a large brown snake, one of the most deadly of Australian snakes. When she
attacked a snake she never made a fuss about it, as so many dogs do, but
watched her opportunity, and nipped the reptile behind, and a little below


the head. The battle-field on this occasion, was all in favour of the snake,
for the reeds were strong, and there was no track through them more than
that which she had herself made ; the place was swampy , too. Liddle tned
to coax her away, for he did not like to use harshness, fearing that, by dis-
tocting her attention too much the snake would gam a further advantage
There'she stood, in an attitude of defiance ; her bristles all erect ; her
white teeth lust parted, and the lips drawn from them. She was the very/
personification of undying hate, and unyielding determination The metamor-
nhosis was complete ; and to appearance, there was nothing left ot the atteo
tionate creature Vat she was. The snake stood erect, and had made several,
lightning darts at her, but missed its mark only through her wonderful agility.
Now is her time, and she makes her attack ; but some reeds not quite beaten
to the mud, were between her and the reptile, and she stumbled slig t y*
causingTer to nip her enemy a little too low. It fastened its deadly angs in
the inner corner of her eye, and held on, at the same time winding its g
tail and body round and round her neck, embracing in its folds one of the
poor little dog’s legs. She would not let go, but groundaway with her sharp,
little teeth, till the reptile was completely severed. The fangs still maintained,
their hold, and the muscular folds contracted more and more, till her tongue
and eves protruded. Liddle jumped of Ins horse, as soon as he saw the battle
going agamst his favorite ; but the mischief was done before. liei could reach
her and he was only in time to prevent her being strangled by the powerful
encircling folds, by unwinding them as quickly as possible. He threw the
bleeding g and still writhing thing into the creek, and proceeded to remove the
head from her eye with a stick. The fangs were deeply embedded m the dogs,
eve and long after the jaws were forced to relax, they gnashed with impotent
ra|e, though the remnant of the deadly reptile was powerless to move away
Liddle carried his dog out of the reeds, and under the shade of a tree, for
she was beginning to feel the effects of the terrible poison, and was passive in
his hands g With his knife he opened a vein close to where the fangs : had
pierced. Nothing but a few drops of black blood oozed from it. He dashed
water over the prostrate pet, but all his efforts to save her were futile, andjie
soon saw that it was so. He was much grieved, for she had
companion for a good while, and there was a great airiount of sympathy be
tween them, as there always is between a kind master and such a
animal. He sat down on the grass, and placing the dog s head on his knees,
said r SS 1 1 i^ y Lassie woman . We have been together a good deal, and have
alwavs been good friends. Have’nt we 1” ~
She turned her eyes softly up at him, whined, and wagged her tad, as
though she knew what he said. A spasm came on, and her eyes became blood-
shot. When the fit passed off, he said— . . , T ■ , T \„ fl
“ Dear little Lassie. You will never see your puppies again ! I wish 1 had
left you at home. I never knew how much I liked you till now. Your pup
will have hard work to grow up as good as you. Poor Lass .
At the mention of her pups she turned her now dimmed eyes up todue faoe*
nut her paw into his hand and endeavoured to lick it; but the tongue was
dark, blotched, and swelled, and refused to fulfil the affectionatyntention
' “ Give her some more water, Frank, her tongue is parched. My poor little
d °lhe turned her face and fast glazing eyes up to his, uttered a Jg
groan ; then another spasm shook her frame, and all hergreatmtcdligencea
love ceased for ever ! Liddle still retained the once active
back against the tree ; covered his eyes with his other hand, and fairly gave


way. Frank had great difficulty in restraining his feelings ; and the blaok-boy
gave vent to a native wail, full of expressions of kindness for the dog, and sym-
pathy for his master.
“Aree-a-raam ! — aree-a-raam ! no-no halongore, barlome ! Aree-a-raam !
Mitter Liddle, wa indo doongeem. Abong-go ! Along / Atu doongeern! ”
Aree-a-rgam is an expression of the deepest sympathy. Along, is “mother.”
However old a black may be he always invokes his mother when in distress.
The interpretation of Tommy’s speech would read somewhat as follows :—“ I
'sympathise very deeply with you because your good dog is dead. Don’t cry,
Mr. Liddle. Mother ! mother ! I cry too ! ” And he suited the action to
the speech.
Do not laugh; reader. Indeed, if you have ever lost a favorite dog under
similar circumstances, you surely will not. The tears that flowed, and the
heartfelt sorrow of the party did them no dishonour. The loss of the beauti-
ful, faithful Scotch Collie was a real blow to Liddle '■ and he knew how sorry
all at home would be to hear of it. Lassie worked herself into everyone’s
good graces wherever she went. She was an honest, straightforward dog,
and never committed a mean action. She never grovelled or fawned to any-
one. Her character was plainly written on her face, and all trusted and took
"to her at sight. She quite understood Liddle’s allusion to her pups. He
often used to amuse himself and his friends, by sending her first for one- and .
then for the other, telling her the name of the one he wanted, which would
be brought without any mistake, any number of times. But all poor little
Lassie’s accomplishments could not be enumerated.
The ground was hard, and there being no implement at hand with which
to dig the hole to put Lassie in, except the tomahawk, Liddle bestirred
himself, and wrapped his faithful dog’s remains up in a quantity of tea-tree
bark, placing it on the branch of a tree, after the fashion of the blacks. The
party then moved on their course northward. The country opened out into
magnificent rolling ridges, and large flats almost deserving the name of plains.
Tommy pulled up short at a large gum tree, whose gaunt limbs extended in
all directions. Deep into its trunk had been cut, years before, two letters—
“ L. L.”
“ Why,” said Liddle, “that may have been a camping-place of Leiohardt’s !
Yet, I don’t know what could have brought him so far north as this. The
' marks have evidently been in the tree for years.”
Tommy asked whose brand it was. Liddle explained what he thought,
and the boy moved round the tree examining it as he went. He presently
exclaimed—
“ Here ’nother brand. What name ?”
“ Why,” said Frank, “ that is an arrow pointing downwards ; what is the
meaning of that ? ”
“ It probably means that there is something buried, and if it is any record
•of Leichardt, or of any other unfortunate explorer, we shall be lucky indeed
to unearth it-—so here goes, if I spoil the tomahawk over it. ”
He worked away, first cutting the grass up, and then digging the earth.
It was slow work, but hard as the ground was, he persevered, and at the
end of half an hour he had only got down about eighteen inches. At that
distance the tomahawk was considerably dulled by striking against a hard '
stone.
“ That’s good !” said Liddle. “ I’ll warrant there is something under
that.”
He cut away round the stone, scooping the dirt out of the hole with his
Lands. His brow bore unmistakable testimony to his labor and excitement.
He felt that he was on the eve of an important discovery. He worked the


dirt from one side of the stone sufficiently to enable him to get his'fingers
round to the under side ; then exerting his strength the stone rose from
its bed. The black-boy and Frank each suddenly caught Liddle by the arms,.
and literally threw him several yards away. He was a very good-natured
fellow, but was inclined to take their rough usage in anything but good part,
when Frank said —
“ That was a narrow escape for you, old fellow ! There is a large death
adder in the hole under that stone ! ”
Liddle became at once more reasonable, and asked if they saw anything
else in the hole. His anxious looks betraying his inward craving for the
reply.
“ I don’t know what Tommy saw ; but the reptile and your danger were
all I saw just then. We will soon see.”
The stone was again raised, but with sticks this time ; and Tommy, who
held a stick ready for the purpose, accomplished the deadly viper’s end at
a single blow. In the hole beside it, was a tin canister about the size of a
small coffee-tin. It was in a very rust-eaten condition. Liddle took it up
eagerly, and while endeavouring to knock off the lid with thet omahawk, the
decayed tin collapsed and fell piece-meal to the ground, leaving a roll of
papers in his hand. They were so stained with rust and wet, and so perished,
that pieces broke off the roll as he endeavoured to open it. In fact, it was all
massed together, or nearly so, and quite rotten. In the centre of the roll
was something hard and round, and a little shaking dislodged it. It was a.
pencil-case, but of what metal could not at first be seen, for it was black from
its long sepulture. With a little gentle scraping, it was found to be gold,
and in the end was set a fine bloodstone, engraved with the initials “ J. F. S.”
A further investigation and shaking dislodged a massive gold ring, set with a
beautiful carbuncle, also engraved with the same initials. The outside of the
manuscript—for such it had evidently been—peeled off and broke to pieces,
and on the last page only were faint traces of written characters. Nothing
much could be made out of them, but the few words, or portions of words
that still remained, left much for conjecture, and that of the saddest descrip-
tion. The little that could be deciphered ran as follows :
“ 21st. —se toda— .... —ead. . . —ruel —cks . . . Jamgs
. . . —lied —ful pai— longer . .
ring .... —ear . —ther . .
ble — —er.
J. F. S—j—
“l would give something to be able to make out what the poor fellow
meant, Frank ; but I think he was dying, or very ill—speared, I fancy. It
looks like a last entry in a diary. It was the 21st of some month. He was
‘Worse to-day.’ Then ‘ —ead,’ I can’t make that out—is it ‘head’ or
‘ dead ’do you think 2 It may have been a wound in the head ; or that he
or some one else would soon be dead. The next means ‘ cruel blacks,’ I’m
certain. Then comes ‘ James,’ and ‘ —lied ’at the end of the line. I expect
James somebody was killed. A lot more out, and then ‘ —ful pai— ’ ‘ dreadful
pain,’ no doubt. The next is ‘ longer,’ plain enough—perhaps he could not
last much longer 2 Then comes ‘ ring’—that is plain, too, and clearly means
the-ring we found. But what is this in the same line : ‘ —ear,’ and some-
thing ending with ‘ —ther?”
Frank’s imagination supplied the deficiency. “He meant, no doubt, that
the ring was to be given to his dear mother.” *
“Yes, that is very likely. Then what is this ‘ble—2’ I can’t make out
the rest of the word—it may be ‘bleeding,’ or ‘bless.’”
F


“ ‘ Bless,’ I should think, if the other is really ‘ dear mother,’ ” said Frank.
It was not so very long since he had left his mother, nor was it a great
while since he had read her last letter, and his imagination was lively on the
subject of mothers generally. He had always been a steady lad, and honored
his mother as he should.
“ Yery likely you are right, Frank. But what can that last be 1 I can
only make out the last two letters—‘er.’ That floors me, for there is so
much obliterated before it. The initials are the same as those on the ring
and pencil-case. It is awfully vexatious that the name is too much damaged
to be made out. That looks like the tail of ayor a g a little way from the
‘S ’ —but I can make nothing more of it.”
The pencil-case, ring, and decayed manuscript, were carefully examined
again and again ; but nothing more could be elicited from them. ■ They
searched about, but could find no other indications of a camp. If it had
been a last camping-place of a party, or of a remnant of one, when perhaps
the few remaining members were in a weak state from travel and privation—
or, still more probable, from wounds—they were not at all likely to have
expended their little residue of strength, in making even as unsubstantial
preparations as is usual on ordinary occasions. Then, admitting the case to
be as above surmised, all indications of such a camp would soon be obliterated
by the heavy tropical rains, and the destructive bush fires so common in that
part. Liddle and Frank knew this, and though they felt certain that some
bloody tragedy had been acted there, or in the neighborhood, they felt no
surprise at not being able to find what they sought. It seemed to them more
than likely, that the writer of the manuscript was actually the last living man
of his party. Oh ! To die thus, by one’s-self, in the lonely bush ; wounded
and fevered, and parched with thirst—not having the power to stretch out
the wasted band to procure a single drop of water ! Not a dear friend within
hundreds of miles—nothing but blood-thirsty savages that would be rejoiced
at your misery and death ! Then the feast for the howling dingo ! How
many Australian explorers have gone through months of privation and hard-
ship, to end their days similarly !
The hole in which the tin canister had been deposited was again inspected,
more with a view to finding how the deadly Acanthophis ardarctica had found
its way into it. Tommy’s sharp eyes soon led to a solution of the apparent
mystery. The reptile had got in through a hole in a decayed root of the tree.
Many of those great trees are hollow from the roots to the topmost branches,
though they look so solid outwardly ; and when such old shells fall, it is not
unusual for them to split into shreds and collapse, leaving little but a flat mass
■of wreck. White ant and grub are the cause of. this rottenness and disaster.
The party had no time for exploring further that day, so they steered away
for water, which was soon found; then they turned out their horses, and
•camped for the night. Conversation of course turned on the principal events
•of the day—the death of poor little Lassie ; the finding of the branded tree,
And the deposit at its roots. The latter was a source of much conjecture, but
of a most unsatisfactory nature, necessarily. Frank said—
“l cannot believe it to have been a camp of Leichardt’s ; it is altogether
out of his proposed track—too far north. ”
“ Well, we can’t say how far a man may be thrown out of his course by
circumstances over which he has no control; but still, I will tell you how it
may have been, One or more of his party returning by way of the
coast, or Leichardt himself, for it does not follow that, because none of the
things we found bore his initials or signature, he was not there.”
‘ ‘ Why should they return ? And supposing they did, why come this way t ”


“ Why they should return, would depend on several conditions—the will,
illness, or death of their leader ; or a mutiny in the camp. Why they should
■come this way, is very easily explained. The interior of the country is said
to be much drier than the coast, and in the event of their being forced to
turn back on account of scarcity of water or grass, they would naturally take
the nearest road to the coast, or to the heads of some river that would lead
to it. There might, indeed, be no other course open to them. For instance,
they may have been passing through a very dry country for some time, and
when determined not to proceed further, they may have judged it useless to
attempt to make the last permanent water on their back tracks.”
“ Then how do you explain the letters ‘ L.L. ’ being in the tree, supposing
Leichardt not to have been of the party 1”
“Easy enough. The chances are, that they would use some distinctive
mark, that would be a guide to any relief party sent after them, wherever
they might happen to cut their tracks, or come across their camps.”
Next morning they started away for another day’s exploration, which they
determined should be the last, as it would be sufficient to put them in
possession of all the knowledge of the main features of the country, necessary
to enable Frank to describe it in his tenders. About midday, as they were
approaching a large lagoon about twelve miles from their last camp, Tommy
cried out “ Flour-bag yarraman sit down !” There was a white horse, sure
enough, standing under the shade of a tree on the opposite side of the lagoon ;
his stumpy tail kept up an incessant switching ; and he rubbed his head
against the tree to keep the tormenting flies off.
“ We must see what brand that horse has on it, before dinner, if we can
range alongside of him,” said Liddle. And away they went quietly, round
the nearest end of the lagoon. They did not remain long unobserved by the
animal, who suddenly stopped the action of his tail, pricked up his ears, and
turned round. With head and tail erect, he snorted and pranced up to the
party, like the proudest Arab charger. His actions were very extravagant;
he curveted round and round the horses, bucking and neighing most energeti-
cally. He was branded on the shoulder with the same letters as those
engraved on the ring and pencil-case—“ J.F.S.” Here, then, was another
link in the mystery, but it gave no earnest of its elucidation. They tried to
coax him, that they might get near enough to catch him, but he eluded
all such attempts, no doubt preferring the freedom he had so long enjoyed,
though his actions indicated his inward joy at once more having the com-
panionship of his own kind. Being pressed a little too close, he at last made
•off at full gallop, casting many a longing look behind. He was very fat;
nevertheless he was fleet of foot, and they did not attempt to try the mettle
of their own horses in pursuit, not wishing to overtax them, but kept steadily
on at a walking pace on his tracks, which led into three or four beaten paths,
branching in as many different directions from a regular drinking-place at
the lagoon, showing that he had revelled in his present life—good pasture
and laziness—for some years. Seeing they had no intention of following
at his own mad pace, he slackened off, and trotted along one of the tracks for
a couple of miles, till he reached a bare spot on the slope of a ridge, where
he rounded up.
“ Kangaroo sit down there, messmate yarraman said Tommy.
As they neared the horse’s camp, they saw that the two animals were not
fresh acquaintances, but old friends. The horse stood with his nose resting
on the kangaroo’s back, while the marsupial, with its short arms, clasped tire
muscular leg of its friend, and licked his shoulder. It was an “ old man”
kangaroo, and large of its kind, being over six feet high, and very heavy.


When they reached the camp, the old horse started off again, making circles:
round them, and using a good deal of very high action ; his heaving sides and
flanks, testifying to the unwonted exertion he had so lately indulged in. The-
kangaroo accompanied him several times in his circumnavigation of the party,
hut at last, either from fear of the intruders or from fatigue, he gave it up.
and hopped leisurely to the top of the ridge, where he stayed surveying the
party till their departure.
“No doubt,” said Liddle, “ this is his main camp. I should like to catch
him and take him home. He is a good cut of a horse, and I should think he
has a lot of work in him yet, though he is ten or twelve years old. Those-
marks on his back and sides show that he has seen some service packing.
Suppose we camp here to-night, eh ? He might chum in with our horses and
. follow; us home. I think we could make home to-morrow. There is another
gap in the range that I believe we can get through—just there, look—almost,
in a direct line between here and Rossdale. Shall we try the experiment ?”
“ By all means,” replied Frank, “ I have seen as much of the country as I
require for my purpose ; and I can explore more fully when I bring the men
over to put up the yards and huts.
Tommy’s invaluable eyes were always open to their surroundings—nothing-
seemed to escape them. He pointed to a tree close to where the grey was
standing—for he had just given up his frolicsome behaviour, and had settled
down a little more out of breath than he had probably been for a long time
past. The old fellow, not liking the familiarity of the party who moved towards;
the tree, again raised his head and the little tail he possessed, and jogged to
the opposite side of his camp.
“ Why,” said Liddle, “there is the ‘ L.L.’ brand again ! I wonder if there-
is an arrow pointing downwards on the other side no, there is not, but
the letters, ‘J. F. S.,’ are here—look, Frank. Well, let us move down the
flat a bit, I’ll warrant we will find water not far off—or, no, perhaps we had
better go back to the lagoon. The old grey will most likely follow us, and it.
will be two miles less to ride to-morrow.”
They took the latter course, and as they travelled slowly away the old grey
looked wistfully, his ears working like a semaphore—the right one pointing
forward, and the left back, and rice versa. Now both are pricked ; then both
lie flat backward. He kept up this telegraphing for some time, as horses do
when they are irresolute, or are endeavoring to work out some difficult prob-
lem. But when the travellers had got about half a mile on their way to the
lagoon—his old beat—he could stand it no longer. His ears shot straight
forward, his stumpy tail cocked up, and after prancing and snorting round the
camp two or three times impatiently, his mind was finally made up, and with
a clear ringing neigh, he started off at full galop, soon overtaking the other ■
horses. The tired animals welcomed him with a few grunts of recognition—
scarcely an echo of his merry neigh of freedom. On nearing them, he jogged
on in their rear, now Snorting and shaking his head ; then smelling the ground,,
and giving little short bucks.
“ I wish I had my green-hide lasso here,” said Liddle. “ I would try con-
clusions with that flash old coon ; and believe I would take some of it out of
him, and have my saddle on him before he knew where he was. When I
was a youngster, and father was living at Liverpool Plains, my brother Tom
and I used to go out and catch a wild horse now and then. There were hun-
dreds of them there ;» some turned out very good hacks and stockhorses, but
strange to say, many became the greatest slugs out after they were broken, with
all their flashness in the mob. It was a fine sight to see four or five hundred
of them going over the plains at full gallop. The way we worked them was.


this :—Tom would go on one side of the mob and wheel them round, while I
kept at a canter, so as to save my horse and meet the mob as they came my"
way ; then I would take my turn and keep the mob at their best, while Tom
cantered on quietly to where he knew I was heading them to. So you see,
our horses had a gallop and a spell alternately. It was tough work, and if we
had not played into each other’s hands so, we should never have got near
■enough to lasso them. Sometimes a big party would go out after them,
but they always made a mess of it, and after some of them and their horses
coming to grief, they would have to go home without a hoof. There was too
much shouting, whip cracking, and flashness ; and their horses got blown
before the real work was commenced. The main thing was, to keep the mob
working round and round in a circle of. two or three miles, on the plain
country. If they once got straight away for the mountains with a good lead,
you might as well coil up your whip and go home quietly. The wild mobs
got so numerous at last, that parties used to go and shoot them. It was not
safe for travellers to turn their horses out when they camped anywhere there,
for the wild ones used to come down at night and decoy them away., When
broken-in horses Joined the mobs, they became worse than the wild ones after
a bit, because they were more knowing—just like the native policemen when
they get back to their own people ; they know so many dodges, and the others-
leam of them. The old horse is following quietly now—l hope he will do so
to-morrow. Here we are at the lagoon. ”
Their camp was soon formed, for the weather was hot. A light sapling
frame pitched on the ground—somewhat resembling a skillion roof— and
covered with green boughs to keep the night dew off, was all they needed.
There was an abundance of dry wood for fuel, and the whole preparation for
their bivouac did not exceed a quarter of an hour from beginning to end.
Their horses were short-hobbled, in case they should feel inclined to follow
any rambling example the old grey might set them, instead of he falling in,
with theirs. Bushmen are seldom caught tripping in such matters, and
always keep their wits about them, to checkmate any adverse circumstances
that may arise. True, they are sometimes overtaken by uncommon and
unforeseen events, but even then, their expedients and ready wit generally
carry them through in triumph, where a new chum would sit down and collapse.
Some men, indeed, never attain the mark of even average bushmen, no matter
how manyyears they maybe in the bush. Such men are alternately butts for the
amusement of, or causes of annoyance to, all with whom they come in contact.
Next morning the old grey was feeding quietly with the others. His friend,
the kangaroo, was also of the company, but hopped away when Tommy went
to catch the horses. When the boy led the latter into the camp, he threw
some pieces of iron at the feet of his masters.
“ Hallo ! Tommy. Where did you get those 2 ” they both exclaimed at once.
“ Mine find him ’long a grass. I believe that been sit down good while.”
It was the ironwork of a colonial made pack-saddle, that must have lain,
where Tommy found it, for many years, Judging from its rusted appearance.
The rivets were still fast in the iron framework, but the wood and leather had
doubtless been consumed by bush fires and native dogs, for the latter are very'
fond of chewing leather.
“I should like to have a search about here,” said Liddle. “I am sure
something might be found to clear up this horrid mystery. Did you see any-
thing else, Tommy 2 ”
“ Yowt —mine see him big bone belonging to yarraman, I believe.”
“ Where 2”
4 ‘ Close up,” replied Tommy, pointing down the flat.


• They all went down to where Tommy had seen the horse’s bones. There;
they were—blanched with sun and rain. The skeleton was not perfect, some;
portion having been dragged away by the dingoes. The two hind legs were
there, and still adhering to their extremities were the hoofs, neither of which
- bore any marks of having been shod for a long period before the death of the
animal. This fact was considered to go some way in evidence, that the horse’
had belonged to a homeward-bound party. They searched about for a time,
but found nothing more. Of course they entered into speculations as to the
cause of the horse’s death—the blacks, hard work, some accident, and many
other guesses were made ; all, however, rested in mystery which might never-
be solved. One thing seemed more than probable, which was, that the poor
animal had been carrying the pack-saddle—the ironwork of which Tommy had
found close to the skeleton—and literally died in harness.
“ I’ll tell you what it is, Frank. I have scarcely any doubt about the matter-
now. We saw no marked trees, or any other trace of travellers further south
than where I found the things by the tree marked with the arrow. Now, I
believe ‘ J.F.S. ’ was the last of his party, which had been attacked by the
blacks further north, on their homeward trip. He has pushed on with the-
grey, and the pack-horse whose skeleton is here. No doubt the poor brute
had been speared, and his owner had to leave him to die. ‘ J.F.S.’ then-
pushed on with his remaining strength on the old grey, to the place where he
buried the things. The old horse left him that night to come back to his
mate, and the poor fellow had not the strength to walk after him. Perhaps
he lived a few days, getting weaker and weaker, writing his diary—the papers
we found—-day by day, till he felt his end too near to delay the closing and
burying of it any longer. There is no telling how long he may have lived,
after that, but if our interpretation of the few words left in the last page of
his diary is correct, Ido not suppose it was very long. There could not have
been any blacks about this part at the time, or they would have noticed the-
freshly-turned earth, and have dug the things up again. It is beginning to
get warm, so we had better be thinking of putting our saddles on, and our-
selves into them. We will soon see how the old grey will shape. I hope he will
follow, and it seems likely, too,for he has chummed in with your horse, Frank. ”
The order of march was, that Tommy should lead the way—not that
Liddle needed a guide, but because he had reserved to himself a delicate task
in connection with the driving of the old horse ; and which, from his great
knowledge of horses, he was the most competent to perform. At starting he
was to ride behind Tommy, and Frank behind him. If the grey followed
Frank’s horse for a mile or two quietly, then Liddle was to strike off at an
angle from the party, and fall into the rear to keep the old horse straight,
should he show symptoms of turning back. This order was strictly carried
out, all being done silently and without any haste, which would only have
aroused the suspicions of their, so far, willing captive, and have caused him
to break back. All went well, however, and in due time Liddle had worked
himself into his self-assigned position, about fifty yards in the rear of the grey ;
and the latter would have had a good deal of trouble to make his escape from
such a guard. They kept on at a quiet jog, and got over the range much
more easily than they could have done by the way they came.
At dinner time, Frank and Tommy turned their horses out in hobbles, and
the grey stayed with them. Liddle kept his horse by him, ready saddled in
case the grey should attempt to leave their company, and break back to his
old beat. Horses are very sociable animals ; very few prefer solitude to the
society of their kind, but all have their affinities and antipathies. Some con-
tract friendships suddenly, which last for life—so strong that they are never


happy out of each other’s sight; others never agree, and fight whenever they
meet. It was fortunate for the purpose of the explorers that the grey had*
taken a fancy to Frank’s horse, and also that the attachment was mutual, fqr
though the black-boy’s horse and he were neutral, it was certain that a con-
siderable amount of animosity existed between him and Liddle’s horse, for
they always squealed and showed symptoms of warlike intentions, whenever
they approached within twenty yards of each other. This hostility was rather
a good thing, for what with his dislike for the horse behind, and his affection
for the one in front, the old grey kept in the desired direction without thinking
too much of the pleasant pastures he had left behind. He had given up much 1
of his flashness during the last eight or ten miles, and jogged along like a hard-
worked horse, except when Liddle got too close to him. In an hour they
resumed their journey, and late in the afternoon entered the paddock slip-
rails, half a mile from the house. Tommy had been sent a-head to take down
the rails, to prevent any stoppage when the grey arrived at the fence, where
it was deemed possible he might try to break away. He followed Frank’s
horse in without any trouble, Liddle putting up the rails and securely pegging
them. As they rode up to house, the dogs rushed out, barking joyfully.’
Lassie’s two pups were amongst them, and added their tiny squeaks to the
noise of their companions. The little things trotted from one rider to thq
other, sniffing at their legs and those of their horses, and, at last, curling their
tails between their legs, they squatted down and gave vent to the most pitiful
howls. Liddle picked them up and carried them into the house with him.
On the threshold he was met by his youngest sister—Minnie—a girl about
fifteen. Between these two and Lassie, there had always been a bond of the
deepest sympathy and affection.
“Oh! my dear Bob !lam so glad you are back. I was afraid you
been killed. I knew you could not get lost, you are too good a bushman.
And she hugged and kissed him heartily. “ Why ! where is my pretty little
Lassie ? ” ,
From his pocket Bob produced a thick curl of black and tan coloured hair.
“ That is all that is left of our pet, Min !”
“Dead? Oh, Bob!” , .
And the poor child threw herself on him, and wept passionately. By that
time all the members of the family who were at home, had gathered round them
brother and sister, and there were more wet eyes as the news spread. “ Lassie
dead !” “How did she die?” and a dozen more questions were all put at
once. It was a sorrowful party that sat around Bob, to hear the particulars
of their faithful little friend’s death. Liddle and Frank then went to the lagoon
to indulge in a swim ; also, to have a change of clothes.
At tea-time, Bob had to detail the events of their journey. When he told
them of the discovery of the caves, and of the adventures therein, he was met
at all hands by smiles of incredulity. Even his sister, Minnie, who sat between
him and Frank, pinched his arm, and cautioned him not to tell fibs. She
looked so pretty that Frank wished she would pinch him, and give him a
caution too. Bob appealed to Frank, who verified all his statements, but it
was all to no purpose, and a hint was thrown out by Thomas, that whatever
statement Bob made would be sworn to by Frank.
“Then,” said Bob, “you don’t believe about the finding of the marked
trees, the pencil-case, and ring, or anything else ? You are an unbelieving
Set ! I’ll go and unpack my saddle-bags, and prove that part of the case, at
all events. You can’t disbelieve about the horse, for you have all seen him—
there he is now, feeding by the lagoon with Frank’s horse. Harry,” he said,


addressing his youngest brother, “ Where did you put my saddle-bass ? In
my room 2 All right.”
In five minutes he returned with the saddle-bags, and also with a face twice
its usual length.
“ Look here ! Is it not enough to make a man tear his hair ?”
As he held up his saddle-bags, a large rentwas seen all along the bottom seam.
“ I would not have lost that manuscript and those other things for anything.
They must have dropped out since we started this morning, because I saw
them in the bag after breakfast, when I was stowing away some things just
before starting. ”
Frank’s countenance reflected Bob’s vexation.
They all looked comically at Bob, and Thomas expressed very nearly the
sentiments of the rest of the family, when he said—
“ You would make a capital pair of actors ! I should like to examine that
tear and see if it is not a fresh cut. ”
“ Examine it, and be hanged to you, you unbelieving old Jew ! ” said Bob,
as he threw the saddle-bags at his brother, half-angrily.' The hole was
critically inspected by all, but not one could say that it had been cut. It had
most certainly been burst. They then began to change their minds, and to
give a half credence to Bob’s statements. Taking the bag again, he said, “It
shall never deceive anyone again,” and with that he tugged at the two sides of
the rent, and ripped the seam from end to end.
When Bob said “ Good night,” Minnie followed him, and slipping into his
room, threw her arms around his neck and said, “ Don’t be vexed, Bob dear.
I do believe you found the ring and pencil-case, and everything else you said you
found. I did not at first, and lam sorry now that I doubted you. And—
and—l am so sorry for poor dear little Lassie ! Give me a few hairs of that
■curl, Bob.” And,she wept again.
He never denied a request of his favourite sisters.
“Don’t cry, Min dear. There, take it just as it is—yes, keep it for me, it
will be safer in your care ! ”
“ Dear Bob. You are always so kind to me. I love you better than any-
one in the world ! ”
The affectionate girl then went to her own room—or rather the one she
shared with her sisters—and opening her own particular drawer, took out her
Bible, and after reading a portion of it, she kissed the black and tan curl, and
placed it carefully between the leaves.
Thomas, who slept in an out-building, not far from the house, and close to
the fowl-house, was aroused in the night by a tremendous noise amongst the
feathered ones. The ducks quacked ; the hens cackled ; and the geese hissed,
and raised their shrill voices most discordantly. It was one of those deliciously
soft, balmy, moon-light nights, such as are scarcely known out of those lati-
tudes, where one can, with perfect impunity, walk about very lightly clad
indeed. Thomas Liddle was very lightly covered, having nothing on, in fact,
but his night-shirt. He opened the fowl-house door, but was unable to see
the cause of the disturbance by the uncertain light of the moon, so he went
back for a candle, and while there took his gun also, which was loaded with
shot. He saw in one comer of the fowl-house a large carpet-snake embracing
a fine young duck in its deadly folds. It was making violent throes in its
endeavours to swallow another, the tail of which was projecting from its jaws.
These snakes are very, numerous, and from their wonderful adaptability for
creeping through small chinks—almost through a key-hole —they are very
hard to provide against. Being nocturnal in their habits, and not at all particu-
lar as to their food, provided it is alive, they invade at the most unseemly hours


everyroom and building on a station. They eat rats, mice, lizards, cockroaches,
frogs, pet birds, fowls, and many other things. They are not strictly nocturnal,
and may often be seen during the day prowling about in search of food, in the
house and in the forest. However objectionable they may be to many people,
they are undoubtedly useful as scavengers among the vermin that so commonly-
beset bush houses in hot climes. They are not venomous, having no fangs, and
are of the python kind. They are not the only kind of snake that frequent
the houses, but many others of a venomous nature may be found there too—
black, brown, and whip snakes; also death adders; none of which are so much
given to climbing up the slab walls and into the roofs.
Thomas’ presence did not in the least disconcert the snake ; it made no
attempt to escape, but continued its meal. He watched the reptile for some
time, and the young duck was at length swallowed ; but during the process
the snake was preparing the one within its folds to supplement its companion
that had just disappeared. The muscular rings contracted more and more,
till the peer duck was squeezed into a long thin mass ; the very bones being
smashed by the powerful reptile. It then partially unwound itself from the
shapeless mass, and, after covering it with a glairy saliva, proceeded to
swallow it head first. The act of deglutition is performed slowly, and is
apparently accomplished by a spasmodic action. The jaws of the- carpet-'
snake are not very large, but are capable of very extensive expansion, from
their being connected at the hinge by an elastic ligament. Thomas Liddle
knew that the meal would take some time to finish, so to settle the matter
he shot the thief, cutting it nearly in two. He then threw it outside and
went to bed. Its color, like all of its kind, was a silver grey, with large'
irregular brown marks all over it ; the jaws being marked in streaks like"
those of a tiger. It was about ten feet long.
The day after Robert Riddle’s return, he ran the old grey into the horse-
yard, and with some trouble put his saddle on him ; for the old horse was so
flash, that for a long time he resisted all attempts to catch him. Liddle,
however, was a first-rate man with horses, and a crack rider ; and knew that
patience was an indispensable quality in circumventing either roguish or
timid horses. There was, as there always is on such occasions, a good muster
of spectators round the stock-yard to see the fun. Held by Tom, the home
stood while Bob put on his saddle and surcingle, and girthed up tight. With
fore legs stretched out, and ears flat back, he trembled all over, and was-
evidently ready for anything. Bob’s brother remarked that he thought he
had better strap his fore leg up till he got on, for he was sure the old nag
meant mischief ; but Bob objected, saying that he was sure he could “ take
it out of an old screw like him. ”
‘‘ He can’t do so very much, Tom ; he is too fat, and will not have the 1
wind to keep it up long. If he throws me, I will never ride another buck-
jumper as long as I live—unless the saddle goes with me. Hold on a minute
till I light my pipe—then I’m on.”
He lit his pipe, then gathered his reins up short to the horse’s ear, which,
with the reins, he grasped with his left hand ; then, putting his foot in the
stirrup, and holding by the cantle of the saddle with his right hand, he rose'
into his seat like a bird—his action being light, quick, and easy.
“ Let go, Tom, and out.”
Tom let go the rein, and the horse suddenly looked round each way, at the
same time tucking his tail still tighter between his legs ; he went off with
three tremendous bounds, which placed his head in close proximity to the
slip-rails. Finding he could not get out, he reared and turned sharp round j
then putting his head between his fore-legs, commenced a series of tremendous’


bucks. Finding that he had a man on his back that he could not get off by
ordinary means, he altered his tactics to side bucking. His motions, indeed,
resembled those of a double cracker—now to the right, then to the left;
backwards, forwards, and round and round in an astonishingly small circle.
His rider sat as though he were part of the horse, smoking his pipe as coolly
as if he were seated in a chair.
<“ Drop the rails, Tom, and let us out. The yard is getting too small for
us two. ”
He saw that the horse in his furylwas losing his discretion,and it took all Bob’s
strong hand could do to keep him off the fence. Tom dropped the top rail.
“ Clear the road, Tom ! ” and Tom had but just time to do so, when the
horse made a rush at the three rails still up, and with the assistance of his
rider, cleared them with a flying leap ; then a few more bucks, and he took
the bit in his teeth and went full tear down the paddock towards the slip-
rails, oyer which he was seen to fly, as he sped on his way in the direction of
his old beat in the new country, from which he had been beguiled the day
before. About two hours after, they were seen returning ; the horse was in a
perfect lather of sweat, and his rider’s boots and leggings were also flecked
over with the salty foam from the same source. The animal’s head was
considerably lower as he re-entered the stock-yard. He stood perfectly quiet
to have his saddle taken off, and was ever after docile in the hands of his
conqueror, though he bucked with everyone else who rode him. He was a
•good bottomed horse, and became a great favourite with Robert Liddle.
At dinner time the conversation turned on snakes, in the course of which
Miss Lizzie Liddle, who was the housekeeper, told Frank of some of her
experiences in that line ; and of several hair-breadth escapes she had had
from those reptiles. One evening, she was carrying the bread platter in with
a loaf on it, to lay on the table. There was no light in the pantry, and to
her horror, when she reached the parlour in which a lamp was burning, she
saw a good-sized black snake coiled neatly round the loaf. She dropped
snake, platter, and bread, and screamed, which brought two of her brothers
to her assistance. The snake made off into a comer behind a box, and was
shot there, much to the relief of the ladies generally.
Minnie gave one of her adventures next.
“ I was going out for a ride with Robert one afternoon, and went hurriedly
into my room for my whip, and was just about to take it off the toilet table,
when I thought it moved. My hand was just upon it, but something impelled
me to withdraw it. It was not my whip but a long whip-snake. On .the spur
of the moment I threw a pretty cut-glass scent-bottle at it; the bottle smashed
to pieces, and the snake made off. Just as it was escaping between the slabs,
I put my foot on its tail, called Robert, who soon killed it. One night
one of my brothers was staying at Wonga, and found a snake coiled up
under his pillow in the morning. It was a cold night, and he thought it went
there for the sake of the warmth. Do you not recollect, Lizzie, that death
adder under your chair ? ”
“ Oh, yes ! The horrid thing ! 1 was sitting at work on that night, with
my back to the fire-place ; the oat kept playing around my chair, and at last
attracted my attention to her antics. Suspecting from her movements that
something was under my chair, I looked without moving it, fortunately ; and
there I saw a death adder. Had I moved my chair to get up in the ordinary
way, I should, in all probability, have stepped on the deadly thing. It was
soon killed by one of my brothers. Our cats often, discover snakes to us
about the house, and for that reason alone, I would not be without one, in,
spite of its being considered ‘old maidish.’”


Her brother Robert said, “ Well, Sis, that was a narrow escape, but I had
a narrower one than it, when on my way from the Clarence with some of our
cattle. We got into camp late one evening, and it took us a good while to
steady the cattle and arrange the camp, for we were short-handed. When
all was done, and we had had tea, I went groping about in the dark for some
wood to keep the fires going during the night. Well, I collected a small
bundle, and was just going to put on two or three more sticks I had in my
hand, when I felt one of them move. I dropped them quickly, and went to
the camp fire for a fire-stick to see what it was, and it turned out to be a large,
death adder. I did put it on the fire after all, but took good care to kill it
first, and carried it oh a stick. The night was very cold, and the thing must
have been torpid, or I should very likely not be here now to tell the tale.” -


CHAPTER VIII.
The day following, Frank started on his way towards Maryborough. While
taking farewell of the kind and hospitable family, with whom he had grown
to be on terms of intimacy, both Mr. and Mrs. Liddle invited him to make
their house his home—and Barrett also—as long as they should find it
convenient, when they returned with their stock. Also, any assistance
that lay in their power to bestow, would be most willingly accorded to their
new neighbours. Indeed, Mr. Liddle said if it would be more convenient,
they might bring their stock out with them, and have the use of an out-station
of his to run them at, while they went over the range and put up their huts and
. sheep-yards. This very generous offer, Frank could not but feel grateful for,
and said he would mention it to his senior partner, Barrett.
Frank did not leave with his black-boy, Tommy, alone. He had an escort,
for his friend Robert Liddle and his sister Minnie accompanied him. The
latter was a fearless horsewoman, and she sat her mare like a queen. Her
brother had taken much care in her instruction, for she had been his pupil
from , the time she was old enough to be taken up before him. She was
passionately fond of horses, and had good nerve, often accompanying her
brothers on the run, to assist them in bringing in a mob of rowdy cattle ;
sometimes, over rough and difficult country. When she was quite a small
child in New England, she always ran up to the stockyard on hearing the
crack of Bob’s whip, as he was returning from the run with a mob of cattle.
She knew she would get a ride down to the house before him ; or if the horse
was a quiet one, she would have the saddle to herself and the reins too, while
he walked by her side. Then she did look a little beauty. Her sunny curls
flowing ; her lips parted ; and her large violet eyes fired with excitement.
At such times she would say, “ Make him buck, Bobby, please ; he will not
throw me off. ”
He would smile, and say, “ No, Min, that would not do ; the girths might
break, you know ; then my little Min would have a tumble. When you are
a big girl you shall have a beautiful little pony that will buck like Sultan.”
That would pacify her for a time, for to be allowed to ride a buck-jumper
was her highest ambition. Sultan was Bob’s own favorite horse at the time,
and was the greatest buck-jumper and the best stock-horse, or roadster, in
New England ; and although Bob was much younger then that at the time of
which we write, he was considered a fearless horseman, possessing much
judgment. Horsemanship and bushmanship were his specialities. He was
good at all bushcraft, but was considered almost without a rival in the two
first-named branches. It was he who found their country, and in a wonder-
fully short time he was master of all its ins-and-outs ; not a ridge, gully, or
water-hole in it, but he could go straight to in the darkest night. All the
best places for out-stations ; the site for the head-station ; and all matters of
importance he had the arranging of. In making a marked-tree line, for a
road from one place to another, he would go as straight without compass, as
anyone skilled in the use of that instrument would by its aid. If the lay of
the country did not admit of a straight course, he would intuitively discover
the best route, though he might not have had any previous knowledge of


the country through which he travelled, his marked-tree lines always turned’
out to he the best for permanent roads. Let it be ever so dry when he-
marked a line, it would be found ultimately, that he had avoided everything-
that could be avoided in the shape of soft spots, and also that he had not
made too much of a circuit to escape them. The marking of a line for a new
road in new country, requires a good deal of skill in every sense of the word,,
to make it a success.
Robert Liddle rode the grey, whom he christened “Explorer.” Minnie-
rode her own particular little mare, a beautiful well-bred Arab, full of life-
and fire, very fast, and could be turned with a thread, so fine was her mouth.
She had never been known to buck, which was no very great recommendationi
in the opinion of her mistress, for she really wished that she would buck—
just a little—sometimes. She was not quite unskilled in the higher branches
of equestrian art, viz., leaping and bucking. She was once on a horse that
bolted with her in the bush, and that suddenly stopped and gave several stifiT
bucks, which she sat well, notwithstanding that the third crutch broke short
off from the saddle. She never had it replaced, it being a dangerous thing,
on a rearing horse ; giving a lady but little chance of freeing herself from
the saddle in the event of the animal falling backwards. Her brother had
chosen the mare, and broken it in himself very carefully, expressly for a
birthday gift, about six months before. Her father gave her a beautiful,
saddle and bridle ; and her mother presented her with a handsome whip
so that in the way of presents to her fancy, she had never before attained,
such a birthday.
They all rode together as far as the Seven Mile Station. The two young;
bushmen gripped each other’s hands most cordially at parting, and the leave-
taking was not a whit less sincere on the part of Minnie and Frank. A dis-
interested spectator might, indeed, have observed a dash of sadness on both.
sides, when their hands relaxed.
Minnie asked Frank when he expected to be back at Rossdale ; he could
only say that he could not tell, as it all depended on Barrett ; but he hoped,
it would not be very long. When his friend had gone, Liddle turned off to
the hut, which was just to the left on the bank of a creek. The Seven Mile
Station, was an out-station of Mr. Liddle’s, at which three flocks of sheep
were depastured—about three thousand in all. There were three shepherd®
and a hut-keeper. The latter was at home, and was employed just then
shifting the hurdles on to fresh ground, as his master was very particular to-
have the sheep-folds moved, so as to occupy clean ground every few days,
that the fleeces might be kept as free from stains and dirt as possible,
shearing time being near at hand. The old hut-keeper, Mickey Bryan, wa®
rejoiced to see Liddle and his sister. He took off his hat and said,
“ Begorra ! Miss Minnie, it does my owld eyes good to see ye, so it does-
You’re looking every inch a queen on that beautiful bit of blood ye’ve gbt.
Ha ! Mr. Robert, ye knows a horse from a donkey; an’ it was yerself as chose
that nate little nag. Whin I was young, I was given to horrses myself; and
by the same token, it was that an’ the love I bore for a girrl, as made me the
poor owld cripple lam this day. I’m a red roaring Irishman from the County
Galway ; an’ was bred an’ brought up in the Duke av Eringobragh’s stables,
an’ a beautifuler lot av horrses a livin’ man niver see. They said he was a
wild fellow, but he was a raal good sort to all the boys. He gave them lots av
money, an’ whisky in galore whin they plased him ; an whin they didn’t—
Muslia ! he’d lave ’em fit for wakin’ ! ’Twas said as he feared nothing, an'
nather man, woman, nor horrse could resist him. He could ride the
divil’s grandfather—axing yer pardon, Miss. Well, one day,l axed the Duke


could I go wid him, whin he took a thrial run round the staple-chase courrse 1
Wid that he looks me all over, an’ siz, siz he, ‘Ye spalpeen, ye, is yer neck
insured ? ’ ‘ Neck in or neck out,’ siz I, ‘ I’d follow yer honor through bumin’
hrimstone.’ ‘ Faith, an’ if ye follow me, it’s that same ye’ll come to in the
ind,’ siz he. ‘ Faix, yer honor, my lordDuke,’ siz I, ‘ I’m quite contint to go
in sich good company,’ if I may make so bo wid as to say that same.’ Wid
that he siz, ‘ Look yer now, Bryan, ye seem to have the right grit in ye, any
ways, an I wont baulk ye at all, at all. Only ye’ll ride Blazing Nora. If ye
take her over all widout a scratch, I’ll give ye a rise in the stables—for I
know ye want to marry that wench Biddy O’Grady. If ye don’t bring the
mare home wid a clane hide, barring the sweat —I’ll ,’ an’ he shook his
big whip. I knowd what that meant. ”
“ Well,” said Bob, “ but what had that to do with the girl ?”
“ Why, just this, sur. What made me ax the Duke to let me go wid him
was, Biddy O’Grady, an’ another lad, an’ me, was chaffin together one night,’
an’ siz Biddy, ‘ I dont belave nather av yez would follow the Duke across
counthry, anyways.’ ‘Be jabers !’ siz Pat Flynn, ‘ Mickey wouldn’t.’
‘ Begorra ! an’ ye’ll see Misther Pat. If ye’ll ax the Duke to-morrow to let
ye go wid him, so will I.’ ‘ Done, siz he.’ He knowd he couldn’t, an’ he got
the Duke’s consent twicet over ; an’ he niver wint, but I did. Now thinks
I, I’ll have all the runnin’ wid Biddy to myself. Neck or nothin, I’ll go in
an’ win. That night I siz— ‘ Biddy darlint, if I bring the mare back will ye
have me V ‘ Faith an’ I will, and be proud av ye too, Mickey.’ That was
the first raal consint she ever giv me, an’ I was a tall gossoon that same
night. Two days afther, the Duke an me was mounted; an’ Biddy an’ me
kissed our hands to each other. Siz the Duke to the butler ‘ Larry, Whisky.
The butler brings out a big silver mug full. The Duke takes a swing, an’
hands me the rest —raal mountain dew !
“ The park gates was open, an’ away we wint at a canter. Blazing Nora
giv me all I knew to keep her from passin’ the Duke. I knowd if she did
what I’d catch. When we gets into the counthry, the Duke says, ‘Now
Micky, are ye ready 1 ’ I touches my cap, and off he wint. The pace wasn’t
too much at first, at all, an’ we wint over hedges, ditches, gates, an’ fences.
At last he goes at an owld wall six feet high. It was a rasper ! but ther
ground was clear on our side. Thinks I, I’ll be glad when I’m on t’other
side o’ that, anyways ; but I wasn’t, for there was a heap av rubbish fominst
it, an’ the mare came into a lot av loose stones, an’ smash on to her back on
the top av me, an’ me underneath. The Duke saw it an’ pulled up ; he
thought we was both dead, but we wasn’t. The mare was stunned, an’ cut
dreadful, an’ the saddle smashed to smithereens. He goes to a cottage and
has me carried in, an’ sinds for his docthor. Siz he, 1 The boy ain’t deceased
yet, an’ plase the Banshees, he’ll not be waked this turn. If he’s tough he’ll
pull through, but he’ll have to be tough to do it ! He stitched up my scalp
an’ puts both my thighs an’ one arm in splints, an’ siz I was to be watched day
an’ night. I niver cum to myself like for three weeks. Biddy niver cujn
to see me, an’ before the ind of nine months when I was beginnin’ to get about
on crutches, she married Pat Flynn, for, siz she, ‘ I’m not goin’ to marry a
cripple, an’ I only said I’d marry him if he brought the mare back. ’ The good
for nothing crathur ! Bad ’cess to her ! Well, sur, it didn’t kill me after all,
an’ I took on bad about Biddy too. At the cottage where I was nursed, there
was a raal good wench ; we was a good deal together, an’ got to be more than
civil. I axed her father for her, an’ he said ‘Yes.’ Whin I got sthrong
enough, I worked at light jobs on the owld man’s farm, for the Duke said 1
would’nt be no more good to him in the stable. But he praised me for my


pluck, an’ the very day Pat married Biddy he sacked him, and gave him sioh
a basting he wint to bed for a week with sore bones. So she had a cripple for
a while, anyway. Afther that the Duke comes my way, an’ says he, ‘ Mickey
me boy, yer sperit’s the sort I likes, but yer body’s no more use for my wort
now. I’ll tell ye what though, it was crumpled up in my sarvice, an’ the day
ye marry Betsy Oregan, ye shall have a hundred an’ fifty pound, and ye can
emigrate to Austhraley an’ be a shepherd, or the like av that.’ I looked at
the Duke, an’ couldn’t believe I was to get sich a pot av gold as that. We
married an’ I got the money fair an’ square. Betsy—Rest her sowl ! lived
with me forty year. Two of her sons wint before her. Now I’m a lone owld
man, sur, but I don’t fret; my other childer’s all out in the world, an’ well-
to-do, an’ I’m quite ready to follow Betsy whin I’m called. Blessed be the
"Virgin !”
“ Why Bryan, your story is quite a romance ; was that terrible scar in
your forehead and head occasioned by your fall 1” ' ’
“ Yes, Miss. An’ I feel the rheumatiz up there, an’ in me poor owld broken
bones terrible bad betimes, at changes av the weather.”
At the commencement of the old man’s story, they had drawn into the
shade of a tree and dismounted. After enquiring as to the welfare of the sheep,
and of the men, and finding that all was well, Robert Liddle and his sister
mounted again, and cantered home, arriving just in time for dinner.
Frank’s three horses having been on good feed during the fime he and Lid-
dle were away run hunting, they were in good fettle for their homeward
journey. Frank went on to within eight miles of Mundango, where he camped
for dinner, and turned the horses out for an hour or two’s spell. Their camp-
ing-place was, therefore, about midway between Rossdale and Chinchin.
Frank called at Mundango; Mr. Paterson was very glad to see him, as he had
just finished some letters of importance that he thought of sending by Koo-
laman towards Maryborough that afternoon. The shearers had arrived much
sooner, by a week or so, than he expected them, and he wanted some more
wool-packs, and a ton or two more of flour, as soon as they could be procured.
He had ordered them before, but had received a reply from the storekeeper
to the effect that, his letter having been delayed so long on the road, the car-
rier who was to have taken his order—which the storekeeper was expecting—
would not wait, any longer, and had taken a load up to another station in a
different direction. Frank undertook to deliver the letters to their addresses,
and after declining a very pressing invitation to stay the night, he started for
Chinchin, which was only seven miles further on, and was reached about
sunset.
The Fosters were at home, and a party of three or four travellers was stay-
ing there for the night. They, also, were going out to look for a run.
Amongst them were one or two whom Frank knew. He told them of his
object in going out, and of his success, so they promised to push away in a
different direction to that he had taken, to prevent the possibility of their
tenders clashing with his. One of the party, who was a friend of Frank’s,
named Phil Merry, was a comical fellow, always full of good-natured fun.
His yams and practical jokes were not offensive, because they never had- in
them the least spice of ill-nature. Fun was fun with Phil, and nothing else.
One might get a trifle vexed with him at times, but was certain to be chaffed
into good humour again by his tormentor. \
“ Did you come through Gayndah, Phil ? ” said Frank.
“Yes. Stayed there three dayg. Our horses got out of Powers’paddock, and
were lost two days. We put up at Powers’ Hotel. I once stayed at McPhaff’s,
at Coorang, and lost my horses for a week. I know the rascal planted them.


It is is a regular dodge of those bush publicans, just to keep a fellow running
up a score at the house.”
“ You should not be such a good customer, Phil, and then they would not
play such tricks on you,” said one of his companions.
Phil turned on his friend, raised his finger, and said with mock seventy—
“ ‘ People who live in glass houses,’ etcetera. ” The reproved one’s conscience
smote him, and he subsided.
‘‘ Did you see anyone I know, Phil 2 ” asked Frank. ,
“Let me see yes; the Doctor, for one.”
“ What, Brown 2 ”
“ No, Brown was away at Coonamhula —three fellows speared and toma- ,
hawked the other day, two dead. No, I mean old Jenkins. He has been ,
there for some time trying to get a footing, but he can’t—lushes too much.
I’ll tell you a lark about him. He and Dick Naughton were drinking together,
and when all their money was gone, the publicans would not serve them with
any more drink. At last they found themselves sitting at a table that was
bare of everything but empty bottles and glasses. The bottles did not, even
smell of liquor, for they had washed them to get the last taste. The pair
looked very miserable. A knock came at the door. 1 Come in,’ said the
Doctor. ,A bullock-driver stepped in. ‘ Beg pardon, sir, I want to see you.' ,
The Doctor said, ‘ Just wait a minute,’ and then winked at Dick, and they
both went out. ’ When the pair got into the back yard, the Doctor said, ‘ What <
on earth shall I do, Dick 2 I have no medicines left. I drank all my spirits
of wine, and everything else that had spirits in it that wouldn’t poison me.
I have nothing left but a little strychnine, arsenic, and belladonna.’
c Haven’t you got a bottle of scent, or anything of that sort now 2
‘ Not a drop ! I drank a bottle of Jockey Club, a bottle of Rimmel’s
Vinegar, and a bottle of Florida Water sometime in the night. I was never
so thirsty and hot in my life, I do believe ! ’
* Never mind, old man,’ said Dick, 1 you see the fellow, and find out what
ails him ; tell him you will make up a mixture that will do. Charge him a
pound. ’ >
' The Doctor had great confidence in Dick, and Dick had much confidence in
himself. Jenkins then went in to see the man. In the meantime Dick was
not idle, and had made up a pale brandy bottle full of stuff, of a reddish
color. It turned out to be fever and ague that the fellow had, and the Doctor
went out under the pretence of making up the medicine for him. In a few
minutes he went back with the bottle of stuff, and charged the man a pound,
telling him to take a tablespoonful three times a day.
‘ Dick,’ said the Doctor, ‘ what did you make that stuff of 2 It looked very
well.’
‘ Why, as I was thinking what I should do, my eye chanced to ligfit on
some rusty horse-shoes in the corner of the yard ; so I just scraped them, put
the rust into the bottle, nearly filled it with water, and shook it up. ItTooked
first-rate, didn’t it V
‘ Right you are old fellow. I got the money too. Now for another drink !
What will not otherwise honorable men do to obtain drink ! When pnce
wedded to the passion, no meanness is too great or too small for them to com-
mit. The above story told in the narrator’s own comical way, and the change-
ful expression of his face and voice during its recital, kept his auditors in
constant good humour. Other more or less good tales, were told by some of
those,assembled, when Phil said— „
“ I’ll tell you who I saw too, Frank, that you know of, Long Humphrey.
The latter’s sobriquet, “Long,” was given him on account of his great


height as may be supposed. He was a squatter in the Barnett district, and
was so’ near-sighted that he could scarcely see across a room without his eye
glass He often drove his own bullock-team, nevertheless, and m spite ofhia
defective vision, he was no mean bushman. Phil continued- I met him
about half-a-mile from the little creek at Four Mile Flat. He was walking
quietly alongside his team, apparently in deep thought, for he did not notice
me until I was close to him. . o> xr
‘ Hallo, Humphrey,’ I said, ‘ Where are you going with your team i He
said ‘ You must be uncommonly cloudy this morning, if you can t see that 1
am going towards Maryborough with a load of wool. You are up to some lark
to-day I suppose, as usual, Mr. Phil. ’ ‘ I can only see eight bullocks.
Where’s your dray, and wool V He turned round and put his glass to his eye ;
pulled his beard, as he always does when he is puzzled ; and then uttered an
exclamation that I shall not repeat before a lot of modest bachelors. He said
< Come here, woi,’ to his leaders, and went back to the creek with his team.
There was the load of wool, and the two polers still in the pole, standing
quietly. As soon as they saw their mates coming back, they boo d. I saw-
how it was at once, and laughed till I nearly tumbled off my horse. Humphrey
looked awfully vexed and said ‘ I say, old fellow, keep it dark—-keep it dark ,
I shall be roasted to death if this gets wind. Keep it dark . Are you not
aslr,w too much of even your best friend 1 If I were forced to keepjhat from
the public, I should waste away like a ha porth of soap after a week s wash.
It would be the death of me. Self-preservation is the first law of nature, you
know, and if yourpossible, or even probable, auto-da-fe is to be put in the balance
against my certain extinction, I shall feel obliged to turn you over to your tor-
mentors. So, my dear boy, you must grin and bear it. He knew the worst
then, and seemed more resigned, but said— Well, you will draw it mild, eh ?
Now do, like a good fellow.’ ‘Yes, of course I will, but the yarnmust be told
with a strict adherence to the truth-in fact, without exaggeration, according
to my invariable practice, and to bush custom generally.
“ This is the way it happened—Humphrey had stopped the team in the creek
while he got a drink— aqua pura you know, because he was g oi ng to town,
not coming back—in the meantime, one of the polers had unhooked the pomt
chain from the nose-iron with his horn-as bullocks sonictimesdowhiethe
chain is slack. Humphrey did not notice it. and started his bullocks without
looking behind. There is no telling how far he would have gone if I had not
PU Thus h they talked till bed-time. The next day Frank dined at Wonga, and
made Stancourt in the evening. James Martin, his friend and companion
in the late affray, in which he was wounded in the thigh, was at home, and wel-
comed him most heartily. George Martin was out on the run looking for
lost sheep, and did not return till after tea. He, too, was very glad to see Frank
They finished the evening with a.rubber at whist, in continuation of the game
at which they were so unceremoniously disturbed when the poor Chinaman
rushed in, and informed them of the attack of the blacks at the sheep-station.
Instead of his former partner—Ford—George took dummy. Frank gave
an account of his adventures and discoveries since his departure from Stan-
court, and the evening passed more pleasantly than the one he had previously
SP George r Martin and Bony started away at daylight next morning, to resume
their search for the remainder of the lost sheep, as darkness had overtaken
them when they found the first lot last
A squatter’s life is supposed by too many citizens to be one of almost un-
mitigated leisure—pipes, novels, spirits, and an easy chair . Nothing
G


further from fact. A squatter’s life in a new country is a hard one; hi»
anxieties are great; his toil heavy and incessant, often extending far into the
night. His pleasures are few, indeed ; and his remuneration very uncertain ;
or, too often, like “ hope deferred,” which “ maketh the heart sick. ” The
'tradesman can calculate to within a few pounds a week, or month, what bis
income and expenses will be. He takes his shutters down at a uniform time
every morning of the week, and puts them up again as regularly in the even-
ts* He has few dangers within or without—the police give him a certain
amount of protection ; and he can lay his head on his pillow at night with
but little fear of robbers or murderers. His business does not take him out
for long hard days in the fervent heat, or the driving rain. He has bia.
anxieties of course—who has not ?
Frank called at Yerilla, but Mr. Brown was out on the run. Mrs. Brown
was at home, and pursuaded Frank to stay to dinner. She told him that her
new servants had arrived about ten days before, and she was much relieved to
find them not only willing, but able to do the work required of them tolerably
to her satisfaction. She thought the man was a very mean fellow to his wife,
from several things that she and her husband had noticed, and their impres-
sion had been strengthened by an incident which had occurred a few days
before. It # was on the occasion of the woman’s birthday. She showed her
mistress a sovereign that he had given her as a birthday present. Mrs. Brown
was rather surprised at his liberality, so when she saw the man soon after,
she, relenting of what she conceived to be her previously unjust suspicions,
thought she would make some amends by complimenting him on his gene-
rosity, when he said—“ Yes, ma’am, I did give she a sovereign, but when it’s
Is birthday, her’li give it back to I.” It turned out that his birthday would
be in about a month and the liberal-minded fellow would then get the sovereign
back ! However, if his selfishness did not interfere with the work, Mrs.
Brown had cause to be thankful. Mr. Brown, who always had a bit of play-
ful consolation for his wife, said “ A new broom always sweeps clean.”
Frank took_ charge of some more letters to post in Maryborough, and then
started for the township. It was a long day’s stage from Stancourt to Mary-
borough, and as he had no time to lose, he pushed on briskly. It was just
getting dark when he reached the Six Mile Water Holes—a,favourite camping
place for teams. A scene or wild confusion presented itself as he rode up.
There were ten or twelve drays and their drivers, with their mates —or off-
eiders—and black-boys. Some of the drays were loaded with wool, evidently
bound for the township. The rest were loaded with general up country
supplies, for some of the stations. One dray had on it cases and casks of
wines and spirits, apparently for some public-house. This was the mainspring
of the disgusting scene that Frank now witnessed. There were both men and
women-—black and white—in every stage of intoxication. Some merry, and
some singing in chorus ; others rowdy and quarrelsome ; while more were
rolling on the ground, or unable to move. The men had resorted to some of
the many tricks known to carriers, for extracting the liquor from casks and
cases, without making any holes or marks w'here they could be seen. One of
these plans was, to displace a hoop slightly ; bore a hole through a stave;
draw off some liquor ; then plug up the hole, and replace the hoop. Or they
would loosen the hoops so that the liquor would flow between the staves into
a . bucket. With cases of spirits, their mode of procedure was, to take the
case and give it a smart jar on a> stump or a stone, and hold a bucket under to
catch the contents of the fractured bottles. In those days, the publicans or
others for whom the liquor was, were entirely at the mercy of the carriers.
In the first place, there was on the part of the culprit but little fear of the


law, it being in such a lax state, and justice so hard to obtain, that it was nayf
to useless to appeal to it. In the next place, the publicans were frightened
to say too much about such practices, because their own hands were not very
clean ; and, moreover, they did not like to offend the very men who were
their, best customers. Besides, the fellows were great at putting the blame off
their own shoulders—“ Now don’t be hard on a poor fellow, sir ;it was the
purest accident in the world. It wasn’t nobody’s fault in the least. I was a
going down the bank of that Baramba Creek with both wheels locked,
and just when I thought I was right, the leaders whips round, and over she
goes twice, and lands on her legs again ! That’s without a word of a lie, sir.
Strike me dead if that ain’t the truth !—Now ain’t that Gospel, Bill 1” appeal-
ing to his mate. “We was sorry, sir, we couldn’t save the lush, nohow.
It was a-running like little creeks arter a thunderstorm, out of them cases ;
and dear! dear ! we was sorry to see it, ’cause we didn’t know no more nor
children what to do with it. I don’t mean for to say as we didn’t hold a pan-
nikin for to catch a ‘nip ’ just—but that couldn’t do you no harm, sir, nohow.
Could it? Anyways it would have been wasted, if we hadn’t.”
Bill, of course, supported with strong oaths—stronger even than the lost
liquor—all that his mate had averred ; but for all that, the dray had never
been capsized. The publican would of course multiply the missing quantity
with water, tenfold ; and make up more than the original strength, with a.
decoction of tobacco and some bluestone, to poison and madden his customers-
There were two or three voices and figures at the carouse, that Frank recog-
nised—Mr. and Mrs. Red Peter’s and Kipper Tommy’s. He kept aloof, not
wishing to be detained, or to join the company. Those men were so roughly'
importunate in their endeavors to make all comers drink copiously, especially
those whom they ranked on the list of friends or acquaintances. If they de-
termined that a man should drink, his resistance was of little avail. He
would be lifted off his horse, by strong and somewhat rough arms— respectfully
and kindly enough—and placed on a five gallon keg. Then would two or
three kinds of fiery liquor, in as many pint pots, be thrust by powerful, dirty
arms, almost into his face, to take his choice of, each recommended as “ mother
milk ” —“ mountain dew”—“ the raal Mackay. ” Or— ‘ ‘ There, put six inches
of that below your belt, and you’ll be able -to sing as good a song, ride as big
a buckjumper, or dance as good a hornpipe as anyone here. It’s the raal
genuine, and no flies about it! ”
Oh, that such scenes should have been enacted in Her Majesty’s dominions I
But then it was a long way from the throne.
Frank reached Maryborough, and put up at the Bush Inn, the best house-
in Town. He at once set about filling in the necessary forms of tender for
the country, and forwarded them by the first mail to the Crown Lands Office
in Sydney. The rule there was, “ first come first served so it was a matter
of importance to send them in as soon as possible. The only exception to
the rule was, in the event of two different parties’ tenders arriving at the same
time, for the same piece of country, the one offering the highest “ premiumf’ 1,
over the rent would obtain the lease. The rent was £lO a year for each Mock
of 25 square miles.
The inhabitants of Maryborough were a curious lot, as has already been said
—there were exceptions, no doubt. Shall it be said how a magistrate used to
be taken home of a night in a wheelbarrow 1 How the Clerk of the Court was
conveyed from the public-house to his virtuous couch—more than a mile away
—on his black-boy’s back, almost every evening. How another J.P. when
“ on the spree,” was caught red-handed breaking a storekeeper’s windows,
with stones after dark—“ just for a lark”—and was put in the old lock-up till


next morning, when he paid the fine and “ squared” ther storekeeper? Aye,
and how another J.P. who, after attending a dinner, was afraid to go home to
his wife, or was too * 4 muzzy,” wandered into a back verandah in town, and
opened the doors of a large meat-safe, crept in, and was found fast asleep on
the bottom shelf by the astonished owner next morning? Yes. She could see
him, but dimly, though she heard him snoring through the wire gauze. She
cried aloud, “ John ! John ! Quick ! There be a pig in the safe ! I can
hear un grunting!” , ,
John came with a big stick, and said, “ Open you the doors and roust un,
•Sal, while I gi’e un a caution !”
The doors were timidly opened, but the pig did not come.
“ John ! It be a man !”
John looked in. . , , T „
“ Golly ! Sally. It be old Smith, for sure ! He fined Hast week, andl worn t
half so drunk nor he. ” . . ... ,
There was an old baker who was famous for his biscuits. Everyone liked
them, and some curious people wanted to know how they were made, but
old Mac. did not encourage inquiry. He kept no assistant, so the secret wore
a durable aspect. One day, however, he incautiously left his shop door open,
and his bakehouse door unfastened, when he was preparing the dough for a
batch of biscuits. A lady customer went in and knocked at the counter,
but not being able to make the old man hear, she went through to the bake-
house and knocked at the door.
“Wha’s there?”’
“Only Mrs. . I want some biscuits.’
“Oo aye, Ma’am. I’m jist makin’ soom the noo. Ye canna have ony for
a’.hoor.” . ,
The door was slightly ajar. Eve’s opportunity could not have been more
favorable, nor temptation stronger. She pushed the door wide open. There
stood old Mac. in a trough of dough ; his trousers tucked up to his knees,
and his face streaming with perspiration. He looked full of wrath, and so
far lost his temper as to say—
“ The de’il tak’a’women.” ,
Poor old Mao. lost more than his temper—he lost the lady s custom, and
that of others for his biscuits, as soon as his mode of manufacture was made
known for who ever heard of a lady keeping a secret except Lady Audley;
well, that was her own. ’
Frank not being able to make any arrangements for the start to the new
country till. Barrett returned from Sydney, had to fill up his time as he best
could, with sporting and riding. He joined a party to go down the river in a
boat to shoot and fish. It was about thirty miles from-the township to the
heads of the river. The river itself was very beautiful, fully repaying any
one for the time and trouble spent. in sailing or pulling on it. For the
greater part, its banks were covered with dense vine scrubs of great height.
These scrubs were extremely beautiful, being composed of tall trees inter-
laced with enormous vines, whose twining stems and branches ran from one
tree to another, covering the whole as with a mantle. Masses of foliage-
were pendent from the branches of the great trees overhanging the water,
forming cool arbours into the shelter of which the heated rowers could thrust
their boat at any time ; or in which they could lie in wait for the numerous
water-fowL which paddled lazily in vast numbers on the surface of the river,
inviting a liberal expenditure of B. No. 1. Only a faint impression ofthe
wondrous beauty of these scrubs can here be imparted to the reader. They
were evergreen, and the foliage embraced every shade of green, from a


yellowish tint to almost black; some of the leafage being dull, some-hitight
and glossy. They were filled with game ; indeed, they were theEmaSofa
great variety of birds and animals. The plumage of the former was diverse
in colour, brilliant, and beautiful. Nor did Nature stay her hand when
bestowing the birds’ covering. Their notes were sweet, and so was their flesh.
Some were large, plump, and well-flavored, especially the Wonga pigeon,
which, however, was about the plainest plumaged bird in the scrub. There
were other large pigeons, whose plumage was equal to any parrot, and at the
same time possessing the great advantage over the latter bird of being juicy,
tender and sweet, when cooked. Then there were turkeys ; large birds, but
their flesh being somewhat dry, though tender and palatable, required a little
management in the cooking to make them a favorite at table ; but a hungry
bushman would never notice the defect, after cooking it on the coals at a
camp-fire. The river opened out into a fine bay, in which were numerous
extensive sand flats, quite dry at low tide, and usually covered with myriads
of birds—snipe and curlew —which, when disturbed, flew up in dense clouds.
The party was composed of four whites and two black-boys. One or two
black-boys were always taken on such expeditions, they being very intelligent
and smart, and handy in many ways—they could row, shoot, track, swim after
ducks that were shot, help to drag the boat over shallows —in fact, they could
do anything; and in the anticipation of a drop of grog now and then, would
put on the steam and perform wonders.
There was one of the party—Charley O’Connor—who would always get
tight whenever the opportunity offered ; and if it did not offer, his resources
were so numerous that he generally overcame the difficulty by creating one.
He followed out the great principle laid down by Mahomet, as a means to an
end, and if opportunity would not come to him, he went to it. However
carefully his friends shepherded or concealed the spirit-keg or bottle, he
generally outwitted them, and took a great deal more than his share. He
had been in the army, and was a perfect gentleman and a very pleasant
companion—away from grog. Indulgence in his inveterate habit, often
caused his company to be extremely undesirable. His friends, knowing his
peculiarity, always took precautions to prevent his indulgence, which, as
has been said, so often failed, Frank was the only one of the party who was
thoroughly moderate. He never had exceeded, having a great horror of the
habit. Indeed, he could seldom be prevailed on to take spirits on aqy
occasion, and he took very little of any other kind of liquor.
They landed late in the afternoon at the mouth of the river ; hauled the
boat up high and dry ; and prepared their camp for the night, by erecting ft
light frame of saplings over which they threw the boat’s sails. It was very
hot, and Charley had already imbibed more spirits than was good for him.
During his absence for a short, time from the camp, they buried the keg in
the sand, so that he should not get any more. After his return, an excursion
afoot was proposed, and all went except Charley, who, pleading indisposition,
said he would have a sleep. Thinking all was safe, they left him. It Was
only a ruse on his part, for as soon as they were well out of sight, he bestirred
himself to find the keg, and by dint of perseverance and tracking, discovered
the plant. It was said that he could find anything containing spirits'by
instinct, wherever it might be hidden. If that were true, instinct must have
a deal of method in it. On their return, he was in a most uproarious oobjii-
tion, having unearthed the keg. It was immediately taken away,
mischief was done. He danced, sang, and behaved in a most extravagant
manner. He begged for more drink, and at length became quarrelsome
because they would not supply it. He would toss-up, run, jump, climb a


■tree, swim, or shoot with any of them for more drink. No one would take
him up. Then he would fight any or all of them, black-boys and all, to the
infinite amusement of the latter, who enjoyed the scene. At length he said
that as they were not gentlemen enough to give him the satisfaction that a
gentleman had a right to expect, he would shoot some of them. He had not
been in the army for nothing—not he, so here goes—and he made a dash at
A gun, which was with much difficulty wrested from him. So violent was Ins
phrensy, that they had as much as they could do to hold him, and as he
showed no signs of exhaustion, they held a consultation on the best means of
preventing him doing harm to himself or his friends. They did not Hke to
tie him up, so they determined to dig a hole in the sand, and cover him all
except the head. A hole was accordingly dug, he was put in, and the sand
shovelled in around him ; then they poured cold water on his head. This
mode of treatment seemed to have a soothing effect, for after a sally of the
most lively vituperation, he collapsed, and took to snoring. They then
transplanted him to the camp and watched him, but he slept on till mornmg,
when he awoke in a more religious frame of mind, and humbly craved for a
■“doctor,” which was duly administered. That, and a dip in the sea, refreshed
him and steadied his nerves a bit, when his mercurial temperament again
rose to a very pleasant pitch.
Such men are very dangerous to youth, and even to those of more mature
age. They are too often men of the most gentlemanly exterior ; frank and
pleasant—even fascinating in their manners ; and their vices are so blended
with, and at the same time so cloaked by their showy qualities, as to be
unperceived by the inexperience of youth, who know not that such com-
panions are like yawning graves, between which they are treading in the dark.
Mosquitoes and sandflies were very numerous all along that part of the
coast, and terribly tormented all who were unprotected from them. Sandflies
are minute, dark insects, about the size of a grain of sand, and their bite
causes a large hard swelling; infinitely more itchy and irritable than that
produced by the mosquito. They come out at daylight, and mostly retire
after sundown, but the mosquitoes keep up their annoyance both day and
night. Of course mosquito curtains are out of the question when one is
travelling ; in any case they would be no protection against sandflies, as they
could crawl through the meshes. Moreover, they creep up one’s sleeves
and trouser-legs, and down one’s neck, leaving the parts attacked by them
in a state of inflammation and itchiness almost intolerable. The only pro-
vision that can be made against either of these tormenting insects, is to keep
up a continual smoke of green wood or cow dung, but the remedy is only of
use as long as it is kept up.
The pleasure party having a fair wind, put up sail and went down the bay
-towards the Bar at a spanking rate. Between the entrance to the river and
the Bar—a distance of forty miles—were numerous islands and sandflats,
where they could have unlimited sport with both gun and hook. There
were also plenty of oysters, and crabs of great size. The time passed
pleasantly enough that day till about one o’clock, when the tide and wind
turned too strongly against them to admit of their making any more headway
ip the desired direction, so they put into a creek in a large island, and
Wont ashore to follow their inclinations in any agreeable way that presented
itself. With a little refreshment, O’Connor was in brilliant spirits, and
during dinner he kept up a constant fire of pleasantries, and told some yams.
One was about a bush clergyman whom they all knew. He said,
“ When I was going up to Gayndah once, I stayed at Taranga.
You know what extreme evangelistic views Mrs. Button holds? Yery


well, it was on a Saturday night. I stayed there, and next morning
Mrs. Button said I could not possibly travel on a Sunday, and as I
did not like to contradict her I stayed—you know how pliant I am.
Well, old Button was away, so I thought I would have a peaceful
time of it with my pipe and a book—for I didn’t think it likely she
would-read service herself. About half-past ten, I was lounging m the
squatter’s-ease in the verandah, and was just getting into the most interesting
part of a sensational novel I brought in my valise, when I saw a man in Jus
Sunday best coming towards the house from one of the huts. 1 thought
nothing of that; but presently another, and another, and then a lot of
children came trooping up, all nice and clean, and looking most solemn.
They all walked past me, and entered the parlour. As the small fry Med
past me and saw that I was reading a novel, they all looked at one another
and then gave frightened glances over their shoulders. Poor little S °M® •
I read in their faces what was in their hearts they expected to see Old
Gooseberry somewhere not far from me. Then up comes Scotchy the
Blower—Button’s bullock-driver. We looked at each other and smiled—lU
teU you why afterwards. Thinks I—you’U be extremely disappointed to find
that there will be no service this morning ! The thought had scarcely passed
through my brain, when Mrs. Button came out and said, Mr. O Oonnor,
our people are all assembled for the usual Sabbath mornings service ; and
as they are a very praiseworthy and religious-minded lot, they will feel much
disappointment if it has to be put off. lam very thankful that I have been
the humble chosen instrument, by which several of our people who formerly-
lived very wicked lives, have been snatched from the burning. The bullock-
driver, who told me that he had been a child of Satan, I am thankful to say
is now a really reformed character, and I venture to hope is one of the chosen.
It fills my heart with joy when I hear him raise his voice in our little congre-
gation, in praise to his Maker.’ She should have heard him raise his voice _
the evening before to his congregation of bullocks at Eeedy Creek ! Will
you be so kind, Mr. O’Connor, as to officiate in Mr. Button s place 1 I always
write a short address or sermon, during the week, for- my husband to read
after prayers, which perhaps you had better first read through to yourself at
once, as it will render it easier for you to do so at the conclusion of prayers.
“ I read the service ! It is not often that lam taken aback, but upon my
word, her request struck me all of a heap. By the powers . 1 w oma
sooner have faced bayonets and broadswords, than act parson to that
congregation, some of whom knew me so well. I could not reply at first,
and when I did, I could only get out ‘l-1-1-’ when she pushed the con-
founded sermon into my hand and said, Thank you, Mr. O Connor. Then
you will be in in ten minutes.’ Then she went inside to catechise the poor
children, and to hear more lying experiences from Scotchy and other
hypocrites. Ten minutes ! Why, there were nine very neatly and closely
written pages of foolscap ! I did read a little here and there, and it was
nothing but infinite mercy, fire, chains, love, and everlasting; punishment.
It wound up by saying that ‘ some people were predestined millions of years
before they were born to everlasting punishment, wrath, and torments , and
that myriads of babes were now suffering such pangs at the hands of tfteir
merciful Creator for the sins of their forefathers ; and that though some of
the children there might possibly be of the evil-predestined number, it whs
still the duty of all to live unblemished lives, and to love their beneficent
Creator.’ Comforting and encouraging to the young ideas, eh I ’
“ Well, she came out and said, ‘ I hope you have mastered my litUe aqgrasa,
Mr O’Connor. It is intended more particularly for the dear x


hope it will be not altogether uninstructiye to those of riper years. Come,
Mr. O’Connor, please, we are all ready.’ I followed her with a.sinking ai
my heart like that felt by a man being led out to execution —or worse still,
like one who has not had a nip for three days. She motioned me to the table,,
and I pretended to be finding the places, just to gain time, when she said,
‘The places are all marked, Mr. O’Connor.’ I bowed, and raised the book.
I would have given the world for just three inches of brandy, my hand,
shook so, and my throat was hot and dry. However, I was determined to do
my best, and was actually going to speak, when a loud knock came at the-,
door, and startled me so that I dropped the book. The servant sought Mrs.
Button’s eye; Mrs. Button’s eye said, I G6, Sarah ! ’ and Sarah moved
through the congregation with down-cast eyes, and a general air of deep-
devotion. Sarah presently returned, and announced ‘ the Rev. Mr. Laughton,
ma’am, please.’ What a relief ! What elixir ! What P.B. it was to my
shaking nerves ! If reprieve from death is like that, I would willingly go-
through a long trial for wilful murder, and be sentenced by the black-capped
judge to be hanged by the neck, and a lot more, to obtain one. The parson
smiled approvingly on me, and shook hands cordially. Didn’t I give the old
gentleman a squeeze that came from my heart ? Of course he said he was
very sorry to disturb us (I begged of him not to mention it), and explained
how it was that he was so late. He was on his round of visits to the various-
stations in his district, and would have been at Taranga much sooner, only
that he had to marry a silly young couple who had only quite decided on the
match the evening before. Sootchy went out and took the parson’s saddle
off, turned the horse out, and then came back. Mrs. Button played the
hymns on the piano, and Scotchy took a leading part in ‘ raising his voice,”
and eyes too —the hairy hypocrite ! He had a good voice, and it had
been fairly cultivated. Mrs. Button knew that I could sing, and read
music too, so I made a virtue of necessity, stood by the piano, turned the
leaves over, and ‘ raised my voice’ also. But it makes my throat dry to
think of it.—Frank, pass that bottle, please.
“ There are not many spare rooms in their house, but there ought to have
been for they never had any children, so the parson and I shared the same
room. He is a jolly old fellow when you get him by himself, but a bit
cautious when in mixed company. He smokes his pipe, takes his glass of
grog, tells good yarns, and can ride a buck-jumper well. He reads novels,
too, on Sunday, and I’ll tell you how I found that out. I saw how horrified
Mrs. Button looked when she came into the verandah and saw that I was
reading a yellow-backed book. Well, just out of respect to her feelings, I
did not let her see me reading it again, but took it into my room. In the
afternoon, the parson and Mrs. Button and myself were sitting in the
verandah. He got up and went inside ; in a few minutes he came round
from the back of the house, with his black-backed sermon under his arm, and
went towards the creek. ‘ The good old man is going to study his sermon
for this evening,’ Mrs. Button remarked. ‘I, too, like to think in the open
forest. One can get ideas there that would never be experienced in a house.’
We sat there, and she talked about religion till I was sick of it ; then I got
up and took a stroll towards the creek. It was a very hot afternoon, and I
thought I would get into the shade by the water, and have a smoke. • While
walking along the bank to find a place to get down—for it was very steep—l
noticed circles in the water. Thinking they were occasioned by ducks, I
looked down. There was my noble parson. Studying his sermon? Ko, but
luxuriously reclining on the grassy bank in the shade. His coat, hat, and
boots were off; his trousers rolled up above his knees, and his legs dangled


in the water, while he lazily puffed away at his pipe. He was reading a book:
that I could plainly see was not a sermon, though it was inside a Sermon
cover. The expression of his countenance was anything but serious. I made
my way down the bank a little further on, and went towards him. Suddenly
he drew one leg out of the water and gave it a slap, saying ‘ Drat those leeches,
how they bite ! ’ He did not hear me till I was close to him ; when he did,
he closed the sermon cover quickly, and looked up anxiously. ‘Oh ! Charley,
my boy. How you startled me !’ he said. I had seen quite enough of the
book to know what it was before he covered it though. It was Iny yellow-
backed sensational. ‘ I hope lam not disturbing your study of your sermon 1
I said. He looked up sharply, and we both burst out laughing. He said,,
‘How Charley, my boy, you must not think me a hypocrite. I never was-
that, but we must not wound people’s religious sensibilities, you know, if we can-
help it. I took up your book, and got rather interested in it this afternoon,,
and after giving a decent time to conversation with Mrs. 8., I left, as you
know, with a desire to see more of this story ; and here I am. But I did not
wish her to know what I was going to read, so, on the spur of the moment, I just
popped it inside my sermon cover. Upon my word, it is not half a bad story. ’
“ I’m terribly dry again ! Just a nip—thanks, that’s enough. How I will
tell you what made Scotchy and I smile when our eyes met in old Button’s-
verandah. I had overtaken Scotchy the evening before in Reedy Creek, with
his dray bogged. I had heard him in the distance, and guessed what was
up. As I got closer, from the language I heard, I should never have taken
him for a man holding extreme Evangelistic views, had I been a stranger to
him, which I was not. He stood half-way up to his knees in bog ; his shirt
was nearly off; his hat was gone ; and his hair streamed over his forehead.
He held a tremendous thick stick in his hands, and "his bullocks showed
wales on their ribs to match. He had just finished his whip up a few*
minutes before, and threw it on top of his loading ; it was soft and
muddy, and the strands were unplatted up to the belly. The bullocks
were all blowing, with their tongues out ; the two polers nearly down to.
their bellies in bog ; and the wheels were axle deep. I said, ‘ Hallo 1
Scotchy, what’s up 2 Where’s your hat 2 ’ ‘ Can’t you see what’s up t
My hat’s down there somewheres, about a fathom -under. It tumbled
off, and old Spanker put his foot in it. I’m nigh dead beat sir, and haven’t
a sup of grog.’ No more had I — worse luck. Well, I tied my horse up out
of the way, and took my coat off to help him out of the mess, for he was
single-handed. ‘ Scotchy,’ I said, ‘ you have lost your temper, and your
judgment. You should keep cool, you know, when you get into a mess like
this.’ I felt quite good when I gave him that advice. ‘Now,’ I said,
‘ you just unhook your point-chain and unyoke your polers where they are,
for they will never get out of that in yokes. ’ ‘ What then, sir 2 ’ ‘ Why,
yoke up your polers again after they get out of the bog ; put them in the
team, and draw a-head a little on to sound ground ; get all the spare chains-
you have—three will be enough—and hook on to the nose of your dray, and
out she will come. Don’t you see, the bullocks all being on the bank on
sound ground will have good foothold. ’ After relieving my mind of that,
I felt like a professional bullock-driver. He looked me all over with a grin,
and said ‘ Beg pardon, sir, but do you think you could teach your granny
to suck eggs 2 Don’t you think I should have tried that there dodge before
if I’d had spare chains! but I haven’t.’ That was a clincher, and made me
feel considerably smaller. So I said, ‘ Well, Scotchy, 111 see you out of
the mess, anyhow. What is to be done 2 ’ ‘ Why, sir, we have two ways to
get out —one is, to take off part of the loading ; and the other is to pull her
89


-out as she is. We can’t spoke her out, because there’s no room to work
the bullocks, there’s so many oaks and tea-trees in the way. If we pull he£
backwards, she’ll very likely tip up, and shoot some of the loading backwards
into the water. If you go on the off-side, and rattle theni up with a stick,
while I rally the near-siders, they may pull it out fair and square—they’ve
.got ago in ’em yet, and eight of them has foothold on the bank; so if they
.gives a good lift, they’ll rise the polers and give ’em a chance.’
“ I kept cool for a bit, but was covered with mud from top to toe.
Every time Scotchy straightened the team, some of the bullocks pulled
and some did not—they would not all put their necks up to the yokes
-at once—and before half an hour was up I began to lose my temper.
Scotchy heard me then, and called over, ‘ Keep cool, sir, or you’ll lose your
judgment. We’ll have a smoke, and then try another dodge, and if that
fails we must unload.’ We had a smoke, and Scotchy said, ‘ Now we’ll light
a fire on the bank and make a good smoke. Then we’ll get the bullock bells
off the dray, and carry ’em up the bank and throw ’em down, so’s they’ll
hear ’em speak. ’ This was high Dutch to me, and I was too proud to ask
him what his object was. All was ready, and Scotchy said, ‘You stick to
them off-siders, sir, like grim-death—wallap into ’em, they can stand it. I’ll
make my lot shape, and if we don’t negociate ’em this time, it’s a case of
unload. You pitch into that off-side leader—Ranger—he’s a gallows old
rogue.’ Well, we put them at it again, and did our main best. The
bullocks pulled one and all, and strained till I thought the yokes or the chains
must go. The dray moved ahead slowly. ‘ She’s coming ! ’ said Scotchy,
‘ Keep ’em at it,’ and so we did, and got the dray up the bank at last. I
“was in an awful state of excitement, and so was my mate. When the dray
was safe on the top of the bank, we both sank down exhausted, and never
spoke for ten minutes. What would I have given for a ball then ! When
Scotchy came to a bit, he said, 1 I’ve tricked many’s the team of knowing old
beggars that way. When they saw the smoke and heard the bells throwed
down, here, they thought we was agoing to camp, and turn them out to be
fed. That’s what made ’em slog into it with a will. My oath !it was a stiff
pull, too. I was gallied they would’nt do it. ’
“ I say, old fellow, give us another ball—don’t know what makes me so
thirsty to-day. I really do not think I should make a good parson, I get so
husky when I talk much. That’s good stuff! Now, if you are not all tired
of my yams, and have not heard how Scotchy raised a Chinaman’s ghost,
I’ll tell you.” No one had heard it before and he continued—
“ Scotchy was once bullock-driving for old Berthelstone of Boonara.
There were some Chinamen at an out-station,- and one of them died.
His mates buried him according to their rites, with some money in his hand,
and a packet of tobacco, opium, rice, and two bottles of grog. They were
determined he should not feel hunger or thirst on the way. Next day the
pigtails found that the grave had been robbed of the tobacco, moqey, and
grog, and they told the overseer. He got a black-boy to examine the
tracks about the grave, and it was discovered that one boot-print had
three nails missing on one side. Several of the men’s boots were examined
privately by the overseer ; at last one of Scotchy’s was found to correspond
with the track. When he came home with his team that night, the old
man discharged him, and told him to clear out next morning, or ha
would very likely be murdered by the Chinamen. The resurrectionist
-.asked no questions, and was off next morning at daylight. The Chinamen
did not stay long, for they said they saw the ghost of their mate walking
.about the flat of a night, looking for the money and food he had been


robbed of. Whether it was true or no, Ido not know, but the Chinamen
believed it. Hallo, Frank ! What is the matter with your black-boy ? ”
Tommy, who was fishing, was also making signs to call their attention, and
pointing out to seaward, he shouted—“ Condole come up,” and on looking
they saw a schooner bearing up the bay at a good rate. She was within half si-
mile of them in less than two hours, when they put off in the boat and boarded
her. She proved to be the Herculean, from Sydney, commanded by Captain
Hitchins. Frank was delighted to find Robert Barrett on board. It was
arranged that the pleasure party should proceed to Maryborough in her, and
that their boat should be towed astern.
Barrett and Frank had much to talk about, and to arrange. The former
brought all sorts of messages, and a long letter for Frank from his mother.
Barrett had on board a large supply of station necessaries—tools, rations,
arms, nails, drays and bullock-gear, woolpacks, and everything that was
required for the forming of a new station. His experience aided him in the
selection of everything that was requisite, to the exclusion of all superfluities.
He had also several shepherds and other hands.
After the average number of groundings on sandbanks and kedging off
again, but sometimes remaining on for a whole tide, the Herculean arrived
at Maryborough. Before the schooner entered the river, a party of blacks
boarded her, and were taken on to the township. They often swam two or
three miles out into the bay to get on board the schooners, others going in
bark canoes, for they were very fond of biscuit, flour, and tobacco, for which
they used to barter their fish and oysters. Occasionally, as in the present
instance, a small party would go on to the township to assist in discharging and
loading the schooners, and were taken back on the vessels’ return to the bay.
Barrett’s plans were as follow : —They were to purchase one team of ten
bullocks, and start with all their men, tools, and a sufficiency of rations,
except meat, which they could obtain at the various stations on the road.
They would, leave the dray and team at Rossdale, and all the men except
two, who would proceed with them to mark and roughly clear a road for the
dray to the intended site of the new station. That done they would return
and bring the men on, and set to work to put up two bark huts, one for the
men, and one for themselves ; and bough-yards for the sheep. Then they
would all go back to Rossdale, and Frank and Barrett would go and inspect
some sheep that had been offered to them, within a reasonable distance of
their new station. If the stock was approved by, and the terms suited
Barrett, he would remain and see the sheep drafted, and take delivery,
while Frank went back for the men and the team. Barrett did think once
of leaving Frank with the men at the new place, to make the requisite
Improvements. But though he knew Frank to be thoroughly trustworthy,
yet he could not hide from himself the fact that he was but a youth, and had
not had much practical experience amongst the rough characters, such as he
knew some of the hands to be, and they would be sure to do very much as
they liked in consequence. From what he had heard of Frank amongst the
blacks, he had no doubt as to his courage, but much as to his discretion;
and he had seen the disastrous results of an attack by the blacks, on a party
under an inexperienced leader. So he determined to incur no risk, not
wishing any fatal mistake to be made at the outset, which would inevitably
have a bad effect both on the blacks and whites in future. Some stations
were, either from their peculiar situation, or from a similar occurrence to the
above having taken place at the beginning, particularly liable to murderous
raids of the blacks, who were always quick at estimating the character and
true strength of the usurpers of their country.


CHAPTER IX.
A team of bullocks was accordingly purchased of a carrier who was leaving
the district, and all started for the “Never Never Country. Besides Tommy,
they took a black-fellow named Mickey, and his gin. Mickey was a very
powerful fellow, and as active as a cat. He was a wit among his people, and
though he seldom laughed himself, his droll speeches and comic cast of
countenance, kept his audience almost convulsed with laughter whenever
sat round their camp tires. Ho was a man approaching middle age, his old
woman'' looked much older, though it is possible she was not, for gins soon
lose any little comeliness they may possess, and go down hill very rapidly in
personal appearance. »Sho was, however, in spite of her somewhat rcpulsne
wrinkled exterior, a very good sort of creature, and useful withal, for she
could cook, wash, and make herself handy in many ways domestically, having
served several white women who had put her through her facings. Mickey,
though but a. sorry horseman, was a very excellent tracker, a magnificent
swimmer, and could do a hard day's work—qualities not to be despiseck
Besides, ho was a brave and able warrior, and never failed to make himself
respected by his enemies. As a spearman lie was almost unequalled.
There was an individual of the party who was a true typo of his kind unb-
ent one of which a dray rarely travelled —a knowing “ old screw. He was
a light grey or white, with a long head, only one eye, and a stump of a tail.
His fore feet were “ pigeon toed " ; his back hollow and sharp; and one hip
was down. Taking him altogether, lie was a most uninviting specimen of the
horse kind. To enhance his natural ugliness he was marked all over the back
and round the girth with patches of black hair, which had been caused by
saddle and girth-galls. On each side, from the point of the shoulder nearly
to the flank, was a ridge of coarse, long, black hair ; showing how cruelly he
had been ripped with the spurs in days gone by. Barrett bought him w iili
the team, for the man said, “ He's a capital old moak. He can a most find
the bullocks his self of a morning. , Ho never goes far from the dray at
night, and follows it all day. There's no fear of anybody stealing of him,
he’s too ugly, and ton well known. Another good point lies got flash
black-hoys can't gallop him to death, cause he wont go out of an old
bullock’s trot to save your life —no fear. ’ Old “Hooper was thus the
possessor of all the virtues necessary to qualify him as a first-class “screw
to travel with a dray : and lie was soon found to lie invaluable in that capacity.
Flour is called h:nt}n:r by the aborigines of that part—hence his name. He
was a sociable old fellow, and would often hang about the camp for a bit of
damper, sugar, or salt ; and he liked to nibble the dough that adhered to
the damper-board. He was a knowing old fellow, for Old Ben, the bullock-
driver, mure than once left his sugar bag on the fetchels of the pole, ana
old Boopcr came in the night, lifted the tarpaulin with his head, bit a hole
in the bag, and licked all the sugar out.
Heavy storms were experienced on the journey, which sometimes retarded
the progress of the team, as it was not safe to continue during a violent storm,
on account of the heavy limbs of trees, or of the trees themselves that were
blown down in great numbers. Crocks were rendered temporarily incrossable
by the heavy tropical rains, during the continuance of which the tarpaulin


had to be spread over the loading and dray, to prevent the provisions and
other things from being wetted. A good-sized tarpaulin will cover both
loading and dray, and reach to the ground. In case of a heavy storm, it is
secured by tying a rope round it and the body of the dray, and the bows,
yokes, and chains, are laid on those portions of it touching the ground, to
keep it from blowing off.
They got on without any occurrences worth noting, beyond those usual on
similar journe3 7 s, such as a half or a. whole day s detention on account of the
temporary loss of one or two rambling bullocks, but these little inconveniences
arc always expected, and if they occasion some feeling of impatience in the
breasts of the travellers, they arc generally overcome by the energy of the
sufferers. It is very trying to the temper to be detained for hours perhaps
for days—on account of the loss of a single bullock, which may, perhaps,
have got in witli a* mob of cattle on the run through vhich the team is
travelling. Or very likely the rogue is planted in a scrub at no great distance
away, while the black-bov and bullock-driver are unable to find his tracks
amongst those of hundreds of other cattle running in his neighborhood.
Polcy bullocks arc particularly roguish, somcof them will by a slcight-oMicad
movement, slip out of the yoke and make off, unless very tightly boved up.
This is not a very pleasant predicament to be placed in at a steep pinch, or
in any other awkward situation. The splitting of a yoke will let a couple of
bullocks free from a team, just when they are most needed. Such accidents
are very vexatious, especially when things have not been going ton smoothly
beforehand. Though very trying to the temper of an energetic bullock-driver
these are only minor misfortunes after all, for spare bows, yokes, and chains
are always carried on a journey ; and if a “nobby bullock slips his head
out of the yoke, it is easy to how him up a bit shorter—unless, indeed, lie
makes off, and plants so artfully as to evade all attempts to lind him nithm
a reasonable time —which occasionally happens—then another is put in .us
place, and his late driver consoles himself with a naughty determination, and
boasts of what he will do v:hen he catches him again I Hut human plans some
times fail, and when the runaway is caught, it may be ho is in someone
elsc's team, and the poor brute is worked down as poor as a crow, and has
to he turned out for months to pick up. So his roguery does neither himself
nor his owner any good. Of course, the man who u soldiered him v- as
quite innocent ! He mistook him for a bullock that sonic person had told
him ho had lost, or left, just where he found him, and which the person said
he could work for a time', if he happened to be short of a bullock, and came
across him ! . ..
When a bullock is a known rambler, his driver will never let him out, except
in hobbles, or else coupled to a steady old bullock'. Another plan is to suing
a heavy block of wood by the middle, to a piece of green-hide rope round the
beast’s neck, so that the wood will strike his knees as he walks, rendering
locomotion both inconvenient and painful. P<>ley cattle are necessarily
roguish, because their horned companions are invariably cruel to them, ihe
persecuted ones are, therefore, forced to make up in intellect for rvaturos
omission in the way of personal adornment.
Hobblino a young bullock, or one not accustomed to having hobbles put
on, is a ticklish business ; and the method is to couple an old quiet one to it,
then reach under his neck or belly, as is most convenient to get at the legs
of the one to be hobbled. Another plan is to have the one to be hobbled on
the off-side at the tail-end of the team—or to explain it more intelligibly to
the non-bullock-driving reader—the last right-hand bullock in the team.


The team is then drawn parallel to the dray, till the one to be hobbled fsr
side on to the wheel. The chain between him and his mate is then fastened
to the tail cross-piece of the dray, and the bullocks drawn on gently till the
chain presses him tightly to the wheel —the dray being previously chocked, so
that it cannot be pulled round. The man then gets under the dray, and puts
the hobbles on between the spokes of the wheel. It is, however, not so easily
accomplished as described, for even the quietest bullocks will rarely allow a
man to handle them on the off-side. Workers are very touchy, and the
majority of them will only allow themselves to be handled in the way they
have been accustomed to. It matters not how experienced a man may be, it
always behoves him to use a certain amount of caution while yoking up a
strange team of bullocks. A great deal depends on the temper of the beast,
but a great deal more in the breaking-in ; .and many a severe accident, and
not a few fatal ones, have occurred through some trivial deviation from the
usual mode of yoking up particular beasts by strangers. For instance, a
near-sidcr is broken in by a man who always bears his weight against it while
ho is yoking its mate ; another man, not knowing this, and having the habit
of standing quite clear of the bullock lie is yoking over, in yoking the same
beast, proceeds in his particular way ; the beast perceiving the difference,
runs back suddenly or throws his head up : in the one case, the man, if
not on his guard, is struck on the hip or chest by the boast s horn ; in the
other, the yoke is struck up and splits the man s head open ; or, perhaps, he
is carried round the yard across the beast's horns, and at last thrown several
yards into the air, and receives a kick from the amiable brute for coming clovn
a trifle too near its hind legs. "Workers seldom pull equally well on either
side in a team, and as they are almost invariably broken in on the off-side, it
requires time and caution to make noar-siders of them. Bullock driving may
seem to the uninitiated to be a monotonous, easy-going occupation that any
fool can follow. No greater mistake could be made. It is, in fact, from the
great variety of circumstances in which a man may be placed, a calling that
requires a long and active apprenticeship for even a smart man to become
tolerably proficient in. It looks simple enough, and really is so at times;
for instance, on a good road in fine weather, several teams may be seen lazily
travelling along ; one or two of the drivers will be asleep on top of the load,
while the others are crawling alongside their teams, and occasionally uttering
a quiet ££ Wa woi, Tinker” or, “Gee back, Smuggler” as they come to a
turn in the road. Now for the other side of the picture. The weathei is
wet. The road traverses new country. It is, in fact, a snake-like thing, all
turns and twists. No cuttings have been made in the creek banks ; and
steep sidling ridges arc covered with logs. No stones have been broken
down, and great boulders and rocks have to be navigated between 01 diiven
over. Bogs and swamps have not been corduroyed, or in any way altered.
The man—whom yon can see by the way he handles his team is a crack
hand-only has a black-boy to assist him in his hard long task. He works
away, doing his best from morn till night, and often and often only succeeds
in getting out of sight of his last night’s camp. The top soft crust of earth
gives way under the weight of the dray, and down go the wheels into the soft
sludge beneath, of the consistency of hasty-pudding, which has no bottom.
Tire more the team is slued and twisted about, the worse it gets ; the top
crust is broken all round the team, and some of the poor bullocks are down
to their bellies, or half-way up their sides in a bog, unable to pull, or even
to get up. The wheels are buried to above their naves, _ and the body of the
dray rests on the ground. The driver has no alternative but to unyoke all
his bullocks, and let them struggle out as best they can, singly ; but previous


to doing so he has to lay down branches and bark, to enable him to get
foothold near his bullocks, the ground not being strong enough to bear even
his weight. The bullocks all out, he has then to fish for the tackling—bows,
yokes, keys, and chains. If he finds them all—and he is a lucky man if he
does—he yokes up again, hooks the team to the tail of the dray, and pulls it
out backwards on to comparatively sound ground. Perhaps lie will have
to take off part or the whole of the loading, and earn - it on his back fifty
yards or so to where he has drawn his dray clear of the bog. He then
prospects all round for some distance, to try and find harder ground over
which he can drive his team ; testing its strength by jumping on it, for
boggy spots will shake and heave for yards around. He also sounds with
his whipstick, by ramming it into the ground. The rain may be coming
down in torrents at intervals, and his bedding and blankets constantly wet.
Many other fixes there arc, in which a man may find himself suddenly
placed when travelling with a team, and which ho must be equal to getting
out of unaided. A tire comes oft', or a box draws out of a wheel, or the pole
may break. He may have to take his dray through flooded crocks, the rushing
water being up to the dray boards ; in which case be must take the loading
off, lash a framework of crossed saplings on top of the guard-irons, and take
half the load over at a time ; working the while up to his waist in water.
At other times he will have to wade knee deep through swamps. It lias been
shown that one way of getting out of a bog is to work on the principle of the
Scotchman who, while getting over his neighbour's wall, was caught and
asked where he was going to—“ Bock agon,” he replied ; but, at times it is
impossible to go “ bock agon then there is nothing for it but to “spoke”
it, spare-chain it, or unload. Perhaps all three have to be resorted to, but
the latter is always avoided till all other expedients have been tried and
failed. It is no joke for one, or even two men to have to unload and carry
bags of Hour, salt, and sugar, through swamps, up creole banks, or over bogs.
The above is not a very inviting picture for a new chum to contemplate,
but the most graphic description could only convey a faint idea of what
bullock-driving really is at times. Then there arc such tilings as capsizes ;
getting fast against a tree or stump while going down hill ; and a score of
mishaps besides. But to describe every contingency and the mode of escape
from each, would fill a large, but not very interesting volume for the reader
to wade through.
Barrett and Frank called in at the different stations on the road, either to
see their friends, or to obtain a supply of meat, but not to stay, for it was
deemed best not to be away from their camp at night. The presence of a
responsible person in a camp is indispensable, to prevent the men from getting
unruly or launching into excesses, as they are apt to do if left to themselves.
When they had passed Stanoourt, and were within two days' stage of Wonga,
the weather, which had been previously very sultry and storm}’, gave signs of
a heavy downpour. Dense masses of clouds, black and lowering, rolled in
immense waves across the sky from the north-west, and Barrett determined
to make as much headway as possible, that they might get to the opposite
side of the Barnett River before the expected flood came, for it was a terrible
river to keep up when it did rise, and become incrossablo. Old Ben, the
bullock-driver, said he was sure that heavy rain was not far oil’, as the bullocks
were so skittish when they were out of yokes, running and skipping about
like lambs. Strange how every one finds signs of the coming changes in the
weather—especially for rain—in his or her legitimate occupation. The good
housewife says it will rain soon, for the salt is so damp ; or the top joint of
her “needle-finger” aches. The farmer says it will rain for sure, for the


sparrows fly low The carpenter predicts rain, for no matter how sharp his
mane irons may he, the wood works a bit dozy, and will not “ swish.”
‘Then the shooting-pains make themselves felt in that old adze , gash in his-
shin. Young ladies, whose hair curls (naturally, of course), know how
troublesome it is to put in an appearance otherwise than as a “horrid,
fright,” when rain is impending. Each believes in his or her own particular
trade or domestic barometer, but the bullock-driver’s barometer is as good
as any—his bullocks get playful, and on such occasions, their actions are truly
ludicrous. Such barometers, of course, would not suit the sailor or the
scientific traveller exclusively, but even they do not scorn to take warning by
thb flight of birds, and other natural and simple signs of coming changes.
Old Ben was right. About 4 o’clock in the afternoon, a terrific hurricane, ‘
accompanied with hail, burst suddenly on them, and swept over the face of •
the country with a fury that none of the party had ever before witnessed.
They had scarcely time to drag the dray into a space bare of trees, when the
bpllocks altogether refused to face it any longer, and turning round could
only be induced to stop by the wheel coming into contact with a stump. The j
tarpaulin was thrown over the loading, and secured with much difficulty, so
grefyt was the force of the wind. The poor cattle had to stand and bear the p
brunt of it for an hour, quite unsheltered in the pitiless pelting of the hail-
stopes. All hands were crouched under the dray, which afforded them',
protection from the hailstones, and partial shelter from the wind and|
rain. It was fortunate they were enabled to reach the little clear flat they |
were on, for though a stream of water flowed under the dray, the same would,
have occurred in any other situation without a deep drain all round to carry.,
it off. Heavy limbs of trees were blown off and carried a hundred yards ,
away. Enormous trees were tom up by the roots and fell all around ; whilej
the great trunks of others were twisted off, or broken through above the)
ground. None of these were heard to fall singly, though so close, for they )
and the wind made one continuous roar, and under their united forces the
earth trembled. It was one of those hurricanes that only occur now and then
even ip those latitudes—perhaps at intervals of years. Fortunately, they did
not spread over a very wide extent of country at a time. The only one of
the kind that had visited that district, within the memory of the oldest
settlers then living, was a few years before, and further south. It completely
denuded a strip of country of standing timber for a distance of many miles,
imd abont a mile in width. It resembled a gigantic clearing along a telegraph
line. In the course of an hour the hail ceased, but the rain and wind
continued in full force. Old Ben, with one or two of the others to assist
him, proceeded to unyoke the poor bullocks, and let them go with the bells
on. They stood the pelting hail very patiently after they had turned their
tails to the storm. They were very cold, too, for be it ever so hot up to the,
time of such a storm bursting, it always turns suddenly chilly. The glass,
will faU from 100 deg. in the shade to 60 deg. in a very short time. _
On creeping out from under the dray, the men could scarcely believe their;
eyes. The whole face of the country was changed. The ground was strewn 1
with branches and trees; in places the latter formed impassable barriers,;
being heaped one on top of the other. There was not a leaf left on the)
trees that stood, and the scene resembled that in a winter forest in England. ,
The hailstones had scored the bark of the gum trees deeply, as though volleys
of musket bullets had been fired slant-wise down them ; even the hard iron-.
barks showed the marks distinctly. On the ground lay masses of hailstones,,
and against the tarpaulin, on the north-west end, they were heaped to the.
depth of quite a foot. They were not smooth, but jagged pieces of ioeJ


many of which were as large as hens’ eggs. The top of the tarpaulin was cut
through in several places by the hailstones, and more than one of the
bullocks showed wounds in their hides from the same cause. The black-boys,
and three or four of the men, were set to strip bark to make gunyahs of, and
also to lay on the ground on crossed sticks to sleep on. Barrett and Frank
had hammocks which they usually slung between two trees, and with a rope
stretched a little higher, and a blanket thrown across it so as to fall on each
side of the hammock, they could sleep in perfect security from the hardest
rain ; but on such a night as the one just described, trees were things to be
avoided, and both of the young men preferred the shelter of a bark gunyah.
Two large gunyahs were soon erected, and a trench dug all round each, the
dirt being thrown up against the bark to keep it from lifting with the wind.
A rough shelter was also erected, to make a fire in sufficient to boil a zinc
bucket of water for the tea. Old Ben, who had suffered from rheumatism,
had taken the precaution to carry a light iron camp-bedstead, which folded up
and packed away in a small compass. His dormitory of course was under the
dray. As there were no other duties to be performed that evening, the party
changed their clothes, had a “nip,” and then their tea ; after which, they
felt more comfortable and cheerful.
During the hailstorm, the old horse, Booper, was knowing enough to stand
close to the side of the dray, and by that means escaped a good deal of the
pelting. The other horses, not so old or so sensible, stood together on the
flat, as much as possible out of the way of the falling timber. About midnight
the wind and rain abated, and caused a lull that seemed strange after so
many hours of tumult. The party were congratulating themselves on the
improvement in the weather, but in half an hour or so it commenced again as
suddenly as at first; and, what surprised them most, from the opposite point
of the compass, viz., south-east. It did not simply pour, or rain “cats and
dogs”—nothing so common-place—it came down in sheets ; but the gunyahs
had been built with an eye to keeping out the wet, and they did so, in spite
of the wind. There is nothing in the way of a shelter in the bush, so cosy of
a cold wet night, as a tight bark gunyah. A fire is seldom required in them
to keep up the warmth, but if desirable one can be made with perfect safety.
Of course a hole would have to be left in some part, or the sheet of bark for
the door left a little open, as a vent for the smoke.
The bursting of the storm so suddenly from the opposite quarter took the
party by surprise, but particularly Old Ben, who was asleep under his dray ;
for with it came a very heavy limb, which fell across the pole, smashing it in.
two by the breeching-hooks. The old man’s peaceful slumbers were thus
rudely disturbed. His bed resembled the “Iron Duke’s,” of which it was
said that, when he turned, on account of its scant width, he had to “ turn out.”
This Ben did quickly, for the force with which the dray was struck by the limb
drove the wheels into the now soft earth sb deeply, as to bring the ceiling of his
dormitory (the boards of the dray) in much too close proximity to his head to
be pleasant. He knew that now the wheels had begun to sink, the increasing
wetness of the ground would cause them to do so still more before morning.
So he chocked them with four yokes, and returned to the gunyah. The hours
seemed long that night, and they were all glad when the dawn appeared. It
still blew hard, but the force of the gale was much abated, and the rain had
dwindled down to a smart shower. By eight o’clock it was quite calm, and
the sun struggled to shine through the clouds, giving a very watery light.
The clouds eventually broke away, and a glorious North Australian day
succeeded as terrible at night as could be imagined by travellers, either
by land or sea. But what a calamity had befallen the country over
H


•which the squatters’ sheep or cattle had to graze or travel! It was a weird,
unpleasant sight. As far as the eye could reach, all the trees that had stood
the gale were completely denuded of their leaves, and many of their branches.
Numbers resembled tall masts pointing upwards to the sky, not having a
single branch left. The ground, however, was what concerned our travellers
most. How were they to proceed 2 Old Ben said that, only for the difference
in the description of the timber, the scene reminded him more of a gigantic
new clearing in the backwoods of America, than anything else. Trees and
branches in places lay one on top of the other for hundreds of yards, in such
confused masses as to almost preclude the possibility of getting through them
even on foot. Everywhere there was ruin and desolation. Barrett, who
had started the black-boys off early to look for the bullocks and horses, said—
“ As soon as they come back, I will start off towards Wonga and see what
state the road is in, and what we shall have to do to it before we can get the
dray along. Ido not suppose the cattle have received much, if any, injury,
for they seldom get hurt during storms—except by lightning. It is a good
thing we have not our sheep with us, for there would certainly have been
great losses amongst them, they are so stupid. I think I hear the bullock
bells now.”
It was not the bullock bells he had heard ; it was the note of the bell-bird,
which so often deceives the ear of the most experienced. Mickey soon after
returned driving about half the bullocks, and Tommy next appeared driving
two of the horses. They thought it best to bring in what they found first, and
then to start for the others. They said they found them some little distance
on their back tracks, not far from the road on a large flat; and that they had
had a good deal of trouble to get them along through the fallen timber.
Barrett saddled his horse, and picked his way laboriously through the forest
wreck towards Wonga. He found the road in a very bad state, but at the
end of ten miles the timber became less thickly strewn about the ground,
and he thought that the storm had probably not been so severe in that
direction as where they were camped, and further to the south. He then
returned, and at once formed a party to clear the road sufficiently wide for
the dray to go along. Wherever there was a possibility of getting round the
heavy timber that lay across the road, it was of course allowed to remain.
Putting in a new pole was a matter of small moment. Old Ben went off
with his axe and cut a sapling to his fancy, over twenty feet long, and about
nine inches in diameter at the butt. He then slashed as much as was necessary
from the thick end to be pushed between the fetchels, and also between the
bed of the axle and the body of the dray. The whole work did not take more
than half a day, from the time he went in search of a suitable sapling, till it
was fitted —roughly, no doubt—into the place of the broken one, with all the
bolts and fittings complete, from the nose-iron to the ring-bolt qt the tail.
Before Barrett’s return, the black-boys had found the remainder of the
bullocks and horses, all uninjured. That night Old Ben put his workers into
a temporary yard made of saplings for the occasion. Next morning at dawn,
he let them out to feed till after breakfast, when he yoked them up, and they
again made a start and proceeded along the newly cleared track, camping that
night close to where the road-party had cleared up to. It rained heavily again
that night, but the next day was fine, and the men went on with the clearing,
which they completed through the heaviest of the timber ; the dray again
moving on as far as possible. Barrett had made his way in the meantime to
the Barnett River, and to his chagrin found it incrossable. Two days more,
and the party were —for the present, at least—at a standstill. There must
have been a great deal of rain up the river, for the water was rising at the


crossing-place at the rate of a foot a day, and was already twenty feet above
its ordinary level. It was now a noble stream, whose swift swirling current
stretched from bank to bank. Large trees, together with masses of drift of
all kinds, were borne on its yellow muddy bosom.
The party camped on the bank of the river for three weeks before they
could cross. During that time they had to depend on Mickey for the
conveyance of their supplies of meat. He used to* swim the river every
day, and bring back half a sheep at a time. He was a splendid swimmer,
but had much difficulty at times to avoid the trees that rushed swiftly down
and the eddies that swirled so treacherously near the banks, and sometimes
out in the stream. But he had no fear, and was as much at home in the
water as on land. He might indeed be called a ct noble savage ” —his frame
was large and beautifully moulded for strength and activity. His chest was
full and deep, and his muscles stood out in bold relief all over his dusky
carcass. J
When the river fell sufficiently for the dray to cross, there was much to
do in the way of repairing damages done to the crossing-place. The road in
was much cut away by the constant rush of the water, and a deep boggy hole
was left at the foot of the bank, which had to be filled in with sand and stones,
and logs on top. There were also other places to clear and repair. Here was
a pile of drift and boulders to be removed ; there, a hole to be filled in ;
again, a large oak had fallen across the track, and must be cut up and rolled
out of the way. This was a good day’s work for all hands, and when com-
pleted, it was found that the water was rising a little, so no time was to be
lost in pushing over. The few inches of extra water at the ford, together
with the great force of the stream, rendered it necessary to take the load off
the dray, and make a rough sapling frame to lash on top of the guard-irons.
The tarpaulin was thrown over this frame or stage, and half the loading was
packed on it, then the ends and sides were thrown up, and neatly and
tightly folded over all, making a large parcel containing about a ton of
All was then tightly lashed down to the dray with ropes. The
precaution was soon found to be of the greatest utility, for when the leading
bullocks of the team had struggled through, and the dray was in the deepest
and strongest part of the current, the water rushed over the upper side with
such vehemence as to wet the tarpaulin in which the loading was secured,
doing no harm, however, as the tarpaulin was well greased. At such places,
inexperienced drivers are apt to make very grave mistakes, which cause the
whole of the loading to be damaged. The height of the dray is measured
with a stick, and then the depth of the water, and if the latter is found to be
a few inches less than the former, the crossing is attempted. When in the
rushing water, the error is discovered, but too late. The team to a certain
extent dams the stream, causing it to flow all the stronger behind. The
upper wheel and side of the dray offer resistance to the swift stream, which
shoots upwards with great force, and drives through the loading. For this
cause alone, it is well to have the load on a frame, because even if it could be
made quite safe from damage by water, if packed in the body, the dray might
be turned over by the force of the current, unless the load was a heavy one in
a small compass.
On reaching Wonga, Kenneth Malcolm kindly proposed that Barrett should
put the loading into his store till the rest was brought over, which was done.
By the time the team reached the ford again, it was too deep to get over, so
nothing could be done but to send one of the men and Mickey over with the
tarpaulin, to cover the rest of the loading, which had been carefully stacked
on some wood to keep it off the ground. The two camped under one end of
99


the covering, which was supported by poles. The river rose several feet, and
it was another week before the whole was got safely across, and again loaded
on the dray ready for a start.
There was not much timber beyond Wonga to clear off the road, but the
country was beginning to get very soft and boggy, and rendered travelling
slow work. Chinchin and Mundango stations were passed, and about five
miles from the latter they met William Liddle with his team, taking a load
of wool towards Maryborough. He was a fine manly fellow, with a wonder-
fully easy-going and amiable disposition. His bullock-driver had left, and
as he was a first-rate hand himself with a team, he determined not to lose any
time in taking a load in, with a view also to hiring another bullock-driver in
town, and some carriers to take the rest of the clip, of which there were a
great many bales on the station. William Liddle would not trust his team in
the hands of any man of whom he knew nothing, as he had broken them all
in himself and would not allow them to be knocked about. He could yoke
them up anywhere without a yard. He would call the off-side leader by
name, and the docile beast would walk up and stand perfectly quiet for the
yoke and bow to be put on ; then, obedient to his call, the near-side one
would step up beside its mate, and put its head under the yoke ready for the
bow. The whole team always having been accustomed to kind treatment at
his hands, allowed themselves to be yoked in the same way. At the time the
party met him, his dray was down to the axle on one side in a bog, and he
was sitting on a log playing a concertina. Frank said, “ What a mess you
are in Liddle ! How are you going to get out of it 1 ”
“ I’m blest if I know yet, how I am going to get out of it,” he replied in
his deliberate way ; the poor bullocks have been trying all they know to pull
it out, and can’t, and lam giving them a bit of a spell. It is no use trying
to make them do more than they are able—Now is it ? Well, I always try
them this way and that way, and between each try I give thenTa spell, and
sit down and have a smoke, or play or sing to them, for they like music. It
comes all right in the end you know, and if a man curses his bullocks into
heaps, lights fires under them, and all.that, he only knocks them and himself
up to no purpose. I get along as well as the flashest of them ; and if I take
a day or so longer over a trip of three or four weeks, I always bring them
home fit for another journey, and no wdiip-marks on their hides.”
“ Do you mean to say that men light fires under bullocks to get them on? ”
“It’s a fact, Frank. I was travelling with my team once, and a fellow
called Scotchy the Blower was coming behind with his team. His bullocks
did not travel as fast as mine, and I used to lose sight of him sometimes.
Once he was a long time coming up, and I thought something was the matter,
and went back to see. Scotchy was just lighting a fire under a knocked-up
bullock that could go no further, and had laid down. He was swearing
awfully. I told him to desist, and he called me a something I didn’t
like. I could have put up with that, but was not going to let him off for the
fire business, and gave him one between the eyes. He fell on the bullock,
but the poor brute only gave a groan ; he could not get up. I kicked the
fire out, and said, ‘Now you unyoke the bullock, and come along without
him, or else you can finish the trip by yourself. ’ He unyoked it without a
word, and with the help of the black-boys we managed to haul it to the side
ef the road, where it was found dead the next day. I lent Scotchy a spare
bullock to put in its place, but took care not to let him get out of sight again.
Well, I think we will have another try to get the dray out.”
“ Old Ben will double-bank your team if you like. The two teams will
take it out easily, I think.”


“ No, no. I never double-bank my team ; it gives bullocks a bad habit of
expecting it when they can’t get it. My bullocks know that they will have
to pull it out in the end. I will just dig a bit in front of the wheels, and give
them another start. Now they see your team coming, it will give them
heart.”
He marched leisurely to his dray, singing “ Billy Barlow,” accompanying
himself on the concertina, which he put away ; and taking a spade off the
dray, commenced to dig in front of the wheels. He patted his bullocks
kindly as he passed them to get to his leaders, to bring them to him a little ;
then cracking his whip, and calling to several bullocks to stand up to the yokes,
he started them. Whether or no it was the excitement caused by seeing
another team standing not far ahead of them, cannot be determined, but
they threw their weight into the yokes, and lifted the dray clear of the soft
spot on to sound ground.
“ There we are now ! That was a good stiff pull! We will have another
bit of a spell, and then get on to the next bog,” said Liddle ; then he
hummed “ The Last Rose of Summer.” He continued —■“ But I think it is
near feeding-time, and we may as well all have dinner together—eh, Frank ?
All right, then I’ll drop my chains and let the bulls have a feed too. There
is good grass here, and they will not have far to go for water.”
Barrett said, “ I do not think you will be able to get on with all that wool
when you get over the Barnett, for you will find the road blocked with
fallen timber, after you get to the camp we were in when the hurricane
came on.”
“ Hurricane ! What hurricane ! I never heard of it.”
He was then enlightened as to what had occurred, and thought it likely
that he would leave the team at Wonga with the wool, and ride on to see how
far the road was blocked up, when he would determine what course to pursue.
He and the others then shook hands and parted, when he said—
“ Ta, ta—Tell father not to expect me till he sees me back home,” and he
went on with his team, whistling a measured tune in unison with his present
feelings.
It is too generally believed that no team can be driven without the use of
disgusting language and a great deal of cruelty on the part of the driver. It
is true of some teams, no doubt, because they have been unfortunately
broken in, and educated expressly to understand that treatment and no other.
The above creed is a mistaken one, for though the flash driver may command
instant obedience to his orders to his bullocks, and may make a quicker trip
with even a heavier load than a quiet driver, yet his cattle cannot keep it up
so long ; they will get foot-sore, strained, and leg-weary ; and will also suffer
in condition. It must not be thought that energy and vehemence of manner
may be entirely dispensed with —they are most valuable qualities at a pinch—
they infuse a fire into the commands of the driver, and from their little
previous use, are very potent as a stimulant; but like all wholesome stimu-
lants, their constant use renders it necessary to as constantly add to the dose
to produce the desired effect. Thus it may be seen, how many teams are
made so useless as to require with a moderate load at an ordinary pinch,
as many as two men on each side with big sticks, bigger oaths, and much
shouting, to get them to pull a few feet at a time ; while it takes another
man behind to scotch the wheels to hold all they gain. Were it not for bullocks,
the pioneers could never have surmounted the ponderous difficulties for which
they are proverbial. Even when the roads become properly formed,
horse teams supersede bullock teams but slowly ; yet those indispensable
and patient creatures, are so thoughtlessly and cruelly used !


The day after parting from William Liddle, when our travellers were
within twelve miles of Rossdale, tracks of blacks were observed by Mickey
and Tommy. Not long after, a black-fellow, painted, and armed with spears
and other tools of his trade—murder—appeared on the scene. He grinned
in a most winning manner, and made pacific signs. Being invited by Barrett
to come on, he did so, and asked for tobacco, flour, and grang-grang (clothes
or blankets). A piece of tobacco was given him, but very little of his language
could be understood, as he was apparently of a coast tribe, and spoke somewhat
different from the blacks about Biddle’s, so conversation flagged, and he com j
menced a pretty loud chant. Presently another and another appeared, as
though they sprang from the ground, till at last there were about thirty
fellows all well armed. They were in skirmishing order, scattered through
the bush on either yside of the travellers, and looking as though they were
almost oblivious of their presence. They rather overdid the thing, and
aroused Barrett’s suspicions, as well as those of the two black-boys. Tommy
drew up to Barrett and said—
“ Look out, sir ! I believe that fellow altogether throw him spear
directly ! ”
Then the leader commenced to chant again, which was taken up by several
of the others. It was evidently a conversation, for the words were constantly
changing ; and the black-boys were able to make out quite sufficient to
understand their import. Blacks are given to conversing under cover of a
song, when they do not wish it to be known that they are actually talking to
one another. Barrett was not slow at following their example, and began to
sing also in an unconcerned way, but loud enough to be heard by all his men,
putting extempore words to his song to the following effect;—
“ Look out lads—those darkies mean mischief. Don’t let them see that
you suspect anything, but have your arms ready, and draw up a bit closer to
the dray. Don’t one of you dare to fire a shot till I give the word.”
At this time, both Barrett and Frank were riding on the dray, on top of the.
loading. Their arms were stowed in between the bedding, but within reach,
as they always were. Barrett took out his pipe and made a pretence of
searching his pockets for matches and not finding them. Then he put his
hand between the bedding, and managed, apparently by accident, to capsize
a pistol off the dray. The bullock-driver, who was on the look out, stopped
the team and picked it up, putting it in his belt, for he was previously
unarmed. This little stratagem fulfilled another purpose, it gave the party
an opportunity of drawing closer to the dray without creating suspicion.
Barrett well knew that any mistake or precipitation on his part, or that of any
of his men, would inevitably cause a collision that he heartily wished to
avoid ;at least till all his party were prepared for it. Even then, he had no
desire to dye his hands with blood unnecessarily, nor to cause his men to do
so. Besides, the latter were not all skilled in bush warfare, and would be
sure to suffer more or less by the first flight of spears. He saw that the
blacks were closing in by degrees, so he said, as though addressing one of the
men, but really intending it for all—
“ When I say ‘ stop,’ turn back to back, and present your guns at the
blacks ; but don’t fire unless I tell you.”
He and Frank were now back to back on the dray. Suddenly Barrett
gave the word “Stop!” At the same time each covered a black with his
rifle, the men doing the same. Barrett’s rifle covered the leader. The
bullock-driver stopped his team and joined his comrades by the dray. The
blacks were completely taken by surprise, and instantly took to the trees
without throwing a spear. They saw that some of their number must fall if


fired on, and as that did not suit their humour, they had the discretion to
place the trees between the terrible telumpies (guns) and their naked carcases.
As soon as they were safe, they uttered the most diabolical yells of rage at
being foiled, and made the air ring with their savage notes. They had
expected the whites would have been an easy prize ; and in their extreme
caution, or else trusting in their assurance that the fray would be all in their
■ own hands, and soon terminated, they had delayed their attack a few minutes
too long. Had they made it when they first appeared, and while the party
were scattered, it must have proved most disastrous to the whites ; as it was,
a bloodless victory was gained by the cool courage and ready wit of Barrett.
From tree to tree the blacks retreated, without exposing themselves for more
than a second or so at a time, and soon, their sharp yells were heard no more.
This was a lesson for the whole party that they were determined to profit
by, and from that day forth, they always kept their arms near them, and ready
in case of need.
That night they camped on a large flat, four miles from Rossdale, which
they had travelled late to reach. It was a good place for their purpose, under
the circumstances, because they could see all round for a long distance from
its centre, there being no trees on it. Barrett determined to keep a watch
through the night, two men in each watch, one to mind the bullocks and
horses and keep them near the dray, and the other to watch the camp generally.
They had called at the Seven Mile Station, and cautioned the hut keeper—old
Mickey Bryan—and the shepherds, about the blacks. Frank suggested to
Barrett that he should ride to Rossdale, and caution the Liddles also, that
they might be on the alert, both for their own safety, and that of the men at
their out-stations. He would be back by ten o’clock, in time to take his
watch.
Frank ! Frank ! Were those your only reasons for wishing to get to
Rossdale in such a hurry ?
Barrett consented, and Frank, mounting his horse, rode rapidly towards
the station. He arrived there just in time for tea, and they were all very
glad to see their unexpected visitor. They did not know of the party’s near
proximity to the station, not having heard of their departure from Maryborough.
Frank then warned them of what had occurred that afternoon. Mrs. Riddle’s
fears were immediately excited on behalf of her eldest son, William, but Frank
calmed her somewhat, by informing her that the blacks had dispersed in a
different direction —in fact towards the coast. In any case William had a
good man with him, and a watchdog ; and the probability was that he was
at Mundango or Chinchin at that time.
Frank found himself between his old friend and comrade, Bob, and Minnie,
at the table ; and it was obvious that at least two persons were very happy
that evening. The time at last drew near for Frank to take leave ; and after
thanking him warmly for his kindness in riding in to warn them of the
vicinity of the hostile blacks, Mr. Liddle renewed his kind offers of assistance,
and expressions of good will, that he had made on the occasion of Frank’s last
departure. The young hypocrite could not quite subdue a pang of conscience,
when his kind host thanked him for his forethought and trouble in riding in
to warn him respecting the blacks; but he smoothed it over with the reflection
that “all is fair in love or war,” and as both were involved in the present
instance, he did not feel called upon to criminate himself by denying the
disinterested motives attributed to him. It was dark, and he rode more
leisurely towards the camp than he had done from it. Just as he was emerging
from the forest on to the flat, his horse snorted and plunged violently ; then
set off at a gallop. He could not make out the reason, for the horse was


usually very quiet; but concluded that something had startled it. In five
minutes more he was at the camp. When he dismounted, he noticed that
the horse was bleeding from a wound on the loin, just behind the saddle. It
was not deep, but the edges were ragged, as though they had been tom.
Barrett and Tommy also examined it, and he mentioned to them the circum-
stance of the horse’s behavior at the edge of the flat. Barrett thought it
might have been a small limb of a tree which had fallen on the horse and
tom it. Frank did not think that could have happened without his knowledge.
Tommy was directed to bring the lantern. As soon as he saw the wound by
the light of the candle, he at once pronounced it to have been done by a
spear. He said it had gone in just under the skin, and had burst it out; and
that it must have been thrown with great force. It was, no doubt, intended
for Frank, but the darkness had caused the would-be murderer’s aim to be
such a trifle wide of the mark—for only by half a second had it missed its
mission. It would have been worse than useless to have attempted to seek
the savages that night, for they would hardly maintain their stand after what
had happened ; on the other hand, the pursuers would be at a disadvantage—
if the blacks had not cleared out—while entering the forest from the flat,
especially if they should happen to choose a place in the vicinity of the blacks,
for they would be distinctly visible in the open, while their enemies’ dark skins
could not be distinguished from the surrounding forest trees. The night
passed quietly, the dogs not even growling an alarm. At daylight the party
were astir, each man performing his proper duties, for though Barrett was by
no means a martinet, he always enforced strict discipline and order in the
camp.
The two partners went ahead with Tommy to see if any tracks of blacks
remained about where Frank’s horse made the plunge the night before. The
black-boy’s sharp eyes detected at some considerable distance, a spear sticking
slantwise in the ground, close to the road ; it had a streak of blood on it from
the point to the middle. The boy recognised the weapon as one the leader
of the blacks had in his hand the previous day. The spear had ripped the
horse’s skin and glanced off, burying its point several inches in the ground.
Barrett said,
“ You seem to be reserved for some other fate, Frank, for this is the
second narrow escape you have had within the last few months, from spearing.
Now let us see how many darkies were here.”
Tommy dismounted and examined the tracks minutely, saying that there
were five or six blacks’ tracks, and that they had gone off to the eastward,
towards the coast, merry michy (in haste). It was now evident that the
savages had dogged them, with the hope of their camping in some awkward
place in the forest, where they could sneak upon them unseen. No doubt
they had seen Frank’s departure for the station, and guessing that he would
return that night, planted themselves where they did to cut him off. The
leader must have been very sure of his game, or a shower of spears would
doubtless have been the consequence. The remainder of the journey to
Bossdale was soon got over, and the men were assigned a hut to themselves ;
the dray being drawn up close to it, and the dogs chained to the wheels.


CHAPTER X.
The recent attitude of the blacks, determined Barrett not to attempt to
carry out his first intention, of taking Frank and two men to mark and clear
the road to their new run, but to take the team and all the men ; for both
Frank and Tommy assured him that a dray with a light load could be got
over the range very easily, by the way they came back with the grey horse.
In fact, but little clearing was necessary, and the marked-tree line could be
blazed as they proceeded. The former tracks of the horses would be quite
sufficient for Tommy to follow and guide them over by. They started with
as light a load as possible, and in five days reached the fine lagoon before
described, and which Robert Biddle pronounced to be as good a site for a
station as could be found. Barrett endorsed the opinion, and as it was the
most central available position on the run, he determined to erect the-
temporary buildings and sheep-yards there. Barrett quickly formed his
estimate of the men, and mated them in such a way as not only to be
congenial to them, but most conducive to the furtherance of the work.
Neither of the principals spared themselves, but took active part in all that
was going on ; and they made occasional excursions extending for a few
miles in different directions, to gain a knowledge of the country which would
be of service to them on their return with the sheep. They found in various
places skulls and bones of savages, some of which had evidently been
murdered by hostile tribes. Five skeletons were found in one place, close to
a patch of dense scrub. In the breast-bone of one the broken point of a spear
still remained ; the skulls of the whole being more or less fractured. No
blacks were seen, though recent tracks were found here and there.
Two bark huts were built, one above and the other below two large and two
smaller bough-yards for the sheep. The upper hut was for the two principals,
the lower one for the men. A bark hut is easily built, and keeps out the
weather effectually. Four corner posts are put in the ground, also door
posts ; then the wall plates are put on top and pegged down. Strong saplings
are then let into the posts horizontally, and nailed on close to the ground,
and another midway between it and the wall plates all round the building,
except across the doorway. The bark is cut to the proper length, stood on
end on the ground with the rough side out, and fastened to the saplings and
wall plates with nails having washers of leather or hide under the heads, to
prevent the bark from drawing away from them. Very light straight saplings
are then either nailed or tied with strips of green hide to the middle bar
through the bark, clamping it tight. A trench is dug all round the hut, the
earth being thrown up against the bottom of the bark. The roof, like the
walls and door, is made entirely of round saplings and bark, over which heavy
poles are secured to keep the bark from blowing away, or curling up with the
heat. The internal arrangements are as simple and unpretentious as the
building itself. The bare ground forms the floor ; and the bedsteads are
simply bunks, made by driving four stakes, or forks, into the ground, on
which a light frame of poles is lashed with hide, and a smooth sheet of bark
over all. The mattress is not usually supplied by an upholsterer, but by the


miller, it being composed of a couple of rough flour bags lightly stuffed with
dry grass. The table is made in the same way as the bunk, with a bark top.
For a light at night a fat-lamp is used, and is made as follows—a little wet
earth or clay is put into a pint pot and squeezed down tight; into the middle
of this is stuck a bit of stick wrapped round with a strip of calico for a wick.
Melted fat is then poured into the pot, and the wick lighted. It gives a long
unsteady flame, a good deal of offensive smoke, and very little light. If it
is desired to have a fire-place in the hut, bark and round poles are again had
recourse to, and with very ordinary care, these fire-places are quite safe. It
is the rarest thing to hear of a hut with a bark or slab chimney being
destroyed by fire, while the novice will no doubt think it a matter of every
day occurrence. There are, however, stranger things than that to be learnt
in the bush.
The rest of the fittings and furniture in a bark hut are as inexpensive as
those enumerated ; the seats are blocks of wood on end, or three-legged
stools, or perhaps benches made of split slabs with four round legs driven
into auger holes. The cooked provisions are put into flour bags which are
suspended from the rafters, or cross beams of the hut, to keep them from tha
cockroaches and ants, which almost invariably infest bush habitations.
The upper hut was made large enough to serve as a store for the provisions.
One apartment, therefore, served as a store, parlor, and bedroom, for there
was no division in the hut. A flat canopy of bark on four poles was erected
a few yards from the hut door, for the purpose of cooking under. In this
open kitchen, two forked stakes were fixed in the ground, with a pole across
the top. A light bullock chain wound round the pole, with the hooks left
hanging, sufficed for pothooks. Bits of iron-hoop, or strong wire, or even
hooked sticks lashed to the pole, were often used as substitutes for pot-hooks.
Neither the interior or the exterior of a bush hut, such as the one just
described, will appear very prepossessing or comfortable in the sight of the
majority of readers ; but what do bushmen care about comfort or outward
show 1 Men full of health and vigor, who have to contend with so many
difficulties and hardships ; who are seldom in the hut during the day, and
are often out watching their flocks at night. Men who go into the bush for
the express purpose of living a hard life—as a means to an end —do not look
for the luxuries of town life ; they start out to subdue new wild country*
and its fierce inhabitants. Did they go out with grand ideas of comfort, they
would at once prove their utter unfitness for the struggle, and would as surely
go to the wall. As civilized habits come slowly to the savage, so must they
to the pioneers. As time and means increase, they may improve their state,
but gradually ; and for some time they must devote all their energies to their
work. It is often a matter of time and extreme difficulty to get supplies for
the bare necessaries of life, and the maintenance of their stations.
Besides the huts and sheep-yards, they put up about half a mile of rough
paddock fence, of split posts and round rails, across an angle of the lagoon*
which made a capital paddock for the horses. When everything was completed,
Barrett, thinking that there might be a danger of the blacks burning or des-
troying the yards and huts, brought in the five skulls of the blacks that had.
been slaughtered, and put them in conspicuous places—one over the door of
each hut, and the others on the sheep-yards. This he knew would be quite as
effective as a protection, as a dozen good men with rifles, the blacks having a
great dread of places where the bones of their dead are deposited, only a
few being privileged to touch them ; even they handle them with fear and
trembling. The relics of their dead that these superstitious people carry
about with them, are always wrapped up in numerous pieces of bark or rag ;


they would not touch a naked human bone on any account. In the last
peculiarity they differ widely from the Dyaks of Sarawak, in Borneo, whose
mania is to take all the heads they can get, for the purpose of embellishing;
their dwellings.
Two days before Barrett’s party reached Rossdale, Phil Merry and hia
companions arrived, on their return from their search for a run. Mr. Liddle
hospitably invited them to remain for a few days to recruit themselves and
their horses, which they were very glad to do. They had found and marked
a splendid piece of country of considerable extent to the northward, and had
struck off towards the coast through some broken country and mangrove
swamps, till they found themselves on the shores of a magnificent river,,
which ultimately led them to a fine harbor.
In giving a description of the country he had discovered, Merry expressed,
his belief that there were indications of both gold and copper on it, but he
did not wish to make it public till he had made certain. He had before seen
the evils of a rush to a field that had turned out a “duffer.” It caused
much distress to those ill-advised persons who were unfortunate enough to.
go to it.
Barrett and Prank lost no time in going to inspect the sheep. The station’
at which they expected to get them was Borilla—Mr. Preston’s—about eighty
miles from Rossdale ; the nearest way to it being by Wonga, then up the
Barnett River about forty miles. This branch road has been mentioned
already. Barrett approved of the sheep, and made arrangements to take
4000 females of prime ages, and 1000 males, of one, two, and three years old,
to keep the station in meat, till the progeny of the ewes were old enough to-
kill. All the Borilla sheep had been shorn, so there would be no trouble of
that kind for nearly twelve months.
As soon as his partner had made up his mind to purchase the sheep, Frank
started back for the men and the team, arriving at Rossdale on the third
day. In the meantime, Barrett and the proprietor went through the flocks,
drafting the sheep, which were put by themselves to be in readiness for the
drovers when they arrived. To prevent the possibility of their boxing with,
any other flocks on the run, they were sent to an out-station.
Mr. Preston said that the hurricane had passed over his station very lightly,
only a little damage was done by the hail. A little to the southward, however,,
the accounts from his neighbours showed that the storm was very severe in
that direction, much damage having been done, not only to their runs, but
also to their stock and improvements. Good huts were levelled to the ground
roofs were blown away bodily, and carried considerable distances ; paddock,
fences blown quite out of the ground ; and galvanised iron roofs were com-
pletely perforated by the hailstones. Sheets of iron were torn off, and carried
hundreds of yards by the force of the gale. Several houses had got such a
dangerous lean during the height of the storm, that the dwellers left them,
and were literally driven before the wind away into their paddocks, where-
they took refuge behind stumps and in gullies. It was next to impossible to
walk against the wind. Two persons left their house because they thought
it was going to fall, and took refuge in the station forge—a low, strong build-
ing. Soon after making a fire, and themselves as comfortable as circumstances
would permit, an old ironbark tree that stood at one end of the building was
blown down, crashing through the roof and sides. The two inmates, were
struck down by a portion of the roof, and knocked senseless. One was not
so much injured as the other, and when he recovered a bit he found himself
lying by the anvil, and his friend under a mass of debris. He saw something
else, too, that struck terror into his heart—the wreck of the building was on.


-1* re *. P e wa ? a powerful young man, and though still half stunned, managed
to extricate himself, but with some difficulty, after which he hauled his com-
rade out by the legs, and conveyed him to a dray which was standing near
the place, where, after some time, he came to. Under that inhospitable
shelter-—if, indeed, it could be called a shelter—they stayed for the remainder
of the night till the pitiless storm abated. Had it not been for the anvil pre-
senting the wreck of the building from falling flat to the earth, both must
have been crushed to death, and burnt to ashes. Indeed, had they been in
-any other part of the hut, that fate had been inevitable.
Ten days after Frank started for the men and the team, they all arrived at
Bonlla. He had used the utmost expedition, and acquitted himself well.
We mil not chronicle how he acquitted himself during the few hours he
stayed at Rossdale. At the table he had his accustomed, and now recognised
seat, between Bob and Minnie Liddle. He took most welcome news with kirn
respecting William Liddle’s safety, and how he had got on since he saw
at the time his dray was bogged. William had left his dray at Wonga, and
went on t*) inspect the road. It was in a very bad state all the way to
Yenlla—-Mr. Brown’s station—beyond which, the storm had been compara-
tively light. Mr. Brown, George Martin, and the Malcolms, lent him two
hands each, who, with his off-sider and himself, made a good strong clearing
party. He drove his team and load of wool to Barrett’s “ Hurricane Camp,
and then set to work clearing the road. When a distance of three or four
miles was cleared, he moved his load on. It was a long job, for many large
trees had fallen across the road, which took the whole strength of his team
to spare-chain away, when severed with saw or axe. Anyone who knew
him not, would have wondered at the quiet man. How effectually he worked
without making any show of quickness. He always knew what he was about,
and one stroke of his axe would effect more than two of most of the others.
Being a man of such wonderful good temper and cheerfulness, he did not get
flurried at difficulties, and his good example and pleasant manners told on the
P art y- Their evenings were rendered enjoyable by his concertina,
which he played very well ; and various songs were sung, and yarns told as
they sat round the camp fire. The men afterwards said that they were sorry
when the work was completed, hard as it was.
Barrett and Frank started with the five thousand sheep, and after a day or
two on the road., every man settled into his proper groove, and the work went
on with regularity. There were too many sheep to be travelled in one mob,
though not too many to be camped together at night; so they were split into
-it* 6 i, oc^s ever y morning, and kept a little distance apart during the day
till they reached camp at night. It was no trouble dividing them ; as they
travelled off the camp a couple of men and their dogs went quietly between
those they meant to separate—about one third—and cut them off from the
main body ; these were then allowed to string on in the required direction ;
when far enough ahead, the rest were divided in the same manner. The
dray travelled faster than the sheep, and generally reached the camping-place
early in the afternoon. The cook at once set to work to make a good fire,
and prepare for the men’s tea. Barrett and Frank paid an occasional visit to
each flock during the day, to see that all was right. Every afternoon one of
them went ahead to choose a place for the camp, and direct the bullock-
•dnver to it.
It was fortunate that they had not to travel through any country much
affected by the hurricane, or the journey would have been prolonged to a very
tedious length. Travelling with sheep is irksome enough at any time, but
through a country that has been visited by such a gale, or through very


swampy country, it is perfect martyrdom, unless one has the amiability of
William Liddle. Sheep are such obstinate, timid, stupid animals. A shallow
narrow stream of water —a mere gutter—is quite sufficient to cause an hour’s,
hard work to induce them to cross it. The leaders may be caught and carried
over, but will resolutely return to the flock. On the other hand, it is at.
times sufficient, if only one jumps down a steep bank of a creek or gully, to-
induce the whole flock to follow, and before they can be stopped by the
most strenuous exertions on the part of the shepherd, hundreds will be
over, smothering those that are undermost in the struggling mass. In the
event of them being met by a grass fire, they will stand to be burned to death,
paralyzed with fear, though they have ample room and time to escape.
Travelling with sheep over moderately good country is so monotonous, that,
the reader would not care to follow them day by day. They travelled about,
six miles a day on the average, and reached Rossdale in fourteen days.
Mr. Liddle made many offers of assistance, and wished our young friends
to leave their sheep at an out-station of his, while they went over and made
their place a bit more comfortable. He would see that the shepherds did
their duty. They were, however, both anxious to take possession of their-
country, and preferred pushing on, for they were now fairly embarked in
their new enterprise, and had a good deal at stake in it. They knew there
were many difficulties to be overcome, and dangers to be braved, but never-
dreamt of putting off the evil day, so resolutely pushed forward to face them.
Frank’s mother had written a long loving letter to him by Barrett, also-
sending him many useful presents. Much advice was contained in the letter,
all good, but much impracticable, for what could she know about a bush life,
and the line of conduct to be pursued in it 1 One comfort she had, she knew
her “ dear boy” to be steady and brave. The news of his going out with the.
Martins and Ford at Stancourt had reached her ; but the revolting particulars,
and his extreme danger, had been reserved. She only knew that he had been
slightly wounded. She enjoined him, of course, never to sit in his wet things
always to wear flannel next his skin (the very thought of it made him perspire);
not to work himself to death; arid above all, to fasten the back door and.
windows at night before going to bed, on account of “those horrid blacks.”
Had she but known the hundredth part of his everyday duties, exposures,
and dangers, she would have tethered the “ dear boy” in Sydney with her-
apron strings, or hobbled him with her garters rather than have let him enter
on such a life. The city would perhaps have gained a bank clerk or a
mercantile drudge, -which it could very well have spared, but the bush
would have lost a stout-hearted pioneer, which could be but ill afforded out
of its little army. But fear not, gentle mother, your son is happy enough—
far happier than you can imagine him to be, so far away from you—for a,
reason which he has never divulged. He is determined to make a lot of
.money in the shortest time possible—not for the sole reason that he may
settle down close to you and be the comfort of your declining years. You
know he would do a great deal to accomplish that ; but he means to go
through fire and water—and blood too, if necessary—to compass his ends.
A word to you, now, Mr. Frank. You are treading on dangerous ground—
morally—and mind it does not sink beneath your feet ! A good steady deter-
mination to accomplish your aim in life, is quite legitimate and necessary,
but —Verbum sat sapienti.
The distance from Rossdale to Leiohardt—as they had christened the new
station—was about thirty-five miles by the way the road went. About the
middle of the sixth day, they arrived at the yards and found all safe. There
were recent tracks of blacks about, but nothing had been touched. The sheep


were drafted into four flocks, and for the first few months were shepherded
at the head-station. The reasons for this arrangement were various. In the
first place, it was safer for the whole party, and for the sheep, to be imme-
diately under the eye of the principals, for a time at least; and in the next
it would require a little time to ride over the run in various directions, to find
the best sites for out-stations. If the sheep were divided into smaller flocks
at once, and sent to out-stations, it would entail a great deal more trouble
and anxiety on the partners, and so encroach on their time, as to render it
impossible for them to carry out some other improvements which were
needed immediately.
It was resolved not to allow any blacks on the station till after they had
•gamed a good knowledge of the run, and some of the contemplated improve-
ments were completed, which they did not expect would be for several
months—perhaps not till shearing or lambing time. It took the whole time
of one of the partners to ride out amongst the sheep, and see that they and
their shepherds were all right. _ They well knew that any laxity on their part
in that respect, would not fail to be noticed by the lynx-eyed blacks, and
taken advantage of ; so they were unremitting in their vigilance, even though
blacks were not known to be about. The time they expected the blacks to be
most troublesome was when the bunya fruit was ripe, which would not be
yet for two years. The principal bunya scrubs were at the head of the run
not far from the Saurian Caves. There was a high tier of ranges to the
•westward, on which they found immense vine scrubs, which appeared to be
miles through, and would be a great shelter for blacks.
Months passed away without the least trouble with the blacks, and a great
deal of work was done. Another hut was built with slabs, and shingled a
little higher up the ridge : and the bark hut was vacated in favour of the
men, making more ample accommodation for all. Some little skill was
expended in the erection of this hut, as it was intended for a kitchen for a more
pretentious dwelling at some future time, but not yet. The time drew near for
shearing, and they set to work to put up a wool-shed, which was to be of slabs
with a bark roof. Then there were some hurdles to be made, for the lambing
shearing, and sheep-washing, could not conveniently be got through without
them.
Leiohardt being the very outside station in the district, it would probably
be the last the shearers would visit. The blacks had several times sent in
scouts to beg to be allowed to come to the station. They said all sorts of
things in their own favour, and that they would work well, and stay for ever
with their masters. The coast blacks, with whom they were at enmity they
said were a worang (bad) lot, and not to be trusted. Barrett was not to be
won over, being determined to keep them off till after lambing, so he told
them that they could come in so many moons. His reason for that deter-
mination was, that the lambing would take place before the shearing, and the
men would be a good deal scattered ; whereas, at shearing time, they would
be more concentrated, and there would be a reinforcement by the arrival of
the shearers.
Frank contrived to get over to Eossdale several times during the few months
past. Barrett had never been able to go with him, not thinking it prudent
for both to leave the station at once ; yet he more than suspected how matters
stood with him in that quarter, though Frank had never divulged his passion
more, perhaps, through bashfulness than anything else. His reticence did
not blind Barrett, however, and a good deal of chaff was the natural
■consequence.
Lambing was to commence in a month or so, and Ben the bullock-driver,


and Frank, started with the team for Maryborough, to bring up the remainder
of their supplies, among which were the shears, woolpacks, and other things
required for the shearing. Frank was to buy another team, and drive it up
with a load on their second new dray. He had had a good deal of experience
in bullock-driving—drawing in stuff for the new building and other purposes,
besides that formerly gained on the way up to the station, and subsequently
to Borilla for the sheep. Old Ben used to let him take the whip, and
instructed him in the noble art of “bull-punching.”
During the winter months the cold was intense at nights, heavy frosts being
common, but the days were warm and pleasant. The native dogs were very
numerous and troublesome, so much so that the sheep had to be wafched at
night. The howling of the dingoes was most melancholy ; they ran in packs,
and so long as the sheep were guarded, they kept at a respectful distance and
howled in concert all round the yards. Sometimes the station dogs were let
loose of moonlight nights, and chase was given ; a good many were killed in
that way. They did not like to lay out poison, for fear of their own dogs
picking up a stray bait. It was not safe to let the dogs go by themselves, for
on one occasion a whole pack of dingoes set upon them, and mauled them
terribly before they could be beaten off with sticks. They were very game
dogs, but the odds against them being about three to one they had no chance.
In due time Frank and his command reached Maryborough ; he purchased
a team, and started on his homeward trip. At every station on the road
down, Frank had received one or more commissions to bring up various
articles for the proprietors, or people under them ; so that, considering the
state of the road, which had not been very good since the hurricane, the
drays were pretty heavily loaded. This custom was, and is, very prevalent,
and the driver of a dray or pack-horse was often victimized to a great extent,
if he happened to be of an obliging disposition. When travelling with a team
the driver is not usually tied to time. Frank made it convenient to stay a
night at each station on the road home, and instead of camping under his
dray, he went into the houses. At Chinchin, there were several visitors —
travellers like himself, but not of such varied experience in bush ways. They
were from Sydney, and consequently “green-horns.” At Chinghin there
was an institution called the “Imported Boy.” He had been sent from
England for colonial experience, and was getting it in a rough school. This
unhappy new chum was not as yet well up in bush etiquette, nor had he
studied fitness of time or place very deeply, for which shortcoming he was
frequently taken sharply to task by the elder Foster, who was of a peppery
disposition. As the guests sat at dinner that evening, two or three shots
were heard in the distance. Someone remarked on the circumstance, but the
matter was pooh-pooh’d by Foster, who said it was a whip. The party looked
slightly incredulous—especially Frank. Shortly after, the Imported Boy
rushed in without previously knocking, and said excitedly, _ ;
“ Please sir, Tommy Sugar says as Dickey ’ll take another shot ! He am t
dead yet!” _
Several appetites were spoiled for the pudding and Foster went out and
cuffed the “Imported Boy” unmercifully. Dickey had been concerned in
some deed of blood, and had been “wanted” for some time previously.
Unfortunately for himself, he had ventured too near the station, giving his
countryman, Tommy Sugar, the pleasurable opportunity of executing his
little commission to wipe him out, and add another notch to the row already
on his carbine stock.
A reverend gentleman of the “ Stiggins” type happened to be of the party,
and he lifted up his eyes in pious horror. In his sermon that night,, he


deplored the terrible necessity that existed for the settler having to redress
his own wrongs. He pointed a moral thus : —“ It is thus that just Heaven
takes vengeance on the blood-stained black sinner.” This view of the subject
suited all parties present, and he went to bed with flying colours. The pious
man never took anything stronger than wafer —in company —but subsequently,,
a medical man of a different persuasion to poor belied “ Stiggins” after holding
a post mortem examination on his body, gave it as his opinion that he died of
“gin-drinker’s liver.” On the present occasion the reverend gentleman was
making a tour through the district, giving the benighted, people at the stations
the benefit of his spiritual counsel. Between Mundango and Rossdale he met
Doctor Jenkins, who was returning from the latter station where he had been
on a friendly visit. When they met, the Doctor was sitting on a log, having
a quiet smoke. Phil Merry was with him. Now the reverend gentleman
had a way of his own of showing his disapproval of other people’s sins. He
looked at, and talked at them, in a manner that used to make their backs
rise. He did so in the present instance, and talked so much about people’s
indulgence in sinful appetites, that the Doctor, who always had a profound
contempt for the humbug, pretended not to understand him, and said in his
driest manner,
“ Mr. Stiggins, will you have a pipe 2 No! Don’t smoke ! Well, smoking
is my only remaining vice, and I make rather a pet of it. ”
Phil laughed backwards, and the parson went on.
Phil had a peculiar laugh which he always indulged in when he was not
saying anything serious, and as he never did say anything serious, it may
be said that he laughed whenever he spoke. It was a back-action laugh. He
drew his breath in through his moustache and half-closed teeth two or three
times, making a hissing noise, finishing up with a chuckle that seemed to go
down his throat.
The two teams reached Leichardt safely, and just in time for the lambing.
Some gunyahs and temporary yards had been put up at convenient places for
the lambing flocks. The lambing went on all right, and when all was over,
an increase of eighty-five per cent, was recorded*in the books. This was
very good, and encouraging to the young firm of Barrett and Co.
When Frank was at Rossdale on his way home with the teams, the shearers
were expected there in a week, so they might now be at Leichardt any day.
They came at last, and as all was in readiness for them, they commenced the
washing—for shearers of that period used to do the sheep-washing too. They
travelled about in pretty large parties, taking the different sheds in rotation.
It was hard work, but well paid. During the season, an expert could make
a “big cheque” at it. They were paid by the score. Some men would shear
but two score a day, while others would do as many as six, and very quick
hands, eight score a day. They were paid about four shillings a score, and
were found in rations ; or eight-pence more and they found themselves.
They were a very flash lot of fellows, as a rule, and were none the less so for
the reason that squatters could not do without them. An employer dared
not say very much to them, or they would leave his shed at a moment’s
notice, or else ill-use his sheep, and annoy him in every possible way. Most
of them, though very good shearers if they liked, were in the habit of
“tomahawking”—hacking both wool and skin off the wretched animals in
junks, and leaving as much wool on them in great ridges as would have
paid for the shearing. Some of them suffered agonies from the back-ache,
and when a pen of sheep was finished, were not able to straighten themselves
for some time. It was not an uncommon sight to see a man lying on his
stomach, and another standing with naked feet on the small of his back, which


rough treatment really gave great relief. This affliction, as may easily be
imagined, did not improve the natural amiability of those half-savages, nor
the comfort of the sheep while under their hands. Seven or eight men on
the floor, gave a smart hand as much as he could do to pick up the fleeces,
throw them on the table, and roll them ; especially when, added to it, were
frequent cries of “ Tar ! ” for the cuts in the animals’ pelts ; and sometimes
for a needle and thread to close the larger gashes with. There was a pen in
front of the shearing-floor, holding from thirty to sixty sheep, according to
the number of shearers. As soon as a sheep was done, its shearer let it
go, and rushed into the pen, feeling as rapidly as possible several of the
best-looking sheep, and quickly deciding which was the “ softest,” hauled it
in and went to work “tomahawking” again, not losing a moment unnecessarily.
The last sheep in the pen was called the “ cobbler,” and it was amusing to see
each man straining every nerve to be done first, that he might get it. The
“ cobbler” being the rejected of all, was usually a very bad shearing sheep,
and took more time to do than three or four others ; but this did not cause
any loss of time to the man who got it, as there was always a spell of ten
minutes or so between each pen of sheep, during which they used to touch up
their shears and straighten their poor backs. During the spell, the sheep
were counted out to check the tally given in by the men, as the fellows were
very tricky. Each man had a piece of raddle with which he put his brand on
the sheep he shore. They were simple marks, such as a single stroke, a crags,
a circle, a diamond, etc. The object of which was, that in case of a discrepancy
between the count out, and the numbers given in by the men, each man’s
number was checked off by the marks on the sheep. This was a pretty
effectual check to dishonesty towards the employer, but not between the men
themselves ; for, if one man forgot to mark a sheep, another would be sure
to notice it and put his own mark on it. This was done while the rogue was
in the pen selecting a sheep to shear. Another method was, to alter marks
on sheep. These things would appear to be almost impossible of accomplish-
ment with so many men at work within a yard or two of the rascal.
Barrett undertook the superintendence of the shed, and by his intimate
knowledge of men and their work, he managed to get the sheep very well
shorn—that is, comparatively. Both Barrett and Frank were favorites with
the men, and though a flash lot, their partiality for their employers restrained
them from making themselves intentionally disagreeable. There was, how-
ever, plenty to be borne without the latter being added.
The blacks had been allowed up, according to promise, and made themselves
exceedingly useful. They of course tried on some of their little dodges, but
soon gave them up on finding that Barrett could not be very easily imposed
upon. He treated them justly, and gave out that anything like sheepstealing,
or interference with the station property generally, would be treated with
severity. At the same time, if any of his men ill-used them or interfered
with their property, the act would be followed by instant dismissal.
The blacks were a curious and unfathomable people. Their surgery was
rough in the extreme. For broken bones, the treatment was generally to tie a
quantity of string pretty tightly round the limb—no splints, not a bit of bark,
or anything to support it and keep the ends of the bone in position. In a
large proportion of cases, the sufferers made a good recovery, with perhaps a
little crook in the limb. A white man so treated would probably succumb to
mortification. In a few instances, false joints were the result of their rude
treatment. An old woman one day went to Barrett with her arm broken
between the wrist and the elbow. She said her “ old man,” did it accidentally,
she having put her arm in the way of his tomahawk when he was chopping
I


wood. The fact was, he had taken another wife, and wished to get rid of
the old one ; she not consenting to the arrangement, used to receive most
brutal treatment at his hands—hence the broken arm. Barrett put the limb
in splints in due form, and to his surprise the next day they were off, and a
lot of string wound round in their place. He remonstrated and bound it up
afresh. Again she removed the bandages and replaced the string, so he did
no more for her, and the perverse old creature was rewarded with a false
joint. Nevertheless, the arm was useful, the severance of the bone not
interfering with the perfect use of the fingers. Barrett hunted the brutal
husband off the station, but it was not long ere the true woman showed out,
even in that savage female breast, for she reiterated her statement as to the
cause of the injury, and prevailed on Barrett to allow her savage lord to come
back with a free pardon.
Deep wounds were treated with the same scant ceremony as broken bones,
generally being stuffed with softened gum from the eucalyptus; old sores and
festered outs were dredged over with the powder from a fungus called “ devil’s
snuff-box,” which grew plentifully in the bush. They often solicited white
aid when sick, but it was so hard to get them to do what they were told, or
to induce them to put up with a little temporary inconvenience for their
ultimate benefit, that it was little use trying to do anything for them. In
their wonderfully rapid and complete recovery from severe injuries, they more
resembled animals than human beings, which may, perhaps, be accounted for
by their simple mode of life, and the absence of stimulating food and drinks.
Their attention to the sick and dying varied according to circumstances or
humor, sometimes kind enough, at others extremely brutal. An old man
had been sick for a long time, and had given them much trouble in carrying
him from place to place as they shifted their camps. At last he died—as
they thought. They dug a shallow hole—or rather scooped out a slight
hollow in the hard ground—tied the old fellow up in his blanket, put him
in the grave, and covered his body with a little earth and some wood and
stones, leaving his head out. The night following the funeral, there was a
thunderstorm. The cool rain revived him, and his head was seen to bob up
and down. The news was carried to the camp, so they went and heaped more
wood and stones on him, and on his head as well, for they said the movement
had been caused by a “ devil devil” inside him. This treatment effectually
exorcised the “ devil devil. ”
There was a very old woman, about whom scarcely a vestige of humanity
remained. Her features resembled those of a most repulsive ape. She was
shrivelled up, and was literally nothing but skin and bone. She was insane
and blind, and was a great torment to the people of the camp, as they never
could keep her quiet. Her insanity took a very mischievous turn—she would
burn their blankets or anything else she could get hold of. She went about
stark naked, unless a thick coat of ashes could be called a covering. One
cold night she crept too close to the fire, and her back was frightfully burnt.
Her vitality was wonderfully strong for such a remnant of humanity, and she
lived on—contrary to the wishes of her friends—with her back one big sore.
Her repulsive appearance is indescribable. So far from killing her, the injury
actually improved her in one respect, for it partially restored her sight. The
blacks took a different view of it, and thought it anything but an improve-
ment. They argued—“ If she was so troublesome when blind, what will she
be now 2 ” Her loving relations determined that she would be better out of
the way. They dug a hole in a sandy spot and buried her, being too lazy to
do the thing properly by digging a grave in good sound ground. They had
probably never heard the old proverb respecting, “ Lazy people, etc.,” and,


“ Well done ” being “ twice done,” but they were doomed to experience the’
fact. After burying the old lady, they shifted their camp, as they invariably
did after a death took place —or even as in the present case, a burial. Oil
completing their new camp, they settled down to their supper, after which,
as was the custom, the old woman’s relations and friends began high mass for.
her eternal repose, by making a most infernal din, that anyone who knew no
better would expect to have an opposite effect. This, with a little cutting of
heads with tomahawks, and butting against trees, was kept up for two hours,
and now began to subside. Suddenly, at a short distance, they heard a well-
known voice joining in the requiem. All stopped short, so did the voice which
had filled them with superstitious alarm. They went on again with renewed
vigor. Presently a form was seen hobbling with a stick into the camp.
They all got up and bolted, but the form trudged feebly on, still singing the
chant for the dead, and at last squatted down by the camp fire of her nearest
relative. Their fear of the supposed supernatural appearance was soon dis-
pelled by the old creature’s action. She took up a dilly- bag and put it on the
fire. They knew her “ ruling passion ” could not come out so “ strong after
death” ; and they thought it very ungrateful of her, after taking the trouble
to bury her, and so kindly howling and afflicting themselves on her account,
to come back and burn their things ; so they rushed forward, carried her out,
and buried her decently ; cutting off all chance of another mortal resurrection
by piling on a large number of stones and logs.
Barrett and Co. got on swimmingly on their new station, till certain circum-
stances conspired to rob them of their peace of mind. They, of course, had
had to cope with many difficulties and some dangers that are inseparable from
the usual routine of outside station life. They thought lightly of these.
Their first lambing swelled their totals to quite 8,000 sheep. The lambs were
weaned and had grown to be good strong young sheep ; and their second
lambing was now near. Frank and faithful Old Ben had taken all the first
clip to Maryborough, and had brought up more supplies. They had built
good substantial out-stations, and made many other necessary improvements
about the station, including a larger house for themselves with a shingled
roof—not that they wanted more comfort or security, but as their sheep
increased, they required more accommodation for their stores, and also for
their visitors, for people’s attention was being drawn to the northern country,
and occasionally parties would pay a visit to our friends, as they travelled out
to look for new country, though, as yet, none had been stocked beyond.
Leichardt station. Besides which, the Biddies paid them a visit now and.
then, and in the old hut there was scarcely room for themselves, so the.
building of a new house became an absolute necessity.
How all the above improvements were effected in so short a time, the reader
will better understand when told, that the majority of the shearers, after
shearing was over, turned their hands to bush work of all kinds during the
winter months. The Leichardt shed being the last in the district, the shearers,
asked Barrett to give them other work when the sheep were shorn. Conse-
quently, they took contracts for the various works he required to be done, and
ere many months had passed, the improvements at the station were both
complete and substantial.
The element of discomfort was introduced by a rascal with whom the reader
has had some slight acquaintance already—Scotchy the Blower. He had
engaged with Frank in Maryborough, to make himself generally useful on the
station—drive a team, take a lambing flock, shear, split, etc. He was indeed,
a good hand at all kinds of bush work—when he liked—but a turbulent spirit
when the humor took him. He had kept on his mask of sanctimoniousness.


•at Taranga, till one day an old mate of his camped there with his dray.
Sootchy swallowed an inordinate quantity of drink with his old acquaintance,
and lost his usual caution. Mr. Button was not at home, and Scotchy went
into the kitchen in the evening, and sat down, contrary to the established
rule, and began to talk to, and make rather free with the women, so Sarah
went to her mistress and complained. Now Sarah had no objection whatever
to a bit of innocent flirtation—she rather liked it—two things provided ;
first, that her mistress was out of the way ; and secondly, that the young
man was eligible and agreeable. Scotchy was neither of the latter, in her
eyes, especially when tipsy—so she complained. Mrs. Button ordered him
■out. He had lost all self-command, and used the foulest language, threatening
violence, insomuch that the lady ran to her room and shut herself in.
Scotchy’s mate induced him to go to his hut, and then kept him there.
Next morning the unveiled scoundrel was dismissed by Mr. Button, on his
return. Scotchy obtained several places after that, but was quickly dis-
charged from each for some act of insubordination or rascality. At last he
made his way to Maryborough, not long before Frank reached there. He
had drunk all his money, and pressed his services very hard on Frank,
wishing, as he said, to get to an outside station, right out of the way of drink.
This was only a subterfuge, he really wanted to leave the town and his debts
Behind him, for he owed a good deal there. Barrett had given Frank instruc-
tions to hire one or two useful men if he could, so a twelve months’ agreement
suited both parties, and Scotchy became one of the Leichardt hands.
Now it so happened that when Barrett bought the sheep at Borilla, Mr.
Preston discharged two or three shepherds, not requiring their services any
longer. Barrett took on one of them, a Chinaman, who was highly recom-
mended by his employer. Ching Lee was indeed a good shepherd, very quiet
and good-tempered, and though a good deal chaffed and teased by his European
mates—as all Celestials are sure to be—he was nevertheless well liked by them
for his many good qualities. He grew in favour with his new employers, and .
was eventually sent to an out-station with another shepherd and a hut-keeper,
where we will leave him for the present, minding his sheep carefully and
■contentedly.
The lambing season was again at hand, and Scotchy had proved his title to
his reputation as a generally useful man, giving every satisfaction for some
time. Before he arrived all the men had been very friendly, but somehow,
unpleasantness began to circulate now. 111-natured things were said, but no
man could point to another, and say that he was the one who had originated
them. Scotchy was as plausible when it suited him, as he was quite the
•opposite when he had no motive for concealing his true meaning. He had
;a very strong desire to conciliate his employers, because he did not wish, for
a time at least, to have to work his way back towards Maryborough and his
numerous creditors. He was not the man to “work the dead horse.” What
he earned he was not likely to tender in liquidation of his debts. No, it '
must go down his throat, or be spent in some other way for the gratification
•of his animal appetites. He had been brought up by careful, pious parents ;
and as a requital of their love and care, he robbed them of a considerable
rsum of money ; and at the age of fourteen, shipped as an apprentice on board
an Aberdeen clipper for Sydney, with his ill-gotten gains. He left his ship
at Sydney, and went into the bush till she sailed. Eventually he worked *
his way to the outside settlements, and though still a young man, was old
in vice.
The lambing was over, and greater provision had to be made for the
sheep. The shearers arrived and took off the “golden fleeces,” but things


somehow did not go on so quietly as before. The men had frequent quarrels,
and two or three fights ensued. Barrett could not make this out. Some of
the men were robbed of cheques and valuables ; and somehow, though
Scotchy was as loud, or louder than the rest in recounting his losses, some
suspicion lighted on him. Still, for a while, suspicion only rested on pre-
sumptive evidence. One night while he was playing at cards with some of
the men, he was detected at cheating. He tried to laugh it off, and said it
was “ only a lark,” but the men knew better, and that if they had not dis-
covered his dishonesty, he would have pocketed the money and have kept the
“ lark ” to himself. This and previous circumstances, caused a general
“ down” to settle on him amongst the men, and Barrett thought it would
be best to send him to an out-station, out of the way, for he had begun to
suspect the fellow’s true character. Consequently, Scotchy was sent out as
hut-keeper to the same station that Ching Lee the Chinaman was at; the old
hut-keeper being put in his place at the head-station. Things were improved
at once, and went on much quieter, but the element of discord having been
sown broadcast amongst so many men, could not be entirely dispelled, and
an occasional outbreak was the consequence.
Scotchy and the Chinaman were each unaware of the other’s existence on
the Leichardt station, previous to the former’s appointment as hut-keeper.
When Ching Lee came home with his flock the first night after the change,
and the eyes of the two men met, an instant mutual recognition was the result,
and each hoped that the other did not recollect him ; but for veiy different
reasons. Ching Lee did not wish to renew his acquaintance with the man
who had robbed his brother’s grave, and as a consequence kept him walking
about the flat, and probably from reaching heaven to that day. As may be
supposed, Scotchy’s desire not to be recognized was not prompted by any
remorse for his deed, but in reality arose from a wish that it should not be
spoken of to his disadvantage. Indeed he thought the matter was clean
forgotten, so far as he was concerned ; but a man’s sins will find him out, at-
a time too, when he least expects and least wishes it. He had another fear
that had been chiefly instrumental in driving him from Boonara, where the
ugly deed had been committed—he thought the Chinaman might kill him.
Scotchy had been tampering with the blacks, too, and had caused them to-
become discontented by his intercourse with them ; and on several occasions,
his cruel treatment had aroused their indignation. They made no complaint
to Barrett, being afraid of Scotchy’s threats of vengeance if they did so.
The blacks were more tricky and troublesome now than they had ever beep,
since they had been allowed up at the station. Sheep had been taken
out of the yards in twos and threes at night, and Barrett and F
had to watch the night through to endeavour to detect the thieves. w£Jwn
one of them went down to the yards to watch, after the sheep had made a ruBHJ"
all would remain quiet as long as he stayed, but as soon as he had gone, the
sheep would rush again. This occurred very often, and they could not make
out the reason ; but so sure as it did happen, and the sheep were counted Out
in the morning, two or three would be missed. They tried to dodge the blacks
by both going down to the yards under one blanket, one behind the other.
One would remain hidden, and the other return to the hut. It was ineffectual,
however, for the sharp-eyed savages seemed to have the power of piercing
through the deepest gloom, and of detecting the attempted fraud. All was
quiet till the second watchman left, then the mysterious rush would be heard.
Some years' afterwards, a civilised black-boy told Barrett, that the first
rush was caused by a black-fellow jumping into the yard and catching a sheep
■by the leg. The sheep’s neck was broken by a sudden jerk of the head.


backwards, and then carried to the side of the yard ; the black lying close in
under the boughs with it, while others were on the look-out for the watchman,
who of course made his appearance as soon as possible after the rush took
place. Not finding anything, he went back ; then the look-out blacks gave the
signal that all was safe, and the thief shouldered his sheep, jumped over the
yard, and made off like a deer through the bush. His action alarming the
flock caused them to rush again. This was a dangerous game and showed that
the fellows were not devoid of pluck, for Barrett and Frank often used to
walk round the yards outside, to see if they could get a shot at the thieves.
Had either of them known that one lay within a few feet of him, his doom
would have been fixed.
It may be seen from the foregoing, how one white rascal may poison the
whole moral atmosphere of a station, and cause his employers an immensity
of trouble, anxiety, and loss, as well as endanger the lives of all in the place.
All was peaceable till Scotchy arrived, both amongst the whites and the
blacks. Now, how different!


CHAPTER XI.
Shearing was over ; the wool was all taken to Maryborough for shipment
to Sydney; and all was going on well so far as the work was concerned.
Now, reader, come with me to the Chinaman’s Hut, as it was called. Scotchy
thought himself secure with Ching Lee, he never having made the least sign
of recognition, indeed he began to think that the Chinaman was not, after all,
the one he at first took him for. He thought “ Chinamen are so much alike
that one may easily be mistaken, and this fellow evidently does not know me,
or I should have seen it in one way or other. Besides his name was ‘ Sammy. ’ ”
True, his name was “ Sammy,” but after the death of his brother he resumed
his own proper name, and had gone by it ever since. Scotchy having settled
this matter to his own satisfaction, the security and inward comfort it
afforded him caused him to cast off his usual caution, and show out in his
true colours. He became bounceable and overbearing to his mates, particu-
larly to the Chinaman. The latter had always watched him quietly,
unobserved, for he did not trust him—how could he 1
The hut consisted of two small apartments ; Scotchy slept, in one, and the
two shepherds in the other. One Saturday night, the other shepherd,
Johnson, went to the head-station to get some little article that he was in*
need of. He said he would not be back till morning, but would be there in
time to take his sheep out at the usual hour. Scotchy seemed restless after
tea, a fact that did not escape the quiet observation of Ching Lee. Bedtime
came, and they turned in. The Chinaman kept awake, for he suspected his'
mate and rather feared to be alone with him. Through the chinks between
the slabs of the partition, he saw Scotchy get up about midnight—for" the
moon was shining brightly—and enter his apartment. Ching Lee feigned
sleep, and Scotchy went cautiously to the head of Johnson’s bed, and removed
something from it. He took it into his own room, overhauled it, and in a
few minutes returned very quietly, going to Ching Lee’s bedside, and slip-
ping Johnson’s pocket-book—for it was that he had just rifled—beneath Ins
pillow. Ching Lee understood the scoundrel’s motive for the action, and
sitting up in bed, said,
“ Why you do that dam bad thing, Scotchy 1 You welly bad man ! I not
wantee my matee’s pocket-book. I tellee him to-mollow.”
The thief became furious, and swore he would kill the Chinaman. The
latter laughed and said,
“ You killee me, eh ? I know you, you thief —you been rob my dead
brother.”
The would-be murderer’s arm fell, and he now took a different line. He
saw that to murder the man there would assuredly prove his own destruction.
Again, he now felt that the Chinaman had known him all along, and had
probably been watching him, and seen other acts of his that would not bear
the light ; so, for the present at least, he must conciliate him. He said,
“ Look here, Lee —I was only playing a lark off on you. I couldn’t sleep
for them muskitters, so I thought I’d just get up a bit of fun between you
and Johnson, and when you’d had it out, I’d have up and told him the lark.”
The Chinaman, who was not so easily deceived, also acted the hypocrite,
smiled and said,
“ Oh, welly good, Scotchy. I savee now—l welly sleepy—good night.”


Scotchy turned'in, and at dawn of day both men were up. Ching Lee
went away rather earlier than usual with his sheep. Johnson was a little late
in returning, and consequently in starting with his sheep. As soon as Ching
Lee had left with his flock, the thief set about completing his plans. He put
the now empty pocket-book under Lee’s mattress, and the money and cheques
he had abstracted, into a bottle, which he buried under the earth floor of the
hut, and swept the place over.
Johnson not suspecting anything wrong, went away with his sheep after a
hasty breakfast. He merely remarked ‘ ‘ The boss told me to tell you, Scotchy,
that he or Mr. Frank would be out to count the sheep and go over the run
to-mOrrow.”
About eleven o’clock, Scotchy took a pair of pistols, put fresh capsbn them,
and went away in the direction of the Chinaman’s run. When about a
quarter of a mile from the hut, he took his boots off and planted them, cut a
thick stick, and then proceeded on his way. He soon spied Lee sitting on a
log close to a water-hole, eating his dinner, his back being towards him.
The treacherous wretch dodged from tree to tree, till he was as close as he
dared to go. Presently Lee got up and sauntered to the water-hole, laid on
his stomach at the brink, and began to drink. Scotchy sprang quickly and
noiselessly forward. Lee’s dog saw him, but made no noise, for he recog-
nized him immediately and tucked his tail in. Lee had finished his drink,
and was just about to rise, when the murderous stick crashed through his
skull, and he was a corpse !
“ Dead men tell no tales,” said the murderer, “ and we’re level chalks now.
Sammy.” # ’
He then rifled the man’s pockets, and taking something out of his owif
pocket, put it into the Chinaman’s. He did not stay a moment longer than
was necessary, and returned by the way he had gone, putting on his boots
when he reached the place where he had planted them. As soon as he
entered the hut, he threw the stick in the fire, sat down, and began talking
to himself—an old habit of his.
“ That job’s done, anyhow ; and he can go to with his brother, if they
can’t go to t’other place without their chow-chow and tobacco. That was a
good stroke of mine taking Johnson’s pistols ! He never noticed the swop, I
dare say. If I’d had to shoot the beggar, Johnson would have got the blame,
because I’d have changed pistols again as soon as he came home, when he
wasn’t looking. Ha !ha ! Murder will out—will it ? This won’t, anyways.
Leave me alone for that.”
Digging the bottle up, he put Lee’s money into it, and again carefully swept
over the place.
Early in the afternoon, the Chinaman’s sheep came home by themselves,
and Scotchy put them into the fold. When Johnson was returning with his
flock later in the day, Scotchy went to meet him, and said,
“ Have you seen anything of Ching Lee, Johnson ? His sheep came home
two hours ago and neither him nor his dog has returned. I doubt something’s
wrong. I don’t believe in them blacks as the boss is so fond of harboring
about the head-station. He pampers ’em, and thinks more of ’em than he
does of us Christians—a precious sight.”
I wouldn’t say as to that, Scotchy, for he’s always treated me fair and
square. I ain’t got much to complain of. May be as Lee’s gone to sleep, j
and ’ll be home to tea.”
“ I’m gallied he won’t, because I’ve heard strange noises like blacks about
to-day, and I believe the boss’ petting of them cannibals will cause mischief
yet—they can’t stand it, nohow. ”


He saw by the alteration in his mate’s countenance, that he had stated his
case well, and made the impression he wished. The thin end of the wedge
was inserted. His companion began to feel some alarm, and also irritation,
against his employer. That was the way Scotchy always worked—poisoning
the minds of his hearers with subtleties, thus sending them miles off the
track, by fixing his own sins on innocent shoulders.
Ching Lee’s absence was the constant theme of conversation between the
two men. The policy of one, and the alarm of the other, were sufficient to
keep it before them.
“I don’t like the looks of this business, Scotchy—what’s to be done 1 I
don’t like to go out to look for him to night, if them darkies is about. ”
“ Neither don’t I, but didn’t you say as the boss would be out in the
morning 2”
“Yes.”
“ Then we’ll wait. Just shut that door, and shove the peg in—we’ll watch
to night. Two men ain’t safe here. ”
During the long hours of the night, Johnson, for want of other employ-
ment —for there was no sleep for him, even if they had not agreed to watch—
looked through his things, and discovered the loss of the pocket-book. He
exclaimed,
“ Well! that bangs all! My pocket-book’s gone !”
“ Nonsense—you’ve planted it somewhere, and forgot it. Didn’t you take
it into the head-station? ”
“ No. I meant to, but forgot it.”
“ Oh, then you’ve forgot where you put it.”
“No fear. It was under my pillow, that I’ll take my oath of.”
Scotchy smiled incredulously. Johnson did not like to say so, but he
had missed two or three little things of late, which must have been taken, and
consequently by one of his mates in the hut.
“I say, Johnson, I’ve missed one or two things since I came here—if I
suspected you, I wouldn’t mention it now. Do you think Lee’s the clean
potater 2”
“ Don’t know what to make of him. He seems a decent chap ; but I don’t
trust them yaller skins.”
Scotchy winked knowingly, but said nothing. His mate thought for some
time, and then said, “ Let’s overhaul his swag, Scotchy.”
“ Do you think he’d put anything like that in his swag, after shaking it
from a mate 2 ”
“ Don’t know. Some fellows ain’t so clever as others that way, and some-
times makes mistakes. ”
“ Well, search away, Johnson ; and if you come across a silver ring, let
me see it. You can search my swag afterwards if you like.”
He never lost a silver ring. It was only one of his customary inuendoes.
The shepherd turned out the poor fellow’s swag, but found nothing of his.
He then stood on the beds, and felt round the wall-plates, but only found
an old pipe or two, and a bit of soap.
“ Well, I’ve searched every place I can think of—l even got on my bed
and on his ”
Scotchy broke in with a laugh, as though misunderstanding his mate, and
said,
“ You fool ! You didn’t expect to find it on his bed, did you 2 That’s
good, that is !”
“ No, no. I got on the beds to look over the wall-plates By Jove I
that’s well thought of—l never looked under his bedding.”


“He ain’t such a fool as you take him for. You needn’t trouble yourself.”
Johnson did trouble himself, and was rewarded by finding his pocket-book
where the treacherous villain had put it.
“The cheques and notes are all gone ! I’ve been saving for years, and
haven’t been drunk three times since I began. It’s too bad ! It’s no use a
man trying to do the right thing. I sent old mother home money every year,
and was going south soon to buy a bit of ground to farm on, and bring her
out to live with me. There was fifty pound in notes, and a bank receipt for
one hundred and forty pound—and—and—”
The poor fellow had been buoyed up hitherto, with the hope of finding his
money. Now he had found the empty pocket-book, the cold cruel truth that
he had lost so much of his honest earnings fell like a pall on his heart, and
he could not speak for a long time.
“ Perhaps he’s bolted with your tin, Johnson. If he has, you may catch
him yet, and get it back.”
The suggestion put the shepherd in better heart, and he felt grateful for it.
“Thank you for that, Scotchy. Maybe he has. I never thought of it
that way. By gum ! I’ll shorten his pigtail for him when I catch him !”
Frank arrived at the hut next morning, in time to count the sheep out of
the yards, and was told by Scotchy of the Chinaman’s non-arrival up to that
time, since he left with the sheep the morning before.
“ Didn’t you look for him 2 ”
“No sir,” said Scotchy, “ we didn’t like to go out last night ; we thought
the poor fellow was murdered by the blacks, then—but—”
“ Then you are two confounded curs, and want kicking. You are not like
Englishmen, to leave a poor fellow lying out in the bush all night, and not
try to render him any assistance, or see whether he is dead or alive. I shall
go and look for him at once, I will not count the sheep this morning, so turn
them out now. Scotchy—you take Lee’s flock— you know the run. Don’t
either of you go far away till I see you again.”
“ But, sir,” said Scotchy, “ my mate’s been robbed of all his money, as we
found out last night, after we thought he’d been murdered—so now we think
he’s bolted.”
“ Ching Lee robbed his mate and bolted ! That be hanged. I know him
better than that,” said Frank.
“ Thank you sir—then it must have been me, I suppose 2 No one else
could have done it besides.” Scotchy replied in an injured tone, but
inwardly furious, for though his furtive glance met Frank’s eye but for an
instant, he saw and felt that the impetuous young man had spoken the con-
viction of his heart.
“ I don’t blame anyone, Scotchy, but Ching Lee is as honest as daylight.
Why, how much money was in your pocket-book, Johnson 1 ”
“ Ten five-pound notes, two small cheques—two pounds each —and a bank
receipt for one hundred and forty, sir.”
“ Then that clears Ching Lee at once. He understood sufficient about
bank receipts to know that he could not get the money for it, so that puts
one hundred and forty pounds out of the question. He would have some
difficulty in passing off stolen cheques, the payment of which might be stopped.
Then he only has fifty pounds in notes for his risk. The thing is absurd !”
“ And good pay too, sir,” said Scotchy.
“ Do you think he would bolt with fifty pounds, when he has more than
that coming to him 2 He told us he had money by him, and wished us to
keep his wages till he wanted the money. He has not drawn a pound since
he engaged two years ago, so we owe him about one hundred pounds for


wages. Besides that, we owe him for a horse, saddle, and bridle, we bought
of him last time he was in at the head-station ; which makes altogether,
about one hundred and twenty-four pounds.”
“ Well, sir, you’d better go and look for your horse first, and the Ohinaman
after,” said Scotchy.
“ I want none of your advice, nor of your insolence either, Mr. Scotchy.
It so happens that I have not far to go for the horse, for I am now on Ms
back.”
Scotchy was foiled at all points. He felt that his position was not so secure
as he thought he had made it ; but even should suspicion rest on him, he
would be personally safe, as no witness could be brought against him ; and
after all, that was all he cared about. Frank rode off at a canter on the
Chinaman’s usual beat. The murderer looked after him with an expression
of the deepest hate, and muttered between his teeth,
“ I’ll lower your crest for that, you—young coxcomb —cute as you are.”
He turned to his mate, and said in an injured tone,
“ I wish you’d search my swag, mate —I don’t like to be thought a thief.
That young snob is too fast a taking away of a man’s good character like that.
They’re both too fond of blacks and yaller skins, and they’ll suffer for it yet.
A decent man won’t work for ’em soon.”
Johnson merely said, very sorrowfully,
“ I don’t want to look at your things, mate.”
Then both men proceeded to obey orders, and feed their respective flocks
at a short distance from the hut.
Frank followed the route he knew the Ohinaman took of a morning, and
ran the sheep-tracks till they went towards the chain of water-holes that Lee
generally took them to at dinner-time to drink. When he was yet a little
distance from the water-holes, he heard a dog barking, and went in the direc-
tion of the sound, which led him directly to the body of the murdered man.
The faithful Collie was still by the corpse of his master. Frank got off his
horse to see if the man was really dead, and found that he was quite stiff.
His head hung over the brink of the water-hole, and touched the water ; his
hat was on the ground beside him. The dog could not be induced to leave
him, so Frank cantered off to the head-station to tell Barrett of the occurrence.
The two partners, with two men and Mickey the black-boy, went out to the
spot and conveyed Ching Lee on a rough litter to his hut, laying him on his
bunk. His clothes were taken off, and the pockets turned out, when the bank
receipt drawn in favour of John Johnson was found ; together with a bit of
tobacco, a knife, pipe, and tinder-box—nothing more. There could be no
doubt as to the cause of his death —the base of the skull was fearfully smashed.
All the poor fellow’s effects were packed up and taken to the head-station for
safety. Barrett said—
“ Now, Mickey, you come along a me. You and me look out tracks where
Lee been killed.”
The above jargon, which reads very like a modern telegram, was readily
understood by Mickey, who, having taken up with the whites at a rather
advanced age, was a very indifferent horseman, and climbed into his saddle
much after the same fashion as he would up a gum tree, and looking as
awkward when there as a big monkey.
Nothing much could be discovered even by the renowned tracker Mickey,
though he took his time, and strained his intelligence to the utmost. AH he
found was the track of a single individual’s naked feet from the nearest tree
to where Lee’s body was lying, and back. All other traces had been obliterated
by the sheep, and those he found would have been trodden out in the same


way, only for the timidity of the sheep keeping them from approaching
prostrate body of their shepherd.
“ You think it that fellow mandoey (feet or tracks) belonging to tarn
(blaokfellow) 1”
Mickey shook his head, and said he could not tell, as the ground was so
very hard : but he thought they were not. They then took a circuit com-
pletely outside the sheep tracks of the day before, Mickey carefully examining;
the ground the whole time, but no tracks of any description could he find.'
They re-examined the ground in the vicinity of the scene of the murder, and
then made straight for the hut. On the way they came across the head ami
Stump of the sapling that had been cut by Scotchy for the dreadful deed, just
in sight of the hut. The sheep tracks had again obliterated all traces of the
man who cut it. On their return to the hut, Barrett sent out Mickey and a
man to take charge of the two flocks, and to send in Scotchy and his mate.
When they came in, he interrogated them closely as to what had taken place
within the last few days, but particularly on the day before. The whole of
the evidence was taken down in writing by Frank. Scotchy said he saw
Ching Lee take the sheep out the day before, as usual; and he also saw hi#
cut the sapling alluded to, but for what purpose he could not say, as he never
saw him alive after. It might have been for a walking-stick. Johnson’s
evidence showed that he had seen nothing of Ching Lee on the morning he
returned from the head-station, which was corroborated by Scotchy. Barrett
had the papers containing the evidence duly signed by all concerned, for the
purpose of sending them to the nearest magistrate, who was much too far away
for it to be possible for him to be up in time to view the body, and take formal
depositions before the burial should take place. In that climate, it was not
possible to delay the last rites many hours, at that time of the year, without
very disagreeable consequences arising. In those days the law was not over
strict, and very little ceremony sufficed in such cases.
Neither Scotchy nor his mate would sleep in the hut, and to while away
the weary hours of the night, and for other reasons of his own, which may be
easily divined, the miscreant proposed to Barrett that he and Johnson should
dig the grave. Barrett consented, and fixed on the spot where it was said the
Chinaman had cut the stick, as being the most convenient, and not too near
the hut. Scotchy would have chosen a spot as far as possible in the opposite
direction for the scene of his night’s work, had it been left to his own option.
Next day the poor fellow was buried ; Barrett reading a short prayer over
him. A square of four pannels of rough paling fence was erected on the
spot, and a post sunk at the head, with the following inscription cut with a
chisel:—
CHING LEE,
CHINESE.
A GOOD
SHEPHERD.
MYSTERIOUSLY
MURDERED.
MARCH 9, 185 .
This terrible occurrence caused much discussion at all hands, but was so
tangled that none could quite unravel it to his own satisfaction or anyone
else’s. Barrett was nearest to the truth, but as there was nothing to point
directly at the murderer or his mate, he was reticent, not wishing to fix a
shadow of suspicion on one who might, after all, be innocent. He reasoned
thus :


“ Whoever committed the deed must have gone from the direction of the
hut, there being no tracks leading on to Lee’s sheep-run from any other
quarter ; but it does not follow that, supposing the person to have gone from
the direction of the hut, it must necessarily have been done by one of the men
in it. Anyone else might have gone that way, knowing that the poor fellow s
sheep tracks would certainly obliterate his own, as the sheep returned to the
yard. Then, the cutting of the stick, though suspicious m connexion with
the rest, may, as Scotchy said, have been Lee’s own act. Then, what became
of the stick 2 We know the murder could not have been committed by
Johnson after he started with his sheep, for I had his tracks followed by
Mickey from the start from the yard till his return. He never left his sheep,
that’s almost certain, for his flock travelled in a regular circle, and only ran
over his tracks about a hundred yards from the fold as they were coming m
at night. We even knew that Scotchy had been down to meet him, by ms
tracks, before he said so. The only way he could have been implicated m
the affair, is by complicity with Scotchy. Then, again, is that a trumped
up affair about the robbery 2 In spite of that bank receipt being found m
Ching Lee’s pocket, Ido not believe he was the thief. No, no, I quite agree
with Frank. Lee was as honest as daylight. Again, what became of Lees
money 2 I know he had some notes —I saw them. Johnson has always been
a quiet steady fellow since he came here, but I know nothing of his ante-
cedents. Scotchy is a drunken rascal in town, and from those yams Charley
O'Connor told Frank about him at Button’s, and his robbing the Chinaman s
grave at Boonara, he must be an unprincipled fellow—but he is not the only
unprincipled, drunken rascal I have here. One thing lam sure of, there w
not a better working hand at Leichardt. The man may be very bad, but I
cannot believe him to be such an awfully cold-blooded miscreant as to
commit a deed like that—such a good-tempered, inoffensive fellow as Lee was
too. TTan g it all, I can’t make it out, but I shall keep my eyes open.
Scotchy went to Barrett and said,
<< If you please, sir, I want to speak to you about that affair. My mate and
me’s been talking it over, and thinks it very hard on us. We don t want to
leave you, and hope you won’t turn us off; it would look as if you d suspected
us, and it would tell agen us anywhere else. We’d like to finish our agree-
ments, anyway. I’ve always done your work like a man am 11, sir . iep,
sir, I know’d you’d say so. Me and Johnson, and poor Lee, had a growl
sometimes, but we always hung together like, and would not have raised even
our fists, on no account. We don’t like stopping out there now, sir it s
This whining, but somewhat logical speech, decided Barrett. He sent
three fresh men out to the Chinaman’s hut, and took Scotchy and Johnson in
to the head-station, giving the latter charge of one of the home flocks.
Ching Lee’s faithful Collie is deserving of some notice. He was always very
much attached to his master, and never made friends with anyone else. Me
remained neutral with Johnson from the first time they met, but though he
allowed him to pat him occasionally, he never showed the least sign ot
pleasure at the attention. He hated Scotchy, and generally evinced his dis-
like to that individual by moving out of his way whenever they were in
danger of meeting. Scotchy noticed this, and returned the dogs aversion
with feelings of hatred, and if he had dared, would have killed him with the
greatest pleasure. The poor brute leaped on the bed, and crouched at the
lower end with his head on the feet of the dead man, till the rough coffin hid
him from sight. He followed him to the grave, and scratching a hole on the
mound curled himself up in it. Neither hunger nor thirst could induce him


to leave the spot, and he resented, in a most unmistakable manner, all attempts
to remove him. Seeing that he would brook no interference, and being touched
by his constancy, the new hut-keeper was instructed to give him food and
water at the grave, but following his accustomed habit, he would take nothing
that was not supplied by the hand of his master. When the grave was fenced
round, he was still alive, and a paling was left out that he might be able to
leave at any time he wished. He never did, and in about a fortnight, the
hut-keeper went as usual to offer him food and water, but the affectionate animal
was beyond grief and pain—dead ! He was not disturbed. Frank nailed the'
paling in, and years after, the bones of the loving sentinel were still in their
place in the little hollow, coiled up with the head between the fore paws, as
though yet watching and mourning.
Since they had brought their stock on to the Leiohardt run—now over
two years—they had never had time to search thoroughly for further traces
of the explorers whose marks Frank and Liddle had found. A sheep-station
was formed close to where they found the remains of the horse and pack-saddle,
but though the sheep had kept the grass pretty short, and the shepherds had
searched all around many times, nothing fresh was ever discovered. The old
blacks were questioned, but if they knew anything they would not divulge it.
Tommy was set as a detective to try to draw them out during their social
gatherings at night, but failed to elicit anything, and there the matter ended.
The articles lost out of Liddle’s saddle-bags were never recovered.
Other changes were going on, and more contemplated ; amongst which were
certain improvements at the head-station. A new house was to be built a
short distance from the last. Surely these young men were getting luxurious
as they prospered ! What could they possibly want another house for ? The
one they had was quite large enough for two bachelors, and for all the visitors
they were likely to have for some time to come. The answer to that question
is simple : Minnie Liddle was now something more than a pretty child. She
was a very handsome young lady of seventeen ; and Frank, if not to be
ranked amongst handsome men, was, at all events, a grown man of strong
build and prepossessing countenance, generous, brave, and with just enough
impetuosity to give him force of character. He was, in fact, a very proper
bushman. Minnie, who may have been influenced by feelings that so often
render the opinions of young ladies respecting the opposite sex totally value-
less, where coolness and judgment are absolutely necessary, thought him—
well, simply perfect. Frank was her acknowledged suitor, by consent of all
parties, and the wedding was to take place in the following spring—about
September. That is the reason a new house was being built, and a new out-
station also, for Mr. Liddle had settled 3000 sheep on his daughter for her
marriage portion. A visit from Minnie and Robert Liddle had been promised,
and they were now daily expected. It would be her first appearance at
Leichardt, and everything was put in apple-pie order for her reception. A
married couple had been brought up from Maryborough by the last returned
wool dray, so the place wore a tidier appearance than it did in former days ;
many little feminine improvements being introduced by the woman. Barrett
and Frank thought there would be no danger to be apprehended from the
blacks, so they had no hesitation in importing this woman. She turned out
to be a most bustling little body, in fact a perfect treasure. She was middle-
aged, and her greatest fault was her garrulousness. They now knew the
comfort of clean-starched shirts on Sundays, and a most unusual display of
buttons on their working shirts. They had become so civilized that when
they went into meals they turned down their shirt sleeves over their brown
arms, and buttoned them at the wrists ; the throat and breast buttons were


still disused, but probably would not remain so very long, as the march of
civilization had commenced. Sheets, tablecloths, bread, eggs, pies and
puddings, made dishes! —a change had indeed come over their mode of living.
Table-knives and forks superseded their old “ Dovers ” and pointed sticks.
Plates appeared in place of the circular pieces of bark hitherto used ; and by
degrees she had perfectly transformed the whole place. One day at dinner
Barrett said,
“ That is a capital little woman, Frank, I did not like all the new-fangled
things she insisted on at first, but upon my word I am becoming rapidly
used to the change, and think it is more comfortable after all. I don’t like
her jaw though.”
“ I’ll tell you what it is, Bob, we are living too luxuriously by far. I must
have gained a stone the last month. I have eaten enormously since she
came, and often do not feel inclined to go to work after dinner. I should
not wonder if I found myself carrying out my dear mother’s instructions
soon—wear flannel next my skin, come home and change my things when I
get wet, and fasten the back door at night!”
They both had a good laugh at this—to them—absurd probability. Just
at the conclusion of Frank’s speech, the talkative little domestic entered with
a roily sugar pudding, and joined in with,
“ Your mamma was quite right too, Mr. Frank. And if I was her, I’d
make you do it too. It isn’t right to sit about in your wet things ; it’s been
the death of many’s the fine young gentleman. As for not wearing flannel
shirts and drawers, you’d ought to be ashamed of yourself sir, not to, and
you’ll rue it some day—mark my words ! I make my husband wear flannel
from head to foot, summer and winter, year in and year out, and he feels,
the benefit of it—Ha, you may laugh, sir, but mayhap you’ll have somebody
that ’ll make you do the same before long. Young gentlemen should all have
someone to take care of them,” looking at Barrett.
“ Oh, yes, Mrs. Blather—my turn will come some day, but I am not so
young and foolish as some young men, and consequently do not require so
much looking after—No more tea, thank you—no, nothing else. I will call
you if we should want anything. ”
This was really the worst point in Mrs. Blather’s character. She was some-
times amusing, but at others most annoying. She always joined in the con-
versation and gave her opinions and advice broadcast, without in the least
supposing that she was out of place in so doing. Barrett always tried to get
her out of the room, but she seemed sometimes impervious to his strongest
hints that her room was preferable to her company.
The bunya season was now on, and for some time past the blacks had been
gathering in very large numbers in the ranges above the oaves, from all parts
of the country. One morning Frank went down to the camp which was near
the lagoon, for the purpose of waking up some of the blacks for their daily
work, but to his surprise, the camp was empty. Not a black had slept there
on the previous night. They had bolted quietly, without the least notice
beforehand. Mickey and his gin, and Tommy, were still there, of course ;
they always camped in their own gunyahs close to the house, for they never
had taken too kindly to the blacks of that part of the country—they never
trusted them. They had heard nothing of the blacks moving off, nor had
they been apprised of their intention to do so. No doubt the runaways had
gone to the bunya, and were even then probably near the scrub.
Scotchy had been sent out with a team to the place where the new station,
was to be built for the reception of Minnie’s sheep. His work was simply to
draw in the split and the round stuff, that the men cut in the bush. It was.


about ten miles west from the head-station, and close to the great western
range before mentioned. There was not much splitting timber on the east
side of the site, within easy distance, but plenty just under the range. In
the course of his work, Scotchy had to take his team to the very foot of
range. When there one afternoon, he was both surprised and alahned at
finding himself close to a mob of blacks. He put his hand to his pistol, but
the leader of the blacks called out in good English,
‘‘ Do “’* be frightened, Scotchy. You needn’t fire at us. How are you
mate, eh? J *
Scotchy knew the voice well, and beckoned the black to him. They seemed
mutually pleased at the meeting, and shook hands heartily.
y° u Scotchy, old man ? ’Pon my soul I’m glad to see you 1
Why, its an age since we parted ! * How wags the world with you V as
Shakespeare says V
, we lV Jack Campbell ! I’m glad it’s yourself. To tell you the
truth, I thought my job of bull-punching was finished, when I seen your mob
so near me. They look a desperate bad lot.”
They re as harmless as babes under me, old man. I can turn them all
round my little finger. They’re a picked lot though, for we are going to the
bunya scrub for a month or two, and I want men I can depend on. Those
fellows 11 ‘ lick their weight in wild cats’ as the Yankees say.”
, - P° the looks of em at all, Jacky, as you seem to,anyway. Suppose
<y£ e though, if you say so. What’s going on up Gayndah way ? 11
Haven t been there for just a little while. The fact is I’m ‘ wanted ’ W
old Bannister, the Chief Constable. I was sitting in my camp in a bit of a
scrub—for I didn t like to appear too much in public—waiting for the paper
for I d sent one of my chaps into town for it. When it came, I did laugh--
just fancy the Barnett Argus coming out on paper out of tea-chests ! It said
they d run out of the proper sort. Well I run my eyes down the locals, till'
I dropped on one headed ( Jack Campbell at his old tricks again,’ It
blamed me for the murders at Coonambula, just before, and wound up by
saying that a warrant was out for me and some of my fellows. That night wo
mustered up, and put forty miles between us and the police. I’d like to get
some of those blessed old women up in these ranges ! ”
Yes, there s no manner of fear of those constables, Jacky, but where are
the native police . If they get after you they’ll have a few notches to put in
their carbine-stocks, before they go back—l know. ”
“Oh, they re all down at Maryborough. Commandant Walker, and the
whole mob went down to disperse the niggers about the salt-water stations—
they ve been playing up ‘ top ropes’ down there with the cattle. Any cattle
about here, Scotchy 2 No 2 My coves likes beef. Well, dare say they’}! do
on mutton and bunya. I say, old man, where are you hanging out ? Is this
a new station 2 I was never here before, but we dropped on a rare place to
camp last night. ”
Scotchy gave a hasty sketch of the Leichardt station’s history, and then said
he must be moving back with his team.
“ Can’t I come and see you to-night, Scotchy 2 I’d like to have a good
yam with you for old acquaintance sake.”
Jacky, it wouldn’t do. I’ve not got many friends at the station— .
they re a queer lot. The fellows would be saying we was up to no good if they
saw us together.” B J
“ Well, you come to my camp then 2 ”
t X? 1 ?, W( S’ i sn t * OO —but you’re sure them fellows are all right?
I don’t like their looks nohow. ”


‘‘Oh they’re all right old man. They wouldn’t hurt a friend of mine.”
The two parted. That night Scotchy said he would sleep under his dray,
as he found it too hot in the gwnyah with the other men. This proceeding
was too natural to excite any suspicion amongst his mates. When all was
quiet for the night, and Scotchy was under his dray awaiting his friend, he
heard a hoarse note, resembling that of the cuckoo, or Australian owl, close to
his head. He started up, and Jack Campbell lifted the tarpaulin and put
his head under, saying, “Are you ready, Scotchy 1” , |io
The two went up the foot of the range, to a place about half a mile past
where they had met on the previous afternoon. They then ascended a
steep and narrow spur, and after half an hour’s hard climbing, Jacky said
they were on top. He then led the way short off to the right, and in ten
minutes they were at the camp. There were at least sixty able-bodied blacks—
a most ferocious looking lot. When some little distance from the camp Jacky
uttered the cuckoo’s cry, and was answered by a doleful howl like a dingo s,
but which really proceeded from his lieutenant’s throat. He invited Scotchy
into his gwnyah, where they sat down for a while talking. Let us leave them
there, while the reader is enlightened on certain points. _ T _ ,
Jack Campbell is the same black who was at the killing of Mr. Brown s
beast at Yerilla, at the commencement of this story. He was a Moreton Bay
black, and had been taken to Scotland and England by a gentleman, when
quite a piccaniny, educated pretty well, and brought out again. His fortunes
were varied, he having obtained several situations, but his propensity for
throwing off all restraint, and returning to his wild life among those of his
own colour, had somewhat marred his prospects. He had no relations living,
many of them had perished by the rifle bullet, his father and mother amongst
the number. He was employed on stations at last, that kind of life being
more congenial to his tastes. His old habit again told against him ; he was
continually going into the bush at inconvenient times to his employers. He
eventually found his way to the bush town of Gayndah, and haying made
friends with the blacks of that neighborhood, he, by his superior knowledge
of the habits of the whites, and by his natural tact and cunning, gained such
ascendency over the natives of that district, as to gradually become them
head man. When the whites required any blacks to work for them, they had
to go to Jacky, who acted as a sort of agent, and supplied the requisite
laborers for a stipulated sum, or payment in tobacco or food. His authority
was at last the means of bringing him into bad odor. He had bands of blacks
who robbed huts, and even houses in town. At length he took to sticking up
drays, and it was more than suspected that there was a white man of the
party more than once. The surmise was quite correct, Scotchy was the man.
He stripped naked, and blacked himself all over for the occasions with charcoa
and grease. He had had several narrow escapes from capture. Their familiarity
on the present occasion will not now be wondered at; nor will their subsequent
behavior create so much surprise as it would, had the above explanation been
talking over their past villainies, Jacky rather astonished Scotchy, by
proposing a partnership on an extensive scale. Jacky said he had come
through a nest of ranges that he would defy any one to catch him in. There
were places in which he could defend himself at great odds with perfect safety,
if he only had a rifle or two, and a good mate to back him up, who knew how
to use them. His fellows would stand by him to the death, for most of them,
like himself, were “wanted.” .
Scotchy was tickled by the proposal. The thirst for gam set him thinking.
Then, had he not something to revenge 1 Yes, and he would as soon as tfte


opportunity offered, with safety to-himself. That young puppy Frank should
sutler yet, but must be tackled cautiously, and off his guard. The villain
then proposed to return to his dray, and asked Jacky to go as far as the ton
Ol the leading spur with him, to which he assented, but invited Scotchy to first
Hymn be , said Scotchy. “ I’ve done with that sort of thing—had
enough of it at Mother Button’s. Bah ! you’re only taking a rise out of me
Jacky—you told me they could not speak a word of English, and I believe it
too, from their villainous looks.” ’
No more they can, old man, but I translated it into their own language
jou know. It isn t right for a man to give up all that sort of thing. Ifi
fellow can tbe all saint, he shouldn’t be all sinner neither. Why, I baptized
most of those chaps myself in the Boppool Lagoon. Now, you just hear ’em.”
Jacky took out of a dilly- bag a pocket Bible and a hymn book ; both were
extremely dirty, and showed thumb marks that wouhUiave delighted a Sunday-
school teacher. He called to his “ Babes” and said,"
“ huh yarliem Cobborn Commandant.’’
This speech meant—“ You speak to the great Commandant.” They have
no equivalent to the word Almighty, and cannot comprehend that any being
could be greater than a commandant of native police. “
The blacks all ranged themselves in rows on their knees, and Jacky with
two nulla nullas with which to keep time, led off; all the others, in excellent
tune and fame, following. Truly, Jacky had trained the ferocious band
wonderfully well. Li spite of himself, Scotchy was so led away by the
unprecedented scene as to be imperceptibly drawn into joining in it, and after
the first verse was as vociferous as the rest.
The savages looked upon the performance as a sort of magic rite, by which
they secured to themselves great, but unseen benefit. Consequently, they
threw the whole force of their superstitious souls into it, and the mountains
re-echoed the sound. After that, they all jumped up, and commenced a lively
corrobboree tune, the words of which had anything but a religious tendency.
This went on while Jacky piloted Scotchy to the brow of the ridge ; when the
two parted for the night, with a promise on the part of the latter to repeat
his visit next night.
During subsequent visits, Jacky and Scotchy had long conversations, which
resulted in the white rascal entering into a compact with his black friend to
take to bushranging on an extensive scale. Thirst for revenge as well as gain,
spurred him on to the final determination. Frank should be his first victim
after which he would take to the bush with Jacky and his “Babes.” The •
district being remote, their operations, they reckoned, could be carried on
for some time with impunity. Jacky said he could bring another mob of
about fifty blacks from the bunya scrub who had preceded him, and Scotchy
should have command of them.
While up with Jacky, Scotchy went over a good deal of the range, examin-
ing its fastnesses, and found them to his satisfaction in the way of affording
security against unpleasant intruders. There were places where he felt sure
he could stand a siege if necessary, at the same time affording every facility
for retreat, if that course were more desirable. The place where Jacky was
camped was in itself a natural fortress, which, if well garrisoned, could not be
taken by an army. It was on the flat top of a mountain, approachable from
the Leichardt run only by the sinuous spur up which Scotchy and the educated
savage went to the camp. On the opposite side of the flat top was another
leading spur, narrow and winding like the one jus! described, connecting it


with a higher tier of mountains more to the west, over which Jacky had come
from Gayndah. The situation of the flat-top was thus : —The eastern side
overlooked the Leichardt run, and was bounded by a frightful precipice com-
posed of basaltic columns. The opposite side faced the western tier of ranges
to which the second spur led ; it was also bounded by an inaccessible precipice.
The first-mentioned spur joined the top at the south side, and the other
started in a northerly direction, and then turned in west, joining the great
range about two miles away. The top itself was about a quarter of a mile in
diameter, round which there was a belt of timber and light scrub. The
centre, or area within this belt, was covered with tall blady grass, which had
not been burnt for years. Jacky issued strict orders to his men not to. bum
this grass, or make any smoke in any other way, by which their presence
might be discovered. There was a spring of water near the cliffs on the
western side, so that all that would be required in case of siege, would be for
them to keep open the communication between the flat-top and the range,
where there was an abundance of food for any number of blacks. The ridge
leading from the country below was quite bare of trees ; so that a small deter-
mined band of spear-men could almost maintain their position in the wood
against a number of men with rifles ; and if they had but one or two riflemen
amongst them, it would be impossible to oust them from their position, while
they could play sad havoc amongst their enemies. This applies equally to
the opposite ridge, it being quite bare of timber.
The sheep station was completed, and all the men moved to the head-station.
Jacky and his mob of “ Babes ” travelled towards the bunya scrub to luxuriate
for a few days on its fruit, and then to bring back his promised company of
fifty savages for Scotchy to command. Their plans had been formed as to
their future mode of proceeding, and Jacky was not to be absent longer than
he could help. This contemplated scheme of brigandage was far too bold a
conception for Scotchy to have originated, but he fell into it by degrees, on
Jacky showing him that he would be quite safe in carrying it out ; and that
the plunder would amply repay him for the risk he would run. Their raids
should be sudden and sure. They would have nothing to do but to plan the
best modes of attack, and, if necessary, retreat. Had they not worked
together before, and were pretty successful on a small scale 1 Then why
should they not be so now, on a large base of operations, when they had
over a hundred of the most desperate savages that Jacky had been able to
gather, in a district noted for the ferocity of its natives ? Was not the
neighborhood in which they were, full of impregnable places ? By posting
small bands of blacks at certain spots on the ranges, they could entrap and
destroy their enemies as they advanced. They could soon get a few rifles, and
amongst the blacks he would bring from the bunya, were two or three old
troopers who had deserted from the native police force ; men skilled in the
use of arms, and who, moreover, dare not allow themselves to be taken, for
that were certain death. Had not the whites been forced to abandon new
country before. Then it was possible to drive them away again ?


CHAPTER XII.
Minnie Liddle and her brother Bob arrived at Leichardt at last, and, as
may be imagined, had a right royal reception. Their visit was to extend over
eight or ten days. They were escorted all over the run. Every place of
interest, and places possessing no particular points of interest were visited.
All the out-stations ; the poor chinaman’s grave, on which the remains of his
faithful dog were still intact, the sight of which drew copious tears from
Minnie, who thought of her favorite “Lassie.” Last of all, the new station
under the range, destined for the reception of Minnie’s dowry. She thoroughly
enjoyed her visit, Frank having been good-naturedly relieved of most of his
duties by his partner, had been almost entirely at the service of his affianced.
The nights were now getting long and cold, and on the evening before
the day fixed for Minnie’s departure, they were all seated on the floor, having
a somewhat noisy game at “hunt the slipper,” when they were suddenly
silenced by the dogs setting up a furious barking ; simultaneously with which,
Mickey and his gin, and Tommy, rushed in, and said they saw a number of
blacks stealing through the bush towards the house, at the back ; and some
more were sneaking round by the lagoon in front. Barrett at once tolled the
great station-bell in a peculiar way, and in less than five minutes, all hands were
mustered in front of the house, under arms—for they knew the signal—all but
Scotchy, and he was fully five minutes after the rest. His excuse for being
late was, that he could not find his ammunition. The howl of the dingo was
heard from the lagoon, and the hoarse note of the cuckoo sounded at the back
of the house. Suddenly a number of howls were heard all round, and Barrett
no longer doubting the fact that their house was besieged, ordered the men
inside. The door was not quite shut, when a shower of spears and nulla nullm
splintered and rattled against it and the slabs, a spear entering Johnson’s leg
as he went in. Simultaneously with this attack, the back door and windows
were assailed either with large stones or logs to try and force an entrance.
The windows were not of glass, they merely consisted of square openings in the '
wall, with strong hardwood shutters. While the battering was going on vC
-chopping of tomahawks was heard in various places round the slab walls..
Barrett divided his forces and placed them in different parts of the house, aa'
soon as these sounds were heard, giving the men directions to fire between
the slabs wherever they heard the work going on. He and Frank fired
between the rough boards of which the doors and shutters were made, and by '
that means rendered the position of the besiegers too hot to be maintained.
The men constantly firing through the chinks soon silenced the chopping at
the slabs. Had the savages once succeeded in making a breach either by
cutting out some slabs, or forcing a door, nothing but a miracle could have
saved the little band of whites.
Scotchy certainly fired through the chinks occasionally, but he took care
not to put anything but powder in his pistols or rifle. He volunteered to
load for one or two of the men, but their pieces would not go off after, and
they had to get fresh ones. He rammed down bullets tightly into the breeches,
rendering them useless for the time. During the heat of the fight, his officioua-
ness was not suspected, but was set down to a laudable desire to do all he could
for the defence. He was, however, watching his opportunity to carry out the
diabolical act of revenge, that he had been actively plotting for some time—


the destruction of his young employer, Frank. Now all was quiet outside,
he began to fear that the blacks had retired, for he did not doubt that some
were wounded, and some even killed, as a great number must have been
round the house trying to effect an entrance, and many shots had been fired.
It was intensely dark, and the only light that was kept burning was in an
inner room where Minnie was placed for safety.
Some of the men had been wounded by spears which had been thrust between
the slabs, but none seriously. The brave girl made no fuss, but employed
herself in loading the spare arms that Frank, Barrett, or her brother took to
her occasionally, when too hotly pressed to load for themselves. She had
herself proposed this arrangement, and did no small service. Her pretty
hands and face were begrimed with powder—and so were Frank’s lips.
During the temporary lull that followed the onslaught, Barrett and Frank
set to work boring large auger holes here and there through the slabs, for
loopholes to fire through. Also, that they might have a better view of their
enemies when the moon rose. They were rather congratulating themselves
that the blacks had retired, when they heard a rustling sound under the house,
which was built about two feet off the ground on wooden blocks. They paid
no attention to this at first, thinking that it was perhaps a dog. Presently
Minnie thought she heard a whisper beneath her feet, for the rough slabs of
the floor had shrunk, leaving spaces between them. Frank’s big blood-hound
which had been left with her, sniffed at the floor, uttered a deep growl, and
went from crack to crack, till he reached the partition wall, as though follow’-
ing up the scent of something he wanted to get at. When he could get no
further, he tore with teeth and nails at the floor, as though determined to get
through, but desisted when he found his efforts useless; so he crouched down
eyeing the crack with threatening looks. The rustling occurred in other places
from time to time ; at length the terrible truth was forced on the besieged that
the savages were preparing to burn them out! They discovered this too late,
or they might have made it uncomfortable for their enemies by taking
board or two here and there ; or even prodding or firing through the cracks in
the floor. Mickey was the first to find out what they were up to, and it fell
out in this way. The three principal white men in the house held a consul-
tation as to what course they should pursue, whether to keep on the defensive
or turn out and attack the blacks when the moon rose, which they expected
would be in about two hours. Whilst they could maintain their little fort
they were comparatively safe ; and what was of more importance, so was
Minnie. Had it not been for the girl’s presence, and that of the woman, Mrs.
Blather, they would probably have decided on the latter course of action ; but
they could not leave the two females in the hut by themselves, and their force
was too small to divide, so a sortie was out of the question. It was fortunate
that they did decide so, and that the circumstances of their case forced them
to it, for they did not know the numbers they were opposed to. Jaoky had
gathered a much larger band of savages than he had reckoned on at the bunya
scrub. The volunteers swelled his force to about one hundred and fifty.
Whilst the trio were in consultation, Minnie said—
“Oh ! Frank ! If you could only send over to my father, he would soon be
here with a good force which would take them in the rear, and you could then
drive them off the station. But it is impossible ! ”
Tommy understood this, and interpreted it to Mickey. The latter said he
would go, and that he had braved even greater dangers than that in the course
of his campaigns against the enemies of his tribe. The white men were
doubtful, and really unwilling that the generous fellow should go forth to
what they considered would be certain death. Barrett said—


“How you get out, Mickey? Suppose mine open him door, spear come
up, plenty—then you bong (dead).” 1
Mickey pointed to the floor and said—
“ Take him up slab.”
~ This thre w a fresh and more hopeful light on the matter. He could set
through the floor and under the house, but how would he fare then 1 He
smiled at the suggestion, and said that he believed the blacks had been’them
already, and if he stripped off his clothes, he could creep out in the darkness
would be All the same like it ’nother fellow black-fellow.” This wm
said with so much confidence that they agreed to let him attempt it. A slab
was taken up m the floor at the end of the house facing Rossdale, and tha
brave, fellow quickly slipped through it, and lay for a minute or two perfectly
stiff, to find out whether any of the savages were near him. He then crept
along under the house, snake-like, till he was stopped by a bundle of brush-
wood winch was being urged against him very cautiously. He whispered in
broken English, ‘ Name you V } for he dared not speak in his own language
or in that of the blacks of the Leiohardt neighborhood, not knowing what pari
of the country the assailants belonged to, as the dialects differed materially in
each district, and even m divisions of a district. He knew that if he made a
mistake in that particular, his attempt would end disastrously ; therefore,
his safest course was to utter the English interrogative “Name you?” as that
was understood by almost every black, even though he might not be able to
say it The reply was, “ Baralga.” That was quite enough. The name, and
accent of its owner, revealed to the wary questioner that he was a Barnett
black. He then said in the Barnett tongue, “ Leave this to me. There ia
plenty of wood now.” The black did so, and crept out again from under the
house. As soon as he was off, Mickey worked his way to the loose slab, and
raising it, told Barrett what was being done, and what natives they were who
were against them ;he then disappeared, and his real work began. On his
way out, he met another black, whom he passed without speaking, and crept
along till he reached the forest close to the house, where he cautiously began
to pick up sticks, as he heard so many others doing. He worked his way
outside of their lines, carrying a bundle of sticks, and pretending to add to
it now and then. When he judged himself to be altogether in their rear, he
cast aside his bundle of sticks, and prepared for a rapid march in the direction
of Rossdale ; and had actually started off, when a black who was standing
behind a tree, accosted him in a somewhat suspicious tone, saying—
‘Yeenbobba! Winy a yan-go ? Weel innonggi?” That is—“ You stop '
Where are you going ? What is your name ?” Mickey knew that if he did
not stop and give an account of himself, a spear would follow the challenge
with but little delay. He replied that he was looking for him, f or Baralga
wanted to borrow two of his spears, all his own being broken. He evaded the
question requiring his name ; and though the black seemed not quite to know
Mickey, yet, as he was so promptly answered, and in his own language, too,
suspicion was lulled, and he at once began feeling down his spears to select a
couple for Baralga. Just when he was separating them from his bundle—for
he held five or six—Mickey seized the opportunity, while his two hands and
his thoughts were occupied, to bury the head of his tomahawk in the fellow’s
temple ; then helping himself to as many spears as he could conveniently
carry, together with two boomerangs and a good nulla nulla, , he felt perfectly
at ease, and went on his way at a swift trot, which he could keep up for hours
when necessary. He did not keep the road, but struck off in a more direct
Ime. What was a high stony range to an active powerful savage like that 1
His muscles had been trained for such exercise from the time he could walk.


and he knew his way as well through the bush by night, as by day ; in the
present instance the darkness favored him, but not for long. Ere he had
reached the top of the range, the moon had risen ; not very brilliantly
norfai.iT.ly, for it was on the wane ; but light or darkness was all the saiqe to
him, for there were no blacks in his neighborhood. It was then about on©
o’clock, and we will leave him to pursue his way, while we return to the
b6si@^6d>
Scotchy was not in the room at the time the slab was raised, and Mickey
started, so he did not know of the occurrence ; he was in the passage, and his
opportunity for revenge was near at hand.
It was the custom at Leichardt, to keep a cask of water in the lobby by the
back door, during the summer months. It was handier there, and prevented
the cask from being spilt, and the upper hoops from being loosened by the
heat of the sun. It also kept the water cool for drinking. Though the great
heat of summer was now past, it had not been removed, for old Booper had
the habit of pushing the cover off with his nose, when it was outside, and drink-
ing the water in preference to going to the lagoon, where the water was not SO
much to his fancy. Whether it was a piece of perversity on his part or not,
cannot be quite determined. The water in the cask was out of the lagoon,
and one would hardly expect to find it taste different because it was in a cask.
His decided predilection, however, remains a fact, and it mattered not t 6 him
how many stones were put on the lid, he always fidgetted and routed them
with his nose, till they were either turned off, or the lid tilted and they fell
into the cask. So it was kept inside. There is no accounting for the whims or
old horses. It is degrading to the noble'and intelligent animals, to say that all
their actions are prompted by instinct. They undoubtedly have reason, as
anyone who has had much to do with them must know. The cask had been
filled up the day before, fortunately. .
At the back of the house, and about twenty yards from it, stood the kitehen,
the building they formerly lived in. It was principally from behind this that
the blacks carried on their future operations. A fire had evidently been kindled
there. Every man in the hut was at his post, awaiting what they now felt sure
would take place—the attempt to set fire to the fuel under the house. Scotchy
was set to watch at the front door, while Frank kept guard at the back door
by the water-butt. Presently three blacks rushed out from behmd the
kitchen with flaming torches of tea-tree bark, and ran towards the house.
They were evidently unaware of the loop-holes, and depended on their quick-
ness to effect their purpose. Ere they had reached half way, they were all three
corpses. Those who were looking on, being infuriated at the result, uttered
the most frightful savage yells. Then all was quiet. Minnie remained
unmoved outwardly, though the yells were enough to disturb the stoutest
breast. She was no ordinary girl, she could face a terror like the present one,
if not inwardly unmoved, at all events with outward dignity and calmness.
She was worthy to rank with the heroic Miss Wheeler, and other noble women
who perished in the Indian mutiny. Mrs. Blather could not be induced to
keep quiet, but was eternally flitting about excitedly, getting in everyone a
way just at the wrong time, and screaming whenever a rifle was fired near her
unexpectedly. She raved at her husband and at her employers, for their
cruelty in bringing her into so much trouble, and certain death. The only
threat that sometimes induced her to keep within even moderate bounds,
was that she should be put outside the door if she did not make less noise.
The blacks soon tried another expedient. Naked painted savages darted
out from either end of the kitchen, and threw spears with torches tied to them,
of flaming tea-tree bark, which slid along the ground and went under the


house. The dry leaves and grass were in this way lit with much less risk to
the blacks. The fires, of course, were not allowed to get ahead, water being
poured on them as they blazed up. Barrett was now employed pouring water
sparingly between the slabs of the floor, to wet the heaps of dried grass,
leaves, and twigs, that had been laid underneath. The blacks performed their
teats of fire-spear throwing, with wonderful rapidity and precision, but more
than one of them were marked by bullets from Liddle’s rifle. This slightly
checked them, and orders were given to load with buck shot instead of bullets.
They seemed to like that much less than the heavier lead, for some few grains
told at every shot, and effectually silenced that mode of attack. But they
were quite as fertile in inventing different plans for the destruction of the
whites, as the latter were in checkmating them. They tied bundles of dry
bark on to their spears, which they launched over the kitchen roof on to that
of the house. Some rolled off without doing any harm ; the points of others
stuck between the shingles, burning holes, but the whites were able to put the
fires out with a little water. Two things were in favour of the besieged.
There was no wind, and the shingles were split from blue gum trees, which
yield the least inflammable timber of any, almost, that grow in the Australian
bush.
When the shingles blazed, the savages gave vent to a prolonged yell of
exultation, which died away as the flames were extinguished. They tried the'
same tactics from the front side of the old bark hut that Barrett and Frank
had lived in at first, but with no better success. Holes were being made,
through which spears occasionally found their way ; but no harm had as yet
resulted from their entrance. One or two having struek the side of the hole
through which they entered, glanced, but fortunately upwards, sticking in the
shingles on the opposite side. The water was getting low in the cask.
Frank and Scotchy were still at their respective posts, and there was only
the width of the hut between them. Minnie was standing by Frank, with a
pair of his pistols in her hands, ready for him when he should require them.
Scotchy noticed this, for the light of the recently-risen moon was just strong
enough to reader the figures in the hut visible to each other. He had pre-
viously, unobserved, unfastened the door, and had several times snapped the
hammer of his capless rifle, making a mock exclamation of vexation each time.
At last he threw it down with an oath and said,
. U I keg pardon, Miss, but if you please, will you oblige me with one of them
pistols 1 My rifle won’t go off, and I can get a good shot at a fellow now.”
Minnie obligingly stepped across to him ; tendering him the two pistols,
which he took, sticking one iii his belt. He suddenly caught her round the
waist, at the same time swinging the door open. Minnie screamed and
struggled, but her efforts to get free were futile in the hands of the powerful
ruffian. He said with fearful oaths,
“ Look here, Frank Willis ! We’re level chalks now-take that!”
Minnie’s scream and Scotchy’s speech, caused poor Frank to turn round and
spring forward to rescue his affianced. He had got but one step, when the
ruffian with his last words—“ take that!” fired the pistol, and Frank fell on
his face on the floor. Scotchy ran from the house, at the same time giving a
shrill whistle through his fingers, which was understood by the blacks. He
was answered by the hoarse note of the cuckoo. As soon as he and his now
inanimate burden were clear of the hut door, a shower of spears and boomerangs
played through it, rendering it impossible for any one to pass through alive.
Johnson pushed it to from behind, and fastened it. When Scotchy appeared,
the blacks renewed their wild exultant shouting, keeping it up for some time.
The moon was now well up, and the enemy consequently more cautious in


their attempts. Indeed the siege was apparently at an end. Not a sound was
heard, nor a black seen.
The little garrison were quite taken aback by Scotchy’s treachery. The
loss of Minnie Liddle and the supposed death of Frank, were two blows in one
that they had never anticipated in the smallest degree. They would at once
have rushed out to a man to rescue her, but the shower of missiles showed
them the utter uselessness of the attempt. To fire at the miscreant, they did
not dare, for fear of hitting the poor girl in his grasp ; so they had to content
themselves with remaining still within the house ; if they left it, then would
end all hope of doing anything for her. They were now like caged lions.
Not a man there who would not have faced death in a possible or probable
form, to snatch her from the enemy ; but not a gleam of hope remained to one
of them, of their being able to rescue her under existing circumstances.
Mrs. Blather went into a fresh fit of tantrums. She stormed and abused
everyone. She was now a lone woman in a hut full of white savages, in her
opinion quite as bad as the black ones outside. She supposed her turn would
come next to be run away with, a climax that everyone heartily wished for.
Frank had scarcely touched the floor when he was lifted by Barrett, and
carried into the little room that Minnie had occupied earlier in the night,
where she was occupied loading the firearms. A mattress was placed on the
floor, and Frank put on it. The pistol bullet had struck him just over the
right temple, and had run between the scalp and the bone, coming ouirat the
back of the head. He was still insensible, but they were rejoiced to find the
course the ball had taken. It bled very little, and he came to in the course
of an hour. His first words were, _ .
“ Quick with my pistols, Min darling ! Oh-! You are running away with
that rascal Sootchy ! How could you treat me so 1”
Occasionally he started up and shouted excitedly,
“ Shoot the rascal! But don’t hurt the girl.” .
By degrees he became more reasonable, and though he asked for Minnie,
they put him off with various excuses. All at once he jumped up, looked
about him despairingly, and exclaimed,
“Oh ! I know now !” And would have fallen, but for ready arms to save
him. They replaced him on the bed, where he lay for a long time in a
dead faint. ... ,
At daylight he said he was all right, except that his head was sore and
swollen. As soon as he was able, he walke.d about perpetually, at times
looking very wild. They all knew the internal agony he was suffering on
account of Minnie, but neither he nor they mentioned her name. Barrett
had, with Biddle’s assistance, cut the hair away from the wound, and put on
wet bandages, which gave him much relief. .
During the time Frank was insensible, everything remained quiet outside,
and they began to hope that they were rid of their enemies ; they talked of
forming a plan of pursuit, as soon as he should be sufficiently recovered to
join in the council. Their hopes were soon dispelled, by the men on watch
informing them that the blacks were peeping round the ends of both the
kitchen and bark hut. Frank at last said in a low hollow voice, “ Barrett,
we must go after those blacks and bring her back, or I shall go mad !
His partner’s heart bled for him, and he assured him that it would be folly
of the worst kind to attempt to leave the hut. While they remained alive
there was a possibility of something turning up to favor their plans ; butrf
they perished, what hope, as far as they could tell, would be left for her i tie
took some more turns excitedly, but was evidently not convinced. The strain
on his self-command was now becoming visible in his haggard countenance.


“ Try and bear this Frank, for her sake. Her father may be here soon, and
depend upon it, if he brings anything of a force, and we can get out to his
assistance, we will have such a revenge as will be a caution to them for all
time—besides bringing Minnie back in triumph.”
This speech calmed him for a time, but he broke out again, looking long-
ingly towards the door.
“You shall judge for yourself, Frank,” said Barrett, who turned to the
men at the loopholes and ordered them to keep a sharp look-out. He then
conducted Frank to a place of safety, and going to the door, cautiously opened
it. Instantly a shower of spears, nulla nullas, and boomerangs were projected
against it, some of them entering the opening and glancing along the floor.
Several shots were fired simultaneously, but so far as could be seen without
effect. Frank said to Liddle,
“Bob, old friend, come and sit down by me for a bit. I want to speak
to you.”
They sat down, and he continued—
“ You don’t know the torments lam suffering ! I have a horrid feeling in
my brain that I never experienced before. I feel 4s if something—some-
tiling—-is going to—to—happen ! ”
He then took a different turn, and said in the gayest manner,
“Don’t you remember, Bob, how you and I went out-to that new country
years and years ago, and all our adventures 1 Wasn’t that a funny thing we
saw in the caves ? Then there Was ‘ Lassie ’ —and the grey horse—and the
pencil-case— and ”
Here he went into many particulars of their adventures and discoveries,
and at last said,
“ But we are old men now, Bob—at least 1 am. I have felt my age creeping
on —on —on, till I must be—how old ? Well, I know I can’t last many years
longer, and want to tell you what to do with my property. Everything, of
course, will go to my wife. How strange ! She so young, and Iso old.
Perhaps that is the reason she would not stay with me. She could not be
happy with a man like that! I would have made her very happy—l meant
to, at all events. Scotchy was a villain !. He shall never touch one shilling
of my money—not one shilling. If I could I’d throttle him. I will too ! ”
He jumped up and grasped Liddle’s throat with one hand, and was about
to strike him with the other clenched fist, when he was secured and forced to
lie down. Liddle kept him down, while Barrett went to the medicine-chest,
and pouring out a heavy dose of laudanum, administered it to him, as he was
evidently suffering from delirium induced by the wound, and the terrible state
of excitement he had laboured under for so many hours.
When Scotchy disappeared in the forest, and entered the ranks of the
enemy—his friends—he had a view of the whole position. As the light
increased, he saw how hopeless was the situation of the besieged. Behind
every tree there were one or two savages ; and sheltered by the men’s hut and
tile kitchen, were two mobs of blood-thirsty wretches, armed to the teeth,
waiting for a mistake to be made by the besieged. He consulted with Jack
Campbell, and they decided that another attempt to burn them out should
be made the following night. They knew that the supply of water was not
exhaustless, and if they could not succeed in burning them out from under-
neath, the roof must certainly be burnt over their heads in time. Scotchy
suggested an improvement in the manufacture of the torches, which was, to
tie up in them quantities of dry gum.
To attempt the burning by daylight would be much more hazardous to
themselves, both while doing it and after, when the party would rush out to


escape the flames. They knew that some of the besieged were brave men,
and would sell their lives dearly ; and that while the besiegers exposed them-
selves in the act of throwing their weapons, some of them must fall. Their
time was their own ; they could afford to wait. There was plenty of mutton
to eat. Then they would hang on till night favored them once more. The
idea of succor never entered their heads. If it had, they would have
scouted it ; for who could possibly know that they were attacking the station ?
They would take care that none of them ever left that hut alive. Scotchy
said,
“ Now Jacky, where is old Boeper 1 I’ll put this gal on him at once, for
she is too heavy to lug over ten miles—and up that range too. I’ll be off
with her at once. Where’s my fellows 1”
Old Booper was tied up at the rear, some distance from the house, where
he had been for hours, awaiting his fair burden ; for the whole thing had
been pre-arranged, and word passed to all the savages to that effect. Jacky
said,
“I’ll call off half our chaps, Scotchy ; the rest will do to keep those white-
fellows bailed up. I’ll pass the word for half my ‘ Babes,’ and for half of
your coves. I’ll go with you, for Baralga can take command till one of us-
comes back to-night.”
“ You going with me, Jacky ! That ain’t according to agreement nohow,”
said Scotchy, in great surprise. ‘ ‘ Why, you said you’d stop and keep the ball-
a rollin’ here. If them fellows gets out, they’ll make us sweat for what we’ve-
done a’ready. Baralga may be a good fellow, but he ain’t got your head,.
Jacky.” _
“ I’ve altered my mind since I saw you, old man. I’d rather go with you,
and see the gal safe. You’re too much in love, you know, to be prudent. If
you was tracked, you mightn’t have enough command over your fellows to
keep ’em in hand. Then there’d be ‘the devil to pay, and and no pitch hot.’”
Scotchy said no more, for he felt that, for the present, he was entirely in,
the hands of the wily savage, and he submitted with as good a grace as he-
could assume. Jacky’s commands were issued, and the savages gradually
gathered round the two murderers and their fair captive. When all were-
mustered, they were divided—Jacky going ahead with his followers, and the-
others, with their leader, following. Scotchy supported the unfortunate girl,
on old Booper, between the two parties. They then proceeded in the direc-
tion of their late camp in the western range.
Poor Minnie had by this time recovered from her faint, and begged of:
Scotchy in most eloquent terms to let her go back to her friends—kill her
at once—anything rather than take her away to live amongst savages.
“You may as well kill me at once. I shall surely die—if not in any other
way, by my own hands ! ”
“No you won’t, my dear. You’ll be very happy along a me. Im a
good enough sort, if you take me the right way, and don’t rile me.”
“You wicked wretch to entrap me so ! Would not my agony be intense
enough, without your forcing me to become instrumental in the murder of
one I loved more than my life 1 Oh ! could you not have spared me that 1”
And she would have fallen, had not the ruffian supported her in her seat.
He only laughed brutally, and said,
“That’s the way them gals always goes on! But she’ll forget all about
him soon, then she’ll be sweet enough on me. My oath ! but she is pretty^!
I’ve got a better revenge than I reckoned on, when I swore I’d lower his.
crest at the Chinaman’s Hut. Ha! ha! ‘ virtue is its own reward.’ Why,
she’ll act as my protector, in case things goes wrong, for they won’t dare to


•shoot at me while she’s with me ; and I’ll take all-fired care she’s never far
you y Jre<£°fo r r. S^Ha! I ha t r ’ Cend6nt ’ ' Y ° Ur ’ e CUter than 1 gave
WaS at Rossdale a little before daylight. Mr. Liddle and his oldest
son, WrUMjn, were at an out-station fifteen miles away, where they had gone
„;® day be , f ° re f ° r J tbo purpose of drafting some sheep. When the note was
given to Mrs. Liddle, her alarm for the situation of her daughter and son,
;ana tier triends at Leichardt, was so great as to overcome for a time all
power of action. What the result would have been, had she known the true
state ot affairs, is impossible to conjecture. Fortunately, the worst had not
-occurred before the note was written. Seeing that it was in her son’s hand,
f i. U £ g ' j written on rtj sh e opened the note with trembling hands,
lor she had a presentiment of evil tidings being contained therein. It was
written in pencil, and ran as follows :
mile DEAR I ’ ATHEE >~ We are besieged by a large party of blacks—send help at
T ., , ~ Robert Liddle.”
Like a true woman, Mrs. Liddle mastered her feelings sufficiently to give
tne note to her son Thomas, and urge him to take it at once to his father
■and brother. There was no other course left to pursue. It was noon before
Jr e cached Mr. Liddle, for one of the shepherds had lost some sheep
the day before, and instead of Thomas finding his father at the yard as he
■anticipated, he had to go out on the run to search for him. When found, Mr.
.Laddie and his two sons rode in all haste to the head-station, previously
ordering the men—four in number—to get in as quickly as possible after
tnem. Un their way they called at another out-station, and directed the
men at it to proceed to the head-station also. No time was lost in useless
regrets between husband and wife. The brave woman had had everything
done that prudence and forethought could suggest, for the furtherance of the
expedition It was not the first time that she had had to act on her own
responsibility in serious matters, in the absence of her husband ; but nothing
so dreadful as this had ever come within her experience before. She had
au tfie horses that could be mustered putinto the horse-yard, the saddles and
bridles earned to it, and put on the fence, and some spirits and provisions
strapped on the saddles. Her thoughtfulness ended not with the above,
but extended itself to the cleaning and loading of the firearms, which she
entrusted to her youngest son, Harry.
relief-party started at about one o’clock, and consisted of nine, all told
It is scarcely necessary to say that they rode hard ; their horses being all
fresh, they did not spare them. The brave Mickey insisted on going with
tnem, and though not at home on horseback, he managed to keep pace with
tnem. He received great praise from all, but especially from Mrs. Liddle,
who was most lavish in her expression of approval, and promises of reward in
future. Mickey took it all with stoical indifference, not thinking that he had
done anything out of the common.
The parting between Mr. and Mrs. Liddle was saddened by feelings of the
case! anXlety ' How much more so > had the y guessed the real state of the
The little garrison at Leichardt, were not aware of the withdrawal of so
many of their enemies, or they might have looked upon their condition as
more hopeful. So stealthily and noiselessly did the savages slip away, that
they could not be seen from the house ; keeping the trees between them and
e besieged they retreated over the ridge. Towards evening, many of
tliose who remained were seen a long way off by the lagoon, stripping the


resinous, paper-like bark of the tea-trees, in great quantities. The besieged,
had made all sorts of conjectures as to the cause of the non-arrival of the
hoped-for relief party. Some of the surmises were correct, some entirely
wrong—none afforded them any consolation, for, after all, they could not
know the truth. The plain fact stared them in the face, that it was more
than probable that Mickey had perished ; if so, that was certainly their last
night on earth. What was far worse to several of them was, that they had
not the power to help the dear girl, who was in the hands of a ruffian,
infinitely worse than the savages with whom he had allied himself. Barrett
felt that the next few hours would decide their fate, and he had done all
that suggested itself as necessary for their preservation. The blacks, of
course, would be on the watch to catch them as they issued from the doors,
when the heat of the fire became too fierce for them to remain any longer in
the house. They should be partially disappointed, however, for he would have
the slabs cut through for six feet or so at the Rossdale side of the hut, so that.
a slight pressure would be sufficient to burst them outwards. They would
issue forth from the hut in that way, all in a body, and not out by the two
doors. That would cause a slight diversion in their favour, by throwing.
out their enemies’ calculations a little. Then, the danger of being burnt out
by the ignition of the brushwood and leaves under the house, would be
reduced to a minimum by taking up a board here and there, and hauling the
fuel into the house, leaving a little all round the outside, that the blacks
might not know that any had been removed.
For several hours after the dose, Frank slept a heavy disturbed sleep.
About four o’clock he said to Barrett,
“ I have come to the conclusion that there is no help coming. I feel as.
though I should go mad ; I believe I shall if something is not done. Will-
you let us go outside and try our luck now ? If you don’t I shall go by
myself—life is nothing to me now. ”
“Frank, you must know how deeply I sympathise with you, and how
willingly I would back you up if I could see the remotest chance of success.
As we are at present situated it would be madness to attempt a sortie. If
you were yourself you would see it as clearly as I do.”
“Then,” said Frank, with a wild look, “here goes—l’m off!” and he
made a dash at the door.
“ Frank ! Stop ! You shall not open that door ! ”
Both Liddle and Barrett sprang forward and seized him. The poor fellow
was verging on madness, and struggled so that it took the united efforts of his
two friends to restrain him from carrying out his rash desire. Tommy, who
had been watching through a loophole at the east end of the house, suddenly
rushed into the room where his masters were, and announced that the blacks
were changing their position from the opposite sides of the trees to-those
facing the house, and he thought some of them were within range of the
best rifle shots. Then a joyful sound was heard that reduced poor Frank to-
a reasonable being once more.
The reports of several shots pealed up to the house —one —one —three
together—one—two—one—from the direction of the Rossdale road. Frank
gave a hearty cheer, which was taken up by every one in the hut in true.
British style. He said,
“Now we will give an account of ourselves !”
“Keep cool, lads,” said Barrett. “ Don’t make any rash you
do you will suffer yet, for the blacks will fight like bulldogs when they are
hemmed in. We wiU burst those slabs out, and go in a body, then separate —
you, Liddle, go to the left round the house with half the party, and I will go


■With the others to the right. When the relief-party press the savages up
this way, and force those from the cover of the kitchen and the hut, we wifi
Have them at our mercy—and mercy they shall have ! ”
The horsemen were in sight, cautiously advancing and driving the blacks
towards the house. Very few shots missed their mark. The blacks were
soon within reach of the defenders’ riflesT, and even of the smooth-bores.
The tables were turned now, and Barrett gave the word—“ Forward! ”
They burst through the slabs and formed into two parties as previously
arranged, and waited their opportunity. It came, there was a sudden signal,
-then a general stampede of the savages. Those behind the huts joined m
+l' ,rAl en much occupied with what was going on in the distance
to notice that the little garrison had left their fort, and a volley from each
party precipitated their rout, and caused some to fall. Mr. Liddle and
his party tore up at a gallop, dealing death and ghastly wounds to the savages
with no niggard hand. They rushed towards the lagoon with the intention
of putting it between them and the avengers as soon as possible. They plunged
in, and did not appear on the surface till they were many yards away, then
only an instant for breath, and down again. Very few were shot in the
water, but as they were getting out on the opposite bank, they were exposed
for a second or two before they could plunge into the long grass. Then they
a
As yet, Mr. Liddle was unaware of his daughter’s predicament; and in
place of the joyful meeting he anticipated, he was met without any demonstra-
tion whatever, for the besieged all held back, none liking to be the first to
break the sad news.
~ time of Jacky and Scotchy leaving for the western range, with
them bands of savages and them despairing prisoner, the death of the black
who was killed by Mickey the night before, had not been discovered. When
the body was found, the matter was looked upon coolly enough, and set down
as the act of some personal enemy of the murdered man’s amongst his own
people, who had embraced the opportunity to avenge himself of some old
injury.
At the camp on the flat-top, Minnie’s captor lifted her off old Booper, and
phmed her in a gunyah by herself, on the eastern side of the camp, next the
elms, and turned Booper out to feed. Jacky placed sentinels along the cliff,
and also on top of the spur to watch for any hostile party that might approach—
a very remote contingency he thought, unless Baralga and his men made some
toemendous mistake, and allowed the garrison to escape. Absurd ! He knew
Baralga better than that.
About dusk, Scotchy said,
Jacky 1 ?’ 1 * U gcdng down to see about roasting them white varmint out,
. He was particularly anxious to get rid of Jacky, but the latter, who had
just as strong a desire not to go, for particular reasons of his oto, which
may, without violatingconfidence be divulged to the reader. He had made
up his mind to make Minnie his wife, and not to return to his own lawful one
whom .he had left at Gayndah. He said,
_‘ <I l 0 ° k h T e /S> ol d m an- I’m not going down there to-night, so that’s the
eruu)f it. If Baralga can t smoke out them bees without me, I’m a Dutch-
cookld 0 ” want rifles ‘ Y ° U WaS t 0 g 0 and get ’ em when the boss ’ gooses was
“Baralga can bring ’em up just as well as me.”


“Baralga be . He don’t know a rifle from a powder-flask.”
“I tell you Scotchy, I ain’t going. We’ll get rifles quite as soon as well
'W3rllt *OUI, **
Scotchy knew very well what kept Jacky back, and losing his temper, he said,
“Look here, Jack Campbell! you never thought about the gal. I planned
all that business, and carried it out, too. She was to be my share, with half
the money we got. An agreement’s an agreement. A man’s word ought to
he his bond, and by all that’s fair between man and man she’s mine, and what’s
more, I’ll have her. Take that, you sneaking little savage !”
As he spoke the last words, he drew from his belt the fellow pistol to the
one he had shot at Frank with, and levelled it at Jacky’s head. It hung fire,
and when it did go off, the ball merely inflicted a flesh-wound in the shoulder
of the black. Jacky had a nulla nulla in his hand, and launched it at
Scotchy. It struck the empty pistol, and sent it flying out of his grasp.
“ That’s the way you treat your friends, is it old man ? Now I’ll show you
how I serve mine ! ”
At the commencement of his speech, he rushed forward and closed with
the white man Both fell. The black was the most active and slippery, but
his antagonist was very powerful, and for some time the two seemed to be
about matched. Scotchy called to his party, who quite loeked to him as their
leader, for he had made them great promises of reward, to be fulfilled very
soon if they behaved well. Any one of them would have killed his dearest
friend for a fig of tobacco. Some of them came forward and separated the
two, who were instantly on their feet. Jacky ran and got his weapons ; all
the others did the same ; and eventually the two parties were arrayed against
each other, and set-to with a will. The fight raged hot and furious, but not
much blood was shed, though a good deal of noise was made. All the scouts
and sentinels, of course left their posts, for it was impossible that they could
look calmly on, and take no part in such a delightful melee.
Jacky had taken care to have a majority of his party over Scotchy s, when
he called them off from the main force at Leichardt. The cute rascal did this
to counter-balance a mistake he had been making ever since he had engaged
the reinforcement at the bunya scrub for Scotchy. At that time he did not
contemplate any treachery to his white friend, and had represented him as a
man in every respect fit for their command. He was a brave man ; skilled in
warfare ; generous —in fact all that they could desire for a leader. On every
opportunity he had spoken of Scotchy to the blacks in the same way ; and
when they first beheld the ruffian’s stalwart form, and swarthy face covered
with long black hair, they took to him at once, and had he now shown himself
half as good a man in the fight as Jacky represented him to be, they would
have backed him through long odds.
Blacks, like Irishmen, are always ready to go in for a cracked head, for the
honor and glory of the thing alone ; but if there is a substantial reward
hanging to the fray, they are the more to be depended on. In the latter
particular, of course, they differ from Paddy.
While the fight was going on, the most diabolical shouts of rage, encourage-
ment, derision, and pain, were indulged in ; beyond this, nothing very serious
had occurred on either side. They were skilful, not only in the use of their
weapons, but in parrying those of their opponents. Scotchy took to a tree
from the first, and kept so close to it for some time, that Jacky had no oppor-
tunity to pay him for his late attempt on his life, as he was determined to.
He launched all the epithets of abuse at him that he was master of—and they
were not few or soothing, stinging the white man to madness. He then
addressed the blacks in their own language tauntingly,


“ You have a fine fellow for a leader ! Look how he keeps behind the tree f
TTia beard is long, but my old woman would fight better than he, with a yam-
stick. He could not send a spear into a hut door the length of a team of
bullocks off. Come oyer on to my side. You know I’m not afraid. I will
lead you where you will get more tobacco, sheep, flour, and sugar, than ever
he can Come out and fight like a man, Scotchy ! ”
Scotchy was infuriated, and incautiously exposed himself in the endeavor
to prove that he was neither a coward, nor unskilled in the use of the spear.
Jacky’s boomerang flew with lightning speed, giving Scotchy a fearful wound
all across the forehead, drenching his face with blood. He reeled and fell, but
scarcely had touched the ground when two spears in rapid succession flew
from the same hand, burying their points deeply in his flesh. The stupefaction
caused by the blow from the boomerang was only momentary, and Scotchy
cried,
“That ’ll do, Jacky. I give you best. Don’t kill me now I’m down. You
can have the gal, and be hanged to her!”
This virtually ended all hostilities between the blacks. It was no use fight-
ing for a leader who could not defend himself better than that; so his party
made a virtue of what they saw would eventually become a necessity, and
became friendly with their late opponents, the whole forming one party under
the leadership of Jacky. The latter was not slow in following up his advantage,
and had his prostrate enemy bound and carried away.
“ You ain’t going to do anything more to me, Jacky, are you 1 You surely
ain’t going to be such a coward as to hit a man when he’s down ! ”
Jaoky’s hate was not one whit abated by the sorry spectacle his enemy
presented; on the contrary, it grew stronger. His savage blood was thoroughly
roused, and he gave full play to his feelings of revenge.
“Look here, old man !” he said through his gleaming white teeth, “Yon
don’t know how to keep a friend when you’ve got one. Look at that !” and
he pointed to his wounded shoulder, and to his face which was swelled from a
blow which Scotchy had given him with his fist, while they struggled on the
ground together. “ I told you I’d show you how I served my friends —and
so I will.”
His look conveyed more than his words, and the doomed man read in the
expression of his face that he contemplated a terrible revenge, but what, he
could not guess. His fears were painfully active. He begged most abjectly
to be spared any more pain and ill-usage. If Jacky would draw the spears
out of his tortured flesh and let him go, he should never more be troubled by
his presence. He would go right south, repent, and lead a good life. What
was the use of taking his life ? It was wrong to take life—Jacky knew very
well. He knew that the Commandment— “ Thou shalt not kill.”
“Yes, old man. I know the whole ten of ’em as well as you ; and may-
be I’ve not broken ’em as often as you. I’m not going to kill you.”
The wretched man’s countenance slightly relaxed from its anxious expres-
sion, and he thanked his tormentor. Jacky laughed with a fiendish expres-
sion, which showed how much he enjoyed the white man’s agony, and he
resumed,
“No, I’m not going to kill you. When I’ve done with you, you can die
yourself,—and you’ll be jolly glad to. I ain’t going to break the Command-
ments, old man, that you seem so fond of. ‘ The Lord chooses his own
judgments, and I’m only an instrument in his hands.’ Ha ! ha ! That’s
your own style—when you was at Mrs. Button’s.”
The whole of this conversation was heard by poor Minnie, close to whose
gtinyah it took place. She spoke not. Her tongue clave to her mouth, and


she sat where she had been placed on the ground, perfectly rigid, holding
with convulsive grasp the supports of the gunyah on either side of her. Her
senses were becoming stunned by the shock of the preceding few hours. She
comprehended what was said, but with perfect indifference.
Scotchy felt that any attempt to soften his enemy would be of no avail, so
he called piteously on his Maker to have mercy on his wicked soul. If he
would but save him now, he would repent —indeed he would—and be a
good man. He was so sorry for killing the Chinaman, and Frank Willis. He
was so sorry for being a thief and a drunkard—and—and—and—. Here his
voice failed him to recount all the different kinds of wickedness that he had
been guilty of, as they flooded his sin-stained memory. He could now see
his red-dyed soul in all its vividness, as the events of his misspent life rose
one by one in rapid succession before his mental vision. Again and again
he cried for mercy from Heaven, and then from Jacky. Did all this affect
the savage 1 Yes, very pleasantly ; and he determined to keep it up as long
as possible. This was sweet revenge, and he mocked the wretched man in
his misery. He had him tied to a sapling which grew by a large ant bed
close to the cliff. Then selecting some light spears, he launched them
singly, at intervals, at the naked body of his prisoner, shouts of approval
coming from the “Babes” and their new allies, as each one struck the mark.
He did not aim at any vital part, wishing, as he said, to have ample revenge
for injuries received at the hands of Scotchy.
The tortured man presented a spectacle that would have melted the heart
of a devil. Large fires had been lit for the occasion, and that side of
the belt of timber was illuminated by the ruddy flames, so that the whole
scene was visible for some distance around. As the sufferer raved and
stamped, the big red ants poured out of their nest in thousands and ran all
ever him, fastening their poisonous mandibles deep into his flesh. The scene
was indeed wild and horrible !
The moon rose. Its calm, pure, silvery light was shed on this unhallowed
scene, and on the heights above, long before it was visible in the valley
below. Jacky was now satiated. He would go and see how his new wife
that was to be, fared in the gunyah, the door of which faced the horrible
scene. He found her as before described, with vacant eyes fixed in the
direction of the wretched man tied to the sapling. She did not move when
he approached her, and still kept her eyes in the same direction, as though
she could see through him. Crack! went fifteen rifles, almost in a single
volley, frem the direction of the spur leading from the run below. Some of
the savages, who were viewing with delight Scotchy’s agonies, fell.. Others
fled with gaping wounds in the direction of the mountains. Crack ! again.
Twenty carbines this time from the opposite quarter, and more fell.
On hearing the first discharge, Jacky made for a tree overhanging the
precipice, close to where Scotchy was writhing. Scotchy watched him as he
got up the tree, and out on to a branch covered with thick foliage.
The savages finding themselves cut off from retreat by either spur, turned
into the belt of forest on the opposite side of the flat-top, but were forced to
retire from it by another volley, and retreated for shelter into the Tong
grass in the centre.
“ Who can they be, who are so effectually assisting us 1” said Mr. Liddle.
“ I did not dream that the smallest help was within a hundred miles of us !
They are apparently spreading a cordon round the savages. I will stay here
with three men and keep this pass, while you all separate and join the other
party at either side. But mind you keep within cover of the wood. Don’t
go into that long grass, or you will be speared without the chance of a shot.”
K


William Liddle and Barrett took half the men and placed them at intervals
to the left, while Prank and Robert Liddle went to the right, placing their
men in a similar manner. Frank saw a white man in the uniform of a
lieutenant of the Native Mounted Police, standing behind a tree ; and
stepping up to him, the two at once shook hands, for they were old acquaint-
ances. Intelligence was at once passed round to Mr. Liddle, who the
unexpected and welcome allies were. As the two stood and conversed, they
heard cries and groans from Scotchy, who, from the nature of the ground,
had remained unseen hitherto. They thought the noise proceeded from
some wounded black, and paid no further attention to it. The Lieutenant
said,
“If we wait round this patch of grass for a week, we will not see a head
of those darkies. They can glide through it like eels ; and if we go in after
them, we’ll lose some of the number of our mess without getting a single
shot at them. I will just pass the word to half a dozen of my boys, and they
will smoke them out.”
He did so, and in a minute the boys appeared. They were a fine lot of
blacks, and were stripped naked, the better to enable them to follow the
savages through scrubs and other difficult places. Each one had a single-
l)arrelled carbine, a pair of pistols, a sword, and cartouch-box slung at his
side by a broad black belt round one shoulder. These, and a cloth cap
with a red band, were all that encumbered their manly forms. They
respectfully saluted their officer, and said,
‘ ‘ What you want, Marmy 1”
They called all their officers “Marmy.”
“Get fire-sticks—go all round this patch of grass, and light it as you go
—you know T
“Yes, Marmy.”
And they saluted again, and went away chuckling. They knew whaf was
meant very well, and thought of the sport they would have with their carbines
and swords, as the blacks jumped through the flames. The dry grass blazed
up as only dry grass can blaze. It hissed and crackled, and the forked flames
licked upwards twenty feet in the air. The fiery circle was complete, and
both troopers and whites were now at their posts awaiting the result. The fire
consumed the grass very rapidly, for a wind had sprung up. The patch was
now reduced to half—now to quarter of its original diameter. Three or
four naked forms had been seen to rise in the air, as they attempted to
jump through, but they fell back, or else straight down into the flames. It
soon became apparent to the sentries, that not one of the band encircled in
that belt of flame, would ever pass through it alive. Nor did they. The last
of the grass was consumed, and when the avengers were able to walk over the
smouldering ashes of the grass, they found the corpses of the whole band
that had so lately formed part of the army of besiegers, who had striven to
destroy the Leichardt people in their house in a similar way . The whole
atmosphere was stifling with heat, smoke, and the odor of the roasted flesh
of the savages.
“While the native police were lighting the grass, Frank and Robert Liddle,
believing that Minnie must be somewhere in the neighborhood, went in
search of the blacks’ camps. On going to the verge of the rise where the
blacks were when they first fired on them, they saw the camp just beneath
them. They both made a rush towards the gunydhs with a tumult of excited
feelings. The first living object they saw was the now dying miscreant,
Scotchy, still lashed to the tree —a dozen spears sticking in him, and
swarming with ants. His agony was fearful, but he recognised them, and


said, with a faint movement of his head in the direction of the gunyah in
which Minnie was,
“There is the gal, Mr. Frank—Fm glad you’re not dead-7—let me go
please. ”
The latter part of his speech was not heard by either, as they rushed off
towards the gunyah where they found the poor girl still in the same position,
and staring straight before her. Both brother and lover were horrified at
her stony stare. Frank went on his knees, kissed her over and over again,
and begged of her to speak to him.
“Min darling—speak to me ! My heart is breaking ! I am your own
Frank.”
She made a motion with her lips, but no sound passed them. Her brother
then said,
“Oh ! Min ! Speak to us. lam your brother Bob, and your Frank is with
you.”
She said in a weak, weird tone,
“My Frank is
They disengaged her hands from the props, to which they had so long clung
with unconscious grasp. While removing her, Robert Liddle chanced to
see Scotchy, whom they had entirely forgotten in their anxiety, first to find
Minnie, and afterwards in their horror at her condition. When they had
laid her down, Robert left her to the care of Frank, and went to Scotchy’s
assistance. The poor wretch said faintly,
“Oh ! Mr. Robert. I’m in hell, if ever a man was ! ”
The first thing to be done was to remove the spears, for the sufferer could
not be laid down until that operation was performed. The ants were then
roughly brushed off, the cords out, and Scotchy removed to a little distance ;
his bleeding wounds were then tied up, and a wet blanket thrown over
him. His body, face, and limbs, were much swollen from the poisonous stings
of the ants. Water was given him to drink, and appeared to revive him a
little.
By the time all was accomplished for the relief of the sufferer, the great
human sacrifice in the long grass was ended ; and the troopers and their
officers, and the Rossdale and Leiohardt parties were assembled where the
dying miscreant and the fair girl were. Mr. Liddle and his sons, with Frank
and Barrett, formed a sorrow-stricken circle round the poor girl. She was
alive certainly, and that was a consolation, but her mind was gone.
Temporarily perhaps, but how terrible for her friends !
The Lieutenant was kindly attending to Scotchy, and had given him a
little spirit from a flask, which revived him wonderfully, and he said,
“Please, sir, tell Mr. Frank and Mr. Barrett, I want to speak to them.
Oh ! this torture ! ” When the two appeared, he said, “My time is short. I
want to tell you all I can, and ask your forgiveness. I’ve led an awful life,
and deserve to die such a dreadful death as this. You were both as kind to
me as I could expect. I murdered the Chinaman out of revenge and fear,
because he saw me take Johnson’s money out of his pocket-book, and swore
he’d tell. I put the bank receipt into his pocket, and the pocket-book under
his bed, and told lies of him, all to cause suspicion to rest on him—”
“Did you cut that stick then?” said Barrett.
“I did—and did the deed with it, and burnt it after. The Chinaman’s
money, and Johnson’s, and the shearers’, and mine too, is all in a bottle—
buried under the hut floor —in the right-hand corner. I meant to have gone
there before I left the station, and taken it up. Then Jacky Campbell and
me planned this bad job that’s been the—the—oh ! the death of me —and: —”


“Jacky Campbell!” said the Lieutenant. “Why that’s the man I’m
after —and a nice chase he has led us. I hope he is amongst those fellows in
the burnt grass—Toby, you and John Brown (two of his troopers) go and
turn those niggers over in the burnt grass ; and if you find Jacky, just bring
him to me. I want to be quite sure of him this time—Stay, though—his
head will be sufficient. I shall know it without his villainous carcass, and I
want to take it to Gayndah. They would be very glad of it at two or three
stations in the district, to stick on a pole by the graves of their men.”
“He ain’t there, sir,” resumed Scotchy. “I’Uputyouon him when I’ve
done, and—and—give me some more brandy—l’m getting weak—but the
pains isn’t so bad quite. Never fear, sir, he can’t get away with them boys
of yours all about—let him bide. Well, I wish you’d give every one his
money—and mine—send to my father and mother —but no—they may be
dead or moved. If they ain’t dead—better not open old wounds—no—no—
give it to a hospital. Now, I want ail of you to shake hands, and say you
forgive me—and say good-bye. The pain’s all gone now—but I’m so weak.
Oh ! What a wicked wretch I’ve been ! Is there mercy for such as me 1
I’ve never, showed mercy to no one else. Mr. Frank, I’m glad you’re not
dead —it’s one murder less to face—to face—face !—Whose face is that ?
There ! —lt’s the Chinaman’s ! No, no, it’s all right.”
They gave him more brandy, for he was becoming delirious.
“ Yes, yes—where was 12 ah, I know—l want Mr. Frank and Miss Minnie
to forgive me—and ”
Then Frank walked away to where Minnie lay, with the stony fixed stare
still in her eyes. Her father had given her brandy, and warmed her by the
fire. Frank again tried to make her comprehend him, but with no better
result than before.
“ Speak to me, Min. lam Frank.”
“My Frank is dead !” was all the reply he could obtain. Just then,
Barrett went over to him with a request from Scotchy to shake hands with
him, as he was dying. Frank replied with a vehemence that startled his
partner.
“ For what he has done to me, he has my forgiveness—if that is any use to
him. But if that deed”—pointing to Minnie—“needs my forgiveness to
keep his black soul from hell— he never has it /”
It was now daylight. The dying miscreant rose to a sitting posture, and
looked up into the tree in which Jacky had been hidden so long in mortal
terror, for he had heard much that had been said, and had witnessed the whole
scene from the beginning. ■ The dying man pointed at the very branch on
which the black was lying, and said,
“That’s Mr. Frank’s face ! And the Chinaman’s too ! They’re speaking
to the devil about me ! I won’t go with the devil ! I’ll say the Lord’s
prayer—that’ll drive him away—Mother always said it would—Look at his
black face, how it grins at me ! ”
The eyes of several troopers followed the direction of the man’s finger—for
it still pointed to the branch. There they saw the terror-stricken face of Jack
Campbell—his mouth open and his eyes staring. An instant more, and two
troopers were up the tree by order of their officer. Jacky crept further out on
the branch. One of the troopers followed him, and made a snatch at his
foot. Jacky swung his body off the branch, holding by one hand. The jerk
was too much for the branch, and it snapped close to his hand. Scotchy
‘ ‘ Ha! ha! Satan has fallen! ”
He fell back, dead.


They all rushed to the brink of the precipice when the branch broke.
Jacky uttered one prolonged shout of agony and despair, and m a few
seconds was a shapleless mass on the jagged rocks two hundred feet below .
Scotchy’s grave was soon dug, and he was put m without coffin or Player.
The Lieutenant and his subs, were pressed to go to Leichardt with the
returning party, but refused, saying that they must get back over the range,
as they had left their horses and saddles there ; and though it was not
probable that the blacks would interfere with them—for they generally
respected police property-yet they thought it best not to beawaytoo long,
as the horses might stray, and give them some trouble to findl them_agam.
Besides, the Commandant had ordered them to take Jacky, dead or alive,
and return as soon as possible, as their services were
direction. They very much regretted not being able to obtain Jacky s head ,
but thought they had fulfilled 8 the Commandant’s “faK
i„;,1 ; n ral , rer by “dispersing the blacks. Mr. Liddle and. au tne
prhicffial men of the party, thanked the officers cordially for their opportune
Td unexpected support ;’and the latter collected their men, and started to
cross the range homewards.
A quantity of weapons and other articles belonging to the blacks were
taken by both parties as trophies, and the rest were burnt A comfortable
litter was constructed for poor Minnie, and the party left the Scotchman s
Peak,” as it was called henceforth.
Mr. Liddle sent two of his sons-William and Thomas-back toEossdale
with the tidings that all were delivered from the hands of the blacks, but
that Minnie was too ill to return home for the present. Mrs. Liddle was
not to be alarmed about her. Thomas had stnct injunctions J 0 F^ eel |;
without loss of time for the doctor ; and William was to escort his eldest
sister to Leichardt to take care of Minnie.
Old Booper, at the first volley of rifles, was a bit startled—nothing but
that or an earthquake, could have startled him—and he ran to the gunyah
where Minnie wits, and stood by it till he was caught to be take away on
their return to Leichardt. He had been petted a good deal by the kmd-
hearted girl during her visit. He was always about the head-station, and
followed 8 her at all times in her walks. He once or twice endeavored to
accompany her in her rides, but the poor old fellow s ) stiff joints and
deformed body, being no match for her beautiful little mare s high spint and
graceful form, he regretfully gave up the attempt in future, and stood
neighing after her, or rather, grunting like a pig. She used to treat him to
almost unlimited supplies of sugar and salt, of which he was very fond, and
which he licked out of her hand. Though a young woman and very domes-
ticated she was as impulsive, fresh, and guileless in feelings and manners,
as any’ child. There was nothing of “the girl of the period about her,
nor could she sympathise with such. Since she became in love, she thought
herself very grave, even matronly ; but her friends perceived no change m
her except her deep devotion to" Frank. Poor girl! All her amiable and
loveable qualities were now at rest, for a time ; but she was none the less
tenderly cared for and loved ; indeed, if it were possible, rather more so.
Johnson, who had been speared in the leg, at the door of the. house-when
the first attack was made, now found his wound getting too painful to allow
of him wffikhiolome from the Scotchman’s Peak, so he was placed on old
Booper He was, of course, very delighted at the prospect of regaining his
Test money, and inwardly vowed that he would never again take a situation


where it would be necessary for him to have hut-mates. He would carry out
his intention of going smith, and buying a small farm. His only hut-mate should
be hist old mother. This part of his resolution, however, broke down in
time, tor in the course of years he had a good many little mates. That is
to say he took a Wife, the daughter of a neighboring farmer on the Richmond
itiver. Hut this is going beyond our limits.
There being no more danger to be apprehended for our friends, who were
starting from the Scotchmans Peak, we give some further particulars
respecting the appearance of the Native Police at the very instant, it may
be sard, that their presence was the most valuable to co-operate with the
white party of avengers.
The Chief Constable of Gayndah, knowing how inadequate and unqualified
his force of four men was to ‘serve” the warrants on Jacky Campbell and
his desperate savages, who had committed the outrages at Coonambala, sent
tor the troopers, who were about Maryborough “dispersing” the blacks, who
had been annoying the owners of cattle-stations on the coast. The Com-
mandant accordingly ordered a detachment of seventeen troopers, a sergeant,
and sub-lieutenant, under the command of a superior officer, to go and take
Jacky dead or alive, and “disperse” his mob. They were successful in
finding the tracks of the murderers, and followed them to the foot of the
great western range. Seeing that they had no chance of getting over it on
their horses, they hobbled them close to water, took off their saddles and
bridles, and hung them up in a tree out of the reach of the dingoes. Thev
knew their property was safe enough from the blacks, to whom their very
name was a terror. Their fear, however, did not prevent them committing
outrages when the police were at a distance, as in the present case. Jacky
was aware that they could not take their horses up the range, even if they
did follow him, which he considered by no means likely. He reckoned on
his own generalship to get his followers and himself off scot free. Once in
those dense vine scrubs where the bunya grew, he felt that he would have a
better chance of escape, than they would have of capturing him. If Mickey
had not escaped so cleverly, and Jacky and his partner in villainy had not
quarrelled—thus occasioning all the sentinels to leave their posts—there can
be no doubt that, m the first place, the Leichardt garrison, and the men at
the out-stations, would have been ruthlessly butchered ; and in the next
Jacky and many of his followers would have escaped. ’
The troopers travelled over the range cautiously, till they saw the glare of
the fires Jacky caused to be made for the purpose of enabling him the better
to carryout his bloody revenge on Scotchy ; and also to give his followers a
treat. The Lieutenant, not knowing the ground, ordered his boys to strip,
in case there should be scrubs into which the blacks could fly for shelter He
then ordered two of his most experienced boys—Toby and John Brown—to
reconnoitre. They discovered the precipice on either side of the flat-top
but dared not go far enough to find the spur leading to the Leichardt run
for fear of being seen, and the blacks taking the alarm. The two spies then
returned to their commander, and reported what they had seen, and how the
blacks were in a state of excitement about something that was going on
beneath them but what, the troopers could not see. A cautious advance of
the whole detachment was at once ordered. Arriving at the flat-top, the
Lieutenant and his men crept from tree to tree. While posting his boys to
the greatest advantage for raking the blacks with a shower of bullets, to his
infinite astonishment, Mr. Liddle’s and Barrett’s men fired their first vofiev
Ihe rest of this scene of terrible retribution is already known


Barrett had the Chinaman’s hut floor carefully dug in the comer indicated
by Scotchy, and the bottle was found. None of the out-stations laid in the
track of the blacks from the range, so the men were unaware of what was
going on at the head-station. Jacky’s and Scotchy s plan was to take the
head-station first, when the others would be an easy prey.
Minnie Liddle’s case was considered by the doctor to be a very serious
one, requiring unremitting medical supervision for some time. More, in
fact, than his practice would admit of him bestowing, at such a distance trom
his residence. He, however, looked hopefully on it, and strongly advised
her removal to some distance from her present surroundings, but not trom
her dearest friends. Consequently, her mother and Frank accompanied her
to Sydney. Frank’s kind mother insisted on them staying with hen ±he
two mothers became much attached in their afflution---for was not Frank s
affliction his mother’s, equally as much as his own A All the attention that love
and tenderness could suggest, was lavishly bestowed on poor Minnie , and
it was a proud and joyful day for all, when the dear girl s mind recovered its
tone sufficiently to allow her to recognize her friends, and to comprehend
that her Frank was not dead.
FINIS.
Printed at the “ Mercury ” Office, Maoquarie-street, Hobart Town, Tasmania.
