



V


,
dp 5*f; •




Ivor Manton
BUT FOR WHOSE
FORETHOUGHT AND
ENCOURAGEMENT THE
“ADVENTURES OF MARGERY
PYM ’ ’ WOULD NEVER
HAVE BEEN RECORDED




Adventures of
Margery Pym






[Frontis.pl
The two spectators leant back and laughed till the tears ran down
their cheeks.”


Adventures oj
Margery Pym
‘Rosalind Miller
Illustrated by
Jean Elder
London
Hutchinson & Co-
( Publishers ), Ltd.


MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
AT GAINSBOROUGH PRESS. ST. ALBANS
BY FISHER KNIGHT AND CO., LTD.


Jhe song “Margery Prim ”
is well-known “over the air ”
Quaintly prim
In her pale blue gown
Corkscrew curls and dark eyes of brown
Margery Pym
Came to Melbourne Town
Back in grand-ma’s day.
Refrain —
She wore a big poke bonnet
And a skirt all furbelows.
There was lace in rows upon it
And it reached right to her toes.
Margery Pym was charming
A demure little miss was she !
But her eyes beheld a twinkle
That was not so very prim.
So now gather round my children
While I tell you tales of Margery Pym.




PAGE
I I
29
42
. 58
72
8l
94
109
. 125
146
. 159
. 175
• i93
204
A? /6/003
CONTENTS
RAFTER PAGE
I. THE ARRIVAL . . . . II
11. pengally’s secret ... 29
111. PLOT AND COUNTERPLOT . . 42
IV. ON THE BULLOCK TRACK . . 58
V. CAPTAIN LIGHTNING ... 72
VI. IN THE RANGES . . . 8l
VII. THE ENCOUNTER ... 94
VIII. TURNING THE TABLES . . 109
IX. NEW HOPE .... 125
X. WILFRED . . . . .146
XI. THE FIRST RUSH . . . 1 59
xii. pengally’s luck . , . 175
XIII. CAPTAIN STEVENS’S WORK . . 193
XIV. BUNINYONG .... 204
XV. THE RIDE TO BROWN’S HILL . 219
XVI. LOST ! 236
XVII. BEEHIVE HILL .... 256


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
“The two spectators leant back and laughed till the
tears ran down their cheeks” . . . Frontispiece
“Why—where’s the gold gone ?” . . . .129
“It’s a blackfellow. He’s talking to Pengally—grin-
ning from ear to ear” . . . , . .137
“If you’re unlucky for the first half of your life, they
say you’ll have a change at thirty-five” . . .142
“My dears, how thankful lam you’ve returned . . said
Mrs. Pym . . . . . . . .146
“The entire place seems to have gone mad !” said Mrs.
Pym . ...... 167
“Out flashed a family of lizards” . . , facing 243


ADVENTURES OF MARGERY PYM
CHAPTER I
THE ARRIVAL
Bending over the rough wooden bunk, the old
nurse took a firm but gentle hold of the sleeping
girl’s shoulder, shook it—then shook it again.
“Wake up, Miss Margery, wake up,” she com-
manded. “It’s long gone six. We’re all but there !
Come now, wake up, there’s a good lass.”
The girl heaved a deep sigh, rubbed her eyes,
brushed back the mop of fair silky curls, and finally
sat up. For a moment she stared sleepily at her
nurse who, after one glance in the cabin’s cracked
mirror, was hastily pushing wisps of grey hair back
under her mob-cap.
The reason for the nurse’s haste suddenly flashed
through the girl’s drowsy brain. This was the day
which, for six weary months, she and her brothers
had been waiting for with such eagerness. The day
on which the Dolphin , the sailing ship which had
brought them slowly but surely across the world from
Southampton, was destined to sail through the
headlands, and up Port Phillip Bay, dropping anchor
by the newly founded town of Melbourne,


The long but wonderful journey was drawing to
an end at last. The little girl felt the impressions she
had gained on this trip were imprinted on her mind
for ever. First the busy dirty wharves back in Eng-
land and the ships drawn alongside of them to unload
goods from every quarter of the world. Spices and
sugar from the West Indies, grain from America,
cotton from Egypt, wines and silks from France and
Italy. Then that terrible first night aboard. Lying
there in her stuffy cabin listening to the creaking and
groaning of the boat, and trying not to be sick.
For days the passengers were huddled below, with
hatches battened down, and the huge waves breaking
against the ship with a violence that made them
imagine, any moment, it would be shattered to
pieces.
Then into warmer climes, and on past the Equator.
Week after week of hot still days when the sun’s
merciless rays blistered the deck, and the heat was
so intense it burnt through her thin black shoes as
though they had been of paper. Calling at the Cape
of Good Hope with its swarming myriads of dark-
skinned natives, and its queer but most welcome
fruits and vegetables. Never had greens tasted so
delicious ! Supplies had long since been exhausted
on board ship. Indeed, lack of vegetables had caused
Margery’s brother David, and other children, to
develop serious skin trouble.
Once again the anchor was pulled up and cat-


headed. Then came another series of endless days
and nights with the ocean a deep blue like ink, and
the sailors telling stories of a strange people, half-
man, half-fish, who sometimes were sighted in these
parts, and describing wonderful islands of deep pink
coral. Margery, David, and the other youthful
passengers would sit for hours watching for one
glimpse of these strange sights, but saw only shoals
of shining porpoises, an occasional albatross, and
the queer flying fish. One day the sailor in the crow’s
nest shouted : “Land ahoy.” Australia was sighted
at last.
Coming across the Australian Bight they ran into
the teeth of another storm, and were violently sick.
But once Cape Otway was rounded the waves sub-
sided, and when Mrs. Pym told the children trunks
were to be packed, their excitement broke all bounds.
They were now, Margery knew, approaching the
entrance to Port Phillip, with journey’s end soon
in sight. She vaguely wondered what would happen
when they were landed at the port. She had heard
the aboriginal tribes were inclined still to distrust
the white men from beyond the sea, and knew con-
ditions would be very different from those back in
England. Sleepily she started to pull the comb
through her tousled curls.
“That’s the spirit, out you tumble, Miss Margery,”
approved the good-humoured nurse. “Your cabin-
mate, Miss Jemima, has been on deck over an hour.”


Margery pulled a face. She did not like the self-
satisfied Jemima. Seeing her charge was now wide
awake, the nurse left the cabin. The girl instantly
sprang out of bed, dressed, washed quickly in the
stinging salt water, then climbed the narrow com-
panion-way to the open deck, and her first sight of
Port Phillip Bay over whose glistening blue waters
the ship dipped gracefully, taking her to new life
and adventure in the Land of the Southern Cross.
The nurse had reported correctly. Despite the
still early hour, most of the passengers already were
on deck. Margery’s brother David, and two other
boys, had borrowed a telescope from the first mate,
and were taking turns to peer at the rocky head-
lands jutting abruptly out on either side. Others
were pointing out the misty purple outlines of more
distant ranges.
“Hullo !” cried David, when it was his turn for
the telescope. “There are people on the beach
there. I can see them moving.”
“Which way ? Where ?” clamoured the other
children, clustering round eagerly. Older passengers,
too, turned to catch a first glimpse of their future
countrymen.
“On the beach by that headland,” replied David,
pointing across the water.
“Here, let me have a look, Sonny,” said an imposing
bewhiskered army captain. The others waited
breathlessly to hear his verdict.


“By gad, yes !” he announced in a voice trembling
with excitement. “I believe the lad to be right !
Without doubt there’s someone there on the beach.
Settlers perhaps, or maybe just members of some
black tribe down to look at the ship.”
Screwing up her eyes, Margery peered intently in
the same direction, but without the aid of the tele-
scope all she could see was a line of white cliffs
bordered by yellow beaches, and flat black rocks
butting into the blue expanse of sea. On the other
side were more beaches, cliffs and rocks. She was
looking for the first time at the tw r o headlands known
as Point Lonsdale and Point Nepean.
A strong breeze was blowing up and Margery,
who had left her woolly shawl in the cabin below,
shivered violently. With one hand clutching at her
skirts and the other endeavouring to smooth down
her mop of unruly curls, she made her way to a
more sheltered section of the deck, behind the neat
deck-house. Sailors were already at the mast-
heads altering the ship’s sails, for the change of
wind meant all had to be swung round. This emer-
gency, combined with the tricky rip tide of Port
Phillip Bay, called for careful navigation. Margery
never tired of watching the sailors at their work and
seeing them swarm up the rigging like agile monkeys.
They wore loose cotton trousers, many being new
ones bought at the Cape of Good Hope, and still
unfaded. Some had red stripes—some were a vivid


navy, others were a plain greyish canvas. Their feet
were bare, but owing to the keen wind, most of them
had pulled on greasy woollen jerseys. As they sat
straddled across the yard-arms, their tightly-plaited
pigtails bobbing about like cow’s tails, she caught
snatches of the cheering sea-songs they chanted to
help them work quicker.
The prospect of a spell of land after the hardships
of the voyage caused them to be in high spirits. The
passengers seemed even more excited. Everyone
was running and bustling about. Women were
handing back borrowed belongings, trunks were
being packed and the military men had donned their
best uniforms. All on board was being made spick
and span for the landing.
One passenger seemingly took no interest in these
preparations. His name was O’Neill. He was a
dark, sad-looking man who had joined the boat at
Capetown, and kept very much to himself. Margery
had felt sorry for him, and come to know him well.
He had told her he had no friends in this new country
towards which they were sailing, and no prospects.
Once he told her in a fit of bitterness his past life
was a closed book. The little girl sensed a mystery,
but held her peace.
Jemima Stevens’s sharp eyes had noticed Margery’s
gaze fix on the solitary figure in shabby black. Cross-
ing from the other side of the deck, she edged close
to her with a sly giggle.


“You may well be sorry for your precious friend,
Mr. O’Neill,” airily remarked Miss Jemima. “He’s
in for a fine time when we get to port. Take my
advice, and don’t be seen mixing up with him too
much.”
The other strove to keep calm.
“Why, Jemima ! What do you mean ?”
I overheard Papa talking to an officer who
boarded the ship at Port Adelaide. They think this
O’Neill left Africa because he had to. They think
he’s someone the soldiers are after. You see, he’ll be
arrested directly we’re in port. Sent to join a chain-
gang most likely.”
Margery could have hit Jemima, but controlled
the impulse with an effort. The noisy breakfast gong
saved her the trouble of answering. They descended
the companion-way in silence.
All through breakfast she kept thinking of the
distressing news she had just learned from the
spiteful Jemima. Her snobbish cabin-mate had
grated on her nerves since the voyage began. She
would spend hours telling the other children of her
aunt who was lady-in-waiting to Queen Victoria,
and had even remarked that when Melbourne
was reached probably she would not see much
of her shipmates as her Mama said they would
move only in the best society. She had sneered
repeatedly at Margery’s sympathy for the shabbily-
dressed O’Neill, and no doubt secretly was pleased
i 7
B


to pass on the news overheard in her father’s
cabin.
Jemima’s father was an army officer. A blustering
red-faced man not popular with his fellow-passengers.
Mr. Pym more than once had rebuked him for the
brutal manner in which he spoke of the Australian
blacks. Mr. Pym asserted these natives were the
first owners of the country, and therefore were
entitled to consideration from the new settlers.
Margery knew well that the suspected man could
expect little sympathy from Captain Stevens.
Before breakfast was over, she had made up
her mind to confide in her brother and get his
advice.
“David, I’ve something to tell you,” she whispered
as she passed along the cheese. “Something most
important. Can you meet me on the quarter-deck
in five minutes ?”
The lad looked puzzled, but nodded yes, and in a
few minutes the two were deep in conversation in a
deserted corner of the deck.
“Well, Miss, what’s the mystery ?” grinned David.
He knew Margery was gifted with a vivid imagin-
ation, and on the slightest pretext would try to urge
him into taking part in her madcap schemes. But
now her face was flushed and anxious, and her hazel
eyes without a twinkle. He felt suddenly something
important was afoot.
“Listen, David,” she said earnestly. “If I tell


you this, will you promise word of honour not another
soul shall know ?”
Her brother agreed, but added : “Be quick though.
I have to go below soon. Got to hunt up the bosun.
He’s said he’ll give me a bottle with a full-rigged ship
in it. A beauty. He made it himself.”
Margery took a deep breath. “It’s about that
Mr. O’Neill. I think there’s trouble ahead for him.”
“Will you always keep on being sorry for every
lame duck you meet ?” answered the other with a
laugh. “We can’t do anything for him. So why
worry ?”
“But I can do something. It may mean life or
death !” and lowering her voice she told him what
Jemima Stevens had said to her on the boat-deck
before breakfast.
“Pheww,” murmured David. “This certainly puts
a different face to things. That poor fellow can’t be
allowed to land unwarned. It may be quite wrong.
He might get sent to the Tasmanian convict settle-
ment through it.”
“It’s a mistake, I’m sure,” cried Margery passion-
ately. “Mr. O’Neill wouldn’t hurt a fly. Captain
Stevens is mean and spiteful. He would tell the
Governor simply to curry favour. Can’t we warn
him ?”
“It’s our clear duty,” replied David firmly.
“Look ! There’s O’Neill pacing the other deck. Go
down to your cabin and pack, Marg, Try to keep


an eye on Jemima at the same time. I’ll tell him,
even if I do get hauled over the coals myself.”
It took hours for the Dolphin to make its way
up Port Phillip. But when it did drop anchor the
passengers and crew were so occupied no one saw
O’Neill quietly drop overboard on the farther side
of the boat, swim to a smaller deserted boat, where
he remained for a discreet period. Margery heaved
a long sigh of relief when she realized he was not
among the passengers. Months were to elapse
before she saw him again. Little did she know that
her act of kindness was in the future to be repaid
one hundredfold.
Rowing-boats took the passengers to the jetties
where a large crowd of settlers had collected on the
wharves to bid the newcomers welcome to Melbourne.
On a hill overlooking the town fluttered a gay
flag.
“The people at the shipping-office ran that flag
up,” explained David. “The bosun told me they
hoist it directly they sight a ship coming up the
bay. When the people see it, they hump on their
horses and ride down here to get the latest news of
England.”
“Most of them are expecting letters and parcels,
too, I suppose,” said Margery. “But see, David,
there’s Papa. He’s signalling to you. He wants
your help.”
“Mama told me to stay here with you,” demurred


the lad. “Think I’d better give a hand all the
same. Will you promise to stay here till we get
back ?”
Margery nodded assent. Everything in this grey-
green land was new and strange to her. She had
no desire to move, but sat still on the dress-basket
gazing at the busy scene about her. Everyone was
talking and shouting. The last load of passengers
was coming off. Shipping officials bawled directions,
women chattered like parrots, children asked ques-
tions, friends were kissing and shaking hands, horses
and bullocks strained at the wagons. Now clopperty-
clop down the road came a squad of soldiers in
bright uniforms. But despite this commotion, the
town looked insignificant compared with the great
cities Margery had known in England. It was still
a small settlement, and, beyond the first line of
stores, warehouses and made streets, stretched green
pastures and tracts of uncleared bush.
The Pyms had said good-bye to England in early
spring. It was November, and there it would be
nearing winter with biting winds, and even a fall of
early snow. But under the Southern Cross summer
was starting, the wind was hot, and the country dry
and parched. Looking to the right, Margery saw
long ridges of sand hummocks, with here and there
ra £§ e d ridges of scrub sheltering groups of houses.
The gum-tree was very different from the English
trees. She studied the nearest one to her, and decided


it was something to do with the hang of the leaves,
and the way the greenery grew only in tufts at the
end of the branches.
A sharp tap on the shoulder brought her to earth
as a hearty voice boomed out.
“Bless my soul. If you’re not Miss Margery Pym
I’ll be a Dutchman.”
Jumping from the dress-basket, the little girl
wheeled round and found herself looking into a gruff
kindly face with eyes and mouth like that of her own
mother.
“You must be my Uncle James,” she cried happily.
How comforting it was to think they actually had
someone belonging to them in this new colony. Her
Uncle looked strong and reliable as he stood by her.
She stared in wonderment at his tanned cheeks,
baggy breeches tied below the knees with cord, and
rough toil-worn hands.
“Look me over,” he directed her with a laugh.
“I’m your mother’s brother—Uncle James Everett,
the family’s black sheep.”
“How did you know who I was ?”
“Because you’re the dead image of my own dear
mother,” came back the quick reply. “Same clear
eyes, curly hair and firm obstinate chin. I hope
you’re as like her in nature as you are in looks—she
was as fine a woman as God ever made. But thunder
and lightning what’s all this . . .” and he broke off
to stare in amazement at a small group of military


men who, led by Captain Stevens and Jemima, were
bearing down in their direction.
Margery’s heart sank. She had a feeling the
Captain had come to question her about the missing
O’Neill.
“Halt here !” cried the Captain, and the soldiers,
spurs jingling importantly, came to a smart stand-
still.
The little girl’s heart was thumping like a wind-
mill. She glanced round to see where her Papa,
Mama and David might be, but they were nowhere
about. Could Captain Stevens have discovered her
brother had warned O’Neill—that he had told him
he was suspect, encouraged him to make a bid for
freedom ? An icy shiver went down her back as she
contemplated the price they might have to pay for
their impulsive action.
Her ne\V-found uncle was indignant.
“Captain, is it necessary you come here on official
matters now while I am welcoming my kinsmen from
England ?”
A large crowd by this time had gathered round
the group, foremost among them being Captain
Stevens’s own daughter, Jemima, looking even more
triumphant and self-satisfied than usual.
“I am not come to address you, sir,” returned the
Captain with a formal bow. “My business is with
this young lady,” he waved a hand in poor Margery’s
direction. “Reports have it, sir, this girl has been


meddling in matters of grave importance to Her
Majesty’s Government.”
A gasp of astonishment went up from the crowd.
Mr. Everett, too, stared at the Captain open-mouthed.
“She’s but a child ! You must be mistaken, sir.”
“Child or no child,” came the pompous answer,
“we have reason to believe she passed on information
leading to the escape of a passenger named O’Neill.
A dangerous fellow we have instructions to arrest.”
Excitement rose high among the watchers. Mar-
gery’s cheeks went white as chalk.
“Ridiculous ! Who gave you this cock-and-bull
story ?” Mr. Everett demanded.
“Jemima, step forward,” called her father. “Tell
us what transpired between you and Miss Margery
here on the Dolphin this morning.”
Jemima, who loved nothing better than to be in
the limelight, shook her curls back and stepped into
the centre of the group. Pointing an accusing finger
at her trembling cabin-mate she loudly and clearly
said :
“Early this morning I told Margery how I had
overheard you say you suspected Mr. O’Neill was a
refugee from justice. That probably when we got
here he would be arrested. You ask her, she won’t
deny it.”
“That will do, Jemima,” said the Captain. “Miss
Margery Pym, do you declare this witness’s state-
ment to be the truth ?”


Miserably she admitted it was so.
“Then, Mr. Everett, I would like to inform you
that this O’Neill evidently came to learn he was
suspect, for he most mysteriously has disappeared
from the ship, yet the sailors say he has not come
ashore in a rowing-boat.”
“They must have missed him in the crowd.”
“They say not. It seems your niece has informed
O’Neill on this matter, and he has taken good care
to leave the ship in an—er —unusual fashion. It is
my duty as a member of Her Majesty’s Government
to ask Miss Margery Pym if she passed on my
daughter’s remarks to the suspect.”
“Thank goodness he put it that way,” thought
Margery. “At least, I can answer that truthfully.
I didn’t warn him ; it was David.”
She shook her head.
“Come, child, speak up—clear yourself,” said
Uncle James impatiently. He did not want the
incident to become the talk of the colony.
Margery turned defiantly towards Captain Stevens.
“I did not do this. I have not spoken one word
with that man to-day, and your daughter told me
what she did of her own free will. You will never
prove I told Mr. O’Neill, because I did not. That’s
on my word of honour.”
Captain Stevens’s face flushed purple, and he
snarled an ugly threat under his breath. Mr. Everett
glanced across to the throng of onlookers then back


to his niece. She was standing her ground, hands
clenched tightly and mouth firm-shut, but he could
see she was on the verge of breaking down. He knew
he must act.
“Captain Stevens,” he said, “this matter has gone
far enough. My niece has given her statement. In
my mind you owe her a public apology.”
“Hear, hear !” came from the crowd.
“And since your daughter is so prone to spreading
news, in future, Captain Stevens, I would see she is
not present when official affairs are discussed. The
leakage of the secret lies not with my niece but your
daughter.”
The Captain opened his mouth to reply, thought
better of it, and standing sharply to attention merely
remarked ;
“Evidently I am mistaken. Further inquiries will
be made. Your pardon, Miss Margery. Your pardon,
sir,” and turning on his heel marched off, looking
distinctly uncomfortable.
Margery could not resist taking a peep at Jemima,
whom she was sure had been responsible for
the incident. But the other had turned her head
quickly, so her face was hidden behind her big poke
bonnet.
“She did this deliberately,” she thought. “David
was right when he said we couldn’t trust her. She
wouldn’t mind if an innocent man were made a
convict for the rest of his life. I’ve tricked them


so far, thank goodness. If only they don’t question
David, they need never find out more.”
The onlookers were drifting away as quickly as
they had gathered, for there was much to interest
the crowd at the jetties. Cargoes from the Dolphin
to be unloaded, goods and mail collected, and new
arrivals to be sorted out and given temporary shake-
downs.
Uncle James Everett, not knowing the true cir-
cumstances, was most upset by Captain Stevens’s
officious action.
“A bullying bungler like that one will soon get
disliked in the colony,” he prophesied. “I’ve a good
mind to send a report of this to the Governor.”
“Please don’t !” cried Margery in alarm. Naturally
she did not want any more attention drawn to her
dealings with the escaped man.
“Don’t fret yourself, forget all about it for the
time being anyway —most unfortunate,” directed her
new-found relation kindly. “Let us see if we can
find the other members of your family —I am anxious
to see your mother again. When we were young she
was my favourite sister.”
The others were soon spied among the diminishing
throng of people. While Mr, and Mrs. Pym renewed
acquaintance with Uncle James Everett, Margery
found time to drop a warning word to her brother.
She told him how Captain Stevens had accused her
point-blank of helping O’Neill escape, and how only


by sheer luck she was able to deny his questions.
David determined he would avoid the Captain, but
evidently Uncle James’s pointed remark about his
negligence in discussing official matters in the presence
of his daughter had struck home. No more was heard
of Captain Stevens that day. The Pyms were invited
to stay at the Everetts’ farm in Prahran. Soon they
were all piled into the wagon, and were driving
briskly down the main street of the colony.


CHAPTER 11
pengally’s secret
As the Pyms jolted along the uneven road they
had the uneasy feeling that Uncle James’s farm
would not present the rosy picture he had painted
to them, but would prove a mere two-roomed shack.
They received a pleasant surprise when Mr. Everett,
after bringing them across the Yarra by ferry, then
driving on past undulating paddocks and stretches
of waving gum-tree, pointed with his whip to a neat
wooden house set among young pines on the crest of
a hill.
“There it is ! And every nail, bolt and plank I’ve
put in myself,” he boasted proudly.
As they drew nearer, they realized the immense
amount of work the pioneer must have put in to
transform the once stretch of straggling gums to this
well-ordered farm. Mr. Pym, however, had no wish
to follow in his brother-in-law’s footsteps. His plan
was to invest the money he had in a warehouse near
the wharves. He began putting his plans into action
almost immediately.
Although it was still early summer, the year was
one of intense heat and drought. All grass had
withered, creeks had dwindled to hard beds of clay,


water-holes disappeared, and sheep and cattle were
dying everywhere through want of feed and water.
Still no rain. Day after day the sun rose clear and
shining in a sky of endless blue. The farm struggled
on, but the Pym family gained anything but pleasant
first impressions of Melbourne. Christmas Day
especially. They felt sick for England. It would be
snowing there, and the boys and girls setting out to
gather holly and sing carols, their breath rising like
smoke in the crisp cold air.
Mrs. Pym made a pudding, but it was too hot for
even David to have more than two helpings, and that
meant he got no silver button. An unheard-of thing
for him.
But despite the heat the building of the large
bluestone warehouse by the river went on, and by
February it was almost ready for the Pyms to start
moving in. But then occurred an event which
paralysed the entire town. It was the huge bush-fire of
1851 —the famous Black Thursday.
A gloom was spread over the colony for months.
Many of the people had lost all their worldly
possessions in that fire which had swept the pasture
lands from west to east. On one day ashes from
Mount Macedon were blowing down Collins Street.
Business slumped badly. This was not only due to
the fire but also to events in New South Wales.
For months there had been reports of fabulous wealth
lying hidden beneath the surface of the earth. The


Pengally’s Secret
aborigines had found gold, lonely shepherds in the
mountains and convicts had glimpsed it. But proofs
were few, and little official heed was taken of reports.
Another bombshell then burst ! Gold had been found
in New South Wales. The rush started. Directly
it was known men actually were obtaining gold
nearly half the men of Sydney left their city homes
to try their luck in the quiet mountain gullies.
What was more serious, Victorian people were
catching the fever and making for the new gold-
fields. Consequently business in Melbourne was at a
standstill and Mr. Pym wisely decided it was no time
to start a new business. The Pym family did not
move into the bluestone store by the shipping
wharves after all. It was let out to others, and they
stayed on with their Uncle.
Each week more people were packing their bundles
for New South Wales, and reports came back many
had made rich finds. The Governor realized the only
solution was to find gold in Victoria’s own boundaries.
Accordingly a reward was offered for the discovery
of a paying gold-field near Melbourne.
About that time occurred an event destined to alter
Margery Pym’s entire life. One day when hunting
for eggs she saw her Uncle come home with a shabbily-
dressed man who carried an awkward lumpy bundle
wrapped in a check kerchief.
He was Pengally, a shepherd. Directly he was
introduced to Mr. Pym, the three men retired to the


dining-room, where they talked earnestly for hours.
Margery was sent to the room to fetch some spoons.
The men were arguing excitedly and carefully examin-
ing specimens of jagged whitish rock. Her father held
one piece to the window. The little girl caught her
breath. In the sunlight she saw a thread-like glint
of yellow shining metal! Had Pengally found gold ?
Was that his news ? In her excitement she forgot
about the spoons. They dropped back in the drawer,
clattering metallically.
The men sprang to their feet angrily. Evidently
they had been unaware of her presence.
“Margery ! What are you doing here ?” demanded
her father sternly.
“Fetching some spoons from the drawer,” stam-
mered the little girl.
“You had no business to come in here at all. I
gave orders not to be interrupted. Those stones we
were examining—did you see them ?”
“Yes, Papa.”
“Did you notice anything unusual about them ?”
Margery’s unwavering gaze met her father’s.
“Yes, yellow lines —shining lines— Papa, does this
mean you’ve found gold ? that you’ll make your
fortune at last ?”
Pengally gave a half-snarl into his shaggy beard.
“Zince the lass knows that much, it be no use
givin’ the he. Best she mun be told to keep mum
as a churchvard itself,” he directed.


Pengally’s Secret
Mr. Pym signed for the other to leave this to him.
“See here, daughter,” he said gravely. “You have
discovered Pengally’s secret —a secret he meant no
one to learn but your Uncle and myself. We can trust
you, I hope, to keep a still tongue concerning this ?”
“I will, Papa,” she breathed, feeling strangely
excited so much importance was attached to her
silence. “I give my solemn promise.”
Her father patted her head.
“I like it but little, one so young should have to
carry such a precious secret —but the harm is done
now. Run along, child. Pengally’s time is short,
and we have much to discuss.”
No more was said about the matter, but for weeks
Margery pondered over the secret she alone knew.
Pengally evidently had come on traces of a gold-
field somewhere in Victoria. She knew the Governor
was offering rich rewards to the first person bringing
news of a paying gold-field near Melbourne. What
if her father were the first ? She longed to confide
in David, but fought back the temptation doggedly,
knowing the men implicitly trusted her to fulfil her
vow of silence.
Others in the household now were suspecting some-
thing was afoot. Mr. Everett cheerfully let his farm-
ing slip back, and Mr, Pym made no attempt to start
his warehouse. The massive two-storied building still
remained leased out.
David was the next to learn the secret.


That month he had started studying bridge building
under the tutorship of Mr. Lennox who had recently
completed the first bridge spanning the Yarra. One
day as he was bending over his work, his father
entered the room, shutting the door behind him
cautiously.
“David, your Uncle and I have some important
maps we want copied. Could we entrust the work
to you ?”
“I would be pleased to,” answered the boy, proud
to think his studies were so soon being of practical
use. “But I’ve not had much practice yet. I’ll get
Mr. Lennox to help me.”
“No—not that—these maps must not be shown to
anyone. This is a matter of absolute secrecy. I will
explain. Remember Pengally the shepherd ? He has
discovered gold in Victoria. Your Uncle and I are
backing him. We are going north very shortly.”
“Pheww .. . gold!” gasped the boy. “Then
these maps are guides for its location ?”
“Exactly . . . now you see why this must be kept
secret. Lock the maps in your drawer. Tell no one
of this except Margery, She can help keep watch !”
After explaining some minor details, he left David
to the task, and harnessing Trixie, the grey mare, to
a large farm cart set off for Melbourne, returning late
that evening with supplies for the expedition. Shallow
tin dishes, picks, axes and spades, and a good canvas
tent.


Pengally’s Secret
The next day another journey to the city was made,
Mr. Everett going too. Margery watched them set
off, and guessed they going to the bank. That
meant they must be starting very soon for she knew
her father’s rooted objection to keeping loose money
about the house.
She raced indoors to consult David and found him
at his desk, bending over his work.
“David, are you busy ?” she called. “Does it
matter if I interrupt ?”
The boy sprang to his feet, automatically drawing
a sheet of paper over his work. Had Margery not
known he wished to keep it from prying eyes, she
never would have noticed the action. She saw he
had planned the position of the desk carefully. It
was turned towards the window so he could see at
a glance the moment anyone entered the room.
“Oh, just you, Marg,” he said in a relieved tone.
“Could you stay in here while I fetch more ink ? I’ll
have to hurry with it —Papa wants the four copies
ready to-night.”
“By to-night! Can you manage it ?”
“If I keep at the work all day I will. But it slows
me up, being forced to keep one eye on the door the
whole time. It would be a help if you could stay
about.”
“Of course I will— But, David, does this mean
Papa and Uncle will be starting their journey
to-morrow ?”


“They must be. I gather someone’s guessed their
secret and is trying to forestall Pengally’s claim.”
“A rival party ! What makes you think so ?”
“First Papa said I could take at least a week with
these maps —then later they must be done this
evening.”
“Perhaps they think someone will find gold in
another part,”
“But that’s been possible for months. No, I think
this is more serious. But talking won’t get the maps
finished. Will you keep guard at the door ?”
“A splendid idea. I’ll get the sampler I’m making.”
She fetched her sewing, and a patchwork bag con-
taining dozens of different silks—the work fascinated
her. It was no hardship for her to sit hour after hour,
her curly head bent over the sampler’s wooden frame.
They had lunch, David first taking care to lock
the maps in his box. Directly she could, Margery
rejoined him afterwards and continued her watch by
the door. She started as the sound of carriage wheels
scrunching on the drive was heard. Rushing to the
window, she looked out.
“David, visitors have arrived. . . . And yes, I
suspected it. It’s Mrs. Stevens and that dreadful
Jemima with her !”
“They would call to-day. I, for one, shan’t enter-
tain them. If Mama calls for me, tell her I’m too
busy to be disturbed. Say I’m studying.”
“Mrs. Stevens will think you’ve no manners,”


Pengally ) s Secret
giggled Margery. “Have a peep at them. Isn’t she
dressed up ! Look at that feather in her bonnet. It’s
the longest I’ve ever seen. She must want to make
her peace after the way Jemima behaved on the
wharf over the O’Neill business.”
This was exactly what Mrs. Stevens did desire. She
had intended calling before, but the agitation of
Black Thursday had driven all thoughts from her
mind. Now she had chosen to visit them on the very
day when David and Margery wanted to be left alone
to complete the maps.
Mrs. Pym came in to fetch Margery. There was
nothing for it. She had to relinquish her position
at the door, and go off to the other room to meet
Jemima.
David, however, refused to budge, asserting he was
too busy.
Margery was surprised to find Jemima ready to be
friendly, and as she herself was not one to harbour
grudges, she did her best to make the visitor feel at
home. They went on the veranda to play hide
and seek.
From time to time, the sounds of Margery’s clear
voice and Jemima’s shriller one floated through the
open window to where David sat at his work. Two
of the map copies were now finished, but as the boy
had no blotting-paper, he had spread them out to
dry at his side.
Earlier in the afternoon the weather was calm, with


hardly a breath of wind, but now a breeze was blowing
up —a mischievous autumn breeze —the type which
chases leaves helter-skelter down paths, and delights
in blowing off sedate gentlemen’s hats.
Along the veranda it came hurrying, blowing the
dining-room curtains out like a ship’s sail. Changing
its course without warning, it whisked one of the
maps from David’s desk, blew it through the window
and along the veranda in a wild madcap dance.
David had his back to the window, and did not
notice the wind’s prank. But Jemima did ! She was
hiding behind the cane chair on the veranda. The
sheet of paper was blown almost against her feet.
Stretching out her hand, she grasped it easily. The
ink was not dry, and in places had run into smudges.
Evidently it was some map of David’s. Should she
give it back ? At first she decided she would, but
remembering David’s surliness when asked to come
and play with her, she decided to keep it to spite
him. Shortly afterwards her mother prepared to go
home, and in the excitement of saying good-bye, she
forgot her original plan of giving David back his map
only after much teasing.
She was quite unaware of its importance. She took
it for an exercise he was doing in connection with
his bridge-building studies.
When later she was changing her frock, the paper
fell to the floor. She picked it up and, looking at it,
felt a twdnge of regret. The boy evidently had taken


Pengally’s Secret
great pains with it. She wished now it could be
returned.
“I know,” she thought. “I shall give it to Papa—
he can leave it at the store, and David’s Father or
Uncle can pick it up to-morrow.” She ran to ask her
father about it before she forgot. Captain Stevens
was in the dining-room interviewing three strangers —
rough outback drovers in riding kit. Jemima did not
know them, and as she came up the passage, strained
to hear their names. Her father was in the act of
ushering them out.
“Bear in mind what I’ve told you, Jenkins,” he
was saying. “If we keep together there’s a fortune
in it for all of us.”
Jemima did not catch the man’s answer, but she
saw him shake hands. Her father went out with the
three as they walked to their horses.
Unfolding the map on the table, she began studying
it more carefully, so did not hear her father stride
back into the house.
“You here, Jemima,” he said sternly. “How often
must I tell you not to pry among my papers ?”
Jemima started guiltily. “But this map isn’t yours.
It belongs to David Pym. I took it to tease him, then
forgot to return it. Could you leave it at the store
to-morrow morning, please, Papa ? He may want it.”
“What for ? Mere school work, I suppose. Hand
it to me,”
“I think it must have something to do with his


bridge-building. He’s learning from Mr. Lennox who
built the bridge,”
“Pheww ! —one minute,” said Captain Stevens, look-
ing suddenly impressed. “Bring that taper and light
the candle. Yes, I thought so. What a find this is.
What luck. Almost too good to be true.”
“What is, Papa ? —what do you mean ?” asked his
daughter, utterly at a loss to understand his sudden
show of interest.
Realizing he had said too much, the man took
sudden control of himself. Folding up the map, he
put it in his pocket, then looked sternly at his
daughter.
“Jemima, this map, it happens, supplies informa-
tion most valuable to me. Now, daughter, I want
your absolute obedience. Should anyone ask you if
you know where David’s missing map is, you know
nothing ! Understand, you have never seen it. You
know nothing about it !”
She stared at him open-mouthed.
“But why, Papa ?”
“Never mind why. Those are my instructions. If
you disobey I shall have to whip you. Remember,
if anyone asks about this map you know nothing
about it. Do exactly as I say, and nothing more
will be said—in fact, I may win a fortune for you.
Now go back to your room.”
Directly she was gone, he took the map out again,
and studied every detail with utmost care.


Pengally’s Secret
“What luck, by gad !” he muttered. “It’s right
into my hands. I’ll make that impudent Pengally
sorry he refused my offer. He’ll rue the day he said
‘No’ to Captain Stevens. Now to get in touch with
Jenkins,” and going to the desk he dashed off a note,
called the coachman, instructed him to find Jenkins
and deliver the message immediately.


CHAPTER 111
PLOT AND COUNTERPLOT
Ten minutes after the Stevenses’ trap had vanished
over the hill, David threw down his pen with a
sigh of relief.
‘‘That’s the four maps finished, thank goodness,”
he stated triumphantly, as he turned to see if the
other copies were completely dry yet. One
two . . . three ... he counted them slowly.
Where was the fourth map ?He counted again. He
had done the four, he was sure of it, but one map
was missing. Where had it got to ? Certainly it was
not on the desk.
“Hope it hasn’t dropped to the floor and smudged.
Bother, I can’t see it. But this is absurd. It must
be somewhere.” And going on his hands and knees
he crawled across the carpet, peering anxiously under
the table, desk and chairs for the missing map.
“David !” The door opened with a rush as Margery
gaily came in, flushed after her romp in the garden,
and pleased, too, she had made up her quarrel with
Mrs. Stevens and Jemima.
“Hullo—whatever are you doing ?” she gasped.
All that could be seen of David was his boots
sticking from under the couch. Gingerly wriggling
42


from under cover, he poked his head round a wooden
leg of the table. By now he was in a thoroughly bad
temper.
“What do I look as though I’m doing ?” he said
shortly. “Playing bears ? I’ve lost one of the copies
of the map.”
“Lost it ? Surely not. It must be somewhere.
Have you searched through the desk ?”
“I’ve looked everywhere. But wait a minute —
there’s the waste-paper basket. See if it’s in there.”
His sister carefully went through every screwed-up
paper, but her search was fruitless.
Another gust of wind sprang up, blowing at the
curtains and causing fresh havoc among the papers
on the desk. Springing towards them, the boy man-
aged in the nick of time to stop another map going
out of the window.
“A gust of wind like that blew up before,” Margery
reflected. “Perhaps the other map blew through the
window. Come on, we’ll have a search in the garden.”
“A good idea . . . but I’d better lock these
others in my box first. Can’t afford to take any
more chances— And to think I had the whole job
finished.”
He banged the lid of the box down with a bad-
tempered slam, and followed Margery out of doors.
Diligently they searched the entire garden, but still
saw no sign of the missing map. They went farther,
and peered in every corner of the farmyard, but here,


too, only met with disappointment. The twilight grew
deeper. The cows were now all milked, and were
ambling back to the paddocks. From other fields
came the bleating of sheep, and against the sunset
clouds stood out the silhouettes of birds winging to
their nests before evening deepened to night.
David and Margery did not notice them. Their
eyes were fixed on the ground. But they straightened
up as the sound of horses’ hoofs broke through the
still air. It was Mr. Pym and Uncle James home
from the town.
“It’s Papa,” said David, his voice giving a slight
quiver. “Whatever will he say, Marg ? I promised
him not to let those maps out of my sight.”
“Accidents will happen—and it’s not as though
someone has taken the map,” comforted his sister,
little knowing the precious document actually was
in the hands of Captain Stevens—the person from
whom Mr. Pym was most anxious it should be kept
secret.
Margery and David had no chance to confess the
loss to their father before tea-time. When they sat
down at the table they looked so miserable Mrs. Pym
thought they must be ill. A theory which caused
them hastily to affirm they were quite well, and to
make an effort to be their normal selves for the
remainder of the meal.
Their father and uncle were in the best of spirits,
joking and laughing about a famous wager which


then was the talk of the town. An old bushman had
challenged the stout hotel-keeper to climb a large
white-trunked gum-tree near Jolimont Square. He
had done his best, but the trunk was smooth and
slippery, causing him to miss his footing half-way up.
“He got caught by the seat of his pants on the
end of a broken branch,” chuckled Mr. Pym, “and
there he hung, swinging in mid-air. It was funny
as a circus.”
It was Mr. Pym who, after the meal, broached the
subject of the map.
“Well, my boy,” he questioned, “what of the
maps —managed to get the four copies through ?”
“Yes, they’re finished,” David faltered. “But I’ve
had a bit of bad luck.”
“Not lost them, I trust ?” Mr. Pym’s voice had
taken a harsh turn.
“The original map is safe enough—it’s one of the
copies. The four were here on the desk to dry. One
must have blown through the window.”
“Then we must search till we find it—l thought
I told you how important the maps were.”
A peal of thunder rumbled ominously as he spoke.
The light wind of the afternoon had increased to a
gale, heavy clouds had massed in the west, and the
rain streamed down.
Striding to the window, Mr. Pym drew back the
heavy curtains—the rain was coming down in
torrents.


“No paper could exist in this storm —the rain
would reduce it to pulp in a matter of minutes. If
anyone does find it, they would never decipher it—
not after this downpour.”
“I suppose the ink would run too,” added David,
feeling most grateful to the weather for planning this
timely downpour. “Can I make another copy ?”
“That’s the only thing you can do—and you and
Margery can look again for the map to-morrow. We
can’t afford to take chances—we’ve had news from
Pengally—he hopes to strike gold any day. If luck’s
with us, there’s a fortune in this.”
Till late that night, David sat up by candle-
light copying another map. Outside the wind was
howling and the storm raging—first signs of the
approaching winter. He took the map to his father
who was packing a haversack.
“Thank you, my boy,” said Mr. Pym. “No—don’t
give it to me —I want you to keep it yourself.”
“What ? I’m to have it ?”
“Yes, there may be complications about this trip.
I believe another party suspects us, and is setting
out for the same district. No one would suspect a
lad of your age to have a copy —and one must remain
in Melbourne.”
David folded it thoughtfully. He decided to stuff
it behind the binding of one of his bridge-building
books, and keep it in his box.
When he appeared at breakfast the next morning,


he and Margery were told his father and uncle had
left in the wagon at five that morning, and would
be away some weeks—perhaps months. A neighbour-
ing fellow was engaged to do the farm-work, but the
children lent a hand, and the next day passed busily.
The following morning Mrs, Pym remembered the
mail-ship to England was sailing that day, and she
had letters which must go by it. As it took some
months for the mail to reach England, and the ships
were not frequent, she was anxious for her letters
not to miss that ship.
“Let Margery and I take them in for you,” suggested
David. “I can manage the horse and trap.”
“Why, a splendid idea—you can start at once,”
smiled his mother, and half an hour later the two
children were on their way to the town, with the
letters and a long grocery list stowed in David’s
pocket.
“Wonder what Uncle and Papa are doing now,”
mused the boy, idly flicking the whip across Trixie’s
broad back. “They should have arrived at Pengally’s
hut by now—barring accidents.”
“Why—how far is it ?” inquired his sister.
“About eighty miles. Rough country though—all
hills and gullies, and the land mostly uncleared.”
“I hope they won’t be attacked by blacks.”
“Not much danger of that. Their chief worry is
the rival search party.”
“But hundreds of men are searching for gold now—


you can’t help that. I hope Papa is first to find it
all the same.”
“Stands a good chance. Pengally is an old hand
at mining. He is certain there is gold in those ranges.
But—hey, Trixie, no slacking now —gee up !” and
whipping the horse to a brisk trot, they soon crossed
the bridge, turned into Collins Street wdiere the Post
Office was. They posted their letters, bought a copy
of the Argus , then proceeded to the store for the
provisions. They had to wait some time. The keeper
was serving three men who were selecting axes, picks
and other implements.
“Maybe they’re after gold too,” whispered David
as they tramped out at last. The storeman came over
to serve the two children. They bought bacon,
potatoes, tea and other groceries which were stowed
in sacks.
“It’s a good weight—l’ll take it out to your cart,”
the storekeeper said. While stacking the goods under
the seat, his practised eye noticed that Trixie w r as
casting a shoe.
“Better take her to the smith’s and get it fixed
up, or you’ll strike trouble,” he advised.
“Perhaps that’s why Trixie would go at a slow
trot,” decided Margery. “Is the smith’s shop far
from here, Mr. Giles ?”
“No, Miss —just up the hill—you can’t miss it.”
“I know the place,” David put in. “Come on,Marg.”
And they waved a good-bye to the storekeeper.


The smith, who was shoeing horses for earlier
customers, asked the children to take a seat outside
in the shade and wait. They soon saw the previous
arrivals were the three men who had been buying
provisions at the store.
“That smith’s taking the dickens of a while with
the shoes,” grumbled one as they had another look
in at the door. “Captain Stevens will be at the
Junction with the wagon before us at this rate.”
“Aye,” muttered a second—“and I for one don’t
want to cross the Captain’s path, I’m willing to do
as he says since he’s paying us well, but he’d be a
nasty one to quarrel with. Tim Jenkins is not getting
in his black books if he can help it.”
Margery and David overheard every word that was
being said.
“Pheww!” observed David softly. “The plot
thickens—Captain Stevens must be after gold too !”
“We don’t want to miss him neither. We’ve got
to get a look at the map,” continued the first fellow.
Margery suddenly went pale. She strained her ears,
but could not catch another word the men said. They
had gone back inside to the smithy. Quickly she
turned to her brother.
“Come this way,” she commanded, and directly
they were out of ear-shot she continued : “David,
why didn’t we think of this before ?”
“Think of what ?”
“The map —the missing map. Don’t you see f


Jemima must have taken it. She’s given it to her
father, and that’s why he’s after gold too.”
“Yes, that must be it. Fools we were not to think
of it before. It’s simple as daylight. Jemima has
shown the map to her father. And he—he’s hired
these men to follow up Papa and Uncle James,
hoping they might strike gold first.”
“If only we could warn them,” said Margery
despairingly. “Could we get a note to them ?”
“Not in a month of Sundays. The country in those
ranges is uncleared except for a few huts and bush-
tracks. Hullo, there’s the smithy signalling now.
Trixie’s shoe must be fixed. It only needed a new
nail or two.”
On their way back to the smithy they were passed
by Captain Stevens’s three men, riding off at top
speed.
“There they go,” said David bitterly. “Racing to
get to Pengally’s Gully before Papa and Uncle James
—yet we can’t raise a finger to stop them. We can’t
enlist anyone’s help, because we’ve promised to keep
news of the expedition an absolute secret. Whatever
we do, that promise must not be broken.”
“Here’s an idea I” cried Margery. “Yes, it might
work. I —l don’t see why it shouldn’t.”
“Leave it till later then —the smith may hear.
We’ll pay him and get into the trap first.”
When they were on the road again, Margery
unfolded her reckless plan.


“David, you’ve a copy of the map with you now,
haven’t you ?”
“It’s here, in my pocket —I meant to hide it behind
a book, but I haven’t had the time yet.”
“You’ve got the map —good ! Then listen ; why
shouldn’t you and I go after Papa and Uncle James
too ? Someone has to warn them about Captain
Stevens. We’ve got the horse and cart, and I’ve got
a little money. We’ve provisions, too.”
Her brother stared thoughtfully down the road.
Yes, why not ? Why shouldn’t they go ? It was a
risk certainly—but for what a prize ! Captain Stevens
could not be let to beat their father now. When
others knew the circumstances they would applaud
their decision—he was sure of it.
“Yes, Marg—we’ll do it—we’ll go ! It’s the only
way. We’ll follow to Pengally’s hut. But wait—what
about Mama ? We’ll have to let her know about this
somehow.”
Margery, always the more reckless of the two,
found a solution to that problem. “We’ll send her
a note,” she stated. “Where’s some paper —haven’t
you some in your pocket ?”
“Yes, and a pencil too. You write it while I see
if I have some money too.”
Margery scribbled off a note telling her mother they
had some important news for Mr, Pym, and were
both going north to try and deliver it to him.
“She’ll have to get it this afternoon,” she reflected.


“Hullo, if this isn’t luck. There’s a boy from one of
the farms near ours. I’ll give him sixpence to deliver
it. How will that do ?”
“The very thing,” answered her brother with relief.
He had felt conscious-stricken about going off like
this without telling his mother, but if a letter were
delivered that day, it would save her anxiety, and
they could send further news later.
He went to the boy, handed him the note, and made
him promise to deliver it within a few hours.
“Hurray ! —that’s that,” cheered Margery, flushed
and excited at the prospect of the adventure. “Now,
come on, David. Whip Trixie up, and off we’ll go.
Before we’re finished, Jemima’s father will learn
underhand methods don’t always pay,”
“Not so fast,” cautioned her brother. “First we
must decide our route. Whoa, Trix ! We’ll stop
under this tree and study the map.”
He took the precious document from his pocket,
spreading it out over his knee.
“This map gives the main route to Pengally’s
holding in the mountains. He’s a shepherd. He came
to Australia as a convict—it’s only a few years since
he got his pardon from Port Arthur. Papa said the
harsh convict life slightly turned his brain. That’s
why he decided to live in the mountains as a hermit.”
“How did we come to know him ?”
“Uncle James once did him a good turn. He went
to Captain Stevens first when he made the discovery.


But the Captain laughed at him, and said it was a
put-up job. So he approached Uncle James. He used
to be a miner in Cornwall. He’s positive they’ll strike
gold in large quantities—the thing is, can we get the
news about the rivals to him in time ? The first
prospector taking proofs to the Governor gets the
reward.”
“Captain Stevens’s men have the heavy imple-
ments to take—they’ll go by wagon, as Papa did.
Our speed will be much quicker,” Margery reasoned.
“We’re lucky to have had rain, so there’ll be feed
for Trixie,” David continued. “Yes, we’ve every
chance of beating them. Now, to go back to the map.
We follow the main road straight north-west. It’s
clear going for to-day, at least. As for tea, we’ll have
to build a fire somewhere. Are you ready ? We’ll
start off.”
He whipped up Trixie, and the two set off as
casually as if they had been going a mere five miles,
instead of seventy-five through bush country of which
they knew absolutely nothing. The road soon became
uneven and plentifully sprinkled with stones, but the
children hardly noticed the bumps, for every turn of
the road brought fresh interest.
At first the countryside mostly was cleared, and
the pleasant undulating hills were ploughed for crops
or sown with grass for sheep and cows. Some of the
tiny houses were of bluestone, others ramshackle huts
not much better than blackfellows’ mia-mias. Here


and there could be seen the canvas tents of new-
comers, and they heard the ringing of axes and crash
of falling trees where pioneers worked clearing fresh
ground. They drove on till sunset.
“Captain Stevens’s men must have come this way —
but there’s no sign of them on ahead—though these
wagon-tracks may be theirs,” remarked David
thoughtfully. “We’ll push on a few more miles,
then make a camp for the night and light our
fire.”
“We’ve all these sacks to wrap ourselves in—do
you think it will be cold ?”
David looked up at the cloudless sky. The night
would be clear and frosty. The quickly-setting sun
cast a fiery glow on the lonely bush. Near by an owl
hooted eerily, and from the distance came the sharp
bark of a fox or dingo.
Trixie was tired now, but they coaxed her into a
trot and hurried on down the rough road, looking
for a sheltered spot to camp. Rounding a corner,
they saw a pin-point of light glowing ahead.
“Pheww !” observed David. “Wonder if it’s Captain
Stevens’s crowd. We don’t want them to discover
we’re following them on any account.”
“Do you think we might be taken prisoner ?”
“Wouldn’t put it past them. We’d better turn
back and camp on the other side of the gully there.”
Jumping from his seat to the road, he led the tired
horse back by hand.


They found a good spot where the grass grew
thickly and plentifully. Trixie was hobbled as a
caution, then tethered to an old tree and allowed to
eat her fill.
David gathered armfuls of wood, and within a few
minutes they had a fire blazing merrily.
“This is much better,” said Margery, feeling far
more cheerful now the fire was lit. She began peeling
some of the potatoes they had bought from the store
that afternoon. An old billy was always kept in the
cart, and David took it and made his way to a near-by
creek for w'ater.
By now, the last remnants of light were deepening
into a mysterious darkness. The stars were clear and
bright, but there was no moon, and as David had
predicted, the wind was blowing up strongly. It
sidled through the trees with a weird rustling which
caused Margery to shiver and draw closer to the
blaze. Near by she could hear the reassuring sound of
Trixie cropping at the grass, and knew any minute
David would return from the creek. Time passed
slowly. All the potatoes were peeled, and she had the
parcel of bacon spread out by the fire. Still David
did not return. Her heart thumped violently. Where
could he be ?
A faint rustling and then heavier crashing began
in the bush on the farther side of the clearing. What
could it be ? Not David, for he had gone in the exact
opposite direction. It was nearer now—as though


some wild creature were lumbering through the bush
towards her.
Pulling herself together, she snatched up a thick
stick and stood ready.
“Who’s there ?” she demanded.
“That you, Marg ? Thank goodness ! Aha, yes, I
can see the fire now,” said a familiar voice. A gasp
of relief left her lips.
“David—it’s you ! Oh, I thought it was an animal.
I did get a fright.”
She stood grasping her stick, half-laughing, half-
crying, as the boy crashed through the tangled scrub
into the clearing. As he emerged from the darkness
into the circle of firelight she saw his suit was torn
and stained, and his face and arms were covered with
scratches.
“I thought Pd never get here,” said the boy. “I
lost my way, and couldn’t strike the road or get back
to the creek. I must have gone round in circles. Still
got the billy though,” he added with the ghost of a
smile. “Spilt some of the water, but there’s still
enough for a drop of tea.”
“We’ll boil it at once,” said his sister, sensibly
realizing it was needed badly. “However did you
come to get lost ? I thought the creek was only a
hundred yards away.”
“So it is—but when I got down there I found I
couldn’t get to the water for brambles and under-
growth. I followed the creek for a while. Then I


heard voices—l think it was Captain Stevens’s men !”
“What ! Near as that ?”
“This road winds in a horse-shoe bend. Although
it seemed a long way in the cart, actually their camp
is only on the other side of the creek, I knew they
mustn’t discover me at any price, so I didn’t risk
returning the way I’d come. I decided to cut back
through the bush, but lost my way. Anyway, here
I am, and they didn’t see me, I hope—that’s the main
thing.”
“But we’re not past them yet,” replied Margery.
“We’ll have to think up some plan, David.”
“I’m too tired to worry about that now —the
morning will do,” said David, helping himself to a
piece of bread. “Let’s cook the bacon, turn in, and
plan a campaign in the morning.”
“A good idea,” answered Margery, and within an
hour they were cosily wrapped in the bags and sacks,
sleeping as soundly as they would have in their beds
on the farm.


CHAPTER IV
ON THE BULLOCK TRACK
The young adventurers opened their eyes next day
to a cold frosty dawn with great drops of dew
glistening from every leaf-tip.
Peeping out from her makeshift but cosy bed,
Margery saw the sun already was breaking through,
making the melting frost sparkle like diamonds. The
birds had been up some time. She could hear them
in the branches squabbling and squawking over their
food. 00-o-oh ! a drop of cold water from a branch
above fell splash on her forehead, making her realize
her entire face was wet and cold. Her nose felt frozen.
She touched it gingerly to see if it were still all
there, then called out to David. “How did you
sleep ?” she asked.
“Right enough, except for the ground which got
frightfully hard over here—and I would keep rolling
on to stones.”
Margery ran to the creek to wash in the clear
sparkling water. Ice-cold it was, but it made her
cheeks tingle, and after a breakfast of bread, more
bacon and potatoes roasted in the coals, and billy
tea, she felt in the best of moods.
“What an adventure !” she laughed. “Imagine
58


what Grandma in England would say if she could see
me now, rumpled like this, and hear I’d slept in bags
out in the bush.”
“She’d faint on the spot,” grinned the boy, and
got up to take the hobbles off Trixie and harness
her to the cart. He could not decide whether to set
off at this early hour or wait for a while.
“I’d feel easier if I knew what Captain Stevens’s
gang is about. We don’t want them to see us —that
would be fatal. They might recognize us, and stop us.”
“But we can’t afford to let them get too far ahead,”
interposed Margery. “Couldn’t we disguise ourselves
by wrapping the bags round us ? I can leave my
bonnet off and tie this red hanky round my hair,
and you wear that old cap under the seat of the cart.
It’s a risk, but so is everything we do.”
David held back, but finally, as usual, yielded, and
they set off looking like very dishevelled gipsies.
Trixie pranced along in high spirits, for the sun
was now shining brightly, giving promise of fine clear
weather for the day. There were no bridges over
the creeks, and David had to take off his boots and
guide the horse across the swiftly-running streams
himself. They passed the remains of a fire and make-
shift camp, proving Captain Stevens’s men were well
ahead.
“So far, so good,” stated David. “But this track’s
getting worse and worse. Better consult our map and
see where we are.” He pointed to a large cross.


“That’s a stopping-place, and we can’t be far from it.
We’ll make for it, and maybe get news of Papa,”
“But what about Captain Stevens’s men ? What
if they pull in first f”
“We must pass them before they get there,” was
the grim rejoinder, and, picking the reins up, the boy
persuaded Trixie to set off at a sharp trot. They
rode at this pace for three miles but still could see
no sign of Captain Stevens’s men, except for their
wagon-track.
“They must have started at dawn,” observed
Margery. “From what we overheard at the black-
smith’s, they had strict orders to reach Pengally’s
Gully at top speed. If they don’t, Papa may strike
gold and hand the report in before they get there.”
She bent suddenly forward, shading her eyes with
her hand.
“Look, David, what’s that ahead ? See, that cloud
of dust up the next hill,”
“Pheww ! I believe it’s them all right. They’re a
mile ahead at least. We’ve come about three. We
can just about pass them before they reach that
farm —if we’re lucky.”
“You truly think we can do it ?”
“We’ve at least a chance. Come on, Trixie, go your
hardest.”
The gallant little mare seemed to sense the impor-
tance of the occasion as if by magic, and pricking
back her ears went forward at top speed. The gum-


trees seemed to fly by, and the cart bumped and
rattled over the pot-holes with a violence strong
enough to jerk a wheel off. As they plunged forward,
cockatoos fled screaming from their trees, and once
they heard a dramatic crash, and saw an old man
kangaroo making off through the bush like lightning.
“Mind ! Slow down—we’re coming to a creek,”
Margery cautioned.
“But it isn’t deep—it’s quite shallow, and we can
trust Trixie,” her brother returned. The horse
plunged into the stream, the cart jogged and rattled
over rough boulders, with the passengers none the
worse except for splashed clothes. They raced on,
then eased the panting horse to a trot. Each minute
brought them nearer to their rivals, whom they now
could see plainly.
Their wagon looked to be a cumbersome vehicle
drawn by two strong horses. David was confident
they would catch and pass it in a matter of minutes.
As they drew alongside, the two children’s hearts
began thumping madly. Would Captain Stevens’s
men suspect anything and stop to question them,
or would they simply rattle past with a wave of the
hand and a bushman’s casual “Good day, mates” ?
Margery pulled the handkerchief farther across her
face, and hoped for the best.
Trixie, blissfully unaware of the approaching crisis,
trotted calmly along the road till the two vehicles
were about level.


“What an enormous wagon ! —no wonder we caught
up to it,” whispered David to Margery.
The little girl peeped cautiously round the hand-
kerchief she had tied to her head in case she would
be recognized. It was a big four-wheeler with three
or four men in it. One of them, a great black-bearded
man, waved a pipe to the two children, and called
out some greeting she didn’t catch.
David waved back, shouting a loud “Good morning”
in the gruffest voice he could muster, after which
they trotted briskly on. To all outward appearances
perfectly calm, but inwardly quaking like jellies.
“Do you think they suspect ?” whispered Margery.
“Don’t think so—but you can never tell. What-
ever you do, don’t look round—keep calm till we
round the next bend.”
Actually it took Trixie but two minutes to pass
the stretch of forest and take them round that curve
in the road, but to Margery and David it seemed
more like an hour. Behind them, they could hear
the squeaky rattle of the four-wheeled wagon, and
odd wafts of laughter from one or other of the men.
Surely they must think it strange for two youngsters
to be travelling that bullock track in a cart obviously
not meant for such lengthy journeys. Round the
bend they went, and for the time being were out of
sight.
“I’ve never been through such an ordeal,” gasped
Margery, who was trembling like a leaf.


“We’re far from out of the wood yet,” responded
her brother grimly. “The question is, can we get
far enough ahead to reach this farmhouse without
them seeing what we’re doing ? I grant you they
don’t seem to suspect so far, but we want to have
as little to do with these fellows as possible.”
“Yes, the farther we get away from them the
better,” agreed Margery fervently.
“Come on, Trix —show us what you can do,”
shouted David at that. He cracked his whip. The
plucky little mare responded to the challenge, and
leaping forward carried them down the track at
fastest gallop. Mile after mile they covered, yet still
could see no sign of the all-important farmhouse.
“The road winds a lot—we must take that into
account,” David said, and on they went.
As the morning wore on, the sun blazed down
hotter and hotter. The children had not had water
since early that morning, and in their excitement
had forgotten to bring a water-bottle with them.
Ahead, and on every side, great paddocks seemed
to stretch for miles without any sign of a creek.
Margery’s throat was getting dry and parched, and
Trixie, too, was showing signs of wear.
“We’ll make for that clump of trees ahead,” said
David. “Looks to me as though we might find water
there.”
On they went through country which seemed
strangely silent despite the screaming of the cockatoos


and galahs and warbling songs of a thousand magpies.
Once they saw some black wallabies, and later some
lizards basking in the sun with all thought of the
dawn’s frost forgotten, but in the main the journey
was uneventful, save for the knowledge the rival
gang was following relentlessly. As they approached
the clump of trees, they caught a glimpse of a house
and sheds.
“Hurray ! We’re here, Marg!” shouted David.
“This must be the farm marked on the map.”
It proved to be a roomy wooden house surrounded
by sheds, huts and well-fenced home paddocks.
When nearly to it, they heard a surprised uneasy
whinny, and a fine black horse cantered down the
paddock to meet them.
“Hurray ! It’s Prince —Uncle’s horse,” shouted
David. “That means he must have been here —and
perhaps still is here. What luck—what wonderful
luck !” And he scrambled from the cart to the gate,
tossing his cap in the air, and literally jumping with
joy. They made their way up the path, and someone
came hurrying from the house to bid them welcome.
It was only then Margery realized what a queer-
looking pair they must be. She glanced at David.
To help in his disguise he had taken off his own coat
and hat, and was clad in a tailored jacket many
sizes too big for him, with an old cap stuck rakishly
on his tousled hair.
“I must look worse still,” she thought, and quickly


whipped off the old sack which she had wrapped
shawl-fashion round her shoulders to her fashionable
dress. She also just had time to unwind the hand-
kerchief she had pulled over her curls to heighten
the disguise.
The squatter’s wife was astounded when she saw
how youthful the travellers were. At first David was
not too anxious to explain the purpose of their
journey because he didn’t know whether the squatter
would prove friend or foe.
“Good morning,” he said, so casually one almost
would think he was merely calling on friends back
in Melbourne. “My sister and I are anxious to catch
up with Mr. Everett and Mr, Pym’s party bound for
the mountains. Could you tell me, please, if you’ve
seen anything of them—or if they stopped here on
this farm ?”
Mrs. Graham darted a suspicious glance at the two
newcomers. “Stay here—l’ll ask my husband,” she
replied shortly, and without asking them to come in,
she walked quickly off, leaving them to cool their
heels on the veranda.
“There seems some mystery about this,” whispered
David. “Why did she look at us so queerly—and
why doesn’t she take us inside ?”
“I’d give anything for a drink,” said poor Margery.
She broke a spray of gum-leaves from a near-by tree,
and fanned herself violently with each hand in an
endeavour to keep cool.


“I wonder why she’s keeping back the truth,
reflected David half to himself. “We know Papa and
Uncle James have been here because there are their
horses in the paddock. Probably Rajah and Prince
have been left here, and the party has hired out
horses to take them up the mountains —ones more
suited for it.”
“Ss-s-s-sh !” broke in Margery suddenly. “Listen !
that voice seems familiar to me. Yes, I’m sure
listen !”
“My hat !” answered her brother. “Can it be —
yes, it is—it’s Uncle James.”
“It is—l’m sure of it !” cried Margery joyfully,
and quite forgetting her manners poked her head
inside to see if it could really be true.
There sat her uncle on a couch, pufiing at his pipe.
One foot was bandaged, and a crutch stood against
the wall.
“Uncle —whatever’s happened to you ?” she gasped.
At the sound of her voice the man turned his head
quickly, and to his utter astonishment saw the curly
head of his niece Margery. She gazed at him wide-
eyed from between the curtains of the window. No
longer was she the prim, demure little Miss who
rather disdainfully had stepped off the sailing ship
Dolphin a few months back, but a dirty, dishevelled
lass with curls tangled, and a hot flushed face heavily
smudged with grime. Blinking rapidly, he passed a
hand over his eyes to see if this was all some dream,
66


but no, he was wide awake, and there before him was
his niece who by rights should be miles away back
in Prahran.
“Ye gods and little fishes !” cried the astonished
man. “What madcap plan is this ? Where did you
come from, Margery ? What in the name of fortune
are you doing here ?”
“Ask David ! He knows,” answered his niece,
beginning to feel slightly uncomfortable about the
whole escapade.
“David, too ! What next ! Come in, both of you,
and give an account of yourselves. But wait, you’re
not bringers of bad news, I trust. Everyone on the
farm well ?”
“Yes, as far as I know. Here’s David now—do
you mind if we crawl in through the window ?”
If Margery’s English Grandmama had been horrified
at the little girl’s madcap pranks in her garden, she
would have been doubly shocked had she seen her
clambering through the wooden window of the
squatter’s house, and present herself grubby and
dishevelled before the astonished Uncle James.
“Who gave you permission to follow your Father
and I in this fashion ?” demanded Mr, Everett. “Why
did you do this ?”
“We had to, Uncle,” burst out David. “You see,”
he swallowed hard, “You know that map of Pengally’s
Gully—the one I lost ?”
The map—yes. Not so loud, boy—walls have
67


ears remember,” cautioned his uncle, now all atten-
tion.
“By chance, we found that somehow it has got into
the hands of Captain Stevens. So you see, we simply
had to warn you. It was my fault the map was lost.
We could only think of one way to let you know
about it, so we followed you up here. And well,
here we are !”
There was a trace of admiration in the elder man’s
voice as he replied. “So that’s it ! Stevens has the
missing map, eh ? And you two youngsters travelled
all this way to let us know. Plucky of you, but do
you realize the dangers you exposed yourselves to ?
Good heavens, a hundred and one things might have
happened on that lonely road.”
“We know—and that’s not all our story,” inter-
rupted Margery. “At a blacksmith’s shop we over-
heard a gang of men saying Captain Stevens had
hired them for a rival prospecting party. Evidently
he is paying them to search for gold in Pengally’s
Gully. Their wagon is on its way now —we passed
it a few miles back.”
“That’s news, indeed. I wish your Father could
hear this. He is a day’s journey ahead. I sprained
my ankle, and had to lay up for a while.”
“Has Papa got the wagon ?” asked David. “I
notice our horses Rajah and Prince out in the paddock,
there.”
“They’ve got rougher horses, ones that will stand


up to the mountains better. Sprained ankle, or not,
I’ll have to make straight off and warn them of
this !”
He regarded the children thoughtfully.
“But what in the name of fortune can I do with
you youngsters ?”
Margery wheeled round, her face flushed and eager.
“Why—can’t we go with you ?”
Mr. Everett stared at his niece in utter amazement.
“You go with us to the mountains ! Absurd !
Utterly ridiculous ! A chit of a girl like you roughing
it outback.”
“Someone has to start these things,” replied
Margery seriously. “If gold is found in Victoria,
there will be hundreds of girls going north—l would
be a great help. I could cook and mend.”
Uncle James scratched his head thoughtfully.
“And what, may I ask, would your dear Mama
think of this ?”
“She didn’t like the thought of us coming to the
colonies at all,” the little girl replied, with engaging
frankness. “But she’s got used to it, so I suppose
she wouldn’t mind about this, when she hears the true
story.”
“And I’ve been studying bridges and building—l
could be useful, too,” her brother put in.
“If David goes you couldn’t very well send me
home—who would take me ?” pleaded Margery,
The uncle gave a short resigned laugh. “That’s


true enough. Who would ? All right, I suppose
there’s nothing for it—somehow I must send word
to your Mother explaining this madcap scheme as
best I can. I dare say she’ll never forgive me, all
the same.”
Margery laughed merrily, but David was in no
mood for joking.
“Uncle James, this squatter and his wife—are
they to be trusted ? Do they know why you and
Papa are off to the mountains ?”
“I suppose so —we’re by no means the first party
to be setting out after gold from here.”
“Mrs. Graham acted very queerly when we arrived.
Don’t trust her too far.”
“Ssss,” said Margery. “Someone’s coming now.”
Almost as she spoke the door opened, and Mrs.
Graham came in, followed by the squatter himself
—a wiry fellow with dark beady eyes.
“H’m . . . your visitors have walked in of their
own accord,” observed Mrs. Graham tartly.
“Yes, and they’ve come to take me farther on my
way —I won’t need to stay here any more.”
“How did they learn you were here ?” demanded
the woman suspiciously.
“These things get about—it’s surprising how news
travels,” was the airy reply. “Graham, if you don’t
mind, I’ll leave Prince and Rajah in your custody
till I come down this way again. Now, how much do
I owe you ?” he added, turning to Mrs. Graham.


When the accounts were settled, and the children
had eaten a midday lunch, they started off on the
second lap of the journey. Mr. Everett’s ankle was
by no means better, but with David’s help he got
into the cart. Waving good-bye to Mr. and Mrs.
Graham, the lad whipped Trixie up, and they set off
for Part Two of their eventful journey to Pengally’s
Gully. Margery was commissioned to look to see if
Captain Stevens’s men were in sight —but no, so far
there was no sight of their wagon.


CHAPTER V
CAPTAIN LIGHTNING
The party continued at a brisk pace towards the
Great Dividing Range, but did not see any further
sign of Captain Stevens’s men.
Again Margery turned in her seat and, shading her
eyes from the sun’s glare, stared down the dusty track.
At this stage of the journey they were climbing
steadily, and could look back along their route for
some distance. But still there was no sign of Captain
Stevens’s men, nothing but the unearthly stillness of
the great grassy plains that lay circled in the shadow
of the mountains where the Cornishman and their
father searched feverishly for gold.
“No sign of them,” she reported.
“It’s peculiar. How far were you from Graham’s
place when you passed these men ?” reflected Uncle
James.
“About three miles.”
“They can’t be far behind, at that rate. Unless
they’ve had a breakdown or are stopping at Graham’s
for a meal.”
“It’s hardly likely men who’re used to roughing
it would do that,” David objected, “ ’Specially when
time is precious,”
“I shouldn’t think so, myself. A breakdown seems


Captain Lightning
the only likely theory. Unless one of their horses is
gone lame.”
“Perhaps they’ve taken a short cut ?” Margery
suggested.
They considered this, but as the track they were
following was the main one, and even it had shrunk
to a path riddled with ruts and pot-holes, it seemed
hardly likely there would be another wide enough for
their rivals’ cumbersome wagon.
“I can’t make head nor tail of the business at all,”
said Uncle James. “The only thing we can do is
make for Pengally’s Gully at top speed.”
“But can Trixie stand the journey—she seems to
be tiring ?”
“Farther on, at the foot of the mountains, we will
hire pack-horses, and leave the cart behind. Get
your map out, David, and see how far to the next
hut. We should be nearing it now.”
The country was now changing from grassy paddock
sparsely scattered with gums to uncleared forest, and
ahead loomed the blue ranges, mysterious and
unexplored. They travelled quickly on, crossing a
mountain creek bubbling clear crystal over boulders
worn smooth as polished marble. Through the tree-
ferns’ lacy screen Margery caught glimpses of glades
carpeted with thick green moss and maidenhair.
They stopped to give Trixie a drink. She was tiring
rapidly.
“I’ll be glad when we reach the hut,” said David.


They came on it within the next hour. It was at
Ironbark Creek, one of the last outposts along the
bullock track to the ranges. A surly-faced man
served them with bread and cheese and glasses of
foaming milk. On the door they saw a notice tacked
up. David strolled over to it. It was a statement
saying a man known as Captain Lightning, who was
wanted by Her Majesty’s Government, was hiding in
the district. He lived by raiding the homes of squatters
and settlers. A reward was offered for any information
leading to his arrest, and any suspected of being
his accomplices were to be held for official question-
ing.
They asked the man at the hut about Captain
Lightning, but he told them very little. The popular
story was that the bushranger and his men were con-
victs who had escaped from New South Wales while
working on bridges in the Blue Mountain district.
For months, even years, they had lived like black-
fellows in the wildest bush country, gradually making
their way dowm along the Australian Alps and line
of mountains to these ranges. No one knew wffiere
or how they lived, and rumour also had it they never
robbed the poor, but took only from the wealthy
squatters.
“I hope we don’t meet this desperate character,”
smiled Uncle James, as they climbed into the cart
again. The man at the hut had told they could get a
fresh horse from a squatter at the foot of the mountain,


Captain Lightning
and he was anxious to reach the place before nightfall.
The three rode on in silence. The ranges were only
a few miles ahead now, and the country becoming
wilder. They had to travel slower for Trixie’s sake.
Poor little horse. Strong and sturdy as she was, the
long trek through the bush had told on her severely
—and she also, for the past two days, had missed
eating the nutritious hay and oats she loved so
well.
Margery, who was stiff and tired, was glad to get
down and walk with David beside the cart up the
steeper parts. The sunset was vividly beautiful, with
the sky glowing like bright silk. They were frightened
they had lost their way, feeling sure the squatter’s
house should be in sight now.
Every nerve on the alert, Margery lifted her head
quickly. Could she be dreaming ? No, there it was
again—the sound of horses galloping at top speed
towards them. Who could they be ? Captain Stevens’s
men, perhaps. There was a gay shout, a ringing
“At them, lads.” Rounding the corner came four
horsemen at full speed. She saw her uncle fumble for
his revolver, but the shadows were against him.
Margery saw all four of the stranger horsemen had
kerchiefs tied across their faces.
“We’re out of the frying-pan into the fire,” she
thought. “It’s Captain Lightning.”
The leader, mounted on a magnificent black horse,
rode up to their uncle. She saw Mr. Everett’s hands


go over his head. Another man was beckoned to
search through his pockets.
“David, what about the map ?” she whispered to
her brother. “Have you got it, or is it still with
Uncle ?”
“He has it—he wanted to study it—l gave it to
him this afternoon. We must do something, we can’t
let yet another person get a copy of the map.”
“Come on, then,” cried the dauntless girl. “We’ll
spring on them from the back.” And both children
flung themselves at Captain Lightning with all their
might. The fellow received a shock which caused his
finger involuntarily to pull the trigger of his revolver.
It went off with a sudden and shattering explosion.
“Uncle —are you hurt ?” cried Margery in despair.
Mercifully, the shot had gone yards above his head,
merely shaking a few leaves from the gums in the
background.
The bushranger seemed even more startled by the
incident than the children. He made no attempt to
overcome them, but stood staring at Margery in
puzzled fashion. His tall, slightly stooping figure
seemed strangely familiar to the little girl, but she
could not recall why. The man was wearing a dark
handkerchief over his face, and his intensely bright
eyes stared at her from the slits cut for them in the
black cloth. David, too, was looking at him in a
puzzled fashion.
With a queer impulsive gesture Captain Lightning
76


Captain Lightning
pulled the mask from his face. The girl and boy
caught their breath. The man’s profile was clearly
outlined against the deepening twilight. It was
William O’Neill, the suspected man they had helped
escape from arrest when first they came to Melbourne.
William O’Neill! Captain Lightning ! They were
one and the same. There were the same regular
features, bright, deep-set eyes, and slightly crooked
mouth with an upward twist on the left cheek—the
relic of some old wound. Margery could see now why
he tied the handkerchief over his face when he went
abroad. It would be fatal for anyone to catch sight
of that twisted mouth—once it was seen he could be
identified again at once.
“Well, do you think you’ll remember me when
you give the military report ?” a mocking voice
remarked.
Still thunderstruck, the children were unable to
utter a word.
“David—Margery—what is the meaning of this ?
Who is this man ?” demanded their uncle, still in the
grip of the other aggressor.
David pulled his scattered wits together.
“He’s very like someone we’ve met before. The
man O’Neill, who escaped from the Dolphin—
you remember the incident ?”
Captain Lightning placed a hand on the lad’s
shoulder.
“Your guess is right. I am William O’Neill. I


recognized you and your curly-headed sister the
moment I saw you. You’re the two youngsters whose
friendship I will never forget. Now it’s my turn to
befriend you —even though I am outlawed as a
dangerous bushranger —a criminal wanted by the
law” —the left-hand side of his mouth twisted to a
cynical smile.
“Things are not solved as easily as that, O’Neill,”
broke in the infuriated Mr. Everett.
“Not that name. William O’Neill is dead. He died
when I left that boat in Port Phillip. Now you
must think of me as Captain Lightning —an outlaw
and fugitive from justice.”
“From the law, perhaps —but not from justice,”
Margery quickly interposed.
“At least one person has faith in me.”
“Two,” she corrected. “David, also,”
“I’m honoured,” replied the bushranger, with a
slightly mocking bow, “But it is now late, you
cannot travel far before darkness falls —your horse,
too, is tired. You must come to my camp.”
Mr. Everett shrugged his shoulders. It was a
fantastic offer, but what else could they do but
accept ?
“No harm will come to you,” stated Lightning,
reading the other’s thoughts. “We will have to leave
your cart here, but the horse can come. The gentle-
man may ride it —the boy can go with one of my
men. Miss Margery will ride with me.”


Captain Lightning
He lifted her on to the black stallion, and they
plunged into the bush.
The moon was now up. It glowed through the
trees, incredibly large and yellow, making everything
seem like a scene from some fairy-tale. Once Margery
saw the silhouette of a fat native bear against it, a
queer dumpy figure with two large ears and hunched-
up body. She thought she saw an owl through the
trees, and could hear the eerie flapping of its powerful
wings—or was it the wind among the strips of bark
which hung dejectedly from the sugar-gums ? They
were threading their way uphill. Margery understood
now why they had been forced to leave their cart
abandoned on the road. It would never fight through.
Besides, she suspected the bushrangers were not
keen to leave the tell-tale tracks of cartwheels in their
wake. She sank into a doze. She did not know how
many miles they had travelled, but awoke with a
start to find they had come to a sheltered valley,
evidently the bushranger’s mountain retreat. There
were more men here. They had roasted meat on a
glowing fire, and had ready a blackfellow’s damper
in the glowing embers. Food had never tasted so
delicious, and even the indignant Uncle James became
more genial as the meal proceeded. They had brought
their rugs and bags with them from the cart, and
soon were all peacefully sleeping round the fire, with
the bush forest for their walls, and their ceiling the
purply-black starlit sky. Only O’Neill could not


sleep. The encounter with Margery and David had
stirred up too many memories—memories which he
had hoped would be stamped out for ever by his
reckless bushranging life, but which he now realized
were as much a part of him as his ear or eye, and
would remain with him as long as life itself.


CHAPTER VI
IN THE RANGES
Morning dawned with frost on the grass and bracken,
and the sun breaking through long banks of whitish
cloud. The fire had burnt to a heap of scattered ashes.
Peeping out from her snug bed of bags and rugs,
Margery shivered, and drew back into the com-
forting warmth. She supposed it was still very early,
for no one else stirred. Curled up beside her, David
could have been taken for a pile of old sacks. Beyond
him came deep, regular snores, proving her Uncle
James, too, was still sleeping soundly.
The bushrangers were on the opposite side of the
fire. She wondered sleepily if they always slept in
the open, or had they some mountain hiding-place
where they enjoyed more comfort ? She dropped off
to sleep again, dreaming of a mountain cave with a
secret entrance between two dangerous cliffs. There
were warm rugs of wallaby skin on the floor, and
more skins thrown over beds of dry leaves and
bracken. She was making a stew of kangaroo meat
in an iron pot, and a blackfellow boy came in with a
handful of queer roots to put in it, and also offered
her some fat grubs with a pleased grin. At this, she
woke up with a scream, and sat bolt upright, to find


the sun shining brightly, and everyone in the camp
up except herself.
Magpies carolled gaily from the gum-trees, horses
champed the grass, and another fire had been built.
The green sappy wood made it crackle and hiss. One
of the men bent over the flames, stirring the content
of a black pot.
“Hungry, Miss ?” he asked, turning to the tousle-
haired Margery, who was sitting up staring at him,
with her rugs and sacks still tucked under her chin.
“Is it kangaroo stew ?” she asked, wide-eyed.
“Haw, haw ! Kangaroo stew ! Hear that, mates ?”
guffawed the swarthy fellow. “No such luck—just
plain porridge, but piping hot.”
To the hungry Margery, “plain porridge” sounded
particularly acceptable. She scrambled from her
coverings, and stood stamping her cold feet, and
blowing through her fingers. Her brown sprigged
frock with its crinoline skirt was more crumpled
than ever.
“One thing, it’s a dark colour, and won’t show the
dirt,” she thought, and smoothing down her hair,
decided to make for the creek to bathe her face and
hands. She felt better when she had splashed the
freshening, ice-cold water over her face and eyes and
dampened her curls down. She did not feel the least
like one who had been held up by dangerous bush-
rangers. Captain Lightning, she knew, would help
them reach Pengally’s Gully.


She raced back to the fireside to receive a large
helping of lumpy but satisfying porridge. After
breakfast, the chief of the bushrangers called Mr,
Everett to one side, and asked him to give his advice
about one of the horses. The injured man was still
only able to hobble along, but seemed in good spirits.
“This Lightning seems a thorough gentleman,”
he said to the others later. “He will take us a short
cut which he declares will shorten the remainder of
the journey by half. What’s more he’s offered to lend
us two horses, and will leave the wagon at a place
arranged.”
“But, Uncle —we can’t take the horses belonging
to these men,” David objected. “If they are recog-
nized, people will say we are in league with the
bushrangers, and the penalty for that offence is
severe.”
“H’m . . . there’s something in that,” pondered
the other. “These horses may have belonged to
near-by squatters. As you say if we’re seen with
them we may land in queer street.”
“Hey now —what’s the trouble here ?” broke in a
ringing voice. The three looked round quickly. It
was Lightning himself.
David explained their objection to riding the stolen
horses. To his amazement Lightning then offered
to lend his own black hunter ... a beautiful
horse with a white star on his forehead.
“He doesn’t come from these parts, I assure you,”


he laughed. “I call him ‘Midnight, 5 and sure he 5 s
the best horse here under the Southern Cross” —for
a moment he had slipped into the Irish brogue of his
childhood. His face softened as he stood thought-
fully stroking the horse 5 s quivering nose. He was a
lovely creature. Powerfully built, but with an air
of breeding making him seem infinitely superior to
the more stockily built rougher mounts of the other
men. Margery would have liked to learn how he
acquired Midnight.
“But, man, this horse is your most prized
possession, 55 expostulated Uncle James. “In the eyes
of the law you may be dubbed scoundrel and vagabond
—but as man to man I have no wish to accept such
a gift from you. 55
“I have no intention of handing Midnight over for
long, 55 was the polite rejoinder. “You will ride him
to the track. Push on for five miles and you 5 1l find a
small farm on the left-hand hill. Go in and ask for
Edgar Digby. The password is ‘No Retreat. 5 He will
keep Midnight and lend you one of his own mounts.
I won’t force you to make promises, I only ask you
to do this. And then —well, forget we ever met. 55
“I can’t guarantee to fill that part of the bargain —
but none shall hear of this. But we will return Mid-
night at all costs.”
Lightning made no offer to lead them back through
the tortuous gullies to the open track himself, but
when the time came for them to go, one of the other


men, the thick-set fellow who had made the porridge,
told them he and another would show them the way.
“Don’t take offence, Miss, but we’ll have to blind-
fold you,” he said. “Lightning’s orders say we ain’t
to let a soul see the way from this gully.”
They could make no objection to this, but meekly
allowed the men to tie cloths over their eyes. They
were blindly led from the bushrangers’ secret camp.
They seemed to ride on through the bush for hours.
They crossed and recrossed a swiftly-running creek,
then continued along the narrow track. Margery
could tell it was narrow for the wet leaves kept
brushing across her face, and the fronds of tree-
ferns tickled against her chin. She began amusing
herself trying to guess their location from the different
smells in the air. When they were in a gully she could
smell the damp pungent odours of the wet moss and
rotting logs. And when they mounted again to a
sunny slope there was the grass and the distinct
perfume of the drier earth and bracken. She began
to realize how very much there was about the bush
of which she knew nothing. How the blackfellows
can find their way in the pitch darkness, and the
animals sense the approach of a stranger by sniffing
at the air. She felt she would like to learn more about
this Australian country, and began listening for the
different calls of the bush-birds, and the buzzing of
innumerable insects. It seemed as though the
myriads of little creatures were one vast orchestra


harmonizing in a never-ending bushland symphony.
After they had jogged on for miles, the men reined
up the horses and leaping to the ground, lifted down
their blindfold charges, untying their bandages.
Margery opened her eyes, and blinked. The sun now
was shining brilliantly, and true to Lightning’s
promise they were again on a bullock track leading
to the mountains and Pengally’s Gully.
The bushrangers explained they now would be
well ahead of their rivals, and if they followed the
track, there was no possible chance of missing Edgar
Digby’s farm. Following the instructions, they
cantered along the track leading to the higher
mountains. But even L T ncle James frankly admitted
he was not sure of their location.
“This isn’t the road we were on yesterday—the
ranges are on the opposite side.”
“If you ask me,” pondered David, “these fellows
have brought us out on the other side of the valley.
As you say, those mountains were away to our left
yesterday. Now they seem to the right.”
“And the soil seems different,” put in Margery.
“Yesterday it was a reddy-brown. Here it’s lighter
and more gravelly.”
“I dare say this man Digby will throw more light
on the matter —I hope so. Hullo, we must be coming
to his place now —see the smoke ?”
“It may be some blackfellow’s smoke signal—
but I fancy it’s Digby’s farm,” observed their uncle


pressing his heels into Midnight’s flanks. The big
horse responded immediately, and quickened to a
steady gallop with Trixie following gamely behind.
Margery was riding pillion behind her uncle. The
wind was whipping her cheeks to red, and tossing
her curls into a tangled mop. She enjoyed every minute
of the ride. They forded a creek, then hardly slacken-
ing, climbed round the next hill. The little girl was
beginning to appreciate the value of Midnight. He
responded to the slightest pressure of foot or hand.
When he crossed the rocky, swiftly-running creek,
not once did he stumble, and he avoided every
pitfall with the instinctive knowledge of one knowing
the lay of the land perfectly. Small wonder Captain
Lightning loved this horse. She glanced back, and
had to laugh to see David plodding along on the
gallant but absolutely outclassed Trixie.
“Yes, there’s the farm —this must be Digby’s
place,” cried their Uncle James. It was a wooden
cottage surrounded by a scattered group of huts and
sheds. They could see a man ploughing. When he
saw the travellers, he hurried to open the slip-rails
and ask their business.
Margery noticed Midnight recognized Digby at
once. He sidled towards him, making as if to brush
his head against the man’s shoulder. Digby
pretended not to notice. Then her uncle was asking
where they could find Edgar Digby, and was told that
was easily done, as they now were talking to him.


Mr. Everett hesitated. The situation was a ticklish
one, and the other evidently was determined to give
him no lead. Tugging nervously at his whiskers, he
remarked :
“This horse Midnight—you know him ?”
Still on guard, the other replied : “Why, yes, sir—
You don’t see too many of his type in these ’ere parts.
Nor elsewhere in the colony, I’ll be bound.”
They could see he was fencing, thinking they might
be angling for information regarding the bushrangers.
“As you see, friend, we’re bound for the mountains,”
continued Uncle James. “The first part of our journey
was by cart, but the little mare couldn’t stand the
hills, so the—er—owner of Midnight kindly lent him
to me, telling us we could leave him with you. And he
said the password was ‘No Retreat’.”
Digby gave a meaning glance, and immediately
answered he would be pleased to supply a horse.
“Come to the back paddock and run your eye over
’em,” he invited. Midnight gazed after them, then
with a low whinny followed.
Edgar Digby led the way to a paddock where a
group of horses were grazing. After a brief discussion
he agreed to hire out a sturdy brown mare.
“You can’t go wrong with Brownie,” he asserted.
“She ain’t much to look at, but she’s a rare one for
the hills, and when it comes to mountains, that’s
the main thing.”
Mr. Everett tried to coax Brownie’s friendship


with a lump of sugar. She soon was nuzzling in his
pocket for more. Before they left Digby gave David’s
mount, Trixie, a good feed of oats, and taking Mid-
night by the rein, led him to a back stable, and
securely bolted him in. Margery noticed he had
chosen the most inconspicuous place as though wishing
to keep the big black horse as much as possible in
the background. No one mentioned Midnight again.
Digby gave no encouragement, and the others wanted
to keep faith with Lightning by forgetting about
him. But before they left, Mr. Everett felt he simply
had to say one thing.
“Should anyone come asking about us, you might
tell we had Trixie with us —but I’d make no mention
of Midnight. You simply hired Brownie to us, and
we pushed off. All clear ?”
The other nodded.
“There ain’t nothin’ to be gained by tellin’ too
much,” he agreed. “You can trust Edgar Digby to
keep his mouth shut. Should folks come pokin’
about for information I say as little as need be.”
“I’m with you there,” responded Mr. Everett,
and leaving it at that, set Margery on Brownie,
mounted himself, and set off along the last stage of
the journey to Pengally’s Gully.
According to Digby, their destination was now quite
near. By taking them through the valley, the bush-
ranger had brought them in a direct line to the gully,
instead of the roundabout way shown on their map.


They had cut off at least ten miles and were back on
the proper track. Digby had told them to keep
straight ahead. They would reach the mountains
by lunch-time, and should strike Pengally’s hut that
evening.
Despite the directions, they found the maze of hills
and gullies strangely bewildering. Luckily the day
was fine with no mist on the mountains, so they had
a clear view of the gap through which Digby said they
must go. Here they would strike a river. They must
follow it upstream for a mile, and would come to
some shepherds’ huts. These shepherds would in
turn direct them to Pengally. Digby told them their
rivals would have little hope of taking a wagon up
the mountains.
As the three travellers penetrated farther into the
mountain country, the track at times became so steep
they had to dismount and lead their horses on foot.
At one stage they came to a cliff of sheer rock with the
path only a few feet from a dangerous precipice.
One false step, and they would have gone hurtling
to certain death one hundred feet in the vallev
below. Peering over the edge, they saw the cliff
continued in a straight drop, then was lost in thick
forest sloping down to a creek which went winding
through the ferns, a narrow ribbon of silver. The
track followed the course of this creek for a mile,
then they came to a cleared sunny place where they
had lunch. They were at the mouth of the gap.


In the Ranges
They consulted the map again and decided that as
Digby had said they should reach the hut before sunset.
They rode steadily till late that afternoon, finally
coming through the gap to the wide river Digby had
mentioned. The sun was low in the west by now, and
the horses weary with the long climb.
“It’s exactly as he said,” cried Margery. “See, the
creek runs into a river—and, ah—there on the other
side are the huts of the shepherds he told us about.”
Reining their horses, they looked about them. The
valley was one of the loveliest spots they had seen.
The river rushed down the mountain over shining
pebbles worn smooth by the action of the water, and
on either side of it, the bank was fringed with ferns
gracefully trailing in the water. Where the creek
they had followed ran into the river, there was a
miniature waterfall, and here the fading sun caught
the flecks of foam, making them sparkle like tiny
jewels. The waterfall made a gurgling sound like
far-away music, and the birds, too, were chiming,
for they carol their sweetest at sundown.
“Let’s hurry,” David urged. “I want to tell Pengally
and Papa the news.”
“Not so fast, lad,” replied his uncle. “Don’t forget
those huts happen to be on the other bank of the
* 55
river.
“And we have to cross it —how on earth can we
do that ?” said David staring at the swiftly-running
stream in dismay.


“There must be some way across —we’ll ask these
men,” said his uncle, and cupping his hands round
his mouth, he coo-ed loudly.
“Hullo, they’ve heard—someone’s coming.”
“Coo-eee !” Once again their greetings rang through
the hills, and the next moment saw a man run forward.
“Hurray! They’re coming ! They’ve heard,”
cried Margery clapping her hands gleefully. The
shepherds hurried down the hill, eager to find out
who the newcomers to their lonely mountain huts
might be.
“Any place where we can cross the river ?” shouted
Uncle James. A bow-legged man pointed up the
valley.
“Up-stream about three hundred yards you’ll come
to a ford.”
They followed in the direction he pointed, and
discovered here that the river ran through a wide rocky
basin, and was spread out more than twice its usual
width, making an easy crossing.
“Mind the rocks—they’re slippery,” warned Uncle
James, as he carefully guided Brownie over the ford.
Both horses managed it without mishap. '
“Good day, sir—could you please tell me how far
it is to Pengally’s camp ?” Mr. Everett asked the bow-
legged man.
“To Pengally’s ! Don’t say you’re Everett, the chap
I was told to watch for ?”
“Yes, I’m Everett.”


“Then what are the young ’uns doin’ here ? How
did you get them tagged on to you ?”
Mr. Everett was about to explain when he changed
his mind. He must be on guard. No good came of
confiding overmuch in strangers.
“That’s a longer story than I’ve strength to tell
now,” he countered. “These young people are tired.
Could you show me the way to Pengally’s hut, please ?”
He had no need to ask. The next moment a ringing
“Hoy” was heard.
“That you, Pym ? Visitors for you !” said the
shepherd with a chuckle. Margery and David found
themselves gazing into the bewildered eyes of their
father.
“Heavens above !” he gasped. “Margery ! David !
Are you absolutely mad or am I dreaming ?”
He gazed at them as though they were ghosts from
another world. James Everett put a reassuring hand
on the other’s shoulder.
“How they got here is a long story. These children
are tired and hungry. Let us have something hot
to drink and a rest. They can give an account of
themselves later.”


CHAPTER VII
THE ENCOUNTER
Margery and David were pleasantly surprised with
Pengally’s mountain hut. The old Cornishman was a
carpenter of sorts as well as a miner, and had built
himself a log cabin from the solid timber of the ranges.
The chinks between the logs were filled in with hard
dried mud, and on the walls he had hung sacking to
make things cosier for the winter.
“I didn’t think it would be like this—l expected
something like a blackfellow’s mia-mia—you know,
made with gum branches and stringy bark,” Margery
whispered.
David nodded.
“I did too. Isn’t it a splendid fireplace ?”
This fireplace was Pengally’s greatest triumph.
He had toiled for months gathering the heavy stones
for the chimney. But his work had its reward, because
it was through it that he first came to study the rock
formation of the country, and to realize it showed
promise of a rich gold yield.
Mr. Pym was still too astonished to do anything
but stand and stare at his children.
“Pym, it be mighty chilly with that door open,”
a deep slow voice from the depths of the hut reminded


him, “Ye’ll have the lamp blown out on us too, if
ye don’t take zum care.”
Margery guessed the speaker to be Pengally, the
gruff Cornish miner who was Mr. Pym’s fellow pros-
pector, and came forward to greet him.
The old fellow was more amazed than their father
when he heard the children had travelled from
Melbourne to deliver their important news. He was
concerned to see Margery looking so tired and
exhausted. He dragged out old boxes for seats,
rummaged for extra mugs and generally tried to make
things comfortable.
Pengally had a strange history. He had been a
tin miner in Cornwall, then later gone to America
looking for gold. He came back to England with a
small fortune, but a rogue managed to trick him of
it, and get most of the money. Pengally lost his
temper and attacked the man, and because the law
was harsh, was sentenced to sail for Australia as a
convict. He grew embittered, and when free once
more, resolved to renounce his fellow-beings and live
as a hermit shepherd in the mountains. Here he
found traces of gold and once more was caught up
in the gold fever. Knowing he must have a partner
he went to Melbourne and foolishly interviewed the
very man he should have avoided—the unscrupulous
Captain Stevens. The men quarrelled about the terms
of partnership. Then he fell in with Mr. Pym and
Mr. Everett. After buying up supplies, they had made


straight for the hills, and were now confident they
would strike gold any time.
“Now you’ve had your hot drink, let’s get to the
bottom of this madcap scheme,” demanded Mr.
Pym sternly. “What is this about Captain Stevens
and how do you children come to be with your Uncle ?”
“You tell your story, David,” directed Mr. Everett.
The boy nodded, and briefly told how first they
had met Captain Stevens’s men at the blacksmith’s
shop, and how they had overheard their statement
that they were being paid to make straight for Pen-
gally’s Gully.
“Suddenly,” he added simply, “it dawned on us
Captain Stevens must have got the missing map
through Jemima, and we thought we should let you
know.”
For a moment there was utter silence. Mr. Pym,
his face grave and serious, leant forward.
“You’re sure you’re telling me the absolute truth ?
These are not excuses to cover a mad adventure ?”
“No, Papa—on my honour ! The news was so
important we felt we must follow you and give you
warning.”
“If you ask me, they be a pair o’ right plucky ’uns,”
put in Pengally with some admiration. “If I’d been
told two pip-squeaks like ’em ’ud come on a bush
journey such as they ’ave, just to ’and over zum news,
I’d a-said zum ’un was pulling me leg right ’earty !”
The two young adventurers looked at him gratefully.
96


“We’re glad to receive the news —it may save a deal
of trouble —but what’s to be done with you now, I
don’t know,” replied their father slowly. “One thing
is certain. You can’t go back to Melbourne without
a proper escort. You are certain now, your Mama
would get that letter ?”
“The boy promised to deliver it the same after-
noon.”
“Good. She’ll know you’re in my care. As for
Captain Stevens’s men, nothing’s been seen of them
so far.”
“They’ll turn up —I’ve been expectin’ ’em, apart
from this,” observed Pengally gloomily.
“What do you mean by that ?”
“It maybe to me shame, but it be my long tongue
that started all this. Your Captain Stevens —’e
’appened to know there was zome chance o’ findin’
gold ’ere before ever ’e got that map.”
“You spoke to him of the possibility ?”
“Aye—but before ever I asked you and Mr, Everett
to be partners with me. ’ls terms was so skin-flintin’
I said I’d ’ave naught to do with ’im.”
“That explains the whole thing,” David excitedly
cried, “Captain Stevens knew you’d found traces
of gold here. At the critical moment Jemima shows
him the map she’d picked up at our home.”
“We can’t stop them searching. It’s a free country,”
said Mr. Pym.
“But if you find any more gold there’s no need to


tell them about it —no need to help them in any
way,” persisted the boy.
“If we find it. Ha ! Ha ! that be a rare ’un. Wait
a zecond, lad—l’ll show you zomething to make you
zit up,” chuckled Pengally, and putting down his
pipe he crossed to the fireplace, and worked at a
loose stone tightly wedged between two larger ones.
“Not a word to a zoul o’ this,” he announced, as
he triumphantly placed the dislodged stone on the
floor, and putting his hand into the cavity brought
out a dirty red handkerchief.
“Here be zomewhat to make you zit up,” he
repeated with a chuckle. A piece of quartz streaked
with yellow veins lay in the palm he extended to
them.
“Why—it’s gold !” stammered Margery.
Smiling, her father placed the specimen in her
hand.
“Pengally picked it up by accident,” he told them.
“But it definitely proves there’s a fortune waiting
here for the man who finds more stuff like this.”
“Where did you come across it, Mr. Pengally ?”
asked David.
“By the creek two miles along-*—but if you be
azked by others ’ow the prospectin’ be goin’ with us,
don’t zay a word about this find. Them’s definite
instructions.”
“We won’t breathe a word. Aren’t the shepherds
we met by the river to be trusted ?”


“We’ve naught against them zo far, Mizz Margery—
they both be fine men. But when you be prospectin’,
it be the thing to zay nothin’ till a good find be made.
When that’s done an’ your claim be pegged, the
whole world ’ll know. That’s when the gold rush
proper zets in—but if you zays much before the claim
be pegged, others may step in to make their fortunes
while you gets nothin’.”
“It’s time these children went to sleep—they’re
dog tired,” their father broke in.
He had prepared their beds which were simply
sacks stuffed with dry leaves. But Margery and
David wanted nothing better. They were soon
fast asleep dreaming of golden nuggets, and Captain
Stevens being chased through the gums by a
bewhiskered and very angry Cornishman.
It was still dark in the hut when Margery opened
her eyes the next morning, but the flames of the fire
Pengally had just lit glowed brightly at the farther
end. Then the door of the hut swung suddenly open,
daylight streamed in, and her father and Uncle
James entered stamping and rubbing their hands.
“This frost will soon melt, then the weather should
be ideal,” her father was saying. “What’s your
programme, Pengally ? Coming down the gully with
us ?Or do you insist on pegging aw r ay at that quartz-
bed higher up ?”
“I fancy I’ll take me pick and axe, and do zome
diggin’ in me old spot,” the Cornishman decided.


“I ’as me fancy we’d strike gold there directly I did
zee the place, an’ I’ll not give up yet.”
“Then you’ll be near the hut all day. Splendid. I
want Everett to have a look at the country where
you picked up the specimen he saw last night. We
can do this if you keep near the hut. One or other
of us will have to stay near by in case Captain Stevens’s
men turn up.”
“Aye—l zhall ztay about, and the young ’uns
can be watch-dogs too —must keep ’em buzy some-
way,” replied Pengally. “What about you, Mizz
Margery ? —be you ready for a bite o’ breakfast ?”
“Oh yes —I’m awake —I 'will get up now.”
She was soon up and dressed. The creek water she
washed in w r as icy-cold, and she combed her hair
with the aid of a tiny mirror tied to a door-post. She
looked at her dress in dismay. She and her mother
had spent weeks making it, but now it was stained
and dusty, with a big tear gaping in the full folds of
the skirt.
“I must ask Pengally for a needle and thread to
mend that,” she decided.
The breakfast smelt delicious. Porridge cooked
over the fire in a black pot —bacon, and queer, but
tasty wheat-cakes cooked by Pengally. Margery
noticed the Cornishman had smartened himself up —
evidently in her honour. His hair was brushed, he
had combed his side-whiskers and curled them
neatly at the end. As a finishing touch he added a


gay splash of colour with a red-spotted handkerchief.
“You do look smart this morning, Mr. Pengally,”
she complimented him.
“One must keep appearances up, I zay, even if
we be in the bush,” he replied, looking pleased.
“But come, zit ye down. The porridge be ready, an’
mun be eaten pipin’ ’ot to warm ye vitals.”
As Mr. Pym and Uncle James were anxious to
make the most of the day and start for the gully
immediately, Margery and David offered to wash
up, get the water and chop the wood.
“I can zee you two will be well worth your salt,”
Pengally told them. “Now your Pa an’ Uncle can
saddle their horses and get straight off.”
The sun now was shining brightly, and the two
men cantered through the trees in high spirits. Their
moleskin trousers were tucked into high boots, and
each had a pistol and knife thrust into his belt. Their
red-and-blue check shirts made a gay splash of colour
against the gums as they set off. Margery and David
waved good-bye to them, then turned back as Pen-
gally was waiting to give out his orders. He was
determined to keep his charges busy, and after
supervising the gathering of the wood for the evening
fire, and other tasks, marched them off to the spot
where he was fossicking for gold.
“Where’s the creek ?” Margery asked when he
told them to stop at a shallow ravine farther up the
hill.


Pengally thought this a great joke. He explained
that at the very moment she was standing on the bed
of the creek—a dried-up creek which once had run
into the river below them.
David glanced around. There seemed nothing
unusual about the place.
“What made you decide to dig for gold here ?”
he asked.
Pengally explained he had found signs of gold in
the river bed, but not above the point where this
creek had once run into it. This showed the gold
must have been washed down from the hillside—a
fact backed up by the formation of the rock.
“But talkin’ o’ the gold won’t do much towards
findin’ it,” he remarked dryly. “Come, lad—take this
pick, an’ give me a ’and at the diggin’.”
The warm sun had melted the frost, and working
in the dried-up bed of the old creek had its advantages,
for it kept them out of the wind. While Pengally was
teaching David how to handle his pick and shovel,
and explaining the formation of different rocks,
Margery looked round for a good look-out post. She
found one, fifteen feet above the fossickers, some
yards farther along. Here she had a good view of
both the hut and the track leading up the hill to it—
an important factor considering their information
regarding Captain Stevens’s men.
“Blezz my zoul, Mizz Margery —what be you doin’
up there ?” demanded Pengally, looking up and


noticing for the first time where the little girl had
settled herself.
Margery laughed gleefully.
“I’m your watch-out man, I can see everything
you’re doing from here and, as well, I can keep an eye
on the hut.”
Pengally’s eyes twinkled as he bent to work again.
Soon the quiet gully was ringing with the clang of
pick and shovel against rock. The two dug till a deep
trench was formed, and the rocks and wet red soil
were piled high on either side.
“Pengally—come down here quickly,” shouted
David suddenly.
“What be the matter ? Be you hurt, lad ?”
“Look here ! This gravel is altogether different
from the surface silt. What is it—have I struck the
creek bed ?”
The Cornishman was down on his knees examin-
ing the foot of the trench David had hollowed
out.
“Mizz Margery, go back to the hut an’ be fetchin’
me the wash-pan,” he directed.
The little girl gathered up her skirts and went
quickly to the hut. As she approached it she suddenly
caught the sound of voices from the farther side.
She darted behind a tree, and peeping cautiously
round it, saw Boneparte Webster, the bow-legged
shepherd they had met at the river, hotly arguing
with three strangers. Then she caught her breath,


for she recognized them to be the men she and David
had seen at the blacksmith’s shop.
Trouble was brewing, and she instinctively knew
she must not let these men know she was near at
hand. She crept to a clump of bottlebrush, and crouch-
ing down, parted the leaves to gain a clearer view.
Without a doubt the newcomers were Tim Jenkins
and the other two members of Captain Stevens’s
gang. Straining her ears, she tried to make out what
the argument was about, but could only catch a
sentence here and there. She saw Boneparte Webster
was thoroughly roused. He was ordering the new
arrivals out of the camp clearing.
“You can’t come here, making free with other
men’s belongings,” he angrily told them.
Tim Jenkins’s hand moved threateningly towards
the pistol at his belt, and the troop disappeared
behind the hut, still arguing.
Margery could now see nothing. Her one hope was
to go closer. Clutching up her skirts, she sped quickly
across the grass towards the back of the hut. The
men now were only a few yards away round the
corner.
“Take my advice and don’t poke your nose in
affairs that don’t concern you,” Jenkins was warning
Boneparte. “We are officers of the Crown, and we
want to search this hut. What business is that of
yours ?”
Margery went pale. What could these men want


to search the hut for ? Cautiously she stole a glance
round the corner of the wall. Boneparte stood at
the threshold barring the way. His face was red and
angry, and his mate Tom stood by him looking
equally determined.
“You won’t take a warning, eh ? Come on then,
boys —into the hut !” snarled Tim.
“You’re not coming in this hut without its owner’s
permission,”
“We’re not, eh ? Take a taste of this, then, you
wind-bag !” and quick as a flash Jenkins had his
pistol out, and stuck it into his opponent’s ribs.
Margery could stand this no longer. Turning, she
ran at top speed to the hill for Pengally and David.
“Oh, come quickly, quickly,” she begged, her
face white and terror-stricken. “He’ll be killed.”
Pengally and David stared blankly.
“Who’ll be killed, and where’s the washing-pan ?”
“Never mind—come back to the hut. They’re
here ! three of them, and holding Boneparte Webster
up at pistol-point.”
Pengally was up the bank like a flash.
“You mean it be them scoundrels, Jenkins and Co. ?”
“Yes, at our hut—they want to search it, and
Boneparte won’t let them. Do come —they’ll kill
him and Tom, too !”
“Zteady lass —no zense in rushin’ into this like a
bull to a china shop. You stay here, Mizz Margery.
You keep here under cover.”


“Don’t worry about me. Go and help Boneparte !
Listen !”
It was the report of a pistol going off
All ideas of a well-planned campaign were swept
from Pengally’s head.
“We’ll give ’em zomewhat to go on with! Come
with me, David lad,” he roared, and lumbered off
with the boy close on his heels brandishing a pick.
Margery, quite ignoring the command to keep under
cover, brought up the rear.
When they reached the hut Pengally saw the
situation was an ugly one. He could not tell if any-
one were wounded, for Boneparte and Tom had
managed to get inside the hut, and had the door
slammed in the invaders’ faces. They were battering
angrily against it, and knowing it to be not over
strong, he knew it was only a matter of minutes
before its fall. He motioned David to keep behind
cover. But too late.
“Hey, look—there’s someone else here,” shouted
one of the men, Tim Jenkins wheeled quickly and
cocked his pistol at Pengally who darted in the nick
of time behind a tree.
The arrival of reinforcements put the invaders in a
quandary. Margery saw them have a hasty con-
sultation.
“If only Papa and Uncle James were here,” she
muttered.
Being both armed, their presence would decide


the conflict. David was totally unarmed, and she
knew Boneparte and Tom also were without weapons.
The attack seemed at a standstill. Tim Jenkins
and his men were determined to wait until the other
side made the first move, knowing they had the key
position. Finally Pengally could stand such inaction
no longer.
“Zince they won’t approach us, we’ll have to come
into the open and zee what the rumpus be about,”
he decided.
With certain dignity he crossed the clearing, David
after him.
“Now what be all this about ?” he asked. “A man
comes back to his own hut to zee strangers guarding
his door at pistol-point.”
Tim Jenkins ignored him, and pointed to David.
“Here’s one of ’em,” he cried. “He’s one of the
three in league with Captain Lightning. Arrest him,
lads.”
“Eh ? What be this about bushrangers ?” interposed
Pengally, scratching his head.
The rest of the conversation was lost to Margery,
but she saw a violent quarrel was brewing. Pengally
was working up to fever-pitch. Shaking his fist at
Captain Stevens’s men, like Boneparte Webster,
he ordered them to get out.
Losing patience Jenkins made to seize David. The
boy wrenched himself clear and darted off. There was
a scuffle, a shot, and to her horror, Margery heard


David give a cry of pain, and saw him clutch at his
arm.
“The wretches—they’ve wounded him,” she cried,
and once again thought, “if only Papa and Uncle
James were here.”
Startled by the shot, a horse tethered near the river
gave a low whinny. It gave Margery the idea she
wanted. Why not take that horse, ride it down the
valley in an attempt to find her father and Uncle
James ? She had heard them say they were going to
follow the river. There was a chance she might find
them, and anything was better than this dreadful
waiting. Cautiously she made her way down the hill,
and when the hut was out of sight, took to her heels,
racing to the spot where Jenkins and Co. had tethered
their horses. She would take one and ride for help !


CHAPTER VIII
TURNING THE TABLES
“You’ve got to do it ! David may die ! You’ve got
to get help !” Margery told herself fiercely.
She was a poor rider, used only to fat quiet ponies,
and eyed the horses dubiously. The big grey seemed
the quietest. Her mind was made up. She must
reach her father. Quickly she untied the grey’s reins
and led him over to the track. The stirrups had to be
adjusted, and two precious minutes were lost as
she fumbled with the straps.
“Come on, for your life, Master Grey !” she urged,
as, pressing her heels sharply against the horse’s
sides, she set off on her momentous journey. The grey
was not easy to manage, and it took all her strength
and determination to pull him round where the track
veered to the right. Luckily the ground was muddy,
and she could follow her father and uncle’s route by
their horses’ tracks in the soft soil.
“Get up, you wretch,” she muttered giving the horse
a stiff whacking across the neck with the ends of her
reins. Responding, he thundered down the track
at top gallop with Margery clinging on like grim death,
hair flying in the breeze, and her face white and set.
At one stage she had a narrow escape from being


caught in the trees, but tugging desperately at the
reins, somehow she managed to keep the horse
in the open. If anyone had told her a month ago she
could have mastered a horse like this big grey, she
would have said it was impossible.
The bush became wilder, but the others’ tracks
were still visible. Then without warning they led her
up a hill to a stony ridge, and petered out completely.
Reining the grey to a standstill, she looked round
her anxiously. Below was a valley entirely surrounded
by high hills merging into a purple distance. A secret
sheltered valley through which the river twisted like
a snake. It was deathly still—so silent she could hear
the distant gurgling of the river across the rocks.
Then she started up—a new sound mingled with that
of the river—it was the distinct but unmistakable
ring of pick against stone. Her father and uncle
must be somewhere ahead. Putting her hand to her
mouth, she coo-ed at the top of her voice.
She waited breathlessly. But there was no answer
except the distant echo of her own call.
She tried again !
“Coooooo-ee !” Faintly from the distance she
imagined there came an answering call —this time
not the echo of her own voice, but the deeper tones
of a man. She rode on down the other side of the
rock ridge, and along the valley, but could not pick
up the tracks again.
She continued calling, and again the return coo-ee


Turning the Tables
echoed along the valley. Then ahead of her she saw
the two men cantering in her direction. With a cry
of joy she rode forward, and almost fell into the arms
of her anxious father.
“Oh, come quickly—come quickly,” she sobbed.
“Captain Stevens’s men are here. They’ve wounded
David and got Boneparte Webster locked up in the
hut.”
The two men exchanged alarmed glances as Mar-
gery poured out the happenings at the hut.
“We can thank God you got here safely,” said her
father. “But you must not ride that bad-tempered
grey back. You shall take my mount. I wish I
could leave you here, but you cannot stay here in the
bush.”
“I wouldn’t—not with David wounded,” declared
Margery. “He”—her voice faltered—“he may be
bleeding to death.”
Once more the valley echoed with the thud of the
horses’ hoofs as the rescue party made for the hut.
But this time Margery was on the steady brown mare,
with the troublesome grey kept well in hand by
Uncle James —one of the best horsemen in the colony.
The ridge of rock where Margery had coo-ed for help
was passed in a flash, and they began climbing
steadily. Margery was surprised to find how easily
she kept her seat. She had no trouble in managing
Brownie. She seemed to know by instinct she must
take good care of her little rider, and followed Mr.


Pym of her own accord. Uncle James was ahead
on the grey. When the clearing at last was reached,
Mr. Pym reined up his horse, and then lifted Margery
down.
“This is no place for a girl. You stay here till we
return and report,” he told her. She nodded, think-
ing only of David lying there wounded. She longed
to be by him to ease the pain.
Mr. Pym and Mr. Everett hurried towards the hut,
every nerve on the alert. Was it a good sign all was
so quiet ? They went nearer, but still saw no signs
of activity.
“An ambush, maybe,” muttered Mr. Pym, and
changing their plans, they decided to work round
and approach the hut from the other side. They
were soon within fifty yards of it, but their view was
blocked by a clump of young gum-trees.
Then Mr, Everett’s grip on the other’s arm tight-
ened.
“They’re inside the hut—l can see them through
the door. What do you say, Pym ? Will we chance
it and rush them ?”
“They’ve wounded David—you can count on me,”
returned his companion through clenched teeth,
and crouching low they both crept quietly to the hut.
Suddenly springing to full height, they barred the
door. “What the deuce —” began Tim Jenkins, and,
looking up, found himself gazing into a pair of stern
steely-grey eyes.


Turning the Tables
“We’ve got the lot of you covered,” stated Uncle
James. “Hands up, all of you —or we’ll fire !”
Up went their arms, and while Mr. Pym kept the
foe covered with his pistol, Mr. Everett released
Pengally and Boneparte, who were trussed up like
fowls to the posts round the hut. The same ropes
which had cut into their bleeding wrists were now
used to secure the three sullen-faced intruders to
trees round the clearing.
“I warned you no good would come o’ this monkey
business,” shouted Pengally, shaking his fist angrily
in Tim Jenkins’s face. Mr. Pym had difficulty in
dragging him to one side to join in the conference
with the others. Now they had Jenkins and Co.
prisoners, they were uncertain what to do with
them.
Margery was now sent for, and went straight to
David who still lay in the hut. He was white as a
sheet and in obvious pain, although he had told his
father he need not worry about him. A makeshift
bandage had been tied round his arm.
The blood was soaking through it, and, tugging off
her petticoat, Margery recklessly tore it into wide
strips.
“No use bandaging me up again,” the boy told her.
“First better get the bullet out.”
“The bullet ?”
“Yes ; some shot is lodged in my arm. Feels as
though there’s a red-hot dagger in it.”


He staggered and all but fainted as a fresh wave of
pain swept over him.
Margery helped him over to the bed. Though she
knew the men needed all their wits to come to terms
with the enemy, she felt David’s arm needed more
immediate attention than they realized. Her Uncle
James had a slight knowledge of surgery. She would
fetch him.
Gathering some chips, she managed to coax the
fire alight and put the kettle on so she would have hot
water ready when he came to examine the wound and
remove the bullet. Going over to the men, she
tugged at her uncle’s arm, whispering she thought
David’s arm should be seen to immediately.
“The boy told us he was all right. I’ll come in a
few seconds. Get the kettle boiling,” her uncle
directed.
She returned to the fire, and crouched over it gipsy
fashion, trying to coax the flames higher. Her
thoughts went back to her long trip by sailing ship
to Australia. The ship’s doctor, who was a man with
ideals, often had gathered the youthful passengers
round him on the deck, and given them lectures on
methods of dealing with the sick and wounded. The
novelty of the nine months’ sea voyage soon palled,
and the children, finding time dragged heavily, had
looked forward eagerly to these open-air classes.
Sitting cross-legged on the deck against a background
of blue sky and sea, they had learnt the first prin-


Turning the Tables
ciples for treating sprains, cuts, burns and other
injuries.
“And see here, me hearties! What be your first
rule ? Cleanliness, that be what it is, though not
practised as it should be,” the kindly old sea-dog had
boomed. “Wounds must be kept clean, me bhoys ;
there be more trouble ahead.”
Margery could see him now, with his red kerchief
and peg-leg. The old fellow’s temper was peppery
at times, but he had been a good doctor in his time,
and gave his young charges a knowledge which was
to stand them in good stead all their lives.
David’s face was now chalk white, his eyes were
closed, and continual shudders of pain shook his
frame. Mr. Everett came striding towards him. He
glanced with approval at the hot water and fresh
bandages Margery had prepared.
“Good work, nurse,” he approved, and the little
girl flushed with pleasure at the praise. Kneeling by
the bed, he unwrapped the bandages and gently
probed the wound.
“Light the candle and hold it above us,” he com-
manded, for the hut was ill lit.
Tim Jenkins’s men had turned everything upside
down, and Margery finally found the candle wedged
behind a barrel of flour. Lighting it from the fire,
she brought it over to her uncle. His only instru-
ments were a pair of deft hands and a knife dipped in
the hot water, but within a few minutes the wound


had been probed and the bullet removed. David
fainted with the pain, and Margery had to steel every
nerve to keep the candle steady. She stared hard at
the wall and would not look at the operation.
“All over now, lad,” reported Uncle James, adjust-
ing the fresh bandage after rubbing salt in the wound.
“Here, Margery, the boy is fainting. Fetch that
flask of brandy from my haversack.”
Margery was back with it in a second.
“Now, lad, take a good swig of this—it will help to
pull you round,” David was told as he opened his eyes
again. The drink made him grimace, but a faint
tinge of colour stole back into his cheeks as it trickled
down. He smiled at the others faintly. Then the
events of the last hour flashed back to him.
“What about Captain Stevens’s men ?” he gasped.
“What’s happened to them, and are we under
arrest ?”
“Certainly not ; the tables have been turned, and
they’re the prisoners now,” soothed Margery. “There’s
no danger. Lie back and rest.”
“I can see we’ve got a competent little nurse in
your Margery,” remarked her uncle, looking pleased.
“I’ll leave you to watch the patient. Administer
more brandy if he faints again, I must go back to
help see to our prisoners.”
Once outside the hut, he paused for a minute, and
reaching for his handkerchief, mopped his brow with
an unsteady hand. The removal of the bullet from


Turning the Tables
David’s arm had unnerved him more than he thought.
“Thank the Lord that’s over,” he muttered.
“Hey, James —come here—we want you !” came a
shout from the other side of the clearing. Mr. Pym,
Pengally and Boneparte evidently had come to some
decision regarding the prisoners. Pulling himself
together, he thrust the kerchief back in his pocket,
and hurried over to them.
“How be the lad ? Did you zee to his arm ?”
asked Pengally anxiously.
“I did. A bullet was lodged in it, but I’ve got it
out now. Luckily, it was only a flesh wound,” was
the grim reply.
The others looked relieved.
“Well, James, we’ve had it out with the villains,”
reported Mr. Pym. “I told them pretty plainly that
if a man we afterwards discovered may have been
Captain Lightning directed you across a short cut,
it was no crime, and if they continued this trumped-
up tale about us being connected with bushrangers
I would report the affair to the Governor personally.”
Mr. Everett nodded. He, Margery and David had
agreed to keep the true facts of their encounter with
Captain Lightning to themselves. This was for their
own protection and to honour their promise to him.
It was as well they had. But how had Captain
Stevens’s men learnt of the incident—or was it a shot
in the dark, an excuse to search the hut for news of
a gold-find, and simply been nearer the truth than


they imagined ? The latter reason seemed more
likely.
“Maybe I could add a thing or two to ’is Excellenzy,
and it’d not be to Mister Jenkins’s credit, I’ll warrant,”
Pengally was interjecting with a chuckle.
He caught his breath. It would not be to their
advantage to have this complicated incident reported
to the Governor.
“Our business is to look for gold, Pengally. We’ve
no wish to make the journey down to Melbourne,
except for Margery and David’s sake. In my opinion
these men seem to be under the impression we’ve
struck gold in large quantities. If we tell them the
actual case, they’ll realize they’re on a wild-goose
chase.”
Actually it was Pengally’s fault that this wrong
impression had been given to Captain Stevens in the
first place. When interviewing him months before,
he had painted so rosy a picture of the prospects for
obtaining large quantities of gold immediately that
the unscrupulous man had been unable to resist the
temptation to share in the spoils. Unable to visit
the gully himself because of his official position, he
had hired others to obtain a true report of proceedings
by fair means or foul. Had he known the hardship
and long months of toil which had to be gone through
before this fortune could be achieved, he might have
acted differently. Mr. Pym had explained the true
position to Tim Jenkins and Co. He was astonished


Turning the Tables
to find they honestly believed Pengally had already
struck gold in large quantities but was keeping the
fact a secret to avoid a rush to the spot.
“The Captain’s hoodwinked us. We’d do better
over at Clunes —no wild-goose chase there. They’ve
struck the real thing good and proper,” growled
Jenkins truculently.
“What’s this ? You say someone has struck a rich
find at Clunes ?”
The man bit his lip, looking distinctly annoyed.
He had not meant to let this news out. But crafty
fellow that he was, he saw the impression it had made,
and knew he could use the report to get on better
terms with his captors.
“Why, man, the news is all over the colony like
wild-fire. A fellow called Campbell has struck gold
on Donald Cameron’s station at Clunes by the
Loddon River, They’re pegging their claims there
in dozens, they tell us.”
“Maybe we could do worse than pack up and follow
their example,” observed Mr. Pym. “Here’s a bar-
gain, Jenkins. If you and your men give your word
to clear out of here and make for Clunes, we’ll set you
free. Two of us will go with you down the moun-
tains. Remember you’re guilty of a rash act to-day.
You wounded a boy and attacked a miner without
reason. We have little time for lodging complaints,
but unless you take yourself elsewhere the matter will
go to the Governor.”


“We’ll go off, by all means —hardly seems it would
pay us to stay even if you invited us. This gold
fever’s a bad thing, Mr. Pym. It gets into a man’s
blood—brings out the worst in him. There’s likely
to be a piece of trouble in the colony now the fever’s
started.”
“Then I hope you’ve learnt your lesson and will
endeavour to come by your share honestly. If you
take my advice you’ll steer clear of Captain Stevens.
It won’t do you any good,” said Mr. Pym dryly.
It was agreed the captives should be set free, pro-
vided they handed over their arms. It was not long
before Margery saw them riding down the hill, accom-
panied by an armed escort of her father, Boneparte
Webster, and her Uncle James. Pengally and Tom
were commissioned to remain behind with Margery
and David.
The old Cornishman stood leaning against the door
watching the party of horsemen till they were lost in
the gully below.
“Let’s hope, Mizz Margery, that be the last we zee
of them scoundrels,” he scowled.
“I can’t understand how things have been patched
up so calmly,” wondered Margery, who had not heard
the conversation in the clearing. “I hope it’s not
a trick ! What if they turn on our party down in
the valley ?”
Pengally patted the little girl’s shoulder reas-
suringly.


Turning the Tables
“No need to worry ye ’ead about that. Our men
be more than a match for ’em, and well-armed, as ye
saw. Bezides, now these rumours about gold bein’
found near Clunes be goin’ round, they want to be off
there as fast as can be done !”
“Gold found near Clunes !” gasped Margery, who
had not heard of this before. “Do you mean they’ve
struck it rich, or just found a few specimens like that
one you found here ?”
David, too, was listening intently
The old miner thought for a moment, then
answered with deliberation.
“That Tim Jenkins, he zaid the find at Clunes be
the ztart o’ a gold rush, one that, maybe, shall be
greater than the rushes in Amerikey. I be thinkin’
much the same. Come next Xmas, we may be
seein’ big changes in the colony, ’ere. Not only
at Clunes, but all around us ’ere ; there be gold in
large quantities if we can but put our finger on
it !”
The words, “They’ve struck it rich at Clunes,” fired
his imagination and kept ringing in his ears. Because
of his mining experience in California, Pengally could
visualize the tremendous changes which would sweep
across the peaceful Victorian colony when rich gold-
fields were discovered. But as yet he obstinately
stuck to his theory they would find big yields in their
own vicinity. Even in the face of danger it had hurt
him to be forced to admit to Tim Jenkins as yet they


had not struck gold in payable quantities, merely an
odd specimen.
“Do tell us some of your adventures gold-mining
in America,” Margery was begging him.
But obstinate Pengally suddenly shut up like a book.
“This be no time for ztory-tellin’. Be you attendin’
to the fire, Mizz Margery, and look to your brother.
I zhall go up the mount a bit to see if I can’t get a
bird or beast for our evenin’ meal !”
Sitting on the doorstep of the hut, Margery watched
him stalk up the hill, his gun over his shoulder. She
knew he would not return empty handed, for he was
an excellent huntsman, but she was curious to know
what his bag would be ... a pair of ducks perhaps,
a wild bush turkey, or maybe even a wallaby.
She sat by David till late that afternoon. Pengally
was the first to return, his prize being a pair of young
wood-ducks—fine brown birds with speckled breasts.
“Ducks ! Oh, and a pair of beauties, too,” cried
Margery with delight, for such a luxury had not come
her way for many a day. Pengally plucked and
cleaned the two birds, then showed her how to roast
them on the open fire, by putting them in a pan of
boiling fat. Before long a rich savoury odour filled
the hut. The sun had now set and they expected the
escort party back any moment.
“Here they are —they’re coming up the hill now,”
announced Margery as the horses emerged from the bush.
Sweat glistened from their legs and backs, and their


Turning the Tables
breath rose smoke-like against the deepening twilight.
“You be goin’ to ’em, lass. I mun stay by the fire
unless we want the duck burned to frizzles,” replied
the Cornishman.
Margery ran to meet the home-comers, her skirt
and curls tossing helter-skelter in the wind.
“Oh, Papa, I’m so glad you’re back,” she cried,
as he swung to the ground. “We thought they might
plan some counter-attack.”
“Not they. We were armed and they had no
chance. But tell, how is the patient ? No compli-
cations in the wound ?”
She shook her head.
“God be thanked for that. That bullet might
easily have got him in the heart !”
“Pengally says Boneparte and Tom are to stay at
our hut for dinner. He shot two wood-ducks, and has
roasted them,” Margery announced.
The men sniffed the air appreciatively.
“M’mm . . . smells mighty good. We’d be pleased
to,” Boneparte Webster quickly responded. “We’ll
step in directly we’ve seen to the horses.”
After the excitement of the day, it was good to sit
round the fire munching the savoury duck which
Pengally had roasted to a turn, and washing it down
with mugs of billy tea. The men plunged into a
furious argument concerning the gold possibilities in
the district. They all agreed the rock looked promis-
ing, but Boneparte and Tom thought the gold was


deep down, and shafts would have to be sunk, while
Pengally asserted that in places the reef might be
only a few feet from the surface.
“Don’t take me for a wet blanket. But Tom and
meself have been fossicking here on and off for the best
part of three months, and what have we got ? A few
specks in a match-box. No ! It’s not good enough.
If nothing turns up in a week, it’s the track to Clunes
for Tom and I, eh, lad ?” asked Boneparte, jovially
slapping Tom on the back, an action which took the
unfortunate boy so completely by surprise he splut-
tered violently and spilt his hot tea on Pengally, who
let out a loud yelp.
David had hoisted himself up in the bed with his
strong arm, and with flushed cheeks and eyes glowing
drank in every word of the men’s discussion. Both
Webster and Pengally were experienced miners, and
despite the pain in his arm, he listened intently.
Margery, however, soon felt her head nodding sleepily,
and slipped away unnoticed to her cubby-hole at the
other end of the hut. Snuggled down on her mat-
tress of dried leaves and bracken, she sleepily remem-
bered Pengally had excitedly declared he “Zeemed to
*ave come on zomething” just prior to the arrival of
Tim Jenkins and Co. That incident had put an end
to all fossicking for the day. As she fell asleep,
Margery determined to be up with the magpies the
next morning, to see exactly what the outcome of his
discovery would be.


CHAPTER IX
NEW HOPE
Margery woke next morning to hear not only the
gurgling song of the magpies, but also the steady
drip-drip of rain on the roof.
“Oh, dear,” she thought in dismay. “This means
work down at the creek-bed will be off for to-day at
least.” The fossicking location was a sloping hollow
which Pengally said became a quagmire with every
shower.
Sleepily she emerged from her cubby-hole into the
main quarters of the hut. Pengally, cheerful as ever
despite the weather, had a pot of porridge already
steaming on the fire.
“Good day to you, Mizz Margery,” he greeted.
“Your Pa an’ Uncle zhall be back in a minute or zo.
They be down at the creek to fetch zome water up.”
“If this rain keeps up we’ll be able to catch buckets
of water at the door,” replied Margery.
The old Cornishman chuckled, and stooped to pile
yet more wood on the fire. Soon he had the kettle
boiling merrily. Margery needed hot water for
David’s wound. She was tearing the rest of her linen
petticoat into strips for more bandages.
“David, wake up !” she called, going over to him


and giving him a gentle shake. “Wake up. I must
dress your arm. How does it feel ? Very sore ?”
The boy turned over, grimacing from the pain.
“Not too good ! It kept me awake most of the
night.”
With deft fingers Margery soon had fresh comfort-
able bandages round the sore arm, and helped to
bathe his face and hands.
“That’s much better !” exclaimed the boy. “My
word, Marg—you’ll have to be a nurse when you
grow up. You’re cut out for it.”
“I’d rather be a squatter’s wife, and help rear sheep
and cattle,” declared his sister, but the appearance
of their father and Uncle James with the tins of
water cut the discussion short. Margery was called
to help Pengally with the breakfast—big plates of
porridge, wheaten cakes, bacon, and mugs of black
tea.
“Bad weather for work—but it may clear up later,”
observed Uncle James. His prophecy proved right,
for by noon the rain dwindled to a mere drizzle, then
stopped completely.
Margery ran to the door and peered out.
“Oh, hurray —the rain’s stopped altogether,” she
reported. “And there’s a rainbow—oh, a lovely
one,” she added as she caught sight of its glittering
arch curving above the mountain.
Pengally, who among other things was an excellent
tinker, had spent the morning mending holes in the


tin pans they used for fossicking. Now he dropped
this work and, picking up pick and shovel, made for
the door.
Margery had opened her mouth to ask if she could
go with him, then stopped, thinking of David. She
could not leave him alone in the hut.
Her Uncle James, who was patching a saddle,
guessed her thoughts. “Go along with Pengally,
Margery,” he told her. “It will be two hours before
I have this saddle fixed. I’ll stay with David.”
Margery smiled her thanks, slipped her feet into
a pair of high boots much too big for her, put on an
old jacket of her father’s, and trotted after Pengally,
looking exactly like a funny scarecrow on legs.
Pengally and Mr. Pym already were disappearing
across the hill. Margery hurried to join them. The
storm now was definitely over. Patches of blue were
showing in the sky, the sun shone warmly, magpies and
thrushes carolled gaily from the trees. Margery joined
in with them, humming a gay tune as she ran. The
bush smelt fragrant and earthy after the close hut
in which she had been cooped up all the morning.
She thought there was no perfume in the world so
lovely as that of fresh gum-leaves after rain.
She found the men already busy with pick and
shovel. The storm had washed a good part of the
gravel back into the trench David had dug, and they
were shovelling it out again at top speed.
In those early days of gold-prospecting, everyone


could be useful, and even Margery was not allowed
to remain idle for long. Pengally dragged a tub
across, and handing Margery the bucket, said : “Here,
lazz, while we be diggin’, you be ladlin’ water into ’ere
with this bucket.”
“Very well, but why ?” asked Margery, glad to
help but as usual demanding to know the reason.
“What a one you be for askin’ questions . . . you
zhall learn the whys and wherefores of it zoon
enough,” returned Pengally, good-humouredly. He
was in high glee now he thought they were on the
verge of discovery. They soon had the soil piled high
beside the trench, and reached the top of the wash-
dirt, some of which was shovelled into the tub.
“Pour more water on now, Margery,” ordered Mr.
Pym, and the little girl had to fetch buckets of water,
which with great effort she managed to lift to the
edge of the tub and empty into it. The stiff clay was
then puddled with a spade until it was mixed thor-
oughly. Then water was poured off, and the process
repeated, not once, but over and over again. Mr.
Pym and Margery baling in the water, Pengally
puddling it into the dirt and tipping it off again. At
last only the heavier sand and gravel which they hoped
might contain the gold, was left in the bottom of
the tub.
This residue was put into a dish very like a dairy-
man’s milk-pan. With a few swift turns of the
wrist Pengally separated the last of the dirt, and the
128


two men peered anxiously into the bottom of the
pan. Margery looked too, expecting to see at least
a layer of glittering gold-dust, but to her disappoint-
ment not even a suspicion of the precious yellow
metal was present.
“Why—where’s the gold gone ?” she cried in
surprise.
“Why—where’s the gold gone ?”
“Looks mighty like as though there never were any
in it,” replied Pengally gloomily. “No—not even the
colour of it,” meaning, of course, that their labours
had not even resulted in a few minute specks which
might prove the presence of gold in other parts of the
stream.
Though disheartened, both men were determined
more than ever to succeed. They toiled on in the
muddy creek-bed till the sun showed red in the west,
and the birds started to fly home to their nests.
Pengally still resolutely kept to his theory there was


much gold to be found in the district, and he con-
tinued washing and fossicking for many days, still
without success. Between helping him, and attend-
ing to David, whose wounded arm was healing far more
slowly than they had expected, Margery was kept
busy too. A week went by, and still the fossickers
met with nothing but hard work and disappointment.
Then Margery heard Boneparte Webster and his mate
say they were giving up —that the next day they
were shouldering their packets and starting on the
trail to Clunes.
That afternoon when she was dressing her brother’s
wound, she told him what she had overheard in the
other hut. The news caused David to sit up with a
violence which all but upset the basin of water over
both of them.
“Pheww! Giving the gully up, are they ? This is
news ! When are they going, and where ? And do
they stick to the idea there’s no gold here in spite of
all Pengally says ?”
“Oh, one thing at a time, please,” cried Margery,
laughingly putting her hands to her ears to shut out
this flood of questions.
“Then tell me more ! You girls are all the same !
Give a chap some inkling of important news, then
leave him high and dry without details.”
“If you give me time I’ll tell you. First, they’re
leaving to-morrow, so Boneparte says. Secondly,
they’re going to Clunes.”


“I thought as much ! Clunes ! Now the rumour
about gold being found there is going the rounds, the
whole colony will be off there. Wouldn’t be surprised,
myself, if Uncle James, Papa and Pengally, too,
followed before long.”
Margery nodded excitedly.
“That’s exactly what I’ve been thinking ! But I
don’t know about Pengally. He’s very proud, and
he won’t like admitting he made a mistake when he
said we’d all strike the gold here,”
“Pengally’s argument has a lot to be said for it, all
the same,” countered David. “After all, he did
manage to hit on some promising specimens. What
about the bit of quartz he showed Uncle and Papa
down at our Prahran house ? And what about the
nugget he has hidden ? I think, like he does, there
must be gold somewhere about—if only they could
hit on it.”
“Quite so, my boy. There’s gold here sure enough
—but probably so deep you’d need to sink a mine
to get it out,” boomed a loud voice behind them.
Turning, the children saw Boneparte Webster’s tall,
gaunt figure looming in the doorway.
“Hullo, Boneparte—we were just talking about
you,” greeted Margery, as she deftly rolled the
bandages and stowed them in a box.
“H’m—then you’ve heard Tom and I are pushing
on for Clunes ? We’re going to-morrow. No sense,
I say, in spending a lifetime here without result.”


“But Pengally thinks you should strike gold any
time now—why not stick it a few days longer ?”
“Maybe we’ll find odd pieces ; but we want it in
payable quantities.”
“But how do you know that news Jenkins told you
about Clunes is true ? It may be just a rumour ?”
“Where there’s smoke there’s fire,” stated Bone-
parte thoughtfully. “Smoke’s been sighted from
Clunes way some time now. The first I heard of it
was twelve months back. Someone picked up bits
of gold quartz on Donald Cameron’s station. But
his sheep were doing well, and he didn’t want the
property overrun with diggers, so had the news
suppressed. Then last April I ran into a German, a
Doctor Bruhn, and he said he’d found gold there.
Now comes this news. Tom and I hope for big things
at Clunes.”
“I wish you luck,” laughed Margery. “But we’ll
miss you.”
“But you won’t be here long yourselves. I believe
your Pa is starting back to Melbourne with you in a
couple of days.”
The children did not know this, but later found it
was correct.
“This rough life is no place for young people,” their
father said, “And if a gold rush starts it will be one
hundred times worse.” He and Uncle James planned
to return to Melbourne at the end of the week. Bone-
parte and Tom, however, did not set out the next


morning. They were stopped by a terrific storm
which lasted for many days. All day and all night
the driving wind and rain swept through the bush
forest, putting a stop to all plans and fossicking work.
The smoke from the fires made the hut stiflingly
hot. Margery went outside whenever the rain eased
off, despite the bitingly cold wind. The men made
good use of the time overhauling their outfits and
discussing future plans. They usually sat grouped
round the fire with Margery and David in the farther
corner. Again and again the conversation drifted to
the newly discovered gold-fields at Clunes.
“If you ask me,” observed David to Margery in a
low aside, “Papa and Uncle James will be off to
Clunes themselves directly we get back to Melbourne.”
Margery thought so too. Pengally was the only
one who wished to stay on in the gully, but they
had a shrewd suspicion that once the others deserted
it would not be long before he packed his swag and
followed suit.
That afternoon the storm died down and the men
went out trying to shoot a wallaby or wild duck, for
the food problem was becoming acute. They were
living on porridge, wheaten cakes, salted meat washed
down by strong tea without milk.
Margery hunted through the supply box to see if
she couldn’t find something a little different.
“You won’t find anything,” David told her, “We’ll
have to do with what we’ve got ! It’s rather fun,


you know —reminds me of the meals they used to
dish up when we were on the sailing ship,” he added
gaily, suddenly seeing his sister was on the verge of
tears.
“It’s all very well to make a joke of it !” she
replied with a wan smile. “When I get back to
Melbourne I’ll never eat salted beef again as long as
I live.”
As she spoke, the door was wrenched violently open.
It was Mr. Pym and Uncle James. But they did not
bring the wild duck. Something serious was the
matter. “Make some tea for us quickly—we have
to go straight out,” Mr. Pym commanded.
The children summoned up courage to ask what
was the matter.
“It’s the horses !” came back the terse reply. “The
thunderstorm has scared them. They’ve broken
loose from their tethers and got away. We must go
after them while we can still trace their tracks.”
“The horses ! And Trixie—has she gone too ?”
“She has —and precious little chance there is of
finding them. Got the tea ready ?”
“Here it is.” Margery brought it over, strong and
piping hot. They swallowed it down, and Margery
and David stood watching them as they tramped
across the hill.
They stayed away all that afternoon, leaving Mar-
gery and David alone in the lonely hut.
“Trixie should comeback—even if the others don’t,”


asserted Margery loyally. “She wouldn’t desert us.
Uncle James has had her ten years.”
“Maybe—but once she gets a taste for wild life in
the mountains she’ll keep with the others,” remarked
David gloomily. “That is, if they’re not stolen.
Scores of prospectors would give their eyes to get
hold of good horses.”
Later they walked across the hill to see if the search
partv was returning. There was no sign of anyone
or anvthing. Just the vast stillness of the bush with
the wind flapping and creaking among the wet leaves
and hanging bark of the gums. It was late when
Mr. Pym and Mr. Everett returned. Their report
was “No luck,” and they retired to bed in gloomy
silence.
Margerv woke up at midnight. The hut was in
pitch darkness, but she was not frightened, for she
could hear the comforting sound of her father’s and
uncle’s deep breathing, and farther away a curious
whistling snore from Pengally. Now there was
another sound. It was something at the door. A
faint scratching noise as though someone were trying
to enter. There it was again ! A faint scratching
sound as if someone were asking to be let in the
door. Following it came the unmistakable whinny
of a horse.
Margery was out of bed in a bound.
“It’s Trixie—she’s come back !” she cried happily,
and groped her wav to the door. Fumbling at the


lock, she undid it, flinging back the door. With a
low whinny of joy, a soft nose came nuzzling towards
her and out of the darkness she saw two round eyes
gleaming brightly.
“Trixie darling ! I knew you’d come back,” she
cried, flinging both arms round her pet’s neck.
“Margery—what’s the matter there ?” came her
father’s voice. Uncle James was awake too. The
scratch of a wax match was heard, and the room was
lit up with the flickering light of a candle.
“It’s Trixie, Papa. She’s come back. Didn’t I
say she wouldn’t leave us ?”
“OWWW!”
An ear-splitting yell broke through the silence.
Pengally, who could sleep through a cavalry charge,
had finally woken up. With a sleepy grunt he rolled
from his stretcher bed, only to land with his bare feet
on a sharp tack lying point up on the floor.
“Yow,” he yelled. “Quickly, zome’un —there be a
tack in my foot. It be gone in a full inch !”
Mr. Everett fetched the candle, and very tenderly
Pengally extracted a small but sharp tack from the
flat of his foot.
“Now r can zome’un tell me what be the reason for
wakin’ an honest mun from his beauty-zleep in the
dead of night thus-wise ?”
“It’s Trixie,” cried Margery. “She’s come back
again. I heard her at the door.”
“Blezz my zoul—zo she be come back —perhaps this


iv


means the other horses may be near by too,” marvelled
the old fellow.
A lantern was lit, and the three men searched
anong the trees, but no sign of the other horses could
be seen. Evidently Trixie had been too much the
household pet to relish the prospect of a wild life in
the mountains. She still retained memories of the
warm stable and deliciously flavoured oats in the
Prahran farm. The Pyms went to bed again, cheered
tremendously. Trixie’s return gave them fresh hope.
Early the next day a visitor arrived at the hut.
David brought the news to Margery.
“Come and see who’s outside. It’s a blackfellow.
He’s talking to Pengally. Grinning from ear to ear.
Come and have a look.”
Margery followed him to the door of the hut.
Pengally was talking to a good-looking black of the
Jajowurrong tribe which lived round the Loddon
and Campaspe Rivers.
“He’s not a wild black. I think he must be work-
ing on some sheep-run,” whispered Margery, “Look
at those old trousers he’s wearing. Besides, he must
have been in company with white people—otherwise
how could he understand what Pengally says ?”
“Wait ! I’ve got it,” her brother exclaimed. “The
other day Pengally was telling me about a black-
fellow he knows. He is called Jackie and works on a
sheep station over the range. He was bitten by a
dingo, and was terribly ill when Pengally found him.


The wound had festered, and if Pengally hadn’t
cleaned and dressed it, the chap probably would have
died from blood-poisoning.”
“Good for Pengally. He may seem a gruff old
bear, but his heart is of gold,” cheered Margery.
“Pengally got the people on the sheep station to
take Jackie in. He had to go somewhere. When his
own tribe thought he would die, it went off and left
him. Jackie never forgot the good turn. Every
now and then he finds out where Pengally is, and
visits him.”
“Yes, I think this must be the same fellow, then.
Let’s go over and see if he will say ‘hullo’ to us.”
But they were given no time to find out, for directly
they came near, Pengally sent them in post-haste to
find their father. “Tell him Jackie has offered to
try and track down the horses.”
The two raced off in great excitement.
“Papa, come quickly,” cried David. “Pengally
has a black tracker here.”
“A tracker. What luck!” And Mr. Pym fol-
lowed with rapid strides back to Pengally.
“Mine tinkit them horses, they go big walkabout,”
Jackie was saying. “We catchem plurry fast.”
Margery and David begged to be allowed to accom-
pany the men on the search. Finally Mr. Pym gave
permission.
When searching the previous day, the men had
found some tracks in a valley farther up the river,


but had not been able to pick them up again, for the
trail led into rocky country. At least they did to
the white men, but when Jackie arrived at the spot,
his keen eyesight and knowledge of the bush soon
told him which way the horses had gone. A freshly
turned leaf on the ground, a broken grass-blade or the
tiniest disturbance among pieces of stick, all have
their meaning for the black tracker. More wonderful
still, he can tell how long it is since tracks were made.
Jackie would kneel to the ground, sometimes leaning
down till his nose was almost on the ground, then
suddenly jump up, triumphantly exclaiming :
“Horses go walkabout this way mine tink it.”
He hardly ever made a mistake. After taking
them across rocks and creeks, they came to softer
ground where the prints were plainly visible again.
Jackie seemed confident the horses were not far away.
“Them no wan’ go walkabout through mountains.”
“What makes you think that ?”
“Him grass —it likem grow here—not grow muchem
in mountains. Too much bad-fellah debil-debil.”
No one could quite understand about the debil-
debils, but it seemed natural the horses would stay
where the feed was best. Five minutes later they
were rounding them up.
Jackie was rewarded with a bag of flour, some
tobacco, a small looking-glass, and left them grinning
broadly. That afternoon Pengally continued fos-
sicking in the creek bed for gold, but his efforts were


now only half-hearted, and the Pyms felt directly
they left he would board up his log cabin and follow
in Boneparte Webster’s footsteps to the district
where it was rumoured gold was actually discovered in
good quantities. David and Margery spent the
evening packing up and preparing for their departure.
The next morning they were to set off for Melbourne.
Margery and David felt a pang of real regret when the
time came for them to say good-bye to Pengally.
Despite his gruff, eccentric ways, the Cornishman
had proved a true friend, and they realized he hid a
kind heart under his rough exterior.
“I zuppose we must zay good-bye for a while at
least, Mizz Margery. God-zpeed to all o’ you,” he
said in his queer, gruff voice.
“When you’re in Melbourne be sure you come and
see us —you’ll promise, won’t you ?” urged the little
girl.
“Once you be down there with the Governor an’
zuch-like, prezious little time you zhall ’ave to take
notice of an old miner.”
“Indeed I won’t,” came back the indignant answer.
“Anyway, Mr. Pengally, if you strike gold, perhaps it
will be you who is the fine one. Maybe you will sweep
past David and me in a wonderful carriage with six
horses. You will raise your monocle and say : ‘Now
where have I met that young person ?’ ”
The thought of himself wearing a monocle was too
much for Pengally. He chuckled loudly.


“I doubt if it ever zhall come to that. Ladv Luck,
J 7
she don’t zeem to have much time for me zo far.”
“If you’re unlucky for the first half of your life,
they say you’ll have a change at thirty-five.”
“I be already well past that age,” was the gloomy
answer, “But there be your Pa and Uncle waitin’ to
v v
“If you’re unlucky for the first half of your life, they say you’ll have
a change at thirty-five.”
ztart off. God-zpeed and zpare a thought zometimes
for Pengally in the mountains.”
The children assured him they would. Soon they
were waving their last good-bye to the hut, and
jogging down the track to the valley. They took the
same route along which they had come, for the horse
had to be returned to Edgar Digby. They rode into
his farm late that afternoon and stayed the night
there. The stockily built man was as reserved as


ever, and had little to say. Margery tried to get news
concerning Midnight and Captain Lightning from him,
but he stubbornly refused to talk.
They rode for the greater part of the next day, and
by sundown pulled in at a squatter’s farm twenty
miles from Melbourne. Mr. Ernest Turner, who owned
the sheep station, was a friend of Mr. Pym’s, and
welcomed the travellers heartily. His wife took
Margery and David in charge, the first thing she did
being to give them fresh changes of clothing. An
old woollen jersey and clean but much too large
breeches for David, and for Margery a dress of dark
blue cloth with a full skirt and sprigs of flowers
worked on the collar. The little girl felt much
happier to be clean and tidy once more. Mrs. Turner
also brushed and curled her hair. Before, she had
looked like a wild gipsy girl—dress torn, hair tousled,
and tattered bonnet.
“Your Mama would faint away if she saw you like
that,” Mrs. Turner laughed.
They rode into Melbourne the next day, passing on
the way a smart carriage drawn by four handsome
grey horses. A coachman in military uniform sat on
the box flourishing his whip, and inside were two
smartly-dressed ladies in fur-trimmed cloaks and huge
bonnets gay with feathers and ribbon bows. It was
the Governor’s wife and a friend, Margery and David
felt pleased they were not still in the ragged garments
they had worn in the mountains.


Before returning to the farm at Prahran, Mr. Pym
and Mr. Everett called at the Post Office, They had
noticed the white sails of a ship in Port Phillip, and
thought it might be a mail-ship bringing letters from
England. While Margery and David waited in the
street for them, they saw a little girl and a fashionably
dressed woman drive up in a dog-cart.
“Look—it’s Mrs. Stevens and Jemima,” gasped
Margery.
She expected Jemima to come and speak to her,
but was surprised to see the other hesitate and merely
nod her head. Then Mrs. Stevens was heard to say
in her haughtiest voice :
“Come away, Jemima. Remember your Papa said
you were to have nothing to do with those children.”
Margery flushed scarlet, and David, too, reddened
angrily, for they caught a mention of bushrangers in
her next sentence. But they held their chins high
and pretended they had not heard.
“Spiteful cats,” muttered Margery wrathfully as
the Stevens drove off with a flourish. “Trust them
to make the most of anything.”
“Don’t take any notice of them,” advised David.
“Papa can make them look shamefaced enough if he
wants to. Anyway, no one will believe a word
Captain Stevens says. Remember the time he spread
the rumour one of the officers wore a false black
moustache and dyed his hair. He said it was really a
ginger colour and didn’t match the uniform.”


Margery had to laugh at that.
“We won’t tell Papa about this meeting,” continued
David. “He has enough to worry him as it is.”
He spoke just in time, for that minute Mr. Pym and
Uncle James emerged from the Post Office surrounded
by friends who had given them a rousing welcome
back to Melbourne, From the warmness of their
greetings, it was plainly seen not many believed the
rumours the Stevens had circulated.


CHAPTER X
WILFRED
“Watch Rajah and Prince —they know home’s near
as well as we do,” declared Margery, as she saw the
horses go forward at a gallop when they were nearing
her Uncle James’s farm in Prahran. “Oh, look,
there’s the house —and someone’s at the door waving !
Why, it’s Mama !”
“My dears, how thankful lam you’ve returned . . said Mrs. Pym.
Directly the horses were pulled up, Margery could
not scramble down quick enough, and the next
minute was in her mother’s arms, hugging her with
all her might.
“My dears, how thankful I am you’ve returned safe
and sound,” said Mrs. Pym, half-laughing, half-crying.
“But oh, what scarecrows you look.”


Margery, of course, was the best of the bunch, for
she had been lent a clean frock by the squatter’s wife,
but David looked a queer spectacle in the old jersey
and too big breeches which hung on him in baggy
folds. Mr. Pym and Mr. Everett were hardly recog-
nizable. Their beards were scraggy and unkempt,
their slouch hats stained, and every scrap of clothing
torn and begrimed with dust.
When they trooped inside, Mrs. Pym filled every
kettle, iron pot and tin with water, putting them all
on the fire to heat, so everyone could have a good
scrub. By the time dinner was ready they were a
transformed quartet.
Margery and David were lectured severely for their
impulsive action in going the long dangerous journey
without consulting anyone. But in those early days
of the colony, foolhardy ventures were not unusual.
Fresh news was flashed round Melbourne daily.
Someone had struck gold ! A new sailing ship
brought fresh settlers from England ! Explorers
were discovering new marvels up north—convicts had
escaped—or some sea-captain attacked by pirates in
the tropics on the outward voyage ! Risky ventures
were the order of the day in Melbourne in those
times.
Before evening dinner, Margery and David were
introduced to a new member of the household —
Wilfred Jellibrand, who had helped with the farm-
work during their absence. Wilfred’s father was an


explorer, and had gone north with a party to charter
the yet unknown coast and country of Northern
Queensland. When his mother died, Mrs. Pym had
offered to provide a home for him till his father
returned, the condition being he helped with the
farm work.
He was a fat, sleepy-looking boy. His skin very
white, his eyes small and bright blue, and his nose
turned up. He wore a large spotted kerchief round
his neck, and had knotted it in a bow at the front,
making his face look larger and rounder than it
naturally was.
“I’m glad to meet you,” he coolly remarked.
“Now there won’t be so much work to do.” Wilfred’s
main aim in life, it seemed, was to avoid work when-
ever possible.
“What do you think we’re having for dinner ?
Apple dumplings !” he confided to Margery. “Be
early to the table, or there mightn’t be a second
helping for you,” he added with a wink, then dis-
appeared in the direction of the kitchen to see what
other news he could glean. Margery stared blankly
after the fat form in the tight-fitting trousers. She
had never met a queerer person.
His prophecy proved correct. There were apple
dumplings for dinner, a huge dish of them. But
there was plenty for everyone. Margery noticed
Wilfred had at least four, and in addition polished off
scones, three slices of her mother’s plum-cake, and


other good things with amazing rapidity. She wished
he would stop nudging her and whispering news
about what he liked best.
After the meal they gathered round the fire, and
Mr. Pym drew from his pocket an important-looking
letter with red seals on it.
“This letter arrived for me last week by the Priscilla
Tidzvorth ,” he explained. “It contains very impor-
tant news. Mv old Uncle Richard died some months
J
ago, and has left me part of his estate, I will have
to catch the next boat to England and see to my
affairs !”
The children received this news with mixed feelings.
The plan was that they should remain on their
uncle’s farm with their mother, while Mr. Pym made
the voyage to London. All thought of a gold dis-
covery now forgotten, he planned to buy a sailing
ship with the money and set up as a merchant. The
next ship to sail was the Sophia Kate , leaving in a
week’s time. Preparations for the voyage started
immediately. Each day Mr. Pym saddled his horse
and rode to the town to discuss details and make
business arrangements. He had already built a large
two-story warehouse near the wharves, and now
planned to have his family move in, and set up as a
merchant directly he returned.
In the meanwhile Margery and David were helping
on the farm under the direction of Wilfred Jellibrand.
The fat boy found this arrangement very much to his
149


liking. He was not fond of working himself, but
dearly loved giving orders to others. One day as
Margery sat sewing busily, and David was studying
a book on bridge building, they saw him rapidly
approaching.
“Oh, help—here’s the nuisance. I suppose he’s
got some job for us,” groaned David.
He was right. The next moment a plump beaming
face was thrust through the open window.
“Both here, and both doing nothing ! Splendid.
Put your aprons on and help me whitewash the fowl-
house,” he commanded.
“We’re not doing nothing—we’re busy,” was Mar-
gery’s indignant reply.
“Before your Papa left for the town to-day, he said
I was to get you to help me whitewash the fowl-
house,” replied the other triumphantly. Knowing
this was true, Margery and David followed him with
an ill grace. Wilfred had a large workman’s overall
over his usual clothes. In it he looked more like a
plum-pudding than ever.
“Here’s the pail of whitewash, and here are the
brushes. Margery, I want you to paint the lower
part of the hen-house. David will mount the ladder
and whitewash the wall near the roof.”
“But there are only two brushes. What will you
use, Wilfred ?”
“Me ? I’ve far too many important jobs to give
you a hand at present,” was the airy answer.


David glared fiercely, but the fat boy was not
perturbed. He had the upper hand, for both Mr.
Pym and Uncle James were in the town, while Mrs.
Pym was preparing for visitors.
David watched Wilfred’s rotund figure disappear-
ing across the farmyard.
“I don’t believe he’ll do any work at all—he’s going
to have a sleep in the loft,” he wrathfully remarked.
A sudden idea occurred to him.
“Listen, Margery ; let’s lay a plot for that por-
poise. We’ll fill another tin with whitewash and
balance it on the top of the fowl-house door there.
Then when he comes back to see how we’re getting
on with the work, he’ll push that door open, and
down it will come all over him.”
Margery laughed in gleeful anticipation.
“Oh, a splendid scheme —but is there another tin
we can use ?”
Her brother recalled there was one near the back
door, but this was dangerous, as they would have to
pass through the farmyard to fetch it, and Wilfred
might spy on them. But they could find no
others.
“There’s nothing for it—we’ll have to creep round
the back of the barn and get to the veranda that
way,” said David.
This also was a risk, for it would take longer, and
if Wilfred should arrive while they were away, the
scheme would be frustrated. Finally, it was decided


David should stay behind while Margery fetched it
alone.
“Be quick as you can, and if you meet Wilfred,
don’t take any notice of him, go straight ahead,”
directed David.
Quickly she raced off on her errand. All was
quiet in the barn, no sound of busy hammering, no
sound of anyone grooming horses near by ; in fact,
no sound at all, except the scratching of mice in the
loft above, and a wheezing noise which was obviously
someone snoring. She peeped through a crack
between the boards, and to her indignation saw
Wilfred stretched out on the hay, fast asleep.
“Greedy thing—he’s helped himself to cakes and
eaten too many,” she thought crossly. Going straight
to the veranda, she lifted down a good-sized tin
and went back to David, not troubling to keep under
cover this time, but making a bee-line straight across
the farmyard.
“You do take things calmly—weren’t you afraid
Jellybeans would sight you ?” asked David.
“Don’t worry, he’s fast asleep in the barn,” was
the scornful rejoinder. “I just hope the whitewash
does fall on him—teach him not to be lazy.”
Like two conspirators of old, they poured some of
the thick white liquid into the tin. David then took
the ladder and propped it against the inside wall of
the fowl-house. Mounting carefully, he asked Margery
to hand up the tin and balanced it between the cross-


piece of the doorway, and the top of the door
itself.
“Splendid !” he chuckled. “Now, when Wilfred
pushes the door open it will come down wop, all over
him.”
“Ssssh —he’s coming now,” said Margery suddenly—
a short while later. “Come down quickly,”
“Now, keep calm—pick up your brush and be
whitewashing in the other corner.”
They both busily set to work plastering the wall
with the thick wash. However, Wilfred seemed in
no hurry to come and oversee the work. First he
loitered near the stables, then strolled to the cow-
shed.
Margery and David had now painted every remain-
ing inch of the inside wall, but went over it again,
not daring to go through the door, and proceed with
the outer part, in case the tin fell on them.
“I do wish he’d hurry —I’m tired of being cooped
up in this stuffy fowl-house,” complained Margery.
Her wish was granted, for shortly afterwards they
heard a familiar voice call out :
“Come on, you two —where are you ? Haven’t
you got that fowl-house done yet ? You’re slower than
snails.”
“We’re doing the inside —come and look at it,”
shouted David.
The fat boy walked straight into the trap. As he
pushed the door open, true to plan, down fell the


whitewash, gushing all over him, and coating him
from head to foot in a white gluey mess.
The two spectators leant back and laughed till
the tears ran down their cheeks. The sight of Wilfred
groping blindly around with the tin on his head was
too much for them. When he had sufficiently recovered
from the shock to pull it off, he still looked so
ludicrously funny, Margery and David burst out
laughing again. The whitewash was all over him.
His fair wispy hair was matted with it. It streamed
down his overalls. It ran in wet trickles down his
neck.
“Can’t see it’s anything to laugh about,” he
remarked in a hurt tone, as he did his best to mop up
the sticky liquid with his handkerchief.
“If you could only see yourself,” gasped Margery.
“You look like a great plum-pudding with white
sauce all over it.”
“Oh, don’t— If I laugh much more I’ll burst,”
gurgled David weakly, and leant against the wall
for support.
“Ha ! Ha ! Now you’ve got whitewash on your
back, too, that wall’s wet in case you don’t know,”
crowed Wilfred, feeling cheered to find someone else
in the same plight, even in a lesser degree. Blinking
thoughtfully, he turned suddenly on David.
“How did that tin come to be up over that door ?”
he demanded. “It’s a plot. You did it on purpose —
own up now.”


“I was painting the fowl-house wall just above the
door—somehow the tin got left up there,” David
answered with a look of cherubic innocence.
“It was awfully careless of you. You’re always
leaving things in awkward places,” admonished
Margery. She thought this might help put Wilfred
off the scent. If he found out they had deliberately
plotted to catch him, she knew he would never forgive
them.
Luckilv her ruse succeeded.
“Yes, it was sheer carelessness—you should be
more careful,” Wilfred answered in a huffy voice,
as he busily continued mopping up the whitewash.
“I suppose it was, but there was so much to be
done, I was too rushed to think of that. Perhaps if
you’d been here to help I could have gone more
carefully,” came back the clever answer.
Wilfred flushed under the whitewash. His
conscience was a guilty one. He knew very well
he should have been helping with the job.
“I was too busy—but I can help now —that’s
what I came to tell you,” he mumbled.
“I thought you said we only had two brushes,”
remarked Margery innocently.
“I did—but now I come to think of it there’s
another in the tool-shed,” and off he went to fetch
it.
“He’s actually hurrying,” chuckled David. “What
a triumph for us, Marg. But ooh, my heart was in


my boots for a minute. I made sure he’d discover
it was a trap.”
“I did, too. But, sssh, here he comes back,” she
warned.
It certainly was a triumph for the two young
Pyms. Wilfred worked with a will for the rest of
the afternoon, and the fowl-house was gleaming
white, inside and out, by the time the men
returned.
“A splendid job, Wilfred —congratulations !” Uncle
James told him.
Wilfred gave a modest smile.
“Of course, David and Margery gave me a bit of a
hand —that made a difference,” he condescendingly
remarked. The others gasped, but said nothing.
It was days before the fat boy got all traces of the
whitewash out of his hair. Every time Margery saw
him, she wanted to giggle. The climax came
the day the minister called to bid Mr. Pym bon
voyage.
“Poor lad,” he remarked sadly when he saw
Wilfred. “Pitiful sight, isn’t it, to see a young
lad’s hair go white like that ? What was it, Mrs.
Pym ? Some sudden shock, perhaps —or was it
illness ?”
Margery, sitting in the corner, had to stuff a
handkerchief into her mouth to stifle the laughter.
Quickly as she could she excused herself, so she
could dash out and pass the joke on to David.


But the episode of the whitewash served its purpose.
It made Wilfred regard the other two as equals,
and people to be respected. And they, in their turn,
discovered that though the fat boy disliked hard
work, he had a most agile brain. He was clever at
working out plots, and picking up news, and had
gathered together a seemingly inexhaustible supply
of stories and interesting facts.
It was he who told the Pyms that the Sophia Kate ,
the ship in which Mr. Pym was sailing for England
had challenged the Priscilla Tidworth to a race to
Southampton. The Priscilla was one of the first
clipper ships to reach Melbourne, beautifully designed,
on trim, finer lines which were a great improvement
on the designs of older sailing ships, such as the
Dolphin. Both she and the Sophia were made of
hard wood and iron, built with sharp bows and
specially rigged for quick sailing. Everyone was
talking of the challenge, and much money wagered
on the race.
The sailing date was a sunny day in late winter.
The sky was a light blue, flecked with a myriad
small clouds, but a keen, salty breeze came in from
the bay, and the sea was choppy and restless. The
Pyms and Wilfred drove down to bid a last good-bye
to Mr. Pym. The wharf, as usual, was a scene of
great activity. The cargo was already loaded, and
the passengers making their way to the deck. Some-
one reported the barometer was falling, and the


captain predicted dirty weather before they rounded
Cape Otway.
“Come on, children, you must say good-bye to
Papa now,” came the dread command.
Margery squeezed her mother’s hand sympatheti-
cally, she could see the tears quivering in her eyes.
Mr. Pym kissed them hastily, and turning abruptly,
mounted the gang-plank. The cry ; “Heave up the
anchor, boys,” rang across the water, the sails swung
over, and the Sophia KaU started on its homeward
voyage.
It was Wilfred who broke the silence.
“When he sails back, it will be in his own ship,
maybe ! Here’s hoping, Mr. Pym !”
Taking off his hat, he waved it dramatically after
the departing vessel.


CHAPTER XI
THE FIRST RUSH
Several weeks later, Wilfred strolled across to
where Margery was busily turning the handle of the
butter-churn, in the farm kitchen.
“Coming with David and I to the town for the
papers and stores ?” he asked. “We might see some
fun !”
The little girl straightened up, and stood wiping
her fingers on the corner of her apron.
“How do you mean ?”
Wilfred loved a mystery.
“Things are moving, you see fresh faces every time
you drive up Collins Street, By the look of things,
we landed a record number of immigrants from the
last ship !”
The Pyms had been so concerned about their
father’s departure that they had almost ignored
outside affairs. But Wilfred, as usual, had kept his
ears open, and heard report after report of gold
discoveries in the vicinity of Clunes, and other
districts near the very mountains where the Pyms
had stayed with Pengally.
Rumours of gold discoveries in Australia had
filtered through to England and America, and


already gentlemen adventurers and fortune-seekers
were starting to flock to the great unknown land
under the Southern Cross. They were merely fore-
runners to the seething hordes who rushed to the
colony in the latter part of the year, but even now,
the sleepy little town of Melbourne was stirring to
activity.
Having finished her butter making, Margery gained
permission to accompany the boys on their trip to
the town, and soon had her cape and bonnet on,
and was seated in the spring wagon, ready to start.
Wilfred had appointed himself as driver, and with an
expert crack of the whip, started up the horse, and
soon they were bowling along the deeply rutted road
to Melbourne. After their business was completed,
the fat boy, who always believed in doing things in
the grand manner, turned the horses into Elizabeth
Street, drawing up outside the coffee-house with a
flourish.
“Nothing like a drive in this keen air to make you
hungry. I shall give morning tea all round,” he
announced patronizingly.
His companions blinked in astonishment, but at
that moment the delicious aroma of coffee and
freshly-baked scones wafted through the open door,
and they accepted the offer with alacrity. They
passed through to the dining-room, and luckily
managed to find a table to themselves near the fire-
place. A great log fire roared up the chimney, and


when the rosy-cheeked waitress arrived with steaming
mugs of coffee it added the final touch to their
enjoyment.
The air of excitement Wilfred had said was so
noticeable, was repeated even in the usually peaceful
coffee-house. Groups of men were clustered in various
corners of the room, arguing excitedly, at times
becoming worked up to a stage when they jumped
to their feet, banging their fists on the tables and
causing the cups to rattle violently all round the
room.
“What’s the excitement ? Do you think Governor
Latrobe has resigned ?” wondered Margery. “Or is
there mutiny among the black troopers perhaps ?”
“No—it’s the gold ! That’s what they’re waiting
for —more news of gold finds ! It’s rumoured they’ve
made rich discoveries in the mountains,” answered
Wilfred.
“Hullo—what’s the commotion outside?” David
interrupted, racing to the window. Through it came
the mingled sound of galloping horses, shouting men,
and general buzz of excitement. The next moment a
burly black-bearded fellow made a dramatic entrance.
“Great news, mates ! They’ve struck it rich at
Buninyong ! The Geelong Gazette's arrived. It’s let
the cat out of the bag properly !”
An enterprising bookseller took advantage of this
startling announcement to appear on the spot wdth
a large bundle of papers. They sold like hot cakes.


David rushed to buy one, and sweeping aside the
cups and plates, spread it on the table. Wilfred
actually forgot about the three fresh home-made
scones still left on the plate.
“Look at this. It says they’ve struck rich gold
finds at Mount Buninyong, wherever that is ! This
is news !”
Everyone wanted to know where Mount Buninyong
was, and it proved to be the last outpost of a coach-run
from Geelong, an out-of-the-way settlement with a
handful of drovers’ waves and stray settlers. Its
leap into fame was the first step towards the founding
of the near-by town of Ballarat. The name Ballarat,
in aboriginal speech, means a resting-place, but from
that eventful day the district was a resting-place
no longer, but the scene of one of the greatest gold-
rushes the w r orld has ever known.
The children drove the spring cart home at top
speed, anxious that their mother and uncle should
hear the news. Mrs. Pym was even more excited
than they were, but Mr, Everett seemed strangely
silent.
He ordered them to see to the horse, and put the
cart in the shed, then turned to his sister, with dark
glowering face.
“With due respects to you, Emelia, I consider it
was a great mistake Robert left for London when
he did.”
Mrs. Pym bit her lip.


“What else could he do ? You know he was in
debt over the warehouse and needed the legacy
money immediately.”
“I know ! I know ! All the same there are more
ways than one of making money just now. He goes
off to London, and the same month news comes
through that gold has been found in the ranges. He’s
missed the chance of a lifetime. We would make
our fortunes.”
Mrs. Pym had her pride. She was not going to
let even her brother blame her husband like this.
Putting down her work, she looked steadily at him,
eyes flashing angrily.
“That’s your reason for being so moody and sullen
these last days ! I can assure you this, James. If
you want to go on looking for gold, there’s nothing
to stop you. David has been offered a position at
Tomkins’s store, he tells me, and we will manage
somehow. I still have a certain amount of money,
and the geese and ducks will help.”
It was such an offer Mr. Everett had been angling
for, but he hid his relief behind a calm face.
“You’re a brave woman, Emelia. I’ll start north
on Saturday. You will find you’re repaid for this in
the end. The chance is too good to miss.”
Mrs. Pym broke the news to the children the next
day, and found to her surprise they had half-expected
it. David had no difficulty in obtaining the position
as assistant at the grocery store. Margery and Wilfred
163


volunteered to work twice as hard on the farm.
They all felt if only they could pull through the next
few months their fortunes would be made without
fail.
Mr. Everett spent the next few days preparing
his outfit, and fixing the dray, but before long he
was besieged with requests for lifts to the gold-fields.
Hundreds of men, already, were forsaking their tasks
in the town, and setting out for Buninyong, Clunes,
and Mount Alexander on foot. When they heard
Mr. Everett was taking a dray and horse, they
came in droves, asking for the spare seat.
But the treachery of Captain Stevens and his men
had taught a lesson. This time Mr. Everett chose
his companions with care. There were two of them.
A lean, wiry fellow, named Samuel Wilkins, and
John O’Hara, an erstwhile ship’s doctor, who had
given up his profession for the lure of gold.
Tools and stores were packed, and on the Saturday
the party waved a last good-bye to the group on the
farm, and went off. Mrs. Pym kept up her courage
till the last, but once the dray disappeared round the
corner, she had a hard fight to keep back the tears.
She knew the struggle they would have till the
menfolk returned, but like other brave pioneers,
knew the position had to be faced, and was determined
to see things through some way.
“Don’t mind, Mama, he may make a fortune for
us, then you’ll never have to work again, ever,”


whispered Margery, giving her mother’s hand a
warm squeeze.
The days flew by, and with the money David
brought in from the store, and by dint of rigid
O 1
economy, the Pyms struggled on from week to week.
They had no news of Uncle James, till one day a
dirty note, scrawled in pencil, was handed to them
from the Post Office.
Wilfred and Margery took it to the farm in triumph.
“Here you are, Mama —a letter from Uncle James
perhaps it’s news of a rich gold find,” Margery told
her.
With trembling fingers, Mrs. Pym ripped open the
note. As she scanned the page, then turned to its
other side, a worried frown gathered on her brow.
“Is it bad news, Mama ?”
Mrs. Pym gave a sigh.
“Your Uncle James is a most extraordinary man.
He is at Ballarat. This letter may be somewhat of a
surprise.”
“Nothing could surprise me these days,” observed
Wilfred half to himself.
“The letter starts :
“Dear Emelia ,
“Be prepared for a shock. My money , and my
entire kit were stolen on the way to the diggings. Ehey're
striking rich finds here , and a new outfit and funds are
essential , so have sold the farm in exchange for a


partnership in a mining claim. You and the young
’uns must store or sell the furniture, and come north
to join me at Ballarat. Buy a good dray. Have arranged
Patrick Mulligan will bring you here. When you
arrive , ask for Everett’s tent at Dingo’s Flat, next to the
tub and cradle.
“Shall expect you by the end of the month. Guard
your supplies and money carefully.
“Best regards,
u Jas. Everett.”
Even Wilfred was thunderstruck.
“S-s-sold our beautiful farm just to buy a mining
claim. He must be mad,” stuttered David.
“They’re all mad—it’s the gold fever,” returned
their mother, with a high hysterical laugh. “Times
are certainly hectic. There’s nothing for it, children.
We must pack up, and be ready for this Mulligan
person when he comes.”
“Did he say Patrick Mulligan ? I know him—he’s
an old sailor,” Wilfred told them.
“Then why isn’t he on a ship ?”
“Deserted to look for gold, I suppose. I believe
they can’t get men to man the ships now.”
“The entire place seems to have gone mad !”
repeated Mrs. Pym in a dazed voice.
She was right. The news they had received was
only one of many such madcap schemes. Every-
where people were selling their farms and possessions,


-5m.
throwing up their jobs, to make for the gold-fields.
When gold had first been discovered, the country-
had been lashed with winter rains and driving gales,
and hundreds of would-be fortune-seekers had put
off their journeys to the diggings till the weather
cleared. But now, spring was at its height. The
storms had disappeared, each day dawning clear and
sunny with blue skies, and warm winds heavy with
the perfume of spring flowers. The colonists had
“The entire place seems to have gone mad !” said Mrs. Pym.
little time for the beauties of the season. They
packed their haversacks, parcelled a few belongings
together, and made for the gold-fields. The streets
of Melbourne were empty and deserted. Even the
policemen left their posts, and when ships sailed into
the harbour, the crews deserted, and joined in the rush.
Pat Mulligan arrived, and as Wilfred had guessed,
proved to be a jovial weather-beaten sailor, in wide-
flapping trousers, a red and white striped jersey, and
hair drawn back into a skimpy pigtail.


“So you be the land-lubbers I’m told to take to
Ballarat, eh ?” he boomed. “When shall ve be ready
to set sail, maties ?”
The answer was : “In tw'odays.” That time passed in
a whirl of activity for the three children. David’s
resignation was accepted at the store with a resigned
sigh. They knew it would be hopeless trying to get
another to take his place.
Mrs. Pym cooked supplies for the trip. A large
ham, a round of corn-beef, bacon and other meats.
Also some large slabs of plain, but very filling,
wheaten meal cakes. Pat Mulligan nailed sacks under-
neath the dray, and the meats were hung there. He
said this was an old ship’s custom. They kept fresher
that way.
A conference was decided to see what should be
done with Dulcie, the nanny-goat.
“Overload a ship in fair weather, and ye’ll regret
it when the storm blows up,” Pat Mulligan told
them. “We be got to take care of our two horses,
don’t forget, let alone the goat.”
“She’s a milch-goat, and gives good milk,” Mrs.
Pym reasoned. “It would pay us to take Dulcie.”
“Have it your own way, but ’tis the bhoys shall
have to take care o’ her, for I shall have a deal to do
without milkin’ the baist,” Pat told them. “But,
o’ course, Josephus can come too —he’ll not be a
trouble.”
Josephus turned out to be a large yellow and blue


parrot, whose favourite occupation was to swing to
and fro in his cage, yelling in a raucous voice :
“Mind the enemy, boys. Three cheers for good
Queen Vic.”
They agreed to his presence with a sigh.
The morning of the departure was grey and misty.
Pat w T as up before dawn, seeking the horses, and by
seven o’clock they had eaten their last breakfast on
the farm, locked up the empty house, and said their
good-bye to Prahran. They were all miserable and
silent.
They had to stop at a store, to leave the key there.
It w T as a shop on the junction of their track and St.
Kilda Road. The storekeeper’s wife came bustling out
to say good-bye.
“Off to the gold-fields, are you, Mrs. Pym ?” she
sighed. “Good luck to you, but dearie me, we shan’t
have anyone left in these parts soon. Captain Stevens
has just gone off—he’s to be Assistant Gold Commis-
sioner. A fine post, they say. Well, all the best to
you, and I hope you make your fortunes, all of
you.”
The children smiled a mechanical thanks, but their
minds were far away. Captain Stevens appointed
Assistant Gold Commissioner ! This news foreboded
no good.
Once back in the wagon, David and Margery
discussed this new development with some misgiving.
It would take them a long time to forget the way


in which Captain Stevens had betrayed Pengally’s
confidence.
“If you ask me, you’re making a fuss about nothing,”
Wilfred coolly remarked. “Probably you’ll not even
catch a glimpse of Captain Stevens at the diggings,
and if you do, you have only to do the disappearing
trick when he comes by. Why worry ?”
As they continued on their journey, they were
inclined to agree. It was still early morning, but as
they rumbled along they met a steady stream of
people making for the road to Mount Alexander,
Ballarat, and other spots, where gold had been
found.
A ship had anchored in Port Phillip the previous
day, and the immigrants, eager to begin their search
for gold, had not waited to have a spell in the town,
but were striking out for the diggings at top speed. A
motley collection they were. Scotchmen in warm
plaids and Highland bonnets. Fortune-seekers from
America. Square-face Germans, with rosy cheeks
and friendly blue eyes, Englishmen, Irishmen, and
here and there yellow-skinned slanting-eyed Chinese
in wide-brimmed coolie hats, and bearing their
belongings in baskets suspended from either end of
poles balanced across their shoulders.
Some were in wagons, some went on horseback,
others, like the Pyms, were travelling in large drays.
But the greater number were on foot. They had their
blankets and belongings strapped across their backs.


On one hand they carried spades, with billies and
frying-pans dangling, and on the other the all-important
axes and picks.
Margery watched them round-eyed. What would
happen to all these people, many of whom knew
nothing of Australian conditions, but who had thrown
up everything to answer the call of adventure and
fortune ?
The dray jogged on, hour after hour. The constant
stream of traffic had made the rough road almost
unbearably bad. The trip was a constant series of
bumps and jolts. They had halted for a rest and
some lunch by the road. On again that afternoon
and evening, and then another halt for the night’s
rest.
Travelling became more uncomfortable still the
next day. There was no made road. Just the winding
track, worn bare of grass by countless feet and
groaning cart-wheels. Early in the afternoon, David,
who was trudging by the horses, sighted a group of
riders approaching. The sun shone on their leader,
a magnificent figure in a uniform decked with gold
lace.
“Who’s this ? Are they the Governor’s men ?”
he shouted to Pat.
The old sailor stared hard at the approaching
troop
“Shiver me timbers, but it be the gold escort,”
he at last announced. “Looks as though we’d best


be prillin’ across to the side to let ’em pass,” and
tugging at the reins, he drew the horses up under a
gum-tree.
On came the imposing cavalcade. Pat Mulligan was
right. It was the gold escort, twelve strong, and all
riding handsome grey horses. At the head was the
Gold Commissioner, a striking figure in a cavalry
officer’s uniform —a dark braided frock-coat, a cap
bound with gold lace, and immaculate boots and
breeches. Following were two heavily armed troopers.
Then a group of four pack-horses, each led by a
horseman riding alongside. Two more mounted and
armed troopers flanked this group, and two others
were on guard at the rear. A fine body of men they
looked, all young and alert. Their orderliness, natty
uniforms, and well-kept horses were in sharp contrast
to the shabby crowds making their way to the
diggings.
Across the saddle of each pack-horse were slung
two large leather bags, something like large purses.
Margery noticed each was fastened by a strong
padlock.
“Is that where the gold is ?” she asked Pat Mulligan.
“Aye, lass —each of those bags, I’ve heard told,
carries gold weighing from twelve to fifteen pounds.
That means the cargo all told should be worth a
cool five thousand pounds at the least.”
“Five thousand pounds,” Margery gasped, and
gazed at the escort with new respect. She noticed


that each trooper as he passed was on the alert, one
hand at the pistol belt.
“Just as well they have those six troopers to keep
guard,” she observed.
“Don’t you worry. The Gold Commissioner be not
the sort to let the grass grow under his feet. It be
mighty unlikely there be any gold missin’ in these
parts. They be prepared for trouble, and be armed
to the teeth.”
Margery was not so sure, though she nodded and
kept her silence. Her mind travelled back to Captain
Lightning, the bushranger they had met on their
previous journey to the mountains.
“The law condemned me to hard labour for seven
years —me, an innocent man,” he had said. “No one
had mercy on me, and now I’m free, by gad, I’ll
have no mercy on the law.”
The gold escort trotted peacefully on, and the
Pyms, starting their horses again, pushed forward
towards the diggings. Previous rains had left the
ground muddy and slippery. After a while, Pat told
David to get down, and walk by the horses guiding
them across slippery patches. Wilfred, too, offered
to get out and walk.
“Hurray —that means twenty stone to the good,”
cheered David. The fat boy ignored this remark.
By midday they were well into the mountains.
They caught sight every here and there of some
shepherd’s hut, or settler’s shanty, but the places all


seemed deserted, their owners having left for the gold-
fields. Women and children were left to carry on as
best they could, their menfolk, caught up in the
ceaseless stream of traffic to the diggings, all hoping
that in the near future they might be adding their
contributions to the Gold Commissioner’s precious
burden.


CHAPTER XII
pengally’s luck
“Cheers ! If I be not mistaken, we be nigh to the
diggings now!” cried Pat Mulligan, late that
afternoon, and pointed with his whip through a
break in the trees.
Ahead, the Pyms saw square solid-looking hills,
covered with forest, and as they reached the crest
of the next rise, caught their first glimpse of a wide
flat land, encircled by a chain of low ranges. Two
larger hills jutted up from them some seven miles
apart. Mounts Buninyong and Warrenheip. In the
gullies canvas towns had sprung up like mushrooms.
Ramshackle and tumbledown towns, for most of
the dwellings were insecure tents or rough huts,
built from bark which left many crannies and holes
which the wind must whistle through on cold days.
From the forests behind them came the ring of
axes, as trees were being cut down for firewood and
buildings.
The first diggers on the scene had pitched their
tents and built their huts close to their gold claims.
But where the ground was rich, and the claims lay
close together, as time went on this became impossible,
and accordingly there sprung up the low rows of


huts and tents, all shapes and sizes. One, perhaps,
a piece of ragged canvas, so old and tattered, it was a
miracle it held together. Next to it, in striking
contrast, might be a neat dwelling of slabs, with a
weather-proof bark roof. The property of an old
bushman this, built by someone who, like Pengally,
knew how to achieve comfort. And next to this,
again, might be a ramshackle mia-mia of which even
a blackfellow would be ashamed.
In the near-by gullies, men worked and toiled
feverishly among the heaps of gravel and stone.
The creeks which once had rushed down the hill-
sides, pure and sparkling, now were turned to dirty,
yellow-tinged streams, and patches of forest round
the canvas towns were stripped bare and desolate,
to feed the diggers’ fires.
The Pyms gazed on this scene of activity in utter
bewilderment. Margery, David and Wilfred had not
expected the gold-fields to be so extensive, nor the
miners so many.
“H’m. ... I can see, me hearties, it’ll take us
all our time to find Jim Everett among these
thousands,” observed Pat Mulligan, pushing back
his cap and staring at the scene before him in dismay.
“Hi, mate !” he called to a passing digger. “Can ye
give me some idea how I’d best go about finding a
chap called Jim Everett up this way ?”
The miner, a thick-set swarthy-looking fellow,
gave a short laugh.


“There ain’t no law or order here, mate. You’ll
find it a hard job. Best go along and ask at the Post
Office. It’s down there, see ! That log cabin. They
might know of the chap you want, in there, but I
don’t like your chances.”
“Thanks—much obliged,” answered Pat, then
turning to the others added : “Lads, be goin’ over
to that Post Office place to see if ye can get any news o’
your Uncle ! I’ll have to be stayin’ here to mind the
wagon. We must take mighty good care to keep
an eye on our things in these lawless parts.”
Eager for adventure, Wilfred and David dashed
off on their mission. Threading their way between
irregular rows of huts and tents, they finally reached
a larger, but battered log cabin.
“My hat—don’t tell me this is the Post Office,”
said David. “Yes it is. What a place ! And Jelly-
beans, just take a look at the notices,” and he pointed
to the walls, which evidently served as official notice
boards, for scraps of paper and letters were nailed
everywhere.
“If this should meet the eye of John Simon, will
he call at the tent by the cross-roads,” read Wilfred.
“Seems a bit vague, doesn’t it ? It looks as though
we’ll have a job to find your Uncle !”
“Come inside. We can only ask,” was David’s
reply, and the two lads pushed their way through
the open door into the dimly lighted office. The air
was so thick with smoke, for a moment they could


see nothing clearly, but only make out a dim crowd
of men, jostling each other, shouting and laughing.
The noise was deafening. Gradually, their eyes
became accustomed to the half-light. They made out
a rough counter on the far side of the room, and next
to it, a shaky wooden box with a sliding shutter.
When a man wanted to ask for a letter, he knocked
at this shutter. With a bang it was flung up, and
the man in charge poked out his head.
This man was one-armed Jem Mickleberry an
identity of the gold-fields. He spent most of his spare
time telling the story of how his arm had been lost
fighting with the pirate, Jean Lafitte, near Cuba, in
the West Indies. There was no regular letter service.
The Ballarat settlement had sprung up like a mush-
room in three short months, and its Post Offices were
simply places where letters might or might not be
delivered. But as they were the one common meeting-
ground (excepting the Gold Commissioner s camp,
where the miners took their nuggets and gold-dust),
gradually the men took to leaving notes and messages
there. This one had been in a chaotic condition,
till Jem Mickleberry took it over. He had come to
Ballarat with a party of gold-seekers, but was
handicapped because of his missing arm, and soon
was looking around for another occupation. It was
through his efforts, any sort of order was established
at all.
Directly the crowd started to thin out, David and
178


Wilfred marched across to the wooden partition,
rapping it smartly.
“Eh ? What is it ?” demanded Jem Mickleberry,
poking his head through the shutter. The sudden
sight of his swarthy face, with its long drooping
whiskers and shock of black hair, made it difficult
for the two lads to stifle their laughter.
David pulled himself together with an effort.
“Excuse me, sir,” he remarked politely, “Could
you tell us where we could find a Mr. James Everett ?
He arrived in these parts a month ago.”
“Everett. H’m . . . where’s his camp? There’s
an Everett at Pennyweight Flat. Is he a fat man
with a limp ?”
“No. Tall, with broad shoulders. He’s got dark
eyes and dark hair. Oh, and a wart on his right
cheek ! He said we must ask at Dingo’s Flat for
Everett’s tent next to the tub and cradle.”
Jem Mickleberry let out a hoarse laugh.
“Near the tub and cradle at Dingo’s Flat ! Haw !
Haw ! That be a good ’un. There’s a few thousand
workin’ at Dingo’s Flat, and practically each party,
I might state, has its own tub and cradle.”
David and Wilfred looked at each other with
dismay.
“The miners crowd in here like bees round a honey-
pot,” he continued. “A fine chance I get to see who’s
who ! No—’fraid I can’t help you,” and the shutter
slammed down.


“Hey —wait a minute,” cried Wilfred, banging
on the wood.
The shutter rattled up again.
“Huh —it’s you two again ! What do you want,
now ? I haven’t all day to waste. I’m a busy man.”
“Just tell us how we get to Dingo’s Flat,” Wilfred
pleaded. “We’ll go along there and ask a few people.”
Jem gave an ill-natured grunt of assent, and
opening a side-door, came slowly out. It was then
the boys saw he had only one arm.
“Come over here, lads,” he directed, and shuffled
to the door with the boys following. “Now, see that
flat down there, between those hills a mile off ? That’s
Dingo’s Flat, but it’s a big place. You could search
through it all day without finding him.”
“What can we do then ?”
Jem Mickleberry scratched his head.
“You might write a note and stick it on the wall
there, that is if you can find a space.” With that
he disappeared back inside his box.
The boys had no ink, but Wilfred produced a
scrap of paper, David a blue crayon pencil.
Carefully they printed in large letters :
“WOULD ANYONE SEEING MR. JAMES
EVERETT OF DINGO’S FLAT, KINDLY TELL
HIM THE PYMS HAVE ARRIVED. HE MUST
LEAVE A MESSAGE HERE, SAYING WHERE
TO MEET HIM.”


The walls were covered with notices of this sort.
The lads had difficulty in finding a spare place to
put theirs. It was an unwritten law of the diggings
that no one should remove any notes already up,
save the persons who had posted them. As they
searched, a digger came up, read a notice telling him
to call at a mate’s tent, and tore it off.
“There you are, young ’uns. Take my place here,”
he offered kindly.
The boys stuck their notice up immediately. It
was in a prominent spot, and they felt sure their
uncle would see it. As there seemed no other effort
they could make, now the notice was up, they made
tracks back for the Pyms’ wagon. Mrs. Pym seemed
very agitated when she heard they had been unable
to locate Mr. Everett.
“He told us to go to Dingo’s Flat, near the tub and
cradle,” she repeated, taking the letter from her
pocket, and reading it again for reference.
“Exactly what I told the man at the Post Office—
the chap with one arm,” David replied. “He said
there are thousands of diggers at Dingo’s Flat—
nearly every party has its tub and cradle, so that
direction is not very much help. He advised us to
put a notice on the wall of the Post Office, asking our
Uncle to arrange a meeting-place. To-day, that’s
about all we can do.”
His mother gave her assent, with a resigned sigh.
The cradles were wooden boxes used by the miners
181


for separating the gold from mud and water. Each
was shaped like a baby’s cradle, and set on rockers,
and inside were wooden shelves to catch the specks
of gold, while the mud and water ran out through
a hole in the bottom.
The sun was setting now and the light fading,
so they agreed they would have to camp where they
were that night. Pat Mulligan had the forethought
to have collected a good supply of dry wood along
the track. It was a wise precaution, because every
scrap of wood in the vicinity of the diggings had been
made use of long before. Soon a roaring fire blazed
high, a piece of dried beef was chopped up and cooked
with carrots and potatoes for a stew. After Dulcie
the milch-goat was milked, Wilfred took her up the
hill, and stayed on guard, as she dined from the
grass and bushes. The children had been warned to
keep a careful watch of their pet, and Wilfred kept
a strict watch. As the light waned, he saw the miners
tramping wearily back to rest after the hard day’s
work. They had gathered in groups, discussing their
prospects. There was a great commotion in one
section of the camp —everyone cheering and shouting.
Wilfred longed to investigate the cause of the
jubilation.
“Someone must have struck it rich —perhaps it’s
a nugget,” he thought.
But doings were wild and lawless on the gold-fields,
and Pat Mulligan had forbidden the children to go


exploring without his permission. The fat boy had
to be content with watching the excitement from the
distance. By now, camp-fires were lighting up all
round the plain, and in the distant hills too. They
glowed through the twilight like myriads of fireflies.
“That’s enough, Dulcie. You’ll burst if you eat
any more,” said the boy, and pulling the unwilling
goat back to the camp, fastened her securely to
the wheel of the wagon.
The meal smelt most inviting and Wilfred was not
slow to join the circle round the fire and accept the
steaming plateful of stew, washed down with billy
tea.
Tired out, the children went to bed early, wrapping
themselves warmly in rugs and blankets, for the
mountain air was frostily cold. But it was long
before they went to sleep. The miners who had
struck a find were celebrating a few hundred yards
away, and they could hear their wild shouting and
laughing, mixed with snatches of popular songs.
It was new, strange and exciting, and not at all as
they had imagined. Gradually they fell asleep,
not waking till daybreak.
They were awake early the next morning, but
most of the miners were before them, and were
away to the diggings by sunrise. Pat Mulligan was
anxious to find Mr. Everett so he could go off and
peg out a claim himself, and hinted he would have
to leave the Pyms to struggle on as best they could,


and go off on his own, if they did not find their uncle
soon. David and Wilfred hurried to the Post Office
to see if their note had brought any result, but they
were disappointed.
Jem Mickleberry stood at the doorway puffing at
a pipe.
“No luck, young bins. I’ve looked for you. There
don’t seem to be a reply for your notice.”
David’s face fell.
“But surely someone who comes here must know
James Everett.”
A man who was bargaining at the counter for
scissors and a pipe, wheeled sharply round.
“Blezz my zoul, lad —what be you doin’ here ?”
exclaimed a well-known voice. It was the Pyms’
old friend, Pengally. David grasped the Cornish-
man’s rough toil-worn hand eagerly.
“Pengally ! Wherever did you spring from ? What
a stroke of luck. How are you getting on ?”
Pengally was delighted to see his young friend.
“It zeems Mizz Margery was a bit right. My luck
be changed at last,” he chuckled. “I came up here,
pegged me claim out, and would y’ credit it, ztruck
a vein of gold not a skerrick more than three feet
below the surface. I tell ye more of that zome other
time. First, explain now what ye be doin’ in these
parts. This be no place for a lad. Ye be not runnin’
from ye Ma for the zecond time, I hopes ?” he added
anxiously.


David shook his head.
“It’s nothing like that. But one minute. Let me
introduce you to my friend, Wilfred Jellibrand.”
The fat boy ambled forward, took his cap off,
placed his hands across the region of his stomach,
and bowed stiffly. Whether on the diggings or at
Government House, he believed in doing things
with a flourish.
“I am delighted to make your acquaintance, Mr.
Pengally. Margery and David have told me a lot
about you.”
This tickled the old miner’s fancy.
“I dare zay they ’ave zpun a number o’ tales at
my expense. So you’ve come to Ballarat with David.
Tryin’ to make your fortunes, I take it. Good luck
to ’ee, lads. Good luck !”
“We didn’t come here by ourselves. Don’t get
that idea,” David interposed. “Mama and Margery
are with us —we came by wagon with an old sailor,
Pat Mulligan.”
“Complete with Josephus the parrot, and Dulcie
the goat,” added Wilfred.
Pengally scratched his head with astonishment.
“Beggin’ your pardon for zayin’ zo, but folks
certainly do be doin’ the rummiest things these
days. Your Ma and Mizz Margery here, at the gold-
fields. This be no place for the likes o’ them,”
David explained there had been little choice in
the matter. Their uncle had sent a note saying he


had sold the farm in Prahran for a share in some gold
claim, and they had come north to join him. He
said they had received a note telling them to ask at
the tent next to the tub and cradle at Dingo’s Flat.
“We will only stay here a little while, of course,”
he added loyally. “Uncle is sure to make his fortune
before the year is out.”
Pengally bit his lip. He did not wish to dash their
hopes, but although Dame Fortune had smiled on
him, he knew not everyone could be lucky enough to
strike rich finds.
“You mun not be too sure about that. I zaw your
Uncle the other day.”
“You did ! Hurray, that solves everything. Can
you tell us where he is—and how is he getting
on ?”
“Mister Everett be not one to give away his own
zecrets. You will have to ask him that yourzelves.
But I can take you to his tent now.”
“Thank goodness we met you. Come back to the
wagon and meet Pat, Mama and Margery.”
They set off at a brisk pace, Pengally pointing out
every landmark and place of interest to the lads.
When they arrived at their own wagon, they found
the others waiting impatiently. Margery jumped
from the step in a bound when she realized the
identity of the newcomer.
“Pengally ! This is a surprise !” She was half-
laughing, half-sobbing.


The Cornishman held out his wrinkled toil-worn hand.
“Mizz Margery, your good wishes brought luck to
me zure enough !”
Her eyes were shining like stars.
“I’m so glad—you deserved it, if anyone did. How
did it all happen ?”
“The ztory will have to wait till we be in the wagon
—I be goin’ to take you to your Uncle, and time
be too precious to waste in these parts.”
Pat Mulligan was soon restored to good humour,
when he learnt Pengally’s intentions. He handed
the reins over to the Cornishman, and retired to the
back of the wagon to work out his own plans. But
the Pyms clustered round the new driver, demanding
to hear of his adventures since they had left him in
the mountain hut.
The Cornishman idly flicked the whip across the
horse’s back, and began in his quaint way to tell
them all that had taken place. Directly he had
verified the rumours of gold at Clunes, he had
shouldered his swag and made across country to
join the diggers. He got there to find about thirty
men on the scene, and here met James Esmond, the
first colonist to produce alluvial gold.
“Maybe you’ve heard of him zumtime. He used to
drive a coach between Buninyong to Geelong.”
“I’ve heard of him,” David nodded. “They used
to call him ‘Civil Jim.’ Papa says he was the best
coachman on the roads.”


“Aye, that he was, but he got restless-like, and
three years ago he breaks his coach-drivin’ con-
tract, and off he goes to Californey, to the gold-
fields,”
To cut a long story short, the children were told
that James Esmond only made wages in America,
and in 1850 he was on his way back to Australia.
On board ship he met a fellow-passenger, Edward
Hargreaves (the man who made such important
gold discoveries in New South Wales). Hargreaves
was confident he would find gold in Australia, but
Esmond was a disappointed man, and said he was
going back to coach-driving.
But another man was driving the coach from
Geelong to Buninyong and there was no place for
him. He found work with a timber cutter in the
Pyrenees. There he met a German doctor, who
advised him to look out for gold. He found it on the
first of July, 1851, and, very excited, set out for Geelong
to report the matter. When Pengally tramped into
Clunes, Esmond was back again from Geelong,
and work began in earnest.
“His equipment was fine,” said the Cornishman.
“Nigh on seventy pounds he mun have spent on
those tents, pr’visions an’ minin’ implements. We
zet to work at Deep Creek.”
“What did you have to do ?” Margery asked.
“To me they gave the task o’ pushin’ the barrow—
me hands soon were one mass of blisters.”


“Near the end of July,” Margery mused. “Wasn’t
it very wet and cold then ?”
“Aye,” answered Pengally with a rueful grin. “That
it was, but after a fortnight a party o’ us had eight
ounces o’ gold—about four pounds a week each that
was.”
“Hardly a fortune,” interposed Wilfred.
“We were well pleased enough while that lasted.
The trouble began when it gave out,” and he went
on to tell them how the shallow diggings at Clunes
very quickly were worked out. The men soon
despaired of making a living. They were on the point
of starving, when a man came tramping into the
camp. He was a Mr. Regan, who had been in the
Buninyong district.
“What luck, mates !” he greeted them. He was
astonished to hear of their desperate straits, and
advised them to pack up and make across country
to the Buninyong district.
“A spot there called Poverty Flat has yielded tip-
top results,” he told them, and also advised that
they try their luck in another spot, which later
proved to be the famous Golden Point of Ballarat.
Esmond, along with nine others, made up his mind
to try this new selection. Pengally was one of them.
Through the mud and the rain they struggled across
thickly timbered hills to the place Regan had advised.
This patch of rising ground was destined to become
one of the richest gold-fields in the w'orld !


“I can tell ’ee,” Pengally continued. “It took
zum doin’ strugglin’ across them hills at that time o’
the year. Rain ! It came peltin’ down in bucket-
fulls —drenched to the skin we were,* and hard put
to it to get our fires lit at times. But the weather,
it cleared off zum when we came to the spot Regan
told us of. You can see it from here,” and he pointed
to the rising ground known as Golden Point.
He went on to tell of their intense disappointment
when they found there were already six parties of
miners working on the point.
“Only six—l wouldn’t call that many,” gasped
Wilfred, gazing at the sea of tents now scattered
everywhere. “There must be nearly six thousand
now.”
“Nigh on three, they say, though more be cornin’
each day. But if ye don’t mind, Sonny, don’t be
blowin’ so hard down the back o’ my neck. It makes
a breeze.”
“I’m sorry.” Wilfred looked crestfallen. “But
do tell us what happened next.”
The Cornishman explained how disgusted the men
from Clunes were, when they found that the main
part of the hill already was pegged out in claims.
“We had to take corner pieces. James Esmond
led the way, and pegged his claim out. An’ my patch
o’ land didn’t look bad.”
“And you struck the gold there,” put in David
hoarsely.


In his simple fashion the Cornishman unfolded one
of the most dramatic happenings which has occurred
on any gold-field in the world. The party set to work
with pick and.spade, not too hopefully, for they were
disgruntled at'not being able to secure land on the
hill, and being forced to peg out corner pieces.
They worked furiously, shovelling out the wet
black earth, then attacking the clay and gravel with
their well-worn picks. James Esmond worked like a
Trojan. The metallic clang of his pick against rock
rang out across the plain. He was the first to dig
down to the mass of reddish gravel, and when he
had reached a depth of six feet, struck a layer of
light-green clay. With feverish haste he seized a
shallow pan, and scooping up some of this green clay,
climbed out of the trench. It seemed alive with golden
specks ! Hurrying to the water-hole he moistened
the clay, kneaded it in his hands, and began pouring
away all the mud which would dissolve in the water.
Already he could see luck had come his way. His
throat felt dry and parched, his hand shook so he
could scarcely keep on with the work.
“He shouted to us to come and look,” Pengally
said. “We could zee he had ztruck something rare.
And when we got a look at that pan, we were nigh
on struck dumb. Glitter ? It shone like the crown o’
Queen Victoria, God blezz her ! Covered with specks
o’ gold it was. Not coarse flecks like we’d got at
Clunes, but round shinin’ bits near to the size o’ a


pin’s head. And in zome of that green clay from
Esmond’s claim I saw bits large as small peas, I
swear to it.”
By this time the children’s eyes were almost
popping out of their heads.
“Mind you, we didn’t get as much as we should
out o’ that haul. The Commissioner who weighed it
out, he gave us two pounds fifteen shillings an
ounce. Worth four pounds we found afterwards.
There be those none too popular in these parts for
that shady dealin’.”
The children glanced quickly at each other. Could
it be Jemima’s father ? They knew he was connected
with the diggings in some way, and such a trick was
by no means above him.


CHAPTER XIII
CAPTAIN STEVENS’S WORK
The wagon rumbled on, finally rounding a low hill,
and bringing the travellers to a flat stretch of country,
through which twisted a winding creek. It was the
scene of a great activity. Men swarmed like ants over
the creek banks and the more distant rises. The
metallic clang of pickaxe and shovel, the trundling
of wheels filled the air. Newcomers eager to try their
luck, were rushing about looking for promising spots
where they might peg out claims—old hands were
working the tubs and cradles at fever-pitch—and the
entire scene was one of indescribable confusion.
“This be Dingo’s Flat, now —this ztretch down ’ere !
the water you zee shining yonder—that be Yuille’s
Zwamp,” declared Pengally, pointing with the whip
to a marshy area to the north.
“There be black zwans an’ toothsome wild duck
there. An’ there be those zays it be also the ’aunt of
the bunyip, if ye’ve ’eard zpeak of that zame critter.”
But the young Pyms were more interested to hear
about the gold-fields than bunyips on Yuille’s Swamp.
Margery wanted to know more about the Assistant
Gold Commissioner—to discover if actually he was
Captain Stevens—father of her arch-enemy, Jemima.
“Bunyips are just the blackfellows’ make up,”


she asserted. “But tell us about this Captain Stevens,
the one you said tricked you of your money. Was he
a big man with black hair and side-whiskers ? Was his
face red, and his eyes small and crafty like a snake’s ?”
Pengally laughed heartily at this description.
“I be not zayin’ he was bad as that ! But, aye, he
be a big man —an’ as you zays, his hair be black, and
his face do go red like to that of a turkey-cock’s
wffien he loses his temper.”
“You’ve told us quite enough,” David interposed.
“It’s Jemima’s father to a T. We’ll have to steer
well clear of him. There’s no love lost between
Captain Stevens and Uncle James,” and he gave
Pengally a brief outline of the way Captain Stevens’s
party had tried to steal their map and jump their
gold claim a few months before.
Pengally gave a low whistle through his teeth—-
an act which blew his wiry beard about like a feather
duster. Margery suppressed a giggle with difficulty.
“Aye, he be a nasty customer, that ’un, he be none
too popular with the men on the diggings,” the
Cornishman remarked. “He bullies ’em about them
licensing fees —mark my words, there’ll be a proper
bust-up zoom”
Margery immediately demanded to know what the
licensing fees were, and why there was so much
trouble about them.
Pengally explained that in order to pay the
expenses of the officials, and gold escort, the diggers


Captain Stevens's Work
were supposed to pay thirty shillings per month before
they could dig for gold.
“That’s fair enough, surely,” observed David.
“Aye —if you be makin’ money,” came the reply.
“But they told us no fees would be levied till after
Zeptember, then half-way through the month this
Captain Stevens rides up bold as brass, an’ issues
orders all must pay fifteen shillings by the end of
Zeptember. That got the men’s backs up proper.
Zaid they’d been tricked an’ made fools of ’em, an’
the way Cap’n Stevens do zend men pryin’ an’
pokin’ round be a dizgrace to England’s name. One
of these dark nights Cap’n Stevens shall ztop a bullet
if he be not careful.”
They had now arrived at their destination. The
confusion here was ten times worse. Men, women
and children were all mixed up among tents and huts
of all sorts, with horses and bullocks feeding wherever
they could find a blade of green grass.
“Look —what’s going on down there ?” David cried,
pointing excitedly to a crowd of angry men surging
round a tent, down near the creek.
“It be as I thought,” said Pengally. “The trouble
be ztartin’ already. That Captain Stevens be makin’
himself nasty, I’ll be bound.”
It could be plainly seen that ill feeling was running
high at the tent on the flat. The rough unkempt
miners swarmed angrily round the flap, blocking the
way, and Margery saw the sun flashing on the red and


gold-laced uniform of a cavalry officer, and a hand-
some black horse plunging into the crowd.
“The zcoundrel —look to him—usin’ his whip on
’em, hound that he be,” gasped Pengally. “You
young ’uns be stayin’ here—come on, Mulligan, come
with me while we zee what this be about.”
But Wilfred’s curiosity got the better of him.
“Coming, David ? Let’s go. I’d like to see the fun.”
David shook his head.
“I’ll stay here with the wagon. If that officer is
Captain Stevens, I’m keeping out of eye-shot. It’s
better he shouldn’t find out a Pym is here at the gold-
fields. We’re old enemies.”
Wilfred shrugged his fat shoulders.
“Thank goodness he’s never seen my fairy form
before,” he said, and made straight for the seething
throng. The uproar was increasing. Wilfred burrowed
and pushed his way through the groups of miners.
Craning his neck he saw a cavalry officer with two
assistants arguing angrily with miners gathered in
front of the tent.
“This ain’t fair play, Captain,” he heard a gruff
voice say. “Jem ’as a licence, we can witness to it.
But ’e’s lost it. I dare say someone’s pinched it.”
The contemptuous answer came back, sharp and
quick, like the cut of a whip.
“You expect me to swallow that cock-and-bull
story ! Fetch Jem Hastings out, I say. I’ll have you
up for mutiny, you curs !”


Captain Stevens's Work
“It ain’t no cock-and-bull story, as dozens here
can testify,” retorted the spokesman, flushing red.
“Aye—we’ll speak for him. Fair play, Captain,”
cried the crowd in general.
Captain Stevens’s face darkened.
“Get back there, or I’ll flay you alive,” he snarled,
“It’s my duty to see Hastings has his licence, and if
he hasn’t, by gad, he’ll have to pay for another.”
A yelp of pain followed the sharp crack of the
captain’s whip. Wilfred had no wish to be mixed up
in this. Turning round he doggedly fought his way
back to the Pyms’ wagon.
A sorry spectacle he looked. His neck-tie was
wrenched off, buttons were missing from his jacket,
and his face was scratched and dusty.
“You were lucky to wriggle out if it, Jellybeans,”
Davidsaid. “What’s happening ? Is it Captain Stevens?”
“Yes, the beast. A gold digger named Hastings
was asked for his licence, and he claims he’s lost it.
He told the officer a few home-truths. If he’s arrested
they’ll clap him in irons.”
“Maybe he’s got away by now,” Margery said.
“I hope so. I’m going to climb on the roof of the
wagon to get a good view,” and gathering up the folds
of her crinoline skirt, the little girl went round to the
farther side of the wagon. Here she stopped short.
There was someone there ! Yes, a man crouched
between the wagon and the next tent.
“What are you doing here ?” she demanded.


“For mercy’s sake, Miss, hide me,” came the gasping
answer. “The troopers are out —they’re after me.”
Only then did Margery understand.
“Can you be Hastings, the digger with no licence ?”
He nodded. “Let me get under cover quick, Miss—
they’ll put the handcuffs on me, if they gets me.
Someone’ll jump my claim an’ I may lose a fortune.”
Quick to act, Margery called for David and Wilfred,
then in a low undertone told the fugitive to get in
under the tarpaulin. She almost shoved him inside the
wagon. Hardly had she arranged the rugs and blankets
to hide him, and explained to the boys, when a shout
was heard from near by. The troopers had discovered
the digger had got away and were searching the tents.
“Gee Willikins —now the fat’s in the fire,” muttered
David. “These troopers have found out he’s got
away, nothing surer. Look, they’re coming this way.
“Cowards and beasts !” said Margery angrily,
her face flushing red. “They won’t find that poor
man if I can help it ! You should have seen him,
David—like a scared sheep,”
“Keep calm, for heaven’s sake, or you’ll make them
suspect something,” her brother hissed back. “We
may wriggle out of this, but we must keep calm.
Look ! One of the troopers is off over the hill now.
He must think Hastings has made a dash for the
bush.” He pointed out a horseman galloping full
speed to the opposite hill.
When the party had arrived at Dingo’s Flat, Mrs.
198


Captain Stevens's Work
Pym had gone to a water-hole to wash her hands, so
luckily she had no suspicion a fugitive was hiding in
the wagon. She now came hurrying back to hear
the reason for the general commotion.
“On no account tell her Hastings is hidden in the
wagon —it would certainly help give the show away
if she knew,” David whispered. Going across to his
mother, he persuaded her to go over to a tree stump
in the shade and sit there for a while.
This left Margery and Wilfred to keep guard at
the wagon. They knew they would have to keep
their wits about them. The troopers had galloped
back again. They evidently had found no sign of
the escaped miner farther afield. Captain Stevens
immediately snapped out further instructions. They
could now see him plainly, for he was riding straight
towards them. He was biting his moustache and
scowling heavily. Margery knew this for a danger
signal. She could hear his arrogant commands, and
see the silver knob flashing from the head of his whip.
She suddenly realized it might be bad tactics for him
to see her there.
“Wilfred, things will be twice as bad if he finds the
Pyms are mixed up in this ; he has enough old scores
to pay back as it is. I’m going. You 11 have to face
the men best as you can.”
Perhaps it was cowardly, but Wilfred did not
blame her for deserting at this eleventh hour. In
fact, he agreed it would be better for her to avoid


the irate captain in his present mood. Squaring his
shoulders, he braced himself for the coming ordeal—
for that it would be, he knew. The captain’s men
would without doubt search the wagon now, and
when they found the missing miner there was bound
to be trouble for its owners. He decided there was
only one course of action : to keep cool and know
nothing ; to pretend he had no idea there was anyone
hiding in the wagon. It was a gamble, all depending
on whether Hastings backed him up. But there was
nothing else to do.
The troopers came nearer. They were now only
five tents away. A curious crowd followed, though
the majority of the miners held aloof, watching
sullenly from a distance. A trooper had gone to a
tent somewhat to the rear of the others. Wilfred
was not taking notice of him, but suddenly the man
gave a loud shout.
“He’s got away, sir. He’s been sighted up the hill.
This way.” And spurring his horse, galloped full
speed up the hill. With an angry shout, Captain
Stevens wheeled his charger round and followed.
Wilfred turned ashy white. Hastings must have
come from his hiding-place and decided to make a
dash for it. Margery raced back to him.
“Wilfred, tell Hastings to run for his life—to go
back down the flat and along the creek.”
Wilfred stared at her. “Too late. He’s gone
already. They’ve sighted him.”


Captain Stevens's Work
“No. That was my doing. I gave a false alarm to
put them off the scent. Get him away. There’s not
a moment to waste, or his chance will be lost !”
Wilfred’s expression was one of frank admiration.
“Good for you, Marg, You stay here and keep
watch. Leave the rest to me. I’ll tell Hastings.
Be sure you don’t look round this way ! It might
arouse suspicions.” Whistling casually, he went
round to the back of the wagon. No one ever would
have dreamt a fugitive was hiding under the rugs and
bags piled there. After a quick glance round, Wilfred
heaved himself on the buckboard, and pulled the rugs
back. The miner drew back terror-stricken when he
saw the lad. For one wild moment he thought it
was Captain Stevens to arrest him.
“Calm, now. It’s friend, not foe,” hissed Wilfred.
“The troopers are off over the hill on a false trail.
Now’s your chance. Out for your life and make
straight for the bush. It’s now or never.”
Wilfred assured the miner it was not a trap —that
freedom awaited him if he liked to take a chance.
“I’ll chance it. I’ll make for the bush,” he mut-
tered. “And as for you and that other young lady—
I ain’t forgetting what you’ve done for Jem Hastings
this day.”
“I’ll go ahead and see if the coast’s clear. If you
see me blow my nose with this red handkerchief,
you’ll know you’re safe. Stay here till I give the
signal.”


Sauntering across the clearing, Wilfred made a
thorough if rapid survey of the surroundings. From
the other hill came the shouts of Captain Stevens’s
men, and to the left lay a patch of uncleared bush.
Once Hastings reached that, he was half-way to
safety.
“He’ll be safe enough,” decided Wilfred, and bring-
ing out his handkerchief, blew his nose with the resound-
ing blast of a trumpet. With a bound Hastings
sprang to his feet, and in a flash was darting across to
the shelter of the farther line tents. Turning his
back, Wilfred resumed his whistling, and sauntered
back to Margery.
The little girl was staring at the opposite hill.
“Look, Wilfred. Captain Stevens and his men are
on their way back again. I know that man. Once
his temper is roused, there’s no stopping him at any
• »
price.
“He won’t find out much from us, thanks to you,”
Wilfred returned. “Hastings is well away now.
Anyway, I don’t think the troopers are coming back.
No, they’ve given the case up as a bad job. They’re
going back to their camp. So that’s that. Your
Mama and David must be longing to hear the news.
Let’s go over to them.”
David’s task had been to keep his mother away
from the wagon all the while, so she would have no
suspicion of what was happening. The news, they
knew, would only upset her, and would be bound to


Captain Stevens's Work
leak out, throwing suspicion on all of them. Wilfred
now came sauntering over to them, Margery following.
“Looks as though the man’s got away from them,”
he observed. David glanced at him quickly, and the
fat boy answered his look with a faint but meaning
nod, plainly showing the danger was past.
The lad heaved a sigh of relief. It had not been
easy to keep his mother from going back to the
wagon, but he had managed, and she had no inkling
of the part her children had played in the gold-miner’s
escape,
“Wonder where Pengally and Pat Mulligan have
got to,” observed Wilfred. “It must be well after
eleven, and we still haven’t found your Uncle James.”
“The pair of them disappeared among the crowd
of diggers —that was the last I saw of them,” said
Margery. “But, David, whatever will happen to
that poor fellow ? He’s left his outfit behind, and
maybe a store of gold. He can hardly come back to
Ballarat now. It wouldn’t be safe.”
“He’ll be right if he lies low for a bit,” answered
David. “He’s only got to change his name and
grow whiskers and it will blow over.”
“I hope so,” sighed his sister. “One of these days
Captain Stevens will overstep the mark. He’ll be
reported to the Governor, and I hope it’s soon.” A
wish which every digger on the fields would have
applauded heartily.


CHAPTER XIV
BUNINYONG
Directly they felt satisfied the troopers’ visit to
Dingo’s Flats was finished, the diggers resumed work
on their claims as though nothing had happened.
The tumbling of cart-wheels, the clatter of barrows,
and the hundred and one other sounds which made
up that confused mixture of noise which was the
continual background to mining life, sprang to being
again. The incident merely heaped yet another coal
on the fires of discontent already smouldering in the
diggers’ hearts.
The Pyms and Wilfred sat watching the activities
of the flat while waiting for Pengally and Pat to
return.
“Wish they’d hurry. If they don’t turn up soon,
I vote we go to look for your Uncle James on our own,”
Wilfred suggested. He waved a hand towards the
busy gatherings clustered on the banks of the creek
which twisted like a glistening snake across the flat.
“He’s sure to be among the men down there.
We’d soon find him.”
David shook his head, “No, Wilfred, we can’t do
that. We’ll have to stay here. We promised that.”
The young Pyms had lost all account of time on
the journey to the diggings, but vaguely knew it was


Buninyong
near the end of October. The day was hot and dry—
so hot, in fact, that Mrs. Pym was completely ex-
hausted. She had not the faintest idea what was to
happen to herself and the three children. She pinned
her faith in her brother, James Everett. In his
letter he had told her he had only one reason for
exchanging the farm for a share in a mining claim
and a mining outfit. That was because it might make
a fortune for all of them. She felt certain that when
she met him he would pour out news of luck even
greater than Pengally’s. They would perhaps have
to rough it for a few months, then would return to
Melbourne and Geelong with their fortunes made.
She sat on, waiting patiently, with the hot sun
beating down on her dark, smoothly curled hair.
Strangely out of place she looked among the rough
and tumble-down surroundings of the diggings, for
despite the tiring journey in the wagon, she still was
neat and tidy. Her gown was dark green. She had
draped a large brown Paisley handkerchief over her
head, and was carrying a bright patchwork hand-bag.
The miners touched their hats and politely wished
her “Good day” whenever they passed her. There
were not many women in those parts yet, and the
sight of her must have reminded many of families
and loved ones left far behind—either in Melbourne
or over the water.
A shout from Wilfred broke in on her dreams.
She did not know how long she had been sitting there.


She was only conscious now of the sun beating merci-
lessy down on her throbbing head.
Margery hurried across to her.
“Pengally’s here, Mama. Come on. We have to
get in the wagon again. He says we’ll be at Uncle
James’s tent in ten minutes.”
Taking her daughter’s hand, Mrs. Pym got up
slowly and went across to the wagon. As they
jogged over the last stage of the journey, the children
and Pengally were eagerly discussing the events of
the past hour. The Cornishman’s temper was roused
by Captain Stevens’s injustice, and he hinted he was
by no means the only one.
“Hastings be away now, and just as well too, for
they’d have made it hot for him all right,” was his
comment.
Margery and Wilfred exchanged quiet smiles. They
were not telling even Pengally of the part they had
played in that escape.
“Why, we’ve gone off without Pat Mulligan. What’s
happened to Pat ?” David suddenly remarked.
Pengally told them Pat had fallen in with some old
sailor comrades and was planning to join them in a
trek across the hills to a spot where someone had
reported a fresh find of gold.
“That means we’re left to take care of his parrot,”
said the boy, gazing with some misgiving at the
bedraggled-looking bird in the cage fastened to the
wagon’s side.


“Don’t worry, lad. He zays to take the bird to
the ztore, they be taken a fancy to it there. He’ll
call back for it when his fortune be made,” chuckled
Pengally. “But here we be cornin’ to your Uncle’s
tent.” And raising his voice, he shouted : “Be there
anyone at home here ?”
No answer came. They clambered down from the
wagon and peered into the tent. Their hearts sank
when they saw how primitive all was. The floor was
bare earth, and in the corner stood a built-up bed
with a straw mattress. Boxes did duty for seats,
and the table was an upturned flour-barrel. Mrs,
Pym gazed about her in despair. Her headache was
worse, but even so she was buoyed up by the thought
of the good news she could expect from her brother.
A neighbour poked his head through the tent flap.
“Looking for Everett, are you ?”
“Yes, that’s right. But tell me, do you know how
he is getting on—and how much gold he has struck
yet ?”
The reply was a jeering laugh.
“What ! Everett ! That’s a rare one ! He hasn’t
had a stroke of good luck since he came here—
hardly makes enough for his supplies.”
“N-n-not enough for his s-s-supplies !”
The man looked at her curiously and began to
regret his mocking tone.
“I’m afraid not, Ma’am.”
Mrs. Pym turned deathly white. Her dreams


crashed round her, the pain in her head throbbed and
whirled, and Pengally just caught her as she pitched
forward in a dead faint.
“Water —get zum quickly. She be in a zwoon,”
he commanded.
Snatching up a large tin pannikin he saw near by,
Wilfred ran to the nearest water-hole. The miners
gaped in astonishment as the fat boy, his face red
as a turkey-cock, came panting to the bank of the
creek, and dropping to his knees, hurriedly scooped up
a supply of water.
“Seems to be in a hurry, don’t ’e ?” one digger
remarked with a wink and grin, but Wilfred did not
stop to explain. Scrambling to his feet, he set off at
top-speed back to Mrs. Pym.
“Here’s the water —tip it over her,” he announced
hoarsely, and handed over the brimming vessel.
“Gee Willikins, Jellybeans, you were quick !”
praised David. “She seems to be coming to now.
Pengally thinks she’s had a touch of the sun. It was
jolly hot this morning, and she’s been in the sun for
hours —no hat on either —just that kerchief round
her head.”
Wilfred tiptoed over to the patient. They had
lifted her on to the rough bed with the straw mattress
in the corner of the tent, Margery had soaked a
handkerchief in the water, and was laying it on her
mother’s forehead.
“I think it’s sunstroke,” she whispered. “I wish


we could get a doctor somewhere. It’s like a touch
of fever. If only we could find Uncle James !”
“I think this is your Uncle coming along now,”
Wilfred announced in calmer tones, though the per-
spiration was still streaming from his red face.
“Yes, it is. Someone must have told him of our
arrival. xAhout time too.”
“Go to meet him, David. Tell him what’s hap-
pened,” whispered Margery. Young as she was, she
seemed to have control of the situation, David
nodded and hurried off to meet his uncle. Margery
watched through the open tent door. She saw her
uncle come forward to meet David, all smiles, then
watched his face grow grave and serious as the boy
told him the news. He came hurrying forward to
the tent.
Margery was shocked to see the change in her uncle.
He was older, his faced was lined and weather-beaten,
and his eyes had the disappointed deep-set look of one
continually dogged by bad luck.
He took one look at the prostrate Mrs. Pym, then
turning to Margery, sharply asked ; “Tell me—can
you remember this—has she been drinking any of the
water around here—unboiled ?”
Margery thought back, then nodded slowly.
“She went down to a pool of water over that way.”
She pointed in the direction through the trees. “She
said she was going to wash her hands—but she may
have had a drink too. I couldn’t say.”


“The water-hole down there ! Good Lord ! It’s
like poison. Didn’t she see the notice ? That water
would give anyone fever !”
Pengally stroked his bushy beard thoughtfully.
“There be but one thing to do, Everett. Get this
lady over to Buninyong. There she could get
lodgin’s. We be in for a zpell o’ hot weather here,
’Twould not be wise to keep her in a tent through it.”
“I suppose that is the best plan,” Uncle James
replied, passing a worried hand over his brow. “We’ll
have to put her in the wagon and get her to Bunin-
yong.”
“How far away is it ?” Margery demanded.
“Zeven miles ’r zo. Here, take this,” and the
good-natured Cornishman put his hand in his pocket,
bringing out a small match-box. Margery opened it,
and saw the gleam of gold-dust.
“That be enough to pay for board an’ lodgin’ for
zome time, and zay to the landlady ’twas Pengally
from Cornwall zent you there,” he said. “Now I mun
be gettin’ along, for time be precious. I may look
you up zoom” And without another word, this very
good friend of the Pyms strode rapidly off.
“I’ll drive the wagon along there with you —then
I can bring it back,” Uncle James told the children.
“I’ve been waiting for it. I’m giving up my claim
here, and trying a new spot. Bad luck seems to
haunt me here.” He quickly made a soft couch of
rugs and bags in the cart for Mrs. Pym. She was now


delirious and they decided to start for Buninyong
without delay.
With spirits at zero, the party turned their backs
on the diggings and set out for the little town seven
miles distant. David and Wilfred tramped behind
with Dulcie the goat, while Margery kept inside
the wagon to watch over her mother. Sometimes she
glanced at her uncle as he sat in the driver’s place,
loosely holding the reins, and staring moodily before
him. His face looked older and disappointed. As
her mother now had fallen into a half-sleep, the little
girl went over to sit by her uncle. He looked down
at her with a wry smile.
“Well, Margery, me girl. I suppose you’re thinking
life on the gold-fields isn’t as rosy as it’s painted, eh ?”
Margery swallowed hard. This was exactly what
she had been thinking, but nothing would have made
her admit it. Tossing back her curls, she forced a
smile to her lips as she answered :
“We can’t expect you to strike gold the moment
you get here, Uncle. Luck will come your way
sooner or later. Then our troubles will be over for
good.”
Mr, Everett frowned as he pulled tighter at the
reins and carefully guided the horse over a crab-hole
in the track.
“I seem dogged by bad luck the whole time,” he
brooded. “Two months I’ve been here, and I’m no
better off than when I came.”


“But you have had wonderful prospects, haven’t
you, Uncle ? You said so in your note to Mama.
You knew where the gold was —all you needed was
the money for an outfit,”
“I know. I got that outfit, girlie, and got a fair
share of gold from that first claim too. But I lost it—
had it stolen from me !”
“They stole your gold ! Oh, what frightful luck,”
Margery gasped.
“I heard a mopoke call as I crossed a creek the
day before. They say that’s bad luck. Anyway,
I thought I had my bag of gold-dust in my pocket
that night, but I took my coat off and left it outside
the tent. It went —so did the gold-dust. Since then
I’ve found barely enough to keep me going in food
and pay for my licence. Thought once I’d struck a
find, but the gold was mostly in the claim of the chap
working next to me. He made a fortune from that
find—l got a few pounds. That’s how it is—the luck
of the gold-fields.”
“Perhaps I’ll bring you luck,” cheered Margery
bravely. “I brought Pengally luck. Maybe I can
pass it on to you.”
Her high hopes seemed to cheer the dispirited man
considerably.
“I hope you will, Margery girl. There’s no good
got from being down-hearted.”
The tents and huts of Ballarat were now left far
behind, and they were well on their way to Buninyong.


Occasionally they passed parties travelling overland
to try their luck at some fresh gold-field. Some in
wagons, some on horseback, others tramping on foot
with their possessions on wheelbarrows, or carrying
them slung across their backs.
As they approached the town, Margery saw a
deserted creek flat littered with heaps of upturned
quartz and gaping trenches.
“They must surely have been looking for gold
here ?”
“That’s part of Hiscock’s Gully. The first place
where they struck gold in these parts, but it’s deserted
now. Everyone’s at Ballarat or Mount Alexander.
Some day I’ll tell you about Brown, Turner and
O’Connor and how they discovered Golden Point.
But it’s too long to go into now, for we’re nearly into
the town.”
Buninyong proved to be only a group of scattered
houses, the hotel, minister’s home, and also a little
school. Mr. Everett told David and Wilfred to stay
with Mrs. Pym, while he and Margery inquired at the
lodging-house for a room for the sick woman. The
landlady at first flatly refused.
“Every room here is full. I’ve got men sleeping
on sofas, on the floor—everywhere. Couldn’t take
another one.”
Margery knew a bed must be got for her mother
somehow, and impulsively pulled out the match-box
Pengally had given her.


“We’d pay you good board money,” she promised
her, and, opening the box, revealed the glittering
gold-dust inside.
“You see you can trust us,” she remarked coolly.
“My Mama is very ill. We’d pay you a lot if you can
get a room for her. It may save her life.”
Directly the landlady set eyes on the gold-dust her
manner changed entirely.
“Oh, the lady’s sick, is she ? Now, dearie, why
didn’t you say that before ? Lodging she shall have,
if it means me giving my own room up. Wait here a
minute. I’ll see what can be done at once.”
It was on the tip of Margery’s tongue to retort they
had already pointed out Mrs. Pym was in a fever, but
bit her lip, and said nothing.
Directly the landlady was out of ear-shot, Uncle
James took Margery by the shoulder.
“Look here, my girl, if you take my advice you
won’t flash that gold-dust round so much. It will
slip through your fingers like quicksilver—and unless
I strike luck soon, heavens knows when we’ll be able
to fill the box again for you.”
Margery nodded gravely. “I know. I will be
careful in future, but I thought something startling
had to be done, or Mama would never get a bed at all.
Oh, she’s back now. Her face one big smile, too.”
Mrs. Bonny, the landlady, had good news.
“I’ve arranged the room for you ! Six men were
in it, no less. But I’ve had their goods and chattels


turned out on the veranda. They’re off for the
diggings to-morrow —it won’t hurt them.”
“Six of them in the one room,” echoed Margery.
“You must be crowded out.”
“The place has been like this ever since Hiscock
found gold in the gully,” Mrs. Bonny explained.
“Time and time again the Geelong coach got bogged,
it was that over-loaded. The men hung on it like
flies. I’ve had all sorts here. Rich, poor, old, young.
Some that can’t speak a word of the King’s English,
poor things. I’ve had them sleeping in rows on the
dining-room table looking like so many corpses laid
out. What’s more, three-quarters of ’em never paid
a penny board. Got away in the mornings before I
could round them up,”
Margery began to understand why Mrs, Bonny had
not been anxious to give them a room unless she
showed they had money to pay for it. The hotel
was a low-roofed wooden place which had been added
to room at a time. The town of Buninyong in those
days was the last outpost of civilization. A rough
road connected it with Geelong, and there was a
regular coach service. A minister, the Reverend
Thomas Hastie, lived here. There was a school,
blacksmith’s shop, a store, scattered houses, and the
hotel. Long before the discovery of gold, this town
in the mountains became a favourite place with
bullock teamsters. They were glad to build huts in
it for their wives and children, knowing they would


be safe from roving tribes of blacks, and have the
company of other white people.
Mrs. Pym was carried carefully into the room, and
Mrs. Bonny’s face grew grave when she saw how ill
the patient was.
“It’s the water-fever. Water from those creek
holes should be boiled before you touch it just now,”
she said, with a shake of her head. “You must go
straight and see if the doctor’s home. You’ll see a
large shack behind the hotel. Try there,”
Margery snatched up her bonnet, collected Wilfred
and David, and set off with them for the doctor’s hut.
It proved to be made of logs with a mud chimney. A
neat board was fastened near the door. Wilfred
marched up to see what might be on it.
“Hullo, there’s a notice here too,” he exclaimed.
Staring at it, he blinked, then studied it again, hardly
able to believe his eyes.
“Listen to this,” he gasped. “The notice reads :
‘Gone to Brown’s Hill, Ballarat. Back in fort-
night.’ ”
Margery and David exchanged glances of dismay.
“The doctor gone to the gold-fields ? Poor Mama.
What on earth are we to do ?” said Margery. “I
don’t suppose there’s another doctor anywhere we
could call in.”
Wilfred laughed scornfully.
“Another one ! Why, there’s not another doctor
between here and Geelong. Looks as though we’ll
216


have to nurse your mother through this fever
ourselves.”
But Margery was not listening. She was studying
the notice.
“I don’t understand this,” she frowned.
“Sounds simple to me. The doctor’s gone to
Ballarat to the diggings. He won’t be back for a
fortnight,”
“But when did he leave ? There’s no date on this
notice, and it certainly has been here more than a day.
Look how dusty it is. The fortnight may be up
to-day for all we know.”
The boys looked at her with some admiration.
“My word, why didn’t we drop to that before ?
The notice does look pretty ancient. The thing to
do now is to find out when the doctor went to Ballarat,
Come on, let’s go back and ask at the hotel.”
Back they sped. The boys in the lead, and Margery
following, one hand holding her full browm skirt, the
other clutching at the bonnet perched askew on her
unruly curls.
Mrs. Bonny met them on the veranda.
“Did you find him ? Your Ma seems worse, poor
thing.”
Margery shook her head. “The doctor’s gone to
the diggings. He’s left a note outside his hut saying
he’ll be back in a fortnight, but we don’t know when
he left. When was he last seen, Mrs. Bonny ?”
Inquiries were made, but they found the doctor had


not been seen for a week. This, however, was not
unusual. His practice extended scores of miles, and
he was often absent for weeks visiting patients out
back.
“Where’s Uncle James got to ?” David suddenly-
demanded. “He may get in touch with the doctor
for us.”
“He’s gone off again.”
“Gone ?”
“Yes, taken the wagon and gone back to the
diggings. He thought the doctor would see to your
mother, and he hopes to join a party going to open
up some fresh gold-field. He’s left your belongings
there on the veranda.” It was Mrs, Bonny who
volunteered this news. She pointed to a heap of
goods in the corner, and remarked Dulcie, the goat,
was in the yard.
David’s face darkened. He could not admire his
uncle for this. Margery did what she could for her
mother, but the next day the fever got worse. They
were in the depths of despair. The doctor had not
arrived back. David felt something had to be done.
If only they could get in touch with the doctor. He
paced up and down the track, passing a horse saddled
and ready for the road. A daring idea flashed through
his mind. “Why not borrow the horse and ride
himself in search of the missing doctor ?” A light of
determination dawned in his eye. His mind was
made up. He would take the chance !


CHAPTER XV
THE RIDE TO BROWN’S HILL
David glanced cautiously round. The little town
dozed peacefully in the midday sun. When a few
months previously Thomas Hiscock announced he
had discovered gold in a near-by gully, it had sprung
to life for a while, but the miners soon deserted it for
the richer fields of Ballarat. The boy sauntered
across to the horse, eyeing it carefully. He was a
powerful big-boned bay with a restless glance the
boy liked but little. A whistle behind him made
David start guiltily, but it was only Wilfred. The fat
boy strolled towards him.
“Not a bad horse, that. Wonder who’s left him
here with his saddle on ?”
David wheeled round dramatically
“Listen, Jellybeans. I’m taking a loan of this
horse. I’m riding him to the Ballarat diggings to
see if that doctor can be found. Mama’s worse.”
Wilfred’s sleepy face sprang to life.
“Ride a horse like that one that distance ? My
word, you’ve got pluck. But hadn’t you better ask
the owner’s permission ? And how about the track ?
Do you remember the way ?”
“I know the track right enough. As for the owner,


I’ll have to chance that. He doesn’t seem to be
about, and Mama’s worse. This may be a matter
of life and death.” He turned again towards the
horse.
“Good luck to you, then. You’re true blue, David.
Am I to tell anyone you’ve—er—taken the mount ?”
David turned sharply.
“Margery can know, but not another soul. For the
time being, the least said the better.”
“Then I wouldn’t start from here,” advised Wil-
fred. “Take the horse to a less conspicuous spot.
There are men coming out of the hotel now.”
“Good idea,” nodded David. “Keep guard, Wil-
fred. I’ll take the horse, cut across the paddock, and
join the track down there in the gully.”
Nervously he loosened the reins from the post. The
powerful animal sensed the boy’s agitation and tossed
spiritedly.
“Keep calm, old boy,” soothed David, stroking the
glossy quivering shoulder. He glanced quickly be-
hind him, then led the horse through the gate, across
the paddock, making for the cover of the scrub.
He paused, listening carefully. All seemed quiet.
His ruse had succeeded. Wilfred had disappeared.
A woman emerged from a cottage to feed some
ducks. David knew he must not arouse her sus-
picions, so, squaring his shoulders, he walked calmly
on his way with the bay plodding behind him. At
last the track was reached. The adventure had


The Ride to Brown's Hill
begun in earnest. Putting one foot in the stirrup,
he swung himself into the saddle, and pressed his heels
against the horse’s flanks. The bay snorted, again
tossing back his head.
“H’mm. I’m going to have trouble,” thought the
boy. Dismounting, he went to a tree and broke off
a sharp switch. Leaping back into the saddle, he
commanded, “Now will you get up,” and applied the
switch with vigour.
The effect was magical. The horse sprang forward
with a bound, thundering down the hill at top speed.
The track was plain enough, and David felt he would
have no difliculty in reaching Ballarat. The one snag
was his horse, who did everything in his power to
throw his young rider—took wrong turnings, bucked,
and made for every tree, hoping the low branches
might knock the boy off. But he held his seat
grimly, never once relaxing his firm hold on the reins.
On they thundered, the hot sun beating down on the
boy’s head till the perspiration ran down his face in
rivers. As they rounded a curve he heard a peculiar
creaking noise from the region of the saddle ; next
moment there was an ominous snap, and to the boy’s
horror the girth-strap which fastened the saddle burst,
and he was pitched violently forward !
Luckily, David was not thrown directly to the
ground. He was pitched forward on to the horse’s
neck, somehow managing to retain his grip of the
reins, yet keeping on the horse’s back. The saddle,


meanwhile, had slid round, dangled clumsily for a
few moments, then fallen to the ground with a thud.
Frightened by the unexpected accident, the big bay
plunged forward with David hanging on grimly and
tugging at the reins for all his might in his endeavour
to pull the powerful animal up. Gritting his teeth,
he stuck on somehow, finally managing to bring the
runaway to a standstill.
With a gasp of relief he tumbled to solid earth.
“Pheww. I had a close shave there,” he mut-
tered, and shuddered as he thought of what might
have occurred had he followed the saddle to the
ground in those first hectic moments. It was sheer
luck he had been thrown forward when the girth-
broke. Had he remained on the saddle, without any
doubt he, too, would have been thrown, and the
horse, free of control, would have galloped on alone,
leaving him to a lonely fate in the bush.
Slowly he mopped his heated brow. The sun
streamed down mercilessly, and both horse and boy
were in baths of perspiration. Overhead a flock of
screaming galahs circled round him, and on a dead
tree near by two ghoulish black crows cawed
ominously.
Keeping a firm grasp on the horse’s reins, he walked
back along the track in search of the saddle. He
found it three-quarters of a mile back, another indi-
cation of the speed at which the runaway had bolted.
He tied the bay to a near-by tree while he examined


The Ride to Brown's Hill
the saddle carefully. The damage was not beyond
repair. It was the buckle which had broken, not the
strap itself. How could he mend it ? He longed
for one thick piece of string and a bag needle.
“I’ve got it —my bootlace !” he exclaimed. He
tugged his boot off and pulled out a strong leather
lace. He always carried a jack-knife, and, digging
the point of it into the leather, he soon had new
holes bored, and succeeded in making a strong if
somewhat clumsy mend.
“There, I think that’s got it,” he decided as he
strapped the saddle back on the horse. “I must go
like the wind if I’m to dig the doctor up to-day,” and
digging his heels into the big bay’s sides, he set off
once more.
Over hills and along gullies, across creeks and
over logs, David travelled at top speed towards
Ballarat. Gradually the track became less lonely.
A hut or two appeared in the bush, then some miners’
tents, and at the crest of a rise he came on two men
trudging along, pushing heavily loaded wheelbarrows.
Farther on, he passed a Chinaman, hurrying along
with a shallow wash-pan tucked under his arm. Against
the background of the Australian bush, he looked
strangely out of place in his loose cotton smock with
a black pigtail flapping behind him, and a peaked
Chinese coolie hat on his head.
The big horse was well under control now, his first
freshness exhausted by the bolt when the girth-


buckle broke. He continued his nasty habit of trying
to run his rider under every low-branched tree, but
David kept a firm grip on the reins and showed him
definitely who was master. The afternoon sun
streamed down as he galloped over the slope leading
to the Ballarat diggings. The men swarming round
the Yarrowee creek seemed to have grown in numbers
even in the past few days.
The busy miners took little notice of the tousle-
haired youngster on the foam-flecked bay.
David was not sure where to find Brown’s Hill.
He knew Golden Point and Black Hill, but Brown’s
Hill had only lately been opened up. Slowing down,
he shouted to some men :
“Could you tell me where to find Brown’s Hill,
please ?”
They let out hearty guffaws.
“Brown’s Hill ? This is it here, lad —and what’s
more, you’re talking to the man that opened the
diggings up.”
David’s eyes widened.
“You mean you’re the man who found Brown’s
Hill! Gee, you’re certainly in luck’s way. Have the
yields been good ?”
The man winked knowingly. “More than you’d
care to carry from the tent in a hurry.”
His mate, who had been staring intently at the horse,
suddenly broke in on the conversation.
“Brown, will you take a look at this here horse ?


The Ride to Browns Hill
Seems at though I’ve seen the brand here on ’is
shoulder before, eh ?” He pointed to a small mark
on the horse’s glossy hide.
Frowning, the other bent forward examining the
brand carefully.
“You’re right, Jem —it’s the one all right,” and
turning sharply to David, he rapped out : “Where did
you get this horse from ? How did you come by
it ?”
If possible, the boy’s face turned a shade even
redder.
“Er—well, it isn’t my horse, exactly,” he stammered.
“You don’t say,” came back the reply. “And we
know why it isn’t ! Because this is the nag stolen
from our tent mate, Ned Greenham, two days back.
You’d better come with me to the Commissioner,
and give an account of yourself. Men have been
given ten years for horse stealing.”
“But you’re making a mistake—listen, you must,”
pleaded poor David. “I’m not the one who stole the
horse. I just borrowed it.”
“We call borrowing and stealing much the same in
these parts. You can pitch your tale to Captain
Stevens.”
“No—don’t take me before the Captain—listen,
you must. I didn’t steal your horse from the tent.
I’ve come here on a matter of life and death.”
The sincere ring in his voice had its effect.
“Might as well give the nip a heatin’ —he’s only


a young ’un, after all,” Jem muttered, thinking
perhaps of a boy of his own, about the same age.
David dismounted, and told them the complete
story. How his mother was at Buninyong ill with a
fever, and how in desperation he had taken French
leave of the horse and ridden it to the diggings.
“And you can’t tell us who left the nag in the road
at Buninyong ?” they questioned him.
“I cannot —that’s word of honour. But my opinion
is that it was the man who stole the horse in the
first place. If you want to prove my story, go to
Buninyong, and ask at the hotel for a fat boy called
Jellibrand. He’ll confirm what I say.”
“Looks to me as though the lad has brought the
horse back to Ned, instead of tryin’ to get away with
it. Thanks, young ’un. The visit to the Commissioner
is off. Now what of this doctor chap —what was the
name again ?”
“Doctor Drury.”
“Drury. H’m . . . come with me, lad. I think
I can put you on to a fellow of that name right now.”
David brightened visibly.
Evidently, the man who stole the horse from Brown’s
Hill had ridden it to Buninyong, and left it tied to a
post, giving David the chance to borrow it for the
important journey. Fate plays queer tricks, and the
boy had ridden the horse back to the very fellows
from whom it had been stolen.
“The scoundrel must have wanted to vamoose


The Ride to Brown’s Hill
from here pretty smart,” the men explained. “There’s
been a fair bit of sticking up round here lately—
mightn’t be safe for those mixed up in it to hang
about too long.”
“A fair bit of what ?”
“Sticking up ! Say I’ve five or six ounces of gold
on me, and I’m sleeping alone in my tent. Someone
gets wind of it, comes along with a gun, pokes his
head in the tent, and says ; ‘Stick ’em up, mate.’
That’s the end of the gold-dust. Tell you what
happened to me. We struck a gutter of gold pretty
quickly when I started here. It was like looking into
a ginger-bread basket, the ground was so yellow with
it. We got near to losing that gold again, though.
Heard footsteps in the dead of night, but had a pistol
handy. I sang out to ’em to be off, or I should fire.
Two others were stuck up that night.”
“Wasn’t a general search made ?” David asked.
The second miner shrugged his shoulders.
“It ain’t much use to try that among so many.
What’s more, Ned’s bay horse got pinched, so we
reckoned the villain’d got off on that. If he got to
Buninyong he’s probably well on the road to Geelong,
or another field by this. Easier to dig for more gold
than worry, we says.”
David agreed this probably was right. They were
now half-way round Brown’s Hill. Skirting a number
of claims, they passed men busily engaged shovelling
up the earth, or washing out the dirt in shallow


tin dishes and wooden cradles. In some heaps the
gold was so plentiful David could see specks of it
glittering in the sun. He noticed, too, that the miners
worked in groups of twos and threes, and were
seldom alone. If one left the claim to go for water,
the mate stayed behind, guarding the claim against
intruders.
A burly red-bearded Irishman told them to look
by the creek for the grey-haired chap working the
tub and cradle.
“This way, Drury—visitor to see you,” a voice
shouted.
An elderly man straightened his back, surveying
the newcomers gravely across a large heap of gravel.
David could barely see his head and shoulders—
for he was standing in a trench, four feet deep.
“Someone for me, did you say ?”
David stepped forward.
“Are you Doctor Drury ?”
The other nodded.
“Doctor, my Mama, over at Buninyong, is ill—
seriously ill—it’s the fever. Doctor, could you
possibly come over and give your advice ? We only
took her there because we thought she’d get attention
—but we found you’d left for Ballarat.”
The doctor frowned thoughtfully.
“I’m not practising now. Fever, eh ? You think
she’s seriously ill ?”
“Oh, yes —I wouldn’t be here otherwise.”


The Ride to Browns Hill
Drury was in a quandary. He did not like to refuse,
but his gold claim was doing well, and he was not
keen to leave it. A crowd of miners had gathered
about, by this time. One, suddenly pulling an evil-
smelling pipe from his mouth, gruffly said :
“Better go, Drury —we’ll keep a watch on the claim,
eh, mates ? If any butt in, they’ll get a taste o’ pick
and shovel law.”
A murmur of assent rose from the others. Doctor
Drury gladly accepted the splendid offer. He had his
own horse and would take David back on it, too. It
was a powerful brute.
The stolen horse was in due course presented back
to its rightful owner. Ned Greenham could hardly
believe his good fortune, and, as a reward, presented
David with a small match-box of gold-dust.
“I’ll be ready to come with you in less than an
hour, my boy,” Doctor Drury promised. “First,
I’ll have to go through this lot of wash-dirt here.
Seems as though it might yield a fair quantity by
the look of it.”
“Would you be quicker if I helped ?” David
offered.
“An excellent idea,” replied the other, accepting
the offer without hesitation. “Ever done any gold
washing ?”
“Not exactly—but I’ve watched others quite a bit—
but tell me, Doctor, are you working alone, or have
you a partner ?”


The doctor explained his mate had gone to the
post office for mail—he was expected back any
moment.
“Wheel the barrow over, my boy—we’ll shovel
the wash-dirt into it —here’s my mate now —he can
stay at the claim.”
The wash-dirt was the earthy clay they hoped
would contain gold. A good load was shovelled into
the barrow, and wheeled down to the creek while
David was instructed to fetch a wooden tub and a
shallow tin dish.
“Look smart, my boy —hurry on with that dish !”
cried the doctor, who was waiting.
David raced up with it, and was told to fill the
dish with water from the creek and pour it over the
wash-dirt.
When enough water was in the tub, the doctor
puddled it with a spade, until it was thoroughly well-
mixed with the water, then poured all the liquid
portions off.
“More water, please,” he instructed, handing the
dish back.
The boy quickly scooped another supply up —
the doctor repeated his former process, puddling
the thick clay with his spade, then pouring the water
away.
Again and again David was sent to fill the tin dish
with water which was poured into the tub, puddled,
and poured off. As there were crowds of miners


The Ride to Brown's Hill
doing exactly the same thing everywhere along the
creek bans, the ground underfoot was a muddy bog.
The doctor finally threw his spade down.
“I think that’s good enough,” he announced.
David looked into the tub. Only the heavier sand
and gravel remained, and among it he could see the
alluringly glitter of gold specks.
“You’ve got gold right enough !” he excitedly
announced.
Doctor Drury smiled. “I’d be disappointed to
find none after all this work, I can tell you. The next
step is to put the remainder of the stuff in the tub
into this dish. Get me more water, please—in this
billy this time.”
David obeyed, and the water was poured on.
With a few swift twists of his wrist, the doctor
separated the gold specks from the dirt.
“Gee Willikins —that was smart !” applauded the
boy.
“This is where the skill comes in,” smiled the
doctor. “It takes some time to learn how to twist
the dish properly—l’ve seen a new chum slip and
upset the panful completely.”
“What —and spill the gold-dust on the ground !”
The other nodded, but did not answer. He was too
absorbed, picking out the flecks of gold and putting
them in a wooden box.
“Very nice haul indeed,” he remarked in a pleased
fashion. David sighed. He wished his Uncle James


could share half the luck, but somehow ill fortune
seemed to haunt Mr. Everett. Perhaps this new
claim he was pegging out would yield gold. He
hoped so. The boy glanced anxiously at the sun
which was gradually sliding towards the west.
“No need to worry, boy—we’ll set off to Buninyong
immediately,” reassured the doctor, “My mate can
go on with this now,” he added, as a young sun-
tanned fellow joined the group.
“What’s the luck, Doc ?” he asked eagerly.
The other with a smile handed the dish over. Its
contents spoke for themselves.
“Fair enough,” he remarked. “But I’ll have to
trust this haul to your honesty. John —this young
fellow’s mother is seriously ill. I’m riding back to
Buninyong with him immediately.”
John’s dark eyes looked straight into the other’s
steel-grey ones.
“You can count on me, Doc, I won’t get off with
it—we’ve been partners too long for that. Besides,
the miners round here would have something to say,
I fancy. The pick and shovel law round these parts
is no joke !”
The boy felt most relieved to discover the doctor’s
mate was a man of this calibre. He did not wish the
doctor to lose in any way by doing the Pyms this good
turn.
“Wait here—l’ll get my horse now,” Doctor
Drury said, and came back later leading a powerful


The Ride to Browns Hill
chestnut, which he saddled immediately. They both
mounted, doctor in front, David behind.
The miners gathered round and gave them a cheery
send off, telling David they hoped his mother would
recover quickly. To the sound of their kindly well-
wishes the pair started on their trip back to Bunin-
yong. They galloped up the dusty track in silence.
The clatter and busy hum of the diggings gradually
faded into the distance, replaced only by the penetrat-
ing notes of the whip bird, and shrill harsh chatter
of the galahs.
The moon was rising round and orange-red over
the trees, by the time they galloped into the little
town. The mail-coach from Geelong had arrived a
while back, bringing a large load of men anxious to
try their luck on the gold-fields. There were all types :
sailors, workmen from Norway, Scotland, Ireland,
tall bronze-faced Yankees, and convicts whose term
of service was up, and dozens of others. Margery
had instructed Wilfred to see if there was a doctor
among them, and as the fat boy came out of the hotel
door, he caught sight of the chestnut horse coming
down the street.
His relief showed in his face as he ran to take the
reins.
“Are you Doctor Drury ?” he demanded of the
grey-haired man in the saddle.
The man nodded.
“I am, my boy—the patient, how is she ?”


“They’re very worried about her, sir—the fever
seems to be worse —would you come straight in ?”
and he led the doctor into the sick-room, where Mrs.
Pym lay tossing in a high fever.
Margery’s face showed new hope when she saw
who had arrived.
“Well done, David,” she whispered, giving her
brother’s arm a grateful squeeze, which spoke volumes.
Wilfred had told her of his daring scheme.
The doctor told them Mrs. Pym had a fever due
to drinking the water from the poisoned water-hole,
and because of the hot sun. She was to be kept
quiet for a few days, hot bottles were to be kept at
her feet, and he assured them she soon would be
well again—in fact, the crisis was already over.
The three children were wonderfully relieved.
Doctor Drury decided to stay at the hotel that night,
attend Mrs. Pym again in the morning, then return
to the diggings.
To help Mrs. Bonny, who had been so good to the
sick woman through her illness, Margery, David and
Wilfred volunteered to wash up that evening. The
dining-room had been packed to capacity, and both
landlady and help were almost exhausted and grate-
fully accepted the offer. The three were now in the
big wooden kitchen. Margery had a large apron
tied over her crinoline frock, and Wilfred, as might
be expected, cut a queer figure in a sack, tied round
his rotund person with a luggage strap.


The Ride to Brown's Hill
David washed the dishes, Wilfred dried them, and
Margery stacked them away. As they worked they
discussed plans for the future.
“Here we are —stuck in this two-horse town away
from everything, and likely to be here for weeks,”
remarked Wilfred, as he cleverly caught a plate,
just fallen from the shelf. “The question is, what’s
to happen when the supply of gold-dust runs out ?”
“Something will have to be done !” sighed Margery.
“I wish we could go prospecting ourselves. Maybe
we’d find a nugget and stop this bad luck Uncle
James is having.”
David smiled.
“I had my first lesson in gold-washing to-day, if
it’s any help.”
“Bit of a comedown to start the day washing
gold and end by washing plates,” observed Wilfred.
But as he dodged a piece of soap, a plan already
was taking form in his busy brain.


CHAPTER XVI
LOST !
Wilfred had not been idle all this time. Far from
it. He had kept both eyes and ears open, and many
were the tales he had heard of lucky gold finds.
Friendly miners described to him the types of ground
in which gold usually was found. He decided he
would start some prospecting on his own account in
the near future.
The question was, how could the necessary outfit
be obtained ? He would need a spade, pick, and tin
dish for washing the gold, at the least, and knew
these articles were fetching prices higher than he
could afford.
“Jellybeans has some new plan, David. I can tell
by the far-away look in his eye,” Margery remarked
the night following the historic ride.
The fat boy blushed, and came rapidly to earth.
“I’m going to sell Dulcie !” he announced.
“Sell your goat ?” Margery gasped. “But I thought
you said nothing would ever make you part with
her ?”
“She’s becoming too much nuisance. Only this
morning a digger left his hat on the veranda. Dulcie
got her eye on it, and that was the end of the hat !”


Without further explanation the fat boy got up
and went to bed. He intended keeping his scheme
a secret until all plans were made. Because of the
continual crowding at Mrs. Bonny’s Buninyong
hotel, Wilfred and David were obliged to sleep in
the wood-shed. As they had blankets of their own,
and also acquired some sacks, into which they stuffed
straw, they succeeded in making themselves fairly
comfortable, excepting the spiders and beetles.
That night Wilfred could not sleep. In his corner
of the wood-shed he tossed and turned restlessly.
A thousand and one thoughts chased through his
brain. Visions of Pengally’s adventures at Clunes ;
Dr. Drury’s hauls at Brown’s Hill; David’s half-
finished account of his lesson at fossicking. Yes,
always his thoughts came back to that same subject—
gold !
It seemed absurd that hundreds of others could
be finding gold in rich quantities, yet the Pyms’
uncle met with bad luck wherever he went.
He had been told that Mr. Everett was becoming
notorious for his poor luck. When he appeared on a
claim, the men groan.
“Here’s Everett—brings bad luck everywhere.
We won’t find much gold now, boys,”
The strange thing was that more than once this
had proved too true. Meanwhile Mrs. Pym still had
to be cared for, and the gold-dust Pengally had given
the Pyms was fast getting used up. Wilfred had


considered offering to help Herr Schultz in his
vegetable garden near by. But he knew he could not
expect much in wages until the garden was paying.
He thought, too, perhaps he and David could help
Mrs. Bonny in return for free board, but that also
did not seem enough. Nothing seemed enough when,
seven miles distant, men were unearthing fortunes,
after a few hours’ work with a shovel and pick.
Wilfred decided he would start prospecting for
himself, peg a claim out and work as he’d never
worked before. Dreamily he remembered the tales
Pengally had told them of his first gold find.
“When it cum time to wash the firzt panful out
we could zee zomething rare had been ztruck. And
when we washed it out, we could have bin knocked
flat with one feather. The bottom o’ that pan
glittered like the crown of our good Queen. Covered
it was, with zpecks o’ gold—round, shinin’ bits,
near to the zize o’ a pin’s head. In zome o’ that
green clay I zaw bits large as zmall peas, I zwear to
it.”
He drowsed off, still dreaming of it.
He woke to find the sun streaming into the wood-
shed. Looking across, he discovered David was
already up, his bedding neatly folded in the corner.
Wilfred rubbed his eyes sleepily. Creak ! Groan !
Squeak ! What was that ? It was the slow creaking
of wagon-wheels. He jumped up as though attacked
by bull ants. Those creaking wheels meant Jem


Mickleberry was starting for Geelong, and Wilfred
had a special commission for him. He might catch
him yet. Hastily tugging his clothes on, he rushed
at top speed through the gate and down the front
street. Still too late. Already the wagon was down
the road.
“You blessed fool,” the fat boy angrily told him-
self. “Serves you right for sleeping in.”
He stared down the track after the vanishing
bullock cart. The road wound about like a twisting
serpent. It suddenly dawned on him that if he cut
across the paddocks as the crow flies, there might
still be a chance to catch the wagon. Calculating
quickly, he decided that if he went straight across
the paddocks, then out through the bush on the
farther side of the hill, he would come out on the
track again. The road took several twists before
reaching the gully. He felt confident he would reach
the spot before the wagon.
Without waiting to tell a soul, he set out. The
first paddock was easy going, but the second took
longer. The earth had been ploughed up, but as the
farmer had gone gold fossicking, no crop had been
sown, and the soil lay in great rough clods, making him
stumble badly. He was out of breath before he was
half-way across it, but kept doggedly on. His brisk
run had dwindled to a trot, and every time he breathed
he made a sharp wheezing sound like a bellows
puffing. The squeak, rattle, groan of the wagon-


wheels could be heard dimly from the track to the
right. The sound spurred him on to greater efforts.
At last, the lumpy paddock was crossed and he was
on firmer, more even ground again. The fat boy’s face
was now beetroot red. He seldom hurried, unless
compelled to —he was not used to it.
“I’ll do it ! I’ll catch him ! I must !” he muttered
gamely, and pushed on across the hill. The timbered
stretch was now merely a bare hundred yards distant.
He could still faintly hear the squeaking wagon-wheels.
“The trees at last,” he thought, with a sigh of
relief. “Shouldn’t be long now. I’ll just have time
to cut through this timber—l’ll be right then.”
Poor Wilfred ! In his excitement he forgot to take
his bearings before he plunged into that belt of
scrub. He struck confidently out in the direction he
imagined would lead to the track, only to find to
his dismay the trees and scrub were thickening every
yard. He became frenzied—thought he would miss
the wagon, and doubled his pace. He did not know
how long he kept on like this, but it suddenly occurred
to him he no longer heard the squeaking wagon-
wheels.
This did not worry him at first.
“It’s crossing gully now —that means I should
get to the track in time, after all.”
Puffed out, he took a short rest by leaning against
the trunk of a large wattle tree. Sticky resin oozed
from the cracks in the bark, and the fat boy, even in


this emergency, could not resist sampling it. It looked
like barley sugar. But, ugh ! its taste was bitter.
Spitting it out, he hurried on.
“Pheww . . . it’s farther across this bush than
I reckoned,” he reflected. Then stopped short.
There, ten yards in front, was the wattle trje he had
leant against a few minutes ago. He hoped for a
moment it might be another, but no ! the broken
pieces of resin were proof positive. They lay there
before him, telling him in mocking tones :
“You’re lost ! You’re lost !”
A white cockatoo, circling overhead, repeated the
fact.
“Lost ! You’re lost!”
Wilfred was not the one to give up easily.
“Lost ! Not a bit of it. I’ll get out of this somehow,”
he muttered between clenched teeth. On he plodded,
striking out in another direction. Once he almost
trod on a snake. It lay like a dead stick across the
ground. When the fat boy approached it slithered
off into the grass with a faint sinister swwwwsh !
Wilfred shivered. He had almost trodden on it.
Picking up a firm stick, from then on he kept a sharp
look-out for any other such unwelcome stranger.
That snake marked the turning-point of the
disaster. Instead of concentrating on getting out of
the maze and following the sun, he spent most of
his time with his eyes glued to the ground looking for
snakes—consequently, he got deeper and deeper


into the bush. He listened in vain for the creaking
of the wagon-wheels. Jem Mickleberry now would
be miles down the track. He coo-ed, but got no
answer except his own echo. Too late he remembered
his first move should have been to climb a tree and
get his sense of direction. He did this now. The
sight that met his eye was not encouraging. On
every side simply dull green scrub and trees, stretching
into the distance. No sign of highway or habitation
anywhere.
By this time the sun was directly over his head,
showing it must be noon. Suddenly he realized he
was feeling decidedly hungry. Realized he had had
no breakfast.
“I must get something to eat some way or other,”
he muttered, and wondered vaguely how the black-
fellows got on for food when wandering in dry bush
countrv.
“A fat lot of good it would be for me to try and
catch a wallaby or kangaroo,” he thought dejectedly.
He pricked up his ears as a sudden rustling in the
grass was heard. Would it be another snake ? No, it
was only a small lizard. He watched it scuttle off
to cover among the leaves.
“The blackfellows go after lizards and grubs—
why shouldn’t I ?” he exclaimed aloud.
The thought of grubs was too much, but he
reflected he might try a lizard. He thrust his hands
into the pocket of his breeches, there should be a box




M r $ •£*& V«J*C-*v 4'^-
04f ittl V
,<z i* » 7 € r* f
3i#' >w' a^& ( L
l,f> n Wvtfnbh a ' i p;v \
•#. r^v, *% £-r >■« •;• W/ p />
HI- AM
“Out flashed a family of lizards.”


of wax matches there. Thank goodness there was.
He decided he would catch some lizards then light
a fire and roast them. He did not relish the thought,
but knew it was better than dying of hunger.
The little creatures were not so easy to catch. He
lay on his stomach, waiting for some unsuspecting
member of the lizard tribe to fall into the trap.
Vainly he attempted to grab one by its tail, but it
twisted and got free; he tried again when another
ventured near. It, too, eluded him. He was in despair.
Almost gave up hope. But the story of King Bruce
and the spider came back to him.
“I must do it —I’ll catch one if I die in the attempt,”
he decided grimly. He tried a new spot. Near a hollow
log this time. He banged on the log to scare out any
occupants, trusting to luck no snake would appear.
A hurried scatter resulted, and out flashed a family of
lizards. He caught two of them.
“Ah ! this seems the idea,” he thought, greatly
cheered.
The lizards were soon killed, and he went to another
log to repeat his success. Again the plan worked.
He banged on the log, and out scuttled the lizards. He
killed another one, and after half an hour’s hunting
had six.
The next step was to make a fire. He set about
gathering dry sticks, scraped a hollow in the hard
earth, and built his fire in its shelter. He struck a
match carefully and thrust it among the dry leaves.


It caught immediately, and soon the fire burnt
briskly.
Its bright flames cheered him immensely. Almost
gaily he searched round for a green branch with a
forked end. Carefully a lizard was speared on to it
and held over the fire. The first experiment led to
disaster, the end of the stick broke, and the lizard
went sizzling into the flames.
“H’m, have to get another stick,” he thought.
This time a stronger one was chosen. The roasting
proceeded without further disaster, and the lizard
was cooked to a turn.
“Not as bad as I expected, H’m . . . not too
bad at all!” he decided as he sampled it, and pro-
ceeded to roast another.
The lizards were all consumed in an amazingly
quick time. The next task was to find a creek. This
gave him a new plan of action. When he found a creek,
why not follow it downstream, it probably would
lead into a larger stream, and that might take him to
a river, which would bring to cleared land and safety,
but the toasted lizards had made him strangely
sleepy, and first he decided he must rest. Curling under
a tree blackfellow fashion, in two minutes he was
sound asleep. It must have been two o’clock when
he woke once more. At first he thought he was still
in the shed at Buninyong Hotel, but certain sharp
stones soon brought home the fact that his mattress
was no couch of soft straw, but extremely hard ground.


He sat up, suddenly remembering his predicament.
He glanced at the sun.
“Golly, wonder how long I’ve been sleeping ?
This won’t do !” he muttered jumping to his feet.
“The first thing is to find a creek,” he decided. He
talked to himself as a matter of course now. It did
not seem easy. Carefully he studied the ground,
and set off at a trot down a slight slope to the left.
There should be a creek at the bottom of this gully,
he thought. The bush in places was almost impassable.
Shrubs, brambles, and sword grass blocked the
spaces between the gums, becoming thicker as he went
farther down hill. He struggled to the first gully
only to discover it contained no creek, merely a few
shallow pools.
Determined not to give up, he continued down the
gully, hoping it would lead to another. His enter-
prise was rewarded quickly. The gully joined
another water-course down which, to his intense relief,
water was running.
Greatly cheered, he followed the course of this
creek for miles. The undergrowth and shrubs at
times became so thick, it seemed impossible to go on.
But by scrambling, shoving, and crawling on his
hands and knees, he got through somehow. His
clothes were torn to ribbons, his hands scratched and
bleeding, but he struggled on. The creek twisted and
turned dozens of times, but he dared not leave it,
in case he could not find his way back.


Late that afternoon the going became easier. The
creek had now swollen to a small river, and ran into
a broad valley, giving him ample room to follow its
course on the higher ground and so avoid the thorns
and knife-like sword grass. Still there seemed no sign
of human habitation. He trudged on stubbornly.
“This should make me thinner, that’s one thing.
Getting lost certainly takes the fat off a chap,” he
thought with a half-smile. In two hours it would
be dark. He had long since given up hope of getting
out of the wood that night.
“I’ll have to find more to eat, and get a shelter
of some sort built,” he decided.
Glancing round, he calculated he would get most
shelter on a hillock rising sharply to the right. The
fat boy always hoped for the best, and even though
forced to spend a night in the bush, did not for one
moment think his life was in danger. His enterprise
would win through. He soon had a lean-to of broken
branches built. Then proceeded to look about for
an evening meal.
“If blackfellows can find enough to eat in the bush,
so can I,” he declared. In the gully he had found a
few nuts which he had gathered and tied in his
kerchief. Now he broke them open with a stone
and sampled the kernels. It was hard chewing, but
he liked their flavour and wished he had more. He
was still hungry. He looked round for lizards but
did not see any.


The natives, he knew, dug for roots, and many were
reported delicious. Breaking a stick to a sharp
point, he went hunting for roots, digging round the
roots of trees. He found two, then moved on to
another spot where more plants were growing. Aha !
here was a large root. This should be good. He dug
the stick fiercely into the ground, but it struck against
rock. Determined to get the root, he tried from
the other side. Though he pulled valiantly, he only
succeeded in breaking the white juicy root in
two.
“I’ll dig round it. I’ll get it somehow—got to,”
he puffed, and breaking off another stick, renewed
his efforts. Again he struck the rock. Thoroughly
exasperated, he scratched at the earth with his fingers.
His hands closed round the bit of rock, and he had
all but hurled it away when something made him
look at it closer. Quickly he scratched the earth
away. The scrap of metal turned out to be a piece
of pure gold, the size of a bird’s egg.
The shock almost stunned Wilfred. He knelt on
the ground staring at the yellow metal, turning it
over in his palm again and again. Yes, it was gold !
Unmistakably gold ! He tried to reckon up its
worth, but could not. Taking out his handkerchief,
carefully he wrapped the little nugget in it, stowing
it in his pocket.
A hillside which yielded a gold nugget after being
scratched with a stick a few minutes might well yield


a fortune if properly mined. He decided to investi-
gate further. The ground was hard and his only
implements sharpened sticks and stones, but by
working busily he soon had a patch of earth uncovered.
A further surprise awaited him. Only six inches
from the surface the clay seemed dotted with golden
specks. He took a specimen of this clay too. Then
he scraped the earth back, carefully covering the spot
with a large branch.
“No sense in letting others see I’ve been searching
here,” he thought. For the moment he completely
had forgotten he was lost.
The sun was slipping behind the distant moun-
tains, and the fat boy with a sigh came to earth,
realizing that no matter how valuable gold is, it
could not be eaten and he had better look for more
roots.
Though too excited to worry overmuch, he found
three more. They tasted bitter, they were tough and
stringy, but at least they appeased his hunger—that
was all that mattered. His spirits already were
soaring high. No longer did he feel a foolish boy
who had got lost in the bush. He was a pioneer, a
prospector who had made good, and in his pocket was
the lump of gold proving it. Not an extremely large
lump certainly, but enough to show that the hillock
might be the means of both himself and his friends,
the Pyms, making their fortunes.
Further experiments showed him the leaves of the


she-oak tree had a delightful cooling flavour and were
good to chew. He nibbled sprigs as he prepared his
mia-mia for the night. He lined the ground beneath
the shelter with dry leaves and bracken, and by the
time darkness had fallen was snug as a rabbit in its
burrow.
Margery Pym had once remarked laughingly :
“My word, Jellybeans, you certainly know how to
make yourself comfortable anywhere.”
“Naturally,” had been his retort. “You don’t
catch me getting cold and dying of exposure if I were
lost. I’d find a way out somehow,”
Little had he known how soon his boast was to be
put to the test, but he had carried out his word. He
made a mound of leaves for a pillow, spread the pile
of bracken over him like a blanket, and snuggled
down comparatively comfortable and at least
warm.
The insistent chuckle of a kookaburra overhead
woke him. His first thought was for the weather.
To his relief it was still fine. Once again he had a
meal from roasted lizards. Their taste did not seem
to appeal so much that morning, but he forced him-
self to eat on, knowing this was better than remaining
hungry.
He longed for a pencil and paper so he could draw
a map as a guide to the hillock where he had found
the gold. He studied the scene carefully. The
she-oak at the bend of the creek, and straight to the


left of it, the hillock rising abruptly from the flatter
ground like a gigantic beehive.
“I’ll never forget that,” he decided, little realizing
how hard it would be to locate the exact spot once he
had left it. He walked for miles along the water-
courses that day. By sundown, to his great joy, he
saw a building in the distance.
Wilfred had been lost the better part of two days.
He was tired, footsore, hungry, but the thought of his
dramatic find in the lonely bush spurred him on, and
immediately he caught sight of the house in the dis-
tance he doubled his pace, trying to reach it before
light faded the second time.
He knew he would have little hope of finding it
once the sun went down. Summoning up every last
vestige of strength he possessed, he pushed gamely
on, only to be assailed by a fresh difficulty. The house
was on the farther side of the stream which by this
time had trebled its size and was a small river.
There was little chance of finding a bridge in these
parts, and the mountain current was too swift and
treacherous for a poor swimmer like himself.
He hoped he might find a shallow place where the
water ran over rocks.
“Aha ! This looks my chance,” he murmured as he
spied downstream an uprooted tree whose trunk
formed a natural bridge across the water. Cau-
tiously he climbed on to it. The wood seemed half
rotten, and he had no desire to crash into the swirling


water foaming below. Crash ! Even then his foot
sank into a section of the mouldering timber. For
a moment he thought himself gone. He dangled
perilously for one dreadful minute, then regained his
balance and crawled on. Every step was one of
danger, and he had to test each section before trusting
his considerable weight to it.
“Pheww,” puffed the fat boy. “Being a tight-
rope walker at a village fair would be easy to this.”
Somehow he managed to cross safely, but once he
knew firm land was beneath him again, he became
over-confident, tripped and landed head-first in a
mass of blackberries. It was tortuous work extri-
cating himself from the prickles, but finally he
struggled free, and continued on. The house was not
far away now. He could see it clearly.
“Keep at it—the worst’s over —you’re nearly out
of it,” he told himself as he stumbled up that last
slope, then dowm another hollow and across to the
farm.
The dogs, sensing his approach, barked loudly. A
woman came to the door to see what was afoot. She
was astonished to see the newcomer was a fat, puffing
youth of thirteen, his clothes torn to rags, his hands,
face and legs a mass of bleeding scratches, while he
seemed so exhausted he scarcely could drag one foot
after the other.
She hurried to meet him as he stumbled into the
farmyard.


“Gracious me, Sonny, what a state you’re in !
What’s the matter ? Was it the bushrangers ? I
hear they’ve been out again lately.”
A faint smile for a moment flitted round Wilfred’s
mouth, something of his old self-satisfied, all-knowing
air came to light again.
“Bushrangers ? Nothing so easy. I’ve been
bushed. Lost for two days. Won through, though.
Didn’t let it beat me.” He swayed for a moment
and clutched at the fence.
“Bushed for two days ! Mercy on us. Come
inside at once,” commanded the kind-hearted soul.
Wilfred followed her to the kitchen, collapsing
weakly on the sofa. His head seemed to spin round,
then all w r ent black ! When he woke, the farmer’s
wife had a bowl of soup ready. After devouring it,
he told his story. To his surprise, he found he was
only six miles from Buninyong. He had struck a
thick patch of bush, and wandered in circles.
There were four people at the farm—an old man,
the woman, and two children. They promised to
show Wilfred the track back to Buninyong the next
day. Within thirty minutes he was asleep again.
He woke next morning to find his body ached in
every limb. For the first time it occurred to him
that the Pyms must be frantic wondering what had
become of him. He felt he must return quickly as
possible. Then there was the gold nugget burning a
hole in his pocket. . . .


He decided to offer the old man a gold sovereign
to take him back in his cart. It was imperative that
his news of the gold site should be told to David and
Margery immediately.
When he broached the question, the old fellow
peered at him suspiciously.
“A sovereign, eh ? Best show it to me first,
laddie.”
“I haven’t got the money with me now,” Wilfred
brazened out. “I’ll get it the moment I reach the
town again. That’s on my dying word of honour.”
“Huh,” the old fellow grunted. “Honour don’t
count much these days. I’d sooner get me money.”
But the fat boy argued and persisted till finally
the old chap gave in, and shuffled off to harness his
one horse to the cart. Soon they were jogging over
the ill-made track leading to the town, Wilfred
hardly spoke one word. He was calculating how
much it would cost to buy a miner’s outfit and get
back to his wonderful hillock. The cart jolted on,
and finally the township appeared in sight. When
the cart pulled up at the hotel gate, Mrs. Bonny
hurried out, thinking it to be a new lodger.
“Lawks a-mercy, it’s Master Wilfred,” she screamed.
“Everyone, it’s Wilfred Jellibrand ; he’s found.”
People came running from all directions.
“I got bushed,” the fat boy kept explaining.
“Found my way to a farm, luckily. This gentleman
here kindly drove me back.”


“Aye, but the price, don’t ’ee forget, was a sove-
reign,” said a voice at his elbow.
“It will be yours in a moment,” promised Wilfred.
“Mrs. Bonny, can I have a word with you in private ?”
“With pleasure,” she answered, and took him to
the parlour.
Carefully Wilfred closed the door.
“It was quite true what that driver said. I offered
him a sovereign to drive me here. No, don’t look
alarmed. I can pay. See here.” And he unwrapped
the nugget the size of a small bird’s egg.
The good lady’s eyes nearly popped out of her
head.
“Master Wilfred —how did you come by that ?”
“Quite honestly, but at present I can’t explain.
Look here, Bonny, on this security will you lend me
a sovereign to pay the driver ?”
“Why, surely,” and fetching her cash-box, she
handed the coin over.
The old fellow evidently had not believed Wilfred’s
promise, for his manner entirely changed when he
saw the money twinkling in his palm.
“Thank ’ee kindly, young sir—thank ’ee. We was
pleased to be of help. I hopes you’re none the worse
for the mishap,” and putting the coin in his pocket,
he drove smartly off.
News of Wilfred’s return had reached Margery
Pym by this time, and she came rushing round the
veranda with crinoline skirts grasped high.


“Oh, Wilfred —then it is true. Thank goodness
you’re safe. What happened ? Where have you
been ?” she demanded.
The fat boy gave a slight wink, signalling for her
to keep such questions till later.
“Where’s David ?” he countered.
“Out with the black trackers looking for you. We
thought you might”—her voice faltered—“might be
dead. Oh, the relief to know you’re safe !”
She went on to tell him they had agreed to light a
fire on the hill if he returned. Already willing
workers had the bonfire blazing merrily. Its curling
wreathes of smoke mounted to the sky-line—an
unspoken signal to the tireless searchers that Wilfred
had turned up, safe and unscathed.


CHAPTER XVII
BEEHIVE HILL
David, the two black trackers, and other volunteers,
meanwhile, were still searching for the missing boy.
They had practically given up hope when, with a
dramatic shout, one of the blacks pointed a thin arm
to a wreathe of smoke rising from behind a distant
hill.
“Mine tink it—that smoke him say white fellah,
he found !”
“You’re right. It’s the smoke-signal without
doubt ! Wilfred’s found,” David joyfully cried.
He felt a great load had been lifted from his heart.
He had not known till yesterday how much Wilfred
had come to mean to him. The thought of his fat
friend perishing in the lonely bush had driven him
almost mad with anxiety.
The party quickly made its way back to the town-
ship, and found the signal had been no false alarm,
Wilfred had been found—he was safe. Mrs. Pym,
too, was recovering now, and after the evening meal
Margery was able to leave her a while, and go to the
front parlour to learn Wilfred’s all-important secret.
The good-natured Mrs. Bonny had lent her room to
the three for the occasion. David and Margery


drew their chairs up to the table eagerly, anxious to
hear what had befallen their friend during the past
two days.
Wilfred’s great moment had arrived. His small
blue eyes glittered strangely—his excitement was so
great he could scarcely speak.
He told them how he had come to get bushed.
How he had tried to catch up to Jem Mickleberry’s
wagon to ask if Jem would buy a gold-miner’s outfit
for him in Geelong.
“What an optimist you are, Jellybeans,” said
David with a resigned laugh. “What do you know
about gold prospecting ? It w r ould take a month of
Sundays before you even got the colour !”
Wilfred jumped to his feet.
“You’re wrong —all wrong ! Look at this !” And
taking out his handkerchief, he tossed his nugget of
gold on the table. It rolled along the cloth, stopping
in front of Margery, who stared at it fascinated.
“Look, David. It’s gold! Pure gold!” she
breathed.
Her brother took it up and tested its weight.
“Wilfred, how did you get this ? You didn’t take
it from anyone ?”
The fat boy shook his head, and unfolded his adven-
tures —how he had struck the lump of gold when
digging for edible roots, and how further searching had
led him to believe the hill would yield a fortune.
“The main thing is to keep this an absolute secret,”


he warned them. “If we don’t, there’ll be a rush to
the spot, and none of us will get much at all.”
The other two nodded.
“Seems to me,” David observed, “our best plan is
to cash your nugget and buy a horse. Then, maybe,
we can find Uncle James and get him to go to this
place with us.”
They all agreed this was the best plan, and the next
day, after considerable trouble, managed to secure a
horse —although they had to give the owner twice
the animal’s value, Margery was left at home to
be with her mother, and the two boys set off in search
of their uncle. First they rode to the diggings and
inquired of Pengally. He directed them to a camp
three miles farther on. They rode to it at full
speed, and here, to their intense relief, found their
uncle.
He looked tired and worn, and his cheeks blanched
under their tan when he saw who the visitors were.
“Is it bad news ? Is your mother all right ?” he
asked.
David nodded. He could have added : “And
that’s no thanks to you,” but felt this was no time to
remember past grudges.
“Having any luck ?”
The other shook his head. “Getting a bit, but not
much more than will cover expenses. Strikes me
I’m the unluckiest man who ever set foot on the gold-
fields.”


“Your luck may change sooner than you think,”
hinted Wilfred. “This way, Mr. Everett ; we’ve
important news.”
Taking him to one side, they told him of the find
Wilfred had made on that lonely hill, and of the nugget.
Hope gleamed anew in Mr. Everett’s eyes.
“But how do you know that find was not an
isolated one ?”
“I have specimens proving that,” was the quick
reply. The man, when he studied them, at once saw
the possibilities of the new find.
“If there’s more like this our fortunes are made.
I’ll pack my kit and come with you at once.”
While waiting, the boys took a quick look round
the camp. It looked far from prosperous. A few
disheartened-looking men were washing for gold by
the creek. Others were digging on their claims, but
all with the air of men whose spirit had been broken.
“Very different,” thought David, “from the pros-
perous, cheerful diggers at Brown’s Hill.”
“How long will it take to wind things up here ?”
he asked his uncle.
Mr. Everett gave a cynical smile. “Not long—
there’s nothing much to wind up.”
“Can we get your horse for you ?”
“The horse ! Er—l had to sell him. Hadn’t the
money for supplies.”
“Just as well we bought Nugget,” remarked Wil-
fred. They had christened their new horse this


name, because he had been bought with money from
the nugget Wilfred had found.
The difference in Mr. Everett’s expression was
miraculous.
“What’s this ? This horse ! You mean he’s yours ?”
“Of course,”
“Then my problem’s solved. I can get ready at
once. The wagon is still here. I was wondering
how on earth I’d get it back to the town. Now we’re
set as a jelly.”
Well within the hour, shovels, picks and the rest of
the kit were piled on the wagon, and the journey to
Buninyong begun.
Mr. Everett drove, while the boys walked alongside
the cart to save the horse, for it was hard pulling
because of the hills. They did not reach the town-
ship till sunset. It was decided to make all plans
that evening, and start for the bush early next
morning.
Margery had good news for them, too. Mrs. Pym
had taken a decided turn for the better, and now
was definitely off the danger list.
The Pyms, Uncle James and Wilfred spent the
evening making careful plans for the coming expedi-
tion. Wilfred had to explain again and again the
locality of the hillock from which he’d taken the
specimens of gold-bearing clay.
“And you’re sure you’d know this place again ?
Did you mark it in any way ?”


“Know it ? Of course I would. I’ve got it pic-
tured in my mind clearly. The creek goes round
here.”
“Creek ? I thought you said a river before ?”
David interjected.
“So I did. A little river, or a big creek, same
thing. It bends round like this.” He did a rough
sketch on paper. “Straight to the left here, there’s
a she-oak tree. And the hillock is behind it. Rises from
the flatter ground for all the world like a beehive.
I’d pick it out in a second.”
“Beehive Hill —a jolly good name for it,” David
exclaimed. “Gee Willikins, we’ll be busy bees right
enough when we get there, eh, Uncle ?”
Mr. Everett smiled gloomily. “Don’t get over-
excited, boys. Many’s the slip ’twixt the cup and
the lip, remember. The prospect sounds good, but
don’t be too hopeful. Wait till you get there.”
He was remembering past disappointments. This
time he would not believe luck had come his way
till he could prove it. They now had to decide how
they would approach Beehive Hill, as it now was
termed.
Wilfred was against going back to the farm where
he had stayed the night. He thought it might rouse
the old fellow’s suspicions, and he might spy out
their movements, later causing a gold rush to the
spot. This had to be avoided at all costs.
They decided to follow the track till they came to


the creek, then cut through the bush, not going near
the farm at all.
“We won’t take the wagon,” Uncle James decided.
“Our best plan is to go on foot and carry the
shovels and picks on our shoulders.”
Margery was disappointed when she heard this.
She secretly had been hoping that if they went by
wagon, she might be taken with them. This new
scheme made this impossible. She simply had to
swallow her disappointment and make the best of it.
They went to bed in a state of high excitement.
The all-important day fortunately proved clear and
bright. Wilfred, David and Uncle James were up
at sunrise to pack their kits, and Margery also was
an early riser. She had promised to prepare the
food supplies. Bread, butter, cheese and wholemeal
buns were wedged tightly into the canvas haversack.
A supply of tea, sugar, and other odds and ends
followed.
David tested its weight.
“Here. Steady on, Marg,” he protested. “Don’t
put more things in it. It’s heavy enough now in all
sense.”
“I can see we’ll have to make an early halt for
lunch,” Wilfred remarked with certain glee. “Might
as well carry the food inside as out —it’s easier that
way !”
“If you eat too much you’ll be puffing like a
grampus before Beehive Hill is even sighted. No—


that’s enough, Marg. Not a thing more —please !”
Margery nodded, and proceeded to buckle the
straps down.
“There you are. I think that’s everything. Uncle
James is waiting for you. He’s out by the stable.
He doesn’t want to set off down the main road.
Might attract too much attention.”
They all were agreed it was a wise precaution.
“Good luck, boys—and don’t keep us in suspense
too long,” Margery whispered as she waved her
good-bye.
The party set off briskly. It was a perfect day,
and they were all pitched up to a state of high excite-
ment. Wilfred felt confident they would locate
Beehive Hill without the least trouble. Their cam-
paign was mapped out. They would follow the track
leading to the farm for some miles, and just before
the creek crossing, branch off, making their way
through the bush. This would bring them to the
spot where the creek made a wide S-shaped turn.
After the first two miles the picks, shovels and
bundles they were carrying began to seem heavy.
They stopped for a breather.
“That haversack must be weighty, David,” Wilfred
slyly interjected. “How about us eating a bun or
two each ? Make it much lighter for you.”
“None of that, Wilfred,” Uncle James replied.
“We’ve no time for snacks till noon—and by then
we’ll be at Beehive Hill, I hope.”


“Aye, aye, sir,” the two lads responded, and
springing to their feet, pushed on once more. They
tramped steadily, reaching the creek ahead of schedule.
“This is the place. We branch off here,” Wilfred
told them.
“You’re sure of that ? Think carefully. It’s easy
to make mistakes in the bush.”
Wilfred walked on thoughtfully for some while.
From the next rise he could see the lonely farmhouse
in the distance. He was positive this was the right
creek, and they plunged into the bush, making sure
to keep the creek in sight the whole time. It was
rough going fighting through the tangled scrub and
sword grass, and Wilfred had no wish to get lost
again.
“Here we are ! It’s working out splendidly. What
did I say ? We’re coming to the bend in the creek
now,” he triumphantly told them thirty minutes
later.
“Good work, my boy. Very sound,” approved
Uncle James. “What’s the landmark we make for
now ? The she-oak tree ?”
“That’s it. We’ll sight it presently. And just
behind it we’ll find Beehive Hill.”
In their excitement all weariness was forgotten,
and the trio plunged forward at top speed. The
bend in the creek was reached quickly.
“Now, my boy—where is this she-oak tree ?”
demanded Mr. Everett.


A puzzled frown had gathered on Wilfred’s per-
spiring brow.
“That’s funny. It doesn’t seem to be here. I’d
better go down nearer the creek. Might see it from
there,” he murmured with sinking heart. There
were not many trees about, and it should have been
easy to pick out the she-oak. He searched frantically,
but still could not sight it anywhere. The other two
were bitterly disappointed.
“Why couldn’t you have made a careful note of
the spot ? Don’t suppose there was a she-oak at all.
Probably an ordinary gum, and there are dozens of
those about,” David scathingly remarked.
“I’ll find it sooner or later. It was a she-oak all
right,” persisted the fat boy. David called a halt and,
lighting a fire, brewed billy tea and spread out the
lunch. For once Wilfred was too occupied to bother
about food. His scratched and bleeding hands
forced a way through bush, thicket and bramble in
search of the missing landmark. Half an hour later
he came racing back to the others, his perspiring face
beaming with triumph.
“I’ve found it. We’ve been on the wrong branch
of the creek. Follow me.”
David and James Everett sprang excitedly to their
feet.
“You’ve found the exact spot where you got the
gold specimens ?”
“Of course. I told you I’d find it sooner or later,


that it was only a matter of time. Two hundred
yards back the creek branches in two. That’s where
the mistake was made. We followed the wrong
branch.”
“So that’s it ? And have you actually sighted the
she-oak tree ?”
Wilfred nodded excitedly.
“This way . . . follow me !” And, like Cortez of
old, he led his men to the hidden treasure.
When the others had accused him of leading them
on a wild-goose chase, and had hinted the she-oak
tree only existed in his imagination, he became even
more determined to search till he found it. At last,
hot and tired as he was, in desperation he had climbed
a tree to see how the land lay. He saw in a flash where
the mistake had been made. The creek had been
joined by a side-stream and they had followed the
wrong branch. He had traced the other creek along
some distance, and to his joy found himself covering
the ground he had trodden on that memorable even-
ing of his great discovery. Here was the she-oak tree,
here the remains of the mia-mia he had built to shelter
him, and before him was Beehive Hill, just as he had
described it to the others, a rounded hillock rising
sharply from the flatter ground for all the world like
a gigantic beehive !
He had sped like lightning to fetch the others, and
now they stood beside him gazing at the hillock, a
thousand hopes and fears racing through their brains.
a 66


“Didn’t I tell you ? There’s the she-oak tree !
There’s Beehive Hill,” he boasted.
“You’re right, lad. We take everything back, and,
by George, it looks a likely spot for gold if ever there
was one.”
James Everett spoke hoarsely. He was excited.
They all were excited. Haversacks and bundles
were dumped on the ground, and within a few minutes
the picks were biting into the hard earth. Evidently,
some time before, in some terrific storm a tree had
been dislodged by the roots, and it was in the hollow
cavity caused by this Wilfred had found his nugget.
Uncle James bent his back with a will, . . .
“Holy Jupiter !” he gasped suddenly, and dropping
to his knees, scooped up a handful of the clay he had
uncovered. It was richer even than the specimens
Wilfred had brought back to Buninyong. It seemed
to glitter like a myriad stars on a summer night. It
was literally covered with golden specks.
Wilfred and David executed a war-dance of triumph
as the claims were pegged out. They were too excited
to do very much. It was Uncle James who shoul-
dered the spade work, and his experience stood him
in good stead. Hour after hour he toiled. Under
his direction, the boys later calmed down, and set to
work with a will, slaving like Trojans.
They were dog-tired when they gathered round the
fire at sundown to eat their simple meal, washed down
by copious draughts of billy tea, Wilfred could not


even summon up strength to make one of his famous
dampers. They could hardly believe their good
fortune, especially the fat boy. His dreams had
come true. Alone he had found a new gold-field and
restored the good fortunes of his friends, not to speak
of himself. They stayed working on the claim all
the following day, and to their delight the luck con-
tinued. Every dish they washed brought more gold-
dust to add to their hoard. But food supplies were
running low, and that night round the fire they
decided one of the number must go back to Buninyong
the next day, and bring a wagon-load of goods,
including their tent.
The next morning a shout from the region of the
creek was heard. It was the old fellow from the farm
Wilfred had visited. He had seen their fire, and had
come to investigate. The trio groaned. They knew
this meant their find no longer could be kept secret.
The old fellow took in the situation at a glance, saw
the prospects, and returned to his farm. Three hours
later he was back again with his grandson, and pegged
out a near-by claim. The next day two others
arrived, and by the end of the week at least twenty
men were working at Beehive Hill. So began one of
the most romantic of Victoria’s gold rushes. Men
flocked to Beehive Hill without a penny, and went
away rich men.
“And all because I was lost in the bush and had to
dig for roots like a blackfellow,” Wilfred thought as


he surveyed the scene some weeks later. “Fate
plays queer tricks. If I had died of hunger the place
would still be deserted.”
The next few months flew by like wildfire for the
Pyms. The diggings at Beehive Hill continued to
yield rich gold finds. Uncle James’s luck seemed to
have turned at last. When the first claim was
worked out, he pegged out another farther along the
creek. This proved almost as rich as the first.
Margery Pym stayed on with her mother at Mrs.
Bonny’s hotel in Buninyong, but directly Mrs. Pym
was recovered, it was decided they must return to
Melbourne. They were to travel by the coach service
running from Buninyong to Geelong. The day
planned for their departure was blazing hot, and the
driver decided to postpone the starting till late in the
afternoon. It was full moon and they could travel
by moonlight.
They set off at last, and it certainly was pleasant
driving through the cool of the evening. Margery
took a last look at the distant hill where David, Wil-
fred and Uncle James would be camping after a hard
day’s work on their gold claims. Thanks to Wilfred,
they were able to return to Melbourne complete with
a bag of gold-dust large enough to supply their wants
for many a month—anyway, till their father returned
from England. He was now on his way back to
Australia, and they hoped would be with them in
five weeks’ time. The twilight deepened to a violet


darkness. Then the moon came up, floating into the
sky like a great golden balloon.
On the coach rattled. It was crowded, but the
people were busy each with their own thoughts.
There was little conversation. Margery peered ahead
of her. The road stood out plainly in the clear moon-
light, but a hundred yards farther on it plunged
down into a gully, and on through a dark, mysterious
stretch of forest.
“There’s something sinister, something uncanny
about that dark patch ahead,” Margery thought.
The coach swayed and bumped over the rough
track. They were down in the gully now, and the
driver had jammed on the squeaking, creaking brakes.
Round the curve they swung and into the patch of
forest. Most of the passengers were dozing now, but
Margery was wide awake. She sensed danger, and
half-expected it, when a pistol shot whistled like the
crack of a whip through the roof of the coach. The
terror-stricken horses reared up on their hind legs, and
a stern, crisp voice rang out:
“Stand and deliver ! Else I fire !”
Inside the coach all was instant confusion. Mrs.
Pym all but swooned, men sprang to their feet, pro-
testing angrily but vainly. The coach was sur-
rounded by a ring of masked horsemen. Margery
looked at them curiously. The moonlight shone full
and clear on a thoroughbred black charger, and on
a small white star in the centre of its handsome


forehead. She looked again, heart thumping wildly.
“It’s Midnight,” she thought to herself. Mid-
night, the black charger belonging to Captain Light-
ning, the bushranger she and David had befriended,
and then met again in the mountains.
By this time everyone in the coach, including the
driver, had their hands above their heads. The bush-
rangers advanced and searched them systematically.
Their haul proved a rich one, for many of the travellers
were returning with gold.
Margery’s mind was made up. When the leader
crossed to her side of the coach, resolutely she stepped
forward.
“Back there, Miss. That a bag the lady has
there ? Hand it over,”
Margery took a step forward. Her face was in the
full moonlight, and her eyes shone strangely.
“Do you forget your friends, then, so soon, Mr.
O’Neill ?” she softly asked.
The man stepped back. His eyes gleamed for a
second through the slits of his mask.
“Nothing much good here,” he briefly reported, and
passed on, leaving the Pyms’ store of gold-dust still
a secret. No other passengers were searched. The
passengers could not for the life of them understand
why the bushrangers suddenly changed their tactics,
but the general explanation was their hearts had
been softened by the presence of the swooning woman
and clear-eyed little girl.


“Drive on —no funny business—or we shoot,”
came a grim command from the shadows.
The coachman needed no further invitation, but
whipped the scared horses up, and drove off at top
speed. Margery kept silent. Well she knew the
reason for the change of front, but knew she must
keep the secret to herself at all costs. The journey
was completed without further mishap, and Margery
and her mother settled in Melbourne waiting for Mr.
Pym’s return. The fortune of their family was made,
but they never forgot the struggle of those early days.
When she was a white-haired grandmother, Margery
Pym still would tell to an enthralled young audience
the strange story of their change of luck at Beehive
Hill, and how the good fortune was due to the courage
and determination of fat, cheerful Wilfred Jellibrand.
THE END






A tZh . 2
M ad
}J I A t-op^


-
■ ' ' . .
~ ’ ■ — --
■
