

AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
AIR RAID PRECAUTIONS COMMITTEE
ADVICE TO
HOUSEHOLDERS
(Issued under the Authority of the Minister for the Interior.)
By Authority:
L. F. JOHNSTON, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA.
8431. (Printed in Australia.)


AIR RAID WARNING SIGNALS.
To be Given by Sirens.
RAID IMMINENT SIGNAL—
A series of blasts rising and falling in
pitch.
Two seconds at high pitch and five seconds
at low pitch alternately.
Duration of signal—three minutes.
ALL CLEAR SIGNAL—
Continuous blast at even pitch for two
minutes.


Since the booklet “ Advice to Householders ” was
issued, information lias been received in regard to the
use by the enemy of an improved type of incendiary
bomb. This bomb is of the magnesium thermite type
but contains an explosive charge. Whilst burning this
bomb behaves in the same way as an ordinary incendiary
bomb until the explosion takes place. Therefore every
1 kilo. lb.) bomb should be regarded as possibly
containing an explosive charge. It may be taken that
tlie explosion must take place within about two minutes
after the bomb has started to burn. Because of this
explosive charge, you must protect yourself against the
steel splinters which are lethal at close quarters, and
can cause serious injury at 30 feet. The best protection
is a shield of i-inch wood not less than 28 inches long
and 20 inches wide, backed with a dust bin lid or beaten
out corrugated iron. This will afford a large measure
of protection. There are other materials such as the
lid of a copper or wash trough or a wooden shield, but
care should be taken as at 15 feet steel splinters can
penetrate this material. Cover can also be obtained
from solid articles of furniture.
When an incendiary bomb has fallen in the open or
in a place where it could be dealt with immediately it
falls and starts to burn, a sand mat may be placed
upon it without danger. Sand mats also provide a
measure of protection by approaching the bomb in a
crouching position using the sand mat for cover. If
the bomb cannot be tackled within i minute from the
time it falls it should in general be left for two minutes.
It can then be covered with a sand mat or loose sand
and left to burn out.
Instructions for the making of sand mats are con-
tained in the attached leaflet which should be inserted
in the booklet “ Advice to Householders ” together
with this slip for future reference.
Speed is essential in covering the bomb with sand
mats otherwise the resultant explosion will cause the
outbreak of further fires and possibly personal injury.
2382.




CONTENTS.
Sec. Page.
Foreword by Minister for the Interior .. 3
I. What has been done .. .. .. 4
11. Things to do now .. .. .. 3
111. Things to do in an Air Raid .. .. 5
IV. What to do if Fire breaks out .. .. 6
V. Incendiary Bombs and how to deal with them .. 7
VI. After the raid .. .. .. .. 9
VII. What householders will be required to do when
Lighting Restrictions are enforced.. .. 9
VIII. Road Vehicles and Pedestrians .. .. 11
IX. How you can assist in Canberra .. .. 12
8131.




Foreword by the Minister for
the Interior,
Senator the Hon. J. S. Callings.
There is no need for me to stress the vital
importance of adequate preparation for and
protection against the disastrous effects
of air raids.
A first step in this direction is the supply
in simple form of general information and
directions for the guidance of each house-
hold.
This booklet has accordingly been prepared
for issue to all householders in the Australian
Capital Territory, and, as the Minister
responsible for the general control of the
Territory, I earnestly advise residents to
study its contents carefully, to take the
immediate precautions indicated therein, and
in the event of emergency to follow closely
the advice given.
It is only by the energetic and whole-
hearted co-operation of all sections of the
community that loss of life and damage to
property during an air raid can be reduced
to a minimum.
If there is any uncertainty in regard to any
phase of the matter, or if additional infor-
mation is required, please make application
to the Air Raid Warden for your district.
8431.—2


AIR RAID PRECAUTIONS COMMITTEE,
CANBERRA, A.C.T.
ADVICE TO HOUSEHOLDERS.
Section I.—What has been done.
1. An Air Raid Precautions Organization has been
established for the protection of the civil population
and provision has been made for this to function
immediately should the necessity arise.
2. Air Raid Wardens have been appointed to operate
throughout the whole of the City area and their duties
in relation to the protection of and assistance to
members of the general public have been clearly defined.
These wardens are at present obtaining data from
householders in the areas to which they have been
appointed. The data is necessary for the smooth and
efficient functioning of the A.R.P. Services, and it is
essential that the public should render every possible
assistance to the wardens.
,1. Provision has been made for the establishment of
medical and first aid organizations, and adequate
arrangements have been made for the care of the sick
and injured.
4. Fire fighting services have been augmented and the
members trained to deal with the outbreak of fires
caused by incendiary bombs or otherwise. Provision
has been made also for the utilization of auxiliary
transport services, demolition and repair parties and
rescue parties.
5. A control centre for the direction and co-ordination
of the whole of the A.R.P. organization is being estab-
lished immediately and this will serve as the channel
through which the operations of the various services
will be controlled.
G. Provision has been made for the installation of
a warning system by sirens.


Section II.—Things to do now.
1. Study carefully the directions contained in this
pamphlet.
2. See that your radio set is in proper working order
to receive information and instructions. Keep tuned
in to one of your local stations.
3. If you are in charge of a business or shop, an
hotel or boarding house, or of tenements, decide upon
places of safety tor those for whose protection you
are responsible.
4. Study carefully the precautions you can take
against fire, and especially the instructions for dealing
with a small incendiary bomb.
5. Buildings may have to he darkened completely at
night. Consider this question for your home and any
other premises for which you are responsible. {See
Section VII.)
0. See that all grown-ups are familiar with instruc-
tions and know of the arrangements you are making
for their safety.
7. An air attack may include the use of numbers of
small incendiary bombs. So many fires might be started
that the fire brigade could not deal with them all, and
every citizen must be prepared to help.
8. For dealing with an incendiary bomb, have avail-
able a bucket or box of dry sand, a shovel (preferably
with a long handle and square mouth) and a hoe.
9. Water is the best means of putting out a fire, but
water mains may be damaged in an air raid or the
flow restricted by fire-fighting operations, so make sure
that you have water ready in buckets or cans in con-
venient places about the house; also, if possible, a
stirrup hand-pump fitted with hose and a dual purpose
nozzle. {See Section V. —Re Incendiary Bombs.)
Section III.—Things to do in an Air Raid.
1. This section describes the ACTION you would
need to take as soon as you receive warning o! the
actual approach of hostile aircraft.
2. It must he emphasized that it is very dangerous
to remain in the open during an air raid and not
to take cover. Fragments of anti-aircraft shells,


including the heavy nose cap, may fall miles away
from the firing point. No time should be lost in taking
cover. Such protection as that offered by archways,
doorways, balconies, and against walls or in unprotected
houses is better than remaining in the street. Bodily
contact with solid matter such as a wall should be
avoided, since there is a danger of injury being sus-
tained through the earth shock set up by an exploding
bomb. If no cover of any form is available, a person
should throw himself flat, preferably in a gutter or
depression in the ground, face downwards, supporting
the head on the folded arms. Protection of the lungs
against blast can be secured to some extent by keeping
the mouth slightly open and gripping firmly between
the teeth a piece of rubber, soft wood, or a handkerchief
rolled tightly. To protect the ear drums from shock,
it is useful to place in the ears a small pad of loosely
packed cotton-wool.
3. On hearing the warning, you should, as head of
the household, personally supervise the following pre-
cautions:—.
(а) See that every member of the household imme-
diately takes cover within the dwelling-
house.
(б) See if any passer-by requires shelter —you
may be a passer-by on some other occasion.
(c) Don’t go out unnecessarily until you hear
the all-clear signal.
Section IV.—What to do if Fire breaks out.
1. A fire resulting from an incendiary or an explosive
bomb is like an ordinary fire, but the incendiary bomb
itself requires special treatment. (See Section V.)
2. Do your best by the use of water, sand, earth, or
any other means available to control immediately the
spread of fire. If unable to do so, inform the district
warden or call the fire brigade.
3. By keeping close to a wall, it is sometimes possible
to move safely about a room or corridor or down a
staircase which has been weakened by the effect of fire.
4. When you have to go near the seat of a fire keep
low, and, if possible, crawl, because smoke and fumes
are less dense near the floor,


Section V.—Incendiary Bombs and how to deal
with them.
1. These vary in weight and contain thermite. They
burn at a high temperature for ten to fifteen minutes
and may remain active for as long as twenty minutes,
setting fire to anything inflammable within 30 feet,
but do not “ explode They will burn through almost
any material, and consequently can cause large fires
if not immediately controlled.
2. You can tackle a small incendiary bomb yourself
if you follow these directions: —
(а) Before you can get close enough to do any-
thing, you will probably have to cool down
the room with water, preferably using hose.
(б) There are two ways of dealing with the bomb
itself, viz.:—
(i) It can be controlled with a fine spray
of water. The best way is to use
the ordinary household water ser-
vice and hose as a means of direct-
ing a jet of water on to the fire
surrounding the bomb and then a
fine spray on to the bomb itself.
Water must not be used on a
bomb in any other ivay than as a
fine spray; or an explosion will
result.
(ii) However, complete reliance cannot be
placed on the ordinary service as
water mains may be damaged
during a raid, or fire brigade
activities may seriously reduce the
available supply. Consequently, an
independent source of water supply
should be provided in tanks,
buckets, cans, or other receptacles.
The ideal equipment for use under
these conditions is the stirrup
hand-pump or bucket spray-pump
fitted with hose and a dual-purpose
nozzle, giving a jet of 30 feet and a
spray of about 15 feet. The equip-
ment may be operated effectively
by two people, but three are prefer-
able. One takes charge of the fire


fighting and operates the nozzle, the
second pumps the water from the
bucket, and the third replenishes
the supply in the bucket and relieves
the others as necessary, in addition
to keeping a lookout for further
possible outbreaks of fire. The
duties of the second and third
members are combined when only
two people are operating. To
approach the fire without being
overcome by smoke, fumes, and heat,
the fire-fighter should lie down and
keep his face near the floor, where
it will be found easier to breathe
and to see. A wet blanket folded
and slung across the left arm will
help to provide protection against
the heat and spluttering magnesium.
The bomb will violently splutter
for about a minute, after which the
situation should be tackled as
follows:
(a) The fire caused by the bomb
should normally be con-
trolled first by means of
the jet, thus enabling the
fire-fighter to approach to
a distance of about 15 feet
from the bomb.
(n) The spray should then be
directed on to the bomb
and the fire-fighter should
gradually work nearer to
the bomb, finally attacking
it from about 6 feet. He
should continue to direct
the spray upon the bomb
until it is entirely con-
sumed, but it may be neces-
sary to stop spraying the
bomb occasionally so as to
keep the resultant fire
under control with the jet.


(iii) It can be smothered with dry sand
where you can get at it. This will
control the combustion enabling a
close approach to the bomb. The
equipment for use with this method
consists of a sand container or
bucket, a long-handled square mouth
shovel, and a hoe. The bucket
should be kept full with dry sand.
Smother the bomb by throwing sand
on to it with the shovel. Then,
placing an inch layer of sand on
the shovel, the bomb can be
approached, and, by means of the
hoe, raked on to the shovel. Place
the bomb in the bucket, making sure
you have some sand under it, take
outside and empty the contents in
a place where the bomb will burn
itself out harmlessly.
(iv) Remember that the bomb might burn
through a floor before you have had
time to control it, and you might
have to continue to deal with it on
the floor or ground below.
Section VI.—After the Raid.
1. After the raid refrain from making any inquiries
by telephone as this service may be urgently required
by the A.R.P. Authorities.
Section VII.—What Householders will be required
to do when Lighting Restrictions are enforced.
1. Objective of Lighting Restrictions. —The objec-
tive of lighting restrictions is a simple one, namely,
that hostile airmen shall see no lights which might
help to guide them to a particular objective or help
them to determine their position.
2. What is meant by the Emission of Light.—
It can be said, as a general rule, that illuminated
surfaces which are plainly visible to ground observers
at night can be seen by airmen overhead. Householders
must therefore prevent the emission of any light what-
soever from their homes.


3. After dusk see that no light is left burning that
may be visible from outside.
4. It is suggested that one room in each house should
be set apart for the accommodation of the household
during the period of restricted lighting. It is recom-
mended that this should be the living room of the home.
All windows and doors having glass panels, also venti-
lators, skylights, &c., should be screened so that no
light is emitted. This screening may take the form
of shutters, curtains, dark blinds, adhesive treatment
on glass, &c.
5. All internal lights other than those in the room
which has been adapted for restricted lighting purposes
should be switched off. Where it may be necessary to
use any internal lights in the case of emergency these
should be fitted with A.R.P. globes.
(5. All outdoor lamp bulbs, such as those in open
porches, verandahs, sheds, &c., or those lighting the
garden or pathways should be removed from the lamp
sockets.
7. What to do under Air Raid Conditions —
(а) All screens, whether on windows, doors, sky
lights, or the like which are open by day to
permit the entry of daylight, must be closed
before dark to avoid the emission of light
should the lights be turned on in an un-
screened room.
(б) To guard against failure of supply have on
hand an emergency moans of producing light.
For safety reasons this emergency lighting
should be chosen with a view to reducing fire
hazard to a minimum. Household types of
oil lamps are unsatisfactory in this regard,
due to the possibility of an explosion in the
vicinity, causing the lamp to upset. Hurri-
cane lamps are more satisfactory from the
safety point of view. Motor car batteries,
as a source of lighting supply, and small
electric lamps are valuable, provided the
difficulty of charging a run-down battery can
be easily overcome. The use of electric
torches is not permitted.
8. Light from Flames or out-door Fire. —Lighting
restrictions apply to any form of glow produced
from any source, such as an indoor fireplace or


an outdoor destructor. Care should be taken to avoid
creating flames in the fireplace likely to cause a glow
above the chimney. Similarly, burning off, destroying
rubbish, &c., should be done in daylight and all glowing
embers carefully quenched before dark.
9. Methods of covering Windows, Doors, &c. —
Simple instructions in the methods to be followed for
blacking out essential accommodation for the purpose
of restricted lighting may be obtained from the A.R.P.
Authorities through the Air Raid Warden for your
district.
Section VIII.—Road Vehicles and Pedestrians.
1. Lights carried hy Bead Vehicles in the Defined
Area. —Lighting restrictions applied to road vehicles
are an important feature of the precautionary
measures to be taken against air attack. The aim is
to ensure that hostile airmen shall see no lights which
might serve to guide them to a particular objective or
help determine their position.
2. It may he briefly explained that, unless expressly
authorized by the Regulations or by the Chief Officer
of Police, no lights other than those masked or screened
by contrivances approved by the Chief Officer of Police
may be used on the outside of any road vehicle.
3. What to do to comply with the Regulations
under Air Raid Conditions.—Only motor vehicles
and pedal cycles properly fitted with approved appli-
ances for the screening or dimming of head lights, side
lights, tail lights, &c., will be permitted to he used
during the period of emergency preceding an air raid.
All transport not complying with these requirements
must pull into the left hand side of the road and have
all lights, except the tail light, extinguished. Tail
lights must be properly screened and/or dimmed.
4. Pedestrians.—Pedestrians when out on the streets
or roads at night should do their best to make
themselves visible to other people, particularly to
drivers of vehicles. A light-coloured suit or overcoat
or white handkerchiefs attached to the arms would help
considerably. Whenever possible pedestrians should
refrain from walking on the roads to be used by
vehicular traffic,


5. What to do during an Actual Air Raid at
Night.—On the sounding of the warning signal all
vehicles must be brought to a halt as near as possible
to the kerb or roadside, and all lights extinguished.
Wherever possible the vehicle should be pulled off the
road to obviate the possibility of collision.
On the sounding of the “ all clear ” signal, vehicles
may be again driven under the conditions referred to in
paragraphs 2 and 3 of this section.
Section IX.—How You can Assist in Canberra.
1. Persons who have qualified in the principles of
first aid, cither through the Red Cross Society or
St. John’s Ambulance Brigade, should offer their ser-
vices to the A.R.P. Committee. Women who are
qualified nurses will be also required in the event of an
emergency, and they are requested to submit their
names for registration to the Secretary of the
Committee.
2. Remember—
KEEP CALM DO NOT PANIC.
If an air raid comes remain in your home or take
cover in the nearest suitable accommodation.
Read these instructions carefully and keep this
pamphlet near you for ready reference.
By Authority: L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.


Your Air Bald Warden is
Address
Telephone No
