

ADVISORY COUNCIL IN RESPECT OF SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCH.
Meeting 14-15th April, 1916.
RESOLUTIONS,
(1) That the Chairman of the Advisory Council shall have
a vote and a casting vote.
(2) That an Executive Committee of six he appointed, of
whom three shall form a quorum.
(3) That the Government he asked to appoint additional
members of this Council so as to permit of Sub-
committees of the Council being formed in each
State.
(4) That the Chairman of each State Committee shall he ex-
officio a member of the Executive Committee.
(5) That the local State Committee shall select as its
Chairman one of its members on the Advisory Coun-
cil as enlarged.
(6) That the Committee in each State consist of the State
representatives on the Advisory Council together
with any other associate members appointed on the
nomination of the State Government. These associate
members of the State Committees shall not be
members of the Advisory Council. The members of
the State Committee shall be called together by its
Chairman.
(7) That the Federal Government be asked to make such
additional appointments to this Council as will
ensure that no State shall have less than three
representatives on the Council in addition to the
ex officio members,
(6) That all questions relating to the staff of the Council
be referred to the Executive Committee, who will
make recommendations direct to the Government,
(9) he Professors baby’s motion for the appointment of an
Education Sub-Committee; That this matter be re-
ferred to the Executive Committee.
(Professor Laby’s motion read -
"That an Education Sub-Committee be appointed to-
fa) Report on what supply of men possessing
a scientific training will be available
to carry out the origins.! • investigations
and form the junior staff of the Common-
wealth Institute of Science and Industry.
and /


Industry, and if the supply is found to be inadequate
to the probable needs of the Institute, to report on
what steps should be taken to ensure that it will be
adequate,
ft) To report oh what supply of soientifioally trained
craftsmen is available to carry on such industries
as the activities of the Institute bring into exist-
ence *
fc] To fr&me the details of a system of Industrial Re-
search Fellowships to he held at the Universities
and Technical Colleges.
(2) That the following he members of the Committee -
Messrs Piddington, Swinburne, D. Clark, Guthrie
(Latter two as representatives of Technical Schools),
the Professors (including Mr* Lyle) who are members
of this Council, and such other members of the Coun-
cil as are prepared to take an active part in this
work)•
10* That the Executive he instructed to prepare a full report
on proposed organisation and future procedure, and to
call together a meeting of tho Advisory Council to re-
ceive this report when ready - within two months.
EXECUTIVE 0 mil TTBB.
The following were chosen to he members of the Execu-
tive Committee
Lelprat, G.U., Esquire.
Lyle, T.R., Esquire,
Mann, E'.A. Esquire.
Masson, Professor L, Orme.
Piddington, A.B. Esquire
Watt, Professor R,D«
(The Prime Minister, and in his absence the Vice-
President of the Federal Executive Council is to he Chairman
of the Executive Committee).


ADVISORY COUNCIL IN RESPECT OF SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCHES ETC.
Mesting held at the Prime Minister’s
Department, Melbourne, 14-15 April,l9l6.
FIRST DAY. FRIDAY, 14th APRIL, 1916,
PRESENT - The Acting prime Minister (Senator The Hon# G.F.
Pearce), presiding.
The Vice President of the Executive Council
(Senator The Hon* A# Gardiner)#
Messrs A.B. Piddington, Hon. G. Swinburne, W.P, Wilkinson,
W.T. Appleton, J.H. Butters, D. Clark, G*D. Delprat,
J.F. Elliott, W.R. Grimwade, F.B. Guthrie, J.M. Higgins,
F. Leverrier, T.R. Lyle, E.A. Mann, Professors C.E.
Fawsitt, R ,D. Watt, D. 0. Masson, T.H. Laby and A.J.
Gibson, Hon. F.W. Hagelthorn (Minister of Agriculture,
Victoria), Hon. W. Lennon (Secretary for Agriculture,
Queensland), Hon. C. Goode (Minister of Agriculture,
South Australia), Mr. G. Valder (Under Secretary and
Director of Agriculture, New South Wales - representing
the Minister of Agriculture, New South Wales).
The Acting prime Minister delivered the opening
address, in the course of which he announced that the Govern-
ment desired the Council to make recommendations as to a
Secretary and staff, and that the Government had agreed to
make available to the Council £5,000 for investigation pur-
poses, this amount to be supplemented from time to time as
further funds were required.
The Acting Prime Minister then retired, and the
Vice President of the Executive Council took the Chair,
EX EC U TIVE G OMMITT EE - Appointment of, A general dis ■
cussion took place with respect to the appointment of the
Executive Committee, the following points being dealt with;-
(a) State representation on the Executive, and the
question of the Chairman of the State Committee
being a member of the Central Executive ex officio,
0>)/


(b) Question of additional appointments to the
Council from the States of Queensland, South
Australia, Western Australia and Tasmania, and
the Universities of Adelaide , Perth ,aiid Tasmania,
(o) The formation of State Committees, and their
connection with the Executive.
sd) Functions of the Council, the Executive, and
the State Committees#
Moved hy Professor Gihson •
TT That an Executive of six be elected from the Advisory
Council, and that in addition to that Executive, a
member be appointed in each State charged with the
duty of the formation of a State Committee to carry
out such work as the Executive may desire , and that
such member in the State shall be considered to Be a
member of the Executive ex officio.
Seconded by Professor Masson, who suggested that the Chairman.
of each State Committee he selected from the Advis-
©ry CotmelX r and become ex officio a member of the
Bxe cut ive.
The motion was altered by Professors Gibson and Masson to read-
’'That a central Executive gommittee of not more than six
be appointed by this Council, andnthat in addition
a ipember of the Council, be appointed in each State
charged with the duty of forming a State Committee to
carry on the work locally and tokeep in touch with
the central Executive, and. such member shall he ex
pfficio a member of the central Executive. IT
Moved by Mr. Piddington as an amendment -
(a) That an Executive Committee if three be appointed.
fb) That the Government he asked to appoint additional
members of this Council so as to permit of Sub-
committees of the Council being formed in each State.
After further discussion Mr. Piddington altered the first part
of his amendment to read -
"That an Executive Committee of six be appointed,
of whom three shall form?a quorum."
Part (a) of Mr. piddington l s motion was carried, namely -
"That an Executive Committee of six be appointed.,
of whom three shall form a quorum."
After further discussion the fallowing motion was carried -
"That/


"That the Chairman of each State Committee shall he
ex officio a member of the Executive Committee."
part (h) of Mr. Piddington t s amendment was then carried, namely
"That the Government he asked to appoint additional
members of this Council so as to permit of Sub-
Committees of the Council being formed in each
State
Moved by Mr. Butters, and seoonted by Professor Masson -
"That the Government be asked, in appointing those
additional members of this Council, as already
decided upon, to give due consideration to the
Universities which are not at present represented."
(Not proceeded with?*
Moved by Professor Masson -
"That the Chairman of the Advisory Council shall
have a vote and a casting vote." - Carried.
Election of Executive Committee•
A discussion ensued as to the constitution of the
Executive, during which Mr. Hagelthorn moved -
"That the Executive consist of four scientists and
educationalists and two representing industrial
and business concerns," (Motion not proceeded
with.)
A vote (by ballot) was taken for the election of members of
the Executive Committee after certain members of the Council
had announced that they were not candidates. This resulted
in the election of the following to be members of the Execu-
tive Committee -
G.T>. Uelprat Esquire.
T.R. Lyle Esquire
E.A. Mann Esquire
Professor I). Orme Masson
A.B. tie dington Esquire
Professor R.l). Watt
The meeting then adjourned until 10 clock on the
succeeding day (Saturday.)


SECOND DAY
Saturday,, 15th April, 1916.
PRESENT: The V3.ce President of the Executive Council
(Senator The Hon. A. Gardiner) presiding,
Messrs A ,B, Piddington, Hon. G. Swinburaa, J.H.
Butters, D, Clark, G.D. Delprat, J.P. Elliott, W.R,
Grimwade , P.B. Guthrie, J.M.Higgins, P. Leverrier, T.R.
Lyle, E.A, Mann, Professors C.E. Pawsitt, R.D. Watt,
P. Orrre Masson, T.H. Laby, A. J- Gibson, The Horn P,W.
Hagelthorn^(Minister of Agriculture, Victoria), The Hon.
W* Lennon (Secretary for Agriculture, Queensland), The
Hon. C. Goode (Minister of Agriculture, South Australia),
Mr. G. Valder (Under Secretary and Director of Agricul-
ture, New South Wales - representing the Minister of
Agriculture, New South Wales*)
Staffj
Moved by Mr. Lyle -
’’That all questions relating to the staff of the Council
be referred to the Executive Committee, who will make
re commends ti end direct to the Government”. (Qarrieed)
professors Gibson and Masson represented that the following
resolution shown on the paper circulated amongst the members,
namely -
’’That the Government be asked to appoint additional
members of this Council so as to permit of sub-
committees of the Council being formed in each State”
was not in the form agreed to on the previous day, as it was not
in accord with professor GibsorMs motion.
Mr. Pi dicing ton said his recollection was that the decision
of the Council was in the terms set out in the paper.
Senator Gardiner pointed out that after discussion the
second part of Mr, piddington 18 s amendment was agreed to, and
this superseded Professor Gibson*s motion, which was not pub
to the meeting:.
State_ Commit bees - Moved by Professor Pawsitt -
’’That the local Sub-Committee in each State consist
of the State representatives on the Advisory Council
together with any co-opted members whose assistance
is desired/


is desired. The co-opted members of the local
State Committees'? shall not he members of the Advis-
ory Council 1 . 7
later,(the motion was altered by Professor Pawsitt to read -
"That the local Sub-committees in each State consist
of the State representatives on the Advisory Coun-
cil, together with any other associate members ap-
pointed by the Staten Governments. These associate
members of the State Committees shall not be members
of the Advisory Council. The members of the Sub-
committee shall be called together by its Chairman. 17
Seconded by Professor Laby,
Moved by Mr. Higgins, as an amendment, and seconded by Mr.
Delprat -
77 That on the State Committee the number be limited
to 5, two to be Government nominees and three to
be appointed, by the Executive Committee of this
Inst itute * 77
After further discussion Mr. Lyle suggested that each State
Government appoint the local Committee.
Mr. Higgins withdrew his amendment in favor of Mr, Lyle's
suggestion.
Professor Masson suggested that members of the Council be
empowered to make nominations for appointment on State Com-
mittees.
Professor Pawsitt altered his motion to read -
77 That the Committee in each State consist of the
State representatives on the Advisory Council
together with any other associate members ar-voint-
ed cn bhe nomination of the State Government".
These associate members of the State Committees
shall not be members of the Advisory Council. The
members of the State Committee shall be called
together by its Chairman* 77
This motion was then carried.
Moved by professor Pawsitt -
"That a recommendation be made to the Commonwealth
Government that the increased representation of
certain States on the Advisory Council consist of
tw€ /


two additional members from South Australia and
Western Australia and one additional member from
each of the States of Queensland and Tasmania*"
Moved by Professor Masson as an amendment -
That^ the Federal Government be asked to make such
additional appointments to this Council as will
ensure that no State shall have less than three
representatives on the Council, in addition to the
ex officio members*"
Amendment carried*
Moved by Professor Laby, seconded by Mr. Butters -
"That an Education Sub-Committee be appointed to -
(a) Report on what supply of men possessing a
scientific training will be available to
carry out the original investigations and
form the junior staff of the Commonwealth
Institute of Science and Industry, and if
the supply is found to be inadequate to
the probable needs of the Institute, to
report on what steps should he taken to
ensure that it will he adequate*
(b) Report on what supply of scientifically
trained craftsmen is available t$ carry
on such industries as the activities of
the Institute bring into existence*
(c) Frame the details of a system of Indus-
trial Research Fellowships to be held
at the Universities and Technical Col-
‘- leges*
(2) That the following be members of the Committee -
Messrs Piddington, Swinburne, TK Clark,
Guthrie (the latter two as representatives
of Technical Schools), the Professors
(including Mr. Lyle) who are members
this Council, and such other members
of the Council as are prepared tc take
an active part in this work."
After discussion, moved by Mr. Hagelthorn (as an amendment),
seconded by Mr. Lyle ~
"That this matter be referred to the Executive Com-
mittee." (Amendment carried.)
After several suggestions had been made, it was moved by Mr#
Lyle, seconded by Professor Masson -
as
"That the local State Committee shall select/its
Chairman one of its members on the Advisory
Council as enlarged," (Carried.)


Moved "by Mr. Hagclthorn -
"That the Executive Committee; take into consideration
the possibility and expediency of this Council
being affiliated or in some way linked up with
the*lmperial Commission which lias been appointed
to perform similar work." (This motion was
withdrawn).
Mr. Butters suggested that the Executive prepare "A plan of
campaign" for submission to the Council, and Mr. Leverrier
moved -
"That the next meeting of this body should take
place when the Executive Committee have noti-
fied that their report is ready for submission -
within six weeks or such shorter time as will
enable the Executive to prepare their report."
Moved by Mr. Mann -
"That the Executive be instructed to prepare a full
report on proposed organisation and future pro-
cedure and. to call together a meeting of the
Advisory Council to receive this report when
ready - ?/ithin two months."
Mr. Mann’s motion was carried.
