

ADVICE
TO
TRUSTEES,
AND TO
Those who Appoint to that Office:
INCLUDING:
TRUSTS AND TRUSTEESHIPS,
CHOICE AND APPOINTMENT,
ACCEPTANCE AND DUTIES,
POWERS AND DISABILITIES,
LIABILITIES AND REMOVAL,
DANGERS AND RELEASE,
INDEMNITY AND PROTECTION,
SUITS AND COSTS.
BY HARDING GRANT,
AUTHOR OF “ CHANCERY PRACTICE.”
1830.
Price Six Shillings , boards.
[BRADBURY AND EVANS, PRINTERS.]
LONDON:
A. MAXWELL, 32, BELL YARD, LINCOLN’S INN,
Law and Bookeseller and Publisher;
R. MILLIKEN AND SON, GRAFTON STREET, DUBLIN.




ADVICE
TO
TRUSTEES,
AND TO
Those who Appoint to that Office:
INCLUDING :
TRUSTS AND TRUSTEESHIPS,
CHOICE AND APPOINTMENT,
ACCEPTANCE AND DUTIES,
POWERS AND DISABILITIES,
LIABILITIES AND REMOVAL,
DANGERS AND RELEASE,
INDEMNITY AND PROTECTION,
SUITS AND COSTS.
BY HARDING GRANT,
AUTHOR OF “ CHANCERY PRACTICE.”
LONDON:
A. MAXWELL, 32, BELL YARD, LINCOLN’S INN,
ILafo 33ffnfcMler a vto |3ufrttsjTr;
R. MILLIKEN AND SON, GRAFTON STREET, DUBLIN.
1830.




BRADDBURY AND EVANS, PRINTERS, BOUVtRIE STREET.




PREFACE.
The following treatise is meant to be, strictly,
what the title page expresses, 'practical; and more
particularly intended for the unprofessional public,
than for the profession; who, however, it is
hoped, may not deem it altogether unworthy of
their notice.
So far as the author has met with any book
of this kind extant, there appears to him to be
quite room for the present undertaking. The
works of Mr. Willis and of Sir George Hampson,
have each their appropriate and well known re-
spectability. But it is no disrespect to those
gentlemen to say, that their works (to which,
however, the author acknowledges his obligations,)


do not answer the specific purposes of this. They
are not by any means adapted, peculiarly, to the
use of, and therefore of little comparative service
to, unprofessional readers. Yet this does not de-
rogate from the esteem in which they may be
held by the profession, not only from the weight
of the names of their respective and respectable
authors; but, as being, on that ground, what is
technically meant by books of authority for pro-
fessional purposes more exclusively. There are,
however, other occasions on which the unprofessional
public need advice or guidance. The present
attempt, therefore, is not anticipated by the re-
spectable works before mentioned, or either of
them.
These explanations will serve to account for the
plain and more familiar style which the author
has adopted, rather than the more professional.
He has also foreborne going into the abstruse
learning of trusts, in the way of tracing their
legal or equitable origin, or otherwise; all which
he deemed foreign to his immediate purpose, which
was to be practically useful. And for the same
reasons he has avoided entering into some other


remoter points of legal nicety of rare occurrence,
or perhaps more speculative than practical, and
respecting which, should they arise, they must
necessarily be subjects, pro re nata, of professional,
and, probably, of counsel's directions. The more
every day, and prominent subjects of information,
therefore, and such as may reasonably be supposed
to come within a trustee’s personal cognizance
and judgment, and on which he must personally
act in his unprofessional character, and of which it
behoves him to be aware, are what have, in these
pages, been kept chiefly in fiew.




INDEX TO CASES.
PAOK.
Allen v. Impett .... 105
Braybrooke (Lord) v. Inskip - - - -5, 9
Burgess v. Wheat - - - - 10
Caffrey v. Darby - - - 115
Chalmer v. Bradley - 04,108
Cole v. Wade - 7
Coltnan v. Sarrel - « - - 115
Dawson v. Clarke - - - - 99
Gretton v. Diggles - , - 66
Griffin v. Griffin - - - 19
Hall v, Hallett - - - 46 •
Hughes v. Hughes - - 60
Lacey, Exparte - - - - 62
Lambton v. Bainton - - 64
Littlehales v. Gascoigne - - - 46


Pack.
Mansell (Sir Edward) v. Mansell - - - 102
Marshall v. Holloway - -41
Middleton v. Lord Kenyon - - - 107
Montford (Lord) v. Cadogan (Lord) - - 19
Morgan, Exparte - - - - 9
Moody v. Walters - - 102
Pye v. George - - - - 17
Pethward v. Prescott - - - 108
Randall v. Bell - 106
Rex v. Emery - - - - 67
Smith v. Snow - - - - 107
Soames v. Rickman - - - - 116
Stevens v. Bailey - - - - 12
Tranes v. Tranes - - - - 196
■Walker v. Symonds - - 107, 109
Watson, Exparte - - - - 107
Worral v. Harford - - - - 99
■Wilkinson v. Parry - - - 120
York Buildings Company v. Mackenzie 62


ADVERTISEMENT.
In the following pages, 12, 13, 14, 15, will be found
a short notice of the act of 6 Geo. IV. c. 74, relating to
trustees who may be infants, lunatics, &c. It is to be
observed, that in respect of trustees so circumstanced,
the act 1 Wm. IV. c. 60, repeals the former, and some-
what varies its provisions. In lieu, therefore, of the
before mentioned notice of the first named act, the reader
will be pleased to substitute the following notice of the
latter ; which enacts—
Sect. 3. That the Committee of the estate of
trustees found to be lunatic, idiot, or of unsound
mind, shall, by the direction of the Lord Chancellor,
convey the trust estate in such manner as the Lord
Chancellor shall think proper. And by
Sect. 4. Stock standing in the name of lunatic
trustees, either alone or jointly with others, shall,
by the Lord Chancellor’s direction, be transferred


by the Committee of such lunatic trustees, to such
person, &c., as the Lord Chancellor shall direct.
And by
Sect. 5, Where the lunatic trustee shall not have
been found lunatic by inquisition, the Lord Chan-
cellor may direct any person, in the place of such
lunatic trustee, to convey or join in conveying land,
or transferring stock; but where money may be
payable to such lunatic, this authority is not to
extend to any sum exceeding 700 Z. And by
Sect. 6. Infant trustees are empowered by the
direction of the Court of Chancery, to convey the
trust estate to such person, and in such manner,
as the Court shall think proper. And
Sect. 7. Extends the power to the Court of the
Duchy Chamber of Lancaster, the Court of Ex-
chequer in the County Palatine of Chester, the
Court of Chancery in the County Palatine of
Lancaster, the Court of Chancery in the County
Palatine of Durham, and the several Courts of
Great Session in Wales, as to premises within
the jurisdiction of the same Courts respectively.
And by
Sect. 8,9, 10. The provisions of the act are
extended to persons out of the jurisdiction of the
court, viz. abroad, or refusing to convey or transfer;
or of whom it is not known whether they be alive
or dead, or who may be their representative. And


Sect. 11. Enacts that all the directions to be
given by the Lord Chancellor, &c., under this act,
shall be on petition. [Not on filing a bill as here-
tofore.]
Sect. 15. Extends the provisions of the act to
persons either having some beneficial estate or
interest, or having some duty, as trustee, to per-
form.
The foregoing concise abstract of this act, is meant
only as general information. For the purpose of acting
under it, recourse must necessarily be had to the act
itself.




CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
IMCE.
OF TRUSTS AND TRUSTEESHIPS GENERALLY; THEIR
NATURE AND IMPORTANCE. EXPLANATION OF
TERMS - - - - - - 1
CHAPTER 11.
OF THE CHOICE AND APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEES - 22
CHAPTER 111.
OF THE ACCEPTANCE OF TRUSTS; INCLUDING CONSI-
DERATIONS PREVIOUS THERETO - , - 32
CHAPTER IV.
OF THE DUTIES OF TRUSTEES - - 43
CHAPTER V.
OF THE POWERS OF TRUSTEES; AND THEIR DISA-
DILUTES - - - - - 49


IMOF.
CHAPTER VI.
OF THE LIABILITIES OF TRUSTEES - - - G 5
CHAPTER VII.
OF THE REMOVAL OF TRUSTEES; RELEASE FROM THEIR
TRUSTS, &c. - - - - - 87
CHAPTER VIII.
OF CLAUSES IN DEEDS AND WILLS FOR THE INDEMNITY
OF TRUSTEES, AND OTHER PURPOSES - - 92
CHAPTER IX.
OF THE EXPRESS INDEMNITY AND PROTECTION OF
TRUSTEES BY THE COURTS OF EQUITY - - 98
CHAPTER X.
OF SUITS RELATING TO TRUSTEES - - - ' - 103
CHAPTER XI.
OF COSTS AND ALLOWANCES - - - 110


Advice to Trustees &c.
CHAPTER I.
OF TRUSTS AND TRUSTEESHIPS GENERALLY; THEIR
NATURE AND IMPORTANCE ; EXPLANATION OF
TERMS.
Among the various friendly offices which the
necessities of civilized society have created, and
induced mankind to perform for one another, and
wherein property forms so principal an ingredient
as in England, that of Trustee is well known, as
to its general nature and peculiar importance.
Trusteeship subsists, as must be supposed, in as
great variety as trusts, from which it takes its rise
and name ; and trusts are numerously diversified.
In all trusts and trusteeships, there are necessarily
n


two parties,—those who confide in, or trust; and
those, in whom trust or confidence is placed. The
former, when a single person, is (in legal phrase-
ology and old law-Frcnch) termed a cestnique trust;
or, if more than one, cestuisque trusts (or cestuisque
trust), in the plural. As to the latter, the term
trustee, or trustees, is sufficiently familiar to English
ears.
With regard to the diversity of trusts, some arc
of a public nature: such as charities, or other
similar institutions; roads, bridges, or the like.
Others, of more private description; among which
latter, some are not, and some are, family trusts ,
comprising the management, care, and distribution,
of private property under family arrangements.
The latter are the more immediate objects of
this work.
Public trusts, and those private trusts which are
not “ family trusts ” of the description just men-
tioned, are more directly the subjects of pro-
fessional intervention, when the occasion to act
in them occurs, as well as of less frequent occur-
rence, and less pervading the different classes of
society than the family trusts, which are the
principal objects of the present treatise. The other
species of trusts may be occasionally noticed.


Of the trusts, then, here intended to be promi-
nently considered, some are created by marriage
settlement, and some by will ; under either of
which instruments, property of various descriptions,
real, personal, or both together, is committed to
trustees for the purpose of protecting, and of apply-
ing it for the benefit of such parties, and in such
manner, as the settlement, or the will, may direct.
These, therefore, which are thus, on the present
occasion, denominated family trusts, are what the
author deems to be the proper subjects of consider-
ation, as being the most general and frequent, most
essential and interesting; and in which, unprofes-
sional persons most need explanatory cautions and
guidance for regulating- their conduct. For these
purposes he proposes to offer some information, in
as plain (as well as practical and useful) a method,
as is compatible with the subject.
Trustees may be distinguished into two general
kinds; or, they become trustees in two ways, viz. one
by express appointment; the other by implication.
This distinction is indeed principally made here
by way of caution, and because persons may un-
wittingly become such “trustees by .implication,”
contrary to their intention and wishes, if not
guarded against the circumstances which lead to
n 2


it ; and because that becoming such trustees by
implication, however unintentionally, they thereby
become exposed also to many of the rules and
liabilities, which apply to express trustees. But
express trustees, i. e. trustees by express appoint-
ment, and not those by implication, or implied
trustees, are the more immediate objects of this
work. But the distinctive character of each des-
cription of trustees may be appropriately given;
and first of express trustees.
When a person is originally constituted a trustee
by deed or will, he becomes an express, not an
implied trustee; or, in other words, such persons are
said to be trustees by creation, arid their trusts
expressly created and expressly vested in them, in
contradistinction to their being called implied trusts.
Thus also, as it may be further said, these trustees
become such, expressly, by appointment.
Express trustees also become such by devolution,
viz. either by the means of descent, or by represen-
tation (the former relating to real property, the latter
to personal) derivatively from a trustee expressly
and originally created; and such devolution, whe-
ther by descent or representation, continues or carries
on the original and express trust in the person upon
whom it so devolves, except as after mentioned.


Thus a trusteeship by devolution takes place, when-
ever an express and originally-created trustee dies.
For if the trust, whether by deed or will, were of
real estate, such trust, on the death of the first
trustee, would devolve (subject to the observation
shortly to be made) upon the heir at law of the
deceased trustee, (a) if such deceased trustee left no
effectual will of his real estate, passing it to a
devisee. Otherwise, that is, if the original trustee of
such real estate did leave an effectual will whereby
his real property was transmitted to his devisee;
then the trust (subject to the observation just
above alluded to) would, along with the trust pro-
perty included in the general devise, supposing the
testator not to have excepted his trust estates, devolve
upon such devisee; ( b ) by one of which means (descent
or devise) the original trust would thus devolve
upon such heir at law or. devisee, as the case might
be; in the first instance by descent, in the other by
devise. If the original trust were of money, or
other chattel, or personal property, then (subject to
the observation before alluded to, and to be presently
made) the trust would still accompany the property
by representation, either in the case of the trustee
(«) 1 P. Wins. 713,736. (b) Ld. Drajbrokc r. Inskip, 8 Vcs. 417.


leaving a will, and then his Executor would take
both the property and the trust; or in the case of
his leaving no will, when both would devolve upon
his administrator . (n)
The observation before referred to, and now to
be made, is this; that the foregoing statements
must be understood, with the restriction or qualifi-
cation following, viz.—that the original trust was
not, in point of personal confidence, expressly con-
fined or restricted to the first trustee personally; for
if it was, the trust would not descend, or pass with
the property to the representative, by devolution, in
the way before stated; but only the legal interest
in the property would pass; not the confidence
attached to it. The transmission of that confidence
into other hands in lieu of the deceased, must, in
such case, be effected by other means, viz., by
application to a Court of Equity, as afterwards more
particularly mentioned. For the trust attaches
itself to the land;(Z») and the law in this case
only intervenes where the original creator of the
trust shews no intention that the trust should not
(a) 1 P. Wms. 554, 575; 2 527; 1 Ves. 16; 4 Ves. 607;
Ca. in Cha. 95; 1 Vern. 134; 7 Ves. 197, 452.
3 P. Wms. 161, 212; 1 Atk. (i) 1 Pro. C. C. 81.


accompany the property. But the law will not
allow a confidence to pass to any accidental hands
whenever the creator of the trusts has manifested
a contrary wish, by making his confidence clearly
personal,. Thus arises the necessity for the interven-
tion of a Court of Equity, which then assumes the
place of the original creator of the trust, and acts
as they imagine he would have done, (a)
In all cases of trusteeships, however, whether
under deeds or wills, it is most usual, and generally
advisable, that co-trustees (that is, a plurality of
trustees,) are appointed; who are then, in law,
joint tenants; on which account, and as resulting
from that relation, when one of them dies, the
original trusts, unless particularly confined or limited
as above noticed, do, along with the property, con-
tinue in the survivor, or in other words, survive to
the longest liver, ( h ) and that in the same manner as
he received them in his original creation : because,
as has been said, such trustees are joint tenants,
and all things held in joint tenancy survive and
go to the survivor or longest liver.
(a) Cole c. Wade, 10 Ves. (6) Jeremy on Eq. Jurisd.
27. of Cha. 104.


It is to be remembered, that all trustees by
devolution .(and that, whether through descent or
devise, in the case of real estate, or bequest or re-
presentation in the case of personal property,) are
deemed express trustees, or trustees by express crea-
tion, (and not trustees by implication), as much
and as fully as those they represent, who were
originally constituted trustees by the original instru-
ment, whether deed or will. For the representative
is said to be “impressed,” or, in other words, in-
vested with the character and office of his ancestor,
or testator, in either case.
Every person has by law an inherent right of dis-
posing of whatever interest may be vested in him.
Hence trust property is liable, in point of law,
to alienation by the trustee. But equity interferes,
and prevents the alienee from taking any other estate
or interest than the trustee himself had therein,
unless such alienee were ignorant of the trust, (a)
This, therefore, though a possible case of unfaith-
fulness in a trustee, is not a probable one; as it
can scarcely happen that any man will purchase
property, the title to which should be so negli-
(«) 1 P. Wms. 278 ; 2 P. Wins. 081 ; 2 Fonbl. on Eq. 167;
1 Madd. Rep. 455.


gently investigated, as not to lead to the discovery
of the intended vender’s want of right to dispose
of it.
Generally also, if a trustee devise his whole
estate by will, his interest in the trust property will
pass by it ; but it will not, if manifestly contrary to
bis intention that it should, (a) If the trustee do
not devise or dispose of it, we have seen above
that it vests, according to its nature, in his heir, or
executor.
A trustee of real estate is, prima facie and osten-
sibly, deemed the legal owner; and, as such, is
entitled to the actual possession of the property ; but
the Courts of Equity will not allow him to retain
possession against his cestuique trust , nor disturb
the possession of the latter if he have entered and
is competent to sustain it, and the trust be not
affected. (6) Even actual possession by the trustee
is considered but as possession of the person be-
neficially entitled, (by whom is always meant the
cestuique trust), so long as the relation between
them subsists ; nor, during such subsistence of the
trust, can the right of the cestuique trust be barred
(a) -Braybrookc (Lord) v. Inskip, 8 Vcs. 417; ex parte Morgan,
10 Vcs. 101. ( b ) Barn. Rep. 354,


by any length of time he may have been out of
possession. In fact, the estate of the trustee exists
entirely for the benefit of the cestuique trust.(a)
Yet it is not a matter of course to divest a trustee
of the management of trust property, and to de-
liver the possession to the cestuique trust for life,
unless it appears to be the intention of the party
by whom the trust was created ; otherwise, and
if it be plain from the continuing nature of the
trust that the actual possession was intended by the
testator to remain with the trustees, the Court of
Chancery refuses to let the person beneficially in-
terested as cestuique trust for life, into possession. (6)
And, it is to be added, that the transmutation of
possession to a trustee conveys to him the legal
burthens, and invests him with the legal privileges
which belong to the trust estate, (c)
Bankruptcy, generally speaking, does not affect
trust property; for the property which is held in
trust by a trader who becomes bankrupt, is not
within those provisions of the bankrupt law which
empower the Commissioners to sell any goods or
chattels which, by the permission of the true owner,
(a) Willis, 86. (c) Burgess v. Wheat, 1
(J) 5 Made!. Rep. 429. Eden, 251.


he may have in his possession, order and disposition,
as reputed owner, or whereof he had taken upon
himself the sale, alteration or disposition, as owner. ( a)
Neither will the trust estate or effects, if distin-
guishable from the general, mass of the bankrupt’s
property,' be affected by the assignment of the
Commissioners. Therefore, trust money kept in a
bag by the bankrupt, or otherwise kept apart from
other money; or guineas, or other coin marked
for the purpose of being distinguished; plate,
leases, or personal estate for discharging the debts
of his cestuique trust; will be sufficiently separa-
ted from the bankrupt’s property, and will not pass
under the commission.
In like manner, though stock be purchased by
the bankrupt in his own name, yet if it appear by
his books that it was purchased for, and with the
money of another, (in which case he would be a
trustee by implication) it will not be affected by
the bankruptcy of the purchaser. (If)
But if the trust property be so mixed with that
of the bankrupt that it cannot be ascertained or
distinguished from his own, it will become vested in
the assignees, and the amount may be proved under
(«) 1 Sch. & Lef. 328. (A) 3P. Wms. Ed. Cox, 186.


the Commission, in which case the cestuique trust
will obtain the same relief as the ordinary cre-
ditors, (a)
The legal estate in lands vested,in a trustee, as
well as all personal property held by a trustee, is
forfeited by his treason or felony: ( b ) chattels on
conviction; lands on attainder. And if a trustee of
lands die without heirs, the lands escheat to the
lord, (c) But under recent statutes, when freehold
or copyhold estates, held in trust, escheat to the
Crown, the king may direct the execution of the
trusts. If a trustee of a term commit treason, the
king, though entitled to it, usually grants it to the
cestuique trust. And the Crown seldom, if ever,
takes advantage of its right to trust estates forfeited
for treason.
With respect to trustees who take the benefit of
the insolvent act, it is presumed that the doctrine
respecting the insolvency of a trustee, is analogous
to the case of his bankruptcy; although the In-
solvent Debtor’s Act appears to be obscure in this
respect.
It not unfrequently happens that a trustee is an
(«) Espinasse, 222. (<') 1 Ilarg. Jur. Excr. .390
( b) Vin. Abr. title. Uses. Stevens v. Bailey, Ncls. 107.


infant, or of unsound mind, or absent from the
kingdom. The act of 6 Geo. IV. c. 74, being
intended as remedial of the inconveniences arising
from those circumstances, requires notice. Its title
is, “An Act for consolidating and amending the
“Taws relating to conveyances and transfers of
“ estates and funds vested in trustees who are
“ infants, idiots, lunatics, or trustees of unsound
“ mind, or who cannot be compelled, or who
“ refuse to act; and also the laws relating to
“ stocks and securities belonging to infants, idiots,
“ lunatics, and persons of unsound mind.” This
act repeals all former acts on the same subjects,
and then enacts, That all infant trustees shall,
under the direction of the Courts of Equity, con-
vey their trust estates to such persons as the Court
shall direct. And that in case of trustees, idiot,
lunatic, or of unsound mind, their committees (in
cases where an inquisition has been had and com-
mittees appointed) shall, by similar direction of a
Court of Equity, convey the trust estate in the same
manner as in the case of infancy. And that where
no such inquisition shall have been found, nor com-
mittee appointed, the Lord Chancellor shall appoint
persons to convey. As to persons out of the juris-
diction, or not known to be either living or dead,


or refusing to convey their trust estates to the
persons entitled to them as may be required ; it
is enacted, that in such cases the Court shall ap-
point persons so to convey on behalf and in the
names, of the persons so out of the jurisdiction, or
not known to be living or dead, or refusing.
And with respect to any public stocks or funds,
annuities, or securities standing in the name or
names of such absent, or lunatic, or idiot trustees,
or trustees of unsound mind, or their represen-
tatives ; the Lord Chancellor may appoint any
officer belonging to such stock or funds, to transfer
or join in transferring the same to such persons as
the Lord Chancellor shall direct; which persons
are to pay over the produce of such stocks or
funds, in such manner as the Lord Chancellor
shall also direct: and a similar enactment is also
made in respect of such stocks or funds standing
in the names of persons out of the jurisdiction (viz.
abroad) or refusing to transfer. These remedies are to
be obtained, not by filing a bill in Chancery, as here-
tofore, but on the petition of the, parties interested.
The benefits of this act are also extended to per-
sons who have some beneficial estate or interest in
the trust property; and also to persons who have
some trust duty or duties to perform, so as to obtain


a conveyance to new trustees, capable of performing
them. Until this act, that also could only be ac-
complished by filing a bill.
The benefit of this act is also extended to the
guardians or next friends of infants, entitled to
public stocks, funds, or annuities; under which’the
Court may direct any portion of the interest or
dividends to be paid to such guardians, or other
persons directed by the Court on petition, for the
maintenance or benefit of the infant.
Its benefits are also extended to the case of idiots,
lunatics, or persons of unsound mind; or the com-
mittees of such, when out of the jurisdiction of an
English Court of Equity ; or when such committee
shall have died intestate, or become lunatic, or of
unsound mind, or are not known to be living or
dead. In such cases, where the property consists of
public stocks, or funds, or annuities, the Lord Chan-
cellor may, on petition, make similar orders as in
the other cases.
And where it may happen that such public stocks,
funds, or annuities, belong to persons abroad, who
have been declared lunatic or of unsound mind, and
their property vested in curators, according, to the
laws of the country where such persons reside, the
Lord Chancellor is empowered to order such stocks,
funds, or annuities, to be transferred by the proper


officers into the names of such curators, and to
direct the payment of the dividends to such per-
sons, and in such manner as he shall deem fit.
It may not be amiss, before we close this chapter,
to advert to trustees of other descriptions than those
we have been considering (but which we before
alluded to), in order to give a more complete view
of trusteeship in its various shapes, though confining
our chief attention, to that portion of the subject,
which is of the more practical and usual nature.
These trusteeships now to be noticed are those
which concern land, but are rather of a formal
description, and are derived from, or invented in
analogy to the ancient uses ; and in which the
trustee is more quiescent than active. These
trusteeships may be confined to three: viz. to
bar dower; to preserve contingent remainders; to
hold a term or terms of years.
There are various ways wherein a trusteeship to
bar dower is created. In some the trustee is, and
in others he is not, required to be a party to, and
execute deeds in respect of the estate with which
he is invested. But these cases are always and
necessarily under professional direction, therefore
need not be enlarged upon here.
Trustees to preserve contingent remainders in
wills or marriage settlements, are of considerable


importance, inasmuch as, by the rules of law,
when one estate is limited to take effect upon
a contingency after a preceding estate, if that
preceding estate be destroyed, the estate first
mentioned could not take effect as intended, on
the happening of the contingency on which it
should have taken effect: therefore these trustee-
ships to preserve contingent remainders, were in-
vented to supply the place of the preceding estate
(called also the particular estate) so destroyed, in
order that, by such intervention, the estate in re-
mainder may still take effect on the happening of
the contingency. These trustees to preserve such
contingent remainders, therefore, should be careful
not to part with their estate, to the prejudice of
those for whom they are trustees ; as, by so doing,
they would make themselves liable to make good
all loss, (a) Hence the importance of their under-
standing the nature of any instrument or deed, in
which they may be required to join, relative to their
trust; and not to do it without the sanction of a
professional adviser in whom they confide.
The character of trustees for terms of years is
also important, and such trusts expose the trustees
(a) By committing such breach of trust. See Pye r. Gorge,
1 P. Wins. 128.
c


to liabilities, if they act improperly in regard to
their trust; the same caution is therefore necessary
for them, as for the trustees, to preserve contingent
remainders, just noticed. They should never sign
any deed in respect of their trusteeship, without
being well assured of the legality of their act, under
the advice and sanction of a professional person in
whom they repose confidence.
We now pass to a few remarks on the other
general class of trustees, viz, trustees by implication,
of whom it was said they are not the principal
objects of this work, because of more rare occur-
rence ; but still convenient to be incidentally no-
ticed, as being liable to many of the same rules as
apply to express trustees. But as such trustees by
implication are not the immediate objects of this
treatise ; and as the circumstances from which they
derive their character are of far less ordinary occur-
rence, than those which constitute trustees by ex-
press creation as before noticed; and as such
trusteeship by implication must ever involve pro-
fessional interference and guidance, it is too remote
from the object of this work to enumerate the many
and nice ' predicaments from which such implied
(otherwise termed resulting or constructive) trusts
arise, and which constitute trusteeship by implica-
tion. Suffice it here to state, therefore, by way of


definition, that these last named trusts must origi-
nate from circumstances of peculiar description, in
which it would be considered to be against the
rules and principles of Equity, that the person
holding such property should hold it otherwise than
as a trustee.
But it may be useful to state a few leading
instances of this species of trusts and trusteeship.
If, then, a trustee renew in his own name a lease of
property he holds in trust, whatever legal claim he
may gain to that renewed lease, still, in equity, it
will be subject to the trust; and he who renewed it
becomes, therefore, in the view of equity, a trustee
by implication : he holds the new lease on an im-
plied trust for his original cestuique trust; equity
considering all benefit that can arise from, or by
means of, the trust property, as belonging to the
party for whom it is held, (a) And if a person
having a limited interest in leasehold property re-
news it for his own benefit, he is, by like implica-
tion, a trustee for the benefit of all other persons
associated with him in that interest. ( b ) So also,
if a person jointly interested with an infant in a
lease, obtain a renewal to himself alone, and the
(«) Griffin v. Griffin, 1 Sch. Ambl. 719; 3 Meriv. 197.
& Lefr. 352; Lord Montford (h) 1 Cruise Dig. 471.
r. Lord Cadogan, 17 Ves. 485 ;
c 2


lease prove beneficial, he will be held to have
acted as trustee, and the infant may claim his
share of the benefit; but if the lease do not prove
beneficial, the trustee must take it upon himself, (a)
In every other case of fraud or undue advantage
in obtaining a conveyance, the grantee will be con-
sidered in equity, as a trustee for him who has
been defrauded, or ought in justice to participate
of the benefit. (6) A mortgagee in fee and his
heirs, hold the mortgaged property in trust for
himself and his executors; which seems to be the
only exception to the general rule, that a man
cannot be a trustee for himself, but that in all
trusts there must be‘a cestuique trust, distinct from
the trustee, capable of enjoying the use or trust, (c)
But when the mortgage debt is paid, the mortgagee
and his heirs are trustees for the mortgagor. ( d )
The acts of parliament creating ■ stock, contain ex-
press clauses that it cannot be bequeathed, as stock,
except by will attested by two witnesses; but if
stock do not pass by the will, yet by virtue of the
statutes it goes to the executor, who takes it subject
to the trusts of the will;. and thus becomes a
trustee for the legatee, in whom, had the bequest
(a) 1 Cruise Dig. 471; Sand. (tj Bam. Rep. 50; Willis, 68.
335; Bos. & Pull. 376. (d) Powell on Mortgages,
(5) Cruise 437. vol. 1, p. 10.9.


been made according to the statutes, the stock
would have immediately vested, («) With respect
to partnerships, when one partner dies, the debts
and effects survive to the remaining partner or
partners, unless there were some express provision
or agreement to the contrary; but if there were no
such provision, then the surviving partner or part-
ners are merely trustees for the representatives of
the deceased partner, for his share. ( b )
No person can be a trustee unless he accept the
trust, and take a vested interest in the subject of
it: or unless he so far interfere with the trust pro-
perty as can be construed into an acceptance of the
trust. The law will not, force a man to take an
estate aginst his will.
If a trustee refuse to accept a trust, a court of
equity will either appoint new trustees or take upon
itself the execution of the trust, (c)
Perhaps the most prominent feature of all others
in trusteeships, is its honorary or gratuitous cha-
racter, as will be afterwards more fully noticed.
(a) 13 Ves. 369. (i) 2 Mad. Clta. 94.
(c) 2 Fonbl. 171.




CHAPTER II.
OF THE CHOICE AND APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEES,
From what has been said at the commencement
of the preceding chapter, it is easily deducible, that
there is a mutuality of interest between those who
have occasion for the friendly intervention of trus-
tees, and those who from friendly motives accept
the office; the one is interested in the character
and capacity of his trustee; the other in his own
safety from injurious responsibilities, as will after-
wards appear.
The present short chapter is devoted to the former
of these considerations, and to other considerations
in near connexion with it; viz, the attention and
care which ought to be bestowed by persons con-
templating the appointment of trustees.
Individuals possessed of property, and wishing to
secure its right distribution, for those who are the


objects of their care, either by settlement or will,
must be supposed to be acquainted with the general
nature of the course of conduct required for the
attainment of those objects in the execution of the
trusts which such property, and its disposition,
render necessary. By this, however, is not meant
that the intelligence of unprofessional persons can
always, if ever, serve as a substitute for professional
assistance, in their arrangements ; the want of which
assistance often leads to the greatest evils, even the
very evils wished to be avoided; expence for one.
It is here only meant, that the individuals in ques-
tion should exercise their discretion in selecting,
as far as possible, for trustees, men possessed of
the qualifications required by the nature of the
property, and. the circumstances of the proposed
trusts. Marriage settlements and wills, as has been
observed, are the instruments by which family trus-
teeships are usually created; and nothing need be
said on their more usual objects, viz, the party’s wife
and children, among the most interesting, doubtless,
of all human relations. Nor should the trustees of
a marriage settlement be deemed to require less
care in their selection than those of a will, merely
from the idea that the husband is in being in the
former case, and not in the latter, himself to super-
intend or watch over his own and family’s interests ;


for even that circumstance may be evaded by deter-
mined dishonesty, aided by equal artifice. There
are more instances of delinquent trustees than meet
the ear, or are generally known. The difficulty of
bringing them before the proper tribunal, and when
there, sometimes, of obtaining effectual remedy;
and the little notoriety, and opportunity for disguise,
to wilfully corrupt characters, which attend those
proceedings; these circumstances, in some instances,
favour their escape. Some peculiar explanation of
this observation may be given in another chapter,
respecting trustees themselves.
As great and little, generally speaking, are com-
parative terms, so trusts differ certainly in magni-
tude ; but all are of comparative importance to the
parties. We shall, however, for the present purpose,
conceive of all trusts as important, and of magni-
tude ; those of my readers whose concerns may
have least of the latter, viz., of magnitude, will
receive no injury from that assumption ; while
those whose concerns and property are larger, will
be proportionably interested in the subject. In this
view of the matter, therefore, it may safely be said,
that “ zeal, probity, and ability,” are qualifications
which ought to be an object of solicitude and
enquiry in persons who contemplate the choice of
trustees. Neither should the party proposing to


appoint, consider the matter in the light merely of
borrowing the formal use of their friends’ names.
We grant that, as men on these occasions seldom,
if ever, resort to any persons whom they do not,
in greater or lesser degree, account their friends, it
may seem absurd not to take for granted their
sufficient cognizance of their friends’ character and
qualifications. For who can be expected to admit
that he has rogues or incompetent persons in the
list of his friendly associations; at least, among
those from whom he would look for such offices as
we are now contemplating. Nevertheless, care and
attention in these respects are still essential. Nor
should it be considered as a compliment paid to,
but rather as a favour asked of, such as may be
deemed competent, from the qualifications above
adverted to, to undertake gratuitously, and from
purely friendly motives, an office from which all
profit is precluded, and which sometimes proves
an office of some anxiety, as well as trouble and
difficulty.
Connected with this part of the subject, is the
propriety there seems to be in (what is often not
thought of being done) communicating with pro-
posed trustees on the appointment contemplated,
including such a general explanation of the circum-
stances, as may elicit the fitness and willingness, or


the reverse, of the party thought of for undertaking
the proposed trust. This certainly may be less
necessary in some cases than in others. The possi-
ble evil to arise from the neglect or omission of it is,
that it may lead to inconveniences, and expence, too,
from its being discovered, when too late, that the
trust implicated some peculiarities, of which, had
the trustee been apprised, he would have declined
it. And in such cases the fault seems chiefly to
rest on the party appointing, since he is assuredly
the most concerned, and the other might from
delicacy, have abstained from making enquiries
necessary for his information. Neither, in case of
several trustees, does it seem superfluous to recom-
mend, with a view to avoiding future inconveniences
also, their being informed of each other’s appoint-
ment, unless in cases where there can be no doubt
at all of their acting harmoniously together. But
this becomes more important to be ascertained, if
what is suggested above be correct, viz. that trustees
should not be named for the formality of their
names merely, but on account of qualifications
which would fit each of them for taking an active
part in the trust concerns.
It has been observed in a preceding chapter, that
trust property, and the confidence also, if not ex-
pressly hindered, survives to the surviving trustees


on the death of any of them ; but that if all die, the
property and trust devolves (if not otherwise limited)
upon the representatives of the party dying. Thus
do trusts frequently fall into the hands of persons
whom the party originally nominating, would not
have chosen. The uncertainty of human life renders
it impossible to guard wholly against this incon-
venience, but it may be provided for as far as
possible. There are two points to be attended to for
this purpose. One is to appoint as many concur-
rent trustees, in the first instance, as the circum-
stances admit of, so that although, as it is said, all
the candles are lighted at once, there may be a
greater probability of the extension of the life of
some ; and the other expedient (so far as its efficacy
can be supposed to extend) is, to give directions for
the remaining trustees, as any drop, to fill up their
number by the appointment of new ones; and this
provision may be extended to a single trustee, in
case, at any time, the number should be reduced to
one. This, indeed, is a usual provision in deeds and
settlements, but it may by possibility be omitted,
and therefore it behoves parties concerned to guard
against such omission. For although by this means
the new trustees thus introduced, are not of the
immediate appointment of the original creator of the
trust, yet being chosen by those whom he did


appoint, it comes as near the intention as human
affairs will admit.
A question of some weight, viz., what is the
motive of appointing several trustees? arises here.
Is it, that in case of death, there may be some to
supply the place of the deceased ? Or is it that
there may be a mutual watchfulness among the
trustees, over each other? Or is it that amonf a
' O
multitude of counsellors there may be wisdom,
and that therefore they may all be actively assist-
ant in the execution of the trusts? Or is it that
the more trustees there are, the more security there
is for the cestuisque trusts in case of misfeasances,
by having more persons liable to answer for the
misconduct of a co-trustee ? It is possible there
may be some discrepancy of opinions, even among
the highest authorities, on these questions. But
perhaps an intelligent person contemplating the
creation of trustees, ought, himself, to decide
upon a solution of his own, of these questions,
and to nominate trustees accordingly. If he wished
that none should take the lead, (a pre-eminence
which sometimes is hazardous to the trust), but
that all his trustees should be equally important
in the trusts, and equally attentive to their practical
execution, he should not only chusc persons com-
petent in themselves, but such as would be likely


to draw amicably together; the reverse of which
is possible to he the case, and where it happens
is productive of injury; and hence the necessity
of circumspection in the appointment, in that re-
spect. These, however, are merely hints, to be
acted upon, with professional advice, as the exi-
gency may occur.
The frequency and the expensiveness of Chancery
suits in trust affairs are well known: and the en-
tering into, or abstaining from such suits, may be
considered as a kind of Scylla and Charyhdis.
Error may be committed by being too forward and
too tardy, too ready or too reluctant. Sir George
Hampson, in his treatise, observes, that “ the
practice now too commonly adopted by trustees, of
obtaining a decree of the Court of Chancery for
their direction, is, in almost every instance,
attended with so much delay and expence, as to
be a serious injury to trust property. ” That
the power of resorting to Chancery has been car-
ried too far, may readily be admitted, although often
to be truly accounted for, by the circumstance of
the trustees finding themselves involved in trusts
not communicated to them by the testator, or other
creator of the trusts, and which trusts, had they been
made acquainted with and declined, others might
have been found to have undertaken them. On


the other hand, there are not wanting, in the records
of official transactions, some testators of great pro-
perty, and good judgment, who have deemed it
advisable, and perhaps to save to their trustees
all dilemma or uncertainty, and to the estate ex-
pence, to direct, that the trustees should file a bill,
make the testator’s children wards of court, and act
under the court’s direction. The old adage, of the
longest way about being the shortest way home,
may be applicable to many, if not all instances of
this nature ; and at any rate, in affairs of material
magnitude and complexity, may be a wise one in
reference to this subject. We often view objects
which have acquired an evil name, with instinctive
aversion; while a nearer approach and closer view
may discover our error in imagining mischief where
lay our greatest benefit. The danger of deferring
some concerns proper for the oversight of a Court
of Equity, consists in their becoming so much
(more or less) involved, as to cause considerable
and expensive investigations in the court; which
would have been avoided by an early reference to
its guidance and protection; which though expen-
sive (and what is not expensive?) is safe, and
perhaps even less expensive upon the whole, if
early applied to, than carrying on the trusts un-
advisedly for some time, and then resorting to the


court, as is frequently the case. All this, however,
can only be decided upon from the peculiar cha-
racter of every case, and from a combined view
of the property, its intended disposition, and per-
sons appointed to execute that disposition. It must
again be admitted, that active and intelligent men,
as trustees, may go far, at all times, to prevent the
necessity of thus recurring to the aid of Chancery,
at least in ordinary cases.


CHAPTER III.
THE ACCEPTANCE OF TRUSTS, AND CONSIDERATIONS
PREVIOUS THERETO.
It has already been observed, that the importance
of trusteeships is mutual, as between the appointer
to, and the acceptor of, a trust; and the last
chapter was occupied in considering the leading
points wherein individuals, proposing to appoint,
should be attentive and cautious. Trustees them-
selves will from thence easily gather somewhat which
may concern them more immediately; but besides
what is there stated, to trustees belong other con-
siderations peculiar to themselves, which I propose
making the subject of the present chapter. I mean
here the points they should advert to, previously to
their accepting the office of trustee.
The prominent feature of this subject of attention
is, what is not always in the contemplation either


of those constituting, or those who are constituted
trustees, that (as before observed) the office, although
strictly gratuitous and studiously excluded from
profit both at law and in equity, may, nevertheless,
and often does, involve serious responsibility, as
well as considerable trouble, and sometimes diffi-
culty. It is by no means intended, by recommend-
ing chnsideration to persons before they accept a
trust, to deter them from that very essential and
valuable friendly service; but only to prevent, as
far as may be, their engaging in what they may
afterwards regret having done, and not find it per-
fectly easy to recede from. It is to be understood
that what may be here said on the subject, is
intended as applying to private, not public trustee-
ships as distinguished in Chapter I.; and indeed
to those private trusts exclusively which we call
family trusts under settlements, or under wills,
and not to those other private trusts which are
rather of a formal and quiescent and less active
nature, as before explained, and which require, there-
fore, the less caution; such as trustees to bar dower;
to preserve contingent remainders; and trustees of
terms; of which some explanation was given in
the preceding chapter.
Persons liable, from their station in society, to
be requested to become trustees, should, therefore,
n


ask themselves whether they stand prepared to
accede to every such request without consideration
or discrimination. If they do, no circumstances
for, consideration need of course be proposed to
them. But if few will be found who do not con-
sider it right to use consideration and discrimination
on the subject, it then becomes of some consequence
to determine what are the points to which their
attention should be turned, when deliberating whe-
ther to accept the office or not, and what they
ought to advert to previously to their accepting it.
■lt is, repeated, because important, that the office
of trustee ought, as well on the part of those who
impose or rather perhaps confide the office, as on
their parts who accept it, to be considered as any
thing rather than merely nominal or honorary, or
unhazardous, although, generally speaking, strictly
gratuitous. This is meant of family trusts in mat-
ters of property where the trustees are expected to
be called upon to, act, on important occasions. It
seems obvious, therefore, to enquire what the
points are of which a person ought to be consider-
ative, previous to his accepting the office of trustee,
in addition to those which will naturally suggest
themselves to the reader of the ensuing chapters,
on a trustee’s duty and responsibility.
It is not then a person’s own future. acts, con


corning which he is to deliberate previously to his
accepting a proposed trust, because those acts will
demand his attention as the occasions for them may
arise; but it is the general nature and probable
circumstances of his undertaking. How then can
he know those particulars unless by voluntary com-
munication from the party, or his own enquiry ?
When he has therefore ascertained the description
of property which is to be the subject of his
management, and how it is situated; whether it
is in a complicated or involved state, or consists
simply of property, whether real or personal, which
will be of easy management, such as the receipt of
rents or of dividends, or other regular income; or
whether the property is of various description, and
will involve considerable attention and care, and
knowledge of business and the affairs of life gene-
rally; he will then be the better able to judge of
his own capability, in all respects, for undertaking
such an office. He must remember, too, in con-
nection with these considerations, that although the
office of trustee is wholly a matter of gratuitous
friendship, and, as will be more fully seen after-
wards, entirely excluded from all permitted gain and
profit in any shape; yet that it involves, as has been
hinted, more liability and responsibility than attach
to a man in reference to his own concerns. For
n 2


that want of due diligence and caution which people
may allow to themselves in their own concerns,
without animadversion, or censure, or penalty, the
law does not allow in the case of trustees of the pro-
perty of others, and of which they having undertaken
the voluntary care and oversight, thelaw charges them
with all the assiduity and prudent conduct which the
matter in itself requires: so that it is not enough
simply for a trustee to say he has paid the same
attention to his friend’s concerns that he would, or
ever has done, to his own. More than that is re-
quired of him, if, of his own, he has been negligent,
or less circumspect than a wise and prudent man
ought to have been. , And for this jealousy in the
law there seems good reason. For the law does not
pretend to the impossible task of diving into men’s
hearts, or motives of action, farther than their deeds
furnish them with the means of so doing: it must
therefore act upon that general principle, and it
must protect all and relieve all who seek its protec-
tion and relief. And in the present state of human
nature, the difficulty (which a court of justice cannot
be expected to undertake) of distinguishing, in all
cases at least, between men’s actions and their
motives or principles, is well known. Besides,
could the motive or principle even be ascertained to
have been free from guilt or turpitude, still in many


cases of laches, or want of due care and caution, the
law will not suffer that consideration to operate to
the prejudice of the parties on whose account a trust
has been voluntarily undertaken. His own suffi-
ciency, therefore, in point of knowledge, skill, and
habits, ought to be a primary object, of consideration
with every one contemplating the acceptance of a
trust. A man should not undertake a thing—for
others at any rate —to which he is conscious of being
unequal in point either of skill or activity.
■ Another enquiry to which it seems obviously proper
for a .proposed trustee to direct his attention, pre-
viously to his acceptance of a trust, relates to the
person or persons with whom he is to be associated,
in it. Trusts ought not to be considered as trivial,
or formal, or nominal matters. It may lead a person
into situations of pecuniary hazard and injury of
which he is little aware, arising, not merely from his
own deficiencies, but from the bad (though to his
friend, who seeks his assistance, unknown) princi-
ples, though fair external character or characters, of
the person or persons with whom he may be asso-
ciated. This is a very proper hint to be thus gene-
rally thrown out here, but some illustration of it will
be given in its proper place afterwards. So that a
trustee’s dangers are not confined to himself or his
own conduct, but depend much upon that of others;


dangers which have, in practice, been realized
where least expected, or suspected. Surely then it
is more than pardonable in a proposed trustee to feel,
and to evince, some solicitude, as to whom he is
to be joined with in a trusteeship. This feeling
indeed has been so predominant, that in one instance
a proposed trustee would only consent to the nomi-
nation, upon condition that, another person being
joined with him, the trust money should be divided
between them for the purpose of making each liable
for a moiety only. This being done, the trust money
divided accordingly, and a deed prepared in the
common form, each trustee was held to be liable
for a moiety of the trust fund only, (a) Besides,
the trust may be of a nature, either as to the
property itself, or as to the objects of the trust,
whether children or others, to induce a probability
of conflicting opinions as to its management; in
which case the mutual characters of the trustees
must be very material in reference to their acting
harmoniously together ; and without harmony in
this as well as in many other things, what but
mischief, in some form or other, can accrue ; or if
no mischief to the trustee, yet perplexity and incon-
veniences.
(a) 6 Madd. 90.


It is not intended, as before observed, by these
remarks to create unnecessary difficulties, or throw
impediments in the way of friendly offices or general
usefulness in society; and in most cases too great
fearfulness or scrupulosity should be as much avoided
as too little caution or consideration. The niedium
line therefore is the line of safety, and to which
these hints are meant to subserve, in aid of indi-
vidual discretion. More points will present them-
selves (which are here omitted to avoid repetition)
on the perusal of the chapter before referred to with
that intent.
One other prominent consideration, however, should
not be overlooked by a person contemplating the
acceptance of the office of trustee, and that is, that
his responsibilities and liabilities, and the conse-
quences of them, serious as they some times are, do
not die with himself. They survive him, and fall
upon his representatives, whoever they may be; and
in some instances have done so, and in all are liable
to do so, to any imaginable extent of injury, to say
nothing of trouble or inconvenience to the family or
friends of the deceased trustee. This surely is no
small additional reason for caution in accepting the
confidence proposed.
It has been, in a preceding page or pages, and it may
be repeatedly said, (for it is of importance to be


remembered), that the office of trustee, of the descrip-
tion we are considering, is wholly and strictly gratui-
tous. This, though a universal and established prin-
ciple, is, nevertheless, like others of the same nature,
capable of, and in fact requires, some modification.
For although the law is, that the office of trustee is
purely honorary, and that he is not entitled to any
allowance for his care and trouble in the execution
of the trust, (not meaning here, the allowance and
reimbursement of all costs, charges, and expences,
as will be mentioned in a succeeding chapter), yet
should the proposed trustee, from his exercise of the
preceding cautions, conceive, that there was a pro-
bability of the intended trust proving particularly
and materially troublesome, and yet of such a
nature as to require the intervention of such friend-
ship as can alone take a principal’s interest in its
concerns—in such case of extraordinary claim, an
exception to the general rule has been entertained,
and the courts of equity have deemed it reasonable
and right, to establish the doctrine and practice of
remuneration or compensation to a trustee. There
are two ways in which a contemplated trustee may
avail himself of this regulation. The one is, after
a satisfactory consideration of the facts and circum-
stances of the trust, to such extent as he may be able
]tp ascertain them, and before he accepts the trust.


to stipulate with the party requesting him to become
a trustee, (whether under a marriage settlement or
other instrument, or will), for such pecuniary remu-
neration or compensation, and in such a form or
mode, as may be deemed fair and reasonable by
all parties. In this case the instrument creating the
trust should contain an express clause for that pur-
pose, under which the arrangement would be carried
into effect as a component part of the trusteeship
without further trouble, uncertainty, or dissatis-
faction. Should this mode be deemed objection-
able, the only other method of effecting the object
would be by a special case, to be made to the court,
shewing that the proposed trustee ought to have
compensation for his personal trouble and loss of
time. Thus where a trustee acted in a trust, re-
quiring great trouble and attention, under the
express stipulation that application should be made
to the court, to authorise the allowance of a rea-
sonable compensation out of the testator’s estate
for such time and labour, and refused to continue
to act therein without such allowance, he was
decreed to be entitled to prospective as well as
retrospective compensation, (a)
The foregoing, in conjunction with the information
(it) Vid. Marshall v. Holloway, 2 Swanst. 453.


to be derived from the following chapter, will furnish
a proposed trustee deliberating on the acceptance of
a trust, with such instructions for his consideration
previous to such acceptance, as may he essentially
useful. And although these circumstances may
hot apply to all intended trustees, that does not
hinder their evident and material applicability to
many, and perhaps most who take upon them that
office.
One more object of consideration, before accepting
the office of trustee should be, whether the indivi-
dual has himself any claim upon any part of the
property for which he may be proposed to be a
trustee; because if he have, that circumstance
should induce him to decline it; inasmuch as the
jealousy of the courts of equity against trustees
being subjected to any possible influence unfavour-
able to the proper discharge of their duty, has been
carried so far, as to have produced a decision, that a
person accepting this office, is precluded from setting
up such claim, when, if allowed, it would defeat the
trusts he had undertaken to execute. Either such
claim, therefore, must be abandoned, or the trustee-
ship should be declined, (a)
(a) Jac. & Walk. 112.




CHAPTER IV.
OF THE DUTIES OF TRUSTEES.
The purpose of the present chapter is to assist
persons, who have accepted the office of trustee, in
obtaining such knowledge of its duties, as may enable
them to execute those duties with advantage to their
cestuique trust , and with safety and satisfaction to
themselves; and the various capacities in which they
may be required to act, shall be stated as succinctly
and clearly as possible.
In the first place, it must be again brought to
remembrance that the office is so entirely of a gra-
tuitous and honorary nature, (with the exception
stated in the last chapter), and so far from being
deemed to be undertaken from mercenary motives,
that a trustee is required by courts of equity, and it
therefore becomes his duty, to execute the trusts
reposed' in him without any direct or indirect, imme-
diate or remote, benefit or advantage whatever, to


himself. The express provision to the contrary, ad-
verted to in the preceding chapter, is the only excep-
tion to that otherwise universal and fundamental
rule; a rule which is carried to the extent of even
not permitting a trustee to be appointed receiver of
the trust estate, except upon the condition of his
performing the duties of that situation without any
emolument. On that stipulation trustees have been
permitted to receive the rents, contrary to the
general practice, when apparently advantageous to
the property, (a) So jealous indeed is the law upon
this point, that a donation from a cestuique trust to
his trustee, very soon after the former came of age,
and the trusteeship was of course dissolved, but
before the trust property was delivered up or ac-
counted for, has been set aside, with costs against
the trustee. (6)
The duty, in general, of trustees, is to execute
with care and fidelity the trusts committed to them,
according to their terras as expressed in the instru-
ment, and intended by the party, creating them.
This indeed will be always presumed by the court
to have been done, until the contrary be shewn.
Should a trustee entertain any well grounded doubt,
or meet with any serious difficulty, a court of equity
is always open to him; and to it in such cases it is
(a) 8 Vcs. 72; 11 Ves. 361. (b) 2 Vc5.549.


his duty to apply, and to execute his trust under the
superintendence and protection of the court, (a) And
trustees are competent to file a bill for this purpose.
The rule, that a trustee is bound to manage and
employ the trust property for the benefit of the party
entitled, the cestuique trust, with the care and
diligence which a provident owner would exercise
in respect of the same property, has before been
noticed. And it may now be added, that this rule
extends to make it the trustee’s duty not to omit
doing what would be manifestly advantageous to
the property, although a discretionary power may
have been given him. A plain proof that improvi-
dence or neglect, or laches, will not be excused in
a trustee, as such, though in his own affairs un-
amenable to any authority on that account. He
must therefore be more careful for his cestuique
trust than he might be for himself. Himself he
may injure by negligence or inattention; his ces-
tuique trust he may not. Generally, also, it is
imperative on trustees to be careful that no loss of
interest accrue to the trust funds of infants. As
soon, therefore, as they are possessed of any sum or
sums of money to any competent amount for invest-
ing, beyond necessary current expences, they should
invest it, for the purpose of accumulation. This
(a) Fonb. on Equity.


should be done even when the trust is under the
care and direction of a court of equity. And trustees
should carefully avoid keeping balances in their
own hands, which exposes them to great liabilities
in point of paying interest for such balances, whether
they have been productive to the trustees or not ;
but more especially if they have. A surplus to the
amount of 100/. in court, will be invested by the
Accountant General. But trustees themselves may
invest smaller sums, (a)
In trusteeships wherein the cestuique trusts are
adult, as well as in cases where infants are the
parties interested, it is a duty strictly required of
trustees, carefully to keep all necessary accounts
with the utmost regularity and precision, so as to
be ready to be at any time produced to any party
entitled to their inspection. And it is equally their
duty (i) to possess themselves of all necessary
information respecting the disposition of the trust
property, and to communicate such information to
their cestuique trust (in cases, requiring it) without
reserve. It is evident that a contrary course is open
to every unfavourable interpretation. This duty ex-
tends to the production also of all the books wherein
(«) 3 Bro. C. C. 431; Lit- Cox Rep. 134. Jeremy 140.
tleliales v. Gascoigne, 3 Bro. (b) 3 Swanst. 61, 64.
C. C. 74; Hall r. Hallett, 1


the accounts may have been kept; and more espe-
cially so, should it happen that the trust property is
mixed either with the trustee’s own, or with other
property he may have in trade with partners; and in
which case the partnership books should be exhibited,
particularly if the property have been lent by him
to his partners, and they dealt with it in their
business, (a) This, however, is rather an extreme
case, though too possible to happen.
But so contrary to that use of trust property just
mentioned is the duty of trustees, where money
constitutes such property, and comes into the trus-
tee’s hands, that they are bound by numerous
decisions in equity, to invest such monies on good
security; by which is meant, either proper mort-
gage, or the government funds, to the exclusion
of all personal security whatever; and those govern-
ment funds are required by the Court of Chancery
to be three per cents, as the acknowledged stock
adopted by the Court, and sanctioned by it for such
occasions. ( b)
Another duty of trustees, though of somewhat
more remote nature, is this, that, .in case of suits
instituted by them respecting the trust property, and
(a) 3 Mer. Rep. 44; Jac. & wards, that bonds and notes
Walk. 135, 140. are not security.
(b) It will be seen aftcr-


wherein, they, the trustees, may be made parties,
they do not permit the interests of their cestuique
trusts to suffer from their neglecting to take the
usual advantages in pleading, (a)
In case also of trusts of real property, and in
analogy to the old law of uses, it is the duty of
trustees, in whom the legal estate is vested, and
who are considered in courts of law as the legal
owners, to permit the person beneficially interested,
to take possession where he is competent to sustain it,
and where it is not inconsistent with the trust, and to
receive the rents and profits of the land. And in
those cases where the whole beneficial interest
belongs to the cestuique trust, to execute such
conveyances as he shall direct ; and also to defend
the title of the trust estate, in any court of law or
equity, as well as to preserve the estate for the
benefit of cestuique trusts, by preventing decay or
waste. (b).
The further duties of trustees, will be more con-
veniently gathered from a consideration of the powers
with which they are invested by the deed or instru-
ment of their creation, and which form the subject
of the next chapter ; as well as from their liabilities,
as stated in chapter VI.
(a) 1 Atk. 450. (i) 2 Mudd. Cli. 1 Sand.


CHAPTER V.
OF THE POWERS OF TRUSTEES; AND THEIR
DISABILITIES.
It has been observed in a preceding chapter, that
trusteeships are of various, and very often of mixed
kinds ; that is, either concerning real property only,
or personal property only, or otherwise of real and
personal both ; and in either of the cases, the duties
and the powers of the trustees, of course take their
complexions from these several circumstances.
In trusts comprising real property, therefore, it is
observed by Mr. Willis, (p. 126) that in a right con-
veyed simply on trust, all questions relating to the
extent of the trustee’s power depend upon the nature
and purposes of the trust, and that if a trustee
cannot properly discharge his trust without having
ample powers over the subject entrusted to him, he
may remove tenants, and exercise every other power
except alienation, which is never presumed, and
E


requires a special clause; but that if the trust he
created for one purpose only, not requiring such
extensive powers, then the trustee’s powers extend
no further than is necessary for the special purposes
of the trust. This exposition of the powers of trus-
tees, is according to the law of Scotland; hut the
laws of England also, as administered in courts of
equity, invest trustees with sufficient powers, with-
out any particular declaration of them for such
management of the trust property as a provident
owner would have used; and going still further
than the Scotch law, in order that the trusts may
be duly executed, will infer a power of sale, although
such disposition is not authorized in express terms.
In this management of trust estates, when the trus-
tees have, as they usually have, the legal fee, they
are authorized to make leases which may endure as
long as their interest in the subject of the lease
subsists, (a) Where lands are devised upon trust
out of the rents and profits, to pay debts and lega-
cies ; or if a trust be created to pay portions out of
the rents and profits at a prefixed time within which
the same cannot be raised out of the annual profits ;
in such cases trustees may sell or mortgage lands so
devised for those purposes. The same, if in aid of
(a) 4 Cruise Dip;.


a creditor; or if the object of the trust necessarily
requires it, as in case of fines and fees of renewal
being directed to be raised out of the rents and
profits, (a) And where trustees may raise money by
sale or mortgage for payment of debts, it may be
done without waiting for a decree of a court of
equity for that purpose. (6)
The power, interest, and authority of trustees is
equal and undivided; and in that respect trustees
differ from mere executors, and cannot, like them,
act separately; they must all join both in receipts
and conveyances. One of two trustees cannot alone
sign a bankrupt’s certificate, as in the case of execu-
tors. If an estate be given to two trustees for
several purposes, and in case of one dying the other
to execute the same, the refusal of one prevents the
other from acting during their joint lives, (c) And
if a power of sale be given to three trustees and
their heirs, reserving to them also a power to
change trustees; if one die, the survivors are in-
competent to act before a new appointment, (d)
But if one of three trustees renounce and give
a release to the others, he is considered as having
disclaimed; and the others may act alone, and give
(a) 2 Ves. & Ilea. (c) 2 Eq. Ca. Abr.
(h) 2 Ves. (<7) 1 Bam. V Aid. Rep.
K 2


a sufficient discharge to a purchaser. («) So if
estates be devised to trustees, and two of such trus-
tees, with two other persons were appointed execu-
tors, and those who were merely executors and
one of the trustees who was also an executor re-
nounced probate, and such trustee refused to act;
a contract for the purchase of the property which
had been entered into by one of the parties who
so renounced being found advantageous to the
cestuique trust, the acting trustee and executor was
held competent to convey the legal estate to him as
the purchaser. (6)
In some particular instances trustees have the
power of retaining, out of the produce of the trust
funds, any debt due to the trust estate. One example
may be given in the case of a marriage settlement.
In this case the intended husband had covenanted
with the trustees to pay them a certain sum within
a limited period, for specific purposes of the settle-
ment. He afterwards assigned over to annuitants
the dividends to which he was entitled under the
same settlement. It was held that the trustees had
a right to stop such dividends, after the sum co-
venanted to be paid to them had become due, and
was not paid, to make good the same for the pur-
poses intended, (c)
(d)2 Swanst. Rep. (h) Willis, 1.18. (c) 3 Mcr. licp.


The powers which, as has been mentioned, trus-
tees have inherently, by virtue of their office, of
alienating, whether by lease, sale, or exchange, are,
notwithstanding such inherent power, usually given
them expressly by the provisions of the deed or will
by which they are created; and in such case it is
required of them to pay accurate attention to the
terms of those powers in the execution of them. In
the instance, for example, of leasing under such
power, if the circumstances required by the power
be not exactly and fully complied with, the execu-
tion of the power is deemed unexecuted, and con-
sequently inoperative. The power then should be
rigidly pursued, and no covenant or other clause
either added, inserted, or omitted, which the power
does not warrant. There is one rather prominent
feature in this part of the subject, which is, that
even a power of leasing will not sanction the granting
of reversionary leases, unless the trust estate itself
be reversionary ■ otherwise the power can only
warrant leases in possession; viz. leases granted to
take effect at the time they are granted. Concur-
rent leases, however, are legal; and to them the
power will give effect. ( a )
If to the powers before noticed, any conditions
should be annexed, unless a compliance with them
(«) Willis, Ml.


have become impossible from any circumstances,
such conditions should be scrupulously complied
with, or they would not he enforced or sustained
by a court of equity. ( a ) This rule does not seem
to extend to an unavoidable transgression of the
time within which a sale has been directed.
Where a power of sale is given for the payment
of debts, and after such payment the residue given
over; in such case the trustees may sell the whole
estate, and not confine themselves to the sale of so
much only as may produce the money required. (6)
Trustees have no power, either alone, or in con-
junction with the cestuique trust, to appoint new
trustees in cases of emergency, and to whom the
property may be conveyed jointly with themselves,
in the cases of death, or refusal, or incapacity of
acting of any of the original trustees, unless there
be an express clause, empowering them so to do
in the deed or will. If there be not, recourse must
be had to the Court of Chancery, to supply by its
authority, the want of such a clause* (c)
The power of trustees does not extend to change
any securities upon which the trust fund may be
invested, when it comes into their hands, unless
(a) 8 Price, Rep. 417. ( b ) Cru. Dig. 529.
(c) 2 Madd. Cha. 161; 1 Cru. Dig. 540.


there be in the trust instrument a clause, authorising
them so to do; but where it is so given, a court
of equity will not control it, unless improperly
exercised, (a)
Another power, in which the discretion of trustees
is often and importantly called upon for their guid-
ance, is the raising portions for children, whether
under a settlement or will. There are, however,
few, if any, cases of this species of trust, that are
not of so nice and difficult construction (unless the
words of the deed or will are decidedly plain and
unequivocal) that trustees can seldom with prudence
act upon their own opinion. This, therefore, is an
eminent instance wherein it would, generally speak-
ing, be quite proper for trustees, as their safest
cause, and consequently most beneficial to the trust
property, to place themselves under the direction
of a court of equity. (6)
One or two instances may be noticed. If, there-
fore, a term of years or other estate is limited to
trustees for raising portions for children, payable
at a certain time, which, by the children’s living to
that time, have become a vested interest, they shall
not stay till the death of the father or mother for
their portions, but they shall be raised forthwith,
(<t) 1 Vcs. & B. 354. (b) Fonbl. Eq.


unless some intention appear in the settlement,
to the contrary, (a) But if portions he directed
to be paid when the party attains the age of
twenty-one years, or in case of a daughter when
she is married, and that if these events happen in
the life time of the father, the portions shall not
be paid till after his death ; although the actual
payment must be postponed until the father’s death,
yet the clause requiring such postponement does
not hinder the portions vesting in the life time of
the father. ( b) But generally, at least frequently,
legal advice is necessary on these points as they arise.
The subject of conditions, in settlements or wills,
in restraint of marriage, is another fruitful source
of consideration and caution for trustees in the
execution of their powers. It frequently occurs,
in the creation of trusts, that the consent of trus-
tees to the marriage of a party beneficially entitled
to the whole, or a part, of the trust funds, is made
necessary, before such party, in case of marriage,
is permitted to receive the provision made for her.
These conditions are not favourably regarded in
equity, and therefore, are construed strictly in favour
of the party affected by the intended restraint. But
this unfriendly aspect towards such conditions does
(a) 1 Madd. Cli. (6) 1 Eden. Rep,


not seem to be extended to a devise of land, or of any
interest arising out of land, upon the terms of not
marrying without consent: such condition is good, (a)
This leads to the doctrine of conditions precedent,
and conditions subsequent. A condition precedent
is where the performance of a certain condition is
required before the benefit is permitted to vest in or
be enjoyed by the party required to fulfil the con-
dition. A condition subsequent is considered to be
in cases where, after an interest is suffered to vest,
the same interest is made liable to cease and be
devested, if the party enjoying it either do not
comply, or cease to comply with a certain condition,
or do any act contrary to it. The circumstances
which are deemed to involve in them either the one
or the other of these species of conditions, are fre-
quently of nice and difficult construction ; but
although in many instances it may be right for
trustees to resort, on such occasions, to legal advice,
yet it is presumed that as the matter is interesting,
and not seldom occurring, some explanatory state-
ments and examples may be useful for the general
guidance of trustees, so that although they may
consult others, they may nevertheless have a well
founded opinion of their own.
It may just be observed then, that a condition
(a) 9 East’s Rep. 170.


annexed to a devise of lands, or of any interest
arising out of land, not to marry without consent, is
good, and will be established ; and that where such
a condition is precedent, the estate does not vest
until the condition is performed; but if it be sub-
sequent, the estate will be devested by a breach or
non-performance of the condition. This may be
illustrated by the following instance. An estate was
devised to the testator’s wife for life, and after her
death to H. L. for life, in case she should continue
single; and after her decease, to such person as she
should by deed or will appoint; and for default of
such appointment, to A. L.,and M. L., their heirs,
&c., as tenants in common; but in case H. L. should
marry in the life time of the testator’s wife, and
with her consent, and after her death w’ith the
consent of two trustees named in the will, then
H, L. was to have had the estate as. she would have
done had she continued single. The testator’s wife
died, and the trustees also died; and H. L, took
possession of her estate, and married. It was held
that the condition in the will as to the marriage of
H. L. was a condition subsequent, and became im-
possible by the act of God, and therefore her estate
for life became absolute, and she might exercise the
power of appointment as directed by the will. («)
(a) 3 Moore’s Rep. 358.


In the case of legacies it is different; for where the
condition of marrying with consent is a subsequent
condition, the legatee will keep the legacy though the
marriage be without the consent required, (a) With
respect to conditions in restraint of marriage in cases
involving personal property, courts of equity afford
a latitude in performing such conditions precedent
as it enforces. Therefore, if a bond be given to a
trustee to pay a sum of money, in case a third party
should marry with consent of the trustee if living at
the time of the marriage, the trustee has all his life
to consent ; and although such trustee should in the
first instance dissent from such marriage, yet if he
live on friendly terms with the party afterwards,
that is deemed good evidence of his consent. (6)
Constructive consent, indeed, is now established as
sufficient without express consent, unless when the
trust instrument expressly requires such consent to
be in writing, (c) In case of consent being fraudu-
lently withholden or refused by one or more trus-
tees, the assent of the other acting trustee or trus-
tees will be sufficient; and a court of equity will
supply such consent so improperly withholden.
There are many nice distinctions and complex cases
which may arise on this subject, which must be the
(«) 2 Madd. Cli. 05. (6) Willis, 157. (e) Ibid.


subject of superior opinions to those of the trustees,
should they arise: what has been said is deemed
sufficient for the purpose of this treatise, in exhibit-
ing the general outline and grounds upon which
trustees should act, and exercise their powers herein.
The maintenance of, as well as (what is before
alluded to) raising portions for children, is also an
important object in the powers which belong to
trustees. A few leading rudimental observations
will be useful, and as much as may be requisite for
the purpose of this treatise. Considerable caution
and discretion are required in the execution of powers
given to trustees, or directions laid upon them, to
apply such portion of the trust funds as may be
needful for infants during their minority. The rule
heretofore was very strict against permitting trustees
to make any expenditures for such purposes in cases
where the parent was of ability to maintain the
children, (a) But the practice of the courts of equity
is now so far altered in this matter, that every case
must be viewed so as to meet its exigencies in a more
liberal and equitable manner. Therefore even al-
though the author of the trust bounty to infants,
may not have expressly directed maintenance to be
allowed ; yet the court will now not only direct it in
(n) Hughes v. Hughes, 1 Bro. C. C. 368, Kd. Belt.


such case, but will go so far as to order the reim-
bursement of a trustee who may have advanced or
applied such maintenance out of the trust fund for
the time past, where deemed necessary. Nor will
the court insist upon a reference to the master to
enquire into the father’s ability, when the circum-
stances are strongly indicative that, the child’s
fortune being large, and the father having other
children, he would be inconvenienced by the burthen
of supporting the child adequately to a fortune in
which the father could not share, (a) But the break-
ing in upon the capital of a child’s fortune is neither
practised by the court itself, unless in the extremest
cases of want, and is absolutely forbidden to trustees
to do on their own authority in any case whatever. ( h )
The powers, which are frequently given to trustees,
in reference to the distribution of a fund amongst
several objects, will not be interfered with by the
court, where those powers are, as they should be,
exercised with equity and impartiality, without
undue preference of one above another. A power
similar to these, is that which trustees have of dis-
charging the debts of their cestuique trusts, if done
with the consent of the person by whom they are
entrusted, and if for the benefit of the trust estate, (c)
(a) 1 Bro. C. C. 380. (J) r. Vcs. 474. (c) 3P. Wms. 381.


But it may be usefully repeated, that in numerous
cases of discretionary powers committed to trustees,
and in all doubtful instances at least, trustees,
instead of relying on their own judgment or on
the opinion of either solicitors or counsel, will
best consult their own interest, and that of those
beneficially interested in the subject of the trust,
even though at some additional expence, by sub-
mitting the exercise of their discretion to the con-
trol of a court of equity.
As to the disabilities of trustees; these, if few,
are of a prominent nature, and arise out of the
express character of their office, before mentioned,
viz., that of being wholly gratuitous ; intended ex-
clusively for the benefit of the cestuique trusts,
and as being wholly excluded from deriving any
advantage from it whatever. Hence, therefore, the
general and influential rule, that a trustee shall
not be permitted to raise in himself an interest,
opposite to that of his cestuique trust. This
gives rise to another and subordinate maxim, that
a trustee, or particular agent, shall not be allow-
ed to become the purchaser of that which he
holds in trust, (a) If the connection be dissolved, the
(n) York Buildings Company v. Mackenzie, 8 Br. P. C. 42;
Ex parte Lacey, 6 Vcs. 64r).


case then appears to be altered, (a) The jealousy of
the courts of equity, lest there may have been
improper management on the part of the trustee,
in obtaining a knowledge of the property, supports
this rule. But as in other matters there is scarcely
a general rule \vhich has no exception, so in this
there are cases wherein the rigour, of this maxim
relaxes. Therefore where there has been a clear
distinct contract, without fraud, concealment, or
advantage taken by the trustee, and he have pre-
viously agreed with the person beneficially inter-
ested, that he shall no longer be considered a
trustee with reference to the purchase; or obtained
leave of a court of equity; he may then become a
purchaser from his cestuigue trust, {b) Neither will a
purchase by a trustee, if found to be beneficial to an
infant cestuigue trust, be set aside; nor in other cases
where more than the trustee has given cannot other-
wise be obtained, (c) So also where a trustee, in whom
land was vested in trust to sell for the payment of
debts, pays more money in discharging such debts
than the value of the land, he becomes the pur-
chaser; and in case of personal property, if he indi-
vidually advance to creditors more than its value, he
(n) 2 Fonbl. on Eq. 49; 1 Sand. 162. ( b ) 1 Madd. Clia. 113.
(c) 6 Ves. 625.


would acquire an absolute right to it by operation
of law, although a court of equity will always
direct an enquiry into such transactions, (a) But in
cases analogous to these, where the trustee makes
any advantage to himself, it will not be allowed. (6)
The rules respecting the not permitting trustees to
act as receivers, have been before noticed, p. 44,
(a) Lambton r. Bainton, I ley, 1 Jac. and Walk. 64.
Cha. Ca. 199; Calmer v. Brad- (b) 2 Fonbl. 189.


CHAPTER VI.
OF THE LIABILITIES OF TRUSTEES.
The liabilities of trustees spring out of that respon-
sible character which, it has been seen, the law
attaches to those who spontaneously undertake the
office; for, as has been observed before, more dis-'
cretion and care and diligence are required of a
trustee for the concerns and interests of others than
for his own : that is, in cases where negligence has
been discovered; which, although not visited upon a
man by legal animadversions in his own affairs, will
not be allowed or overlooked in him, as a trustee.
These liabilities also are produced by breach of
trust, which often consist not only of grossly negli-
gent or erroneous conduct, but also (which is worse)
of fraudulent or dishonest conduct. In short,
F


“ wherever (as remarked by Mr. Willis) trustees
fail in the performance of their duty, or exceed, or
pervert the powers with which they are invested,
they and their representatives, (unless it be a per-
sonal confidence limited to the original trustees, and
then it dies with them), 'whether deriving any benefit
from it or not, become responsible to those for whom
the trust property may be held, and are chargeable
in equity for breach of trust.” So long, therefore, as
trustees retain possession of the trust property, they
are bound to act respecting it with the care and
diligence of provident owners. A trustee will incur
peculiar liabilities by assuming the ostensible owner-
ship of the trust property so far as to make it appear
that he alone is beneficially entitled to it; for he
will not only be liable to his cestuique trust, but will
also be subject to all the responsibilities which would
otherwise attach to the party beneficially entitled:
as where a trustee to whom two leases-were assigned
in trust, represented himself as the actual landlord
to a tenant of the leasehold estate, the trustee so
acting was held personally liable to the original
lessor, for want of repairs and subsequent rent, (a)
Trustees merely acting as such, cannot discharge
(a) 4 Taunt, Rep. 7G6.


themselves, or those claiming under them, of the
legal liabilities which would have attached to them
as individuals placed in a similar situation. Wherever
trustees violate their duty either by fraudulent aliena-
tion ; by refusing to give possession to the cestuique
trust , where he is competent to maintain it, and it
does not militate against the trust; or by endeavour-
ing improperly to eject him from possession of the
trust estate; or by neglecting to receive and pay over
the rents and profits of lands where the trust is for
that purpose; or by refusing to convey at the request
of the party to whom the beneficial interest belongs;
or if guilty of fraud or negligence, want of caution,
misrepresentation, mistake, or concealment; these
will be deemed breaches of trust, for which a remedy
may be had against them in a court of equity*
Other instances will presently be noticed, but the
foregoing may first be somewhat exemplified.
As to want of caution : it has been decided, where
a loss would have fallen upon trust property through
the negligence of the trustees, that the trustees them-
selves should make it good, although not acting
from any improper motive, (a) And in a case where
trustees had joined in a transfer of stock and
(a) Rex v. Emery, 5 Ves. 141; Hainpson, 47.
F 2


entrusted the same to their co-trustee, upon his repre-
sentation that it was required to pay debts, the truth
of which they omitted to ascertain, those trustees
were charged with the loss occasioned to their ces~
tuique trust by that transaction, (a)
The renewal of leases also is a matter wherein
a trustee may easily incur censure, if not a more
serious visitation, for want of due attention. Some
leases, whether from the church, or from corporate
bodies, or otherwise, and which are designated by
the well known term of beneficial leases, require
to be renewed at certain periods and before the
expiration of the term originally granted. These
renewals, though generally deemed desirable, yet
sometimes are inconvenient where the trust funds
happen to be inadequate to that demand upon them.
It is, however, required of trustees to use every
means in their power for enabling themselves to
effect such renewals. Absolute incompetency or
great inexpediency would, of course, have its due
weight in exonerating them from blame for not
renewing. But it should be added, that should the
omission to renew actually occur, if without flagrant
culpability, then, although the trustees would still be
(a) 11 Ves. 335; 1 Mer. 712.


liable to make good all loss in the first instance, yet
they may, it is presumed, have a remedy over, against
those who may have enjoyed the rents and profits of
the trust estate, out of which the fine and other
expences of renewal ought to have been paid, (a)
The selling of stock is another matter always
requiring care, in order to avoid liability to which a
trustee may be exposed from various sources. There-
fore, if a trustee, mistaking his power, should sell
stock which he was not authorised to do, he would
be decreed to replace it immediately. (6) And if
acting even under a forged power in disposing of trust
money, he must reimburse his cestuique trust, (c)
Even gross ignorance will not excuse trustees from
liability for mistakes, because the courts of equity
are considered to be always open for their direction,
under whose authority they may act securely.
Trustees selling stock and entrusting the produce
to any speculation in business or trade, however
specious, are, as is reasonable they should be,
responsible for all losses. They are also responsible
for all losses arising from their adoption of any
modes of investment considered improvident by the
courts of equity, as before noticed, (the three per
(a) Lord Montford v. Lord (b) 1 Vcs. 297.
Cadogan, 17 Vcs. 485. (c) 2 Eden Rep.


cents being the only stock approved of by the
court), and which the instrument creating the trust
did not distinctly authorise; or in any merely per-
sonal security; or for even continuing to re-invest
stock in any objectionable fund wherein it stood
when it first came into their hands, (a) These rules
have fallen hard upon some trustees who have been
ignorant of them, and acted to the best of their
judgment for the benefit of their cestuique trusts.
But the importance of observing the rules, when
known, is sufficiently obvious.
With respect to erroneous payment of children’s
portions, somewhat has been said in a former chapter,
to put trustees upon their guard in that respect, and
to shew that, generally speaking, it is a part of their
trust on which they are peculiarly required to act
under the authority of the court, unless in cases too
clear to admit of doubt. One instance of this kind
was, where, under a direction to pay portions to
children as they came of age, a trustee paid one of
them in full, after which the estate decayed, and was
insufficient to satisfy the rest. The trustee was
compelled, personally, to bear the loss; it being
said he should have taken security in case of the
estate decaying. (6)
(a) 5 Vcs. 844 ; Hampson, 50. (4) 2 Ca. in Cha. 132.


Another misfeasance in a trustee, and which
would make him liable to its consequences, is con-
cealment. Many cases may arise in which the with-
holding of information, possessed by the trustee,
from his cestuique trust, either during the con-
tinuance of the trust or afterwards, would be in-
jurious to the interests of the cestuique trust. In all
such cases (of which trustees are supposed to be
cognizant) trustees will be visited with appropriate
penalties for such breach of trust, in violation of
their avowed duty. If such concealment arose from
corrupt motives of advantage to a trustee himself,
the animadversions of the court would be still more
severe against him.
All misconduct incurs a breach of trust, as the
word itself imports; and it may be made a cause of
liability even in cases where the trustee has acted
under legal advice; for a great authority (Lord
Redesdale) has said, (although he admitted that the
party meant to act honestly), “the court must pro-
ceed, not upon the improper advice under which the
party .may have acted, but upon the acts he has
done. If, under the best advice he could procure, he
acts wrong, it is his misfortune ; but public policy
requires that he should be the person to suffer.”
There may be an apparent hardship in a case of this
nature. But at least it shews the caution a trustee


ought to use in regulating his conduct by the highest
authority he can obtain in momentous cases, if he
do not choose to put himself wholly under the
superior guidance and the indemnity of the court.
It is not, however, meant that every instance of
error in a trustee’s proceedings will be visited with
severity by the court. But is it one thing to punish, and
another to allow an innocent person to suffer through
the error of one who ought to have been more cir-
cumspect. The case, I apprehend, must be pecu-
liarly strong in which the court would suffer loss to
fall upon the cestuigue trust. The following incident
will throw light upon this subject. In a settlement
before marriage, it was agreed that £2OOO in the
hands of a trustee should be laid out in land, the
trusts of which were, that the husband should
receive the rents during his life, and in case the
wife should survive him, then that she should receive
the rents for her life, and after the death of the
survivor of them, the estate was limited to the
children of the marriage equally ; but in case of the
husband’s dying without issue of the marriage, then
the land was limited to the widow absolutely ; but
if he survived her, then to him in fee. The husband
and wife were necessitous ; on which account the
trustee was induced to pay them a part of the fund,
which should have been so laid out in land, taking


their release and joint bond of indemnity; and after-
wards paid them more, amounting together to one
half of the trust fund, on similar indemnity, and with
a new agreement, that the remainder of the fund
should be laid out for the separate use of the wife as
long as she and the husband should live, and the
whole to go to the survivor. The trustee moreover
paid afterwards the remainder of the fund to the
husband, who died without issue, and left his wife
destitute. This certainly was a case of misconduct,
and perhaps as favourable a one to the trustee as
could well be imagined. Yet on a bill filed against
the representative of the trustee, he was decreed to
make good to the wife what was due in respect of
the whole fund, out of the trustee’s personal estate
in the course of administration, (a) Cases of this
description are numerous; but one example is suffi-
cient to shew the general rule, and the general
necessity for trustees to avoid liability to themselves
and their representatives, by adhering closely and
carefully to the terms of the instrument creating
them, and the trusts committed to them; if they do
not deem it absolutely necessary to put themselves
under the protection- and indemnity of a court of.
equity. With respect to any extraordinary divisions,
(a) 1 Atk. 615.


in the shape of bonus, amongst any proprietors of
stock, such bonus is considered not as interest but
capital, and as such not to be paid to a tenant for
life of the dividends, (a)
The compulsory payment of interest by trustees,
is another liability to which trustees- are exposed,
and which they ought to use all care to avoid.
Generally speaking, the court will not allow the
property of infants to remain unproductive; and
there are two predicaments under which it sometimes
does, and in consequence of which trustees are
visited penally by the court. One of those predica-
ments is, where the non-production of interest by the
trust fund has not, and the other where it has, been
advantageous to the trustee. In other words, the
difference is between the trust property being
suffered to be idle instead of diligently employing
it for the benefit of the party interested; and the
trustee’s using it for his own profit. If indulgence
be sometimes shewn to the defaults of the first
class, it never is to those of the other class. Trus-
tees, therefore, should not keep balances (beyond
necessary current expenditures) in their own hands,
unless they mean themselves to be responsible, not
only for its safety, (instead of paying it into court.
(a) 4 Ves. 800.


or investing in the funds, or on secure mortgage),
but also for legal interest. Sometimes the court will
consider such legal interest to be four, sometimes
five per cent., and will sometimes require even
higher interest than this, according to the circum-
stances, and the conduct, more or less culpable, and
more or less profitable to the trustee, as the case
may be. To guard against these liabilities (which
dishonest trustees often incur, though, perhaps, they
often escape also) a trustee should not forget, not
only that he is bound to do the best in his power,
or that circumstances will admit, for the benefit of
his cestuique trust; but that the law absolutely
forbids his turning his office of trustee to any advan-
tage at all to himself, by using for his own benefit, the
trust property, in any way whatever; guided by which
simple rules, a trustee cannot err in this quarter, (a)
The carrying on of trade or business also for the
objects of a trust estate, is a very hazardous expe-
dient ; for the trustee may easily make himself
responsible for various losses. He ought, therefore,
to abstain from such measures, unless under the
most explicit and clear direction of the party by
whom the trust was created, and by the instrument
of'creation itself, and even then, perhaps, seldom,
(n) 2 Madd. Ch. 135, 137; 2 548 ; Hilliard v. George, 2 Ca,
Foubl. 186; Lee e. Lee, 2 Vern. in Cha. 235; Willis, 178, 179.


unless in very clear and satisfactory cases indeed,
without the sanction of the court, (a)
The principal, if not only, source of justification to
trustees in dealing with trust property out of the
ordinary and approved way, sanctioned hy courts of
equity, is where cestuigue trusts legally competent, and
fully informed, nevertheless acquiesce in the trustee’s
proceedings. In such cases they are held to preclude
themselves from making claims they otherwise might
have done, where losses have occurred. But in all
such instances the trustee must distinctly shew that
those for whom he was trustee were completely in-
formed and aware of their rights in all respects
whatever, without any concealment or misrepresen-
tation at all on the part of the trustee. ( h ) Added
to'which must be, as before noticed, the terms and
directions of the trust instrument itself, whether
deed or will, to which, if trustees strictly conform,
they will not be deemed to fall under the charge of
grossly negligent, mistaken, or improper conduct.
But it must be remembered that doubts and diffi-
culties are not seldom found even in pursuing, inten-
tionally, at least, the directions of the authority
under which they act. In such cases to resort to
the' direction and consequent indemnity of a court
of equity, is the only safe course.
(a) Willis, 180. (6) 1 Russell, 297.


As an instance wherein it may be somewhat diffi-
cult to know the precise boundary to be set to the
meaning of the trust deed or instrument, the follow-
ing case may be selected as an intimation to trustees
to exercise not only the greatest caution, but even to
use the utmost discretion in estimating their very
powers. It is this: that where trustees are expressly
authorised to lend the trust property on real or per-
sonal security, they will not be justified in lending
it to a trader on his bond, (a) Here is to be observed
first, the jealousy which the courts of equity en-
tertain of trade as an investment of trust property, on
which there seems little occasion to animadvert,
considering trade in all its aspects ; and then, that
neither promissory notes, nor bonds, seem to consti-
tute that personal security which the court intends,
when the term is used with reference to the employ-
ment or investment of trust property. Notes and
bonds, in this point of view, appear to be looked
upon rather as evidence of debt, than as security. ( b )
Personal security therefore, for these purposes, must
mean something tangible, and convertible into
money; suppose chattel interests in land for houses,
but inferior to freehold or real property. Loans,
therefore, in any shape, or to any person whatever,
(a) Langston t. Ollivant, Coop. Rep. 33. (/>) 3 Swansf.


whether to any of the trustees themselves, though all
responsible, or to others, yet if not secured by actual
and valuable property, will be deemed improvident,
and subject a trustee to all consequences in case of
loss. With respect to public funds wherein to invest
the trust property, it has been already observed that
the three per cents are the only fund that will afford
trustees full indemnity. But South Sea, or other
similar stock, is not acknowledged by the court,
either for original investment, or wherein even to
suffer the trust property to remain, unless when they
have no authority given them, by the trust instru-
ment, to change securities. In such case it should
seem they are justified in allowing their continu-
ance; and would even change them at their own
risk in point of any loss]that may happen ultimately
to the fund. And where a trustee had unnecessarily
and without authority sold trust property, which
afterwards increased considerably in value, he was
decreed to account for the value which it bore, at
the time when he actually did obtain the authority
for its sale, (a)
It may have been gathered. from the preceding
statements, but is now expressly stated, that corrupt
motive is not essential for charging a trustee with
loss. Gross negligence, or even confidence mis-
(a) Pro. in Cha. 205; Hampson, 52.


placed, will make them liable: but this does not
extend to confidence placed in those Jin whom, as
well known and universally trusted, a trustee may
commit the trust property, under proper circum-
stances. This applies to bankers of acknowledged.re-
putation, and, perhaps, other public persons of similar
description. In these instances, however, care must
be taken to keep the account distinct, so that the
property be not mixed up with that of the trustee’s
own. (a)
Instances of co-trustees trusting each other inju-
riously to the trust property, are not wanting: but
even the circumstance of one trustee confiding in an
attorney, a co-trustee, will .not excuse a solvent
trustee so confiding, in case of loss through the
dishonesty of the trustee so confided in. Inactivity
will, in some cases, form a ground for charging one
trustee for the fault of another, where, by common
activity, that fault might have been prevented. For
if one trustee consent to the trust property remaining
in the hands of another trustee to whom it was con-
fided for a particular purpose, and that trustee do
not, in proper time, apply the money to the pur-
pose intended, it behoves the co-trustee to inform
(a) 4 Madd. Hep.


himself of its safety. At least he runs the hazard of
being charged for any misapplication if he do not.
Shades of difference in circumstances will, in all
cases, as may be supposed, vary the effect. One
remarkable instance may be of service for elucida-
tion. There were three trustees of money in the
funds under a marriage settlement, one of whom
was the confidential solicitor of the husband, and
a man of reputed great respectability. The settle-
ment authorized the trustees to sell out the funded
property with the consent of the husband and wife,
and to invest it in mortgage. The husband being
desirous of so doing, applied to his trustee and
friend, the solicitor, who acted for him also in that
professional capacity independently of the trustee-
ship. He communicated the matter to his co-
trustees, who confided in him unreservedly as a
professional man, and the friend of the husband ;
and at his suggestion they joined him in a power
of attorney, under which he sold out the stock then
standing (by having been previously transferred to
them) in their joint names in the books of the bank
of England. This they did under his information
that he had a mortgage ready wherein to invest the
money. Having received the money, however, the
trustee, the solicitor, instead of lending it on the
proposed security, applied it to his own uses, and


then absconded. The other two trustees were per-
fectly ignorant, but it may be said ought not to
have been so, of the non-application of this money by
their co-trustee, as intended. It may be considered
a difficult case, whether, under all the circumstances,
the innocent trustees ought to be burthened with
the loss thus occasioned by their too great confi-
dence in a co-trustee; yet there seems to be equal
difficulty in permitting, perhaps, a ruinous loss, hot
to the husband and wife alone, but to infant children,
the objects of the trust. But the trustees were
certainly remiss : they had not even obtained the
express consent or authority of the wife, even if
they had of the husband, to this change of the
security : and they should perhaps not have suffered
the produce of the stock (which never came to their
hands at all) to have been out of their custody
jointly with their co-trustee the solicitor. They
should have secured it either by placing it in the
hands of bankers or otherwise, until they had paid
it to the mortgagor and seen the mortgage deeds
executed. But it must be confessed this would have
involved milch contrariety to the usual course of
business in similar cases. Few trustees are so jealous
of each other as to have their separate solicitors, nor
in general, where a solicitor is a trustee, is he an
object of distrust. The consequence of these trans-
o


actions was a suit instituted by the husband, and
wife, and children, against the solvent trustees.
The peculiar hardship of the case on all sides, and
the peculiarity of the .circumstances (the leading
ones alone being here noticed) seems to have pre-
vented a speedy decision of, the court against the
trustees ; which, with some difficulties with which
the plaintiffs were encumbered in their case, appears
to have left the matter in an undetermined state, (a)
But it is a case much calculated to induce the utmost
circumspection in trustees, in all similar predicaments.
And in a case somewhat less strong in favour of the
trustees, it has been determined, that where they
voluntarily permit a co-trustee to receive purchase
money and retain it a considerable time without
calling for it, contrary to the trust, they are charge-
able with the loss occasioned by their co-trustee.
Nor in either of the last mentioned cases were thq
innocent trustees at all helped by the express clause
in the trust deed, that the trustees respectively should
not be answerable for more than what they should
individually receive, nor for the acts or defaults of
each other, but each for himself and his own acts
(«) This case occurred when evinced evident difficulty in
Lord Eldon was on the point balancing the various consi-
of retiring, and his lordship derations due to each party,


only. That clause is not considered as extending to
cases where trustees can be shewn to have been
deficient in due diligence and care. Another re-
markable instance of this nature was, where stock
belonging to a single woman Was settled, on her
marriage, upon trust, to pay the dividends to her for
her separate use; after her decease to the husband,
and after his decease to divide the principal among
the children. The trustees, with the wife’s privity,
sold the stock and paid the produce to the husband,
who died insolvent. The trustees not only replaced the
fund, but were decreed to pay the dividends to the
widow from the death of the husband with costs, (a)
And if money be given to a trustee upon trust to
be invested in the funds, and he retain it in his own
possession, paying the interest to the cestuique trust,
as if it had been, and representing it to have actually
been invested, he will be compelled to purchase the
same amount of stock' as the original sum would
have purchased, when he first possessed assets of
the testator sufficient for investment. ( b )
Executors and trustees differ in this, that, as to the
latter, it is considered that whoever pays money to the
credit of a trust estate may require all the trustees to
(n) 4 Ves. 129. (h) f! Madd. 235.
G 2


join in giving him a receipt. All trustees joining in
a receipt ar eprimd facie deemed to have received the
amount, and are answerable for it, unless they can
shew that the money was in fact received by only
some or one of the trustees, and that the rest joined
merely for conformity. Trustees should not there-
fore invest a co-trustee with unnecessary powers; as
one trustee is answerable for another with whom he
has concurred in acts not required for the manage-
ment of the trust estate, whether beneficial to the
rest or not. So that a trustee who suffers another
to hold trust money in his -hands upon the security
of his promissory note, is considered as equally
responsible for the loss with him who had the
money.(«) And if all trustees so join in a receipt
that it cannot be distinguished what they have sepa-
rately received, they will all be charged with the
whole. This consideration should induce correspond-
ing caution in those who thus make themselves
responsible for monies which never came into their
own 'custody, but only into that of a co-trustee.
Concealment has been already noticed as a means
of liability ; nearly connected with which is conniv-
ance. A trustee, therefore, besides being liable for
(a) 3 Bio. Cha. Ca. 111.


improper confidence placed in a co-trustee, is ,ame-
nable for concealment or connivance also, if he knows
of a breach of trust by a co-trustee, in misapplying
the trust property, and does not take proper steps
for bringing it back' into the joint power of those
to whose care it was entrusted, (a)
The foregoing statements do not apply to the
confidence reposed by trustees in bankers or other
accredited agents in whom confidence is usually
placed in the ordinary course of business. To
create liability to loss in such cases there must be
manifest negligence or want of due attention and
care.
There are also cases wherein a trustee may be
liable to others than those immediately interested in
the trust property. For, in case of a trusteeship of
real estate, if the property be to be sold, and the
trustee be cognizant of an incumbrance on it, mis-
representing the fact to a purchaser, he will be com-
pelled in equity primarily to make good the loss
sustained by the purchaser in consequence of such
fraudulent misrepresentation. ( b ) And so too if a
trustee enter into a contract for sale of the trust
(a) 11 Vcs. 327.
(b) 10 Vcs. jun. 470; Sugd. Vend. He Purch. 11.


estate, and is afterwards unable to make a good title,
be will be compelled to pay the purchaser his costs.
A trustee should in all cases consider how far he
may be making himself personally liable. There-
fore, in drawing or accepting a bill or note, he
should use express words to exempt himself from
such personal responsibility, by explicitly stipu-
lating that payment should be made out of the
trust funds; for a general indorsement would bind
him personally, («)
(n) Willis, 197.


CHAPTER VII.
OF THE REMOVAL AND THE RELEASE OF TRUSTEES.
The removal of trustees from their trusts on account
of their own misconduct; and their release from them
by their own desire, are subjects, especially the first,
of some interest.
Misconduct, inability, or a perverse refusal to act,
constitute the general or most usual causes for which
a court of equity will interpose for the benefit and
defence of trust property and the persons interested
in it, by removing trustees from their office. And
this is done by various accompanying circumstances,
according to the exact nature of the case; that is,
whether the removal be attended with the penal
visitation of the court in the way of costs or other-
wise, or not. The proceeding is rather a delicate
one ; and unjust or unreasonable complaints against
trustees will not be listened to; nor will the court


presume delinquency in them; it must be clearly
shewn. While dishonest trustees, therefore, should
remember they are exposed to every required animad-
version, those of a contrary character have nothing
to apprehend from fair investigation and exposure.
Justice will always be done to them. It may be
useful to advert cursorily to some of the more or-
dinary cases wherein the removal of trustees becomes
requisite, and will be effected by the court on the filing
of a bill for that purpose. Breach of trust where it is
apparently wilful and corrupt, and not merely con-
structive, arising from nice or difficult circumstances,
seems to be the first and leading cause of removal.
Though what amounts to breach of trust may be
gathered from the preceding pages, it seems right
for this purpose, and that trustees may have the
subject clearly before them, to mention some prin-
cipal instances. The court then, it should seem, will
remove trustees, and appoint others in their room,
in cases of gross misapplication of the income of the
trust estate, and especially where the trustee may be
incapable of making good the sums he has so mis-
applied. On such occasions it appears that the court
will direct the trust estate to be conveyed by the
delinquent trustees to other persons. ( a ) Also where
(n) 2 Bro. P. C.


trustees have actually been invested with a legal in-
terest, but refuse to undertake the trusts; in such case,
the court will appoint other persons to perform them.
The refusal to render just accounts when reasonably
required, is a plain instance of such misconduct as
would not he tolerated by the court; as well as
undue partialities in the exercise of the trust office;
the improper and corrupt lending of the trust money
upon personal security; or forbearing, from dis-
honest motives, to call money in at proper times;
refusing to join in conveyances for the benefit of the
trust estate, or of the parties interested in it; general
want of such care and attention, as a person would,
at least, pay to his own affairs and property; the
neglect of renewing leases, when the benefit of the
trust evidently requires it; the improper assign-
ment of terms of years, and improper execution of
deeds to destroy contingent remainders; the not
bringing trust property to sale, when the exigencies
of the trust require it; or injurious and corrupt pro-
ceedings on such occasions; general and obstinate
mismanagement from whatever cause. So also if a
trustee abscond for a criminal act, as forgery; or if
a female trustee marry a foreigner; or a trustee goes
abroad for permanent residence; or if the colleagues
of a trustee refuse to act with him. Bankruptcy
also is a ground for removal. The foregoing arc


some, leading instances wherein the court will re-
move a trustee. Analogy, and the foregoing chap-
ters on duty and liability, will supply all other
needful information..
The release of trustees from the burthen of their
trusteeship is yet another matter. Generally speak-
ing, the court will attend to a trustee’s wishes in
this respect, whether arising from incapacity, infir-
mity, or any other lawful; cause, rendering a con-
tinuance in the office either painful or injurious to
the trustee, or detrimental to the objects, of the
trust. In these cases, however, the court generally
directs enquiry to be made before the master (for
these applications must be by bill filed) whether the
trustee so desiring to be released and discharged,
remain accountable for any act done by him as
trustee. Yet in some cases.it is presumed, especially
where all the cestuique trusts are adult, and com-
petent, such applications by suit may be made, and
perhaps at the trustee’s instance often, merely to
obtain the decree of removal by the court, and
perhaps the appointment of new trustees and trans-
fers and conveyances to them, without the elaborate
and expensive process of taking the retiring trustees
accounts, where the cestuique trusts are perfectly
satisfied of their correctness. And so of other enqui-
ries. And it may be useful to add that where the


office expires by the completion of the trusts on the
coming of age of the cestuique trust, the trustee is
both entitled to, and ought in prudence to have, an
effectual release from all the trust concerns, and all
liabilities on account of them. But this had better
not be done until after a reasonable lapse of time,
in which their conduct might be investigated, which
would afford a greater protection against future
questions, and so add to the validity of the discharge
given. But a trustee, it is said, cannot, by any act
of his own, without communication with his cestuique
trust, denude himself of that character, till he has
performed his trust, (a)
(«) IJ. W. 08.




CHAPTER VIII.
OF CLAUSES IN DEEDS OR WILLS FOR THE INDEM-
NITY OF TRUSTEES AND OTHER PURPOSES.
Marriage settlements, wills, or other instruments
creating trusts, should, and usually do, contain
various clauses, as well for the indemnity of trustees
in the cases about to be mentioned, as for other
purposes of the trust. The prominent clauses of
the first description are, first, those which declare
that each trustee shall not be accountable for the
acts or defaults of his co-trustee or co-trustees, but
each for his own acts only. It is true indeed that
generally speaking, the courts of equity will imply
this protective clause in favor of all trustees, and act
upon such implication; but the express insertion of
the clause shuts the door against all doubt or possi-
bility of misconstruction or mistake, and trustees have


a right to its benefit. Similar to this clause is that
for exempting trustees individually from being re-
sponsible for any greater or other suras of money, or
personal property, than shall actually come to their
respective hands. This clause, though, like the for-
mer, it is in general presumed and acted upon by
the court, still ought not to be omitted in the instru-
ment creating the trust, because it expressly shews
the parties’ intentions, a matter which is sometimes of
great importance; and no one can tell when it may
not be of importance. At the same time, as has
been before remarked, the insertion of this defensive
clause is not permitted to operate to the prejudice
of the trust property merely by the force of the
terms of the clause itself, in cases where one or
more trustees have either corruptly or negligently,
or with too little care, though otherwise innocently,
permitted a co-trustee to alienate or make away
with, or convert to his own use any part of the trust
property, to the detriment of the cestuique trusts.
In such cases, unless, as has been seen, under very
peculiar circumstances, the innocent trustee or
trustees will be made to sustain the losses occasioned
by the malversation of their co-trustee. Still, a trust
deed would be defective without the clause accord-
ing to established usage, and for the beforementioned


purpose of at least shewing the intentions of the
parties. And this clause is usually intended pro-
tectively to the trustees against all losses not arising
from their own misconduct personally. Another
clause intimately connected with these and equally
requiring insertion in the instrument of trust, is that
which authorizes the trustees to reimburse them-
selves out of the money they may receive, all the
costs, charges and expences which may be justly
incurred by them in the execution of the trusts. The
strict propriety of this clause is easily deducible
from the perfectly gratuitous nature of the office of
trustee, and his not being entitled, as before stated,
to any allowance for his care and trouble in the
execution of the trust. The least return, therefore,
that can be made to a trustee is, to guarantee the
re-payment of all monies properly laid out by him,
and all expences properly incurred. The preceding
clauses are intended to obviate all doubts of any
liability attaching to a trustee who has joined in
receipts for the sake of conformity, or unavoidably
sustained any loss in the execution of the trust.
But with respect to the' clause of reimbursement,
it may be added, that independently of it, if casually
omitted, and nothing appear to the contrary, a
trustee is, by established rules in equity, entitled to


those allowances, in all cases not affected by mis-
management or breach of trust, (a) Such allowances
also, if requisite, are extended to the expences of
employing a. bailiff, accountant, or attorney, (b)
It has already been stated in what cases com-
pensation for trouble may, against the general
rule, be claimed by a trustee, and the modes of
obtaining it.
In trustinstruments also, a power is very generally
inserted, enabling the trustees to change the securi-
ties on which the trust funds may be invested.
Without such express authority trustees have not
authority to change those securities, however bene-
ficial or desirable to the trust estate. The want of
this power is sometimes severely felt, though some
more cautious persons have abstained from giving it,
especially where the funds have been of a satisfactory
description. The principal desideratum of such au-
thority is to enable trustees to sell government
securities when it may be done advantageously, and
to enable them to invest the produce in other securi-
ties (real securities in the way of mortgage for
instance) at better interest. But individuals have
(a) 2 Fonbl. on Eq. 176. (6) lb. and 2 Madd. Clia. 158.


in their own case often, it must be confessed, suf-
fered by so doing, from the depreciation of their
mortgage securities in value. One instance in illus-
tration of this subject may be noticed. A testator
gave to his wife a life interest in all his funded pro-
perty, and authorised the trustees at their own dis-
cretion to alter and vary the securities wherein the
trust property was invested. Part of the trust
property consisted of long annuities. The residuary
legatees, wishing for their own benefit to have these
annuities changed into three per cent consols, filed a
bill for the purpose of directing and authorising the
trustees so to do. But although it was contended
that the long annuities were a perishable fund, yet
the court refused to compel the trustees to change
them into consols for the benefit of the residuary
legatees, holding that the power was not given to
alter the relative rights of the legatees, but with a
view to the security of the property, (a)
On this subject it may be not amiss to add, that
where the ground of a power is personal confidence,
it is apparently limited to the original trustees, and
does not, without express words, pass to others, to
whom, by legal transmission, the same character may
(a) 4 Madd. Rep. 455.


happen to belong. Such power, therefore, cannot
for that specific purpose be executed by the devisees
and executors of the surviving trustee, (a) The
clauses in deeds and wills, however, do, most usually,
extend the powers expressly not only to the survivor
and survivors of the trustees first appointed, but the
heirs, or executors, or administrators (according to
the nature of the property whether real or personal)
of the last surviving trustee.
(a) 1C Ves.


CHAPTER IX.
OF THE INDEMNITY AND PROTECTION OF TRUSTEES
BY COURTS OF EQUITY.
The legal exclusion of trustees from all remuneration,
profit, and advantage whatever to arise from the
gratuitous office confided to them, has been often
noticed in the foregoing pages. But their exemp-
tion from all loss, expence, and risk, so long as they
perform their duties properly, is no less an object
which equity keeps in view on their behalf.
On one occasion Lord Eldon is reported to have
thus expressed himself on this subject. “Itis in the
nature of the office of a trustee, whether expressed
in the instrument or not, that the trust property shall
reimburse him all the charges and expences incurred
in the execution of the trust. That is implied in


every trust deed” (a) Upon another occasion his
lordship is reported to have said ( b ) “ The Court of
Chancery infuses a clause of indemnity to trustees
in every will, though not directed.” The following
positions have also been laid down from high autho-
rity, viz., “ Trustees are entitled to the protection and
direction of the Court of Chancery in the execution
of their trusts, whenever their conduct may otherwise
lead them to incur responsibility, and their motives
are not obviously vexatious ; ” and “ that they are
equally entitled to such assistance as plaintiffs or
defendants in a suit; and must have their costs out
of the trust fund, whether it be large or small.” (c)
The mutuality of interests which subsists between
the party confiding and the party confided in, in all
trusts, has been before noticed; and a similar obser-
vation may be made as to the anxiety of a court of
equity to extend its power and protection indiffer-
ently, and with an equal hand to both parties. The
one it will not suffer to be injured or defrauded by
the unfair, or iniquitous, or mercenary views of a
trustee; nor the latter to be damnified by his zealous
and faithful execution of trusts committed to him,
and from which he was to derive only trouble. It
(a) Worrall v. Harford, 8 Vcs. 8. (i) Dawson v. Clarke, 18 Ves. 251.
(<•) 3 Madd. 178; (i Madd. 123.
ii 2


seems, therefore, to he the least that can be done for
such persons, to secure them from damage. To
honest trustees, therefore, the courts of equity are
ever open for their guidance, protection, and indem-
nity, which they may resort to with freedom and with
confidence. Still this is not meant to oppose what
has been before said, of the equal propriety of
trustees abstaining from that course otherwise than
in cases fairly and reasonably calling for it.
Cases do, sometimes, occur in the execution of
trusts, when not under the superintendence of the
court, wherein trustees are under a kind of necessity
of going somewhat beyond the strict rule of their
authority, in order to prevent injury to the trust
estate for want of timely expenditure. There are
instances in which, although trustees exceed their
powers, they will nevertheless not only be exempt
from imputation of misconduct, but will come under
those principles which induce courts of equity to
protect trustees from loss or prejudice ; but this is
doubtless to be understood of those. cases in which
trustees, without having applied to a court of equity,
have done that which the court, on their application,
would have approved, (a)
(a) A Ves. 309; 7 Ves. 150.


But although the courts of equity are thus dis-
posed to protect and indemnify trustees against all
loss or damage ; that protection will not be extended
to cases wherein expences have been either impro-
perly, erroneously, or uselessly incurred, (a) These
distinctions are sometimes rather nice, and require
proportionate consideration • for it has often hap-
pened that the Court of Chancery has refused to
allow trustees to be reimbursed out of the trust pro-
perty, those monies which they have expended, even
beneficially, for their infant cestuique trust in their
maintenance and education, when such expenditure
has amounted to more than the interest of the trust
fund. This severity arises from the general rule
laid down by the court, that the capital of infants’
property shall not be broken in upon for any other
purposes than those of apprenticing or putting them
out in life. (6)
There is one instance of peculiar description in
which the protection of the court will be extended
to trustees, in the case of trustees to preserve con-
tingent remainders; of which it has in a former page
been said, that trustees should be very cautious in
their proceedings. Although, therefore, it has been
declared by Lord Eldon to be the safest rule of
(a) Barnard, 37; 1 Jacob. (i) Freeman, 77; 6 Vcs.


conduct for trustees of this description, never to join
in destroying contingent remainders they were ap-
pointed to preserve, without the direction of a court
of equity, (and there are some circumstances under
which courts of equity have directed them so to do),
yet where trustees had joined in a recovery after
the tenant in tail in remainder was of age, even in
a case in which they would not have been directed to
join in destroying the remainders; his lordship has
stated that no judge in equity had ever held that he
would punish such trustees as for a breach of trust, (a)
The case, however, would appear to be different if
such an act by the trustees had occurred before the
first tenant in tail in remainder was of age. ( b ) If
then, in the case here noticed, a trustee should act
inadvertently, but incorrectly, and a suit should be
instituted against him on that account, and to compel
him to make restitution by purchasing and settling
other lands, the court, it should seem, would protect
and indemnify him therefrom. But the cases are too
hazardous to justify trustees acting on their own
authority.
(a) Moody r. Walters, 16 128; Sir, E. Mansell v. Man-
Vcs. 283. sell, 2 P. Wins. 678.
(i) Pye v. Gorge, 1 P. Wins.




CHAPTER X.
OF SUITS.
A few remarks,, by- way .of general information,
respecting -the suits to which trustees, either as
plaintiffs or defendants, are liable, though not of
frequent occurrence, may yet be useful. Such suits
respect either real or personal property according to
the description of.the trust.
In case of trusteeship , respecting real property,
although, as has been seen, the cestuique trust, i. e.
the person beneficially interested in the trust property,
has an estate, in equity equivalent to the legal owner-
ship ; yet all suits at law, should occasion arise for
the institution of .any, must be instituted in the
trustee’s name as being the ostensible owner, and the
person actually in the legal seizin, (a) And it is
(a) 1 Sand.


also the province of a trustee to be the plaintiff at
law in suits to recover debts for the use of his ces-
tuique trust. Even bankruptcy will not divest a
person of this duty; for if (as the law now stands)
a bankrupt assigns his interest in a debt to another
person, such bankrupt may still bring his action for
the benefit of his assignee: the bankrupt in this case
being merely a trustee (by implication) for the person
to whom the assignment was made. On which Mr.
Willis observes, (a) “ that a legislative enactment to
enable the assignee of a chose in action” (which this
debt so assigned was) to sue at law in his own name,
might perhaps be productive of great public utility.”
Where, however, trustees have only a civil remedy,
it will not be converted into a criminal one for them.
With respect to suits which trustees are exposed
to have instituted against them, they may arise as
well to public trustees as private. The latter we are
particularly engaged with. Where trustees, there-
fore, hold lands for a cestuique trust for a term of
years, or other limited periods, it is enacted by the
statute 6 Anne, c. 18, that trustees holding even after
the determination of their interests, shall be con-
sidered as trespassers, and in that character be liable
to be sued. But as to cestuique trusts themselves.
(a) p. 20(3, n. 11.


and their trustees, it appears to be now considered
as a general rule, that no action at law by the
former will hold against their trustees. Their remedy
is in equity. This rule, however, is subject to mo-
dification ; for if a trustee receive money on account
of his cestuique trust, in such case it should seem
that an action of assumpsit lies for the cestuique trust
against such trustee for money had and received.
An instance or two may be pertinent. One is in the
case of trustees of stock under the marriage settle-
ment of a bankrupt. The trustees, for the purpose
of paying the dividends to the bankrupt during his
life, gave him a power of attorney to receive them.
This he did until his bankruptcy, and the trustees
then executed a power of attorney to another person,
who received three half yearly dividends, two of
which were paid over to the bankrupt’s wife, and the
third was retained. On an action being brought for
money had and received, it was adjudged that the
whole was recoverable. ( a ) The other case was, where
the holder of a bill of exchange, who held it in trust
for one who sued the drawer, and, pending the suit,
became bankrupt; and his assignee afterwards brought
an action against the drawer in the bankrupt’s name ;
(a) Alien v. Irnpctt, 8 Taunt. 263; S. C. 2 Moore, p. 240;
Willis, 210.


in which action the sheriff having suffered an escape
on mesne process, the assignees of the original holder
of the bill recovered against the sheriff in an action for
such escape, damages to the amount of the bill; it
was held that the party beneficially entitled to the
bill, might maintain an action for money had and
received, against the assignees of the bankrupt, for
the damages recovered, allowing them the costs and
expences. (a)
Courts of equity are the tribunals which almost
exclusively exercise jurisdiction in matters of trust;
over which the ecclesiastical courts have no jurisdic-
tion ; and if a trustee be arrested and committed by
ecclesiastical process for not exhibiting an inventory
and account of the goods of a testator, he will be
discharged out of custody upon habeas corpus.
Trustees may have relief in equity against their
co-trustees for breach.of trust; consequently all trus-
tees are liable to be so sued. (6) But as to the parti-
cular circumstances under which it may or may not
be requisite, in conformity to the rules of practice,
to make trustees parties defendants' to many suits,
that is a matter for the determination of the profes-
sional advisers of trustees rather than for that of trus-
( n ) Randall r. Bel], IM. &S. (6) Tranes v. Tranes, 3 Ves.
Rep. 714. . 75.


tees themselves. Any bill filed against trustees not
guilty of misbehaviour will be dismissed with costs, (a)
Whether trustees can be called upon to act in the
execution of their trusts, by parts, seems doubtful, (b)
But in cases where several trustees are involved in
one common breach of trust, they may be proceeded
against either jointly, or separately; (c) and even
persons participating •of the wrong may be so pro-
ceeded against,having become trustees by implication.
This may happen in the case of partnerships, where
one or more of several partners are trustees, and
apply the money arising by sale of the trust property
to the purposes of the partnership with the knowledge
of the others ; the latter are implied trustees, who, as
well as the actual trustees, may be proceeded against
at the option of the cestuique trust. And in case of
bankruptcy the debt may also be proved against
their joint estate, {d)
By way of limiting, within a reasonable period,
the liability of trustees and their representatives to
suits, it is laid down, that where there have been
laches on the part of the cestuique trust, in not
(a) Middleton v. Lord Ken- (c) Walker v. Symonds, 3
yon, 2 Ves. 391. Swanst. Rep. 77.
(b) Smith v. Snow, 3 Madd. (d) Expartc Watson, 2 Ves.
Rep. 11. 5c Rea. 414.


asserting his right; an account of the rents and
profits of the trust estates which have been mis-
applied, will be confined to the time of the filing of
the bill, (a) And the courts of equity much dis-
courage the calling for accounts from the representa-
tives of an accounting party deceased, if he lived
long enough to have accounted in his life time. On
a similar principle, claims made after considerable
lapse of time have always been unfavourably received,
in courts of equity. (Z») What such lapse of time
would be held to be, as a bar to or discouragement of
suits, may depend upon the peculiar circumstances
of each case. Few cases perhaps would be counte-
nanced beyond the period of eighteen or twenty
years, (c) In cases of suits, however, against
trustees for breaches of trust, wherein there may
have existed any circumstances of concurrence or
acquaintance on the part of the cestuique trust, the
court will always enquire strictly into those circum-
stances ; but although the party beneficially inter-
ested may have done an act which places the trustee
in a different situation in regard to relief against
third persons ; yet, if under the circumstances, the
(a) Pctliward v. Prescott, 7 Jac. and Walk. 62, 63.
Ves. 340. (c) Ibid.
(A) Chalmer r. Bradley, 1


act may be considered as that of the trustee rather
than of the cestuique trust, it will not preclude the
latter from relief, (a) And, as between the trustee
and the cestuique trust, the statute of limitations is
not a good plea in bar to an equitable charge ; and
even interest on a debt will be decreed after a great
length of time, if there be not sufficient grounds for
presuming a release. ( b )
(a) Walker v. Symonds, 3 (i) Beames on Pleas, 168.
Swanst. 61, 64.




CHAPTER XI.
OF COSTS AND ALLOWANCES.
It is the usual course of the Court of Chancery
to allow to trustees appointed by an instrument which
legally passes the property to them, their just and
necessary costs, charges and expences, whenever such
trustees have, without any default of their own, been
involved in proceedings either at law or in equity
respecting the trust estate. These costs are intended
to indemnify them entirely from expence ; not being
merely the taxed costs between ordinary parties
to suits, but costs as between solicitor and client,
which extend to the allowance of many charges
not allowed in the taxed costs between party and
party. Indeed, without these latter costs, trustees
never could receive that full indemnification and


exemption from loss, which the courts of equity
ever intend they shall receive. This rule is perhaps
departed from, and costs as between party and party
only given, where a bill is dismissed against a
trustee, (a) It not unfrequently happens, that trus-
tees expend money by reasonably and properly
taking counsel’s opinions for their directions in the
necessary execution of their trusts. These expences,
therefore, when cautiously incurred, are not usually
refused to be granted to the trustee by the court,
under the description, not of costs strictly, but of
“ just allowances.” (6) It is impossible, accurately,
to enumerate the species of disbursements, charges
and expences, which will be allowed to a trustee
under the head of just allowances. But generally
speaking, whatever the trustee can shew to have
been reasonably, judiciously, beneficially, and bond
fide expended by him out of the trust funds, for the
benefit and advantage of the trust estate, and the
parties interested in it, and which could not have
been avoided or withholden without detriment to
them, will be allowed. Still, in cases where any
very considerable expenditure is contemplated, the
(a) 2 Russell, 112. (h) 19 Ves. 205


safer course would certainly be, to act under the
direction of the court, procured through a reference
to the master. Much expence and trouble may be
saved by this proceeding. Ordinary and reasonable
sums actually paid to solicitors, bailiffs, or others in
managing the trust property, are among those which
are allowed to trustees without difficulty ; even
payments to accountants are not refused in cases
appearing to require their assistance, (a) There
seems to be some uncertainty however, as to the
allowance to trustees of the expences they may have
been at in employing agents in the receipt of rents,
instead of receiving the rents themselves : although
it appears, that in some cases trustees have been
allowed by the court the expence of employing a
collector to receive the rents of a trust estate,
notwithstanding their testator had bequeathed a
small annuity to them expressly for the care and
trouble they might have in the execution of the
trusts, (i) But upon the whole there appears little
ground to doubt of such allowances being granted
by the court ultimately, even should they be dis-
allowed by the master in passing a trustee’s accounts
comprising such charges, in the first instance ;
(a) 3 Macld. (A) 2 Bro. C. C. (i(i3-2; 2 Simons and Stuart, 237.


because the-court..is well aware that the expence
of employing an agent to collect rents (which
trustees are not expected to do personally if too
troublesome or burthensome), is much less than that
of obtaining the appointment of a receiver’ by the
court, through the expensive, medium of a suit, in
addition to the greater allowances that would be
made to such receiver, • than to an ordinary agent
or collector.
On' the other hand, the court holds the reins in
allowing trustees . their costs, and exercises its dis-
cretion in judging both of the justness and expe-
diency of such costs, before allowing them. As to
their expediency, one case may be noticed which
may serve as a general rule or guide on this branch
of the subject. It is a case wherein, in one instance,
the court allowed the costs incurred, and in another
instance refused them: but in both instances the
trustees, though acting fairly and with integrity
for the benefit of the parties* had,, in a case of
magnitude, incurred large expences without such a
sanction from the court as is just above recoirimended.
The instances now adverted to' are those of two
distinct applications to Parliament. In one, the
court alloived the costs of the application, though
made without its previous sanction, but which had
succeeded. In the other instance of a similar kind,
i


but in which the application was unsuccessful, the
court refused the costs, although the failure had
arisen from accidental circumstances, and the trustees
had acted from proper motives. The fault in the
trustees was, having ventured, on their own autho-
rity and without the sanction of the court, to institute
so expensive a process as an application to Parlia-
ment, without a previous application for a reference
to the Master to enquire if such proceeding was
a proper one . under the circumstances. Had that
sanction been obtained, a failure in the application
to Parliament would not have been thrown upon
the trustees. And the reason why Lord Eldon gave
their-costs to the successful applicants, is stated to
have been, as declared by his lordship, in making a
distinction between the two cases, “ that he con-
sidered the Court of Chancery could not, with any
propriety, dispute the prudence of measures, although
taken without, its sanction, which the legislature
itself had enacted as prudent.” (a)
Some few instances may be added in which trus-
tees have been either denied full costs, or all their
costs. Thus, in what appears to have been a flagrant
case on the part of a trustee, and where the contract,
in question in the suit, was by no means meritorious;
(a) 2 Russ. 51U.


Lord Thurlow on being asked for the costs of the
trustee in that deed, is reported to have said with
some warmth, “ I shall not give him his costs. Let
those who manufactured the deed give them to
him.” (ay The circumstance of trustees acting with
obstinacy or caprice will also induce the court either
to deny or abridge their costs ; and still more so if
they have acted from self-interest, and from a view
to the determination of questions respecting their
own rights or claims in the institution of any suit.
Trustees also have been deprived of their costs where
the suit was occasioned by their mistake or negli-
gence, though without any corrupt motive, (b) Also
where they have set up a trust different from the
real one ; also where the character of the trust was
suspicious ; also where the trustees had overcharged
the trust estate. And in one case, though without
any imputation on the trustee, but from consideration
of the hardship of the circumstances upon the plain-
tiff, (the trustees being defendants), and the court
thought he, the plaintiff, ought not to pay costs, the
trustees were left to their remedy against their ces-
tuique trust. (c )
Not only are trustees, however, sometimes deprived
(a) Colman v. Sand, 1 Ves.ss. (A) Caffrcy v. Darby, OVcs. 488.
(e) Beanies on Costs, 149, 150.
i 2


of all, or abridged of their own full costs, but in cases
of peculiar misconduct they have been made to pay the
costs of others also: though where the misconduct
has been slight, and the trustees have been charged
with payment of interest by way of compensation,
the payment of costs, and even the abridgement of
their own has not been insisted upon, (a) An instance
of gross misconduct may be, where a trustee forces
his cestuique trust into court, by the filing of a bill,
to settle some point relative to the trustee’s private
interest, unconnected with the trust. Here the trus-
tee has been visited in the severest manner in regard
to costs. In this class of delinquency may also be
comprised the case of a trustee’s admitting, by his
answer to a bill filed against him, that he had in
his possession certain deeds to which his cestuique
trust was entitled, but which the trustee, that Jie
might continue to withhold them, did not particu-
larize in his answer. A trustee’s refusing to join in
a conveyance; or selling trust property with a stipu-
lation for his own private interest; or being guilty
of improper concealments; or attempting to purchase
the trust property; in such and similar instances,
it appears that trustees will be charged with the
payment of costs, (b) And in general it may be
(a) Sonnies r. Hickman,2 Ves. jun.3G. ( b) Bcaraes, passim, on Costs.


concluded, that, with all the favour, indulgence, and
protection shewn to trustees by a court of equity,
still there is required of them both unimpeachable
integrity, and all reasonable care and circumspection,
when thus voluntarily undertaking, in a trust capa-
city, the care, and protection, and management, of
the property and interests of others. More especially
are all these qualities required of trustees when
married women or infants are the subjects of the
trust. But upon the whole it may be said, that the
courts of equity, though thus regardful of the conduct
of trustees, yet appreciating the importance of their
office to society, and being, therefore, unwilling to
infuse a general dread of undertaking it, are anxious
so far as possible with justice to others, not to inflict
upon them the consequences of their mismanage-
ment. ( a )
(a) 3 Atk. 444; Jeremy, Eq. Juris, of Ch. 145.


ADDENDUM.
In farther illustration of the necessity there is for
trustees acting with the utmost caution in con-
formity to their trusts, as noticed in page 44, the
following instance may be adduced. On the mar-
riage of a plaintiff in a suit against a trustee, a
sum, of stock, was invested in the names of two
trustees, in trust as to the dividends, to pay them
to the wife (this plaintiff) for her life, and after
her death the principal to her children, as therein
mentioned. The settlement contained a power to
the wife during her life, and after her death to the
guardians of the children, to appoint a new trustee
in the place of any trustee who should die or desire
to retire from the trust; and in case any trustee
should decline the trust, the settlement directed
that such retiring trustee should assign the trust
property to the new trustee so to be appointed in
his place, and the continuing trustee, jointly. This,
in fact, is the usual practice. One of the trustees
became desirous of retiring from the trust, and
another trustee was appointed in his stead; to
which new trustee the stock was not assigned, in


conjunction with the continuing trustee, as it ought
to have been, according to the abovementioned direc-
tion of the settlement. This new trustee accepted the
trust by signing the deed of appointment; but, be-
fore he had acted in the trust, became also desirous
of retiring from it; and a deed appointing the con-
tinuing trustee to be sole trustee, was prepared ac-
cordingly, to which the wife, and the present retiring
trustee, were made parties , though he did not execute
it. After this, the trustee, who had first retired,
transferred the trust stock into the name of the con-
tinuing sole trustee alone; which was certainly a
departure from his duty under the settlement, and
in which he was therefore ill advised, though inno-
cent of ill intention. The continuing sole trustee,
in whom the stock was thus solely vested, afterwards
sold it at the request of the wife and of such of the
children as had attained the age of twenty-one, and
took their indemnity for what he did. There were
other infant children of the marriage, who were
interested in the funds under the settlement. It was
alleged that the stock was thus sold to purchase an
annuity for the life of the widow', to increase her
income. The widow, and one of the children who
had joined in the indemnity, together with one of
the infant children, then filed a bill against both the
original trustees, viz. he who first retired, and had
transferred the stock so improperly into the sole


name of the remaining trustee, as well as. against
that remaining trustee also, praying, that for this
abuse, or breach of trust, both might be responsible
for the stock so parted with, though at the instance
of the widow and children themselves. This was
deemed by the court a very hard case on the first
retiring trustee, who had so ill advisedly, though
innocently, transferred-the'stock, not indeed into
the joint names of the new and continuing trustee,
as he should have done, but into that of the latter
alone, which gave the latter the power he so wrong-
fully exercised,.of parting with .the trust property
directly against the trusts of the settlementbut as
that trustee made default at the hearing, the court
determined, on the ground of .all the authorities,
that the trustee who first retired, and so imprudently
transferred the stock to the remaining trustee alone,
was himself liable to the whole responsibility, and
decreed against him accordingly (a).
The above. is a striking proof of the propriety
of trustees not suffering themselves, to be ever ad-
vised to deviate from, the plain requisition of the
instrument creating their authority, and pointing
out their duty.'
(«) Wilkinson v. Parry, 4 Russ. Rep. 272.




INDEX.
ABSENT TRUSTEES— PA ° E '
Act respecting Trustees abroad, see Advertisement
ACCEPTANCE—
of trust, considerations on . . . . 32
when refused . . . . . 21, 89
ACCIDENTAL LOSS—
from bankers, or accredited persons . . . 79,85
ACCOUNTS—
trustees’ duty in regard of . ■ . 40
ACCOUNTANT—
as to employment of, by trustees . . .112
ACCUMULATION—
of trust property by trustees, in case of infants espe-
cially, as to . . . . . 45
ADMINISTRATORS- *
when they become trustees .... 0
AGENTS—
accredited, losses by . . • . . . 85
ALIENATION—
by trustee, of trust property, how far operative . . 8
ALLOWANCE—
to trustees for their trouble, when permitted . . 40
ALLOWANCES, Just—
to trustees, instances of . . . . 11l


Pace.
APPOINTMENT—
of trustees, considerations on . . . 22
of new trustees, as to .... 51,90,129
ATTAINDER—See Treason.
BALANCES—
as to trustees retaining ..... 46, 74
BANKRUPTCY—
of trustee, how trust property affected by . . 10,11
BENEFIT—
as to trustees deriving, from trust property . . . 43, 62
BONDS—
how to he regarded by trustees in point of security . 77
BONUS—
on stock, how considered . . . . . 73
BOOKS—
as to production of to cestuique trust ... 46
BREACH OF TRUST—
acts constituting ..... 67, 129
different visitations of, in point of costs . . 114, 115, 116
BURTHENS—
IegaI, how trustees affected by . . . .10
BUSINESS—
as to carrying on with trust property . . . 69, 75
CAPITAL—
of infants’ fortune, how regarded by the Court . . 61, 101
CESTUIQUE TRUST—
when entitled to possession, and whten not . . . 9, 48
acquiescence of, in regard to trustees' proceedings . 76
CHANCERY SUITS—
as to expediency of instituting by trustees . . 29
CHANGING SECURITIES—
power or duty of trustees therein . . . . 54, 78
CHILDREN—
as to mortgaging for portions of . . . 50
as to the time of raising portions for ... 55
as to maintenance of . . . .60


Page.
CLAIM—
of trustees on trust property, how inconsistent with the
office . . . . . . . 42 •
COMMITTEES—
of lunatic trustees, act respecting—See Advertisement.
COMPENSATION—
to trustees for trouble, in what cases given . . 39, 40
CONCEALMENT—
of information from cestuique trust, how regarded . . 71
CONCURRENT Leases—
may be granted by trustees . . . . '53
CONDITIONS—
when annexed to trustees’ powers, as to . . . 53
when in restraint of marriage, as to . . 56
precedent or subsequent, what . . . . 57
CONFIDENCE—
when limited to original trustees . . . . 6, 96
CONSENT—
of trustees, in what cases necessary to vesting of
estates or legacies . . . . . 58, 59
constructive, what ..... 69
CONTINGENT REMAINDERS—
. trustees to preserve, as to . . .16
when breach of trust incurred by them or not . . 101
CONTRACT—
when to be made good by trustee (See Purchase ) . 85
CONVEYANCES—
trustees’ duty as to, for cestuique trust’s benefit . 48
COSTS—
of trustees, expediency as to . . . . 113
fully given, or withheld, or trustees liable to those of
others 114,116
CO-TRUSTEES—
as to their acting amicably together . . . 26,29
as to their joint power . . . . . 51
mutual confidence ..... 79
institution of suits against each other . . . 106


Pace.
COURT—
application to by trustees, when sanctioned, . . 44, 55
COUNSEL—
as to resorting to the advice and assistance of, hy
trustees . . . . . . C 2, 111
CREDITOR—
trust property, how amenable in aid of . .50
CROWN—
the rights of, on attainder of trustee . . . 12
DEBTS—
as to raising and paying, hy trustees . . . 50,01
retaining out of trust property . . . 52
DEFENCE OF TITLE—
of cestuique trust, the trustee’s duty . . . 48
DESCENT —See devolution of trusts.
DEVISE—See devolution of trusts.
DEVOLUTION OF TRUSTS—
by descent . . . . . . 4, 5
by devise . . . . . Ib.
by personal representation . . . 5
DISABILITIES—
of trustees, instances of . . . . ... 02
DISBURSEMENTS—
of trustees, how considered . . - 94,112
DISTRIBUTION—
of funds, hy trustees . . . . 01
DONATION—
by cestuique trust to trustees, how regarded . . 44
DOWER—
trustees to bar, as to . . . . 10
DUTIES—
of trustees —See Chap. IV. and . . . 129
ECCLESIASTICAL COURT—
has no jurisdiction, where ' ... . 100
EXPENCES—
of trustees ..... 94,112


Paob.
EXPENDITURE—
for maintenance of children . . . (iO
improvident ..... 100, 101
EXPEDIENCY—
as to costs . . . . . .113
EXECUTORS—
distinction between, and trustees . . . 83
FATHER—
his inability to maintain his children, how regarded . CO
FELONY—
■ of trustees, its effects on trust property . . 12
FEME COVERTE—
express consent of, when necessary . . 80,81,117
FINES—
on renewal, as to advancement of . . . 61
FUNDS—
as to application of . . . .61
public, which most eligible for trust purposes . .GO, 78
GRANTEE—
fraudulent, considered a trustee by implication . 20
HElR—
when trustee by devolution . . . . 5
IDlOT—
trustee, act respecting—See Adi'ertisement.
IMPLIED TRUSTS—
what circumstances constitute . . 18,19
IMPLICATION—
trusts by . . . • .18,19
IMPROVIDENCE—
of trustee, how regarded . . . . .45, 101
INDEMNITY—
of trustees, by deed ... . . . 92
express, by the court . . . . 98


Page.
INFANT—
trustees, act respecting—See Advertisement
INFORMATION—
necessary to be obtained by trustees, and rendered to
cestuique trusts ..... 40
INSOLVENT TRUSTEE 12
INSOLVENT ACT Ih.
INSANITY—
of trustee —See Lunatic.
INVESTMENT—
of trust monies, as to . • . . . 45
on what security ..... 47
improvident . . . . 09
INTEREST—
of trust property . . . . .45
as to charging trustees with . . . . 74,75
JURISDICTION—
trustees, when out of, act respecting—See Advertisement.
KlNG—
his rights on attainder of a trustee ... 12
LACHES—
of trustee, as to . . . . 30
LEASES—
as to trustees granting . ... 63
and renewing . . . . . . 08
when implied trusts . ... 18
reversionary or concurrent . . . . 63
LIABILITIES—
of trustees —See Chap. VI.
LOANS—
as to, hy trustees .... 77
LUNATlC—
trustee, act respecting—Sec Advertisement.


Pace.
MAINTENANCE—
of infants, as to . . . . . . GO, 101
MANAGEMENT—
of trust property, as to . . . . . 45
when to be given to cestuiqne trust or not . . 10, 48
MARRIAGE SETTLEMENT—
as a trust instrument, observations on . . . 23
MISCONDUCT—
of trustees, as to . . . .71, 87, 89,129
corrupt motive not essential to . . 78, 129
costs respecting . . . . . . 11G
MORTGAGES—
in what cases trustees may make ... 50
MORTGAGEES—
when trustees by implication . . . . 20
NEW TRUSTEES—
as to appointment of ... 54, 129
NEGLIGENCE—
in trustees . . . . . . 3C, 129
NOTES OF HAND—
not to be taken by trustees as security . . 77
PARTNER—
surviving, is trustee for representatives of deceased
partner . . . . . . 21
PARTNERSHIP—
as to investing trust property in, by trustees . . 47
PORTIONS—
for children, as to the raising, hy trustees . . 50, 55
trustees’, liability respecting .... 70
POSSESSION—
of trust property by cesluique trust, as to . . 9, 10, 48
POWERS—
of trustees, generally ..... 49
must be closely pursued . . . . 53, 129
PRESERVATION—
of trust estate, the duty of trustees ... 48


Page.
PRIVILEGES—
IegaI, of trust property, transferred to trustees . 10
PROFIT—
from trust estate, as to . . . 33, 43
PURCHASE—
by trustees of trust property, as to . . 02, 63
PUBLIC FUNDS—
what ones preferably countenanced by the court, for
trust investments . . . . . 69,78
REAL ESTATE—
as to trusts respecting, in point of devolution . . 5
RECEIPTS—
as to trustees joining in .... 51
and for conformity . . . 83
how trustees answerable for each other . . 83, 84
RECEIVER
in what case trustee may be appointed . . . 44
RELEASE—
from trusteeship, as to . . . . . 90
general, when to be obtained by a trustee . . 91
REMOVAL—
of trustees, general causes for . . . .89
REMUNERATION—
in what cases trustees may claim - 39
RENEWAL OF LEASES—
how incumbent on trustees .... 68
when creating implied trust . . . . 19
RENUNCIATION—
of trusts, as to . . . . 01
RENT—
receipt of, as to . . . . . .112
REPRESENTATION—
when it transmits the confidence with the estate . 6
REPRESENTATIVES—
when they succeed to trusts and when not . 6, 96
their liabilities, as to . . 39


Page.
REVERSIONARY LEASES—
not generally to be granted by trustees . . 53
SALE OF TRUST PROPERTY—
by trustees, as to . . . . . 50,54
unadvisedly ...... 78
SECURITY—
what so deemed or not, in respect of trust property . 77
SECURITIES—
changing, by trustees, when to be done or not . . 54, 78
STOCK—
unauthorised sale of . . . . C 7, G 9
SUITS—
as to trustees’ attention to .... 47
by and against trustees ..... 103
SURVIVORSHIP—
between trustees, trusts how affected by . . . 7
TERM OF YEARS—
trustees of, their duty concerning ... 17
TRADE—
as to the carrying on of, by trustees . . . GO, 75
TREASON—
of trustee, trust estate how affected by 12
TRUSTS—
considerations as to accepting . . . . 32
by implication . . . . . .'lB
TRUSTEES— -
considerations as to appointing . . 22
refusing to act, its effect .... 21
distinction of ...... 4
express, or implied . . . 4, 18
by devolution . . . . 5, 8
of real estate . . . . . . 5, 6
of personal . . . . . . Ib.
as to alienation by . . . .10
as to making themselves ostensible owners . . 0
invested with legal burthens and privileges . . 12
K


PAGE.
TRUSTEES
to preserve contingent remainders . 17
to bar dower . .... 17
for terms of years . . . . lb,
powers of—duties—liabilities—See those heads.
UNSOUND MlND—
persons of, act respecting—See Advertisement.
WILLS—
of trustees, their effect ..... G
THE END.
BH. A .l)liUtlY AND EVANS, I'IUNTEES, DOUVEniE STHFET,


ilato 2soo&>,
PUBLISHED BY A. MAXWELL,
S 3, BELL YARD, LINCOLN’S INN.
1. GRANT’S CHANCERY PRACTICE. The PRACTICE of t
COURT of CHANCERY under the New Orders, with Tables, of Costs,
Orders, &c. &c. 2d edit. By Harding Grant, Solicitor of the said Cou
12mo, 11. 12s. boards,
2. KING’S BENCH PRACTICE. Die PRACTICE of the SU
COURTS at Westminster, so far as the same is varied by the Act 1 Wm
for the more effectual administration of Justice in England and Wales, with
Essoigns and Returns as altered. Also, a full Abstract of the Act, and an
Thomas Chapman, Esq., Assistant Master of the Court of King’s Ber
• price 3s. 6 d., boards.
3. THE EXECUTOR’S ACCOUNT BOOK; exhibiting a safe
Method of keeping Executorship Accounts; with an adequate number of R
so arranged as to be adapted to the circumstances of every Estate ; and a
Win., comprising a variety of Bequests of Personal Property, and the Acc
which, from the death of the supposed Testator to the termination of the Ei
are accurately arranged and posted on the plat proposed, as an illustration
plicity and comprehensiveness of the System, and an infallible guidance ti
under any other estate. By John H. Brady, late of the Legacy-E
Somerset House. 4to, price 12s. extra boards.
Latest and Best Work on the Law of Elections.
4. THE LAW and PRACTICE of ELECTIONS in England, See
Ireland, and of the Trial of Controverted Elections, with an Appendix of
and all the existing Statutes analytically arranged. By William Fist
of the Middle Temple, Barrister at Law. In a close printed volume,
price 14s. boards.
a. THE STATUTES and ORDERS of the COURT of CHA
and the Statute Law of Real Property of the State of New Y ork, recently
amended, with a brief account of Equity Jurisdiction, and Law of Ret
and Registration in the United States, North America. By Joseph Pab
price 12 s. boards, *
0. CRIMINAL LAW. A Short Analysis of the Criminal Law of En(
of the New Forgery Act, giving a general and comprehensive view of C
Punishments, and the Statutes that create them, with a few remarks on th
and other observations. By Charles Penruodocke, Esq. of the Midi
Barrister at Law. 12mo, ss. boards.
7. FORGERY ACT. A collection of all Statutes, and parts of Stati
in the Reign of King George IV., and now in force, relating to Indictab
in England, viz., from 60 Geo 111., 1 Geo. IV. to 11 Geo. IV., and i
1820 to 1830 inclusive, with Notes and Recent Decisions thereon ; ti
prefixed, The Statutes Relating to Treason. By JohnßeswiceeGreenv
of Lincoln’s Inn Barrister at Law. 12mo, Bs. boards.
8. BOROUGH of EAST LOOE. Shortly will be published, RE
the CASE of EAST LOOE, in the County of Cornwall, as tried before a
of the House of Commons, in March, 1827, with some Observations.
Scarlett, Esq., of the Middle Temple, Barrister at Law.
9. WOODFALL’S LAW OF LANDLORD AND TENANT.
Harrison, Esq. A PRACTICAL TREATISE on the LAW of LA
and TENANT, with an Appendix of Precedents, by William Wooi
The Eighth Edition, very considerably enlarged and greatly improved
Harrison, Esq., of the Middle Temple,'Barrister at Law, Author of the
Index to all the Reports.” In one thick volume, royal Bvo, price board
Shnrtlu will be mihlished .


