

ADVICE TO IMMIGRANTS,
IN THE SHAPE OF
FEW FAMILIAR CHARTERS:
POINTING OUT THEIR
DUTIES TOWARDS THEIR EMPLOYERS
TOWARDS EACH OTHER.
BY CHARLES 0. EARDLEY-WILMOT, ESO.
SECOND EDITION.
HOBART TOWN:
PRIN TE D BY WILLIAM FLE TC HE R,
ELIZABETH-STREET.








ADVICE TO IMMIGRANTS,
IN THE SHAPE OF
V FEW FAMILIAR CHAPTERS:
POINTING OUT THEIR
DUTIES TOWARDS THEIR EMPLOYERS
TOWARDS EACH OTHER.
BY CHARLES 0. EARDLEY-WILMOT, ESQ.
SECOND EDITION.
HOBART TOWN:
PRINTED BY WILLIAM FLETCHER,
EEIZABETH-STREET.




PREFACE.
F 9333
In writing the following pages I am actuated
entirely by a desire to be of use to the Lower
Classes who arrive in this Colony, or who are
already working here. Ido not think they are
sufficiently aware of their responsibilities, their
duties, their dangers. I therefore claim no
literary merit: Ido not aim at what our Ameri-
can friends term “ smart writing,” or at epigram-
matic point. I aim at nothing more than doing
a little good in a very humble way to a class of
people who in this Colony are exposed to pecu-
liar temptations, and who have sometimes met
with peculiar trials.
I trust no one will be offended at my calling
things by their right names, —at my inveighing
against cruelty and oppression wherever it may
be practised.
As long as harshness is pursued towards the
working classes, so long, I trust, will men be
found to deprecate it. My conscience would
not rest, I know, if I did not protest against it.
Let this be taken as a reason why, in a pamphlet


professedly brought out for the sake of servants,
some allusion is made to what should be the
conduct of masters and mistresses.
But let Employers and Servants both take
heed of what St. Paul said in his Epistle to the
Colossians:—•“ Servants obey in all things your
masters according to the flesh, not serving to the
eye as pleasing men, but in simplicity of heart,
fearing God. Masters do to your servants that
which is just and equal, knowing that you also
have a master in heaven.”
Hobart Town :
24th December, 1855.


ADVICE TO IMMIGRANTS.
CHAPTER I.
My Friends, —It is a very common complaint
out here that Immigrants do not quite understand
the position they occupy on arrival in this colony;
that they are ignorant of their duties and respon-
sibilities ; that they claim an indulgence they have
no right to expect; that their advantages and
their disadvantages are alike a sealed book to
them. To remedy this misfortune, though ever
so slightly, is the cause of my now addressing
you. Bear with me, then, if anything I should
write should seem too stern, or too offensive to
your worldly pride. You have none of you, I
fancy, young or old, men or women, found this
world’s journey, hitherto, to be altogether a path
of roses. Believe me, in this country, as in every
other, life’s walk is thickly set with thorns.
In addressing you now I wish to impress upon
you very clearly your duties ; to point out to you
your responsibilities ; to show you how you are
called upon by every law, both human and divine.


to act with justice towards your employers.
The whole Christian scheme is comprised in the
few words —“You shall do your duty to God
and your neighbour.” Do you ask, —you the
servant, the mechanic, or the labourer, —“ Who
is my neighbour ?” Your neighbour is every
man with whom you have to do : your neigh-
bour is your master, your mistress, your em-
ployer. Those employers are equally hound
towards you. If they neglect your interests,
temporal or eternal, they commit a sin. But try,
in your service, to realise that fact, without feel-
ing which employer and employed hold a false
position relatively to each other, —that your
interests are identical. Without this link to con-
nect the two classes, prosperity will not, cannot
last; and though in this colony masters and
employers have great power over the servants
and the labourers, yet but two things remain to
be secured: first, that the employer does his
duty by his servant; secondly, that the servant
does his duty by the employer.
First, as to employers : they have a great
responsibility. A stranger hires to a master in
this colony, unknowing the ways of the land,
probably with a mistaken idea of the value of his
services, and a mistaken contempt for the social
position of a colonist. A master showing such
a servant forbearance, whilst at the same time
he firmly resisted encroachments, will probably
end by making a good servant of one who, at
first, was somewhat hard to deal with. “ For-
bearance” is the motto I would have all keep in


view. There are very many masters in this
colony excellent men, who truly prove them-
selves the servants’ friends. The generality of
employers are generous and liberal, willing to
give good wages and good food for well-performed
work, and anxious to keep their dependants
comfortable : but some of them do not quite
know what domestic comfort is themselves, and
are therefore often unjustly accused of being
reckless of their servants’ well-being when they
have been simply ignorant. But this is rapidly
changing throughout the Island, and comforta-
ble places for the servants on an estate are not
now so much the want of the many. Immi-
grants should also remember that though this
colony now smiles with plenty through the
length and breadth of her borders, the time is
not so very far back when a dismal bush ob-
scured its beauties—when hardship and privation
were the lot of those whose homesteads now
adorn the landscape; that hard work was the
order of the day, and domestic service was not
the clean and easy thing it now is in a well-
appointed household. If the lower class of
Immigrants could only be taught not to expect
too much , sixteen thousand miles from home,
there would be less discontent and unhappiness.
At the same time, there are two classes of
employers (though their number is not great) to
whom a servant’s happiness should not be en-
trusted ; and if on arrival in this colony there is
any chance of your being deceived into such a
service, I should advise you to hire with your


first employer for a short period: for, ignorant
of the country and its people, and sometimes
hired by agents for employers who reside far-
away in the country, you may perchance be
deceived as to the nature of your service.
The two classes I speak of as being unfit
to have free respectable servants are, — first,
the few that have for so many years been
accustomed to convict servants that they have
learned that most dreadful lesson, —to disbelieve
in the possibility of honesty among their de-
pendants;—who have acquired a habit of treating
them, like wild beasts, with blows and impreca-
tions. This is the class that are always com-
plaining at the police-office, forgetting as they
do, that a bad master makes a bad servant.
It is a fact almost amounting to a truism, that
the most exacting masters are the most unjust
ones. “ Bear and forbear” is the reverse of their
motto ; their service is a low detestable tyranny:
they drive where they ought to lead; and the
servant, goaded by ill-usage, and taught nothing
better by either precept or example, at last reck-
lessly plunges into the misconduct he at first was
unjustly accused of.
The second class are those who, by the sud-
den social changes which have taken place in
these Australian Colonies, find themselves in a
higher than they were ever brought up
to expect, and who exercise the tyranny of wealth;
who, rising from obscurity, become well to do in
the world, and so take the—to them unknown
and strange —position of head of a house. All
that vulgar pride and arrogance can create, they


inflict on their domestics; they remember their
own former insignificance, perhaps their own
former misery too, and they inflict four-fold on
their dependants. Should you, unfortunately,
find yourselves tied down as servants to such
people, have a guard over your slightest actions,
your simplest speech, and, as soon as it is prac-
ticable, and in accordance with the law of the
land, leave them. This is the class, too, that
sometimes in hiring you will give too flaming a
description of their social position, and thus
trick you into service ; and who, though perhaps
they are guiltless in the eyes of the law, in my
eyes are guilty of entrapping Immigrants by hiring
them under false pretences. But you must
not forget that whilst employers have certain
duties to perform to their dependants, servants
must do their duty to their employers.
Always bear in mind that you have many and
grave responsibilities, and do not let excitement
or love of change lessen your usefulness, or
injure your employer’s interests. If you get a
good employer, stay with him , nor move from
house to house at the change of each moon:
remember that, whilst employers are imperfect,
servants are imperfect also ; nor suffer a little
irritation to make you incapable of recognising
the good qualities of your masters.
To each class of you a separate word of advice
and warning may be necessary. So I would say to
the young man arriving in this colony in the
full flush of youth, vigour, and hope, avoid the
curse of drunkenness as you would avoid the


appearance of Satan himself. Drunkenness is the
curse of this country. The facilities of obtaining
liquor tend to this ; the absence of any legitimate
amusement for the lower classes tends to it; the
neglect of the employers, in failing to provide
wholesome mental food for those beneath them,
tends to it; the very climate tends to it; and
the same climate makes it more dangerous for
men to indulge in spirits to excess than in
England. If, then, a higher inducement will
not make you refrain from this sensual vice,
if God’s laws will not persuade you to shun
intemperance, shun it on a lower ground, shun
it on a less exalted principle. I have never yet
seen an instance of a sober temperate man in
this Island who did not succeed in his vocation.
Is not that an incitement to sobriety ?
To the young Immigrant girls who come out
to this country, and who set good examples of
virtue and decorum, I would say one word of
kindly warning.—Do not be deceived by your
affections; do not be too hurriedly betrayed
into marriage; do not fancy that every man who
pretends to offer marriage is able to redeem his
pledge. Consult those who should know better
than yourselves ; and so shun the risk which has
ere now been too often incurred, of being
betrayed by some villain whose first wife weeps
at home unheeded; or the risk which, I am
sorry to say, is too often disregarded,—that of
being bound to one with no sense of religion,
whose neglect of things appertaining to the
world to come is too often a type of the neglect


(if not something worse) that you will too often
experience.
In concluding this chapter, let me remind
you that, without religion, neither usefulness nor
happiness can be yours. Let your advent,
therefore, to a new country be marked by new
zeal in your religion. If you suffer from cruelty
and wrong, there was One before you who
suffered more, though sinless ; if you receive
unmerited punishment, was there not One on
whom was laid “ the iniquity of us all ?” If you
are even wrongly accused, bear in mind that
there was One who for us “ made his grave with
the wicked.” Then, when remembering all this,
if you suffer patiently, and set an example of
goodness, let it be your comfort that, as you
have .borne the cross, you will one day wear
the crown.


CHAPTER 11.
I would wish in this chapter to address myself
entirely to the Catholic Immigrant; but no Pro-
testant need fear to read on, for I have nothing
to write which will hurt any feelings, I trust.
Controversy I have nothing to do with : all I
aim at is, in humble charity, to give a little
advice to my Immigrant friends. Many of you.
Catholic Immigrants, will arrive in this Colony
unaware that your Churches are few and far
between, your Clergymen unequal in numbers
to the many duties imposed on them. You
will hire, some of you, as servants into families
living in remote parts of the colony, where the
Sabbath bell will be nought but in memory,
where your Sunday will be unblest by your
attendance at Mass, where Vespers and Bene-
dictions are never heard. Do not be down-
hearted or querulous: remember, that if you
follow in spirit the holy service, and in the
absence of a church pray to God in your closet,
that ever-wakeful eye will see, that ever-listening
ear will hear, and your blessings will be manifold.
In humble earnestness take every opportunity
of attending your religious duties ; shrink not at
the length of the way ; the Christian’s path is


ever thorny; grudge not any trouble or ex-
pense : self-sacrifice is piety. Does a Priest pay
an occasional missionary-visit to a settler’s house
within a few miles of you, let your home-duties
be performed with such zeal and earnestness
that your employers will part with you for a
few hours as a reward. In this colony there is
a good deal of liberal and kind feeling between
Protestant and Catholic. I have seen a great
deal of consideration shown by the former to the
latter, especially in the way of permitting them
to attend to their religious duties at inconvenient
seasons, when there have been no regular Sunday
services. Nor is this consideration confined to
the Protestant Laity; the Clergy have equally
evinced it. Of course, there are instances where
both one and the other have thought proper to
show their holiness by a little pious persecution;
but these instances are so few, and are so much
censured by the many, as only to prove as a
general rule the contrary. Should you be so
unfortunate as to hire with such an one, who
thanks God he is not as you are, try to show by
your forbearance, by your cheerfulness, by your
willingness to please and your backwardness to
take offence, —and oh ! above all, by your purity
and piety,—an example, which, though set by a
poor servant , no master need be ashamed to
follow.
My friends, believe me, the duties of a mis-
sionary do not remain solely with a duly
appointed Priest. God’s missionary servants
wear many liveries. Not the least honourable


rank in this pious army of his is the humble.
God-serving, despised menial, who, by precept
and example, gives a tone among his fellow-
servants, checks ribaldry and blasphemy, warns
the careless one to prayer and praise—protects
God’s interests in his master’s house, whilst he
takes care of his master’s earthly interests too —
and by his conversation and conduct makes
people, who never thought before, think seriously
on subjects affecting their immortal weal. No
employer, however bigotted, no employer, how-
ever unbelieving, but must learn from such a
servant. Let this, then, be the poor pious ser-
vant’s consolation when, so far from the home-
church where God’s mercies were poured out
to him with such a lavish hand, he goes among
strangers, and feels that heart-sickness which
comes upon us where all is cold and new, —let
this be his consolation, that it is within his reach
to do some good even in his humble position—
that his example may benefit, his warning voice
instruct; and so, living in humble piety, without
the applause which greets in this world a more
visible struggle, he has an honest consciousness
in his heart that one day his applause will be
eternal.
In some parts of this colony, at a distance
from a Priest or a Catholic Church, mass is said
on a week-day, once during the month, for the
sake of the Catholics in the neighbourhood, the
Priest coming some distance for that purpose,
and solemnising it in some public building or in
some settler’s house.


Servants should distinctly understand, that
whilst, as a general rule, their employers permit
them to attend, they cannot legally claim per-
mission to desert their week-day work for this
purpose —unless, indeed, there is a stipulation
made to that effect in the hiring. I have rarely
known of such leave being refused; and, even
then, there was generally a press of business on
the farm, which was the cause of such refusal.
But my reasons for mentioning this subject
are, first, to exhort those refused not to resent
the refusal by anger, insolence, or disobedience.
Such is not the spirit of holiness. Make up for
your spiritual loss by more energy in prayer, and
by a firmer determination to make a better use
of the spiritual privileges you enjoy.
My second reason is, that I may caution those
who do attend to return to their houses and
their work soberly and steadily when church is
over. Do not let the meeting with old acquaint-
ances and the desire to talk over old times
seduce you to the public-houses. Your employer
gave you leave to go to Church probably at an
inconvenience to himself: do not repay his
kindness so badly as to squander that time after
Church, which is his, and his alone, by drinking
and brawling, and bringing scandal on your
religion. If you do this, you yourself are your
Church’s most bitter enemy; and by such con-
duct you cause other employers to refuse their
Catholic servants the permission to attend their
Church, lest they in like manner should mis-
behave. Common honesty should prevent you


from even loitering on the way. With fresh zeal
you should return to fresh exertions: then your
employer, finding that for the few hours’ loss of
time he has received compound interest in
cheerfulness, steadiness, and energy, will gladly
extend this occasional liberty to others, and
blessings will be multiplied.
Do not let any weariness, any haste, or any
temptation, prevent your morning and evening
prayer. If the household you dwell in has a
different faith from the one you profess, let the
prayer-time in that household be the period
when you exercise your private devotions else-
where. Your Church forbids you to pray with
them , but you can pray alone. There can be no
obstacles to this which are not to be overcome.
God looks not to the accessories of prayer, but
to the heart . If you have not a comfortable
apartment to retire to, yet any nook will
suffice.
Only let your heart be in your prayers, and the
rest is nothing. Many a humble word breathed
at the plough-tail and the harvest-field has borne
more fruit than a cold utterance in the cathedral.
Above all, do not be laughed out of your prayers.
In some households the voice of prayer is
never heard; but be not partakers in this
wickedness.
The time will surely come to each and all
of us when the question “ How have you lived ?”
will be a weighty one. Let not ridicule have
caused you to be unable to answer that question
as it ought to be answered. Act rightly by your


employer—act rightly by yourself: so, on the
one hand, you will do your duty to your
neighbour; and, on the other hand, your duty
to your God.


CHAPTER 111.
There are many ways in which respectable
Immigrants might assist in raising the moral,
social, and religious position of their fraternity,—
the position of the working classes of this Island.
I would not assert for one instant that this
Island is the best fitted to receive the free
Immigrant of the lower classes of all the
Colonies of this Southern Hemisphere. On the
contrary, it has disadvantages which no other
colony possesses to the same extent. To the
agricultural labourer, who hopes ere long to
possess a small freehold, —to the mechanic,
whose ingenuity deserves ample payment, —to
the talented, whose taste for speculating would
quickly lead to opulence, —there are better
openings than any in Van Diemen’s Land. New
Zealand, Adelaide, Melbourne, and New South
Wales, have each and all better claims on the
Immigrant’s notice. But at the same time there
can be no doubt that in this Island any man
possessed of what in England is technically
called “ pluck” is sure to succeed , if, added to
that essentially British quality, he possesses a fair
proportion of physical strength. And what
openings at home are there ? How few in


number, how paltry in detail! As a general
rule, what does honest labour in England ever
reach ? When work was to be had , it reached a
week’s hare subsistence for a week’s enduring
toil, with the body, mind, and soul standing still
on the Sabbath, (not resting, as He who ordained
our Sabbaths had intended,) —a mere triplex
piece of machinery, unwound up nor in motion.
In places less favoured, where absenteeism,
famine, and oppression made the battle of life
more bitter, was to be seen through many a mile
of country that dull glassiness produced by the
frost of despair, when the heart’s torpidity was
its best guarantee against lively vice !
The great thing to be guarded against is that
fatal idea which, once embraced by Immigrants,
leads to disappointment—too often to ruin,—
that they have nothing to do but to arrive in
this country to sit down at once in competence
and contentment. That word “ contentment /’*
How often misapplied!—how often misunder-
stood ! Did you think to leave the humble
homes of your early life, and step at one bound
on an eminence ?—without a struggle or a
drawback to gain a position you never held
before, and to look down on the scenes you had
left ? The time may perchance be for you,
when in trouble or in sickness you will pant for
the days gone by, when your poverty and your
humility were true contentment, —when you
will learn that misery and distress are of no
country, but are genuine citizens of the world.
But too many are exhilarated by the tale of


success in the colonies. They hear of the happy
hit that has made one man wealthy, nor think of
the hundreds who have failed. The news of one
great prize that has been drawn in the lottery of
Australian enterprise reaches them, and it
deafens their ears to the mournful history of the
many blanks! So they speculate in Immigra-
tion, and cry —“ In the Colonies we will compel
a capital —gain a fortune—or fill a grave,—in a
country where gold would seem to grow spon-
taneous !” And many a soul has been cast away
on the cruellest shoals that have ever ship-
wrecked a man’s pride, his happiness, or his
virtue.
Trust me it is a dispensation of Divine—
though it may be inscrutable —Providence, that
rapidly-gained riches are frequently a curse to
their possessor ; and the aged proverb is still
seen to be a true one—“ Thou shaltnot become
quickly rich without guilt.” Colonial history is
full of painful proof of this wise saying.
Let us deduce a few simple lessons from these
things. First of all, in due humility, let us learn
that the pursuits we are engaged in, however
humble, do not degrade, —that we sink only by
not performing those duties properly. Does the
highest earthly authority perform the allotted
task with honour, —you are as acceptable in the
sight of God if you perform your humblest duty
with equal conscientiousness. Does the judge
on the bench dispense justice truly, —you act as
well when you do to others as you would they
should do unto you. Learn, then, this lesson.


in whatever state you are, therewith to be con-
tent : and learn, also, that the only thing worth
striving for—the only thing worth succeeding in
—is to strive to do your duty ; —to succeed in
glorifying God by performing that duty towards
your neighbour. I write this because I have too
often seen a false pride which has made Immi-
grants feel ashamed of honest labour. In their
own aspirations, whilst looking forward to good
fortune, they have entirely overlooked the inter-
mediate steps,—steady work. Let the word
“ work ” be dinned into the ears of all, —let the
word “ work ” be the watchword of each and all
of us. Let us all remember that we have not
come into this world to play , but to labour. Is
it degrading to work ? —how much more so to
eat the bread of idleness ! How false the pride
that will take the wages (whether at the palace
or the plough), and yet be no partaker in the
toil! Then let the prayer we each of us utter,
whether in riches or poverty, in health or sick-
ness, in knowledge or in ignorance, be—“ May
we so act, that, when Thou comest. Thou mayest
find us working /”
Let those who engage with employers in this
Island do something, then, as I said before, to
raise their position. For this purpose save your
money, instead of squandering it in frivolity or
in vice. Let the Savings Banks be the recept-
acle for the wages which in bygone days went to
swell the gains of the publicans. You who are
steady and well-disposed can have little or no
difficulties in such a matter. Your temptations


are few —your opportunities many. As a general
rule your employers will assist you : the magis-
trates throughout the Island are hound to advise
and befriend you. Deposit the amount of your
savings in the bank—that 'poor man’s friend ; —
and doing so, enter your master’s, or some friend’s
name (whose steadiness you can depend upon),
as co-trustee with yourself. Then, if in a moment
of guilty temptation you wish to draw that money
out to invest it in the “ wages of sin,” or if some
designing man should try to take advantage of
your simplicity, the advice of your co-trustee
may preserve you from a sin or a folly which
might have plunged you into misery and ruin.
Afterwards, when you possess a few pounds by
way of capital, and feel an interest in the
country which has treated you so well, seize an
opportunity of investing that money in the pur-
chase of a small freehold ; and become —as you
have long been in feeling—in thorough earnest
a son of the soil. Hereafter, when a snug cot-
tage perhaps, and a blue-eyed matron with child
at her knee, shall endear the humble spot you
have cleared and sweated for, you will bless the
day when the Savings Bank received your first
deposit,—when, by steady firmness, you van-
quished your first and greatest enemy— self.
Improve, all of you, your spare time. When
the body is actively employed, do not let the
mind rust. Work does not mean bodily labour
only: the mind should be taught to work too.
Read whenever you can get a chance. Ask
your employer to lend you books wherewith to


improve many a stray time which would other-
wise be unemployed. Remember that education
last a man’s life time : be he wise or simple, a
man’s education lasts his whole life , whether in
the castle or the cot.
This world is simply a place of probation,—a
life-college which we enter that we may be edu-
cated for a better one. Some are called away
from the mother’s breast—others are still learn-
ing to a ripe old age; some leave their school
by battle or by wreck—others falsely desert
their class, and are, as it were, expelled on the
desert of crime : but whether we die as infants
or as aged, struggling for life, or executed as that
life’s criminals, we still live and die pupils to
our schoolmaster— Time , who hands us over to
his superior— Eternity. Pity that, whilst so many
glean the field, so few should reap the harvest.
Need I add a caution against those polluting
books which set up impiety and blasphemous
unbelief as “ free and bold philosophy,” “ and
estimate the recklessness of licence as the right
attribute of liberty.” I think not: the honest
heart will repudiate them.
I will conclude this chapter by exhorting you
to remember your Bible and your religious
teachings. Acting upon those precepts you
will of necessity lead a life of pious usefulness,
to be succeeded by an eternity of happiness.


CHAPTER IV.
I would devote a few sentences to a class who,
though no immigrants in the proper sense of
the word, are a portion, and no inconsiderable
one, of the domestics and farm labourers of this
Island. I allude to the class who have been
prisoners of the Crown.
The great difficulty the Legislature must have
felt in framing an Act for the protection of
masters and servants would, I should think, be,
that the free Immigrants and the compulsory
ones must be treatedAn a similar manner: that
the same rules must confine the free and the
bond. Hence the clauses which have been too
stringent in their complexion—hence the outcry
against the law of the land. But this evil was
an unavoidable one.
Let us try to extract a little good from this
apparently great evil.
To those who have been prisoners I would
say—Do not forget that you have another
opportunity now given you for reform, for
redemption of your characters. Embrace the
opening. If your former days have been evil,
redeem the time. You are removed from
degrading associations; listen to the voice of


warning and advising virtue, and purify your
hearts. Let even the sins you have committed
have a sanctifying influence. God does not will
that any one should perish everlastingly : so
the stigma that has been upon you shall be
washed out by the tear of penitence ; and those
around you will surely welcome the return of
another stray sheep to the fold.
To the free Immigrants are these not fitting
words of advice to be offered on this subject ?
I would say to them—Beware of encouraging
that wretched self-pride which is the drawback
to all virtuous action. Be tl*p Publican of the
Christian parable rather than the Pharisee.
Remember how many of you have enjoyed the
respectabilities of an early home, where both
precept and example have assisted in guiding
you aright. Even at a mother’s breast, and
afterwards at a mother’s knee, you have imbibed
lessons of goodness. The child of prayer and
pious nurture, you perhaps are ignorant of trials
which to others may be daily ones. Say then,
in all humility, —“ Had I been in like manner
tempted, in like manner I might have fallen.”
And do not, with a cold self-pious chilliness of
demeanour, add another reason why an erring
fellow-servant should offend. Think of what has
been the lot of some of those who have once
been prisoners. Think of an infancy without
innocence, a childhood without education, a
manhood without sympathy. Think of that
infancy being a struggle, that boyhood a crime,
that manhood a punishment. Then sorrow over


the neglected babe who never knew a tender
mother’s solicitude (and what is its greatest
boon in life, a tender mother’s prayers), —over
the neglected boyhood which, uneducated to
good, rushed with quick early footsteps into the
trodden paths of crime, —and more than all,
over the wretched manhood which has suffered
for crimes (crimes, for which we ourselves are
too often responsible, as having neglected some
of our gravest responsibilities—the amelioration
of the spiritual, intellectual, and social position
of the poor); and do not deliberately and cruelly
throw the stone. If you find one of this class
wicked, try to reform him; if still impenitent,
attempt the reformation still: but do not act the
vile part of the Levite, nor pass by on the other
side. We are none of us without sin in the
sight of God : we are none of us without stain
in the sight of man. Let not the greatest of all
social wrongs be our disgrace,—the Phariseeism
of self-approval and hasty judgment, the heart-
lessness which thanks God we are not as others
are.
Do not let us either, in our fancied knowledge
of the world, be too ready to doubt the sincerity
of the repentance professed by some of these
persons. We k all honour those who have never
fallen, though temptation may have pressed
heavily somewhile: but let us reserve high
honour also for him, who, having fallen into sin
through temptation, want of knowledge, or want
of care, can retrieve his position, can redeem his
character, —though having fallen, can retrace his


steps, and by self-denial and determination suc-
cessfully struggle against both temptation and
antecedent. Shall the slough of sin be cast,
virtue be redeemed from vice, and then shall
erring fellow-man pronounce “ no quarter,” and
point the finger of scorn and reprobation ?
Shall the “ ninety and nine” pro-
claim there is no mercy on earth to the “ one
sinner that repenteth ?”
English principles should teach something
better than this severity. Would English
mothers thank us for acting thus contrary to
their native tenderness? Would common jus-
tice authorise such cruelty ? Above all, would
the spirit of Christianity authorise it ? —that
spirit which inherits the glorious lesson, handed
down for us her children, since, somewhat more
than eighteen hundred years ago, on the cross,
the penitent thief was pardoned, and even per-
secutors were prayed for! Must I use such
strong language as this to induce people to act
conscientiously ? Our daily experience teaches
us how needful it is. Let that daily experience,
then, make each of us enforce the lesson of
charity, —that great lesson, that great secret of
life. Without it we are Christians only in name.
Let us be stern in our recognition of sin in our-
selves ; let us be charitable in our discovery of
it in others: then the heart, chastised and self-
examined, will not be a tabernacle for self-esteem ;
then the heart, purified and enlightened, will
love the sinner whilst it hates the sin. Hitherto
we have been too apt to reverse that pious


maxim, and proclaim aloud our disgust at the
perpetrator, whilst we have, many of us, hugged
our pet vice to our bosoms. Away, then, with
that mock modesty! Let us proclaim only
against the sin and the scandal, remembering
each of us, whilst we daily offend, and trust to
our Saviour for pardon, that our brother may
offend in like manner, and be forgiven, until
seventy times seven.
And you who are or have been prisoners of
the Crown, and who in your hired service have
suffered from wrong and injustice, remember
that you suffer for your offences against society.
Strive, then, by silence and by steadiness under
oppression, to make amends to the society you
have outraged. If you find yourselves treated
with suspicion, you cannot be surprised; if with
severity, you have earned it: do not then, in the
name of every memory which reminds you that
you are human, be too prone to throw away
your chances of reforming. Earn liberty, and
you will gain it; earn respect, and it shall some
time be your meed : but do not let a casual
hastiness on the part of your employer, or a
discomfort that at worst is only temporary,
cause you to fling down the gauntlet to virtue,
and to pursue vice with a passionate profligacy.
Let better influences work their way in your
heart; let not the Christian virtues knock at the
door of the heart in vain : then if even (which
will not be the case) all on this side of the
world turn coldly from you, your reward shall
be great in the world to come.


CHAPTER V.
In a book intended principally for the use of
Immigrants, a chapter devoted to Employers will
perhaps appear to some to be out of place. I
do not think so : the interests of employers and
employed are so bound up together that it is
impossible to separate them without injury. I
write for the purpose of doing good : then let no
one be offended. If a word or a hint of mine
can teach one employer increased usefulness, can
exterminate one social wrong towards the em-
ployed, I have not written this chapter in vain.
Therefore I address you, employers, masters,
and mistresses of Van Diemen’s Land. Ido not
ask much, or causelessly. I ask for a little pity,
a little forbearance, a little Christian charity,—
nay, more, I demand a little justice for your
dependants. We are all fighting in the battle of
life—a hard battle for some of us; —with all of
us it is a struggle for life or death. Do not,
then, you gentlemen, who are, as it were, the
officers in this fighting army, be too hard on
the poor private soldiers whom, by the fortune
of war, you command. Remember the scanty
ration of the poor soldier: remember his ill-
provided dress, his spiritual squalor, and mental


privation. Think how he has to mount guard
over many a temptation, and stand sentry to
check many a vice of his own, from which you,
in your dignified position of officer in this life’s
camp, are exempt. Commissioned officers that
you are, you don’t know what the poor rank-
and-file have to go through. Some of you enter
this great army as a lounge; others as a matter
of course: how few of you, in camp, garrison,
or quarters, think to better the condition of
those beneath you. Oh ! be induced to think a
little more favourably of the living jewel that
inhabits that rough casket. For remember that
on that awful parade, which sooner or later must
be to every one of us, the petty distinctions that
in this life distinguish our worldly uniforms, will
be entirely and altogether done away with. The
despised private of our vain-glorious grandest
field-days may be raised to honour and renown ;
whilst we, the quondam commanding officers,
may be degraded to the ranks of the impenitent.
In the name of the servants and labourers of
this fair country, where climate and scenery
unite in making us remember with but a chas-
tened regret “ old England,” the home of our
fathers, you are called upon to help the poor in
their struggle onward and upward. Let your
sympathies be with the poor : they need them
all. Think what it was to you to leave your
childhood’s home, and, sixteen thousand miles
away, to sit by a new hearth, even when sur-
rounded by every blessing —friends, relations,
and comfort: then realise, if you can, the sorrow


felt by those poor Immigrants, who have left all
things, but not to enjoy your blessings. Alone,
in a new world, their very acquaintances ship-
horn, without a single consolation but that of
virtue and honesty, they come to a far-olf land
to seek that honest livelihood denied them at
home. Shall cruelty, coldness, or persecution
meet their struggling efforts ?
Let employers, then, cease to remember that
once on a time in this Island constant crime
rendered them justly suspicious. Let them
cease to remember that once upon a time Vice
stalked a giant through the land; whilst Virtue,
unheeded, hid her outcast head. Let them
learn this lesson—so necessary to their pros-
perity,—that the comfort and happiness of the
working classes are essentially necessary to their
own. Let their own interests teach them to
treat their dependants well, as a safe investment
which will return an usurious profit. Let them
remember the words of Ecclesiasticus : —" Hurt
not the servant that worketh faithfully, nor the
hired man that giveth thee his life. Let a wise
servant be dear to thee as thy own soul: defraud
him not of liberty, nor leave him needy.” Do
not let the threat of the Police-office be such a
household term when a servant does wrong.
Remember that in England the Police-offices
never see a domestic servant on a charge of mis-
conduct. If your dependant does not please
you, a month’s warning can terminate his
service. Is his conduct bad, then dismiss him
without the month’s warning or a character:


but always set your faces against a system which
authorises a forfeiture of wages , nor consent for
one hour’s misconduct to defraud your labourer
of six months’ pay. The employer who could
hold back such money, however legally, must
have curious sensations in the -closet. For
myself I should feel that the back wages would
partake somewhat of the nature of the price of
blood.
And you, too, mistresses, who have in your
service young free; immigrant women, remember
you are wives, perhaps mothers; and think with
kindness on these poor motherless girls. Are
they ignorant, bear with them; are they stupid,
encourage them: but do not be too hard on
your own sex so far from home. Then I can
predict a time when these poor young women
(who in innocence and honesty, at least, are
mostly unrivalled) will bring a blessing on the
homes where they have been cherished, on the
roofs that have sheltered them. For a time will
most assuredly come when the kind Christian
employers will have it said to them—■" Inasmuch
as ye did it to the least of these little ones, ye
did it unto me.”
W. Fletcher, Printer, Elizabeth-street, Hobart Town.




