

•L!: AGRICULTURE. ' J
-
■
THE
ADAPTED TO THE COLONIES:
FOR TIIE
USE OF THE YOUNG STUDENT,
WITH DIRECTIONS FOR
DRAINAGE AMD IRRIGATION.
j* :$•
.
BY WILLIAM JOHNSTON,
(Aallior.cf thePriz: E* ..ay f»ii Eu:,t and Emut in Wteat.”)
THIRTY TEAKS PRACTICE IN EIATAIN AKD N/NE IN THE COLQNIES.
'
'
:
EE ROSS, ERINTEES, 231 CASTLEREAGH STREET,
; v EXC«ET AOORS SOUTH OS? MARKET STREET. $O.
I mji (r
lf a * *4 •- - * * *


Shears, and Extra Fittings.
GNED
Mould Bo
AMERICAN Ploughs, Corn-Shellers, Corn-Crackers, Corn-
stalk-Cutters, Wheat Sieves, Wheat Mills, Churns,
American Seed-Sowers, Bluestone.
ENGLISH and AMERICAN Steel Spades, Grafting Tools
Digging and Stable Forks, Garden Shears and Rakes
Hoes—Breaking-up, Chipping, Grubbing and Posthole
Pruning Knives, Saws, and Scissors.
W. S. FRIEND & CO.,
WSCUsHSiL 11 lllOlflillSflßll
181, 183, & 185 YORK STREET, SYDNEY.
THE USE OF TONIC FOOD FOR SHEET
Has in all Countries become an absolute necessity, botl
as a preventive and cure lor disease and as a means (oi
the speedy development of carcase and irnprovemen
of wool.
THESE TONIC FOODS CAN ONLY BE HAD AT THE
SHEEP MEDICINE MANUFACTORY
263 ELIZABETH STREET, SYDNEY.
J. POTTIE, VETERINARY SURGEON


Goodlet & Smith,
TIMBER MERCHANTS, *
VICTORIA SAW & MOULDINp MILLS,
483 GEORGE STREET, & 1 PARRAMITTA-ST.
(Successors to Burrows & Barnard,)
BARN A 1!1) & HINTON,
IMPORTERS, WHOLESALE GROCERS,
AND WINE * SPIRIT MERCHANTS,
422 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
T 6 BAD W"BITERS ! 1
Mr. NORRIS, Writing Master, forwards by post, on receipt of £l, to all
parts of the Colonies, his complete system of teaching ladies’ or gentlemen’s
styles of writing, by which the most cramped writers may acquire the free
use of the pen, in a few days, Avithout the inconvenience of attending
classes. The copies are very gradual—No. from 1 to 200, and detailed in •
hooks ready for use. This System aaris awarded “ Special High Commenda-
tion at the last Exhibition. Mr. NORRIS, guarantees improvement in
FOUR LESSONS, or will return the money.
i Address—Mr. NORRIS, ’Writing Master. 241 Castlereagh-street, Sydney.
Established, 1861. A course of Jessous from 10s.


Carlton Tea and Coffee Warehouse.
James Welch,
FAMILY &» IStML €lO6ll, •,
102 SOUTH HEAD ROAD,
Corner of Crown Street,
S 3 "ST 3ZS jKT JE3 "ST
J. & W. GELDING,
Ihmsfpmi and
8 and 10 George Street Markets, Sydney,
AND
IMTOEM IIMIEY, SAITBIHIEY EMB,
PETERSHAM, near SYDNEY, N.S.W.
J93T All Seeds proved on our “Trial Ground” before sent out.
AGENT v pi • a
for JV&Zsr hne Pulverised
BONE DUST J- GRAHAM, BOii OUST
wh S^«S din NURSERY AND SEBBSHAX, SBl Guano &Ct
sgfro & 11 New Ma »™
t /-i i , ’ vtS/T GEORGE ST., SYDNEY m
J. G. has always a good wSsM/ . ’ Trees, Shrubs, Coni-
snjUjly of the undenncn- N\vtS AXD AT T’lfbfM ers . Roses, and Bulbous
tinned Vegetable, Flower, d JC]A // llm'SSI’V c. rooted Plants, Garden
Agricultural and Native ~x\> KfrffW Pots, etc., etc
Seeds. All Seeds are . ■ „ ,
proved before being sent 'MfIRR' Catalogues or Seeds,
♦ut- Plants, &0., on appli-


P*i^.T]ElO]XriSß
I)cnrijT dfalonml (Ointment
MSTMMM wmm P®¥BgEB,
Vegetable (Tasteless) Antibilions Pills,
Sold by all Chemists and Storekeepers, and by
J , HENRY, CHEMIST,
754 GEORGE STREET SOUTH, SYDNEY.
Genuine Seeds ! Genuine Seeds!
ANDERSON, HALL & CO.,
SUCCESSORS TO
LAW, SOMNER & CO.,
The celebrated American Early Rose POTATO (true variety), Is. per
lb. ; also, splendid sample of Ashleaf, Cambridge, and Fluke Kidney,
White, Rough, and Improved Derwent Potatoes.
GARDEN SEEDS —Our 20s. assorted case ; a season’s supply for
half-acre garden.
GLADIOLI—A magnificent collection of all the finest varieties, 18s. to
245. per dozen.
NORWAY OATS—White and Blach Tartarian ; Potato Oats ; Cape
and English Barley ; Grasses of every description ; Lucerne, Clovers, and
other Agricultural seeds.
Our New Illustrated Catalogue is now ready.
ANDERSON, HALL & CO.,
anti pant JHcrcljants,
258 & 260, PITT-ST., SYDNEY.
H. PRESCOTT & SON,
COMMISSION & PRODUCE AGENTS,
101 SUSSEX STREET,
ss'srionsriEi'sr.


SHERWOOD DRAIN TILE WORKS,
(On tlie Estate of Arthur T. Holeoyd, Esq.)
SHERWOOD SCRUBS, Near Parramatta.
Pipes for Draining Orangeries, Orchards, and Farms, are supplied at the
Works, at the following prices : —lin. bore, 30s. per 1000 ; Hin. bore, 355.
per 1000 ; 2in. bore, 50s. per 1000; Sin. bore, 80s. per 1000; 4in. bore, 2d.
a foot; Oin. bore, 3d. a foot ; Din. bore, Cd. a foot ; 12in. bore, 9d. a foot.
Pi 4 x 3£, lid. each ; Garden Edging Tiles with Gutter L, 4d, each;
Garden Gutter Tiles, 4d. each.
Socketted Pipes.
Sin. a foot; 4in. Sid. a foot; Oin. sd. a foot ; Din. Dd. a foot
12in. Is. 3d. a foot.
Junctions, Sends, and Elbows of all kinds and sizes.
Pantiles, for roofing, 170 to the square, £lO per 1000 ; Plain Tiles, for roof-
ing, 420 to the square, £4 per 1000 ; Gothic Tiles, for roofing, 420 to the
square, £5 per 1000 ; Ridge Tiles, ornamental, Is. each ; Ridge Tiles, plain,
(id. each ; Hollow Bricks, 30s. per 1000 ; Perforated Bricks, 30s. per 1000;
Pressed Bricks, 00s. per .1000.
Hip and Valley Tiles.
Flooring Tiles, 20 to the square yard, £8 per 1000.
A moderate Price is charged for delivery in the neighbourhood of the
Works, or at the Railway Station, Parramatta.
JAMES PEMELL & CO.,
TOf©l24 EIIIS, BOBSIQtSV•
3STear tlie Haymarket,
OFFICES AND STORES—
791 GEORGE STREET SOUTH,
Opposite the Railway Station,
Superfine Silk Dressed Flour.
Best Seconds. Wheat hleal,
Kiln-Dried Corn Flour, &c.
NT.43.—liest Quality, Ijowest ZPxdces !


AGRICULTURE.
THE
AET if fllffllli
ADAPTED TO THE COLONIES:
FOR THE
USE OF THE YOUNG STUDENT,
WITH DIRECTIONS FOR
DRAINAGE AND IRRIGATION.
BY WILLIAM JOHNSTON,
(Author of the Prize Essay on(j“ Eust and Smut in Wheat.”)
THIRTY YEARS PRACTICE IN BRITAIN AND NINE IN THE COLONIES.
Price — Is. 6d.; By Post, Is. 10d. Each.
LEE & ROSS, PRINTERS, 231 CASTLEREAGH STREET,
EIGHT DOORS SOUTH OF MARKET STREET.


WITH KIND PERMISSION, AND IN ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF
OBLIGATIONS CONFERRED BY SOME OF THE MEMBERS OF THE
AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES, I BEG, WITH
MUCH RESPECT AND GRATITUDE, TO DEDICATE THIS LITTLE
PAMPHLET TO THE COUNCIL.
The Author.


3.7-S-Ty
Contents.
PAGE.
Introduction 1
Soils : Their Properties as determined by their External Character 4
The Properties of Soils as determined by the Vegetable Pro-
ductions 9
Means of Increasing the Productive Powers of Soils 10
Improvement of the Soil by Home-made Manures, and their
application to the Soil
Mineral Manures—How applied to the Soil jr„. 16
Mixed Manures—Their Usefulness and Value to Poor Lands 20
Liquid Manures—How to make the most of them 21
Tillage of the Soil, a Preparation for receiving the Seeds, and the
Production of Crops 22
Potation of Crops 25
Arterial Drainage 34
Catch-Water Irrigation 38
Management of Pigs 41
Rearing of Poultry and their Future Management 42
Breed and Treatment of Cows, and Time of Calving 44
Sheep Farming—How adapted to the present condition of the
Colonial Farmer
General Management of the Farm 50
U'VG -V \\ C
Addenda 53
fOITf
The Drainage of Land—How it affects the Soil 28
Irrigation of Land : The Bed System 37




PRACTICAL INSTRUCTIONS
IN THE
ART OF AGRICULTURE.
The writer of this short treatise on the practice of agriculture in
the Australian colonies, having had many opportunities of seeing
the varied operations of the farmers, and of knowing much of their
condition, and the difficulties with which many of them have to
contend, the reduced state of fertility into which much, or all, of
their land has fallen through excess of cropping, and aware of the
difficulty of again bringing that land to a condition in which it
can be farmed with a profit even by those who have the advantages
of experience in the treatment of such land, and aware, too, that
many of them have not had the opportunity to learn the system of
farming which must be adopted to reclaim these overcropped lands,
has thought it might be of much benefit to put into their hands a
practical treatise on farming adapted to the Colonies, and which
would be a guide to the young farmer who may not have the
opportunity of procuring that instruction in a more advantageous
form. There is in the opinion of many farmers a great difference
between the proper method of farming in the colonies and that
practised in European countries, and that it is necessary to abandon
all home ideas before you undertake anything of importance in
these Colonies. This erroneous view of the matter has done much
mischief, and the sooner the mind is disabused of it the better.
The man who is well grounded in the true principles of agriculture,
and has had a practical training in any country or climate, has the
means, by an easy analogy, of applying his knowledge to other and
dissimilar cases.
The agriculture of a country is affected, in its general character,
and details of practice, by climate, the fertility of the soil, and the
food and habits of the people. Climate chiefly determines the
plants to be cultivated, and the order of the labours of the season,
and modifies all the practices of the husbandman. Within certain
degrees of temperature the practice of the farmer must be varied
to suit the differences of the climate, but the principle on which
the land is farmed may remain the same. To treat agriculture,
therefore, as a practical art, without reference to some given con-
ditions of climate, would embrace a wide range of observation, and
the consideration of a great mass of details. I shall therefore
confine my observations to the temperate climate of New South
Wales, and the production of the cereals and bulbous roots common
to the European farmer, perfectly satisfied in my own mind, that


(unless in extra dry seasons) the same practice which has raised
the European farmer to his present high standard of perfection,
will elevate the Colonial farmer to a similar state of agricultural
prosperity.
I propose to observe the plan I have thus laid out. One con-
dition of climate is assumed, and there is explained, as briefly as
possible, a system of agriculture which is conceived to be good,
which is founded .on long practical experience, and which is
capable of being reduced to practice. The young farmer will find
directions how to choose his land for his future operations, and
instruction how to judge of the quality of his land, and the stock
suitable for it and the climate. If the soil is naturally wet, he is
instructed how to drain it; if it is exhausted, how to reclaim it *
and if supplied with an abundance of water, how to irrigate in the
most economical plan.
It may be proper and necessary for me to state the opportunities
I have had of acquiring such an extent of knowledge in the various
departments of practical agriculture as to warrant me in assuming
the part of a monitor to the agricultural student. The following
short narrative, I trust, may be sufficient to satisfy the reasonable
enquirer.
My father was the tenant of Sweethope Farm, in the County of
Berwickshire, Scotland, for thirty-eight years, Sir John Pringle
the landlord. The land consisted of 600 acres, all in tillage except
about thirty acres; it was farmed on the five-field system of
rotation—the usual mode of farming in that locality. My educa-
tion consisted of the usual sound elements of the English language
procured at a parish school, with private tuition in land-surveying,
levelling, &c. Being the third son in the family, I could not
expect my father to take a farm for me ; I therefore prepared
myself for the situation of overseer or steward, or, perhaps, if
fortune favoured me, of Agent for a Gentleman’s Estate. With
this view I went to work, with my hands, at all the different
occupations of farm-labour, until I had arrived at that perfection
in which I could challenge any labouring man on my father’s farm
to any kind of work. At the age of seventeen I took the manage-
ment of the farm, under my father’s supervision, for two years, at
the end of which I was chosen out of eighteen or twenty applicants
by W. Halcomb, Esq., to manage a farm in the South of England,
and to introduce into that country the Scotch system of turnip
husbandry on the drill system. I remained in this situation till
the end of Mr. Halcomb’s lease, and before I had left the place I
obtained, through his influence, the situation of under agent on the
estate of Sir George Coulhurst, in the County of Cork, Ireland.
There I had to conduct the erection of a model farm, to introduce
the Scotch system of agriculture to the tenants on the estate,
which consisted of 22,000 acres of poor land, with ninety or one


hundred tenants. I gave the plans of the steading, and laid out
700 acres of land into fields, appropriate for such a farm, drained
all the wet land, irrigated as much as the water at command would
go over, and fenced with quick or stone all the fields connected
with the farm; when this was done, I got a steward from
Scotland, under my instructions, to conduct the work, and I had
then to attend to the improvements for the tenants, in straighten-
ing of boundaries, revaluation of their holdings, &c. At this time
(1848) the potato disease broke out. The Home Government was
giving advances of money to the Irish landlords to be laid out in
reproductive works to keep the people from starving ; but before
that could be done, the work was to be laid out on a plan, with
specifications of cost, etc., &c. I was chosen in the absence of a
professional surveyor to do this work, and succeeded in planning
and giving estimates for £20,000 worth of drainage, irrigation,
roads, bridges, fences, &c., which, when the Government Surveyor
had examined, Sir George Coulthurst got an advance of £IO,OOO
—a little more than the usual. Sir George was pleased, and
rewarded me with £2O in hand and £2O of additional salary. My
overtasked energies gave way, and I had, through sickness, to
leave that district. I went to Tralee, in the County of Kerry, and
when a little recovered I got the sole agency of the Estate of
Crotta, owned by James Julian, Esq., with an advance of salary;
but the state of my health forced me to leave it and remove to
Scotland for native air. Before I had quite recovered I got
another engagement with George Barbour, Esq., of Edinburgh, to
reclaim 300 acres of his property in Perthshure, on the banks of
the Garry, near the famous Pass of Killicrankie ; it had been in the
hands of five tenants, who had reduced it to that degree that no
more than a nominal rent could be got for it. I got erected a
steading for one farm, laid it out into fields according to the size of
the farm, drained all the wet land, put it all through a course of
tillage, manured highly with artificial manures for turnips, eat
them off with sheep, giving them at the same time hay, chaff,
oilcake, &c., and sowed down the whole 300 acres to permanent
grass. The last year’s crop was sold by auction, and brought on
an average £lO per acre ; the farm was then let as a grazing farm
at £2 per acre.
Resolved to see Australia, I came to Melbourne, saw the state
of agriculture there, and came on to Queensland, and visited most
of the Agricultural districts, engaged in raising some crops near
Gympie diggings, and left for New South Wales about two years
ago, the most of which I have spent with the Hon. Sir William
Macarthur, at Camden Park. The Hon. William Fox, late Prime
Minister of New Zealand, saw my operations in the South of
England—bis father-in-law being my employer.
It will, I think, be admitted that the farmer who had the oppor-


tunities of learning the varieties of rural labour, thus particu-
larized, and who has bestowed all the powers of his faculties for
upwig?ds of thirty years in acquiring them thoroughly, may, with-
out presumption, considei himself sufficiently qualified to impart
the results of his experience and observations to agricultural
students. It is in the belief that such practice and observation is
much wanted in these Colonies, and may be of no small benefit to
the intending farmer that this treatise is given. So long as I was
a pupil, no such brief and easy instruction could be procured, and
having personally experienced the want of it, sympathy for the
young beginner, struggling for a practical knowledge of his calling,
and unable to find it, or if found, beyond his means to purchase,
or when purchased too voluminous, or couched in terms beyond
his ability to comprehend, has prompted me to endeavour to make
his path smoother than I found my own.
Soils: Their Properties as determined by their
External Character.
The soil is the upper portion of the ground in which plants are
produced. It forms a stratum of from a few inches to three feet,
in alluvial deposits ; but the general depth of the best soils on
the uplands is twelve or fourteen inches. It is usually of a dark
colour, arising from a mixture of decomposed stems, leaves, and
other plants, which grow upon it, and in part, often by the presence
of animal substances. I may remark here, that the trees in this
Colony not shedding their leaves annually, as they do in Europe,
may account for the larger quantity of poor land here, than in
Europe, but I don’t mean to follow this argument. It is this
mixture of organic bodies, in a decomposed state, with the mineral
matter of the upper stratum, which distinguishes this stratum from
the sub-soil, or under-stratum of earth or rock, in many places
there is no earth between the proper soil and the rock, geologists
have included rock as a sub-soil. This decomposable organic por-
tion of the soil is often termed mould, and it is the presence of
mould accordingly which distinguishes the soil from the sub-soil.
Soils are very various in their fertility and texture. With rela-
tion to their powers of producing useful plants, they may be termed
rich or poor; Avith relation to their texture, they may be termed
heavy or light. The heavy or stiff soils are those which are
tenaceous, and cohesive or sticky in their parts ; the light or free
soils are those which are of a loose gritty texture, and whose parts
are easily separated. But the heavy soils pass into the loose
by imperceptible degrees, when ploughed up and exposed to fhe
air, frost, &c. ; hence, though all soils may be rich or poor, stiff or
light, they are so in every degree of fertility and texture. All
soils too are more or less heavy, or more or less light, and as they
possess more or less of these qualities, they are called heavy or clay


soils, or light soils. These names vary very much, not only in
different countries, but in different parts of the same country.
Light land is sometimes called barley-land, sometimes turnip-land;
the heavy and clay lands are called wheat-land or tilly-land.
The fertility of the land is indicated by the greater or smaller
proportion of mould, or vegetable or animal matter which enters
into their composition. When soils are thus naturally fertile, or
are rendered so by art, they are frequently termed loams ; thus
there are clayey loams and light loams. Peat even may, by the
application of labour and art, be converted into loam. This would
most readily be done by mixing it with sand to make it porous,
and then exposing it to the influence of the atmosphere. The
reason we have no peat in the neighbourhood of Sydney is, that
this climate decomposes vegetable matter so quickly, that instead
of any large quantities of vegetable matter in marshy places
becoming peat, it is decomposed into mould—thus we have such
depths of mould in our flat marshy lands; in colder climates such
large quantities of vegetable matter would become peat.
Soils then may be distinguished from each other —Ist. Accord-
ing to their texture, in which case they may be divided into two
classes —first, the stiff, called clays ; second, the light or free,
comprehending the peaty. 2nd. According to their fertility or
powers of producing useful plants, in which case they are termed
rich or poor.
Soils, too, from particular causes, may be habitually wet or
habitually dry. Soils, therefore, may be further distinguished by
their general relation to moisture, as—wet or dry.
Plants, in growing, may extend their roots into the sub-soil, and
there decompose and mix with it; but this is in small quantity,
and for the most part the sub-soil is readily distinguished by the
eye, from the upper stratum, or soil, by the absence of organic
matter.
Sub-soils may be divided into two classes, the rocky and the
earthy.
When the soil rests directly upon the rock, and no earthy sub-
soil comes between the two, the soil will frequently be found to
be similar in the composition of its mineral parts to the rock on
which it rests, it having been formed by the gradual disintegra-
tion or separation of its parts. This is chiefly found to be the case
with the soils of mountains ; for in plains the soil is generally
formed, not by the disintegration and decomposition of the rock
upon which it rests, but by the intermixing together of the dis-
integrated parts of different rocks and mineral strata.
The rocky sub-soils consist of granite, sandstone, limestone,
chalk and other mountain rocks of a country. They are sometimes
easily penetrated by the water that falls upon the soil, and are
then termed free or porous, and when they resist moisture, they
are termed close or retentive.


The earthy sub-soil in like manner, may be divided into porous or
retentive ; the retentive are those which, from containing clay, are
tenaceous and cohesive in their parts, and little pervious to water.
The porous are those which, having less clay in their composition,
are more readily permeable.
Whether the sub-soil be retentive or porous, the soil which rests
upon it should be of good depth. If the soil be shallow, on a
retentive sub-soil, it is affected too greatly by the alternations
of dryness and moisture. And if, again, a shallow soil rest on a
porous subsoil, the moisture of the soil is too easily acted upon,
and exhausted by heat.
A sub-soil, in so far as mere texture is concerned, should be
neither too retentive nor too porous. But although this interme-
diate condition is in most cases the best, yet in a very cold and
moist country, a free or porous sub-soil is to be preferred. The
soil, besides being affected by the texture of the sub-soil is
sometimes also affected by the nature of the mineral substances of
which the sub-soil is formed.
If the subsoil be rocky, it is desirable that it be calcareous,
(partaking of lime), rather than siliceous, (of a quartzy nature).
Sometimes the sub-soil contains matter which is directly injurious
to plants. This matter is generally found to be the oxides of
metals in combination with acids. Sub-soils of this nature are
generally distinguished by deepness of colour.
Soils, then, it is seen, are affected in their properties, not only
by their own texture and composition, but by the texture and com-
position of the sub-soil, and they are divided into the stiff or clayey,
and the light or free.
The clayey soils have, as their distinguishing character, the
adhesiveness of their parts ; and this property alone, will enable
the inexperienced to know them. A stiff clay, when dried either
by natural or artificial heat, becomes so hard as to resist a great
pressure. On account of the tenacity of such soils, they are tilled
with more difficulty than the freer soils. They require, to fertilize
them, a larger proportion of manures ; but they retain the effects
of those manures for a longer time. They are better suited to the
cultivation of plants with fibrous roots, such as wheat, than with
bulbous roots such as the turnip.
Soils of this class, as of every other’, possess many degrees of
natural fertility. The poor clays form, for the most part, a very
unprofitable soil, because, while their powers of production are
inconsiderable, the expenses of tilling them are large. The clay
soils of this description are generally of little depth, and'rest on a
retentive sub-soil. The natural herbage they produce is coarse and
little nutricious, and they are not well suited to the production of
the cultivated grasses and other herbage plants. They are little
fitted for turnips or other tuberous or bulbous roots. They are


sometimes termed cold soils—a very appropriate nate. Sometimes
the are classed amongst the soils called “ moory,” which denotes a
low quality.
Very different in their nature are the rich clays. These bear
weighty crops of all the cultivated kinds of cereals. They do not
excel the better soils of other classes so greatly in the production
of oats, and still less that of barley, in which the lighter loams
may surpass them ; but they are unequalled for the production of
wheat, and in many places derive their descriptive name from that
circumstance, being termed wheat soils. They are well suited for
the growth of the bean, a plant with a weighty stem ; also
the maize, each requiring a stiff soil to support them. Clays
approach to their most perfect condition as they advance to that
state which has been termed loam. The effect of judicious tillage,
and the application of manures, is to improve the texture of such
soils as well as to enrich them. Thus clays in the neighbourhood
of towns become dark in color, and less cohesive in their texture,
from the mixture of animal and vegetable manures; and thence
acquire the properties of the most valued soils of the class. In
Scotland the writer has seen them let as accommodation land, at
.£7 the Scotch acre, and he has also seen £3O per acre obtained for
the produce. The quantity of produce they will raise when brought
to high tilth is truly astonishing—almost past belief.
The next class of soil is the light or free. These are readily
known from the last by their smaller degree of tenacity. They
are less suited for wheat and beans than the clays; but they can
be brought to great perfection in wheat-growing, by art. They
are admirably adapted for bulbous roots, such as the turnip, or
tubers, such as the potato. In the South of England this descrip-
tion of land is treated in great perfection by the farmers who keep
sheep for the purpose of manuring their land; they grow large
quantities of green food, such as turnips, vetches, rye, and perma-
nent patches of sainfoin and lucexme; they can do almost without
artificial manures on this account. The sheep are kept in the best
possible condition, as well as the land, therefore, I consider such a
system adapted for these colonies ; and in sowing wheat in this
sort of land, they use the sheep for treading the land to make it
firm, and thereby make wheat land out of light free soil.
These light free soils may be divided into two kinds—first, the
sandy soil; these are of all the degrees, from almost barren to that
of fertile; when wholly without cohesion in their parts, they are
all but barren, and are only rendered productive by the admixture
of other substances. They part readily with their moisture on the
application of heat, therefore, unsuited for a climate like New
South Wales, unless they are made fertile by art, and they then
become a useful, easily worked, and reliable soil. What they
require to render them fertile is vegetable matter; if they are


required for wheat growing, the system described for the light, free,
soils, will answer remarkably well, they then become more cohe-
sive, and retain moisture to a greater degree. Sandy soils thus
made rich are early in maturing the cultivated plants, and hence
they are familiarly termed “ kindly ” soils. They are fit for the
production of every kind of herbage and grain. They, when in
the hands of practical men, even surpass the rich clays, for
barley, peas, rye, or oats; grasses of all the cultivated kinds
grow and flourish, and when laid down to perenniel pasture, they
get close in the bottom, and answer well for sheep pasture.
The second division of the light, free soils, and allied in character
to the sandy, is the gravelly. The character of the gravelly soils
is the quantity of loose stones which they contain. These stones
will be found to consist of those varieties of rock which the
mountains of the locality afford ; and the nature of these rocks
will frequently indicate the character of the soil ; thus the soils, of
which the stony matter is very siliceous, are generally found to be
barren, while those of which it is calcareous, are found to be
fertile. ,
Sands upon examination, will be found to consist of small parti-
cles of stony matter, and thus sands may be said to differ only
from gravels in the more minute division of their parts ; yet in
this minuteness of division there is generally sufficient to distin-
guish the two kinds of soils. The stony matter of the sand forms
its principal component part, while the larger stones in the gravel,
which give to it its name and character, seem only to be mixed
with the other necessary parts of the soils. The stone of the one
has undergone a considerable mechanical division, while much of
that of the other has only been loosened in sensible masses from
its native bed. Any light soil, mixed with a sufficient portion of
stones, is gravel; and gi’avel, therefore, is nothing else than the
different kinds of light soil, mixed with a greater or less proportion
of stones.
Gravel, like sands, have all the gradations of quality from fer-
tility to barrenness. The loose soils of this nature, in which the
undecomposed material is great, and the intervening soil—siliceous,
are held to be the worst of their kind. These are, in some places,
termed “ hungry ” gravels, not only to denote their poverty, but
their tendency to devour, if I may use the expression, manure,
without any corresponding nourishment to themselves. They may
be made fertile by art, for I hold that any soil can, if we adopt the
right plan, but the low descriptions of this soil are the least pro-
fitable, in their reclamation, for they retain that character they
deserve—“ hungry.”
The rich gravel will produce all the cultivated kinds of grain—
this term does not include wheat. Their loose texture renders
them less suited than the clays to the growth of wheat and beans,


but they are admirably adapted for barley and rye. They are
quick in their powers of producing vegetation, and tor this quality
they are termed “ sharp ” or quick soils. When in condition as
farming land, they produce a tine berry of grain, and they answer
well for pasture for sheep or cattle, being healthy, when laying on
a moderately porous subsoil. They are trusty soils, for they gene-
rally yield well, and in this respect, they differ from many of the
sands, in which the quality of the grain produced does not always
accord with its early promise. It is well, then, even in the best
sands, to see a tendency to gravel, which denotes a sharpness, as it
is termed, in the soil. They are suited for the growth of roots,
bulbous as well as as tuberous, and consequently are termed
“ turnip ” soils.
This simple nomenclature of soils is sufficiently intelligible to
the practical faimer or the learner.
The Properties of Soils as determined by their Vegetable
Productions.
When we regard the distribution of plants in ditferents regions,
we perceive that this is determined by causes which have little
relation to the nature of the soil on which they grow. The soils
of all countries are—in their essential characters—alike. The
same mineral masses, composed of the same substances, exist over
all the world, and yield, by their disintegration or decomposition,
the same minerals for the forming of soils.
But although this is the case, it is altogether different with the
vegetation by which these soils are characterised. Every zone,
from the equator fo the polar circle, is distinguished by a different
vegetation, and different regions have their peculiar plants.
Amongst the natural causes which affect the vegetation of
countries, the influence of temperature, is that which is the most
obvious to the senses. When we pass from a warm country to a
cold, we perceive a change in the whole character of the vegetation.
We cannot ascend a mountain without finding such a change in
the kind of plants produced, and in the vigour with which they
grow, dependent upon the change of the temperature. The degree
of moisture, too, the distance or nearness to the sea, and the cir-
cumstances connected with the climate and physical condition of
the country, affect the nature of its vegetable productions, and show
that the influence of soil, with respect to the kinds of plants pro-
duced, is entirely subordinate to that of temperature, and the
effects of climate.
When we extend, then, the range of our observations to different
and distant countries, we see that the nature of the plants cannot
indicate that of the soil on which they grow. It is only within
narrow limits, and under given conditions of climate, that the kinds
of plants afford any indication of the nature of the soils which
produce them.


I have made these observations to confute the erroneous opinion
which extensively prevails, that the plants on the surface of any
land, will indicate the character of that land. When we cast our
eye over a country, we have generally little difficulty in determin-
ing whether the country be barren or fertile. The general aspect
of the vegetation, whether stunted or vigorous, the absence or
presence of heaths, the richness of the sward, the cleanness and
straightness of the stems of trees, the verdure of the foliage, and
the like, present to the eye a general character not readily
mistaken.
The fertility of soils, generally speaking, is denoted by their
power to yield the useful plants ; and it is a law, with few excep-
tions, that the poorer the soil is, the less nutricious are the plants
which, in its natural state, it produces. The soils of the poorest
class produce mosses, lichen, and heaths, which are less nutritious
than the grasses. As the soil improves in quality, the grasses
become intermixed with the heath and lichens. But these grasses
are still inferior and little nutricious. As the soil continues to
improve the grasses become more valuable in their kind, and more
numerous in their species, and thus indicate the increasing fertility
of the soil. A square foot of rich old tmf has been found to
contain 1000 separate plants of 20 distinct species.
In choosing a soil, however, an essential circumstance in this
Colony is its depth, and the texture of the sub-soil; a good depth
could not be said to be less than twelve inches ; depth is a favour-
able indication of its quality, if it does not exceed six inches the
indication is reversed. Such shallow soils are rarely good, unless
when resting on limestone. A shallow soil on a retentive clay
cannot be good till the subsoil is made porous, by drainage and
subsoiling, with plough or spade. If a soil produce sub-aquatic
(water plants), it is wet, if these plants are tall and vigorous, and
the soil earthy, and deep, the removal of the wetness will remove
the infertility. And such a soil may become of the richest kind.
Means of Increasing 1 the Productive Powers of Soils.
The means at our command of increasing the productive powers
of soils, may be comprehended under the following general
heads;—
Ist. —Supplying to the soil those organic and mineral substances
which may be required.
2nd.—Altering its texture, depth, properties, by tillage and
other means.
3rd.-—-Changing its relation with regard to moisture.
Vegetable and animal matters, in a decomposing state, appear to
act in various ways in increasing the productive powers of the soil.
They improve its texture ; a rich soil works more easily than a
poor one ; they increase its power to absorb and retain moisture,.


and this is an essential quality in these colonies, and they supply
that matter, which, in whatever form conveyed .to the organs of
plants, tends to nourish them. Experience has, in every age,
accordingly, taught the husbandman to supply those substances to
the soil, and the doing of it so forms one of the most important
means of maintaining or increasing fertility. Besides mixing
vegetable and animal matters with the soil, the minerals of the
soils themselves require to be mixed in order to produce the greatest
state of fertility ; a great cause of the fertility of our deposits is,
that they derive their soils from such a variety of materials, and
from so many different soils, these being washed by floods, are
mixed most thoroughly, this accounts too for their being adapted
for so many different kinds of plants.
The second means referred to of increasing the productive
powers of soils is altering their texture, depth, and properties, by
tillage and other means.
Ploughing, harrowing, and rolling, and all other means adopted
for exposing to the action of the air, and for mixing its parts, is
seen to have a beneficial effect on the productive powers of the
soil. It is, indeed, conformable to analogy, as well as to experience,
that soils should be improved, by pulverization and exposure to the
atmosphere ; and we have noticed that their fertility is in a great
degree indicated by the proportion of minutely divided earthy
matter which they contain. Another object is promoted by tillage,
and that is, deepening the soil, by turning up part of the sub-soil;
this, however, must be done cautiously, for sometimes a sub-soil is
found to be, on its first application, injurious to vegetation, but
when exposed to the influence of the air, it soon mixes with the
soil, and does more good by deepening than harm by its temporary
injurious effect.
The third means referred to of adding to the fertility of soils is
changing their relations with respect to moisture, but this will be
treated of under the head of “ drainage.”
Improvement of the Soil by Home-made Manures, and
their application to the Soil.
Manures may be composed of animal or vegetable substances; or
they may consist of mineral matter; or partly from mineral and partly
from vegetable substances. It is not intended to treat of their
chemical mode of action. This investigation forms one of the most
interesting parts of the chemistry of agriculture, and, I might add,
the most useful. But it is not essential to our present practical
treatment of this subject, and it will be little alluded to in our
general remarks.
In supplying animal and vegetable substances to the soil, in a
decomposed state, we, in truth, supply the same substances which
enter into the composition of the living plants. Science has made


known to us the truth, that the living plants and the dead manures
are resolvable into the same elementary substances, but experience
has nevertheless taught the husbandman, in every age, that all
animal and vegetable substances mixed with the matter of the soil,
tend to fertilize it, by affording nourishment to the plants which
it produces.
The simple bodies which form the substance of manures exist in
various states of combination, and often in a solid state. Now, in
order that these solid bodies be absorbed by the roots of plants,
they must be dissolved in water, for the absorbing pores of the
roots of plants are so small that they are only discovered by the
microscope. The solid bodies, therefore, which find their way into
these minute pores, may reasonably be supposed to be held in solu-
tion by that aqueous matter which enters into the roots of plants
and forms the sap. Water is the medium, therefore, by which all
the matter of nutrition, in whatever form, is conveyed to the roots
of plants, and without which, accordingly, vegetation is never
known to take place.
Of the means which nature employs to render those substances
soluble in water, fermentation appears to be the chief. By this
process the elementary parts of the substance fermented, assume
new forms of combination, and become fitted to supply the matter
of nutrition to plants in that form in which it can be received by
the pores of the roots. We need not be surprised then with the
wonderful effects of rain, seeing fermentation cannot take place
without it. There is, up to this time, a little controversy as to the
necessity of fermenting the common farm-yard manure before it is
applied to the soil, it is agreed that fermentation is begun in the
farm-yard, and completed in the soil, but how far it should be
carried on in the farm-yard, is the point of dispute, chemisty has
not, to my knowledge, solved thoroughly, this important matter ;
all animal and vegetable matter when acted on by the air decom-
poses readily, and when they are buried in the soil and ferment
there, the various proportions of their elementary parts make
their escape into the earth, in various forms of gaseous combina-
tion ; if these manures are fermented too much before they are
consigned to the soil, these various gasses escape in the air, but
the main difficulty in applying them to the soil before being well
fermented is, that they cannot be so easily mixed with the soil.
There is another difficulty, namely, that when put to the soil in a
bulky unfermented state, they keep the soil too loose for the plants
growing in it, the air gets too free admittance, and the soil gets too
dry ; in a wet season it does not so much matter, for it is kept
moist by the frequent showers. But there is a general modifica-
tion of these difficulties which all farmers should thoroughly
understand. In practice it is found that on stiff clayey lands,
manure of this sort is generally best applied when not much fer-


merited, it helps to keep the soil porous if it is inclined to be too
much condensed, it allows of the admission of air, for no plants
can grow without it, and it admits water more readily, another
essential; it also continues longer in the land, giving out its
virtues gradually. The light and free soils on the other hand,
require the manure to be considerably decomposed, therefore, in
turnip-sowing the most decomposed manure is used, so as the
turnip plants get at once the full benefit of the manure; manures
put to turnip lands in this way are principally intended for the
turnip crop, and the land is then noux-ished by the sheep while
eating them off, the turnips in this case are expected to use the
greatest part of this manure for their own benefit.
The great desideratum in the application of manures of every
description is their thorough incorporation with the soil. I have
shown that the soil itself requires it, and in no less degree does the
manure, and the best mode of doing so that we have found is the
treading of sheep, their little feet act as so many punches, thrusting
the manure in amongst the earth, no implement has yet been
invented to equal this simple process of scattering the manure
equally over the loose soil, and running a flock of sheep over it.
In making an implement to suit this purpose, it might answer in
dry weather, but in wet it would fail, the soil and the manure
would clog, and it would be unequally distributed ; but all
weathers are alike, as to the other, the wool about the hoofs seem
to act as non-conductors ; the best crop of wheat the writer ever-
raised was done in this way; the land was a light barley-land, it
was ploughed and pressed with the land presser, about eight cart
loads to the acre, of what is called in England muckle, i.e., manure
half decomposed, was spread over the pressed land. The presser
leaves the surface of the land like a sheet of corrugated iron, only
the furrows left by the presser are eight or nine inches apart. The
seed was sown by hand, and naturally fell into those farrows, the
sheep, were then driven over it, in the direction of the furrows; it
rained moderately at the time, and just gave us the right consist-
ence for our puddling process, the land was harrowed after the
sheep, to smooth the surface, but the harrow tines could not reach
the firm part of the bottom of the drills to disturb the seed. This
piece of land, 15 acres, yielded 60 bushels of wheat to the acre.
It was considex-ed the poorest piece of land on the Froxfield Fai-m,
formerly alluded to. So that I consider when little fermented
manxxre can be mixed thoroughly with the soil, it is the ixxost
economical xnode of using it. This is the system to suit these
Colonies, it has maxxy advantages, the seed is in a firm and secxxre
bed, with the manure equally distributed arouxxd it, and the
surface of the land can be made as fixie as ashes to atti-act the
moisture, and resist the rays of the sun.
I have been told in these Colonies, several tixnes, that sheep
manure is too heating for this climate. This piece of inforxxxation


being foreign to my ideas, I have invariably asked for further
information on the plan of application of the sheep manure, when
this important decision was come to, and as invariably got for
answer, that it was taken from a sheep-pen and spread on the
land. I need not tell those who have seen it that fermentation in
the sheep-pen goes on time without end, possibly no virtue was
left in this manure, and all the harm it did to the land was to
keep it hollow. It is a very different matter when the ‘sheep are
eating off a green crop of any kind, they are then treading into
the soil their own droppings, and getting up the right consistence
by using their own urine, this latter ingredient I hold to be of
equal importance with the first, in some cases, twice as much;
when sheep are getting salt in their food, I am of opinion that
this liquid is the best antidote for rust and smut in wheat, in as
far as destroying the seeds in the land.
Independent of any antidotal effect, this urine, as a fertilizer, is
invaluable, and were its qualities better known, it would be more
prized than it has generally been. When cattle or horses are kept
in the house and the urine allowed to drain away, the manure
made from that housing, is poor in comparison with that where
the urine is preserved and mixed with the dry part, to help to
decompose and enrich it. Were it not for the fertilizing power
of urine, our pastures would fail in their fertility, and more
especially in warm climates, where the dropping of cattle and
other animals soon dry up, and their gasses, which would otherwise
have benefitted the land, escape in the atmosphere. But let those
who cavil save a few gallons of liquid manure, and apply it to a
piece of grass-land, and watch its effect; if it has been kept some
time it will be found to be too powerful, and the grass will appear
as if scorched by a burning sun, but if it is diluted to the proper
strength, it will cause a flow of vernal grass.
I have been also told, with the utmost gravity, by a farmer, that
farm-yard manure is no good in this Colony, and to show his sin-
cerity he challenged me to make a trial, he would give any kind of
farm-yard manure I wished, and he would have the bare-land ; the
crop was to be potatoes. This interesting trial of skill, for want
of opportunity, did not come off, but I mention it to show the
want of knowledge as to the proper method of applying manures,
and therefore the estimation in which they are held. The ex-
perienced can easily see a case, especially in these Colonies, in which
farm-yard manure could be detrimental to a crop of any sort; in
the case of unfermented manure to light land, and not properly
mixing it with the soil, the result would be that I have already
explained. The bulky, unfermented, manure would keep the land
too open, the heat of the climate or drying winds, would evaporate
the moisture from the crop, and as far as that crop was concerned,
that sort of manuring would be the cause of the failure • but if


the manure had been well decomposed, and put in moist, and well
mixed with the soil, the case would have been reversed—the vege-
table matter here introduced would assist the land to absorb and
retain moisture, it is one of the distinguishing qualities of a pro-
ductive soil that, having a considerable amount of vegetable
matter in its composition, it is thereby fitted for absorbing or
retaining moisture. A little science, or common sense, is wanted
in a case of this kind, and particularly with regard to a potato
crop when put in with the plough and earthed up with the same
implement. The best mode of applying the manure for this crop
is, to put it on the land in Winter, and cover it with the plough,
and then leave it till the Spring • if it is not too much decomposed
it will ferment in the soil, and its virtues will be transposed to the
soil, the land then will be easily worked into fine tilth, and no fear
need be apprehended in respect to its effect on the potato crop.
The writer has proved this plan of applying farm-yard manure,
and invariably found it to answer well—even in England, but it
is much more adapted for these Colonies, and much more necessary.
This principle is one of the first, and most important, in farming
in these Colonies, and cannot be too much enforced. If applied
slovenly, and not thoroughly incorporated with the soil, it must do
harm in dry weather; but if thoroughly intermixed it must of
necessity fertilize the soil, and make it more productive. The
artificial manures may be economised by limiting their application
to the roots of the crops, such as those which stand at considerable
distances from one another, in putting in a crop of corn, for
example, by throwing a small quantity of guano round the roots
of each plant, and digging it in with a fork, the roots would get to
it early, and be forced on till they extend themselves well into the
soil, and thereby be prepared to withstand a dry season, for any
plant is accelerated in is growth by such means, and often it is
saved by such litlle help ; when the roots are not extended deep
enough into the soil to get the benefit of the moisture underneath,
they soon succumb to the drying wind or scorching sun. In this
mode of applying artificial manures a great saving is effected, one
cwt. of guano may be made to go as far as two scattered all over
the ground.
The different kinds of manures to apply to soils in climates such
as the temperate, I will here enumerate, as I know the facility of
obtaining them. Farm-yard manure is at the command of every
one who tills the soil, but in general it is overlooked, if not
economised, it will, in general, be insufficient for the farmer’s
use, but there are many ways of increasing it; it is often
neglected and allowed to waste its best qualities before it is. put
together ; when it lies exposed for a few days in this climate, it
looses much of its fertilizing ingredients, it should be collected
daily, and kept in a sheltered place, a tank for the liquid mamire


should be made close to it, and all the liquid manure drained into
it and applied to the manure heap when wanted, the manure will
not ferment without a certain amount of moisture, all sorts of
animal and vegetable substances will form manure, and may be
added to these heaps—turning them over two or three times, and
adding the liquid manure when wanted, is a great means of accele-
rating their decomposition; by adding daily to these heaps, a con-
siderable amount of manure can be collected through the year, and
if only enough to put in a crop of turnips, or mangold, to give to
the cows through the winter, when feed is scarce and butter high
in price, the farmer will find his incomings increased, and there
will also be afforded a greater facility of increasing the quantity of
manure for the following season’s crops, and thus, by unabated
energy and perseverance, the farmer will increase his capital, and
improve his farm.
If green crops are raised for the purpose of ploughing into the land,
to increase its vegetable ingredients, they should be ploughed in
just when they are coming into flower, for then they contain the
largest quantity of readily soluble matter, and have the least
exhausted the nutritive substance of the soil. Buckwheat is a
plant well suited for this purpose, it is easily cultivated, and soon
arrives at the necessary maturity. Bones may, and should, be
gathered whenever found, they are invaluable for turnip manure,
and can be broken or crushed by the farmer himself fine enough
for his purpose, the larger they are the longer they continue to
give out their vh’tues to the soil. Malt-dust could be procured
from various places, when mixed with wood ashes, and steeped in
the urine tank of the farm, it forms an enriching compost for
turnips or mangold. Night soil too, abounds in matters composed
of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, and whether recent
or fermented, supplies abundant food for plants, the disagreeable
odour of this substance may be destroyed by the application of
quicklime, in this way it soon dries, and is easily pulverized. It
is useful for turnips and may be put in with the seed.
The refuse of the various manufactures in which skin, wool, and
other animal substances are used, forms manures of various quality,
according to the substances employed, and the nature of the manu-
facture ; such are the refuse of the currier, the offal of the glue-
maker, and various others, all such as can be concentrated are of
vital importance for raising green crops, and as I have already
pointed out, the green crops are the farmer’s main stay.
Mineral Manures-How applied to the Soil.
The mineral substances which are employed as manures, may be
supposed to exert two modes of action ;
Ist—They may act upon the soil by improving its texture, or by
rendering the parts of it which are insoluble—soluble ; or by
otherwise fitting it to promote the growth of plants.


2nd—They may act immediately upon the plant itself, by being
x-eceived into its substance.
The manner in which this action takes place upon the organs of
the plant may elude our observation, or may be explained by
chemical science; but this much may be admitted, that certain
earths, oxides, and alkalies, or those combined with acids, pass into
the substance of the plant, absorbed it may be, in part from the
atmosphere, but chiefly, along with the aqueous portion of the sap,
from the earth in which the roots are fixed. We cannot generally
distinguish when a mineral substance acts upon the plant,.through
the medium of a change in the soil; or when it acts directly upon
the plant itself. All that we tnily know is—that certain earthy
alkaline bodies, or their saline combinations, applied to the soil,
promote the growth of plants, and are what farmers call manures.
Of all the mineral substances known to us, lime is that which
performs the most important part in improving the soils and
promoting the growth of vegetables. Lime is found in nearly all
soils that are capable of sustaining vegetation, and, in combination
with other acids in nearly all vegetable substances.
Lime, as employed in Agriculture and the Arts, is derived (in
the Old Country) from three distinct orders of rocks. The
primary series—these are compact and crystaline, they aflbrd the
finest marbles and yield a pure lime. The secondary or transition
rocks—these also are hard and yield good lime. The carboniferous
and cretaceous rocks—it is from this class the largest supplies of the
material are derived. But lam not aware of any of these being
used extensively in the Colonies, the most of the lime used being
made from sea shells.
Limestone, from whatever source derived, becomes a substance
of an acrid nature, absorbs water with an evolution of heat, and
by this, looses the carbonic acid with which it was united, and
forms what is termed a hydrate. In absorbing water it readily
crumbles down, and at the same time it begins to imbibe carbonic
acid from the atmosphere, the hydriate is expelled and the carbonic
acid takes its place. In this manner the lime recovers the principles
which it had lost by calcination. Lime, in its caustic state, is
observed to exercise a powerful action in decomposing the ligneous
parts of plants ; while it dissolves vegetable fibre, and renders it
soluble, it has also the power of forming compounds of a soapy
nature with the soluble portion of vegetable and animal substances,
which compounds are not dissolved till after a considerable time.
Caustic lime thus performs two functions apparently opposed to
each other. It decomposes the inert vegetable matter of the soil,
and then forms compounds which are not themselves readily
soluble. It first disposes certain substances insoluble in
water to become soluble; while, by combining in part with
substances which are soluble, it prolongs the nutritive action of


soft vegetables and animal substances beyond the time in which
they would Lave acted, if they had not entered into a combination
with lime.
Of this particular mode of action an example may be given—
When it is wished to carry off from the vegetable juices in the
manufacture of sugar the animal substances which have been used,
lime is employed, which combines with these substances and rises
with them to the surface of the liquid in the form of a thick scum,
which is insoluble in water. This scum laid upon the fields is
injurious to plants; but, when it is deposited in a ditch and
allowed to ferment for a year, it forms one of the richest manures.
This fact has been proved during a period of many years, where
the substance is too bad in quantity.
We have in like manner seen that the application of lime to
nightsoil does not hasten the decomposition of their substance, but
on the contrary, forms with it a less soluble compound. It
moderates its action, and renders its effects less sudden, but more
permanent.
Certain acids, and acid combinations often exist in the soil or
sub-soil, and produce infertility. Lime, by forming new combina-
tions with these bodies, frequently neutralizes their hurtful effects;
thus, if sulphate of iron, or green vitriol, which is a combination
of sulphuric acid with the oxide of iron, exist in the soil, and lime
be applied, the lime will combine with the sulphuric acid of the
vitriol, and form gypsum, and thus convert into fertilizing matter,
a substance which, in excess, is injurious.
Lime may be applied to the land in different ways, and at
different periods. It may be spread on the land and ploughed or
harrowed in. If not too caustic it may be spread on grass lands,
or other growing crops. It is usually applied when land is in
fallow, sometimes made into a compost with vegetables and earths
mixed. The quantity also is very various, as much as 120 bushels
of shell lime, (wduch would, when slacked, make 240 bushels,) is
applied per acre ; heavy land requires more, generally, than light
land. In warm countries less is required than in cold and humid
countries.
The periods at which doses of lime should be ] cpeatcd too, differ
according to the quantity applied, and the manner of using it.
When large quantities are put, a period of fourteen years may
elapse before another is required. But when applied in smaller
quantities, a less time may elapse before another dose is admin-
istered, there is nothing opposed to a sound theory in this practice.
The application of lime, however, calls into powerful action the
nutritive principles of the soil, and hence if land be severely
cropped after lime has been applied, it is reduced to a greater state
of sterility than if the stimulant had not been given. Lime,
therefore, calculated as it is to produce the best effects in fertilizing


a soil, is frequently made the means, in the hands of unskilful and
injudicious men to injure it most materially. This is especially in
the case of light soils of an inferior kind. These are frequently
so injured by injudicious cropping, after the application of lime,
that they are reduced to a state of the greatest barrenness. When
soils are brought to this condition by scourging crops, they cannot
be restored to fertility by a subsequent application of lime. So
far from this, the future dose, generally renders them more barren
than before. The only good remedies are the application of vege-
table and animal manures, and rest in grass, and many years will
elapse before they are reclaimed to their primitive fertility.
.But, although dangerous in the hands of unskilled farmers,
and their stimulating properties often abused. Lime is an instru-
ment of production of the highest importance in the hands of
practical men, on land improved and cultivated for the first time,
it exercises a powerful influence, and it is even difficult to improve
some lands without this mineral. It is found to improve the
quality of plants produced, to render those cultivated more pro-
ductive of farine matter, and even to cause species which were not
before growing naturally to occupy the ground. Thus lime spread
upon a piece of peaty land is frequently found to eradicate, in
whole or in part, the heaths, and to permit the grasses and clovers
to take their places. If it is wanted to deepen a soil by ploughing
up an inch or two of the sub-soil, a little lime thrown over it is
the most speedy means of correcting the defects, or stimulating the
productive powers of the new substance exposed.
To admit of the beneficial action of lime, the soil should be
relieved of superfluous water. Not only lime, but all manures,
are insufficient when the land is saturated with excess of wetness.
The only safe mode of applying lime in these Colonies, where
land is much exhausted, would be in the shape of a compost made
with weeds or any other decomposing organic matter found on the
farm, such as the sediment of ponds or waterholes, and give it
time to exhaust its powers before it is applied to the land. Two
bushels to a cubic yard of such material would make a good com-
post, and when applied in this way it is best in its caustic state.
It will be in these times of indifference to the common sorts of
manure, of little use my introducing the sodas or the potasses,
but the salts will deserve some remarks in these times of rust and
smut, and may not be out of place.
Experience has taught us that salt applied to land in any con-
siderable quantity is of doubtful benefit—the ancients regarded a
salt soil as synonymous with an unfruitful one. Soils abounding
in salt, however, have been found to yield herbage very nutritive
and wholesome, and certain saline marshes are highly valued on
this account.
Salt is probably as essential to the health of vegetables, as of


animals, and we may believe that a mineral, thus widely diffused,
performs important functions. It exists in all plants, is a consti-
tutional part of almost every kind of animal and vegetable
manure, and is found in most soils, in sufficient quantity for the
purposes of vegetation.
The whole subject of saline manures deserves more investigation.
That all saline bodies that exist habitually in plants are beneficial
to vegetation, we may almost from analogy infer. We see this in
the case of the carbonate of lime, the sulphate of lime, and the
phosphate of lime; and it is not unreasonable to infer that all
saline bodies, which exist in plants in their common state, may be
employed as manures.
I cannot close this subject without remarking the absence of any
investigation into the cause of the prevalent disease in wheat in
these colonies ; that it may be caused by the small amount of
saline properties of the soil, is not improbable. The circumstance
of its greatest virulence being on those lands most cropped, favours
this supposition ; so likewise does the fact of its declining vigour
in the old country, where so much salt is now being used in the
artificial manures, and many other forms. The analytical exami-
nation of some of the soils where it has been most prevalent, would
decide this important point with very little trouble, and it would
be of vast benefit to the farmer and the Colony.
Mixed Manures—Their Usefulness and Value to
Poor Lands.
This class of manures, consist of those derived partly from organic,
and partly from mineral substances.
Ashes of different kinds used for domestic or other purposes, are
of this class. Coal ashes from factories, form a large part of the
refuse of towns, and are of an indifferent quality as a manure, but
act well on heavy clay land, they make it more porous and easily
worked.
Soot from either coal or wood is a most useful manure. Its
base is charcoal, and it is advantageously applied to all soils and
especially to grass land.
The sweepings of streets, or the general refuse of towns, is a
very compound substance of much importance to the fertility of
the adjacent country, but will seldom pay for cartage to long clis
tances. It consists of all kinds of offal, vegetable, mineral, and
animal; this species of manure is much valued, but not generally
equal to farm-yard manure. In every town, however, this manure
ought to he carefully collected, and in an especial manner in towns
such as Sydney, where the surrounding country requires large
quantities of such manure, to make it of any value for the growth
of vegetables or other crops.


Liquid Manures—How to make the most of them.
I have already made some hints as to the value of liquid manure
on a farm, and the necessity of saving every available portion of
it, for the fermenting of the dung heap* and if any remains when
that is effected, the next most important use in which to employ it
is, the mixing of it with any sort of light material, such as malt
dust, chaff of wheat, barley or oats, or in fact any vegetable
matter which requires enriching and fermenting in order to decom-
pose it, and prepare it for the use of plants. By this means such
quantities of an easily conveyed manure for the purpose of raising
turnips or mangold, and which can be concentrated by fermenta-
tion, to be almost equal to the special manures sold by the mer-
chant. If our farmers would be advised to economise manure of
this description, and increase, year by year, the breadth of their
turnip or mangold, or other green crops for their cows in Winter,
I would then say, here is the first dawn of hope for their future
prosperity. This is the spot where it must begin, and although
that beginning may be weak, it is like the pebble thrown on the
still water, it will radiate in all directions, till the little farm,
become the fruitful, profitable, and happy home of the farmer.
The waste of liquid manure is deserving of public attention, and
should be directed to that committed by every town in the colony.
When taken advantage of, in the old country, such town drainage
has proved highly beneficial both to town and country. The
Edinburgh sewage has made land outside the town, similar to our
Sydney soil, worth £2O per acre, which was formerly rented at <£l
per acre. When we consider what escapes from every human
being every year, and add to that the washings of soap, grease,
and other materials incidental to domestic purposes, we may
imagine the enormous quantity of the most valuable matter, as
manure, which is thus lost every year —literally wasted. It has
been ascertained by Boussingault, with regard to London, as an
instance that man, in a healthy state, passes 3 lbs. of urine daily ;
and Liebig states that, in the same stat«, he voids 5|- ozs. of dung.
These two quantities give a total annual quantity of 1220 lbs. of
liquid and manure voided by every person on the average. Now,
taking only 2,000,000 as the population, the quantity of those
manures would amount annually to 1,089,285 tons.
The Flemish farmer is a pattern to look to, in the case of liquid
manures ; they have either vaulted cellars under their byres and
stables, or in other convenient places of the steading, and
they have, besides, such vaults placed at the road-sides to empty
into them the excrementary materials they collect from towns and
villages. And so much do the inhabitants of the towns in Belgiam
make it a business to collect the liquid and solid manures of their
own houses, that it is in evidence before a Committee of the House
•of Commons that a housemaid may be hired for a year in Burges


for £3 of money wages, with the privilege of disposing of the
manure.
The value put upon the manure of a single person in one year,
by Dr. Radcliff, is £1 7s. ; if farmers would save it from their
families and workmen on the farm, it would amount to something
considerable in the year; but if they would also give their cows
turnips or other green food in stall in winter and save their urine
and economise it, they would soon see their farms put up a
different appearance than they do at present. Put up a cow for
four months in winter and supply her with what turnips she
would eat and a little hay to keep her from getting too loose in
the bowels, economise the manure as I have described, and, at the
very least, it will manure an acre of ground for turnips, that acre
of turnips might yield 15 tons of feed for next winter, —enough
for three such cows for four months ; these again would raise
manure for three acres of turnips, and at this rate go on till all the
farm was in high cultivation, for the turnip land would then pro-
duce oaten hay, and the cows would be producing milk and butter.
"Winter is the time to sell butter, and the farmer would be, as I
have said before, earning money and improving his farm at the
same time. I am not giving these details as a model of good
farming, but as a starting plan for farmers in low circumstances.
If he could afford it, I would say to him, give the cows, when
using the turnips and hay, a feed of boilded com once in the day,
it will come out in the milk and butter, and the manure will be
all the richer; it will go farther and hasten on the reclamation of
your land, your cow will come out in better condition to the spring
grass, and if she is getting too old to keep for another year, will
soon run into beef for the butcher. There is nothing got by
starving an animal of any kind, and as for farmers, but we have
often seen it, starving an animal, where food for animals is had at
first cost, is the height of folly.
Tillage of the Soil, a Preparation for Receiving the Seeds,
and the Production of Crops.
In giving instruction to the farmer on this most important work,
it will be necessary to introduce some science, in order to make
him understand fully the importance of the various qualities
required in a soil properly prepared for the reception and growth of
the different seeds.
The pulverising of the soil, I have already shown, is necessary
for thoroughly mixing its own component parts, so as to enable it
to act more efficiently by bringing all its parts into more intimate
relation to one another. The plough, and the harrow, and the
roller, perform this operation sufficiently in some soils, but in
others more mechanical power is required, in which case the


Grabble and Croskil’s harrow, &c., are indispensable; when a soil
requires deepening, the sub-soil plough is necessary. The practical
farmer knows all these to be necessary, because his experience has
taught him that, with the most thorough tillage, he has got the
most produce from the soil. The farmer also knows that the
roots of the various plants are so minute that they cannot be seen
with the naked eye ; therefore, the more he pulverises the soil,
these tender fibres, whose part is to search through the soil for the
particular ingredients wanted for the nourishment of the plant,
can only be done when the soils are softened sufficiently for their
power of penetration. The experienced farmer also knows that
the finer he gets the tilth, the better the land is adapted to absorb
and retain moisture ; that if the surface of the land is fine, it will
attract moisture from the air; that the deeper the soil is, the roots
of the plants have the greater facility of getting out of the reach
of drying winds and a scorching sun, and that where the greatest
body of soil is, there will be the greatest quantity of air, moisture,
and heat, —all indispensable to the thorough vigorous growth of all
plants.
The healthy seed of a plant is a living object. Though
apparently lifeless to the sight and the touch, it has life ; and its
vitality is capable of exerting great power when excited into
action. What the agent is, and how it acts, which excites the
vitality of seeds, we do not know, and perhaps never shall know ;
but we do know the circumstances in which, when seeds are
placed, vitality is invariably excited, and the proof of this excite-
ment is furnished by their germination, which is the first
movement towards the production of a plant.
Now the circumstances which excite germination are a combina-
tion of air, heat, and moisture. These must be afforded in the
most favourable conditions before the plant will grow. They may
be applied to the seed, and its germination secured in the air, as
certainly as in the ground ; but, on the development of the root,
the province of which is to penetrate into the soil, the young
germ, instead of growing upwards, would die were it kept
constantly in the air. The earth supplies all the requisites of air,
heat, and moisture to the plant, in a much better state than the
air can of itself, and the soil continues to supply them, not only at
the period of its germination, but during its after life. A vital
seed, placed in the ground, must be affected by three agencies
before it can produce a plant—viz., physical, chemical, and
physiological. The first of these agencies claim most of our
attention.
When a vital seed is placed in pulverised ground, it is sur-
rounded with air; for although the particles of the soil may seem
to be close together, on examination it is found that the interstices
(or the spaces between these particles) occupy one-fourth of a


given quantity of soil. Hence 100 cubic inches of pulverised soil
contains no less than 25 cubic inches of air. Therefore, in a field,
the soil of which has been pulverised to the depth of eight inches,
every acre of it will contain 12,545,280 cubic inches of air; and
hence, also, as every additional inch of depth pulverised calls into
activity 259 tons of soil, at l - 48 of specific gravity, so the plough-
ing of the soil deeper, every inch introduces into it an additional
1,568,160 cubic inches of air. Thus, by increasing the depth of
pulverised soil, we can provide a quantity of air to any extent for
the use of seeds.
This air roust then be above a'certain temperature before the
seed will germinate ; it must be above the freezing point, else the
vitality of the seed will remain dormant. A pulverised state of
the soil affords protection to the seed from a considerable depression
of temperature, and the more finely it is pulverised, the more it
will resist the cold from without, and the less will it radiate the
heat from within. The less finely the soil is pulverised, and the
shallower the soils, therefore, it may be clearly seen, the less
probability there will be of a plant germinating and progressing to
maturity. When a seed is placed among hard clods of earth, or
comes in contact with stones, and little of the fine particles of the
pulverised soil about it, there can be little moisture or air for its
support. The air, again, may be excluded by water, and besides
the direct exclusion of the air, the water, on evaporation, renders
the earth around each seed much colder than it would otherwise
be; hence the necessity of drainage. Total want of moisture
prevents germination, but that is seldom the case when land is
thoroughly pulverised.
The chemical agency will here be almost out of place ; the
farmer, or the pupil farmer, will take little interest in it, and its
discussion will- afford little real insight into the duties of the
agriculturist. I may say that the chemical composition of seeds
consists of organic and inorganic substances. That when consigned
to the ground, the first change which takes place in it is its
increase in size, on account of its taking in moisture. If the
moisture is presented to it in due form, i.e. , from every particle of
soil, but not from water between the particles, excluding the air, it
is in the most favourable circumstances for germination, and only
requires the necessary degree of temperature to excite its vitality
into action. If it wants moisture, it will remain dormant till
moisture arrive ; if it is placed in excess of moisture, its germination
is prevented by the exclusion of the air, and its tissues are
destroyed by maceration in the water. In favourable circumstances,
besides the direct effect of the absorption of moisture in increasing
the size of the seed, it softens and expands all its parts, many of
the dry and soluble parts become fluid; sap or vegetable food is
formed, and a sort of circulation is formed, which communicates
between the more remote parts of the embryo.


If heat now is present, it assists the air and moisture to excite
the vital principle into action. It expands the air contained in
the numerous cavities of the seed, produces the distension of all
the organic parts, and their irritability being thus excited, the seed
cannot be destroyed but by death.
The physiological agency in the production of plants from seed
will not be treated of in this case, as it does not come within the
intended use of this essay. I have been more particular with the
first, as I consider it quite necessary that a farmer should know
as much of his calling as possible, and above all, have his mind
stored with that part which gives information of the treatment of
seeds in connection with the soil. The prosperity of the farmer
depends, in a great measure, on starting the seed, and the proper
treatment of the young animals on his farm.
Rotation of Crops.
Experience has demonstrated that one crop after another of the
same kind, greatly reduces the fertility of all classes of soils. This
conclusion might be drawn from reason as well as experience, since
it is reasonable to suppose that crops of the same kind take the
same sort of food out of the same kind of soil. Experience has
also demonstrated that one crop after another of a different kind
does not materially reduce the condition of soils. This deduction
then seems fair—that the condition of the soil is best maintained
by taking different crops after another; and, as every crop, though
of a different kind, and deriving support from the soil, assists in
exhausting it, a limit must be put to the number of crops that
should follow one another. Accordingly, in practice, a limit is
placed on the number of crops taken in succession of whatever
kind, and this number and succession is called a “ rotation of
crops.”
Though all crops derive support from the soil, one kind appro-
priates food in a different degree to another, and one crop also takes
food of a different sort to another, one crop will thrive in land on
which another would not subsist. When a crop is allowed to seed,
it requires a different substance from the soil, to mature the seed,
from what it does to produce the stem ; and it is wellknown that
the producing of the seed taxes the soil more strongly than the
stem, or the leaves, or the bulbs.
It is true that the same sort of grain can be grown on the same
soil for years in succession, without apparent deterioration of the soil;
but it must be done by the instrumentality of manure. Theoreti-
cally, if the ingredients taken from the soil by any crop are
restored to it, the soil will not be deteriorated.
No practice of husbandry requires, in my opinion, explanation
by a satisfactory theory, that its principles may be properly under-
stood, so much as the “ rotation of crops,” but as yet no unexcep-


tionable theory has been propounded. Dr. Candole first founded
his theory of the excretory powers of plants, which were corro-
borated by the experiment of M. Macaire. This theory was, that
plants imbibe soluble matter of every kind from the soil, but they
have the power to excrete such as do not nourish, and retain those
which are suitable for their support. That plants cannot subsist
on matter which they eject; the more of this matter the soil con-
tains, the less it becomes fit to support plants of the same kind.
This excrementitious matter from one kind of plant may be taken
up by another kind from the soil, and again rendered fit for sup-
porting plants of the former kind.
This power of plants to excrete objectionable substances has been
denied by other theorists. Some affirm that though plants have
no power of selection, but take into their texture any solution
offered, they have little or no power of again excreting it, that any
excretions are only the true sap. But the theory which agrees
most with practice is, to my mind, the one most to be relied on,
viz., that different species of plants require a particular nutriment,
that wheat, for example, requires a different nutriment from
barley or oats, or from any of the green crops, and that if it were
cultivated perseveringly for a number of years it would entirely
exhaust the soil for wheat. Upon this idea the present barren
state of the northern coast of Africa, and of the island of Sicily,
has been attempted to be explained. It has been conceived that
the constant growing of wheat in those countries to supply the
wants of the Homan people, after they relinquished their own
agriculture, impoverished the soil to its present condition. The
progress of botanical physiology soon made it appear that the
organs of each plant derive their many juices from substances
which concur in the nutrition of plants generally. In effect,
plants the most apposite in botanical character and properties,
alimentary as well as poisonous, will live and flourish on the same
mound of earth, and on the same manure ; but this does not prove
that each plant has not the power of taking up the particular
substances which suit its own character and composition, and
which alone will nourish and support it. It appears very clear
that although all plants may use a certain quantity of the same
substance contained in the soil, there is yet some other ingredient
which one must have, and another can do without. I have said
that wheat requires a different nutriment from barley or oats —
this is corroborated by the analyzation of the plants. Wheat has
been proved to contain one substance, at least, which is not found
in either of the others.
To sum up the different opinions of theorists on this important
matter, I think the following will appear rational. That there is
no absolute necessity for alternation of crops, when manure and
labour can be easily procured. Nevertheless there are certain


plants which cannot he reproduced upon the same soil advantage-
ously, except at intervals more or less remote. The cause of this
exigence on the part of certain plants is still obscure, and the
hypothesis propounded for clearing it up far from satisfactory.
The reason this subject has not engaged the attention of the
practical agriculturist more than it has, is, that on all the farms
where a system is obseived, the rotation of the different crops is
necessary to keep up the system. Cattle require so much of one
kind of fodder, so much litter, and so much green feed every year,
and these quantites cannot be secured without a regular course of
cropping. But the practical farmer knows from experience quite
enough to confirm him in the belief that crops taken in rotation
are much more profitable than when successively grown. They
also know that if they attempt to grow one crop successively they
run every risk of a failure. In the South of England, where the
clovers were found so advantageous for sheep feeding, and were at
one time grown every four years, they are obliged to grow them
less frequently—six or eight years now being the usual interval.
He knows, too, that lucerne and sainfoin, which is sown for a
permanent crop, will not keep its plant for more than eight years
in the best descriptions of soils, and that that time is gradually on
the decrease. Our own colonial farmers have proved too com-
pletely for their oWu interests, that wheat cannot be grown
successively on one soil; and those who have sown lucerne, even
on the deep alluvial deposits, are now proving to their great dis-
appointment that their lucerne plants are beginning to die out,
and the natural grasses are taking their place. Those who are
familiar with the fairy-rings in the old pastures of England, can
give a useful lesson on this subject. These are spots, or circles of
luxuriant green grass, sometimes two or three yards in cir-
cumference, sometimes the same in diameter. 'They have attracted
the attention of men of science, and various hypothesis have been
suggested to account for them. Dr. Wollaston and Professor
Way have at last settled the controversy. It is now generally
admitted that fairy-rings result from the centrifugal development
of a certain fungi. The spot where it at first takes root becomes
unfitted for its support, and the spawn extends outward from a
centre to new soil, unfitting that soil to which it extends for the
immediate nourishment of grass, but enriching it afterwards by its
own decay—the decayed fungi, containing not a little of the
phosphate of potash, is a highly stimulant manure for grasses.
It is believed by many that this fungi does not occupy the same
ground more than one year before it exhausts the soil of all the
nutriment it contains for the nourishment of the fungi; out the
preparation of the land for the increased production of grass, by
its decayed substance, is somewhat wonderful, it can be seen for
veiy considerable distances, and stock seem to enjoy it, for it is


always eaten close to the ground, and yet it retains its verdant
hues.
In conclusion on this subject I would remind those who are
interested in this question, that there can remain little doubt in
the minds of any who take the least trouble to investigate, that it
is of the highest importance to change crops every season, and in
making that change it is necessary to bear in mind the fact that
some crops borrow largely from the atmosphere, and others very
little, the alternate growing of such crops must be advantageous,
that by so doing they are veering towards that system which will
enable them to obtain the greatest amount of vegetable produce
with the least manure, and in the shortest possible time.
The Drainage of Land—How it Affects the Soil.
It is no difficult matter to determine whether or not land requires
draining. By the experienced eye, the particular parts of a field
most affected by superfluous water are easily detected ; the pecu-
liar state of the crop the field bears at the time, indicates them,
such as want of vigour in growth, a sickly hue of colour, and none
of the parts sufficiently developed, which are all strong indications
of the presence of water, and these are more evidently exhibited
by grain and green crops, than by the sown grasses ; also by old
pasture, which bears coarse, hard, uninviting herbage. The soil
that indicates such always feels unelastic under the foot.
Moist land may also be easily detected by the inexperienced eye,
when, after a continued rain, he observes the land spotty, and dark
or light coloured patches here and there. This is the naturally dry
parts, where the sub-soil is porous, and the surface is partly relieved,
and becoming dry ; while the naturally wet part is, with its reten-
tive sub-soil, still saturated from top to bottom, keeping the surface
damp, and of a deep colour. When these dark patches at last dis-
appear, it is thought, erroneously, that they can do no harm, but
long ere this the harm may be done, which will not allow of a
mistake on that point.
Superficial symptoms of dryness may not indicate the state of
the subsoil, for that water does lurk in it to a very great extent,
almost in all countries, and will continue so to do until vents are
made for its egress, is an established truth ; so much so, that, even
naturally dry soil, around wet, becomes injured by imbibing the
stagnant water from it. In the cold climates, where this water
remains during a Winter season, the most of the Summer follow-
ing is taken to dry, rather than force on the vegetation. The heat
of the Summer is thus engaged in evaporating the moisture, and
thereby producing a coldness in the atmosphere, instead of nour-
ishing the growth of the crops. Observation has shown that,
wherever stagnant water is found, rushes flourish, but all useful
nutricious grasses lanquish, in old pastures, die out, and are
replaced by aquatic plants, which, in general, yield little nutriment.


We cannot enquire too minutely into the extensive injury sus-
tained by the soil and its products, by the stagnation of rain water
upon an impervious sub-soil. Where the soil is shallowest, it is
injured by the stagnant water remaining constantly beneath it;
and when deepest, it is injured by chilly exhalations arming from
the water below. The direct injury done to land by stagnant
water may be estimated by these effects. Manure, whether
putressent or caustic, imparts no fertility to it; the plough, the
harrow, and even the roller, cannot pulverize it into fine mould.
The new grass contains little nourishment for live stock ; and in
old the finer sorts have disappeared, and are succeeded by coarse
sub-aquatic plants. The stock never receive a hearty meal of grass,
hay, or straw, remaining hungry and dissatisfied, and in low con-
dition. Trees acquire a hard bark and stiffened branches, and
become a prey to parasitic plants. The roads are constantly soft,
and apt to become rutted. The air always feels damp and chilly,
and from early Autumn to late in Spring, the damp aii meets the
face like a damp cloth. In Summer, mosquitoes, green flies, midges,
gnats, and gadflies torment the cattle, and the ploughman, and
the horses, from morning to night. In Autumn the sheep get
scalded heads, and are eaten into by the maggots of the green and
carrion flies, during hots blinks of sunshine. These are not
exaggerated statements, but such as I have observed in numerous
situations —on hill, valley, and plain ; and wherever these pheno-
mena occur, to a sensible degree, it may be safely concluded that
stagnant water lurks beneath the soil.
Ha ving no doubt of the places which require draining, the work
should be gone about in a systematic way. In a newly-made farm
the power remains with the farmer to commence in any given
place. I would, therefore, advise draining to be done on the natu-
ral grass, it is, when pretty well eaten down, the cleanest mode of
draining, fox - , when the land is tilled, the sides of the drains are
apt to fall in, while the tiles or other materials are being placed in
the bottom. The material for the drains should be carted to the
side of the intended drain befox'e the cutting is commenced. When
the land drained is not intended to be tilled, but lie in grass, the
turf taken from the sui’face should be carefully laid on one side,
and when the drains are finished, neatly laid in its primitive situa-
tion ; in filling the drain with the earth taken out, if all is returned,
the drain will for some time be a little higher than the level of the
ground ; but this is required, as the soil will ultimately sink down.
Rolling, in the case of little plots, is common to bring the land to
a proper level; the rolling must be done when the surface is dry.
Draining should always begin at the lowest parts of the land.
Should the land be pretty level, it matters not at what side the
drainage commences ; but when it has a decided inclination one
way, the lowest part should be first drained, to affoi'd the water


from the upper part at all times an outlet; and when the inclina-
tion occurs in more than one direction, each plane of inclination
should have a system of drains for itself, commencing at the lowest
point of eaoh.
In level ground it may not be easy to determine the fall by the
eye, and Us it is of the utmost importance to have a good outfall
for the drained water, the fall should be ascertained by means of a
spirit level. This is easily procured, in fact for little jobs, a com-
mon level, set on a stem or stick, in the ground, is often used.
There should be a decided fall from the outlet of the drain,
whether natural or artificial—not less than eight feet to the mile,
or one foot in 220 yards. In large deep rivers the fall is sufficient
at one foot in the mile, and in small rivers two feet. The drain
should never be allowed to have back water, if it is possible to
avoid it. In cold countries, a proper outlet, to protect the water
from frost as it issues ' from the drains, constitutes an essential
element in every system of drainage. Directions for cold climates
will not be necessary here ; I shall, therefore, enquire into the
depth of drainage ; but, before doing so, I may mention that 1 'eside
the fall for the outlet of drains, the fall in the ground to be
drained is an essential point; in very level ground the natural fall
may not be sufficient to carry away the water quick enough, and in
such a situation no way exists of increasing the fall, but by artifi-
cial means, i.e., by causing a greater fall than on the surface, by
cutting the drains deeper at their lower ends than at the uj>per.
Whatever depth of drain, therefore, should be determined on for
the whole piece of ground to be drained, the lower parts of the
drains should be cut deeper, and the upper parts shallower than
the determined depth, and the fall, if possible, brought up to one
foot in 220 yards. In level ground, too, the force of the water
should be increased, by keeping it in narrower channels, and its
depth will thereby increase as it flows nearer to the outlet of its
own drain wherever that is. Level ground will absorb more rain
than inclined, along which part of the heavy rains flow away above
ground, and never enter the drains. The object in producing a fall,
however, should not be to carry away the rain water in the shortest
time, but to convey it away in sufficient time not to injure the land,
and at the same time not to wash out by its force any of the
valuable ingredients of the soil or sub-soil. When the inclination
of the ground is steeper than is necessary, the best way to retain
the motion of the water is to give the drain a little more breadth ;
for the shallower the water, it acquires the less force and velocity,
these being regulated by the square root of the depth.
Before fixing on the depth of the drains to be cut, it will be
necessary to ascertain the nature of the sub-soil. This is generally
done by making exploratory drains through the piece of land
to be drained. When a piece of land presents a uniform surface.


but inclining, and does not exceed ten acres, let at least two explo-
ratory drains be cut from the part at the bottom, where the main
drain should be placed, to the top. In larger pieces of land,
one such exploratory drain should be made for every five acres,
according to the uniform strata of the sub-soil. Whatever the
nature of that sub-soil let these trial drains be made three feet
deep, if the fall will allow it; as you proceed up the rise of the
ground let them be increased to four feet. Where small undula-
tions exist, the drains should pass right through, keeping the
uniform level at bottom. In very flat ground, no considerable
increase of depth is practicable. This extensive exposure of the
sub-strata will supply satisfactory data for fixing the proper depth
of the drains of the field. Should the sub-soil be pretty similar in
all the experimental drains, it may reasonably be concluded that
it is so all over the field ; but, should it prove otherwise in different
parts, then the nature of the difference should be strictly observed.
A correct judgment, however, of the true nature of the sub-soils
cannot be formed immediately on the opening of the drams ; for
time must be allowed the water from the adjoining ground to find
its way into them, and several days may elapse ere the water may
make its appearance in some of them. When it is believed the
drains have received as much water as they can in fine weather,
the part which supplies the most should be observed, whether the
water comes into the drain from a line nearer its top or bottom.
Should rain fall during the experiment, let its effects be observed.
It is better that parts of the sides of the drain fall in, during the
dry or the wet weather, as the new fractured ground affords
indications of the natural structure of the sub-soil better than the
newly cut ground by the spade. Whatever may be the facts
observed, it should be borne in mind that the durability of the
drains wiil depend upon their standing on impervious matter, as it
prevents the escape of the water by any other channel than the
duct; and such a sub-soil should be sought for in the experiment.
To make the drain more secure still, it should stand upon the
impervious matter below the level of the stratum or strata, which
supply the water. Wherever the drains indicate the depth that
draws the most water, it should be adopted for the least depth of
the drains to be made on the ground on each side of the particular
experimental drain; and, should different experimental drains
indicate a difference of depth by the same indication, the difference
should be adopted for the depth in that particular part of the field.
Thus the same field may have drains of different depths, but all its
parts will be drained at which have indicated the greatest
effects in each of their localities. In no case should the drains be
less than three feet in depth, unless it be found impossible to do so
for want of level; and even means of obtaining that depth should
not easily be relinquished. The experimental drains are converted


into drains themselves, in common with other drains near them,
though they will require some repairs before being fitted with tiles.
Thus, knowing the depth of the drains and the nature of the
sub-soil, data are furnished for also determining the distance
drains.
Matters thus far settled, the commencement in actual operations
is to fix the position of the main drain, to convey away the water
brought by the other drains from the most distant parts of the
field. As main drains are only intended to lead away water from
other drains, they should occupy the lowest part of the field,
whether along the bottom, the sides, or the middle. If the ground
is so flat as to have very little fall, the water is directed towards
the main drain by making it deeper than the general depth of the
other drains, and as deep as the fall of the outlet will allow. If
the ground has a uniform declivity one way, one main drain along
the bottom will take away all the water, provided the drains are
not too long. If it has an undulated surface, every hollow of any
extent, and every deep hollow of however limited extent, should
be furnished with a main drain. No main drain should be placed
nearer than five yards from a tree or bush that may possibly push
its roots into it.
As main drains occupy the lowest parts of the ground, the fall
along them cannot generally be so great as in other parts of the
ground; and conveying more water they do not require so great a
fall as the smaller drains ; should the fall vary in the course cf the
drain, the least rapid parts should be made the narrowest. With
the view of accelerating the speed of the water from the other
drains, main drains on level ground, when practicable, should be
made six inches deeper than the small ones which fall into them.
The position of the main drains being determined, the next thing
is to settle that of the small drains, which should be placed and
constructed with an easy descent towards the main drain into
which they discharge their waters. They are usually placed in
parallel lines up the inclination of the gi-ound ; not that all in the
same field shall be parallel to one another, but only those in the
same plane, into whatever number of planes the surface of the
field may be divided. Small drains should run at nearly right
angles to the main drains, excepting in confined hollows having
steep ascents on both sides, the drains should run parallel with the
ridges which correspond with the inclination of the ground.
Having had the data furnished by the experimental drains, let
us see how these facts should guide us in determining the depth of
the drains. If it is found that a depth of three feet affords as
much water as four or more, it is unnecessary to incur the expense
of cutting the additional foot, unless it afford some other advantage,
and so all the parts of the field containing the same kind of sub-soil
should have the drains cut of the same depth. If a porous and


tenacious part of the sub-soil afford the same results, the drains
should be cut of the same depth in both. On the other hand if
four feet evidently afford more water from the same kind of sub-
soil than three, a four feet drain should be preferred without
hesitation, because we do not know but the larger quantity of
water is required to be extracted from the land to dry it thoroughly,
while the extraction of the smaller quantity might effect very
little good. On comparing porous and retentive sub-soils, the point
from which the water issues is an important element in determining
the depths of drains. If is is found that the porous sub-soil
affords all its water at not more than two and a half feet, where
it rests upon retentive matter, it is unnecessary to take it deeper,
as far as the supply of water is concerned, than will just afford a
trough for the tile in the retentive matter, and which, being six
inches more, makes the enth-e depth thirty-six inches, so that
although the whole water of a drain is supplied at two feet, its
depth should still be carried to three feet, for the drain to be
completely out of the way of the working of the plough, or of the
future trenching of the ground. So in the case of retentive sub-soil
if it parts with all its water at four feet, it is unecessary to go
deeper, but if on going six feet, the sub-soil still continues to give
out water, it is advisable to go that depth, for the extra depth
draws farther on each side of the drain. When very porous
material is found anywhere beyond four feet, it is generally well
to go just below it, enough to get a firm set for the tiles.
The adoption of the most proper depth of drains is a more im-
portant step in draining than many people are aware of. By
grudging to cut half-a-foot, perhaps only three inches deeper, the
largest amount of benefit may be unattained; for it is perfectly
true what the late Mr. Stephens said—that “ land may be filled
with small drains, so that the surface will appear dry ; but the
land thus attempted to be drained will never produce a crop, either
in quality or in quantity, equal to land that has been perfectly
drained.” A result which can only be attained by suiting the
drains to the depth best suited to the nature of the sub-soil; and
its nature can only be best ascertained by direct experiment.
The distance at which four feet drains will not dry a retentive
sub-soil, is not left to conjecture, but has been partially determined
by experiment. Conceiving that, a drain in every furrow in a stiff
sub-soil would be attended with more expense than the anticipated
return ; a farmer in Scotland put a drain in every fourth furrow,
and that they might collect water from that distance, he caused
them to be cut four feet deep. The result of the experiment was,
that the two ridges on each side of the drain produced nine bushels
of com more per acre than the two more distant ridges ; which is
a great differenc of produce from adjoining ridges under the same
treatment and crop; and still it was not probably a fair trial to


decide the entire advantage, for the farthest ridges must have had
some little benefit from the drains.
My opinion with regard to the distances between drains in
retentive sub-soils is, that three feet drains cannot be expected to
drain more than fifteen or sixteen feet, while a four feet drain will
as effectually drain twenty-four feet. In porous sub-soils three
feet drains may draw twenty feet with as great, if not greater
effect than tire above. In deep loams, resting on stiff clay sub-
soils, a four feet drain may dry thirty feet. In sonre of our flat
alluvial deposits I have no doubt there is strata underneath which
would draw from thirty to forty yards. I have seen instances in
which a strata of sand has drawn more than one hundred yards ;
and that land is at the present time undrained, and only producing
the coarser grasses, when by the expenditure of about ss. per acre,
the same land would be so dried that the best descriptions of
herbage would be produced.
I have little to say on the subject of filling such drains as may
be made in this Colony—a great deal depends on the locality.
There may be instances in which stone could be obtained at a
very cheap rate, such as coarse gravel pits, when lying just along-
side the ground' to be drained, may be used in preference to driving
tiles from a long distance. In the absence of such, the tile is the
best and the cheapest. Tiles, to be safe in this Colony, where the
sub-soil is so unequal in its qualities, and so often intersected with
sand beds, should be furnished with collars, to keep the ends of
the tiles directly opposite one another. There is only one drain
tile manufactory in the Colony—that of Arthur T. Holroyd, Esq.,
at Parramatta. The draining community are indebted to Mr.
Holroyd for furnishing them with an article of excellent quality,
and at a price much below what might have been expected in a
young Colony where everything must be got at a sacrifice of both
time and capital.
Arterial Drainage.
From my limited knowledge of the bush I am of the opinion
that large tracts of land are very much in want of tapping by
arterial drainage. This system of drainage is adapted to runs or
extensive pasturage. The drains on this principle are not generally
covered, but left open, so that they act in two ways, namely, by
drawing off the surface water, and also the water from the sub-soil.
When water overspreads the surface, or is absorbed by the soil,
and is unable to penetrate to the loose strata below, the carrying
of it away in channels is termed surface draining. When it has
already penetrated into the earth, and is contained in reservoirs
there, or is finding its way to a lower level through permeable
substances below the surface, the confining it to a fixed channel is
termed under draining, and the larger and less frequent cuttings


employed on coarser soils, or more extensive flats for the general
carrying away of surface and sub-soil water is termed arterial
draining. Intercepting the water below the surface constitutes the
most difficult part of draining, and requires the application of
principles which it is not necessary to apply in the case of surface
or arterial drainage. When we penetrate a little way into the
looser portion of the earth we shall generally find a minute
stratification, consisting of gravel, sand, or clay, of different degrees
of density. These strata are frequently horizontal, frequently they
follow nearly the inclination of the surface, and frequently they
are broken and irregular. Sometimes the stratum is very thin, as
a few inches in thickness ; and sometimes it is several feet thick ;
and sometimes the stratification disappear, and we find only to a
great depth a large mass of clay, or other homogenous substance.
When lands are Irregular in their surface, these beds or
stratum in which water is percolating, often burst out, ooze over,
and saturate the ground for long distances. Or when they meet
with a bed of impervious clay to intercept their course, the
pressure of water from a higher level often forces the water
upwards, and thus saturates the super-jacent soil. In either of
these cases the object of the drainer is to reach the water before it
arrives at the surface, and carry it away in a drain.
Sometimes water will not be found until we come to a great
depth—it may be so deep that we cannot reach it by any drain.
In this case we are saved the labour of making the drain unneces-
sarily deep. Sometimes we shall proceed to a considerable depth
before we find any appearance of water, when all at once, when
breaking through a thin stratum, we shall reach it in large
quantities.
If I am not mistaken the flats at a distance from rivers in these
Colonies being deposits, are composed of very various strata ; but
I have noticed in those which have come under my observation, a
very frequent occurrence' of a porous strata, composed principally
of sand or gravel, and often laying near the surface. These layers
will often extend for long distances, or perhaps throughout the
level as far as it extends. There may be layers of clayey imper-
vious matter above, but much more frequently below, forming a
barrier to the water and preventing it from sinking any deeper in
the soil. The heavy rains which fall saturate this soil all above
this layer of impervious strata, and the only relief this sort of land
gets is by evaporation, the baneful influences of which is perhaps
little thought of when land is so easily obtained. The first injury
sustained by the grazier, in this case, is that done by the cattle or
other stock treading up the surface and destroying large quantities
of the herbage, and making it unfit for their pasturage. The
stagnant water dissolving the various metallic substances under-
neath, is continually exhaling noxious gases, capable of injuring


the health of any kind of stock, the fine grasses are prevented
from growing, and the land is covered with sub-aqnatic plants
which are little inviting to stock, and, when eaten, give little satis-
faction to the beast, or profit to its owner.
The worst feature in such a case as the above may not be noticed
by the casual observer. Once thoroughly saturated with water,
these lands have little chance of any improvement, the water
lodged at the bottom, and impregnated with all sorts of obnoxious
ingredients may lay there for years without any dilution ; the
heavy rains falling on the surface do not get time to reach it, they
pass off without, perhaps, carrying any of the deleterious matter
with them. The evaporation, too, may, for anything we know, be
only carrying the pure water, and leaving the heavier mineral
solution still in its place. Be this as it may, observation has long
ago proved all such stagnant swampy land to be of little value for
its produce, and deleterious to health.
But such lands are generally the easiest to drain, for the beds
of sand so intersect them that very little cutting is necessary for
their amelioration, or it may be their thorough reclamation. It is
not unusual to see such soils after their drainage throwing up the
sheep clover, and a whole host of nutritive grasses which never
had occupied the soil while it contained an excess of water. One
drain cut a little below the layer of sand or gravel, or other porous
substance, usual to such fiats, may drain it thoroughly for forty
yards on each side. In such pasture land the object is to get
circulation, the drawing off the poisonous substances will be going
on slowly but surely, and every fresh shower will help to purify
and fertilize the land. I may be told this system will not work
in these Colonies, where it is moisture we want more than anything
else, and these lands thus drained would soon burn in a dry
season. This is easier said than proved. We have some good
authority for maintaining the opposite effect. Even were such the
ease, it would be better for the grazier to be stinted of grass on
the occasion of a very dry season, than to have the disease or un-
thriftiness of his stock all the fine seasons. But lam of opinion
that drainage has not the effect of thus drying up pasturage, el-
even sown crops. In the case of pasturage, where it is, as I have
described, the drainage of it would enable it to throw up a
luxuriant flow of the best grasses, which has the effect of shelter-
ing the soil from the heat of the sun or the drying wind. Capillary
attraction is promoted in land by drainage, because, by removing
the water, which always has a tendency to consolidate, the dry
earth becomes more porous ; drains only take superfluous water,
they have no power to attract moisture from a distance. When
the superfluous water is forced by its own gravitation into the
drains, the remaining saturation is claimed as much by the force of
capillary attraction as by that of gravitation, and while we im-


prove the surface of a soil, and make it more fit for exercising its
functions, we are giving it the power of overcoming its antagonist.
Tillage of land, more especially in the colder parts of this
Colony, which retains water in Winter, is in a bad state, though
it should be burned up in Summer, because the burning in fact
requires draining to cure it. Lands burn when naturally light,
thin, and on a retentive sub-soil. Being thin, they are easily
saturated by rain in Winter; and being light, the water in
them is soon evaporated in Summer ; and when drought continues,
the crop is soon burnt up. But let anyone try the experiment,
drain such land, manure it, and thoroughly pulverize the soil, and
they will find that is the best cure for burning land. I have
already explained how manure acts in making land retentive of
moisture, and why undrained or naturally wet land cannot be
bene fitted by manure ; in fine, it is the quality which makes land fer-
tile, namely, that of being able to retain moisture uncontaminated
by noxious matter.
Irrigation of Land: The Bod System.
Several considerations should be. carefully [attended to ere the
formation of a water-meadow is determined on, the principal of
which is, whether there be a sufficient supply of water to ii’rigate
the meadow thoroughly; if there be not, the desire for possessing
a water-meadow should be abandoned, or its extent confined to
suit the water at command. Another important consideration is,
whether the water can be spared from the stock on the farm. If
the situation admits of the water being used for irrigation before
it is wanted for the stock or after, then it may be profitably
employed for irrigation ; but otherwise, the advantages of irriga-
tion would be purchased at a cost beyond their intrinsic value.
Allowing the water is sufficient for your extent of irrigation, it is
better to take it direct from, the river or creek, than to erect a dam
across them, to collect the water, even though you should possess
the power to do so, because the nearer the bottom of the river or
creek the water is taken, the better it is for the purpose of irriga-
tion, on account of the sedimentary matter which it contains. It
may cost more to make a channel for the water obtained direct
from the stream, than to construct a dam, though that is even im-
probable, for dams in these Colonies must be substantial to resist
the force of floods.
Sluices should be formed to prevent the water reaching the
meadow when not wanted, and also to allow one portion of the
meadow to be watered at a time, while the other part is kept dry.
The sluices should be built with stone and lime, of which the
foundation should be sunk to a depth below that which the water
has any chance of reaching. These sluices may at first be expen-
sive, according to the situation, &c., but unless the entire appoint-


merits in connection with water' are constructed in a substantial
manner at first, and on correct principles, tbeir repair will be
incessant, and use unsatisfactory.
The land to be converted into water-meadows should be
thoroughly drained, unless the sub-soil consist of sand or gravel,
because if irrigating waters find their way through the soil, to a
retentive sub-soil, it will remain there in a stagnant state, and the
object of irrigation entirely frustrated, the sward of the meadow
would soon be composed of coarse, sub-aquatic plants. Pipe tiles
are the best for filling such drains.
These preliminaries being finished, in the case of land having a
level surface, or a little on the incline, the first operation is the
cutting of the ditch from the river or creek, to the highest point
of the land to be irrigated ; the main conductor is the next opera-
tion, this watercourse should run with a gentle incline, so as to be
the feeder of all the smaller watercourses which run on the crown
of each bed ; it should be capacious enough to pass as much water
as will cover at one time the entire surface of the field, it should
have the power to overflow at all points alike, therefore it should
get smaller as it recedes from the ditch or entrance point, for the
water it contains will be getting less at it is given out to the
respective beds. This perfection of level is brought about when
clearing the conductor, what is taken out of the bottom is laid on
the edges of the cut, or sometimes stops are put in to regulate the
flow of water all through the piece.
The next channel made is the main drain, whose province it is
to carry the water out of the field after it has served its purpose
in irrigation, and, on that account, must be within a little of the
same size as the main conductor, which brought it into the field,
but its position is the reverse, it must be at the lowest side of the
ground.
The beds are made at regular distances, “ ridge,” may be the
most descriptive name for this part, for they are so formed, having
a cut to convey the water all along the crown, and another all
along their lowest parts, the breadth of these is usually about
30 feet, the water flows down about 15 feet on each side of the
cut on the crown; it is made to flow, or just trickle thi-ough the
herbage at a very slow rate. The success of such operations
depends much on the niceness of the regulating of the flow of
water through the whole piece.
Catch "Water Irrigation.
This system has derived its technical name from the circumstance
of a lower set of feeders catching the water in its more rapid
descent down steep ground, from a higher, thus causing the same
channels to act the part of feeders and drains at one and the same
time. This system of irrigation has been lightly esteemed by


many writers on agriculture, probably because they have not seen
a case in which it has been successfully carried out. In ray
opinion it is, according to the lie of the ground, the best, the
cheapest, the easiest accomplished, and the supply of water can be
made the most of ; undoubtedly the best for these Colonies where
water is scarce in certain seasons. A little rivulet or creek, when
taken up at a high level, can be made to irrigate twenty, thirty,
or forty acres, and, in a climate like this, will produce a flow of
grass or other herbage of a large amount, and may possibly be cut
two or three times in the season; this system could be adopted on
many of the large runs in these Colonies, and be the means of
producing large quantities of hay for winter feed ; one advantage,
I may mention, would be that a large amount of hay could be
obtained from a comparatively small piece of ground, thereby
saving the expense of fencing in from the other parts of the run.
It is almost past belief the large quantity of produce that can be
obtained by a small quantity of water, being on the declivity, the
water does not penetrate so deep into the sub-soil, it runs down
the surface into the next catch drain, and as soon as that is tilled,
it then overflows to the next bed, and so on till it reach the lowest
level; it may then be used to irrigate the level, for the irrigation
in these Colonies is not like that of the old country ; there the
great produce is got through the fertilizing qualities of the water,
here water is more wanted for its moisture, our temperature then
does the vegetation through the heat. I had an opportunity of
seeing this system in practice, in the temperate part of the West
coast of Ireland. A gentleman bought twenty-five acres of poor,
thin land, it was let for the yearly rent of 2s. 6d. per acre. A
little mountain stream ran through its highest point, this was
turned by a few spadefuls of earth on to the land, and the catch
drains made, principally with the plough, and put in shape with
the spade, the result was surprising. The crop of hay, when fit to
cut, was sold by auction ; it brought from .£4 to £7 per acre, and
the after grass was valued at A 2 per acre. The whole cost of
cutting the catch drains for the twenty-five acres did not exceed
this was done when wages were about 6s. per week. The
system is cheap, because the lie of the land is not altered, there are
no ridges to form, no sluices, no main feeders to cut, all that is
required is to distribute the water regularly over the natural form
of the ground.
I need not tell the intelligent breeders of high-blood stock that
Winter fodder, if not actually necessary in all climates and in every
season, it is dangerous being altogether without it, and that
although water-meadow hay is not the best, it is a great deal
better than none; but the hay produced in the manner I have
just described does not partake of the qualities of the water-meadow
hay, it is similar to the dry meadow hay which some of the finest


stock in England is kept on in AVinter. The water-meadow hay
has been proved deficient in nutritive qualities in comparison with
clover and rye-grass hay, but the nutritive part is so easily brought
up by a condiment of some kind, that this little deficiency is not
worth notice. The Catch Water System of Irrigation, however, is
of a different nature from the regular water-meadow, the catch-
water acts more in the way of rain ; it is the means of adding
moisture to the land in dry weather, not for saturating it for three
or four or more days at a time for imparting to the land the
fertilizing properties of the water, therefore the use I would
recommend it for, in these Colonies, would be to add moisture
alone, , the vegetative qualities of the climate would do the remain-
ing part, thus the hay produced by the Catch Water System would
partake of the nature of the dry meadow hay, and by this method,
too, a much larger quantity of land can be irrigated.
I have elsewhere drawn the attention of breeders of stock, both
of sheep and cattle, to the necessity of keeping at all times a stock
of hay in the event of a dry season. Machinery now has become
so powerful that large quantities of prepared food can be dispensed
at little expense, and if taken advantage of in connection with the
natural resources of these Colonies, would add much to the present
flourishing condition of these important industries. These gentle-
men know better than I do the large tracts of land, on almost
every run, where bush hay could be made on an extensive scale,
and at little expense; they know, also, the necessity of keeping
all sorts of stock in a progressing condition, or at least the absolute
necessity of not letting them get too low in condition, that it is
the occasional hard winter or dry summer that reduces the
quantity and quality ol the wool, checks the growth of all live
stock, and often decimates flocks or brings on scab or other
diseases. Only last Winter the farmers cows were dying in all
directions, and many of those that did not die got so reduced that
their use for the season was considerably decreased. The farmer
was forced to buy hay at a price he could not afford to give to
save a part of his herd. All these evils, in these enlightened days,
might be prevented, or modified to a great extent, by saving even
bush hay, cutting it up into chaff, and adding, if necessary, a
condiment to increase its nutritive powers. The worst and
coarsest of bush hay is infinitely superior to the most of the herb-
age the cattle or sheep can pick up in the Winter, after a period of
dry, harsh winds just before the Winter season commences.
Wherever these winds find ready access to the now fast failing
vegetation of these natural grasses, its powerful effect in depriving
them of almost all their nutritive matter is greater than many
would imagine. If it were not for the shelter of brush and trees
'and such like, the cattle and sheep must inevitably perish for
want of proper nourishment. Were cattle to eat a bellyful of the


least nutritive part of these grasses the effect might be almost
instant death. When we see these animals dying for want, it is
not because they have no grass to eat, but because nature has
given them the instinctive power of discriminating between
nutritive grasses and those which have no nourishment in them.
But when we cut down the most common grasses with their
natural sap most developed, experience and science has taught us
that their power of giving the desired nourishment to animals is
very considerable.
In most seasons the breeder of stock, and also the famer, have a
superabundance of the coarser grasses, where cutting them at a
proper time would not only supply such hay, but would also
increase their Winter eatable herbage, because it would then take
the second growth and remain succulent longer in the Winter—-
these dry, harsh winds would not have the same effect on
them, so that this storage of Winter food would also increase the
herbage in the bush, and the starving of cattle and sheep would be
seldom heard of. It is just what the farmer would require, if he
would take to the Winter feeding of his cows. The sort of hay
described would do well to mix with a turnip mash for cows.
Many of these coarser grasses yield better milk than the finer
descriptions. The fiock-master and the cattle-breeder would find
much benefit from such storage, and hand feeding in hard winters,
or indeed on any occasion when food is scarce. When sheep are
checked in their growth and condition, the wool must
suffer in quantity and quality, and when cattle are much reduced
in Winter it takes a considerable time ot the Summer before they
regain what they lost. One and all would be benefitted by the
more equalized condition of their respective herds, and the conse-
quent improved state of their health.
Management of Pigs.
The feeding of this useful animal is somewhat allied to the simple
process of poking a fire, in that every one seems to think they
know best how to perform it effectually ; but there is a consider-
able science in each of them—the most successful stoker often
knows least of the philosophy of his business; so it is with the
pig-feeder. The errors often committed in feeding pigs is a too
sudden transition from poor food to that of rich forcing food. All
changes in feeding should be gradual, it tends to increase health ;
the too sudden, tends to bring on disease by overtaxing the
digestive organs. There is a great mistake made by many feeders,
not only of pigs, but all other animals, namely, that of giving too
much nutritive food. It is supposed that the more an animal eats
of nutritious food, the more flesh they must necessarily put on—
this is a mistake, and often a fatal one. Nature' seems to have
taught all animals to eat a limited quantity of the most nutritive


food, and were we to imitate nature more than we do, we would
not make so many mistakes in the feeding of animals. We have
seen where the thorough washing of turnips or potatoes has
brought on disease on horses and cattle. We have also seen cattle
when fully fed on turnips pulled and cleaned for their use, eating
the dirty earth on the wheels of the cart that supplied their food.
A horse will eat its own litter when fully fed on corn and the best
hay. All these show us that something more than mere nutri-
tive matter is required for animals. A certain quantity is required
as well as a certain quality, and if the over supply of quality is
given to any animal, it tends either to waste or disease.
Pigs when highly fed will be seen to root for insects in their sties,
this shows that animal substances are wanted, they should there-
fore be supplied in some form as near to that of nature as possible,
a run out for a few hours might enable the animal to supply its
own wants, but to stop every crevice to prevent its rooting might
prove fatal. It is best and most profitable, in the rearing of all
kinds of domestic animals, to give them such food as will keep
them in a growing state all through, till they are fit to fatten, and
then to increase the nutritive qualities of their food gradually,
until they are killed, but never to give them too much of one kind
of nutricious food. Barley-meal seems to be about the highest
feeding substance a pig can bear, and that only for the finishing
diet. The breeder of all animals should bear in mind, that a check
given to the growth or the condition, is seldom thoroughly restored,
and always takes something extra to redeem the loss, and animals
are never healthier than when they progress steadily.
In feeding pigs for bacon, it is necessary to allow them two or
three weeks’ feeding on some substantial food, such as maize or
barley-meal, to firm the flesh and prevent the fat of the bacon from
getting too easily dissolved in the cooking. Pigs too, though not
habitually clean of their own nature, always thrive best when they
are kept clean, both in their skin and their stye. The Irish cottager
teaches the pig to go to the river and stand quietly till he is
thoroughly washed, and he evidently seems to enjoy it, even in the
coldest time of Winter. In cold climates, pigs, as well as other
farm stock, require a certain degree of heat to be kept up in their
feeding places, no progress need be looked for where this is not
observed, they will do with less food when kept warm and com-
fortable.
Hearing 1 of Poultry and their Future Management.
As far as has been under my observation, the cottagers in this
Colony reared more poultry than the farmer. One cause may arise
from the farmer being farther removed from the market; the
railways and the commission agent run away with a considerable
part of the profit, still the farmer has the best opportunities of


raising such .stock, and while they complain of the low price of
corn, one would imagine they would see it to he their interest to
convert their corn into poultry and eggs, and thereby realize a fair
price. The rearing of such stock, when properly done, is a paying
business, the prices are good and there is at all times a demand for
such commodity. The farmer, of course, has the facility of grow-
ing everything necessary for their maintenance, he has also, what
is invaluable for such a nursery, plenty of space for their
recreation. Fowls do not thrive well when too many are together,
they should therefore be divided into two or three herds, according
to the number kept. They should be kept clean, and the manure
will pay for the cleaning. Their food should be often changed ;
and who is more able to raise a variety than the farmer 1 Swedish
turnips are relished by fowls in Winter, potatoes, corn, the refuse
of wheat, barley, or oats, rye, &c., and what is to prevent their
having any or all of these cooked for a change “2 Animal substances
are required for an occasional meal in the Winter season, when
worms and insects are not so plenty. A warm house is required
for the Winter in accordance with the climate. A farmer in this
Colony, with the present prices of poultry and eggs, and renting a
farm of fifty acres of good land at eight shillings per acre, ought
to pay half his yearly rent from his poultry-yard—half-acre of corn,
eighth-acre of turnips, eighth-acre ot potatoes, in all three-quarters
of an acre of produce should be all that is required, with some
liver or other ofial from his butcher. I would recommend the
grinding of the corn into meal, and the potatoes and turnips to be
boiled and mixed with the meal, as a general rule this mixture will
fatten as well. The poultry brought to this market are only half
fattened, this is a very short-sighted principle in the breeder, for
very little more time and a comparatively small quantity of food,
would add a fourth, or in some cases a third, more to the price. It
should never be forgotten that the liberty of fowls is as precious to
them as it is to ourselves. See the proof in the hardy little chicks
that are hatched in the stolen nest on the field or the hedge-row,
they grow and fatten in a superior style to those nursed in the
coop, they are superior in health, and strength of body, and flavour
of flesh, and whenever a hen steals away let her enjoy her liberty,
the advantage to be derived from runaways will far overbalance
any loss by vermin, or dogs, or any other enemy.
Many cruel experiments are exercised by country people to
prevent hens from hatching or clucking, when they do not wish
them to breed, such as—dipping them in water for a few seconds
till they are almost dead, pulling feathers from a certain part of
their body, and such like barbarities—all alike, ineffectual; the
best plan is to place them in darkness, and there deprive them of
food and water for two days and two nights, in obstinate cases
three days. This is best accomplished by putting them under a tub,


and just raise one side an inch or two to give air. If hens are
chased by dogs or otherwise frightened* they will often lay their
eggs without a shell, if this occur in the case of one wanted for the
rearing of a good or precious breed, the egg may be covered with
paper and gum, or stucco, to make it prolific. To every hen belongs
an individual peculiarity in the form, and colour, and size of the
egg she lays, which never changes during her lifetime, so long as
she remains in health, and which is as wellknown to those who
are in the habit of taking her produce, as the handwriting of their
nearest acquaintance. Some lay smooth cream-coloured eggs,
others—rough, calky, granulated ones. There is the buff, the
snow-white, the spherical, the oval, the pear-shaped, and the em-
phatically egg-shaped egg.
The frugal hen-wife will not sell her eggs when the price is low,
she will keep them till the price obtained will remunerate her for
her trouble. They should be kept in as fresh a state as possible,
this is done by preventing the air penetrating the shell, and the
yolk coming in contact with the shell. The first is best done by
smearing it with butter or melted suet, when just warm from the
hen ; if it is not done then, it will be too late, a certain quantity
of air will soon be admitted through the pores of the shell. The
second is done by frequent turning from one side to the other, or
from end to end, once in the twenty-four hours will be sufficient.
Breed and Treatment of Cows, and Time of Calving 1 .
Amongst all the breeds of cows, and there are not a few, I see
none to surpass the good old Ayrshire for the general farmer. She
is the best for general purposes. She is a good milker, she fattens
well, she is docile. These are the qualities wanted for a farmer in
these Colonies, he wants milk and butter, and he wants to rear
good fattening stock for sale, and he wants a quiet animal that his
wife or a boy can milk, he has all these in an Ayrshire cow, if he
use her well. But the farmers in this Colony, whether from a
belief that because they are situated on the opposite side of the
globe from the old country, they should also be opposite in all
customs relating to farming, or from what other logical ground I
cannot tell, but such is the fact. The old country system is, to put
an old man to take charge of the cows, just because his movements
are slow, quiet, and gentle, and he is expected to be cautious and
considerate. Women, in Scotland, are preferred as milkers, and
they know how to humour them when they are milking, for this
purpose they generally sing all the time, others will give the cow
something nice to eat, while they are being milked ; a fetter of any
description is never required, except in cases of sore teats, or the
like; the cow knows the milker and will often refuse to give down
her milk to a stranger ; if the cows are brought in to be milked,
the old man walks them quietly in, and quietly out again; but the


Colonial fashion is, to put a boy on a fleet horse, and with the help
of a good dog, he brings the cows in at a gallop, they are forced
with sticks and stones into their appointed stalls, a rope is then
put round the hind leg and tied to the stall, and she is milked by
main force ; is it likely, under such circumstances, that the cow
will give all the milk she has got 1 decidedly not.
I have already hinted that the Colonial farmer should raise
turnips and house feed.
With regard to the difference of the produce of the cow, when
turned out to grass, in the Winter, when grass is scant and dry,
and the keeping them in the house and giving them cooked food,
I will give a case in point. It was the experience of a Mr. John
Lynch, who farmed in Ireland first, and came to Edinburgh as a
cow-feeder, he thus writes : —“ 1844, Nov. 7, I had her milked at
II o’clock, a.m., in the presence of workmen; the milk measured
was one quart and three naggins, and at night her milk was but
three naggins. Nov. 9, milked, before the workmen, at 10 o’clock,
a.m., one quart and one naggin ; and in the evening, before them,
three naggins. Nov. 11, I got her in to house feed, after the fol-
lowing manner :—First feed, 6 o’clock, a.m., cut straw, hay, and
turnips all boiled together. Nov. 2, 8 o’clock, raw turnips. Nov.
3, hay. Nov. 4, prepared food. Nov. 5, raw turnips and mangold
leaves. Nov. 6, hay. The increase from the first to the third dav
was two quarts in the morning, and the same at night; at the
twelfth day she had increased to three quarts, twice per day.” At
last he got her up to seven quarts per day, and as he fed, so she
milked. Now what is to prevent our farmers from going and doing
likewise 1 They, have every accommodation —fuel for cooking the
food at their doors. The man who made the experiment, I have
just related, had the turnips to buy, at £25, per acre ; hay, at £5
per ton ; and coals to cook the food, at 15s. per ton ; and he brings
his cows produce up from about one quart to seven quarts. I don’t
give this case as anything new, it is wellknown, and has been
repeatedly demonstrated; but I wish to convince our farmers of
the advantages of stall-feeding, both for the purpose of producing,
milk, and raising manure.
I have often argued the point, and am still of the same opinion,
that farmers in this Colony, and especially those near a market
town, would improve their condition by altering the time of the
cows dropping their calves ; say they calve about the beginning of
April, the farmer would then have the best season for making
butter, the best price for it when made, and the best time to make
manure for his following crops ; if he adopt the plan of raising
turnips, or other green food, and give his cows cooked mixtures,
they will produce more milk than they would in the Summer,
when pestered with flies, and scorched by the sun ; if the manure
litter is supplied in proper abundance, would be as valuable nearly


as the milk and butter. The only argument I have ever heard
against this plan, is the rearing of the calves. I grant there will
be a slight drawback in that respect, but it is a mere trifle, the
farmer, I know, makes much of it, and even maintains that calves
cannot be reared in Winter. I ask, in defence of my argument,
how does the English and Scotch farmer rear better calves, in much
colder weather, when there is not a chance of the calves getting a
mouthful of grass till they are two, and sometimes, three months
old. But let us reduce this drawback to 10s. per head on each
calf, the price of them when reared is only 30s. It will be found
the difference of the produce of the cow in milk, butter, and
manure, is as three to one; if the cow’s produce is worth £3, by
Summer milking, it will be worth £9 in Winter.
Not only would this change in the farmer’s system give him
temporary relief, it would ultimately prove the only means at his
disposal, of raising him to a state of prosperity, for it is impossible
for him ever to improve without such reversion of his present
operations.
The system I have thus described, has the advantage of being
within the reach of the poorest farmer. The starting point is the
price of five cwt. of guano, or any other suitable manure. Guano
is the most generally suitable, it will prove productive on almost
any soil; 2|- cwt. even, to raise half-an-acre of turnips or mangold,
might put this system in a way of working, the farmer could
surely muster as much manure as would do for mixing with this
little quantity, and perhaps extending the breadth of this turnip
patch; if he would exert himself and cultivate one acre of his land
thoroughly, and manage it so as to obtain one good crop, he would
then be in a position to commence this renovating process, which
he would find, though slow, it would be sure. One acre of mangold
or turnips, would keep two cows for four months in Winter, if
cooked and mixed with some chaff or hay, or straw, or even bush
hay, the third cow may be kept for the four months, on the one
acre of turnips. The cows being in their best condition for pro-
ducing milk, and this sort of feeding being the best to make them
produce their greatest quantity, we may reasonably expect a full
flow of milk, and this sort of feeding will produce the greatest
quantity of manure, we may also reasonably anticipate a good
manure-heap for the following year’s crop. It cannot be denied
that the butter, made by this system, must exceed that made in
Summer, by three or four times the amount in value; for, in fact,
few of the farmers think it worth making, at the price they get for
it, and when they do make it, it is seldom fit to send to market, on
account of the heat; thus it may be said the butter will be
altogether additional, and if we put the produce of each cow, in
butter, per week, at 41bs., and the price per K) at Is., little more
than two weeks will make up for the drawback of 10s. on each


calf. It is difficult to estimate the produce of cows, they vary so
much in their milking qualities ; hut the following is what I would
expect from such feeding for the four months ; —The three cows
would rear three calves at 30s. each, £4 10s., besides each cow
keeping her own calf, she should produce, one week with the other,
throughout the four months, 2|lbs. of butter, 120R>s. at Is. is £6;
the manure of these three cows, if properly handled, would be for
the four months, somewhere about £5, total produce for this time
£ls 10s. The time these four months end, will bring August,
with a flow of young grass, and these cows are now turned out;
the time for making butter still continues, the calves may be
weaned, and the whole milk of the cows from the young grass may
be availed of; £2 worth of butter, per cow, would not be too
much to expect for the season, thus making the aggregate value of
the three cows’ produce for the year, amount to £2l 10s. This is
a low estimate, but I question whether the present practice brings
the farmer much over one-third the amount.
Although I have allowed 10s % as the value of the drawback on
this system of rearing calves, it appears to me doubtfully correct,
the calf thus reared, would have the whole Summer’s grass before
it, to give it a good start in life, whereas in the present system it
has only half the Summer’s grass, before the Winter overtakes it.
If that Winter happen to be a hard one, the farmer knows, the calf
which has got most age and most of the Summer grass is the one
most likely to get through the hard Winter ; so that, if this chang-
ing of the time of the calving of the cows, and this mode of
feeding were adopted by our farmers, it is my opinion they would
have some feasible chance of bettering their condition ; there ap-
pears to me no other mode of raising manure, and a farmer without
the means of raising this indispensable material is like a builder
without mortar. It is true there is another plan of manuring land,
i.e., by raising the same crops and eating them off with sheep, but
it is not so convenient to the farmer in his present condition, he
would bo obliged to alter his whole system, and even then, it would
not be so convenient for him, for while the cows are being milked,
the farmer has it always at his command for the use of his’family,
and perhaps his workmen.
I would again impress upon the farmer the importance of this
system; let him give it his serious consideration, for he may be
sure, the true fundamental principle of agriculture lies in that one
little operation ; it is the beginning and the ending of all successful
farming, and without this old fashioned, substantial, farm-yard
manure, no country and no class of farmers ever rose, or ever can
rise to eminence; all the artificial extraneous manures are mere
stimulants, they raise one crop it is true, and one crop begets
another, but, the farm-yard manure will give a permanent fertility,
unknown to any artifice yet invented \ it is returning to the soil


that which we have extracted from it, in the most natural way,
and the nearer we keep to nature’s laws, the sooner will we gain
that which we require at her hands ; the farther we wander into
the yet imperfect scientific appliances, the more we are exposed to
error and disappointments. No enlightened farmer would have
recourse to artificial manures, if he coidd raise enough of the home-
made, it is only done when his own yard manure will not hold out,
or in cases where his fields are far from the stacking, and a more
portable manure is easier conveyed to where it is wanted.
Sheep Faming—How Adapted to the present condition
of the Colonial Farmer,
I have already stated that the starting point of all good farming
is the farm-yard manure, next to that is manuring with sheep.
When the farmer has got his cows’ and horses’ manure in its high-
est state of production, then is the time to look to-the extension of
his manuring system, by employing sheep to accomplish this object.
It is usually done by raising turnips, or other green crops, and eat-
ing them on the ground with sheep, when the crop of turnips is too
much to eat all of them on the ground, or when the ground does not
require all of them to be eaten on it, to bring it to a good, fair state of
fertility. Then a part of the turnips is carted home for the cows, or
the fattening of bullocks, and the remaining part given to the
sheep ; this is regulated by the state or condition of the soil on
which the crop is growing, or the requirements for manure else-
where. This system, I have elsewhere observed, is peculiarly
adapted to the soils of these Colonies, wherever light land prevails.
The sheep are wanted to prepare the land for a crop; by their in-
fluence being brought to bear, on proper principles, on this kind of
soil, it can be made to grow almost any kind of crop, from the
light barley soil, to that of the heavy wheat or bean soil. Many
years cannot pass over our heads, before this system is in operation
on these light sandy soils, or before the farmers find out that the
farther he goes from the market, the less must be his profits ; the
thousands of acres of available land now lying disregarded within
a few miles of the principal market town, while those who are
looking out for a place to invest their capital, are away hundreds
of miles into the wild bush in search of it, and when found, his
hard earned produce will do little more than pay for the expense
of bringing it to market. When I say that sheep farming,
properly applied, will save, in a great degree, much of this
unnecessary expense, it is saying much in its favour. There are,
in the neighbourhood of Sydney, better opportunities for investing
money in farming, than there is in any other pari of New South
Wales; I refer principally to the lands lying in the vicinity of
slaughterhouses, where thousands of loads of manure can be had
for about one-third the price it would cost in countries where the


farmer is paying £2 or £3 per acre, yearly rent. Here is land, if
let according to other lands in the Colony, would be worth ss. per
acre rent, with manure for sale at Is. 6d. per ton, and no one seems
to take advantage of it; were sheep farming combined with such
advantageous circumstances, the land in the vicinity of Sydney
would soon be worth twice the amount of that on the banks of the
Hunter, or the Clarence, for they are declining in value, and this
would be rising at a rapid rate.
Sheep are of most benefit to light, sandy, gravelly, and porous
soils, and the mode of action is their treading the soil so as to
make it firm and binding ; when required for plants whose stems
are tall, and require a good hold of the ground, it is possible, by
the trampling of their feet, while the land is wet, to make light
land heavy enough for wheat, or beans, and perhaps for maize ; but
I have not had the opportunity of seeing the latter, therefore I am
not sure of that plant; at the same time, I believe the land that
will support wheat, will support maize. The sort of land, too,
which is most benefited by sheep, is the most healthy land for the
sheep, and therefore the one suits the other. Sheep require dry,
heathy soil, to allow of their being folded on it at night, this is
essentially necessary for the working of this system, for they
deposit most of their manure at this season. They have been found
of great value in transferring the riches of one piece of land to
that of a poor piece, and in this respect would they be found of
value in bringing the poor soils of these Colonies into cultivation.
If our farmers had kept small flocks of sheep, and cultivated only
a fourth part of the best of the land, and run the sheep on the
grass part, and folded them on the cultivated part, where the
land was out of crop, they might have been in a high state of
prosperity ; their land, if it did not increase in fertility, would not
have lost much, but had they given the sheep a little hand-feeding
in their fold every night, such as bush hay cut into chaff, and as
much ground corn as would induce them to eat it, their land would
have improved materially under anything like fair cropping. The
sheep, by this management, would be superior to any squatter’s
flock, in both mutton and wool, provided the management was
good. It would require the farmer to consider first how many
sheep the three-fourths of his land would maintain ; and next, the
system of cropping which would allow of a succession of bare land
to fold on, so that he could keep the sheep always at work in pre-
paring land for crops, and above all, he would require to see to the
sheep being at all times supplied with sufficient food for their own.
welldoing. I would not have the farmer to understand that I hold
up any one of these systems as a model-farm for the Colonies, but
I hold that a combination of the whole is the most profitable
system for the farmer, and the best for bringing into cultivation a
large proportion of the lands of these Colonies, and maintaining


them in the condition which will afford the largest produce. It is
the system, too, which will enable the farmer to bring his pro-
duce to the greatest perfection, because it is only when the land is
in condition that its produce can be good. The miller knows that
poor land will never produce wheat that will give satisfaction to
the baker. The butcher will seldom buy his beef or mutton from
poor land for his best customers, and the wool-buyer gives a price
for the wool according to the quality of the land on which it is
raised.
The plan, therefore, which I would recommend to our Australian
farmers would be, to begin in earnest with their present stock of
cows, and other animals on the farm ; feed them in the Winter
season in the house, with the green food best and easiest raised, on
their respective farms ; if possible, give them good substantial food,
at the same time bear in mind that the cow giving milk requires
food of a softer nature than one that is put up to fatten for beef, a
mash is the best for a milking cow, because the liquid substances
are easier converted into milk; but if really rich milk is required,
the mash should be rich, and not too thin. By thus feeding the
stock already on the farm, and raising a good manure heap, the
farmer will be able, by degrees, to extend his feeding and manur-
ing system, and also through the better quality, and larger quantity,
of his produce. If then he find it convenient to extend the system
of feeding and manuring, he can procure a few breeding ewes,
which, by proper management, will get him into a small flock, by
easy degrees, the better he keeps them, the faster they will breed ;
the wool will pay for their keep, and the wether lambs, if fattened,
which the farmer has the best opportunity of doing, would bring
in a niece bit of money : this is another commodity which would
pay the fanner well, and the townspeople would be obliged to him,
for really good fat lambs are difficult to be got. When a little
flock is thus obtained, the farmer can go on with the two fertilis-
ing systems, and if he then have a desire for further extension, and
raising more produce, he can procure artificial manures, and cul-
tivate more green crops, increase his flock of sheep, and herd of
cows, but never draw upon the intrinsic value and condition of his
land, the moment he does, he turns his back upon improvement.
The soil is grateful, and will repay liberally, but it is easily
offended, and slow to forgive an injury.
General Management of the Farm.
In treating on farm management, it will not be forgotten that the
Colonial farmer is meant, for his benefit principally I took up the
subject, and although it is not a pleasing one, to rake up past mis-
managements, or advise about rigging up dilapidated circumstances,
I know it is little use to probe without going to the bottom ; I
would therefore advise the farmers to club together, for the pur-


pose of obtaining the better class of implements, which I have
shown to be actually necessary to till the land in that pulverised
condition which will prepare it for raising the best and greatest
produce. Their tillage is so small, that it would not pay for one of
them to get all the rather expensive implements necessary for their
work, but were four or five of them to join in buying these extra
implements, and agree to some condition about their use, it would
be of great benefit to all; and were they even to help one another,
and do their several operations conjointly, it could be done both
cheaper and more thoroughly; for when one man, with only one
pair of horses, sets about prepairing a piece of land for a crop, the
influence of the sun, and parching winds is so great, that although
the land was moist enough when he began*his work, it may be too
dry for the seed to vegetate when he is finished, it would be other-
wise were they each to take a part in the work, and it would be
cheaper, because, when stiff land gets dried in the working, it takes
much more work to pulverise it. By this united effort to regain
lost time and opportunity, the land might be deeper ploughed, and
perhaps some unused matter brought up to help in the general
reclamation, or the land may be trenched with the plough, and
thereby made more fertile ; in fact, it would, with common sagacity,
be an important step in the road to improvement.
In any occasion when the farmer has not been able to get to the
bottom of the soil with his own strength, it would be. reached by
united application ; three horses put to a plough, or even four, if
necessary, on strong lands would bring up maiden soil, and prove
a treasure to the owner. The land would thus raise a crop which
might materially assist him, and which, by no other means, he
could be availed of it. One of the most effective implements
which this company would require, would be a drill, or sowing
machine. It is rarely possible to sow any sort of crop in these
Colonies, in the broadcast form, nor is it often safe to do so, when
appearances are favourable. A drill, to let the seed into the land
a few inches, is quite necessary, so that the roots at once strike into
moist, fine, soil. The want of such an implement must hitherto
have been a great hindrance to their success in raising crops of any
kind. A roller, a drill, a grubber, or Finlayson’s harrow, are the
implements which would be required, ,£35 or £4O should be about
the amount required for the purchase of these indispensable
articles.
In no case is it advisable for the farmer to attempt to raise a
crop of any kind on land which he knows to be already cropped
too severely, his work and seed generally go for nothing, the land
is further reduced, while the small return will not pay the labour.
Better, in such a case, to sow a smaller piece, and put extra work
on it, and the extra seed which he would have sown, converted
into guano, and put on the small piece ; this plan, in most cases,


would give him a larger crop, with less work ; for if the season turn
out a dry one, he may have a fair crop in the small piece manured,
while on the large, he may have none worth the harvesting; suppose,
for example, he meant to sow 20 acres of wheat : the tillage of the
ground would cost £l5, the seed (at two bushels per acre) would
be £lO, in all £25. But let him in place of 20 acres, sow only
7 acres, the tillage would be £5 55., and the seed only £3 10s., in
all £8 155.; the saving in seed would thus be £l6 55., this would
buy 28 cwt. of guano, or other manure, at 12s. per cwt, 4 cwt. per
acre put on the 7 acres; the 7 acres thus manured, are more likely
to yield 25 bushels of wheat to the acre, than the 20 acres 8 bushels
per acre ; this would make the yield of the 7 acres 175 bushels,
and the 20 acres 160 bushels. The farmer might not see this, but
the explanation is simple, if we take an average season. The rain-
fall is little in Summer, the plants which have the benefit of
manure, are enabled to push their roots down into the moist soil,
and there find nourishment; and not only are they enabled to send
down their roots, but they can send down many more roots than
those which have no manure, these roots also run further, and per-
meate every crevice where nourishment is to be found ; whereas
the plants which have no manure are too weak and sickly to send
their roots in any direction, they remain near the surface, and are
thus exposed to sun and winds, if rain falls every two or three
days, they may come to a crop of some kind, but it cannot be
much.
Thus it is the Colonial farmer is so much at the mercy of the
seasons, if I may so speak, his land being so much reduced in fertil-
izing matter, it cannot retain moisture, and as soon as a dry season
comes, the yield is reduced. It would be otherwise if the land
were in condition, and more especially were it thoroughly tilled at
the same time. The farmer should never forget that the greatest
amount of soil for the roots of plants to extend themselves, and
get out of the reach of the scorching sun or drying wind, is the
safest in these Colonies. If the land is deeply tilled and properly
pulverised, it puts it, in a great measure, in the way of producing
a crop, because then it will have the full benefit of what moisture
can be got, the rain will continue longest in it, if it come, it has
the advantage of a greater power both of capillary attraction from
below, and of attracting moisture from the air above. If a soil is
not ten inches deep, and pulverised to that depth, it is too shallow,
and should, by trenching, or by some other means, be brought to
that standard.
There has been generally, I believe, a fair yield of wheat and
other crops in almost all the Colonies this last season, but it was
not caused by the land being in better condition, it was the better
season; more rain and the usual influence of the sun, but every
crop we get in this way is got at the expense of the land, not from


what is put in it, or done for it, and because we have thus succeeded
this time, we rely on it being so again ; if the next season happen
to be a dry one, it is to be feared we will be as much short, as we
were over our general average last year. This must continue as
long as we persist in cropping without manuring.
ADDENDA.
The sowing season for the various Agricultural Districts will be
treated as the various operations of the farm, one climate is
observed, atid the other parts of the Colony must reckon from
analogy. We take the vicinity of Sydney, which will include the
Coast Districts a considerable way north ; the Southern and high
exposed uplands will find the seasons from one to three weeks
later. August is therefore the first Spring month wherein prepara-
tion, will be made for all the principal crops of the farmer, and as
a proper time for sowing in this Country is of such vast importance,
I would advise the farmer not to be too scrupulous as to the date,
but take a season when it can be got anywhere near the mark.
The middle of September to the middle of October will be the
time for sowing Rye, Maize, Barley, Oats, Pumpkins, Mellons, and
such like, two months later for Turnips, Mangolds, Carrots, Beet,
&c., &c. Potatoes should be put in in the beginning of August.
When the “ secondary crops ” are put in depends so much on the
season, that it may be left to the judgment of the farmer in his
own particular district. Winter Wheat especially should not be
sown too early in cold climates, to get too much grown before the
frost come—the end of March is about the time.


An Indispensable Household Requisite!
hj _ Hd (rj
P 2 o o
►s. $ O ,_,
<T) CD (T) TT*
M O
i 02 p S*
B & §• I
§g • «
r Mo
Vh i B
n H S' B
r < g
?.*$ I
This really useful article is now so wellknown and extensively patronised
throughout the Colony, that it would be superfluous here to enlarge upon
the many good and desirable qualities it possesses, beyond stating that it is
most economic in application (a small proportion only being required for
each operation), and if the directions be adhered to in using it, the result
will be a clean and scarcely discernable joint, unyielding to the action
(within reason) of moist and dry heat, and capable of resisting any strain
to which ordinarily it may be subjected.
Prepared solely by JAMES MOORE, Chemist and Importer, 34 South
Head Road, Sydney. Sold in bottles, Is. each; by post for 2s. in stamps.
May also be had of the following appointed agents : —Sydney—Mr. M'Carthy, 7 Hunter-st.
Mr. Watson 567 Brickfield-hill, Mr. Penney, Parramatta-street, corner Newtown-road,
Parramatta, Mr. Rowling; Windsor, Mr. Neilson; Newcastle, Mr. Hobbs ; Maitland, Mr.
Lipscomb; Armidale, Mr. Mallam ; Grafton Mr. Hewitt; Bathurst, Mr. Butterworth;
Hill End, Mr. Hodgson; Orange, Mr. Downes; Mudgee, Mr. Barnes; Eorbes, Mr,
Armstrong; Molong, Mr. Haslam; Campbelltown, Mr. Bourke; Goulburn, Mr. Kerr;
Yass, Mr. Ritchie; Braidwood, Mr. Clapham; Gundagai, Mr. Elworthy; Clarendon,
Messrs, Denoon & Weir ; Wollongong, Mr. Hosking; Kiama, Mr. Bedford; Shoalhayen,
Messrs. M‘Arthur & Co.; Tamworth, Mr. Blackall.
“ THE SEED STORE,”
4fi iiilil itilSfa, iliiif.
C. F. CRESWELL,
Executes orders promptly from his Large and Varied Stock of
UNTHS'W -A-UNTX* CHOICE
lfopptaHe, anti iHolotr stfbs.
Catalogues of which, containing in addition, much useful information to
the Amateur Gardener, sent gratis to any part of the Colony.
BRANCHES:
MURRAY STREET, HOBART TOWN (from whence most of the seeds
are imported,)
And 37 SWANSTON STREET, MELBOURNE.


JOHN ALLEN,
Okmmhisiimi cl’ YmTrai’tlini] gig cat.
IS7 STJSSKX STREET,
SYDNEY.
Agent for all kinds of Colonial Produce.
CASH ADVANCED ON RECEIPT OF GOODS FOR SALE.
MR. STEWART,
Begs to intimate that he has resumed the practice of
his profession at
PITT STREET, SYDNEY,
Opposite Tattersall’s.
JB2T FIRST-RATE HORSE SHOERS.
Excellent Stabling.
BSOOELL BROTHERS,
495 & 497
GBOKGE STK3S3ST, SYjONJSTT.
GEORGE LEXER,
STEAM MiIEiJL.,
BOUEKE STREET, SYDNEY.
Superfine Silk-Dressed Flour.
Best Seconds. Wheat Meal.
Kiln-Dried Corn Meal and Bran.
BEST QUALITY AND LOWEST PRICE'.!


TABLE and POCKET CUTLERY S
ELECTRO-PLATED WARE /
KITCHEN UTENSILS . yS y
BEDSTEADS and COTS S
SPORTING POWDER \\ y X'jf+X
SHOT and caps Jr xx rx
BRUSH WARE Xj& X&
GUNS. k/ A^X\^
K^X^yx nails
6 /V/y # ' SCREWS
/Vf COLOURS
XX AND 0ILS
XjL * BLASTING POWDER
y / * FUZE AND MINERS’ TOOLS
X X BUILDERS’ IRONMONGERY
AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENTS
y BRASS FOUNDRY.
r- u
r 1 1 » i H Ccojt
JAMES MACGREGOR,
IfJkMSHaIT
Wine and Spirit Merchant,
IMPORTER OF CHOICE WINES AND SPIRITS.
Sole Manufacturer of the Celebrated
320 GEORGE STREET,
Wholesale Store —25 Queen’s Place,
SYDNEY
Country Orders promptly executed. Communications to he addressed
320 GEORGE STREET.


<
J. NEWTON,
Cabinet iMaiter $tt.>
ITTENITURE, IBONBEDSTEAD, AND BEDDING
WAREHOUSE,
83 WYNYARD SQUARE,
Opposite the Post Office York Street,
GOODS PACKED AND FOSWAEDED TO ADD PABTS.
W. McLEAN,
HOTSI & SHIP P&UHBSS
AND GALVANIZED IRONWORKER, &c„
81 NEW PITT STREET
And 1 UNDERWOOD STREET.
Pumps, Baths, Water Tanks, Coppers, Boilers, &c.
GENERAL IRONWORK, SPOUTING, AND ROOFING.
WILLIAM PRITCHARD,
PORK BUTQHEfI, HAM & BAOON CURE
JPOTJJjT u, R I JR ,
BUTTSa, CSS33S3 & SSC- MSRCHAIT
ie®)' 6101C1 STSiiT,
Between J. Barlow’s and Commercial Bank.
Families SupplOd. Bcaics and eoantry Orders jromptl / esecut
W.P. is a Cash Buyer of Prims Fat Poultry, Gan
Sucking Pigs, and Corn-fed Porkers, and First-cla
brands of Butter, Cheese, Eggs, &c.


j . . c , i ■ m - M m
0 ' |
F. LASSETTER & Co.,
WHOLESALE, RETAIL, & EXPORT
mONMOKTOERS,
Beg to call attention to the following outline of the different Departments
of their Business.
MATERIALS FOR BLACKSMITHS AND WHEELWRIGHTS
■ Bar, rod, and sheet iron ; boiler plate, steel blocks, boxes, patent axles, springs, bolts, and nuts,
chains, traces, haimes, &c.
MATERIALS FOR BUILDERS ,1
Galvanized corrugated iron and zinc for roofs, nails, wire, wrought, Ewbank’s patent, &c.; locks,
latches, bolts, hinges ; brass foundry in great variety; a large assortment of handsome fittings, g» J
for superior bouses, as well as for economical work. Parties building will find themselves com-
pensated for time spent in a visit to this department.
MATERIALS FOR PAINTERS.
Colours in oil, white lead, oils, turps, varnishes, painters’ and plasterers’ brushes, window glass in
boxes, putty, &c.
MATERIALS FOR TINSMITHS
Tin in shfeet and block ; solder, kettle ears, wire, &C.
ALL KINDS OF TOOLS
For Blacksmiths, Tinsmiths, Joiners, Coopers, Millwrights, Shipwright*, Saddler's, Engineers,
Plumbers, Diggers, &e.
FARM, GARDEN, AND VINEYARD IMPLEMENTS
Patent iron ploughs for bullocks or horses, grubbers, horse-hoes, barrows ; all descriptions of spades
forks, rakes, hoes, harvest tools, com-shellcrs, chums, corn-mills, chaff-cutting machines for hand
or power, horse-works, pumpkin-sheers, &c.
STATION SUPPLIES
Sorby’s sleep-shears, superior Scotch seaming twine, ruddle, bells, cattleJ rands made to order ;
eveiy article of ironmongery wanted on a startup.
FIREARMS, &c. >' '
Sportsmen and purchasers of firearms will do well to inspect the largest slock in the Colonies of
single and double barrel guns, duck guns, revolvers, carbines, and repeating rifles; gunpowder, !
shot, caps, cartridges; sportsmen’s appliances, &c.; blasting powder, fuze.
SADDLERY
English and Colonial sadcTes and bridles, buckles, stirrups, spurs, bits, girths, whips, and j
\ saddlery’ fittings. s
J PUMPS
Suction, force, deep-vscll, engine, &0., with pipes fitted Complete, if desired.
AMERICAN IMPORTS
A monthly shipment of axes, shovels, picks, lamps, stoves, and other articles in which American
manufacturers excel, and selections of the most, iugeffious “ Yankee Nortons.” jm 1
FURNISHING IRONMONGERY
English, American, and Scotch cooking stoves; superior BhefßSd cutlery, spoons, forks, disbedvers
cruets, tea and breakfast services, tea-trays, urns, lamps, b* 4eaifc, baths, toilet sets, &c., &c., and
a really beautiful selection of statuettes, lustres,,.vases, Bohemian glass, and general ornamental -
ware.
FOR HOTELS
' , A class of goods is specially imported, of extra strength and good appearahee, and proprietor's will
find it to their interest to sort up or furnish from our £tock.
’- ' %
-
F. LASSETTER & Co.,
421 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY,
NEAR THE MARKETS.
iNTiiIJA X JLIJZi IViillllVii/lOf
5. "*» -
''
* v
