

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, N.S.W.
Agricultural Education.
BY
Principal H. W. POTTS, F.C.S., F.L.S.,
Hawkesbury Agricultural College, Richmond, N.S.W.
It is too late now to discuss the Question ; “Is Agricultural Education of any
Value? ” Hungary boasted of an agricultural college in the eighteenth century
and may claim priority amongst the countries of the world in providing systematic
agricultural education for her people.
■Lectures in agriculture were first given at the University of Nagy Syambat in
1680, and a Chair of Agriculture was established at the University of Sciences at
Buda in 1777.
A compulsory course of training in agriculture, gardening and horticulture of
two hours weekly is found in all schools of the German Rhine and other provinces
during the final two years of the school curriculum. This is deemed a preparatory
course to that of the agricultural colleges, which are established in all the leading
agricultural districts.
In France the teaching of agriculture in all primary schools became obligatory
in iB6O. This terminated in 1879 by provision being made by departmental and
communal instruction in agriculture by means of departmental cehtres and colleges.
In March, 1882, “ the elements of physical and natural science with their application
to agriculture became compulsory.” Later on, further provision was made j n
every province to'make agricultural education a leading subject. j. c
It is claimed by competent authorities that as an indirect result of the adop ,i,i
of this prudent policy the yield per acre of the crops in France have been doubled
during the past 40 years.
In Italy a revival of agricultural training was inaugurated in 1897 in a stirring
appeal made by the Director-General of Primary and Normal Instruction :
Let us return to the fields ! This is the invitation which from all time men c r
superior understanding and of generous hearts have repeated to the Italians.
Be it granted to us to join them; let us enamour the rising generation with •
the land. From the little garden, where the country teacher shall practically
teach the rudiments of agriculture, upwards through the technical schools and
to the colleges, may the knowledge tof agriculture continually be reinforced
and elevated. Everywhere may there re-awaken the Virgilian affection for
rustic labour.
During the past ten years over 11,000 rural schools have given instruction in
agriculture in Italy.
In Switzerland there are sixteen agricultural colleges or schools, and over £250,000
per annum is devoted to the support offagricultural colleges.
Denmark is one of the brightest examples we have of the effect of agricultural
education on the people. Sir John Gorst, in referring to the progress of technical
education in Denmark, made the following statement -
The important influence technical education had on the national, social and
economical development of the people was indicated in the case of Denmark
which had, from being the poorest of European countries, become one of the
richest; and that by producing butter, bacon, and eggs chiefly for the English
market.
Since 1865 practical teaching in agriculture and arboriculture has been in vogue
in Sweden throughout the leading schools.
Even little Belgium, prior to the war, expended over £150,000 per annum in
agricultural education.
In England there are eight agricultural colleges supported by rates from the
county councils and annual grants from the Agricultural Department, London.
»!8179


The Commissioners of National Education in Ireland make a special effort to
teach agriculture in all rural national schools and prepare students for the higher
training in agriculture and live stock at the Glasnevin Agricultural College and at
the Cork Agricultural College.
Scotland has her Chairs of Agriculture at the Universities of Glasgow and Edin-
burgh in addition to several important agricultural colleges.
Despite the rigorous climate, Canada may be considered one of the most advanced
in so far as agricultural education and training is concerned. In 1885 Dr. W.
Saunders visited Europe to study the progress of Technical Education in the agri-
cultural colleges. As a result of his report the magnificent Agricultural College of
Guelph was built and equipped. When the writer visited it in 1914 there were
i ,600 young men in residence and 200 young women, all undergoing training on
similar lines to that given at Hawkesbury. Dr. Saunders made the following
remarks at a public gathering at the College :
The occupation of farming has been elevated in the eyes of the community.
It is no longer looked upon as a sort of drudgery suited to the dull and slow-
going, but is now regarded k,as a suitable field for the higher intelligence of
cultivated minds. It is recognised as a calling requiring much skill to conduct
it successfully, and is giving ample scope for the exercise of the most attrac-
tive and earnest minds and one in which information of almost every sort may
be turned to practical account.
Similar colleges costing up to £lOO,OOO to build and equip are built in Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Nova Scotia and Columbia.
In America it is plainly evidenced that the United States Government face any
cost to the community that is likely to provide the farmer with a better knowledge
of his avocation. Profitable production to them is almost a constant care. They
are prepared to advance the well-being of the nation with any stimulus, irrespective
of cost.
In 1862 Congress alienated 11,000,000 acres of land to provide funds to establish,
endow and maintain agricultural colleges and experiment farms in every State
belonging to the Union. In 1885 the provision was found insufficient and the
Hatch Act provided each college or experiment farm with a special endowment of
16,000 per annum. Later on this was further increased and in some cases we find
lillcges receiving to-day annual grants of £30,000 per annum from the Federal
Lrliament, apart from the support given by private donors and State Parliaments.
*The wealth expended on these valuable institutions, some of which the writer
. visited and, closely inspected in 1914, may be realised by quoting that at the State
Agricultural Cpl\ege for New York £600,000 was expended on buildings and equip-
ment; Minnesota, £120,000; Illinois, £92,000 ; and Wisconsin, £210,000.
The Federal Department of Agriculture at Washington spends over £6,000,000
annually imsfibscribing agricultural education and conducting investigations likely
The writer visited the Ames Agricultural College, in the State of lowa, where
over 2,009 students in agriculture were in attendance.
It has all resulted in a remarkable of the American farmers to the
desirability of having more definite information and securing a higher range of
profits for their skill and intelligence. Every farmer in each State has not only
benefited by reason of the splendid system of education being made available for
himself and sons, but also by the wonderful system of sound practical information.
No country has ever attempted so complete and systematic means of helping the
farmer, and the farmers eagerly look for it. They appreciate the efforts being
made to assist them and realise that it is not only an intellectual awakening; but
provides the means of rendering farm life attractive and salt - factory. ,
In Australia colleges have been established : three in Victoria, one in New South
Wales, one in Queensland, one in South Australia, and one in New Zealand. They
are all being steadily supported and are doing excellent work.
The object at Hawkesbury is to teach the Science of Agriculture with Live Stock
and the various sciences associated with rural occupations, having a distinct bias in
favour of their practical application. It is realised that in this vast and thinly
populated country students must be pioneers and trained to be self-reliant, practical,
methodical and resourceful. The aim is to provide a training in which manual
dexterity combines with a sound knowledge of principles to turn out men who will
take up farming and stock raising.
Apart from the possibility of'a trained student being in a position 1o acquire land,
numbers are not so fortunate and hence qualify to assume the management of
mixed farms, irrigation farms, stock areas, wheat farms, or wheat and sheep, piggery


and poultry farms, orchards and vineyards. Training is also provided for those
who desire to render themselves competent for positions as dairy factory managers,
butter-makers, cheese-makers, milk testers, inspectors, teachers, &c.
The Hawkesbury College is situated on the uplands overlooking the Hawkesbury
Flats, and lies about one mile south of the Richmond Railway Station and in close
proximity of the Kurrajong Heights and Blue Mountains. It has accommodation
for 200 resident students, each student having a single room. The whole building
is lighted by electricity.
The farm comprises 3,546 acres, which includes a separate area of rich, alluvial
flats of xi 6 acres on the banks of the Hawkesbury River. The latter is laid out as
an irrigation farm. In all about 1,500 acres are set apart for cultivation.
Over 100 draught horses are used on the farm.
Each department is under the direction of skilled and competent experts,
especially selected as teachers. Students pursuing the full course of training spend
every second day on the various sections of the farm engaged in all phases of prac-
tical work. The student is given expert training in scrubbing, ringbarking, clearing,
fencing, ploughing, rolling, harrowing, drilling, cultivation, and the rpanagement
of crops. Every phase of harvesting is taught, such as binding, stocking, carting,
stacking, and thatching: the management and use of the reaper and binder and
Sunshine Harvester; the use of the scythe and the mowing-machine; threshing,
chaff-cutting, maize shredding and cracking. All operations associated with the'
dairy, piggery, poultry yard, orchard and vegetable garden are taught. Moreover,
each student pursues a course of training in the saddler’s, carpenter’s, blacksmith’s
and wheelwright’s shops, as well as in horse-shoeing.
He is taught butchering.
Every phase of sheep work is taught, such as shearing, marking, dipping, wool-
classing, &c.
Each student is given sufficient practice to manage a boiler, steam engine, oil
engine or motor.
The total number of students who have passed through the College since its
inception, and who have pursued a course of training in farming and live stock, is
2,037. Of this number 130 are occupying various official positions, such as Director
of Agriculture, Inspectors of Agriculture, Managers of Government Experiment
Farms, Inspectors in Dairying and Orcharding,' Teachers in Agricultural Colleges,
Experts in various Departments of Agriculture, and Teachers in the Agricultural
High Schools, not only in this State, as well as in the other States of the Common-
wealth, but also in New Zealand, Fiji, South Africa, and other countries.
Again a number of the College graduates are occupying responsible positions in
the management of stations, farms, dairies, butter and cheese factories, orchards, &c.
We have sufficient evidence, mainly collected through the agency of the Old
Boys’ Union and their Journal, to enable us to distinctly state that at least 78 per
cent, of our ex-students are putting College training • into practice on the land or i
occupying responsible positions associated with rural pursuits.
Returned Soldiers.
Over 300 returned soldiers have so far each received six months’ training in one
or more sections on the College farm, sufficient to enable them to settle down to
rural avocations such as ploutry-raising, orcharding, market-gardening or pig-
raising. In many instances these men are maimed and rendered unsuited for other
occupations.
A steady stream of these fine men, who have responded to their country’s call,
is passing through the College to enable them to secure enough information to earn
a living.
Training Country School Teachers.
For several years a Summer School was maintained to afford training to country
teachers of schools, in residence during the mid-summer holidays, in Nature study
and elementary agriculture, school gardening and similar subjects,n order to
introduce such methods of training in the schools as to develop a love for country
life and avocations in the mind of the young child. In all, 621 country schoo
teachers passed through -this course.
Rural Camp Schools held under the Direction of the Public Instruction
Department.
With ar similar object in view, and especially to interest children in the cities i
country occupations, rural camps were formed in which were accommodated 144
children weekly (with 12 teachers) from the cities to give them an insight into farm
life, and by means of demonstrations, lectures, and visits of inspection to farms


dairies, orchards, &c., give them an interest in and regard for country avocations
with a view eventually to inducing a boy to select a course of training in the Agri-
cultural High Schools and College and take up farming.
So far 2,180 scholars and 180 teachers have attended thisjcoursc—the chief centre
of training being at the College farm.
Farmers’ Winter School.
In 1905 it was decided to organise a Winter School during the slack period of the
year for busy farmers and stock owners who can devote only a limited time to study
and intensive practical instruction.
Advantage was taken of the absence of the regular students on this mid-winter
vacation to place 100 bedrooms at the disposal of the farmers. Concessions to
travel by rail were granted by the Railway Commissioners.
The course of training embraces a variety of subjects; every section of the farm,
orchard, dairy, piggery and other departments are kept in full operation, and each
farmer selects any branch of training that may suit the conditions of his own farm
or district.
Lectures, demonstrations and practice are daily given on stock, agriculture,
manuring, cultivation, dairy work, orcharding, poultry-raising, wool classing,
carpentry, blacksmithing, wheelwrighting, farm engineering, saddlery, butchering,
gardening, apiculture, veterinary science, fencing, and a variety of other sections
too numerous to mention.
During the period of 12 years a total number of 1,055 practical fanners have
attended these Winter Schools from every part of New South Wales. So popular
and useful has this class of training become that at the Winter School held this year
a number of applications for admission had to be refused owing to the absence of
accommodation.
As an instance of the keen appreciation of the student farmers it may be men-
tioned that five beautiful illuminated addresses are hanging on the College walls,
expressing the satisfaction and gratitude of the farmers' signing them of the
facilities afforded them for this training by the Department of Agriculture; and
of the practical value of the teaching provided by the Principal and his capable
staff.
It is an inspiring sight to see 100 farmers ranging in ages from 16 to 70 attending
a lecture on such a subject as “ Colic in the Draught Horse,” or a demonstration in
the paddocks of testing the most modem agricultural implements.
Schools for Poultry Farmers in Summer and Winter.
The opportunity is taken of the absence of the College students in mid-summer
and mid-winter to conduct Poultry Schools for men and women.
The lectures and demonstrations by .the College experts cover every section of
poultry-raising and egg production.
The attendances at the three schools so far conducted totalled 124, and included
64 women.
School for Apiculture.
Two Summer Schools so far have been held for apiculturists. This form of rural
avocation is attracting attention.
The apiarists at the College give a series of demonstrations and lectures with
practical training at the College Apiary, extending over a period of one month.
The attendance was 35.
Visitors.
During the past 15 years, 46,700 visitors have been entertained at the College.
These consist of parents arranging to enter their sons, graziers, farmers, dairymen,
orchardists, poultrymen, stock-breeders, bee-keepers, and others who visit the
College for the purpose of gaining first-hand information on matters affecting stock,
crops, methods of cultivation, diseases of plants, stock, &c. To these are distri-
buted seeds, plants, bulletins, publications, and the services of the Principal and
the various members of the stafrand the experts are always available for the purpose
of answering inquiries.
Farmers and others also visit the College to purchase stud poultry, turkeys,
geese, ducks, ostriches, pigs, sheep, cattle and horses.
I It may be noted that these visitors include parties of farmers arranged for and
sent to the College by various agricultural societies, agricultural bureaux, high
schools, fruit growers, poultry associations, and other organisations.
The College may be visited any day during each week except Sundays, Saturdays
or public holidays. It will be seen that the average attendance of visitors per day
throughout the year is 12-5. These visitors come from every part of New South
Wales.


Correspondence.
The College staff deals with between 5,000 and 6,000 letters annually. The
majority of these are inquiries of a varied nature relating chielly to problems
associated with farming and the raising of live stock. Many involve long and
careful answers. They demand the best attention of the staff and are promptly
attended to daily. In this connection thousands of miscellaneous publications
and bulletins giving first-hand informatin are distributed.
Lectures.
The College teaching and expert staff are frequently called upon by the various
agricultural societies, agricultural bureaux, poultry and orchard associations to give
public lectures and demonstrations in the County of Cumberland.
The Principal has gone as far as Cowra to give public addresses on live stock at
■the request of the Farmers’ and Settle 's’ Association.
Press Inquiries. v
A number of the leading weekly and daily newspapers of the State, including
Agricultural and Stock Journals, continuously make use of the Principal and the
College staff to answer inquiries for their numerous correspondents, and which are
recorded in the press without acknowledgement of the source from which the replies
are furnished. It will be seen that the reliable character of the information is
vouched for from its source.
Stud Stock.
The College farm is utilised as a stud farm for the distribution of pure-bred stock
at prices within the means of men on the land with limited incomes.
Pure-bred Clydesdale horses are bred, reared, and distributed, as well as mules.
Pedigreed Jersey and Norfolk Red Polled cattle are bred, reared, tested, and
distributed at the dairy.
After twenty years’ continuous tests, it was determined that the Romney Marsh
sheep were the most hardy, disease-resistant, and best type of sheep for the coastal
areas of New South Wales. For the past fifteen years a pure-bred flock has been
kept at the College. There are 150 pedigreed ewes kept with high-class rams. The
stock of these are distributed yearly for stud purposes at reasonable prices.
The piggery has acquired an Australian reputation. Great care has been exer-
cised to establish a stud piggery with imported stock from the most reputable studs
in England and America. Six breeds are kept. Nothing but the most prolific
and high-class strains are bred and the progeny sold at very low prices to assist the
farmer and dairyman.
In this connection during the past ten years the following pedigreed stock have
been bred, reared, and distributed : . >
Berkshire boars... ... 354 Poland China sows 79
„ sows 350 Large Black boars 61
Middle Yorkshire boars 153 „ sows ... ... 97
~ sows 1 128 Large York boars ... ... 51
Tamworth boars ... 123 ~ sows ... ... 44
„ sows... ... 192
Poland China boars ... 109 1,741
a total of 1.741 stud pigs, which realised a total sum of £7,891.
It may be mentioned that to encourage the rearing and fattening of pigs for pork
and bacon, the Principal, with the assistance of his staff, wrote a book on “Pigs
and their Management.” which has been readily sold throughout Australia. The
third edition is now in the press. This book is based on Australian practice and
experience, and affords practical information on every phase of this branch of stock-
raising.
In the poultry section, the industry has been stimulated by the College poultry
farm distributing annually large numbers of stud poultry, ducks, geese, turkeys,
and ostriches; also eggs for hatching. These are from prolific strains and give
poultry keepers an assured source of supply from which they secure the finest types
at moderate prices.
Egg Production.
The College has established a world-wide reputation as being the centre from which
the most convincing statistics and remarkable series of tests have been made and
issued on egg production.
The Egg-Laying Competitions—organised, designed, and carried out at the College
commencing in 1902 —still continue, as do the weekly issue of results and yearly


returns. They have attracted attention all over the world and the tests copied
and carried out in advanced countries with equally beneficial results to the poultry-
man.
The original yields exhibited an average of 130 eggs per bird. These returns by
dint of comparison, well-designed tests, and accurate and intelligent methods of
collection, feeding, management, breeding, and selection, have steadily raised the
yield. To-day, are hens averaging over 200 eggs per bird; phenomenal yields have
been recorded from individual hens and world’s records established in these
competitions yearly.
It is not too much to state, after a personal investigation of the leading competitions
conducted in other parts of the world, that the Hawkesbury Egg-Laying Competitions
are leading with singular effectiveness and convincing accuracy.
In this regard, the College has conferred a world-wide benefit of inestimable worth
to poultry-keepers.
The deep interest in the College methods of selection, breeding, rearing, feeding,
and management is evidenced by the attendance at the' Annual Poultry Conference.
The first, inaugurated nine years ago, had an attendance of under 100,whereas the
ninth, held this year, totalled 870.
Experiment Tests.
These are conducted in every section of agriculture and live stock work.
Amongst the numerous tests conducted may be mentioned the trials of motor
tractors. Five different tractors were tested, extending over a period of five years,
with the hope that petrol motor-traction might be introduced as a payable sub-
stitute for horses. So far the results have not warranted any change for the farmer,
but the Department of Agriculture will not fail to utilise the College and other farms
to discover any methods or implements likely to render the conditions of cultivation
easier and more profitable. In this connection it is wise for farmers to look to the
Department to determine problems of this kind.
Wheat Trials.
For many years past, the College farm has been systematically utilised to conduct
trials in new varieties of wheats which have been specially bred or selected to meet
coastal conditions. It is here where highest yielding varieties for hay are selected
as a result of annual trials, also the best rust-resistant varieties kre determined.
Other tests are yearly made to discover-the most economical source of phosphoric
acid to apply to wheat, as well as the most economical and effective fertilisers or their
combinations.
Stud wheats are grown annually under the immediate supervision of the Depart-
ment’s Plant Breeder to arrive at the best varieties suitable for coastal conditions.
Thousands of varieties have been subjected to test.
Valuable information is also acquired in the annual tests conducted to determine
the best varieties of maize, sorghum, millets, lucerne, clovers, barley, vetches, sugar
beet, mangolds, cow cane, peas, rape, potatoes, melons, pumpkins, rye, sweet potatoes,
cabbage, kale, &c.
In the grass garden river 150 varieties of introduced grasses have been subjected
to continuous tests in order to ascertain their habits of growth and grazing values.
Recently Sudan grass and elephant grasses have been subject to growth and inquiry.
Furthermore, valuable experiments are being conducted at the College farm to
test and improve a number of our native grasses under the direction of the Depart-
ments’ Agrostologist.
Amongst the numerous clovers that have been introduced and tested the variety
known as “ Chilian,” and imported by the Department from Chili, has been subjected
to keen test during the past nine years at the College and promises to afford us a
variety that will thrive well under our climatic conditions.
Expriments with Live Stock.
For many years tests have been carried out to select the best farmer’s horse from
Suffolks, Shires, Clydesdales, and their crosses. The conclusion arrived at is
that the modern Clydesdale gives the best return, and in the majority of points
affords the farmer the most satisfactory results.
Mule raising has been subjected to a continuous trial fpr the past twenty years, and
the conclusions are of such a satisfactory nature as to induce the Department to
establish a stud farm at Yanco, with importations of the best stock from America.
In relation to fodders, many methods have been adopted and practically carried
out to arrive at the mast satisfactory means of conserving fodder as ensilage. The
- esults have been published from year to year, and the American Tub Silo has been


shown to be uperior to others in point of relishability and the nutritive value of the
food, as well as the economical aspect of its conservation. The College has provided
the dairymen of Australia with reliable data and conclusive proofs of the value of
this class of fodder for dairy cattle.
Again, the dairy has been utilised to ascertain many facts in relation to the feeding
values of fodders in rations balanced and otherwise.
Tests have been conducted from time to time to discover the feeding values of
new fodders as well as methods of rearing calves.
The various processes of manufacture in butter and cheese have been under
scientific review in order to secure standards of manufacture in the conduct of a
valuable export trade. The College expert and scientific staff have from time to
time been employed in important investigations in this connection.
The Orchard.
This section of the College operations includes 42 acres used as an orchard and
vegetable garden. For several years past the possibility of utilising septic tank
effluent, under proper control, for the profitable growing of vegetables has been
successfully demonstrated. ♦
The orchard is used as a standard guide to the orchardist of the County of Cum-
berland. Varieties of fruits are under observation continually to ascertain their
possibilities under local conditions. Over sixty varieties pf peaches have been
submitted to a sufficiently long period of growth to arrive at their direct commercial
value and to determine comparable results. The information is made available
and the few varieties giving profitable returns are made known io the local orchardists.
Similar-tests are conducted with grapes, plums, apricots, nectarines, pears, apples,
quinces, persimmons, guavas, tomatoes, &c.
Like investigations are applied to root crops and vegetables.
The orchard and vegetable garden are constant sources of inquiry from those who
derive their living from this class of rural pursuit.
Furthermore, interesting and profitable practices are investigated and adopted
with public demonstrations in packing fruit, drying, crystallising, jam-making,
bottling, as well as lemon-curing and raisin' drying.
Moreover, full investigations are scientifically conducted to ascertain the habits
and life history of insect pests, fungoid diseases, scale and other troubles which
continually assail the orchardist. The most economical means of prevention or
control are made known to orchardists and practical demonstrations given at all’
times to assist inquirers.
The Entomologist, Vegetable Pathologist and Chemists at the College are always
available to offer practical aid where applied science is brought to bear to secure
good results.
“ Agricultural Gazelle.’'
Since the inauguration of the College and the Agricultural Gazelle, a persual of
the pages of this useful help to farmers will show that the Principal and staff have
annually contributed valuable and useful information in order to establish the most
serviceable forms of farm practice applicable to Australian conditions of climate
and soils in whicn modifications of standard processes have been soundly established.
varieties of produce have been tested and introduced and a varied class of
information gathered along with material help from the Government Experiment
Farms. All the information has been focussed in the most practical manner in the
Farmers' Handbook, issued by the Department ofAgriculture.
Bulletins from time to time have been issued by the staff, all of wliich contribute
to the information so much needed by farmers.
Shows.
At the Royal Agricultural Society’s Show, held in Sydney annually lor the past
twenty-two years, the College and its various sections has never failed to present a
tangible proof of the capacity of the farm. It has to be remembered that the
College soils are extremely light, inferior, and low grade. From these we have
produced hay, maize, sorghums, oats, grasses, root crops, ensilage, and other fodders,
as well as fruits that would vie with more favoured districts. This points to keen
training and the adoption of sound farm practice, with a full appreciation of rotation
and fertilisation.
This somewhat hard phase of farming is not a disadvantage, as no student is
likely to settle on poorer land; and if his training is such as to secure remunerative
returns from such he peed have no hesitation in taking up lands of somewhat inferior
quality.


COLLEGE ADMISSION RETURNS—TEN YEARS’ AVI[?]
FROM SECOND SESSION, 1905, TO FIRST SESSION, 19[?]
Countries and States Per cent.
New South Wales ... ... 75-44
Victoria ... 7-09
Queensland ... 4-50
Tasmania ... ... ... ... 3-36
West Australia ... i-oi
South Australia ... -17
Great Britain ... 3-87
New Zealand ... ... ... -96
South Africa 1-43
South Seas -90
Countries and States Per cent.
Java and East Indies -45
India ... ... ... -30
China ... ... ... ... -14
Burmah "... ... ... ... -05
Germany ... ... -03
United States of America ... -03
Russia ... -03
Not stated ... -20
Total ... too
Average Age 18 6.
Age of Students. Per cent.
15 years -67
16 13-35
17 2253
18 „ 21-88
19 15-59
20 ~ 9-67
21 ~ 6-74
22 3-45
23 I-? 2
24 ~ -88
25 -68
26 -95
27 -45
28 -32
29 -ii
Parents’ Occupations. Per cent.
Not de cribed ... ... ... 3-47
Farmers and Graziers ... ... " 17-54
Widows ... ■ ... ... ... 6-46
/ Gentlemen ... ... ... 8-76
' Solicitors and Barristers ... 2-06
Engineers ... ... ... 3-60
Bank Managers, &c 2-63
Clergymen ...- 2-43
Doctors, Dentists, and Chemists 4-77
Travellers ...- ... -42
Captains, Pilots, and Sailors ... -63
Merchants/ Brokers, and Agents 6-85
Ship Chandlers ... ... ... -20
Superintendent of Wharves. &c. -15
Brewers and Hotel Keepers ... 2-90
Government Officials and Civil
Servants ... ... ... 5-24
Millers and Flour Merchants ... -20
Journalists and Newspaper Pro-
prietors ... ... ... -83
School Inspectors and Teachers... 4-53
Builders and Contractors ... 1-33
Secretaries, Accountants, and
Clerks ... ... ... ... 4-67
Overseers and Managers ... 3-28
Shopkeepers ... ... ... 3-14
Manufacturers ... ... ... 1-36
Auctioneers ... ... ... -48
Wine Growers and Merchants ... -40
Architects and Land Surveyors.. 2-18
Trainers ... ... • ... ... -26
Ages of Students. Per cent.
30 years ... ... -15
31 '°3
32 -I2
33 ' -I 5
34 -13
35 -°3
36 .. 06
38 „ -03
39 'll
40 -°3
42 -il
43 '°9
Over 50 -09
100
Parents’ Occupations'. Per cent.
Ferry Owners ... ... ... *65
Laundrymen ... -08
Draughtsmen ... ... v .;. •44-
Engine Drivers ... ... ... -2 2
Bricklayers, Slaters, and Masons J *59
Mine Owners, Miners, &x. ... -04
Insurance Inspectors, &c. ... -53
Members of Parliament ... -73
Caretakers ... ... ... -04
Pianoforte Teachers and Tuners -14
Policemen... ... -57
Carriers ... ... ... ... -06
Wool Classers ... ... ... -12
Stock and Station Agents ... -27
Butchers ... ... ... ... -28
Collectors ... ... ... ... -05
Pawnbrokers ... ... ... -13
Blacksmiths ... ... ... -25
Coachbuilders ... ... ... -16
Saddlers ... ... ... ... *O3
Carpenters ... -09
Domestic Duties ... -19
Artists ... j ... "22
Sawyers ... ... -09
Bakers ... ... ... ... *44
Military ... ... ... ... -18
Theatrical ' ... ... ... -06
Labourers ... ... -io
Boarding House Keepers ... -13
100
Sydney : w illiam Applegate OolUck, Government Printer. —1920
