

AGRICULTURAL COLLEGES:
A PAPER READ BEFORE
THE VICTORIA AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY,
At HEIDELBERG,
AT THE
quarterly meeting
HELD Otf
Q’ITESQAY, 16th JfiJlTJfiliY, 1878,
MR. GEORGE SHERWOOD
EVELYN :
JAS. ROSSITER, PRINTER & PUBLISHER, EVELYN OBSERVER OFFICE.
187 8 .


I'Jl i i SI l> :\ . V k {.\ l
iU I Jt> JKiTKUi'J


AGRICULTURAL COLLEGES
Mr. President, —“ Agricultural col-
leges” is the title of the subject to
which I have the honor to invite your
attention. It is very generally felt, if
not expressed before in this form, that
“ practical agriculture” must compre-
hend a scientific system, expressly
adapted to this sunny climate of Vic-
toria. It is difficult to give a lucid
expression of what it is intended to
convey in defining a scientific system.
As agriculture is a polytechnical insti-
tution it must embrace:—First. Metho-
dical management in the direction of
farming operations, and a knowledge
of the mechanical pulverization of soils
at the most suitable season. Second.
How to produce the greatest crop, on
a given area, at the least expense; and
how to utilize the crop in the most
profitable way. Third. To make choice
of situations where the climatic character
does not depend alone on geographical
position, but owes much to local in-
fluences, and points to probable genial
stations for crops that require a specific
climate, and would not succeed in
localities where the conditions were
not favourable. Fourth. And make
choice of crops suitable to the land at
your disposal. Fifth. An education
in the elements of botany, chemistry,
animal physiology, hydraulics, and
meteorology. This definition of a
scientific system may be questioned as
containing parts that are held to be
not truly scientific in character ; but as
the business of directing farming opera-
tions is. admitted to be an art that
requires skill of the highest order, |
good management is as much entitled I
to be considered a science as any other
branch of knowledge. I have stated
the question in this way because, 1
generally, when proposals are made t°
educate the farmer, there is a disposition
to pass over the skill required in the
good management of the farm. In
support of the view here taken, an old
writer thus dilates on good manage-
ment. He says :—“ The causes which
operate to increase farm labour are
numerous and mostly accidental, the
result of the variation of the seasons
when the operations are performed.
The influence of the seasons should be
studied in a prospective point of view,
and plans devised to counteract the
disarrangement this casual interference
may occasion. Farming operations can
only be successfully carried on by
strictly observing a due regard to order
and regularity.” Another writer thus
expresses himself on good management:
—“Under good management when the
labour is efficient and effectively per-
formed, and at the right time, and the
horses kept in condition to do a good
day’s work without distressing them,
and all the operations done in due
order, on a systematic plan, under
direct and careful superintendence,
would effect a saving of twenty-five
per cent, on the whole labour of the
farm.” I have to invite your attention
to all those parts that are not known
as technical knowledge, to which branch
we have, perhaps, too often been directed
to look for the true panacea that is to
remedy all the defects of our present
system. Like the notable Mr. Triptole-
mus Yellowly, described in Sir. Walter
Scott’s “ Pirate,” who purposed to con-
vert the barren island into an “ Eden”
by ejaculating a few Latin phrases,
technical knowledge explains the prin-
ciples on which farming operations
depend; but how to acquire skill in


management to effectively direct these the kangaroo grass, that are indigenous
operations, must always remain a lead-
ing feature in the education of the
cultivator. Technical knowledge is a
high attainment. But how to manage
a farm is absolutely necessary. And I
will delegate it to you to work out this
problem. To enable the farmer to un-
derstand and explain his practice, he
must be educated in the elements of the
kindred sciences of botany, chemistry,
animal physiology, meteorology, and
hydraulics. The last named, hydraulics,
perhaps would be better understood as
irrigation, which must yet become a
national agricultural enterprize. There
has been a proposal to transport to a
distance the mechanical power of the
Falls of Niagara, and if it is necessary
to do this, and made to pay, surely
means can be devised to conduct water
to a distance, and distribute it over the
land, if on no better plan than what
has been used at the gold diggings.
There is no reason why the water we
have should not be turned to profitable
account. And where there are no
creeks or rivers the country must be
tapped for springs and artesian wells.
There is a greater wealth in the water
we have than there is in gold mining.
It is constant, regular, and inexhausti-
ble, and no natural product should be
wasted, where the outlay on the ap-
pliances for utilizing it would pay. The
Chinamen have proved the advantage
of irrigation on a small scale, and their
plan of husbanding water is worthy of
consideration. If what is known as
the Coliban scheme of water supply
was applied to agriculture, farmers
could afford to give as much per
thousand gallons for water to produce
grass and green fodder during the
summer months, as the gold miners
could for sluicing purposes. This ex-
cessively dry season should have Jlie
effect of directing the attention of the
agricultural body to the importance of
this subject. Hydraulics applied in
our Victorian climate should make one
of the class books in the education of
the agricultural population. Botany
should be taught conjointly with clim-
atology, because some plants, such as
to Victoria, have, like it, a wide distri-
bution over Asia and Africa, indicating
in those places a climate approximating
to that of Victoria; and where, no
doubt, other grasses exist that have
special merit, and if introduced would
find a congenial climate in Victoria,
and luxuriate side by side with the
kangaroo grass as well as they do in
their native habitation. Baron Mueller
has published a book which describes
a great lot of foreign plants that are
suited to the climate of Victoria, and
merit introduction. The elements of
chemistry is one of the most important
subjects in the education of the intend-
ing agriculturalist, as it explains the pre-
paration and nature of soils, and the pre-
paration of manures, and what kind of
manure is best suited to each variety of
soil, and also explains the processes and
operations of the dairy, and the pre-
paration of food for animals. The above
is a glance at what should constitute
an agricultural education. We can see
if the history of our Victorian State
Department of Agriculture will show
that the attempts at educating the
farmer have met this requirement. It
is a long time since the feverish excite-
ment of how best to promote agriculture
culminated in the establishment of the
experimental farm. This was the first
acknowledgment of the defects of a
foreign system, and was one step to-
wards improvement, but it never got
any farther. As an undertaking to
spend money it was a great success.
The benefits were few, except to those
who were doing very well out of it by
regularly receiving the country’s money.
Agriculturalists soon tired and gave it
up in despondency, and the Government
of the day was only too glad to let it
out to a tenant. This question of agri-
cultural improvement was not long in
cropping up again ; the farming mind
had lost one plaything, but it soon
determined to have another; and it
again rose to the importance of the
occasion ■ though, like Miles Standish,
courting by his deputy, John Alden, it
nestled out of the responsibility of doing
what Miles Standish should have done


himself, and persuaded the Government thousand pounds, this would involve
to inaugurate a Board of Agriculture.
This is certainly a very high institution,
and all foreigners who read of it in
any of the Victorian newspapers will
be constrained to entertain great respect
for our intelligence as an agricultural
people. We will not here further dis-
course on what the Board has done to
educate the farmer and promote agri-
cultural interests, but will proceed to
consider what the Board has proposed
to do. And we extract the following
from the recommendation of the Secre-
tary for Agriculture, and which he
considers quite sufficient to meet the
present requirements of our agricultural
system. He says, “It should be borne
in mind that we have to administer to
the wants of the two sections of the
agricultural population, viz., the men
in occupation of the land, and the
rising generation. The methods of
instruction to each differ one from the
other. The adult needs to be instructed,
by ocular demonstration, how to turn
his land to account without impairing
its fertility. The youth requires not
only to be taught practically the most
profitable methods, but has time to
■investigate the reasons why these
methods are best. The establishment
of a central and three or four experi-
ment! farms—the management of
the farm to be entrusted to a practical
agriculturalist, who is to be guided by
a lecturer on chemistry. Instruction
in practical agriculture to be given by
a farm superintendent, and instruction
in science given by resident and visiting
lecturers. Students to pay the low
fee of thirty pounds per annum. To
divide the country into twelve agricul-
tural districts, each district to represent
the Department of Agriculture, and an
experimental farm in each district, as
deemed necessary. The first to be es-
tablished at Mount Macedon, for present
requirements, to cost six thousand
pounds. To limit partition in the grant-
in-aid to the societies in the depart-
mental districts. This is the proposal
of the Department. And if each of
the districts proposed had a central
farm, and each to cost yearly six
an annual expenditure of seventy-two
, thousand pounds. What a lot of cozy
billets it would have made; it is a pity
it was not carried out. If we estimate
. the proposal, by the light of what the
Department has done, we meet with
no great encouragement. Agricultural
improvement flags under the reign of
the Board. Its whole machinery should
be carefully examined, and the cause
of its failure sought out, so as to prevent
such a n'ightmare repeating itself. The
scheme of the Secretary for Agriculture
is a very costly one, and perhaps has
been estimated at its true value; it has
been rejected by the Government and
censured by the press. It would be
very slow in its results, and would take
a long time to have any appreciable
effect on the education of the cultivator.
But this plan appears to have been
intended to educate agricultural profes-
sors, and leave the great majority of
the youth of our agricultural population
without any training at all. Two or
three generations must pass away before
all could share in the benefits the coun-
try would have to pay for. And only
farmers would care to pay thirty pounds
a year for teaching their sons how to
farm. Some time ago there appeared
in the Melbourne newspapers an account
of the prizetakers in England for the
best cultivated farms, and it was dis-
tinctly stated that the first prize-taker
was a young man who had acquired
all his practice on his father’s farm.
How can such a school of training be
best established in Victoria 1 “ The
adult farmer, or the men in possession
of the land,” would have to continue
groping their wav, as being capable of
receiving instruction only “bv ocular
demonstration.” They would have to
travel to these experimental farms to
see for themselves how farming work
should be done, and the nearest place
of instruction in the “ departmental
plan”for all the farmers,in this southern
portion of Victoria, between the Wer-
ribee and the Bass Barme, would be
Mount Macedon. And the same dis-
advantages would he experienced in
the other districts. The Secretary’s


statement that “the youth requires not also been pronounced aI he
only to be taught practically the most
profitable methods, but has time to
investigate” the reasons why these
methods are best, and which the present
race of adult farmers have hot time to
investigate, seems a singular delivery.
The majority of Victorian farmers have
already had ten years’ practice, and
must have gained some experience, and
many will probably add ten years more
on to that, making twenty years prac-
tical experience, which is as much as
the rising or any generation can expect
to get. Therefore the isolation of the
adult farmers from the opportunities
of learning, on the flimsy pretence of
them not having the time is not justi-
fiable.
The estimate of the ability of
Victorian farmers varies considerably
by different assessors. The Secretary
for Agriculture appears not to have
rated the ability of Victorian farmers
very high, as he addressed them as |
( { tlie men in possession of the land,
who need to be instructed by ocular
demonstration. But Mr. MTvor, a
popular lecturer, must have formed a
greater estimate of their capabilities
by delivering to them lectures of a
high order on the chemistry of soils,
manures, See. And report says great
interest has been manifested in these
lectures by all the agricultural societies
where they have been given. The
Creswick Advertiser says—“ That the
lecturer’s views sometimes appear to
be at variance with the practice of his
hearers ; and this difference is often
openly discussed, and by this means
every one receives the best possible
information. At other times farmers
discuss the several arguments and
statements of the lecturer; a lively
interest is stimulated, experiments are
tried, and information diffused.’' This
could not be correct if the farmers
were capable of learning “ only by
ocular demonstration.” One plan of
disseminating agricultural information,
yiz., the Experimental Farm, has sig-
nally failed; and the second, the
Agricultural Board, is on trial, and
(jpgs ngt give satisfaction, 'Phis has
Cvesmck Advertiser says, “We venture
to state that Mr, MTvor has already
done more, in spreading valuable
information amongst our farming
community, than the Secretary of
Agriculture and his Department is
likely to do in fifty years. It is very
evident Parliament must extinguish
the evil ; it is time the farce ended,
and the department was abolished, or so
remodelled that it would be of some
service to the colony.” Probably one
of the chief causes of. its failure, is its
utter irresponsibility. And, if so,
perhaps the best remedy is for the
whole agricultural body to accept the
responsibility of directing the educa-
tion of its members. From the fore-
going this would appear to be a very
favourable time for reconstructing our
agricultural system,
This constitutes the subject before
us, viz., “ Agricultural Colleges, And
I ask the agricultural body, through
you, to accept the responsibility of
educating the cultivator. It is most
essential that the adult farmer should
have the benefit of all the information
it is possible to give him. The proper
place to learn farming is on the farm,
as was the case of the young English
prizetaker. Training the young cul-
tivator must become an household word*
The vestiges of the British system of
agriculture, which we have importeo
with our own immigration, is not
applicable to many parts of Victoria.
Agriculture is now in an experimental
stage, and this has not advanced
beyond its inception, and in founding
a system of agriculture in a new
country, attention should be directed
to those parts of practice which the
features of the climate would dictate
to become specialities of culture. It
is our dutv and privilege to ascertain
what the Victorian school of agricul-
ture should be to suit this southern
climate. V\ hat branches of field cul-
ture are there remaining in countries
that have a similar climate to ours
that merit attention, and wliat new
branches could we initiate, rhese
questions fiemand earnest consifiera?


tion and on this part of the subject it sponsible would the institut ion become,
mnv bo fluid that agriculturalists are The srnne rule would also apply to
may be said that agriculturalists are
agreed. And also "it is agreed that
the cultivator must be educated in his
vocation, Perhaps we only differ in
deciding on the most practical method
of working it out.
The following plan I submit to your
earnest and careful consideration, and
ask you, if it. meets with your approval,
and you consider it capable of effecting
any improvement in our agricultural
system, to give it inception. If we
consider the meaning of the word
u college,” we find it means an as-
semblage in general, a body of pro-
fessional men, or a body of practical
men fitted to do a thing. An agricul-
tural college should be an assemblage,
or body of practical men, skilled in
field culture. Do you not individually
and collectively profess farming, and
are you not more or less qualified or
fitted to conduct farming operations,
and if you are competent to conduct
farming operations you possess the
necessary requirements to qualify you
to become members of an agricultural
college. If you are not qualified, who
is to teach you ? The answer is, you
must depend on yourselves. The
question of establishing agricultural
colleges, which I have for some time
hesitated to propose, is a very simple
one. You have nearly all the materials
at your own disposal, you have only
to turn them to account. And those
which you have not, have no great
itrpediment to remove to acquire.
Having the materials immediately to
hand, we begin the foundation of our
system by erecting all the agricultural
societies into agricultural colleges.
Each of these agricultural societies
hae a managing committee, and what
is necessary to be done is, to decide
on the number of members which shall
constitute the college, and elect them
out of the members of the society for
a specified time—not too long—a cen-
tral agricultural board to be elected
out of these colleges by the members
of each society. The members of the
Central Board should be elected at
farthest bi-annually. The oftener the
meinberp were changed the more re-
the colleges —each college or society
to have an equal representation on
the hoard. This would stimulate a
spirit of emulation between the dif-
ferent societiesand among the member*
of each society, and also diffuse energy
into the body generally —the members
of each college and the several
colleges yieing with each other as to
which should disseminate the greatest
amount of useful information. By
this system there would be a college
in every settled district. Agricultural
societies are not established where
they are not required, and where
there is no necessary work to be done,
The people of each district know their
own wants and requirements, and will
provide for them if left to themselves,
There is no material work to be done,
no experiment to be made, no useful
information to be diffused, no science
to be taught that could be accom-
plished by a State department college,
that could not as well be worked out
by the National system here projected,
because the colleges would be respond
sible institutions, and would be located
where they are most required, dis-
tributed over a wide range, and cir-
cumscribe an area that would embrace
all the varieties of climate in the
colony, which could be tested and the
products adapted to each ascertained,
For one experimentalist, in a Govern-
mental college, there would be a dozen
or more experimentalists in each of
the colleges’ of the several societies,
The workforyour college to undertake
would be to decide in each year what
kind of experiments were most re-
quired in the district, so as to include
the different soils, and the crops suited
to them and the climate. And how
many gentlemen are there among you
who would not. be ready to conduct
an experiment on his own farm, say
an area of two, four, or six acres, as
the case may be, according to the
means at the disposal of the experi-
mentalist, when the experimentor
would be most benefited thereby,
I The experiments could be con—
| ducted on plans suggested by the


college, or any person could experi-
ment on any object of culture. Ex-
periments should be repeated, to ascer-
tain the effect that different seasons
would have on the crop. Experiments
should be made on g-rass and arable
land, and not only on soils, but on
different grasses and herbage; which
yielded the most, and produced the
best butter and the best cheese, and
the greatest quantity of milk ascer-
tained. Prizes could be given for
these experiments, which would de-
velope latent ideas. And what an
amount of valuable information would
he collected in a few years. Prizes
should always be given for good
management, and good culture. All
knowledge must be acquired by prac-
tice, and is necessarily the result of a
series of experiments. The greater
the number of experimentalists, gives
a corresponding number of results,
and the most favourable results are
selected as a basis, on which to con-
duct more extended and perfectexperi-
ments, out of which true principles
are evolved. The more unfavourable
results acting as beacons of danger,
every cultivator’s farm must be his
class-book. Each college would re-
quire a library, a reading and lecture-
room, and each college could engage
its own lecturers, who could be paid bv
direction of the Central Board. And
would not every Shire Council in the
colony be willing to place their Shire
Hall at the disposal of the colleg-e, for
a library, reading and lecture-room,
till the accommodation required could
be obtained ? There is little doubt, but
what the government would subsidize
the colleges with libraries. The
Board of Agriculture would be pre-
sided over by a President ex officio , a
member of the government, who
should be an agriculturalist, and who
would be responsible to Parliament.
The President should be the Head of
the Department, and could be elected
at the time of election for the As-
sembly, by the Agricultural colleges
or Societies, after he had been re-
turned to that Chamber. It would ,
be best for the President not to
be trammelled by party politics.
An interest that has an aggregate
capi al of fifeen millions s erdnj in-
ves ed is en'it ed to a represen a ive
in each government of the day, by a
member from their own body. To
here define the func'ions of he Board
of A ;riculture wou'd be on ering on
*he de ei's, and perhaps cou d be be -
'er done af er the coMe.es were ap-
poin ed. But, briefly s'a ed, they
would be to consider aU ques ions
which affect the whole body Agricul-
tural.
We now come to the question of
educating- the young farmer. This is
ot the greatest importance, and especi-
ally in connection with the settlement
of a new country. But it is of no use
to entertain a project, that purposes to
educate only a few. All must partici-
pate in the benefits, and there is no
occasion for any delay. The machinery
for this purpose is our educational
system—our National schools, indi-
rectly referred to by the Chief Sec-
retary, in his reply to the deputation
that waited on the Minister of Lands,
asking for the establishment of an
Agricultural College ; as follows :
u We had an educational system which
was tolerably complete, but the Gov-
ernment were trying to make it more
so. He saw no reason why they
should not use their school system for
all the practical work of life, indus-
trial, mechanical and scientific. The
Minister of Education, if applied to,
would provide for an agricultural class
in the farming districts, and in towns
a class for mechanics, the same as he
provides for a singing class.” Surely
these subjects are of as great import-
ance as singing. This would not add
materially to the expense of the
Educational Department, as it would
not require a large extra staff of
teachers, and it would make little
difference whether this extra staff was
paid by the Educational Department
or the Board of Agriculture. The
class hooks for this purpose would only
cost about tenpence each, and would
he cheerfully paid for by the parents
of the pupils, the same as other school
books. The farmers of Victoria have
for some time begn experimenting on


a State Department of Agriculture, agriculture, the G >vernmen t were
and you know with what result. The
State may be a good teacher of read-
ing, writing, grammar, algebra, logic,
and such like polite science ; but I
opine it has not yet attained profici-
ency in the economy of the stern
operations of husbandry. The na-
tional plan here submitted to your
consideration would be a responsible
Institution, and also be capable of
educating the adult agriculturalist,
and the young intending farmer,
simultaneous.y. *nd what is done in
this direction, will not be spent in
vain, on “ the men at prepent in pos
session of the land,” neither is there
occasion for any misgivings, that what
isßown in the mindsoftheyoung farmer
will fail to bear timely fruit. If there
ii one thing that needs to be inculcate
or repeated more than anothert, it is
that of representation in corporate
bodies. An institution is responsible
when it is representative, and this
element of representation must be
present in all corporate bodies It
binds all the component parts together
iu one firm bond of unity, and makes
each integral part feel its liability to,
and close identity with the main
body. All the interests coalesce, be-
cause each individual interest is repre-
sented. Take the representative ele-
ment away, and the body at once be-
comes inert. There is one thing that
comes up in grim relief and that is,
what would be the annual working
exDenses of the machinery of this
system, and by whom a r e the expenses
to be paid ? The Secretary for Agri-
culture asked for the sum of six thou-
sand pounds to establish a central
farm in one district. ihe working
expenses of one college on this plan
could be effectively done for an eighth
part of that sum. Who is to pay ?
I he Parliament at present subsidies
agriculture and would further subsi-
dise it, if it could be shown that the
money would be advantageously spent
in the interests of agriculture. The
t hief Secretary in reply to the depu-
tation before referred to, said :—As
regarded the object the deputation had
in view v z • to assist and encourage
thoroughly at one with them, and that
ha l been proved in the past.” He
further said “ More than half a
million a-year wassp*-nt on our school
system, and this most important part
of study and tuition was left out of
their curriculum. What they wauted
education for, was to enable them to
fight the battle of life with success,
instead of making literary s udies the
aim and end of the business of the
Uuiveraity. He thought they should
make other branches of study, the
business of the University, and there-
by mak»industrial degrees honorable.”
Mr Berry, in order to convince the
agriculturtl deputation that waited on
the Minister of Bands how far his
government and P irliament were pre-
pared to assist agricultural education,
referred the deputation to what other
governments, and t' e Parliament of
Victoria had already doße to promote
agricultural interests, and proposed to
institute degrees for all the industrial
branches of knowledge, at the Univer-
sity, and give these most important
classes of learning a place with the
other sciences.
The great daily requirement of the
agricultural body is a weekly or
monthly journal of agriculture, con-
ducted and maintained by the agricul-
tural body. The daily and weekly
newspapers give great prominence to
agricultural operations and proceed-
ings ; but they have not space to
properly debate agricultural questions
such as is required. Such a journal
would not in any way interfere with
the usefulness of those papers that
give such prominence to agriculture.
Farmers would continue to buy those
newspapers for the great amount of
general information they give, along
with the interesting news of the day.
A journal combining agriculture with
horticulture is much required, to
record the transactions of these two
industrial sciences, and which cannot
be so completely recorded and pre-
served without a journal for that
purpose.
Ik this paper your attention
has been directed to two notable


characters, viz., Mr. Triptolemus Yel-
lowly and o»piain Miles Standish.
Mr Triptoletnas Yellowly was a scien
tific man. He was always talking
Latr>, and in this language proposed
to the inhabitants plans to convert
the inhospitable island, on which th> y
dwelt, into an Elen. The language
was Rot well understood by this
people, and as he never practised
farming amongst them his proposals
could not be appreciated. There was
nothing to show this people how the
island coulo be made fertile, and so it
remains barren Most of you know
the history of Miles Standish and
.John Alden. Miles Standish was the
protector and tutor of his young
friend, and amongst other admirable
axioms the captain took great pains
to inculcate this one, viz , “ That if
you want a thing done well you must
do it yourself” 1 he bluff captain,
like most other men, fell in love “ with
Priscilla, the Puritan maiden,” and
he who could lead an army up to a
formidable fortress did not possess
stratagetic qualities to enable him to
carry by storm the citadel that guarded
a lady’s aff ctions This important
task he entrusted to his young friend,
i. a, F sinter, “Observer” Office, Evelyn
and armed him with full powers to
negotiate on his behalf. John A'den,
strong in hope, started on his errand
to execute his important commission,
and in the captain’s name wooed the
maiden. John was received with great
coldness, and bad to return and report
the result to his protector, who severely
rebuked him, and sent him back to
the lady. John earnestly importuued
for his friend, but with no bette* result.
The lady was still cold, and John, in
despair, turned to go away, when the
lady coyly said, “ Why don’t you
speak for yourself John?" Of course
John took the hint, and at once com-
menced business on his own account.
Ihe captain, net being informed of
the result, enquired into the matter,
and on ascertaining the state of
affairs severely rebuked John Alden
f >r his insincerity; but the education
John had received was not throwu
away, and in justification he reminded
bis tutor of the great less m he had
taken such greit pains to teach him,
viz., “ That if he wanted a thiig done
well, he should have done it himself ”
And if you want agricultural interests
promoted you must “do it yourselves ”




M
bI&UQ
FISbSO
