

AIR FORCE HOUSE.
Patron:
The Rt. Hon. The Lord Mayor of Melbourne—Cr. Frank Beaurepaire.
President:
Mrs. J. V. Fairbairn.
Trustees;
Sir Harold Luxton, K.B.
M. H. Baillieu. Esq.
Honorary Treasurer:
M. H. Baillieu, Esq.
Assistant Honorary Secretary:
R. C. Evans, Esq.
Air-Commodore A. T. Cole,
C.8.E., M.C., D.F.C
Honorary Secretary:
John J. Woodward, F.C.A. (Aust.).
Honorary Auditors:
Messrs. Sherlock &c Daniell.
Honorary Architects:
Messrs. Stephenson & Turner.
Management Committee:
Mrs. J. V. Fairbairn.
Mrs. Alex Russell.
Miss I. Connolly.
Mrs. Ross Grey Smith.
Mrs. Eric Harrison.
Miss M. K. Stuart.
Sir Harold Luxton, K.B.
M. H. Baillieu, Esq,
Air-Commodore A. T. Cole,
C.8.E., M.C., D.F.C.
R. C. Evans, Esq.
J. S. Dunbar, Esq.
R. Turnbull, Esq.
J. J. Woodward, Esq.
General Committee:
Sir Harold Gengoult Smith, K.B.
Hon. W. L. Russell Clarke.
Captain R. Ross.
D. Lavery, Esq.
L. Nelken, Esq.
G. R. Nicholas, Esq.
R. Ritchie, Esq.
J. M. Sinclair, Esq.
Sergeant Sinclair.
Ross Grey Smith, Esq.
A. G. Stephenson, Esq.
D. M. Taylor, Esq.
E. C. Tronson, Esq.
Lady Brookes, C.B.E.
Mrs. T. W. White, 0.8. E.
Mrs. S. Addison.
Mrs. Harold Darling.
Mrs. G. Hain.
Mrs. L. Nelken.
Mrs. Richard Turnbull.
Mrs. R. Williams.
Miss S. J. Burnett.
AIR FORCE HOUSE, 53 Market Street, Melbourne.
Telephone: MU 4871. 19th July, 1941.


DONOR
Bessie Rischbieth


TT is with pleasure that I am able to say that Air Force House
has completed twelve months of active service.
Air Force House was officially opened by Air-Chief
Marshal Sir Charles S. Burnett, K.C.8., C.8.E., D. 5.0., on the
3rd July, 1940, and during the last twelve months, we believe,
has filled a very great want in this city.
The organisation, known as Air Force House, is authorised
under the Patriotic Funds Act of Victoria, 1939, and is con-
trolled in accordance with this Act.
The House, as you will remember, was first suggested at
a Meeting of the public held in the Melbourne Town Hall and
has been made possible by the assistance of numerous and gen-
erous donors. It was established to act as a Hostel for Air
Force men on leave, or who, for any other reason, were in need
of accommodation and service, and it has endeavoured and is still
endeavouring to do everything in its power to assist these men.
When opened, Air Force House had 80 beds, and in
September a new wing was opened, making the total number of
beds available 275, The House has a writing room, recreation
room, lounge and a library. The library is organised by the
Victorian Women Journalists’ War Service Committee, no
charge being made for books.
Never a week-end goes by without the hostel being booked
to capacity and unfortunately many men are turned away to
accommodation elsewhere.
The following brief information will give some indication
as to how the House is used and the facilities it affords.
From the Ist September, 1940, to the 30th June, 1941,
132,709 Meals were served in the Dining-Room and this includes
1,099 Meals served to personnel of the Women’s Auxiliary
Australian Air Force. This figure does not include the meals
served in the Canteen.
From the 3rd July, 1940, to the 30th June, 1941, 54,711
beds have been provided. The cost for a night of a Bed, Towel
and Shower is 1/-. There is a combined Kitchen and Dining-
Room open from 6 a.m. to 10.30 p.m. The charge for Breakfast
is 6d. or 9d., for lunch Bd. or 1/-, and for Dinner at night Bd.
or 1/-.


To cope with these demands, Air Force House is most
fortunate in having the splendid services of approximately 300
to 400 Voluntary Workers, who are organised into three shifts
for Canteen Work and between 50 to 70 members of the Women’s
Air Training Corps, who attend each morning to make the beds.
Many people have been exceedingly good in donating pro-
visions and their assistance has been of material help.
Air Force Auxiliaries have, during the past twelve months,
been of invaluable assistance and have raised a considerable
sum to assist in the maintenance of the House.
The Victoria League in Victoria has established a Hospi-
tality Bureau at Air Force House and through this Bureau,
hospitality has been arranged for the men, no charge being
made. Dances, Theatre Parties, etc., are all arranged for the
entertainment of the men, and billets are also provided. From
the inception to the 30th June, 1941, hospitality has been ex-
tended to 53,580 men. Much of the success of Air Force House
has been due to the untiring efforts of this Bureau and its
workers.
Air Force House is, of course, entirely dependent on
voluntary contributions, which are continually required for the
maintenance of the House, and any donation, no matter how
small, will be very greatly appreciated during the coming
twelve months.
We have received from airmen a request that their appre-
ciation of the House and its facilities be placed on record.
Neither time nor space permits me to mention individu-
ally all those who have co-operated so willingly to make a
success of this work, and the Committee would appreciate it
if all those persons who have so assisted would please take this
as a formal acknowledgment of its appreciation.
[?]
19th July, 1941.
President.


Contributed by the Publishers of
“ LIFE,”
230-236 Stanley Street, West Melbourne.
