

jfi) CL-
p f jji
ll
, ,J3L„ ,
U
it)
pro X
Bcndlflo.
Diamond Jubilee
1852 —1912
Price is.
H Souvenir


1
V dO
All frn-Qlatlu'itnil lUnuMijo
oiitrm' of Untfoujo.
lamouft Jubilee
1852—1912
Brice 1/-
A iuununttr


1
gfrr -'•-i^f^V& '' ' • P** ' * w. • -^7■^■^^^^jl-Fiil^g
All Saints' Church, Bendigo.


Au
11
Iff” instnrtail Mt'tdr af AU faints’, ”^1
UritJitijn.
81l OR every reason it is fitting that the Diamond Jubilee of All Saints’ Church,
C Bendigo, should be celebrated on, and following the Festival of All Saints.
This 60 years’ Jubilee ought do be more than a definite stock-taking of the
outward prosperity and progress of the Church in this parish. It will be a
spiritual festival, a festival of memory ; it will unite the present congregation
with those beings, who long ago, lived and worshipped and worked here,
sJrjS) and who, most of them, have passed out of the ranks of the Church Militant,
into the rest of Paradise.
Earnest churchmen look forward to a time of great rejoicing, thanksgiving, and
alms-giving for past blessings, to a time of fervent prayer and resolution for the future, to
large attendances at all services and social functions during the ten days of Jubilee. These


All Saints' Rectory and School.


blessings the faithful hope and pray for —but, above all, there is the yearning hope for deep
spiritual re-union with the departed Saints of God, who, in their own time, have borne the
burden and heat of the day here. There is the hope of understanding, more fully than before,
the joy of belief in the Communion of Saints.
All Saints’ is quite an historic church in this land of short histories. It had a humble
beginning in this “Golden City’’ of Bendigo—this new spot consecrated to the old, old warfare
to be waged between God and Mammon, the powers of light, and the powers of darkness, here.
For on the most central, convenient site available, the church, at once, at the call of need of
her wandering children, set up her citadel of defence —a rough bush tent, one in a community
of tents —and it is around that original spot that all the sacred associations connected with the
history of the church in this parish are clustered.
When the peaceful Bendigo valley was suddenly invaded, and changed from a remote
bush solitude into a populous, bustling mining camp, the church at once realized her respon-
sibility, her opportunity, and, about June, 1852, sent one of her ablest men, the Rev. J. H.
Gregory, to minister to the curiously assorted floating population attracted to the goldfield.
Mr. Gregory’s place of residence was a covered waggon, drawn up beside the tent in which
the first services were held. Occasionally it was moved from place to place, but was usually
stationed on All Saints’ Hill, as it later became known ; and the ministrations of the church


\
•I
Rev. Amos Brazier
Rev. J. H, Gregory


were gradually conveyed, by means of the travelling sanctuary and temporary home of this
zealous priest of God, from head-quarters on the hill to the utmost boundaries of his parochial
district, extending northwards to the River Murray.
Before long a slab building, canvas roofed, replaced the tent on the above-mentioned
site, and an acre and a half of land on the hill was reserved for church purposes by the
authorities.
(The first baptism in the register of All Saints’ was that of Emma Stephens, January 23,
1853,. The first marriage, of Joseph Milloden to Sarah McWilliams, was celebrated on
February 21 of the same year.)
The growth of the Anglican Church in Bendigo, however, was so rapid that before
three years had passed, the slab building was found insufficient to accommodate the
worshippers, and a sandstone church was erected at a cost of ,£4,500, the foundation stone
being laid on January 22, 1855. The ceremony was performed by Mr. Wollaston, one of the
first trustees of All Saints’, a son of Archdeacon Wollaston, of West Australia. Before the
building was completed, Mr. Gregory received an appointment to Prahran, and his successor
the Rev. J. D. Brennan, arrived in April, 1855. The church was dedicated in October of
that year, when the Bishop of Sydney, the Right Rev. Dr Barker, officiated.
At this period, the other church buildings comprised the residence of the clergyman,


” 4' V
' ’ ' ‘ SB* .
WfMp-
•r' -v.
.
*
v ; ■•■ ■.
mV *
1 Lfe 1 tr *'
1 . f f ilflBf' 0* «M»KV or TKt CATC
fe 1 i i R»v Vr. R. CRC\Ti>N
1 «? | <•» r«» »•«>«»•*
[ ‘ | iyamr**** rm w»trkt
’ . 4fi* rv*r m«Ai in an
Iflmplfpwiiint f* m awm «s% *«> v> »f {
*** * \ j
\ V
B«i ■OHHHHK . M
MR. • • *'' m
Kf,.. ■?,
spa... ■ K
Rev. W. R. Croxton, J859- \ 883
Memorial Tablet to Rev. W. R. Croxton


now known as the old rectory, and the Denominational School, conducted by Mrs. Barker,
on the site of Dr. Atkinson’s present dwelling.
On January io, 1858, eighteen months after the opening of the- church, it was badly
damaged by a storm, there having been some defect in the mortar used in building. The
roof was carried away and the western wall cracked and shaken, so that it was found necessary
to practically rebuild the edifice. At this time the Rev. J. Stone had temporary charge of
the parish, Mr. Brennan having left All Saints’ at the end of 1857. After a few months, the
restoration, costing nearly £3,000, was completed, and the church re-opened for services.
The carving of the church furniture was done by Mr. J. M. Fly, the well-known Bendigonian.
In October, 1859, the Rev. W. R. Croxton. then in Sydney, was appointed to the
incumbency of All Saints’. This appointment at first met with some little opposition, many
parishioners wishing to retain Mr. Stone permanently among them ; and, on Mr. Croxton’s
arrival in Bendigo, the coach was met by throngs of miners, who seemed desirous of raising
a hostile demonstration against the new rector as a “Puseyite.” However, he held on his
way, and soon proved himself a most able and stirring man, the man for the position.
The scope of Mr. Croxton’s duties soon widened considerably, for new stations were
constantly being opened up, and the people looked to head-quarters in the parochial district
of Sandhurst for aid in procuring the ministrations of the church. Under these circumstances


extra help was needed, and in 186r, Mr. Croxton received an assistant in the person of the
Rev. R. Hayward, as Curate of All Saints’. The colleagues laboured together with great
energy and earnestness, and in two years many were added to the church, over i,ooo children
being baptised, and 140 young people confirmed, several Victorians of subsequent distinguished
career being among the number. The late Canon Tucker, for so mapy years incumbent of
Christ Church, South Yarra, also acted as curste to Mr. Croxton in these early days.
In 1871, it was found necessary to re-build the chancel, owing to a crack appearing
in the wall, so a larger chancel, with vestry, choir stalls, and organ chamber in addition was
erected at a cost of ,£1,200. This was opened by the Rev. W. Chalmers, on June 17, 1871.
On this occasion, the choir wearing suiplices, were accommodated for the first time in the
chancel, sharing the distinction with that of St. John’s, Latrobe Street, Melbourne, of being
the first surpliced choir in Victoria.
Previous to this date, there had been several changes in the position of the choir stalls.
At first they had been placed in the rear of the church, to the small organ then in use.
Rater, they were removed to the gahery, an organ also being placed upstairs. Here they
remained until the final move in 1871. Two well-known Bendigonians, Messrs. I. E. Dyason
and J. Alcock (White Hills) were early members of the choir, and are still to be found in their
old places, whenever the services of an auxiliary choir are requested.


Mr. Croxton’s earnest wish was that the services at All Saints’ should be Cathedral
services, worthy of “the Cathedral of the North,” as the old church was then proudly called,
'knd the traditions established by him have been faithfully observed, though the consum-
mation of his desire, that the present church should be, in the future, replaced by the
Cathedral of the Diocese is yet to be fulfilled.
In 1874, Dr. Atkinson purchased a portion of the church lands for ,£3,000, and with
the proceeds of the sale the new rectory and school in McKenzie Street were built.
Mr. Croxton resigned in March 18S3, on a superannuation allowance of £l5O per
annum. In the year 1898, he died in England. Shortly after his death, a memorial was
erected to him in All Saints’ by the parishioners, in the shape of a handsome credence table
and canopy of carved Oamaru stone, on the south side of the sanctuary.
On Mr. Croxton’s retirement, the Rev. J. Garlick, of Echuca was appointed to the
incumbency, and for thirteen years this gentle and scholarly man did his quiet but effective
work in the parish. In 1884, the massive cast-iron fence, with stone foundations, was erected
on the south and west sides of the church yard, £3OO, of the £450 required, being collected
by the lady workers. Mr. Garlick died at his post in October, 1896, and until the appoint-
ment of his successor, the Rev. R. C. N. Kelly, M.A., the services were conducted by the
Rev. M. M. Whitton, of Melbourne. Mrs. Garlick, the widow of the late Rev. J. Garlick,


Interior All Saints', Bendigo
East Window, All Saints', Bendigo.


various^sp^fv^
still retains her warm interest in the welfare of All Saints’, and shows it in many practical ways.
On November 21, 1898, the handsome stained glass east window, representing in three
different lights the church of the Present, the Past and the Future, was erected to the memory
of Mr. Garlick, and a marble tablet, presented by the Ruridecanal Chapter of Sandhurst,
placed upon the south wall. At the same time, the interior of the church was renovated, and
the lighting arrangements brought up to date.
Mr. and Mrs. Kelly and family came from St. John’s, Launceston, in February, iB9y.
and the former made his presence felt in all branches of church work. During his term of
office, the boundaries of the parish were finally defined, the district of St. Matthew’s, Long
Gully, and, later, St. John’s, North Bendigo, being separated from the Mother Parish, and
supplied with stipendiary readers. Mr. Kelly was assisted at Ad Saints’ by a succession of
able curates, notable among them being the Rev. F. Grist, now of Chiltern, Wangaratta
Diocese, and the Rev. A. E. Saxon, Rector of Charters lowers
Mr. Kelly resumed full choral services in the church, augmented the choir by the
addition of boy choristers, and instituted daily services. The work of the local Chinese
Mission was re-organized, and several new organizations founded, the Communicants’ and
Missionary Guild, etc., among the number, and the morning Sunday School opened.
I lie financial prospects of All Saints also considerably improved, by means of


|v
Rev. R. C. N. Kelly
Rev. John Garlick \ 883- \ 896


rents being added to the church funds. The old rectory was renovated for residential pur-
poses, thus making the new rectory available as a doctor’s residence, at a rental of per
annum. The valuable block of land facing View Street was leased for a term of 50 years for
the purpose of building shops thereon ; for this a ground rental of /80 per annum is received.
In February, i9oi, Mr. Kelly accepted the charge of St. Paul’s, Geelong, and was
succeeded by Canon G. W. Watson, of St. John’s, Footscray. On March 5, 1902, the first
Bishop of Bendigo, the Right Rev. H. A. Langley was enthroned in All Saints’, afterwards
created the Pro-Cathedral; and at the first Church Assembly, held in September 1902, Canon
Watson was appointed Archdeacon of Bendigo, the then Archdeacon, the Yen. J. C.
MacCullagh, being promoted to the dignity of Dean. Canon Watson brought with him to
Bendigo his curate, the Rev. A. R. now Organizing Secretary for the C.M.A.
In November of that year, 1902, the 50 years Jubilee of All Saints’ was celebrated, on
the Sunday following All Saints’ Day, by largely attended services, at which the preachers
respectively were, Dean MacCullagh, Archdeacon Watson, and Canon Carlisle, of Melbourne.
On the following evening, Monday, a social re-union of past and present parishioners was
held in the Masonic Hall, the late Bishop Langley presiding over a most successful function.
In 1905, at the earnest request of the Bishop and clergy, the Yen. Archdeacon Watson
undertook a tour of the diocese on behalf of the Bishopric Endowment Fund, the work of


parish being, in the meantime, carried on by the able and energetic Curate, the Rev. H. B.
Hewett. Unfortunately, shortly after his arduous task was concluded, the Archdeacon’s
health, which for some time had been giving cause for auxiety, completely broke down ; and
as the year 1908 advanced, it was found necessary to relieve the Archdeacon of the re-
sponsibility of parish work. At the Annual Meeting, 1908, the parishioners of All Saints’
agreed to allow him a retiring annuity of The Archdeacon now resides in Melbourne.
On August 5, 1906, the Diocese of Bendigo sustained a heavy loss in the death of Dr.
Langley, the first Bishop, who passed away at Bishopscourt, White Hills, after a short
illness. On the afternoon of August 7, the day of interment, a most impressive funeral
service was held in the Pro-Cathedral, the cortege afterwards proceeding from there to the
Back Creek Cemetery.
After several meetings of the Bishopric Election Board, the choice fell upon the Yen.
Archdeacon Langley, of Sydney, brother of the late Bishop, who accepted the office. On
St. Paul’s Day, January 25, 1907, Bendigo’s second Bishop was consecrated in St. Paul’s
Cathedral, Melbourne, his enthronement in All Saints’ Pro-Cathedral following on January 30.
The Rev, W. E. H. Percival, 8.A., Vicar of St. Alban’s, Armadale, who had acted as
locum tenens at All Saints’ for the Archdeacon for six months during his absence on sick


leave, was unanimously elected as his successor, when the vacancy occurred ; and on October
29. 1908, was inducted to the charge of the parish.
Mr. and Mrs. Percival have done, and are still doing, faithful and effective work in the
parish of All Saints , a special feature of their efforts being the progress of the Girls’ Friendly
Society, and Mothers’ Union, the recently formed C.E. M.S., the M.C.L., and the Missionary
Guild. The Scout movement is represented by a strong corps under the leadership of Scout-
Master Usher.
At the Synod, held in September, 1912, Mr. Percival was elected a Canon of the Pro-
Cathedral, in place of Canon Pennicott, late of Castlemaine, who has left the Diocese. The
congratulations of the parishioners were extended to Canon Percival upon his new dignity.
“I have considered the days of old : and the years that are past ..... I will
remember the works of the Uord : and call to mind Thy wonders of old time.”
Those who have tender and sacred memories enshrined within the walls of All Saints,’
Bendigo, memories of spiritual blessings personally received through the church’s ministrations
and sacraments, memories of beloved fellow-worshippers now passed away ; above all,
memories of many opportunities offered and accepted, of consecration to the service of the
great Designer and Founder of the Holy Catholic Church will have a chance of re-consecration


r j
.
■ . 0fgp InM^H
' p 1 j
The Ven. Archdeacon Watson
Rev. Canon W. E. H. Perdval, B.A,


at the forth-coming Diamond Jubilee. It is an epoch in the history of the church, and it
suggests, not finality, but progression. It is an exhortation to new service, new endeavour.
It is also the introduction to a new period. It is a new call to warfare for Christ’s faithful
soldiers and servants.
The old church, so hoary in outward appearance, so radiant in spiritual associations,
calls upon all who love her to take part in her Jubilee Celebrations. She asks for your
presence, your fervent prayers, and liberal thankofferings, your devoted efforts in her
continued service—whatever you have to give, the time to yield it up has come.
The ardent invitation is sent forth, “ Come ! Rejoice with us ! ”


(lifts to All faints’ (Elntrdi, Irubigo
Altar Cross in Memoriam —Sarah Craig; Altar Vases— Ladies' Guild
Altar Book Rest—F. Ryall (Brough-Smyth)
Altar Linen ... ... ... Mrs. J H. Craig;, A. and E. Craig;
Two Altar Service Books —G. H. Tatchell Festival Hanging's —S. A and E. M. Craig
Violet Hangings —Mrs. J. H. Craig Crimson Hangings— Ladies' Guild
Rod for Hangings—Mr. and Mrs. Bailey Crimson Banner —Mrs. Henderson (A. Millin)
Episcopal Throne and Desk - Mr. J. R. Hoskins
Cushion and Kneeler —Miss A. Corr, M.A.
Credence Table In Memorram —Rev. W. R. Croxton
Chancel Window, In Memoriam —Rev. J. Garlick Three Medallion Lights- -Mrs. Garlick
Chancel Lights —Messrs G D. Watson and G- H. Tatchell
Lectern Bible—Mrs. I. E. Dyason Lectern Book Rest —Mr. W. J. James
Service Book —Mr. C. B. Marriott Watson Memorial Brass to M. Penfold


(gifts In AU (fifoirrly, Untftigtu
Memorial Tablet given by Ruridicanal Chapter to Rev. John Garlick
Memorial Brass to Edward Hands for many years Churchwarden and Trustee
Alms Dish —Presented by Mrs. Moorhouse
SIDE WINDOWS.
John Wagner
Lewis P. Moline
John Holdsworth
G. W. B. Vibert
Martha Vibert
MEMORIAL WINDOWS
Thomas Crabbe to his wife Alicia M. J. & E. Gardner to their parents.
The Vestry to George Robotham The Vestry to Robert Newboldt
Robert Watson, C.E. to his wife Elizabeth
Frame of Arches for Decoration —Mrs. Frew.
Pulpit Frame —Mr. West.


2Ctot of (furatpfi. (Hosßtblg inrmttglidr)
Rev. PACKER
Rev. ROWLAND HAYWARD
Rev. E. MORRIS
Rev. A. J. DREWETT
Rev. A. BRAZIER, also loc tenens, while Rev. H. J. HOWEEE
Rev. W. R. Croxton was in England 1875-6 Rev h p TUCKER, afterwards
Canon
Tucker of Christchurch, South Yarra,
Rev. J. T. MAY, M.A., Principal All
Saints’ School.
Rev WAEKER, loc. tenens 188 r
Rev. F. GRIST
Rev. T. THOMPSON
Rev. A. E. SAXON
Rev. C. W. WOOD
Rkv. H. B IIEWETT
Rev. A. R. EBBS
Rev. H. R. HOLMES, M.A.
Rev. J. ROWELL
Rev HERKFLEY ROWELL
Rkv F B MULLENS


iFtrat Hratry of All Manila’, 1855.
Mr. EMMETT
Mr. NORRIS
Mr. WOLLASTON
Mr. J. H. WALKER
Mr. H. BROWN
■Pmmtl lira try, 1912-13
(Elutrrbuutriirn«.
Messrs. A. J. PEARCE
J. T. HILL
J. H. CRAIG
Upßtnmtcn
Messrs. I. E. DYASON, J. C. KILFEDER, R. M. HARVEY, J. P. B. MoQUIE,
S. W. M. WEST, J. C. BECKETT, C. T. LAVENDER. E. S. USHER,
S. GORDON-MOORE, A. E. LITTLE, W. H. BROWN, H. RICKARDS


Bendigo : v °\
AC) CAMBRIDGE & LEAN EY. (
R Printers.
f/if) Williamson Street ami *
.Market Square A
,-7°


