

-2f7
CO9l
rlL^
-3 NOV
Why Swine’s Flesh is
Prohibited
A Message to the Public at large
The following point deserves special notice:
A swine is one of those things which the Muslims
have been forbidden to eat. The very name of this foul
animal contains an allusion to the prohibition of its
flesh. The name which God gave this animal in the
beginning therefore points to its foulness, and why it
was made —to clean and eat up the foul dirt of the
other animals in the Ark. As to the habits of this
animal there can be no question. Everybody knows
that it is extremely ugly and lives upon filth and is,
moreover, the most shameless of all creatures. The
reason of its prohibition is thus evident. Taken as food,
its foul flesh will have the most injurious consequences
upon body as well as soul, for the food eaten affects
the whole, external as well as internal, system of man.
Mahomet Allum points this out to people as a guidance
to health and acclaims the fact that all the sickness and
disease with which he comes in contact daily is brought
about through this race partaking of this foul flesh
the swine.
Sturt Street, Adelaide
M. ALLUM. 181
H.E.K. Ltd.


“All Men Are Brothers ”
The chocolate-coloured aboriginals of Australia, the brave
Maoris of New Zealand, the Red Indians of America, and the
Kaffirs of South Africa.
The conquering, empire-building white man robbed them
of theii lands, their honour and their wild, free independence.
And, along with the men of India, Afghanistan, and ancient
Japan and China, the intolerant white man is apt to display,
in his arrogance, a “superiority complex” over these children
of an ancient race. This is wrong.
Human brotherhood admits of no barriers of creed
colour, occupation, or descent.
The members of the human race are all alike in the sight
of God, and it would be far better if the white man, instead
of alluding to the aboriginals as “niggers,” would remember
this great fact.
The Holy Quran, the jewel of Islam, says:
“AM people are a single nation. O men, .we have created
\ou all of a male and a female, and then made you tribes
and families.”
I have been dubbed A Quack by one of your magistrates.
I am pioud of the fact that such people call me by that name.
Ihey might have called me something much worse.
Rut, though I thank God that I possess no medical degree;
while I at least will not have to one day face my Maker to
answer a charge of having mutilated the bodies of His
creatures, I am satisfied to leave a Higher Power to decide
whether the magistrate’s statement is a true one, “that
I am a cunning and deceitful Afghan,” and “that I do not
cure my patients.”
MAHOfMED ALLUM.
