

ALL OVER CLOVER...
THEY COULDN'T WAIT FOR ME
TO DIE!


Some of you will remember that picture taken years ago when
parachuting was parachuting and not sky diving. Some of you will remember
when I founded the parachute Industry in Australia and some of you will
remember that changeover slogan “From Parachutes to Swimsuits” when,
immediately after the war we put glamour on the beaches.
That was the beginning of this story. One parachute, a new design
from America malfunctioned on a test during the war and later, as a result
of this, I was advised to live out in the open. Five years they said I had.
Not long after the war, when it became possible, I gave all this away
and twenty years ago bought “Clover Hill” a glorious place nestling in the
mountains at Macquarie Pass overlooking the valley and the sea. There were
waterfalls, palm trees, tree ferns, lyre birds, parrots, bower birds, wallabies, in
fact, all manner of wild life.
Here my wife and I spent our time. I concentrated on going on
living, the five years went by and I began to "live on borrowed time.
It was such a beautiful place we delighted in sharing it with our
friends. They brought their friends to see Clover Hill and so on, until we knew
we must open it to the public.
We began to clear land and' make paths round the mountains. We
blew up rocks to gain access to the river. We cleared away trees and cut away
vines so the public could see the fantastic balancing rock. We cleared pools
for people to swim, we built bridges. We began to restore the century old
homestead and built cottages where people could stay. Then, one day, we put
out a sign on the Highway “Macquarie Falls and Picnic Park.”
At first, only the adventurous braved the narrow mile and a half
winding around the mountain edge but they went away and told their friends
of the beauty of “Clover Hill” and so more and still more people came.
Great trees would fall across the road and we’d clear them. The
rivers flooded and washed away the bridges and we rebuilt them.
A National Paper heard about our -efforts and featured “Clover Hill”
in colour under the heading “They want to share their Shangri La with Tourists.”
More people came, the road needed widening so I went back into business to
try to make money to do the things that were needed. I guaranteed a Company.
The recession killed it, I had to meet the company debts. Its a long job.
We reverted then to the old barter system and made a deal with a
timber man, supplying him with logs in exchange for rebuilding the road from
the Highway, clearing land and making bridle paths and roads for people to
drive to the Wild Life Reserve and natural botanical gardens we had designed.
Thus we built bridges strong enough and high enough to withstand
the floods. We dammed the Macquarie river with great boulders and poured
concrete to make a causeway and establish a large natural swimming pool.
Twenty years went by and then one day we had a visitor, a Mr.
Tim Warner from the National Parks and Wild Life Service. He said he was
“Just passing by.”
Shortly after this, on or about the Bth July ’6B, I was visited by
Mr. Sam Weems, Director of the National Parks and Wild Life Service. He was
accompanied by Mr. Boardman, the secretary to Mr. Tom Lewis, the Minister
for Lands.
I showed these gentlemen around my place. I reminded them of
my future plans, pointing out where we are making the Wild Life Reserve.
I explained to them we were going a bit slowly owing to lack of finance. They
left, they said, for a meeting with the Minister at Moss Vale.
The following week, on the 16th July last two officials of the National
Parks Service called upon me. They told me that my property, freehold property,
was to be resumed as a State Park and that I would be officially notified the
following week.


EDITED COPY OF LETTER:
“Clover Hill Farm”,
Macquarie Pass,
Albion Park, Box 48.
South Coast, N.S.W.
4th August, 1968.
Mr. Sam P. Weems,
Director,
National Parks and Wild Life Service,
189-193 Kent Street,
Sydney.
Dear Mr. Weems,
I address you as Mr Weems, for it is my custom after granting people
my hospitality to give this token of respect. I have received your Registered
letter dated 30th July, a letter which of course I have been waiting
patiently for since the 16th July when I was granted the favour of a
visit of a distinguished deputation consisting of His Worship the Mayor of
Shellharbour, Mr. Des King the Town Clerk, another gentleman from the Council
who’s name for the moment escapes me, although it shouldn’t, for we have
known each other for years, and two other gentlemen, two followers of yourself,
Mr. Allan Carey, a surveyor and a Mr. Jim Starling, a geographer.
A most uncommon name that “Starling” and quite a coincidence, for
many years ago, thirty-five years to be precise, when I first started jumping
out of aeroplanes for a precarious living, my first pilot on the Circus was a
Mr. Starling, a perfect name for a flyer, don’t you think? That was of course,
at the outset of my career, the wheel has turned full circle, and at what looks like
the close of my career, another Starling flies into my orbit. A happy name.
Starling for one associated with Wild Life!
It was Mr. Starling in fact, who told me whilst accepting the comfort
of my lounge, and I quote: “steps have already been taken to resume your
property for a National Park and you will receive an Official letter next week”.
This was on the 16th July, and your letter was dated 30th July, 68.
The letter is interesting, in that you give me one month to make
“representations”. Well, the two weeks that have gone by have not been wasted.
I have been “setting my sights”. I have been making my investigations. I have
been organising my plan of campaign. At this particular juncture, my represent-
ations to you are limited.
I had an old Uuncle, a great old chap full of wisdom, who told me
many things, two of which have particularly served me well. Uncle Charlie
was my favourite Uncle, even though, when I was a little boy at the outbreak
of the First World War, he slapped me round the ear when I laughed because he
lost his false teeth in the sea.


It was the day war was declared, August the fourth 1914. Yes exactly
fifty four years ago to this very day that I write this letter. We were on holiday
at the Isle of Wight, and on the beach.
There were English families and Continental families massed all
over the sands. There was a German family close by, and their little girl with
whom I had been playing, was floating her bucket in the sea. Suddenly, newsboys
were rushing all over the place shouting what was blazing on the bills they
carried waving in the wind. “WAR DECLARED!”
The German families upped and cheered, the British families upped and
cheered and the little German girl in the tumult and the shouting, abandoned
her bucket and it began to float out to sea, then quetly, it sank. There were
tears and my Uncle who had been watching, said, “That’s a bad omen for the
Germans”, but being a true Britisher, disregarded the fact that we were at war
and dived into the sea and retrieved the German bucket and returned it to the
enemy, running back to where we ivere with his hand over his mouth muttering
“quick, come and help, I’ve lost my ruddy false teeth!” at which, being a small
boy with a sense of humour, I laughed, whereupon Uncle gave me an almighty
swipe behind the ear. I’ve always had a lot of respect for my Uncle Charlie.
Well, you may ask, and rightly too, what are these two simple
statements of wisdom? and what have they got to do with the present situation?
“There is a place for everything and everything in its place.” That’s
the first one, the second is, There’s a time for everything, and everything
at the right time.”
This is not the time, nor is it the place, for me to make representations
to you. I think it is none the less, most propitious for us to get a little
better acquainted, for it does seem to me that we may be destined to “cross
swords” in the not too distant future.
I am an honest, and I try to be a just man, I am a man of
peace, I do not now, nor have I in the past, desired to work behind people’s
backs. As things appear to me at the moment, this cannot be said for yourself
or for the Honourable the Minister for Lands.
I am very sad about this because I have always had a great respect
for the Minister. He is, as you know, the Member for my Electorate. Your
fame too, has spread before you.
I am sad at finding my judgment wrong and to see things coming
into their proper place, with the pieces of the Jig Saw puzzle slowly fitting
into the pattern, revealing the true picture.
I was visited a month or two ago by Mr. Tim Warner, a charming
young man from your Department who said he was “just passing by.” The
first piece of the puzzle. A little later, on the Bth of July or thereabouts, I
have the date, you yourself called upon me with Mr. Boardman, Mr. Tom Lewis’
Secretary. I showed you round my property, I told you some of my plans, you
accepted my hospitality, you even spoke to me of the future when you said
and I quote: “Why don’t you build the swimming pool up on the hill?” This,
instead of where I am, putting it dovm in the river in its natural surroundings,
where people can enjoy the crystal clear water in such an idyllic spot. “Why
don’t you?” the future NOT “why didn’t you?” the past “Why don’t
you?” Not a hint was given to ms that you had secretly made up your mind
to take over my place, this little piece of heaven, that I have been working
on for years so that other people may share in the beauty of it all; this place
about which we have been giving away thousands of leaflets telling visitors
of our plans, for just on ten years now.
No hint was made the day you came here that you had already
planned to take this from us. But, another piece of the Jig Saw had dropped
into place and still there was no picture to see, not even the hint of a picture.
It takes a man of courage to say to a man face to face "I am going
to take away your home.” It takes a man of courage to say to a man face
to face “I am going to take away your hearth, your living and your life’s work,
I am going to take away your life” and so you send two of your men on
the 16th of July to execute this deed. A five man deputation descends upon me,


your two men emerge, one from each side of the glistening vehicle like members
of some secret police descending upon an anti-communist who dared to call
the President a stupid ass.
Another piece falls into place and behold, the picture is revealed
but not, mark you, fully. There is still something missing one piece.
I wait for your letter, it is sent to me per Registered post dated
30th July 1968. Here is the final missing piece, just three words: “I am Directed”
Now the picture is complete.
We two have some things in common, Mr. Weems; we both came
from overseas, we both had to found or start something for this country, we
both obviously are lovers of nature, as from your remarks at the river about
“God’s work,” we both believe in some supreme being, but we have one other
thing in common. We have lost our confidence in human beings. God made an
exquisite job of nature, the grass, the trees, the birds, the rivers, the winds,
the sun to follow the rain, all with its own miracle balance but he made a
pretty lousy job of human beings didn’t he?
You are out here to preserve for Australia its Wild life but, you
have no time obviously for human beings. It is most apparent that you will
preserve this Wild Life regardless of whatever human beings may suffer or
how many human beings may die in the process.
Is this the story? or is it that you have been surrounded by nature
so long that you cannot see the wood for the trees?
Am I unjust, Mr. Weems, in what I have just said? I hope I am
unjust for I find it difficult to believe that a man of your calibre can have
so little regard for humanity. The missing piece of the puzzle “I am Directed”
is that perhaps the answer? we shall see.
Mr. Weems, the shock of this thing has made me a very sick person
but none the less, I want you to know that as an Australian citizen, and if
anyone deserves the right to call himself an Australian citizen, I do, I will strive
to the utmost of my power to defend my hearth, home and living.
I do not want to cause bitterness, sorrow or hardship to anyone. I
do not want to come out of this quiet, rewarding life, here, close to the earth,
to “do battle” as I did years ago for things that are right. Twice, I have
crossed swords with bureaucracy, and twice I have won. This issue is a greater
one, in that it affects myself and my wife, personally.
At this moment, I am offering you my hand of friendship, and
from this place, let me say with respect Sir. It is not you, yourself,
who is giving me one month to make “representation.” The wheels of Govern-
ment grind slowly. My wife and I cannot live on the edge of an abyss. It
is I, who am giving you until Tuesday 27th August ’6B to notify me in writing
that you, or the Honourable the Minister for Lands, or the State Government,
will keep your hands off my property until the year 2000 or when I am dead
whichever may be the longer (accidents can happen) or if I so desire it, before
that date in which, case I shall notify the Minister for Lands of that day in
writing. After I have received such an undertaking I shall negotiate further
with you.
Mr. Weems I believe this country must have its National Parks, I
believe the people have a right to walk freely in their land which they have
built, but, there is a right and a wrong way to do everything. In this case,
yours is the wrong way.
If a country needs to build a new road,, an aerodrome or a new
hospital and, in order to do this, private land must be resumed, then progress
cannot wait. Adequate learning must be given and adequate compensation given
having regard to the circumstances involved.
I opened “Clover Hill” to the public many years ago. Twelve years
ago in fact a famous National paper featured our place in colour under the
heading “they want to share their Shangri La with tourists.” It is absolutely
unnecessary to resume a private property for a National Park particularly,
when I have already built it wo as a Park, with such brutal haste. This is not
holding up progress so surely it can wait until I am dead!


I collect my mail from my Box No. 48 Albion Park, only on Saturday
mornings and therefore Saturday the 24th August ’6B, will be the last occasion
for me to pick up your letter. Remember, this letter must be strictly to my
terms.
Should this not arrive in my Mail Box then, in order to give you
further time, I shall be waiting on the steps of the G.P.0., on the corner of
Martin Place and Pitt Street, on Tuesday morning, from 11.30 a.m. until twelve
noon, the 27th August, waiting for your hand of friendship.
When the Post Office clock strikes twelve, if I have not received
this undertaking, either from yourself or your representative, (I hope it will be
you and we can walk off together as friends to talk), let these people who are
responsible for this foolish thing, gird up their loins and put on their armour,
for I shall walk up the steps to the Post Office, but have no fear, there will
be no violence, there is too much war and unrest in the world today.
God gave me two weapons to fight with, my head and my pen.
Remember you, in your way, are causing our small war, and I am trying
to stop the cause of it. If then you too have not done your part, as I say,
I shall walk up the steps of the Post Office, lift up the phone and give the
orders “Let Battle Commence!”
Yours faithfully,
Ben. H. Turner.
Published by Ben Turner, and printed by New Life Printery Pty. Ltd.,
54 Renwick Street, Marrickville, N.S.W.


It takes a man of courage to face up to a man and tell him “I am
going to take away your home, your life and your living.” So we got this death
warrant not from Mr. Weems nor from the Minister, but from these two other men.
The official notification came in a letter dated 30th July ’6B.
Not the slightest hint or indication of any kind had been made to
me at any time over the years of my contact with Mr. Lewis that he intended
to take over my place.
On August 4th I wrote to Mr. Weems protesting about (1) Resuming
my property and (2) the manner in which it was carried out. I gave Mr. Weems
until midday Tuesday 27th August ’6B to notify me in writing that no such
action would be taken until the year 2000 or when I am dead, whichever may
be the longer.
If this undertaking were not given, I informed him it was my inten-
tion to fight for my rights. This undertaking has not come. Now I reveal other
facts about this cruel secret grab.
Mr. Tom Lewis is the member for mv electorate and as such, I
contacted him some years ago. before he was made a Minister, about excessive
noise from a neighbouring coal mine’s ventilating fan. The noise was appalling
day and night, I also told Mr. Lewis of our tourist developing project, it was
the first time that I had mentioned this to him in his parliamentary capacity.
That nothing eventuated is only incidental to my story. In point of
fact eventually it was I who stopped the noise. I issued a summons against
the mine and then the noise ceased, but that is beside the point.
Some years ago Mr. James from Wollongong and myself were granted
“Authorities to Enter” certain areas on my place on the plateau above and
away from the Tourist area, with the ultimate purpose of establishing a coal
mine. A month or so later this permission was withdrawn because a prior claim
had been established to this area by the Electricity Commission. Fair enough.
In 1965 a Japanese Company wrote me that they were interested in
the coal. I informed Mr. Lewis, who in the meantime had been appointed
Minister for Mines and for Lands, asking if this area could 1 be freed from the
E.C. claim.
Mr. Lewis later forwarded to me the original letter sent to him by
Mr. Morton, the Hon. Minister for Local Government, dated 18th Jan. 1966.
Ref. No. 9653998 on the matter and I quote:
“. . . if the economic development of N.S.W. continues at the rate
comparable with that experienced over the last decade, it will be
necessary to examine the development of this power station along
with the development of other sites for additional electricity genera-
tion at some time beyond the year 1975 . . . .it would be in the best
interests of the State for Reserves to be wholly retained. The
Commission accordingly considers that it is essential that Mr. Turner’s
land should not be revoked from the Mining Reserves.”
Well, that too, is fair enough, there was no argument about that,
not then, but there is now!
My comment now, in the light of recent events is a different one,
it is: What then do they want “Clover Hill” for? For a State Park? For the
coal? Or for both?
Now listen to this: Over the years I have had considerable cor-
respondence with Mr. Tom Lewis before and after he became Minister for
Mines and for Lands, and then later, when Mr. Wal Fife took the Mine portfolio
and Mr. Lewis remained Minister for Lands.
Mr. Lewis has been made fully aware of the work I have been doing
preserving Wild Life and pioneering Macquarie Pass as a tourist resort.
Some years ago I told Mr. Lewis in the hearing of Mr. Boardman
his secretary, that as we had no family I would, in all probability, at my
death, leave “Clover Hill” to the Nation as a National Park. I also told him


this in the company of Mr. Arthur when at Parliament House on the 9th
August ’67 I asked the Minister, among other things, if he would assist me
later in obtaining wild life for the Reserve we were building.
On July the Bth last, when Mr. Weems and Mr. Boardjman visited
“Clover Hill” I asked Mr. Boardman why Mr. Lewis had not come after the
many invitations I had extended to him verbally and in writing. I told him
after hearing me say that no doubt I would leave Clover Hill to the Nation,
I was surprised and disappointed Mr. Lewis had not taken the trouble to visit
the place! Mr. Boardman told me he hoped Mr. Lewis would visit me shortly.
That’s not a bit surprising now in view of events the following week when it
was revealed that Mr. Lewis had made up his mind as Minister to take the
damn place!
No hint was given to me in the past or even at that time, that he
intended to take over our property for a Park.
They have allowed us to go on working all these years, waiting
whilst we developed the place, building nearly four miles of roads and byways
and established the place as a beautiful Park, only to take it from us to
take away our home, our hearth and our living, just as things are showing
some reward. Twenty years of life wasted!
And yet if they had waited till our finances were in order and I was
dead they could have had all this for nothing but
THEY COULDN’T WAIT FOR ME TO DIE !
Now if they want this magnificent 360 acre Park I have been building
they will have to pay Park prices for it. Through the foolishness of a Minister
it is going to cost the country a mighty lot of money, YOUR MONEY, for this
park.
I am sorry for Mr. Weems who is helping to give this country
National Parks but I am not going to sit back and let this man break my
wife’s heart through the thoughtlessness and utter stupidity of his Minister!
This then is not the end of me, you shall hear from me again. I went
to a school who’s motto was: “Rather death than false of faith,” I try to the
best of my ability to live up to this. I fight always for what is right Some of
you older people know this.
Never has a thing like this been done before in this free country.
1 am going to see that it doesn’t happen again.
Remember this, you who live in Mr. Lewis’ electorate my
electorate.
Whatever your party politics may be, IT’S THE MAN THAT STANDS
ON THE SOAP BOX THAT COUNTS, NOT THE BRAND ON THE SOAP
BOX HE STANDS ON!
Write to me and give me your support.
Ben, Turner,
“Clover Hill Farm,” Macquarie Pass,
Albion Park, Box 48,
South Coast, N.S.W.
IF YOU ARE GOING TO THROW THIS AWAY
DON'T BE A LITTERBUG, BUNG IT IN THE BIN
Published by Ben Turner, and printed by New Life Printery Pty. Ltd.,
54 Renwick Street, Marrickville, N.S.W.
