

,*r'• iifii ■’ - n - iMv"* X** 1 v'.* V 4 ■■"•o' w {£ , y-r ~»*S» *'•• •«vf^ry- *
' : fX**r. 3fij£?. V* *'•.: ~* * *•' $$*» ffr ; TV n niir f*~ ’' l : <v . ■SS'fej'a-T 'iiji a **4 Kf r » ■ 'Tftf
HB|Mr 1 1 li j |
if *§ k i I Fr
r I m «. «» 1 M W ■# * v ■ p . J| ■ -*Jf
.ssa^a^r^m■ '. m MRffp wst *«* m n a ■ ~jl HM
r W t. tgfc UaesaaSsr m ■n>-1« JBfe 8» rjg *. B B -7-1 -
■sV" a V 1 ,HMPff - SHHHBm
mI. 'Jkw £ --■■■■ flaT*& iT^^7!K*y.-jM^K*gB i , * ,^nK2eSSQ)59C|^7 v .v ■ - .■#•4'<!33 ’
' '--4— i-*Jl ■• • •;»•.'
; 53F / “T-fftfr r#fc? *$ ': * r-*' 1 1t*'^y % T‘CTrTi-' 4 M l f , .y-' ti' -••LB- 2s* sCjBHSffVv ~Wy', "f t Cat uu, :!" ; ' 11,. I? : . ; /.' *“. . .»■■ T -‘ ■«, ' «■ ■
■ s ; , 1 : <v*. ■ • ■>. v ' " ■■■'.■ \ -■•■ \_.j
K'’. / - v,T v T <■ ■■ - -« - > ’ 'JIB* . . I
I 0 11 M ,• • K 1 V>j C ' "t - « J .r a Wt: fi 1 *tvVW. ’*-1 'fcLygi
BBb' - ' .r v i v >«^f*Tc:-^- :: £»^ °«/UMHilI a^mkI
ifwF? IB‘WffBMlpMWBH^BlBHlg i MP*flBftak-_ 1 r ~ -~* _ J - ■ ■r ' p, , ■ • , .*.<■ «■;■ < -.iv^' -,,**. ._ - di—WW—IBWiBIIIW i 11 i I * flfPBib i h i HrlM » 11 1 ‘ii i • I 1 f I
« * .-M>,»^ V J l~»py.j !‘,?til'*J - ■£ :'• - --■ r ■ h ?yfc f*t * I - ||BRSt T n ” i iHl» ■ B » .11 Bm
■ ■---..--'^«Wf/#~<■/■;^%>? ! - . ,t. '
■OaBMBMfeia^^SiMv^^M-tiaiMB^BBB^:. - - r-;._ . r±Jk
cd f-' . -• J^Cb xl * s>^T g ir / lfyraartaKiwBi n-^jjfasYTl
Li ' 7. . . : ■ IWM^BMBibBBiM 1 ;^WfBg»iaiMMiiiHMiM^
■ "~ j7<%>' .: '”-»t ; - - < <Vf" I
03 " .^■*1
CsJ IS
o:
rr








Pa£e
THE FAIRIES 2
THE ROSE 3
QUEEN ELLA 11
AN AMBITIOUS PAIR 23
THE MAKER OF TROUBLES .... 39
U t A<f>ZA6SZfA.
IO J( . / 2X?oQ >


Jtye pairies
You thought all the fairies dead, you say,
Qone from this beautiful world so gay ;
Lying asleep on a lost moonbeam,
Or carried away by a sparkling stream.
How silly to think the fairies die !
C £T hey are always somewhere dancing by,
Qliding here and whirling there.
Swiftly moving on little feet bare.
Hfhey float along on the gentle breeze,
Uhat softly stirs the whispering trees ;
c 77hey wander dreamily to and fro,
‘Past where the woodland waters flow.
'fjhe willow trees by the lonely creek,
c Z?he tall grey gums on the mountain peak,
Welcome them all as they dance along,
Gripping it lightly to IBellbird’s song.
When told of fairies, don't shake your head,
find say that you they all are dead ;
For although the years glide swijtly hy,
Übe sweet little fairies never die.


£
1 VMMMHnHnMMMMBBBpan


If ——I
i. I
/3[r^i
" |i
—— —


“ A tiny elf £azln£ up at her. with wide open eyes.”


It grew. It is certainly the queen of all
flowers,” she added, nodding her little head
wisely, “ but I wonder how it came to be
called the queen.”
“ Well, you are ignorant if you don’t
know that,” said a voice beside her; “ it’s
certainly a thing you ought to know.”
Anna started, but looking down she saw
a tiny elf gazing up at her, with wide
open eyes.
“Do you really know?” she asked, with
a world of wonder shining in her eyes.
“You must be very wise,”
“ Oh, well, I know a good deal, because
I’m a fairy,” he said, drawing himself up
proudly.
“And do fairies know such a lot?”
“Of course,” he said, glancing at her
scornfully.
“ Well, don’t get cross and horrid, but
tell me about it instead,” said Anna.
“Very well, I will tell you the story if
you promise me you won’t interrupt and
ask questions.”
“ Oh, yes, I will promise; do begin at
once.” So the elf began :
“ Once, many years ago, there was a
beautiful garden situated on the borders of a
great forest. It was in this garden that the
fairies lived. Now, in the garden there
grew all kinds of flowers, and the Crown
Imperial lily claimed that she was the most
beautiful ot all. *I am the fairest flower,’
the stately blossom would cry, and the rest
would repeat, ‘Thou art by far the fairest.’
Now, when the great moon shone over the
sleeping world, the fays, fairies and the
woodland sprites would come from their
mushroom homes and go dancing and
singing among the flowers, the Fairy Queen


“ The Fairy Queen touching them each with her magic wand as they passed.”


“ ‘ Yes, your Majesty,’ said he, stepping
forward, ‘ I am here.’
“ ‘ I find,’ said the Queen, ‘ that the Crown
Imperial lily, of our beautiful garden,
considers herself the fairest and the best;
therefore I have decided to put all these
flowers to a test, and that which passes
shall be the queen of flowers henceforth.
That is all 1 have to say, Merlin. Go;
deliver my message to the flowers at once.’
“ * Your Majesty is obeyed,’ replied Merlin,
as he disappeared.
“ ‘ Now to the dance,’ cried the Queen.
“ And, oh I how they danced,” said the
little elfman: “up and down, in and out,
till they seemed just a whirl of glittering
colours. But when the first streak of dawn
appeared, the fairies, outspreading their
golden wings, flew away. The flowers were
greatly excited when they heard about the
test, and they waved and danced in the
breeze, bowing and bending as though their
stalks would break. The next day there
came to the garden a beautiful maiden, clad
in glistening gold, with large shimmering
gold wings. Her eyes were blue and
sparkling, and in her hair was fastened a
beautiful crown of little pink roses and pearly
dewdrops. She walked proudly around the
garden surveying the flowers. Then, seeing
the Crown Imperial lily she said sweetly:
‘May I shelter under your leaves?’ and her
voice was like a song. “Most certainly,”
answered the lily, ‘for 1 am the fairest of
all flowers; the whitest and the best.’
“The following day was wet and stormy,
and through the garden came a little beggar
maid, and her little bare feet were blue with
the cold. She went from flower to flower
and begged pityingly for shelter which they
all refused with the cruel words: ‘We have


‘‘ In the mornlr t$, when the rose
awoke, she found that the child
up. That afternoon, the Queen
Jjt \ \ \ carne and told the flowers that the
(I'm \ test was over * ancl had been won
1/ l\,\ \\ fi/M by the rose - 5he ,hen ,old them
I l‘ \\ \A •. \i *^ at s^e was *he beautiful maiden
I ' || \ and a^S ° 0 C^d *
f H \ Vv “ Then the Queen turned to the
L^rSX]' if X \\ rose and said that she would
£rant her any one wish. The rose
I may become a fairy child, and
“ Then, seeing the Crown Imperial Illy, she said, sweetly : ‘ May I shelter under your leaves ? ’ ”


, ft ,11 5"-,
w-a
'
go forth into the world to help those in
trouble.’
“ ‘ Your wish is granted,’ said the Queen,
* and henceforth you shall be known to
the world as Charity; and not only will I
grant your wish, but all the rose trees that
grow hereafter shall bear beautiful blossoms,
and will hold the first place among flowers,
and, therefore, the rose will be for ever-
more the queen of flowers.’ ” Here the elf-
man stopped.
“Oh, is that all?” exclaimed Anna; but
strange to relate, there was no sign of the
tiny being.
“ Yes,” nurse said, “ it was all a dream,
and Miss Anna must certainly have
gone to sleep in the garden.” But Anna
did not agree, for the little girl knew better-
yes, far, far better—than nurse, for once.


Queen Ella. J
i| I! 1 I




Queen Ella.
<7?HE hall clock struck six chimes with
stately measure, the sixth stroke dying
away like a distant echo in some gloomy
cave. Ella started up, and, opening her
window, looked out. She sought for her
friend the sea; to-day it looked beautiful, as
it sparkled in the sun. Quickly dressing,
she ran down to the beach, and seating
herself on a large stone she gazed thoughtfully
out to sea. She was a lonely little maiden,
for her mother and father were dead, and
she lived with her Aunt, who was very
old and quarrelsome, and who did not
understand her ways or childish pleasures.
As she sat there she could see the little
fishing boats coming from their midnight
voyages, and could hear the low murmur
of the waves as they broke one by one
upon the shore, with a sound like very soft
laughter.
“ Good morning, Missie,” said old Bob,
the fisherman, as he came along with his
fishing net. “You will not come to see the
fish caught this morning, I suppose?” he
added, smiling, (for some weeks ago Ella
had asked him to let her watch him draw
his net ashore, and she had told him that
she thought it would be great fun to watch
the fish come Inside it from the sea; but
when the little leaping things were lying
upon the sand she wanted to put them back
Into the sea again.)
“Oh, no, Bob,” cried Ella, “I do not
want to come, and 1 hope you will not


catch many to-day. 1 feel so sorry for them,
I wish I could put them back a£aln and let
them swim away.”
“ Why, Missie,” said Bob, “ what would
all the people do if fishermen were like
you ? ”
“ Well, good-bye, Bob,” said Ella, as the
old fellow walked away; “ I hope you will
not catch too many.” Ella sat and watched
the little curling waves break upon the
shore, and it seemed to her dreamy fancy
that they were calling to her, and that their
white arms beckoned as they lapped gently
back with the receding tide, leaving behind
them countless tiny furrows in the silver
sand.
“ Oh, my little waves, if I could go with
you! ” she cried, standing up and stretching
forth her hands. “Oh, dear little waves, do
take me with you as you go back with
the tide.” Then one little wave bolder than the
rest came swiftly forward and broke around
her feet with a hushing murmur, then re-
turned again with a sobbing sound, as if it
regretted to leave her.
“ I shall go to the haunted cave to-
night,” murmured Ella, as if speaking to
the sea, “ and see the beautiful maiden
who is said to go there every night ; and I
shall ask her to take me away with her,
for no one will grieve for me, and Auntie
does not love me,” she added sadly. That
night she slipped out unobserved, and ran
down to the beach and crept into the cave.
There she waited behind a great piece of
rock, for what seemed to her a very long
time. The air was still and quiet, and no
sound broke the stillness save the wash of
the water as the tiny wavelets broke one
after another on the beach.
“ Oh, will she never come ? ” cried the
weary little maiden. Stay what was that ?
—only a loose stone from above falling with


■— ■
' leaned of


forward and entered the cave. Ella drew fur-
ther back into the shadow and watched her.
She glided slowly forward —her white garments
swaying musically as she walked —then she
leaned wearily against a large piece of
rock in the centre of the cave. Presently
she began to sing, in a round, full voice,
that rang through the air with the clearness
of a silver bell. The sweet notes were full
of melody, but mournful and pathetic.
Little Ella was enchanted, and, as she
listened, her heart grew soft and full of
tenderness for the beautiful singer.
Such a wondrous song it was, full of
sadness.
She sang of the beautiful world, so full
of Joy, of the fairies that live in the
woodlands, of the mermaids and merbabies
under the sea, and of the little water-babies
In the river. She sang of the happiness of
these little beings, and how she herself was
so sad because they had no queen to rule
over them, and how she came every night
to the cave in hopes of finding some little
earth maiden who would go and watch
over them.
“ I will go with her,” thought Ella, as
she listened, “and I will ask her to take
me to the little water-babies.”
When she ceased, Ella stole softly up
and took her hand. “ I will come,” was all
she said; but the maiden understood, and,
taking the child by the hand, she led her
to the boat, telling her softly to step in.
Then the maiden pushed the little craft out
into the water, which was received by the
waves and borne gently along.
“ Won’t you come too ? ” cried Ella, from
the water, to the fair maiden, who was still
standing on the shore. “ Ha\ elto go alone.
“ Yes, alone,” she answered ; “all alone
to the 4 Sunset Lake,’ for now my work is


done, and I return once more to
my home in the land of dreamful
sleep. 5o good-bye, little queen,
good-bye.”
The last words died away in a
whisper, and at that moment a sigh
seemed to fill the soft night air,
and Ella was alone, whilst far out
on the water she saw a large,
crimson poppy floating away on its
surface.
The little boat swung out with
the tide, and Ella was borne swiftly
and silently along, she knew not
whither. On and on they went,
leaving the lights of the little fishing
village far behind them. At last
Ella saw they were approaching the
mouth of a large, gloomy cave.
The water flowed sluggishly in,
bearing the little boat with it. The
splash of the waves, made by the
“ Ella came suddenly upon a beautiful fairy seated on a stone.”


moving of the boat, seemed to echo gloomily
through the cave.
Ella began to feel afraid as they went
swiftly on, and there was no sign of a light,
nothing but total darkness; but suddenly,
as they rounded a corner, Ella uttered a
cry of amazement, for there she saw,
stretching far away, the beautiful “ Sunset
Lake.”
The sun was just sinking in the west
as the little boat shot out of the cave,
ruffling the water of the placid lake before
it, and presently, with a little sighing sound,
it ran ashore in a maze of golden flowers
by the bank.
As Ella stepped out of the boat, she
was more surprised than ever at the beauty
of the scene around her. The glorious
sunset lighting up the sky with crimson,
gold, and quivering opal ; the clear, still lake,
reflecting the beautiful colour of the sky,
was all aglow. The air was still and quiet,
for all the little birds had gone to rest, and
no sound broke the stillness, save the
mournful plash of the wavelets rolling the
whole length of the shore. Far away on the
water Ella could see the little boat, with its
silver sail, like pale moonlight, floating down
the shimmering waters to the spot where
the sun was just dropping into the lake. She
stood and watched it till it was lost to view
in the haze of golden light.
What should she do ? She stood awhile
pondering, and having made up her mind,
she turned and walked slowly along the
shore.
As far as she could see was beautiful
silver sand, and dotted about, right to the
water’s edge, were little clumps of flowers,
while further back the sand lost itself in
the depths of a beautiful wood. Ella entered
it and was amazed at its splendour.


All around her were large trees, some
with their beautiful foliage touching the
ground. Her footsteps fell noiselessly on a
thick carpet of velvety green moss, dotted
prettily here and there with snow-white
flowers, and the red gleam of ripening wild
strawberries. Ella pushed through the tangled
bushes and came suddenly upon a beautiful
fairy seated on a stone, decorating a silver
trumpet with some of the flowers that
grew around her.
Far away behind her stretched another
part of the sunset lake. Ella was so
astonished that she could do nothing but
stand and gaze.
“ Who are you ? ” said the fairy, looking
up from her work, “and what do you
want ? ”
“ I have come,” answered Ella, “to stay
with the little water-babies, and ”
“ Oh ! ” cried the fairy, Jumping up, “ you
have come to be the queen, and rule over
our little water-babies. I have been ex-
pecting you. Come along, and I will get
you ready at once.”
She then led Ella down a little path-
way of stones to the edge of the lake. Far
out over the water Ella saw a beautiful
city built of pure crystal. Domes, towers
and steeples stood out against the sky, and
the red gleam of the sunset, shining through
the crystal, enveloped it in a golden haze.
The castles and shining domes glimmered
and shimmered, casting a glow of fire over
the water.
“ What is that ? ” cried Ella, delightedly.
“ That,” answered the fairy, “is the City
of Sleep, where Zerina lives.”
“ And who is Zerina ? ” asked Ella.
“Zerina is the maiden you saw in the
cave,” replied the fairy; “ but come, let us
be going.”


The fairy then drew out a
tiny boat from among the rushes,
and set it afloat on the water.
When they were seated, the little
craft began to move slowly along.
Ella sat enchanted with the beauty
of the scene around her. Suddenly
she became aware that the boat
was anchored, and the fairy was
speaking to her.
“Come, Ella,” she said, “jump
into the lake.” Ella could not
swim, but she threw herself
obediently into the water, and the
fairy sprang in after her.
When she opened her eyes,
she was surprised to find herself
in a most resplendent hall. The
>
floor was covered with soft, white
sand that gleamed like moonlight.
The roof was supported by coral
pillars, and the walls were made
“Ella stood and watched them.”


of strange coloured stones and metals, and
over it all the light shone in tender quivering
rays. Then the fairy led her up a winding
stairway into a little room made of mother-
of-pearl.
“ Now, little maiden,” she said, “ I am
going to turn you into a little water queen.”
She then took a flower from her trumpet,
and waved it over Ella’s head. The flower
seemed to unfold as she waved it, enveloping
Ella in a gauzy mist. Then she took some
gold pollen from another flower, and threw
it into the air, making the mist clear instantly,
and Ella stood before her arrayed in queenly
robes.
Her dress was a pale pink colour, with
a silver ribbon encircling her waist, her
black hair was long and shining, and on her
head was a garland of pure white waterlilies.
“ Now, Ella,” said the fairy, as she kissed
her, “ shut your eyes,” and then-well, what
had happened ?
The fairy had gone, and Ella found
herself standing on a stone in a little river
that flowed slowly along, to lose itself in
the Sunset Lake. All along its banks were
trees and beautiful flowers. Ella sat down
on a stone and gazed In bewilderment.
Suddenly, from every quarter of the
stream, came a crowd of little children
swimming up. Some had little curling tails,
some wore garlands of flowers, and some
had red strings of corals round their necks
and arms, others blew on crooked shells,
and many of the children, with hugs and
kisses, hung on her neck and shoulders,
murmuring softly : “ Our little queen ! our
little queen!
Ella was enchanted with the little beings,
and she kissed and caressed them in return.
Then they began to play with one another,
Jumping high out of the water, laughing and
singing all the time.


■—aw— — 11 ™*~***^
I Ella stood and watched them, and, after streaks of dawn appeared, all grew quiet,
a time. Joined in their sport. and they floated silently away on the River
, of Dreams to the “City of Sleep.”
They played, san£, and swam about
till long after the great moon had taken the Day came, and the wonderful mysteries
place of the setting sun; but when the first of the sunset and moonlight vanished.
( 22 )


(&£>') ‘
fin Ambitious Pair. M
'm"‘
cyS


• 4


T-
- _■ —-—■ —
fin Ambitious pair.
CpAR away in the forest, where the fairies,
the elves, and the hobgoblins dwell,
lived two little gnomes. Their home was
under a large mushroom, and their names
were Hip and Hop respectively.
They were very fond of adventure, and,
in fact, were in the habit of saying to one
another. When shall we start to seek our
fortune ? ”
They were really very ambitious, and
looked forward to the time when they should
set out on their travels to find some hidden
treasure, or to rush bravely to the rescue
of any fair maiden, whom they might find
imprisoned in a great castle.
borne years before the time that my
story begins, there was a great tumult in
fairyland, for it was discovered that the
beautiful princess of a neighbouring tribe of
wingless fairies had completely disappeared.
The two tribes were on very friendly
terms, so, of course, the grief on both sides
was very great. However, the princess had
never come back, and the general belief
was that she had been spirited away by
the forest witch, a tiresome old thing who
raced about on a broomstick, and whom the
princess had upset one day, just as she
was alighting on the ground.
From the day that the princess dis-
appeared, the witch had changed her abode,
which she had hitherto held in a large
ca\ ein, and the fairies had never seen her
or the princess since.


'' ' ' '' I


middle of his narrative, “ I have a splendid
plan. Let us set out to seek the lost princess
ourselves.”
“The very thing,” cried Hip; “I wonder
we did not think of it before. We had
better start at once.”
“Yes, I think we should,” answered
Hop; “which way ought we to go?”
“Well, I don’t know,” replied Hip, “ but
I propose we should go straight ahead, and
we will be sure to find something.”
“Well, agreed,” cried Hop, and off they
started. Up hill and down dale they went,
till they had left the fairy forest far behind. At
last they found themselves on a huge,
sandy plain, across which ran a narrow
track, leading to a dark forest.
Arriving there, they sat down and rested
awhile, quenching their thirst at the brink
of a little stream, which lost itself in the
depths of the forest. Much refreshed, they
pursued their journey, following the little
track, which wound on and on.
The way led through a dark, thick
wood, and continued so for a number of
miles; then the road led up a steep and
bare hillside. At last they reached the top,
and there below, at their feet, they saw,
stretching far away, a beautiful forest.
The great sun was just sinking in the
west as Hip and Hop made their way down
the hillside. The whole sky was lit up with
its gorgeous light—azure, crimson and gold.
They picked their way among the
trees and, finding a beautiful grassy space,
they lay down to rest. The air was still and
quiet, for all the birds had gone to rest, and
no sound broke the silence.
“Oh! isn’t this lovely?” cried Hip, “it
is almost as lovely as our own beautiful
forest, all these beautiful trees and sweet-


scented flowers, and not a sound to break
the silence.”
Hardly had he finished speaking when
the sound of sweet singing reached their
ears. Springing to their teet. they stood
listening to catch every word.
“Who can It be?” whispered Hop, as
the singing became louder and sweeter, as
it was borne along on the evening air.
“Come, let us find it,” shouted Hip,
and off he went, with Hop running behind.
“What is it?” cried Hop, as he came
hurrying up.
“Look! look! isn’t she lovely?” cried
Hip. as he peeped through the bushes
which hid her from view.
“Let me have a look, too,” said Hop.
.. oh! ” cried he, the next minute, “ she’s
jus t beautiful. Come, let us go to her.”
They pushed through the tangled bushes
and came to an open space, where a
beautiful maiden sat, sinking sweetly as she
plucked and kissed the flowers that grew
about her.
“Well, little elves,” she said, as she
gazed at them, “ what is it you want? Hip
looked at Hop and Hop looked at Hip, but
neither could speak.
<• |_er —at least, we —we came,” began
Hip, but could get no further.
“ Well,” said Hop, looking round for
help from the almost dumb Hip, “The—er
—the fact is ”
Yes,” said the beautiful maiden, looking
inquiringly at him, "is what?”
.. uj S it is—Oh ! I don’t know, 1 don’t
know.”
“Oh! Hip, let us go away at once,”
cried the poor little gnome, starting to run
away.


“ Not so fast, not so fast, my little friends,”
said the maiden, “ I think 1 know what you
want. You are seeking the lost princess.”
“ Yes, yes, that’s it,” they cried, both
in the same breath, “ that’s it, we are seeking
the lost princess, who disappeared at the
same time that the witch left her home, and
neither have been heard of since,” they
added, mysteriously, having quite recovered
their tongues. “And,” said Hip, growing quite
confidential, “we think that she stole her,
and that she has gone away and taken her
too, and that she ”
“ Why, who is she ? ” asked the maiden,
smiling.
“ Why, the witch, of course, and that
she is chained in a great castle,” continued
Hip, growing quite excited, “ and that if we
do not rescue her, she will ”
“ Come,” interrupted Hop, thinking his
friend had said quite enough, “don’t talk
any more, for the beautiful lady knows all
about it —don’t you ? ” he said, gazing in-
quiringly up at her.
“ Yes, my little elves, I know all about it.”
“Then help us, pretty lady,” said Hip.
“ Help us to find what we seek.”
“Yes, certainly, 1 will help you,” she
answered;“but why are you seeking her?”
“Well,” said Hop, ‘‘we wanted to go
on a journey and win honours for our-
selves, as other gnomes have done, and to
show some little elves, who were rude to
us and called us cowards, that would
become famous throughout Fairyland.”
They then explained to their companion
all they knew about the princess, and their
theories on the subject.
“ Well,” said their new friend, “ I think
I can help you a little.”
“ How ? ” asked Hip and Hop, in the
same breath.


“ First find the track, then the tree,
and then the Princess. Now, that is all I
can tell you,” and, with a merry laugh, she
bounded up a mossy bank, and was lost
to view.
The twilight had just faded into night
as our two friends started off.
“Look, Hip,” cried Hop, “look at that
light over there on the grass, ’ and there,
sure enough, something sparkled on the
ground, and the longer they looked at it
the plainer they saw that a long line of
twinkling lights stretched across the grass.
With beating hearts, they rushed towards
it. Hip stretched out his hand and touched
them.
“ Why, they’re only dewdrops,” he said,
“ but who ever saw them lying in a line
like that.”
“ Let’s see where it goes,” cried Hop,
“ for it may have something to do with the
Princess.”
Off they started along the track, which
lost itself in the distance. On and on
they went, till, suddenly, when turning a
corner, they saw that the line ended in
something white.
“ Look, look! ” whispered Hip, as he
drew nearer, “ why it’s a skinny white
rabbit.”
“5o it is,” said Hop, “and, look, it is
brushing away the dewdrops.”
As soon as the rabbit caught sight of
them he bounded away with the two little
gnomes after him. But fast though they ran,
they could not catch him ; and, just as they
were gaining, he stopped at the foot ot a
large stone, looked around at them, and
disappeared.
“Well,” said Hip as they came up,
“he disappeared here, so he 11 come out
here, and I shall just wait here till he
comes.


I “ An old decrepit looking woman holding by the paw the white rabbit.” |


sure enough was a door fitted beautifully
Into the side of the oak.
•• I can't see anything,” cried Hop, as
he peeped through the keyhole; “and the
door is locked, too.”
“Let me see if the key is on the
inside,” said Hop, as he advanced with a
long reed in his hand. He probed the
keyhole, but the reed went right through.
“Well,” said he, “there is no key in the
lock, so 1 think it is likely to have been
locked from the outside.” jj
“ Yes, perhaps so,” said Hip; “so come
and let us hide behind these rocks and
see what happens.”
The time dragged slowly on, and still
no sign of anything. At last, just when
the first streak of dawn appeared, they saw
coming towards them an old decrepit-
looking woman, holding by the paw theii
enemy the white rabbit.
She went straight to the oak, and
unlocked the door and entered. Quick
as thought, Hip and Hop crept in with
her. In the gloom it was impossible for
her to see them, and the rabbit was
nodding sleepily. Having locked the door,
she shambled away.
“ What luck we had to get in,” whispered
Hop, as the two little gnomes set off down
the passage.
In the dim light they could see the
old woman hobbling along with the rabbit
close behind her. Presently they came
to the end of the passage, and saw that it
branched off in two different ways. Seeing
the witch already half way down one
passage, they at once took the other.
Suddenly, as they went forward, Hop
stumbled and fell, making no effort to
rise; and Hip, rushing to his assistance,
tumbled on top of him. They both fell


distance, narrower and
narrower, till at last they had to
“ A maiden standing chained to a pillar of stone."


then the roof suddenly widened, and they
found themselves in a large cave. Peering
through the gloom, they saw the form of
a maiden standing chained to a pillar of
stone, whom they rightly judged to be the
long lost Princess.
“ Who are you ? ” she asked; “ has
the witch made two more prisoners?”
“ No, no! ” answered Hip ; “we are
two elves who have set out to look for the
stolen Princess, and we think we will not
have to search any more; for, unless we
are very much mistaken, you are she,
fair lady, and therefore we have come to
rescue you and take you back to your
own people.”
“ Your news is good, indeed, and I am
the long lost Princess, sirs,” she said. “See,
the key of my fetters is under that stone.”
With some difficulty our heroes got
the key, and soon the Princess was free.
Full of gratitude, she put her arms around
the two little elves and cried for joy.
“ Now, tell me all about it,” she said,
as she sat down between them. Having
told her all, they asked what next should
be done.
“Well,” said she, “the witch visits me
once every seven days, and, as she came
yesterday, I will not see her again for another
week, so we must wait till to-night, when
the witch mounts her broomstick, and sails
away to see her sister, who lives in the back
of the moon, and whom she visits every
night. 50, then, my dear little heroes, we
will slip out of the door, and leave the
witch for ever.”
“Well, dear lady,” said Hop, “I propose
to set out as soon as possible.”
“Then let us start at once,” answered
the maiden, “for I have been here longer
than I care about ; however, we can get


back quicker than you came; see,
here is a door that has never
been opened, and can only be
unfastened by the person or per-
sons who come here successfully
to rescue me. Open It, my friends,
for it will yield to your touch.”
The door being opened, there
was revealed a steep flight of
steps. On reaching the top, they
found themselves in a narrow
passage. Running quickly along,
they came to the hole through
which our heroes had fallen.
It was very large and quite
impossible to get over. Here they
stopped in consternation.
“ Oh ! ” cried Hop, “ what shall
we do ?”
“And just as we were getting
on so well,” sobbed the Princess.
“ Mounts her broomstick, and sails away to see her sister
back of the moon.”


“ Yes, you were doing pretty well, my
friends.” The words seemed to come from
their feet, and looking down, they saw a
huge black spider, as large as a man's
head, watching them. They all started back
in terror.
“It’s all right,” said the spider, “you
have nothing to fear from me. 1 am the
friend of all who need my help, and you
will need It, I see.”
“ I don’t think you will be able to help
us,” they murmured, disconsolately.
“ Don’t you ? ” answered the spider quietly ;
“ wait and see.”
Then he took a great jump, landing on
the other side of the hole, leaving across
the cavity a fine silken thread; then he
went backwards and forwards many times,
and each time the web became thicker and
thicker. Thus he toiled till, at last, there was
a strong bridge of glistening web over the
hole.
Cautiously our friends tried It, and
finding it perfectly strong, they ran nimbly
across and landed In safety on the other side.
“ Oh! dear spider,” they cried, “we are
so ” But the spider was nowhere to be
seen.
“What a pity he is gone,” murmured
the Princess, “ I did so want to thank him.”
Walking quickly down the passage, they
soon arrived at the door, but found, as
they expected, that it was securely locked.
“ Well, now we will wait till to-night,
when the witch will mount her broomstick
and fly to the moon,” said the Princess.
“ Look ! ” cried Hop, “ let us hide behind
this boulder, and then, when the witch
opens the door, we will be able to slip
out.” Having settled themselves comfortably,


open door, and went out into the
1|| the before stood them.
“Panced with Hip and Hop.”


while Hip and Hop related their ad- “ You darlings,” cried the Princess, who
ventures was £ eUin S c l uite £ ay at the P ros P ect °*
' en going home, “I should like to marry you
“ And now ” said the Princess, when bothi but as \ canno t do that, promise me
they had finished, “ thanks to you, I am free, (hat you wl]1 come an d be my pages,
and 1 can return to my father’s palace.” Now promise me-do.”
.. oh! Princess, there is no need to “ Oh! yes. we promise, indeed we do,”
thank us, for we would do much more for cried they, dancing excitedly round her.
you,” cried the two gnomes, “ and we will “ Three cheers for the Princess and our
always think of you, dear lady.” Forest Friend-Hurrah ! hurrah ! hurra .
u
hr,, “ i v\
" w f>r ■ h
( 38 )


JTze JVCaker of
As "r<S&r** i


1


JVtaker of Jroubles.
■ birds and the beasts went to’ him
inhabitants of the wood were kept
Wmt'rfc, a wicked dwarf> known by the
namC " C a^6r troubles.”
him for it; if the fruit dropped
Ml fr_ ,j&I 11 ill. (' • m fell i ! W{ <f off before it was ripe, he had a
“ Was reading quietly under the shade of a lar£e oak . . . Wonderkin sitting opposite,”


hand in it ; if a little frightened elf lost him-
self in the wood, you may be sure that the
dwarf had settled it carefully.
Well, one night, as the Wise Man of
the Wood (for that was the name of the
old gnome) was reading quietly under the
shade of a large oak, with his little boy,
Wonderkin, sitting opposite, one of the forest
maidens came running up crying and
ringing her hands in grief.
“ O-oh,” she cried, “my youngest sister
caught her foot in the chimney of the
Maker of Troubles’ house, and fell right down
under the earth, for he lives underground,
you know ? And, as I stood still in terror,
I heard him say to her, as she fell thump
on the floor, ‘Have you hurt yourself?’
“ ‘ Yes,’ answered my sister, ‘ very much.
“ ‘ Good! ’ replied the old wretch. I
arranged that it should, and ’ ; but I did
not hear any more, for I was so frightened
that I rushed away to see you.”
“ Well,” said the gnome, as she finished,
“I will think it over; come back at this
time to-morrow, and I will tell you my
plan.”
“Very well,” replied the maiden, “I shall
be here. Good-bye,” she called, as she ran
up a mossy bank and disappeared from
view.
At the appointed time the next day the
maiden visited the gnome.
“Well,” said he in his gruff voice, “I
have thought of a plan, a very good plan,
too. The old dwarf has taken your sister
far away to one of his unknown haunts,
so the old owl told me this morning, and
my plan is that you should go to the black
pool, and wait there till the Maker of
Troubles passes. As soon as he sees you
he will at once seize you, and take you


away to the place where he has hidden
your sister. My little Wonderkin will, of
course, follow you to find where he takes
you, and then he will come back and tell me,
and I will go at once and rescue you both.
Now, what do you think of my plan ? ”
“Oh! I think it is splendid,” cried the
maiden, skipping about and clapping her
hands; “Wonderkin and I will go at once
to the pool and wait till he comes.”
Arrived at the pool, the two sat down,
Wonderkin hiding under a large mushroom,
and the maiden sitting on the top.
At last the old dwarf came along, and,
seeing the maiden, he immediately seized
her and bound her hands behind her back,
and fixed a heavy chain around her waist,
and led her away. Wonderkin threw over
himself a flimsy cloak that his father had
made, which rendered him invisible, and
hurried after them.
On and on they went. Now the track
led down into a sunny valley, with fresh
green grass and a sparkling stream. The
air was full of sweet music from the throats
of hundreds of bright birds that darted to
and fro. Then suddenly one little bird, as
he flew along was pounced upon* by a
large hawk and carried away.
“ Good! ” muttered the dwarf, “ I arranged
that carefully—l arrange everything carefully,”
he said, turning to the maiden, who only
looked proudly at him in answer.
The scenery began to grow wild and
desolate. Huge rocks and boulders lay
scattered around, and rugged cliffs towered
upwards to the sky, and still the dwarf led
the maiden on. At last, when suddenly
turning the corner of a projecting rock, they
came upon what looked like a huge yellow
stone, which was the dwarf’s destination.
When they came closer, Wonderkin noticed
that it was a gigantic cheese set on end.


u '
To this the dwarf led the
maiden. Arrived at the great yellow
mass he took, off the maiden s
fetters, and opened a door in the
side, and dragged her in with him.
The poor prisoner felt terribly afraid
as she was led inside the cheese,
and placed in a dark room.
At last, as her eyes grew
accustomed to the dark, she made
out the form of her sister sitting
dejectedly on the floor. Rushing
to her, she embraced her tenderly,
kissing her the while.
Here let us leave them, and
follow Wonderkin, who, as soon as
he saw the Maker of Troubles
disappear into the cheese with the
maiden, turned and set off home-
wards. Just as the daylight was
dying away, he arrived at his
The scenery began to grow wild and desolate.


home, and related to his father all that had
happened.
“ Well,” said the Wise Man, when he
had finshed, “go and get my axe, for we
must go and smash up his home.” Wonderkin
having got the axe, they started away.
When they got to the dwarf’s house,
they discovered him lying asleep just out-
side the door. The Wise Man was delighted
when he saw this, for he had been longing to
capture him.
He took out a large bottle from his
pocket, and so huge was it that it was a
the bottle and laid It down; and the dwarf,
knowing nothing of this, slept on.
The Wise Man then cut a big hole in
the back of the cheese. Having removed
the piece of wall, father and son entered.
There they saw the two sisters lying asleep
on the floor. Little Wonderkin went forward
and woke them up.
They all then went outside, and a
strange sight met their view. The bottle in
which the dwarf was entrapped was swaying
from side to side, and the little man himself
{
was springing up and down inside in a
_ . u .. . £reat rage, crying, “Let me out; let me out
mystery how it had got there. He then drew
out the stopper, and a little puff of blue
smoke curled upwards, floating away on
the air. Then the Wise Man seized the
dwarf, and stuffed him into the bottle, and,
as the blue smoke was charmed, he grew
smaller and smaller, till he fitted beautifully
inside. Then the gnome put the stopper in
“ Ha! ha!” laughed the Wise Man, “you
arranged your own capture very carefully
indeed, didn’t you? ha! ha!” Despite his
earnest entreaties to be let out, they carried
him away to the gnome’s house, and there
he was placed on a table and held up to
ridicule.


she had found the house
After relating their adventures,
\ have another look at the dwarf.
Jik \ \ when she saw him' jumping up
W dOWn * in 0 r f ° amin^
Troubles, and hear how he was
“Beautiful maidens dancing with a little boy”
__ 1
I Mr* V


But that happened long, long ago,
and the forest folk have never had any
trouble since. The Maker of Troubles is
still in the bottle, but has long since ceased
to spring up and down, but sits quietly,
gazing with sad eyes on any who came
to look at him.
Perhaps he is thinking of his misdeeds,
and all the muddles he has made, or,
perhaps but who can tell ? I’m sure I
cannot.
The forest grows more beautiful every
day, and peace reigns over it, and if you
penetrate into its heart at midnight, you
would see three beautiful maidens dancing
with a little boy.
Of course, I need not tell you who
they are; but, perhaps, you would be more
satisfied if I did. They are the three forest
sisters and little Wonderkin, the son of the
Wise Man of the Wood, and —well, that’s
the end of my story.




*
R
W
.
1508 01908086


