

jsp* 7
H. S. BLAKE
Illuatrfttsd by
ALBERT AND KATHLEEN COLLINS


-4n thil






ALL THE WAY TO BARCELONA






\V ?*. . /
7
THE BREEZE LIFTED THEM GENTLY OVER THE HILLS . . . ON T
AND ON TO BARCELONA


I BY H. S. BLAKE
[ILLUSTRATED BY
A. & K. COLLINS
|
AUSTRALIA
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LIMITED
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY
1935


Set up, printed and bound
in Australia by
Halstead Printing Company
Ltd., Arnold Place, Sydney
Registered at the General
Post Office, Sydney, for
transmission through the
post as a book
Obtainable in London from
the Australian Book Com-
pany, 57 Great Russell
Street, W.C.I.


104953
2 5. NOV 1936
NICK
ALTHOUGH HE?S ALMOST A MAN


4


CONTENTS
Spring Comes to Lapland - - - - i
Ivan and the Squirrel-that-knows-
EVERYTHING ------ 3
All About the Wonderful Nut - - 8
Ivan Swallows the Nut - - - - 13
Off to Find Mr Frost ----- 22 M
The Little White Fox Arrives - - 26 M mk
At Mr Frost?s Hut ----- 29 m
Off to Barcelona ------ 36 m W
The Magic Organ ------ 40
Ivan Becomes a Bullfighter - 45 \
The Magician Saves Ivan - - - - 49 m
The Singing House - - - - _ 56 Wp fri
At the Nut-tree ------ 62 � M
At the Home of the Spanish Children 64 ? i
Off Home Again ------ 69 || I




CHAPTER I
Spring Comes to Lapland
'VT?OU may be very fond of snow. And again, you may
not. It looks very nice on Christmas cards, but
when you?ve seen nothing but snow for weeks and
weeks, you?re likely to get very tired of it.
Olga was, at any rate. She?d seen enough snow to
last her a lifetime. And another thing that made it
worse, was the awful long night. Truly speaking, what
seemed so long a night was really days and nights for
weeks and weeks. You see, Olga lived in a land where
during the winter the days seemed exactly like the
nights. The sun never, never shone.
Can you guess what the name of the country is? It
is called Lapland. And it?s away up in the cold, cold
north, miles and miles and miles away from here.
Olga was wishing she lived anywhere but there, with
the bitter north winds, the snow-drifts, and the dark
winter.
And then, one morning, a wonderful thing happened.
Far away, on the line where the sky meets the earth,
a tiny, rosy light appeared. It was very small, and at
first it seemed as though the ugly black clouds were
trying to push it back over the edge. The clouds would
scowl and push into the tiny pink light and make it
seem to grow paler and smaller. But only for a little
while, for the light seemed to gather all its strength
the next moment and send the black clouds slinking
away.
It was such a darling pink light. It made Olga think
that the fairies had hung a tiny Chinese
edge of the world.
lantern on the


The next day it was bigger, and the next day bigger
still. Soon it began to throw long warm red fingers
across the earth. Everything the fingers touched
changed as if they had been touched with magic. The
snow glistened and sparkled like precious stones, and
the icicles that hung from the bare branches of the
trees seemed to light up and dance with all sorts of
hidden lights of such marvellous colours.
Gradually the light climbed higher and higher in
the sky, and became stronger and stronger, until at
last the long night of winter was spirited away and the
land was bathed in warm sunshine.
Spring had come to the land where Olga lived


//ww7
CHAPTER II
Ivan and the Squirrel
TF there was any one more pleased than Olga about
A the coming of spring, it was Ivan, the stupid
reindeer. He sat up on his hind legs blinking at the
red sun until he nearly went blind.
?Ha!? he said aloud, ?they can have all their bean-
feasts and carpet tacks. Give me moss and I wouldn?t
call the King my uncle.? Ivan was very fond of moss.
Well, he watched the sun thawing the snow away
until first a little piece of moss popped through, and
then other pieces of moss began to push through the
snow, all over the place. The snow patches grew
smaller and smaller, and the moss patches grew larger
and larger until it seemed to Ivan, who sat staring at
the ground all the while as if it were a dream, that the
earth was one big plate piled up high with moss and
with a little ticket on the very top saying that it was
all for Ivan?s breakfast.
He nibbled at a very choice piece which was grow-
ing right at his feet. It tasted so nice that he rolled
his eyes and looked even more stupid than ever.
Just at this moment the Squirrel-That-Knows-Every-
thing came hurrying past.
The squirrel hadn?t really a moment to spare,
because he was hurrying to meet Olga, but when he
saw Ivan rolling his eyes and gulping hard he thought
the reindeer was having a fit, so he rushed forward and
gave him a tremendous slap on the back. He knew
this was the right thing to do when any one was
choking.


Ivan wasn?t choking, but he was very nervous. So
when the squirrel slapped him so hard on the back, it
made him jump high into the air, and when he came
down again he could do nothing but shake.
?Do you feel better now?? inquired the squirrel.
?Better!? gasped Ivan. ?I thought I?d been hit by
a bus. And it was the nicest piece of moss I?ve tasted
for months.?
When the squirrel understood that Ivan wasn?t hav-
ing a fit, but only just enjoying the moss, he laughed
till his sides ached.
Then he became very serious.
?Look here, Ivan,? he said, ?you?ll have to be more
careful. You?re eating far too much moss, and it isn?t
good for you. I think I?d better take your pulse and
have a look at your tongue.?
So Ivan, who began to feel rather frightened be-
cause he remembered his mother had always told him
to be careful and not eat too much, looked very
sorrowful.
The Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything stood on a big
stone and peered down the reindeer?s throat.
?Goodness gracious!? he exclaimed at last.
?W-what?s the matter?? stuttered the reindeer, feel-
ing very alarmed indeed.
?It?s just exactly as I thought,? replied the squirrel.
?Inside you look just like the old garden wall ?all
covered with moss.?
Suddenly he took a much closer look into the rein-
deer?s throat. ?I do believe,? he muttered to himself.
?Here,? he suddenly asked quite sharply, ?have you
been eating fish lately??
mm
V


IVAN AND THE SQUIRREL
?Well,? answered Ivan. ?I did have a couple of
sardines yesterday, but they were only a big one and
a little one.?
?Was the big one slightly cross-eyed?? asked the
squirrel.
?Yes, I believe he was.? Ivan wondered what was
coming next.
?Ho!? exclaimed the squirrel, very loud indeed.
?Now I know who stole my fish tea. It serves you
right. You stole my sardines and now the big one is
chasing the little one all over the place inside you.
That?s what?s making you go all wobbly.?
Ivan indeed was behaving very funnily. His sides
were going in and out like a concertina, but it wasn?t
the sardines that were causing it. It was indigestion.
?You?ll have to be very, very careful what you eat,?
went on the squirrel, ?or there?s no telling what may
happen to you. Why, I do declare,? he said excitedly,
and jumped off the stone in order to examine Ivan?s
back. ?Yes, it is indeed. You?ve eaten so much moss
that it?s actually poking through your skin.? And he
plucked a handful of moss from Ivan?s back to show
him.
Ivan was terrified. You see, he hadn?t noticed the
wicked squirrel stoop to pick the moss off the ground,
so he really did believe that the moss was growing
through his skin.
The squirrel was enjoying himself immensely. ?That
will teach him to steal my sardines,? he said to himself.
But Ivan was in an awful state of fright. He first
turned hot and then went icy cold.
?Can?t anything be done about it?? he managed to
ask at last.


V 5
The squirrel looked wise and said he would see what
the Nut-from-Barcelona could do. He took off his
little knapsack and stood looking at the Nut for some
time before replying.
?Well,? he said thoughtfully, ?the trouble is with
your inside. I should think that if you were to put
the inside on the outside of the outside it might help.
Because then the real inside would be outside and the
outside inside. The real outside?s inside the inside
outside, if you follow what I mean.?
?Not, not exactly,? replied Ivan.
?If the inside?s outside and there?s nothing wrong
with the outside, there can?t be anything wrong with
the inside if it?s no longer inside, but outside instead,?
explained the Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything.
?Look here,? exclaimed the reindeer, because the
trouble was getting awfully mixed up for him, ?if you
think my inside can be dragged outside and inside like
an old sock, you?re mistaken. Besides, I don?t like the
sound of it. So there!?
?All right, then,? returned the squirrel, ?have
indigestion.? He turned away as though it had all been
a waste of valuable time and walked off briskly towards
Olga?s hut.
?Here, wait a minute,? called out Ivan, who didn?t
like the idea of indigestion at all. ?Isn?t there anything
just a little bit simpler that I could do instead??
?Oh, well,? shouted back the squirrel, ?you won?t
put the inside outside, and you don?t want to give up
eating moss, and you don?t want indigestion, so the
only thing I can see for it is that you?ll have to diet.?
?Pardon?? asked Ivan, a bit bewildered.
?Diet!? shouted back the squirrel.
?What, the moss?? asked the reindeer.


impatiently and called out:
?Yes.? The next moment he was out of sight. He
had arrived at the door of the hut wh
IVAN AND THE SQUIRREL
The squirrel was a long way off now, but he turned


CHAPTER 111
All About the Wonderful Nut
it
I 'i 6
fYLGA was glad that spring had come at last, and
yet she was sad about other things. She was very
often thinking about the Little White Fox and Mr
Frost and all the others she had met.
The day when the Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything
called to see her he found her looking very sad indeed,
though she did brighten when she saw him.
?What has the Nut-from-Barcelona to tell you to-
day?? she asked him.
?Quite a lot. Quite a lot,? he answered importantly.
?It tells me that Olga wishes she could see the Little
White Fox again.?
?Oh, come,? said Olga, ?it doesn?t take a very
wonderful nut to tell that. I thought everybody knew
it.?
But the squirrel was not going to allow his nut to
look just like any ordinary nut, so he thought quickly
and said:
?Yes, but I haven?t finished all I was going to say.
I was just about to tell you that it looks very much as
though you will see the Little White Fox again soon.?
?Oh, do tell me when,? pleaded Olga.
?This year, next year, now or ? said the squirrel,
looking very wise indeed.
?Never!? finished Olga. ?Why, if that?s all the
answer the Nut can give, I don?t think much of it.
You might just as well have a game of touch-and-take
to find such an answer as that.?
?Very well, then, go and have a game of touch-and-
take,? grunted the squirrel, getting ready to leave in a
bad temper.


ALL ABOUT THE WONDERFUL NUT
But Olga didn?t want him to go, and besides, she
had only been teasing him. So she tried to make him
better tempered again.
?Oh, don?t go away,? she called after him. ?You?ve
promised to tell me all about the Nut-from-Barcelona.
Of course I was only joking just now. We all know
how wonderful it really is.?
So the squirrel came back. He wasn?t really bad
tempered, you know, only he couldn?t bear hearing any
one laugh about his nut.
?Wonderful! I should say so. Why,? he said, ?there?s
only one nut like this in every thousand nuts that grow
on one tree in a thousand.?
?Really?? said Olga. ?Then it must have been very
hard to find it.?
?Indeed it was,? agreed the squirrel. ?My father
was nearly all his life looking for it, and he knew
quite a lot about nuts. Even then he would never have
found it if it hadn?t been for a magician who lent him
a pair of magic spectacles. He wouldn?t have parted
with it for a gold-mine.?
?Wouldn?t it be dreadful if you lost it?? asked Olga.
?It is a big worry, you know,? admitted the squirrel.
?I don?t know what I?d do.? He seemed to think about
it very seriously before he said any more.
?I suppose the best thing to do if it did get lost would
be to find the Magician. I?ve his address somewhere.?
And he pulled out of his knapsack a heap of all sorts
of odds and ends, bits of string, a few rusty nails, and
a knife without any blades. At last he found a dirty
little scrap of paper, all creased, on which were a few
very faded words. ?Here it is,? said the squirrel, ?off
the Market Square, Barcelona,? and he held it up for
Olga to see.
I, dIUI /
dirty I/ / /
a few I j f /
, ?off 1 '
p for
// . #


But something did happen. Past the window there
seemed to fly all the colours of the rainbow, and the
next moment the door flew open and something
bounded into the room all streaked with red and blue
and yellow.
Both Olga and the squirrel jumped up and stared at
it for some minutes without speaking. Then the
squirrel leaned forward and poked it with his finger.
?What is it ?a rainbow?? he asked Olga.
But Olga shook her head and said she did not know.
And the coloured mystery which had been standing
quite still began to cry.
?I?l?m Ivan!? it gasped, as the tears splashed on
the ground.
Olga laughed and laughed.
?Well, anyhow, you mustn?t cry in here, Ivan, if
you?re going to cry in all those colours. Mother will
?Still, it might be very difficult to find the address,?
said Olga.
?Not a bit,? replied the squirrel, very pleased to
pretend he was so knowing; which wasn?t so very hard
to do, for so far as he could see there wasn?t much
danger of his ever going to Barcelona, and so he could
boast as much as he liked. ?At least it wouldn?t be
hard for any one like me,? he added. ?Just follow
your nose, you know. Just follow your nose,?
?Yes, that sounds all right,? agreed Olga, ?but what
if your nose happens to be pointing in the wrong
direction??
That was rather a puzzle for the squirrel and very
hard to answer. In fact, if something hadn?t happened
just then to make both of them forget everything about
the Nut-from-Barcelona, he would have looked very
foolish.


ALL ABOUT THE WONDERFUL NUT
think the painters have been and spilt all their paint.
However did you get in such a mess.?
It was Ivan. And he was in a state. One leg was
blue, and another was red. His head was yellow,
streaked with orange.
?It?s all him,? said Ivan, pointing to the squirrel.
?He said if I didn?t want to give up eating moss, I?d
have to dye it. So I?ve been dyeing it. Will you
please come and tell me which colour you think will
suit my digestion best. Myself I like the violet moss,
but it doesn?t taste very well.?
Then the squirrel understood. Outside at the spot
where he?d left the reindeer when he came to see Olga
were six little piles of moss, and each pile was dyed
a different colour. There were little basins of the dye
stuff standing about all over the place.
The squirrel winked at Olga, and although they
could hardly walk for laughing, they followed Ivan
out to look at the different colours.
?What are you laughing at?? suddenly demanded
Ivan, glaring at the squirrel.
?You!? laughed the squirrel. ?Ha, ha, ha! I can?t
help it!?
?But it?s all your doing,? grumbled Ivan. ?And
anyhow, the moss was green and didn?t suit me. I don?t
see anything funny in trying another colour. You told
me to dye it, didn?t you??
?No, I said you should d-i-e-t,? explained the
squirrel.
Ivan looked at the squirrel very queerly. Then he
went over to Olga. ?I think,? he whispered to her,
because he didn?t want to hurt the squirrel?s feelings,
?it?s time we saw a doctor about him.? He tapped his


head. ?His brain must be softening. By the way he?s
talking it must be as soft as a piece of putty.?
Olga laughed. ?You don?t understand,? she said.
?He told you to d-i-e-t, not to d-y-e it.?
But poor Ivan was getting very fogged. ?Told me
to dye it, not to dye it,? he muttered. ?I do believe
she?s as bad as he is.? And he began seriously to
wonder whether he had not better go for the doctor
himself.
?Let me explain what the squirrel means,? Olga
said. ?When he told you to diet he meant that you
could go on eating moss but that you would have to
eat it in moderation.?
?Where?s that?? asked Ivan.
?No, no,? laughed Olga. ?You?ve got it all wrong.
It means that you must eat only a little moss at a time.?
?Then why didn?t he say so?? demanded Ivan,
It took quite a long time to explain. But at last Ivan
said he understood, and they were all friends again.
Ivan, indeed, was only too glad to find that he could
still enjoy his moss, and made up his mind to eat less
but to have more meals a day.
He was so pleased that he started straight away
munching a big patch growing at his feet.


%
f
m
CHAPTER IV
Ivan Swallows the Nut
MOW it would have been quite all right if the
squirrel hadn?t suddenly taken it into his head to
turn a few somersaults. As you know, the Nut-from-
Barcelona was in the knapsack which the squirrel
always wore slung over his shoulder.
As the squirrel was turning the fourth somersault
the Nut rolled out without any one seeing it, and rolled
right into the patch of moss which Ivan was eating as
fast as he could. Suddenly there was a terrific crack,
and Ivan yelled:
?Oh, my hollow tooth,? and immediately began to
cry. Ivan often had toothache badly, so Olga knew
what was wrong, and went to fetch the oil of cloves,
hoping to make it better.
But the squirrel was even more upset than Ivan. He
was frantically feeling inside the knapsack for the
Wonderful Nut. ?It?s the Nut-from-Barcelona,? he
cried. ?Stupid Ivan has eaten the Nut-from-
Barcelona.?
Olga didn?t know what to do. Ivan was dancing
first on one foot and then on the other. He was nearly
mad with toothache. As for the squirrel, he couldn?t
keep still. He looked as if he was going to fly at Ivan
at any minute.
Olga tried to help the reindeer first. Besides the
toothache, the pieces of nut-shell were sticking in his
throat. So she had to give him oil as well, which was
a very messy business, because Ivan simply hated oil.
He managed to swallow a dose, and then sat dolefully
sucking at a raspberry-drop to take the taste away.
Then Olga tried to think of a way to comfort the
squirrel, but nothing was any use. He hurried back-
wards and forwards with his hands to his head.


?It?s dreadful, dreadful,? he kept saying. ?I, who
used to be known as the Squirrel-That-Knows-Every-
thing because I had the Nut-from-Barcelona, ought
now to be called the Squirrel-That-Knows-Nothing,
simply through a stupid reindeer. Why, I believe I?m
as stupid as Ivan now.?
?Wait a minute,? said Olga. ?You said a little while
ago that if you ever lost the Nut, all you would have
to do would be to go to Barcelona and find another.
You?ve even the address of the Magician to help you,
and know all about the way to go.?
?You mean I did know the way,? replied the
squirrel. ?But you forget that then I had the Nut and
so knew everything. Now that the nut is lost I don?t
even know which is east and which is west. Oh! it?s
simply dreadful? ?and again he started dashing back-
wards and forwards ??to think of the ruin that a silly
bag of moss like Ivan can do!?
The squirrel would not be comforted. So all that
night Olga lay awake trying to think of some way to
get to Barcelona. And every now and again she heard
the squirrel tearing up and down outside the hut. But
as for Ivan who had caused all the trouble, well, it?s a
pity to have to say so, yet the truth is that he soon
forgot all about the Nut and could be heard snoring
loudly through the night.
Early the next morning Olga was up. She had
thought of a plan.
?Look here, Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything,? she
j
* k
commenced
?Oh, please don?t call me that any more,? pleaded
the squirrel, ?because now I know less than Ivan.?
?Oh, don?t be silly,? replied Olga. ?Still, I always
have thought
the name rather too long. What if we


IVAN SWALLOWS THE NUT
call you Nutty? And look, I?ve thought of how we
can find which way to go for Barcelona.?
?Do you mean it?? asked Nutty, as his name now
was.
?Of course,? Olga told him. ?You remember Mr
Frost, don?t you? Well, he was very old and knew
quite a lot, so I shouldn?t be a bit surprised if he knew
the way.?
?Very likely,? agreed the squirrel, cheering up a bit.
Ivan sat, trying to look intelligent, with his feet
spread out wide. But his face was all swollen on the
side where he?d had toothache, so he wasn?t very
successful.
?Well, come on,? said Olga after they had looked at
each other for quite five minutes. ?If we are going
to make a start, we may as well go now.?
?But I can?t go to-day,? put in Ivan.
?Why not?? demanded the squirrel.
?Because it?s a Friday,? explained Ivan.
?Nonsense. What?s Friday got to do with it?? The
squirrel was getting quite angry now.
?Well, you never heard of a sailor starting a voyage
on a Friday, did you?? asked Ivan.
?I don?t know anything about that,? replied the
squirrel, ?and I don?t see what it has to do with it.
We?re not sailors, anyhow.?
?Oh, indeed!? sniffed the reindeer, ?I?m a reindeer,
and sailors and reindeers are both most unfortunate
people. My father used to sing a song about a sailor
and a reindeer that started a voyage on a Friday, and
the most awful things happened to them.?
?Nonsense,? exclaimed the squirrel, and would have
argued about it much longer if he had been able to
do so. Ivan, though, was doing his best to sing his
father?s song. It was very pathetic. When he came
to the sad parts the tears ran streaming down his face.
So far as can be remembered, this is the song:


The Admiral danced on the edge of the shore,
On the edge of the shore, on the edge of the shore,
He shook his fat fist and he cried and he swore,
On the edge of the shore, on the edge of the shore,
I?d lend you my wings, but they?re stuck on too tightly;
So run to the Reindeer, and ask him politely,
If he?ll kindly oblige you, and put out to sea.?
?Thanks for the tip,? said the Admiral,
?It?s first rate,
By the way, is it true you can navigate??
The Reindeer sat dozing not far from the scene,
Not far from the scene, not far from the scene,
He and his wife with the baby between,
Not far from the scene, not far from the scene.
When he heard of the Admiral?s terrible need,
He sprang to his feet and went off at top speed.
?Ha!? said the Admiral, ?I?m glad you?ve arrived.?
The Reindeer saluted, ?Aye, aye, sir,? he cried.
Then the Admiral showed him
The speck on the ocean,
?If we don?t hurry up she?ll be soon out of reach,
Come! your wife and the baby can starve on the beach.?
THE ADMIRAL?S TRIP
The Admiral stood on the edge of the sea,
On the edge of the sea, on the edge of the sea,
And he was as angry as he could be,
On the edge of the sea, on the edge of the sea;
His ship had gone sailing and left him behind,
Because he had treated the bo?sun unkind;
And the crew lined the rail and made faces at him,
And said he could come, but he?d just have to swim.
?I?ll catch you,? the Admiral roared,
?I?ll be blowed if I don?t,?
But the bo?sun explained, making faces anew,
?It?s my honest opinion, you?ll drown if you do.?
?If I may,? said a Penguin standing near by,
?Be permitted to mention, it?s useless to cry.


IVAN SWALLOWS THE NUT
The Reindeer at once made ready to sail,
Ready to sail, ready to sail,
By fixing a rudder in place of his tail,
In place of his tail, in place of his tail.
A few minutes after the anchor was stored,
And the Penguin came with the Admiral aboard,
?Now we are off, and we?ll soon let them see,
That it doesn?t quite pay to make faces at me.??
So the Admiral said,
And he meant it, I?m sure,
Because all the fishes have told me they knew,
He?d made up his mind to kill the whole crew.
Away went the three o?er the rolling main,
O?er the rolling main, o?er the rolling main,
At first it was fun, till it came on to rain,
Came on to rain, came on to rain;
The sea became rough and the Reindeer was sorry
He?d forsaken his wife in such a great hurry.
Do what he would he couldn?t slow down;
He flew past the ship and the lights of the town,
Flew off the track of the big sailing ships,
And this is the end of the pitiful tale,
For they?re still flying on in the teeth of a gale.


It made things very difficult, but Olga thought of a
way in which they could manage it nicely.
?Look here, Ivan,? she said, ?if you can?t go facing
north, the best thing to do is to go backwards. You
could then face the south and still be going north.?
Before he had finished Nutty was in tears as well,
and they sat on the rock together drying their eyes with
their handkerchiefs. The tears fell so fast that it
looked as though they would soon be able to go fishing
in the water.
?Come, come,? implored Olga, ?surely there isn?t
any reason for all this fuss. If you don?t want to go
to-day, I don?t suppose one day will make so much
difference and we can start early to-morrow.?
At that Ivan fetched a calendar. ?What?s the date
to-morrow?? he asked, as he began crossing off the
figures.
?June the third,? Olga told him.
?Well, that?s done it, we can?t go to-morrow either,
if it?s June the third,? said Ivan.
Both Olga and Nutty looked at him, too surprised to
ask him why.
?You see, it?s like this,? explained Ivan. ?No
reindeer would think of going in any direction except
pointing south on June the third. It all has to do with
the state of the moon.?
?With the state of the brain, you mean,? said Nutty,
in a voice that said clearly that he thought the reindeer
was perfectly mad.
?The brain may have something to do with it,?
agreed Ivan, solemnly. ?But I know that if a reindeer
goes facing north on June the third he has bad luck
for seven years. It?s the same as seeing the new moon
through glass.?


IVAN SWALLOWS THE NUT
?Good idea,? agreed Nutty.
?Good idea, indeed,? grumbled Ivan. ?It might be
if I were an acrobat. I?ve never seen a reindeer running
backwards before.?
?That?s the worst of you reindeers,? said Nutty.
?Stick-in-the-muds, that?s what I call you. Just
because you haven?t seen a thing you think it can?t be
done.?
?Well, clever,? retorted Ivan, ?since you know all
about it, you show me how to do it.?
?It?s easy,? answered Nutty, and to prove it he
walked and then ran backwards without the least
trouble. Olga, too, did the same, and it certainly did
look simple. But there was this difference: both Olga
and Nutty had only two legs each, and Ivan had four,
which makes it rather more difficult.
All the same, Ivan tried. The first time he went
clean over backwards, and the second time was very
little better than the first.
?You?ve all the day to practise in,? laughed Olga,
?so you don?t need to hurry.?
But, you know, Ivan could have practised for the
rest of his life without getting any better. It looked at
one time as though he wouldn?t be able to start on the
journey on the next day, but have to wait until June
the third was over.
Still, there?s no telling what can be done with magic,
any more than you can tell when there?s magic about.
On this day we?ve seen several wonderful things
happen?quite enough to make us believe that we?ll
see a lot more before the day is out.
We remember, too, that Ivan had
wonderful Nut-from-Barcelona, and
heard how magical that nut was.
swallowed the
everyone has


So after he had tried to run backwards without any
success several times, and was beginning to feel like
giving it up, he felt something very strange inside him.
?Stop!? he said suddenly. ?I believe something is
going to happen.?
Both Olga and Nutty looked at him, half expecting
the earth to open and swallow the reindeer. Nothing
like that happened, though, and after making some
very strange noises whilst his back went up and down
like a switchback, Ivan asked them to turn one of his
front legs round.
?Go on,? he said, ?you won?t break it. The joints
seem to be made of elastic.?
Olga and Nutty pulled and twisted and twisted and
pulled. Then suddenly Ivan?s leg went round and
settled into position with a loud click. Then they tried
the other front leg and the same thing happened to
that, so now the two front legs were facing backwards.
Ivan was so excited he forgot all about his hind legs.
?Now I can do it,? he cried, and immediately started
trying to run. With his front legs he went backwards
and with his hind legs he went forwards, so really he
remained in the same place, though he kicked up an
awful quantity of dust, and looked as though he was
doing his best to tie himself into a sailor?s knot.
?What?s the matter with me?? he asked after he had
been doing this for some time. He looked very alarmed
indeed. He?d been running so hard that clouds of
steam rose off him.
?It?s your hind legs,? Olga told him.
?Why, of course,? Ivan answered, brightening up at
once and again standing still. ?I did begin to think
I?d have to stay in this spot for the rest of my life.?
So Olga and Nutty commenced work on his hind
legs without wasting any more time, and soon they,


?
IVAN SWALLOWS THE NUT
too, were turned round so that each of Ivan?s knees
was at the back.
?That?s more like it,? Ivan told them. ?Now I shall
be able to run backwards quite easily.?
It was very silly, but the biggest trouble with Ivan
was that he didn?t think enough. Instead of just trying
a few steps to commence with, as you would, what must
he do but run backwards as hard as he could.
Of course, as he wasn?t looking in the direction that
he was running, he couldn?t see that Olga?s hut was
right behind him. So you can guess how surprised he
was when he suddenly went crash into the wall with
all his force. The next minute he was spinning through
the air in a very dazed state, and landed near the spot
where Olga and Nutty stood watching him.
?Who hit me?? he asked.
?Nobody hit you,? replied Olga. ?You?ve only been
trying to knock the house down. You?ll have to
practise a bit more, Ivan, before you start running
about at such a speed.?
So for the rest of the day Ivan walked about back-
wards very slowly. He couldn?t have gone any faster
if he tried, because his knees were so sore, and he felt
stiff all over.
21


CHAPTER V
Off to Find Mr Frost
'M'EXT morning was bright, and long before the early
birds had caught all the worms, Olga was up and
dressed. She and Nutty packed all the things they
thought they would want on their long journey, and
then went to where Ivan was dreaming of moss that
grew as big as trees and of giants that went around
with big hammers with which they banged reindeers?
legs.
?Come on, Ivan,? Olga called to him, and after
yawning and rubbing his eyes, Ivan stood up saying he
was quite ready to start.
He looked carefully at the sun to make sure he was
facing the south and Olga climbed on his back. She
sat facing the north, which was the direction in which
they wished to go, and then Nutty climbed up the
reindeer?s tail.
?All ready?? asked Ivan, and the next moment they
were off like a shot.
On they went, and soon they came to the spot where
V\ . 1 they had said good-bye to the Little White Fox. Ivan
v \' \ \ I ( thought it was now time for breakfast. So whilst he
\\ greedily started to eat all the moss within sight, Olga
V thought it would be a good chance to see whether she
could find the Little White Fox, so she and Nutty set
out to do so.


OFF TO FIND MR FROST
Had Olga been alone she might have searched for
days without finding the Little White Fox. She
couldn?t be expected to know all about animal magic.
But it was different having Nutty to help her. He told
her to leave it all to him, and he led her round rocks
and hills, past little trees, and in and out of all sorts
of queer places.
At last they came to a small cliff with a row of neat
little doors burrowed into it. Most of the doors were
closed, but each had a little stone scrubbed perfectly
white for a door-step in front of it.
Olga stopped at the very first little door and tried to
read the writing on a brass plate, but couldn?t make
anything of it.
The squirrel tugged impatiently at her sleeve.
?Wait,? said Olga. ?Why not ask here whether
they?ve seen the Little White Fox??
?Oh, I shouldn?t,? replied Nutty. ?The Mad Walrus
lives there, and he?s very unpleasant at times.?
?But all the same, he might be able to direct us,?
said Olga, and she gave a little rap-tap on the door.
Immediately a flap in the roof was pushed up, and
the head of the Mad Walrus popped out.
?Good morning, good night,? he said, and bobbed
back into his house again.
Olga gave another knock on the door. This time
one of the windows was jerked open very quickly and
the Mad Walrus was there again.
?How do you do?? he asked, and looked as if he
was about to disappear again. So Olga thought she?d
better be quick:
?Have you seen the Little White Fox?? she asked
The Mad Walrus didn?t seem to notice them
?All change for London,? he said.


m
They hurried along down the passage, and still the
end of it seemed just as far off as when they started.
?Oh, I wish we were at the end of this tunnel,? said
Nutty. No sooner had he said it than the ground and
the walls started to go flying backwards, and the little
lamps went twinkling by like the lights in the house
windows do when you are in a train. The air, too,
rushed by so quickly that it was all Olga could do to
keep her hat on.
Nutty whispered softly to Olga. ?He thinks he?s a
station master. Look at his porter?s cap.? Olga took
a step forward and said:
?Have you seen ?
But before she could finish the Mad Walrus rang a
little bell and said:
?All tickets, please.?
Next he hung out of his window and waved a red
flag:
?All stations to Australia,? he called out loudly.
?Oh, come on,? said Nutty, dragging Olga away.
?We shall never make any sense out of him.?
They hurried along past the other doors, and the last
Olga saw of the Mad Walrus, he was standing on his
head with one leg straight in the air and the other leg
bent.
?He thinks he?s a signal-post now,? Nutty told her.
Soon they came to a little hole which was almost
buried in the grass and into this the squirrel turned
with Olga close behind him. At first the tunnel was
so dark they couldn?t see anything, but after a while
they noticed that there was a row of very tiny electric
lights on each side, which seemed to stretch for miles
and miles.


OFF TO FIND MR FROST
You see, they were in the Wishing Gallery, though
neither of them knew it. There are only two in the
whole world. This was one, and another in China.
Had Nutty wished that the Little White Fox were
there, it would have suddenly appeared as if from
nowhere. What a pity it was they didn?t know.
The squirrel was some way in front. Now Olga
could see a round hole of light, which was very small
at first but grew bigger and bigger. It was the daylight
showing through the end of the tunnel.
The squirrel had just passed through the hole, and
in another minute Olga, too, would have been safely
out in the open, but just then there was a terrible noise
of falling rocks and earth. All the little electric lights
went out, and the daylight disappeared too, so that it
was completely dark. Olga stumbled forward, but a
moment later something hard hit her a terrific blow
on the head,
and she fell flat on the floor,


The Little White Fox Arrives
knew nothing more until she heard voices that
seemed a long way off. She had a very bad head-
ache and at first could not bear to open her eyes.
U I think she?ll be all right soon,? one of the voices
was saying, and another answered, ?I hope so.?
The voices seemed like those of people she knew
well, but she couldn?t remember clearly, and her head
ached worse when she tried to think. So she lay quite
still for a little while.
Gradually her head grew better, and at last she tried
opening her eyes slowly. When she did so the sight
she saw made her forget all about her head and she sat
up suddenly.
On one side sat the squirrel, rubbing her hand, and
on the other side sat ?whom do you think? But you?d
never guess. It was the Little White Fox himself.
?Ah, that?s better,? said Nutty.
?What?s happened?? asked Olga.


THE LITTLE WHITE FOX
?Sh! You mustn?t talk,? the squirrel told her.
?You?ll be better soon.?
So Olga kept quiet whilst the squirrel told her what
had happened. After he had passed through the end
of the tunnel he had heard an awful noise behind him,
and looking round, had seen the tunnel close up. At
first he didn?t know what to do, but the noise the falling
rocks made had brought all the animals who lived near
by hurrying to the spot. Amongst them had been the
Little White Fox, and together they had dug and dug
until they were able to drag Olga through into the
open.
Soon Olga felt much better. There was such a lot
to tell the Little White Fox, and so many questions to
ask. She finished by telling him how Nutty had lost
his wonderful Nut-from-Barcelona, and that they were
now on their way to find another.
?I?ve told him all that already,? said Nutty.
The Little White Fox hadn?t very much to do just
then. It was summer, and food was easy to find. For
a little while he thought in silence and then turned to
Olga.
?You know,? he said, ?I?d like to come with you to
Barcelona. I?ve heard a lot about the place. Besides,
whilst we?re looking for a magic nut we might find
several, and I?d certainly like to have one myself.?
?Why, that would be simply splendid,? said Olga.
Nutty agreed it would be lovely to have him with them
again.
So very soon the three started off to find the way
back to where Ivan was. No, they didn?t go through
the Wishing Tunnel. There was no need, as the Little
White Fox knew a much shorter way, and very soon
had guided them safely back.


Ivan, of course, was bound to be doing something
stupid. He was standing on his hind legs and trying
to touch his toes without bending his knees. He had
heard it was a good way of getting rid of unwanted fat.
He?d eaten moss with such a speed that he had
indigestion again, and very badly this time. Ivan
always promised never to eat too much or too quickly
when he had a pain, but as soon as the pain went and
he found himself amongst the moss again he quickly
forgot his promises and commenced eating as if he?d
been starving for months.
He, too, was glad to see the Little White Fox once
again, and now, as it was getting very late and there was
a long way to go before they came to where Mr Frost
lived, they all climbed on to Ivan?s back and away they
went, Ivan with his nose still pointing south and the
squirrel guiding him with his tail.
On and on they went until it seemed that Ivan had
grown a pair of wings and taken to flying.
Up the hills and down the hills. Over the rivers
which at first were running water, then, as they went
farther north, were of thick ice which never melted.
On and on till at last Nutty, who was keeping a sharp
look out, suddenly exclaimed:
?We?re nearly there! I can just see the smoke rising
out of the hole in the roof.?
?Where?? asked Ivan, turning round very suddenly
so that they all had to hold on tightly. Ivan was
beginning to get tired.


CHAPTER VR
At Mr Frost's Hut
'VT?ERY soon afterwards they were standing on the
* door-step of Mr Frost?s hut, and Olga was shaking
the bullfrog which was snoring heavily outside.
?Ceasar,? they yelled all together, for that was the
bullfrog?s name. After a great deal of shaking and
calling he stirred in his sleep and turned over.
?Oh, come on,? said Olga, ?it?s no use trying to wake
him. We?d better go and find Mr Frost. Very likely
he?s designing more carpets round at the back of the
hut.?
But Ivan, too, was tired. He gave a tremendous
yawn and leaned heavily against the side of the house.
He leaned so heavily that the house went sideways.
?Look out, Ivan!? called Olga. ?You?ve nearly
pushed the house over.?
Both she and Nutty rushed to the other side of the
house and tried to push it upright again. Ivan, hearing
Olga suddenly shout, jumped away, thinking the house
was falling on him; and as Olga and Nutty pushed
with all their might on the other side, it went over too
far, and now leaned on Ivan?s side.
?I?ll soon settle that,? said Ivan, and turning his back
to the house, he took a fast run at it.
Crash! Bang! Ivan as usual had overdone it. He
certainly settled the house. The roof came off in two
pieces. Half of it landed on his head and very nearly
killed him. It would have done so if it hadn?t been
the half of the roof with the hole in it. As it fell,
Ivan?s head popped through the hole, and the roof
fitted round his neck like a collar.
?Help!? he yelled. But the others were too busy
scrambling out from under the rest of the house.


So Ceasar looked very sheepish at that, because as
he was asleep when Ivan knocked the house over, he
didn?t really know whether he?d done it or not.
All this time Ivan was crying his eyes out. There
were two big bumps on his head where the roof had
hit him, and the worst of it was that now his head was
all swollen he couldn?t get it out of the hole, so he sat
with the roof round his neck.
You may be sure that Ceasar the bullfrog was well
awake now. He thought a ton of bricks had fallen
from the sky, and was ready to tear anybody to pieces.
He was so angry that he barked. And then Olga,
Nutty, and the Little White Fox crawled out from
under the ruins.
You can?t blame Ceasar for being bad tempered.
He?d been left to keep house, and now look at it. It
was more like a rubbish-heap than a house.
Olga told him they were sorry.
?Sorry!? he grumbled. ?Being sorry won?t put the
house together again.?
Things looked very black, and what would have
happened I don?t know, but Mr Frost, who had heard
all the noise of the house falling over, came hurrying
up at that moment.
?Dear bless me!? he exclaimed. ?Dear bless me, if
it isn?t Olga. Why don?t you ask them inside, Ceasar??
he inquired, as though he couldn?t see that the house
had fallen over.
?Ask them in!? repeated Ceasar. ?And which way
do we go in when the house has been knocked down
by the visitors??
?Oh, the house!? The little old man turned to look
at the ruins, and scratched his head. ?Very awkward,?
he said. ?Have you been sneezing again, Ceasar? You
ought to be more careful, you know. This is the second
time you?ve blown the house over.?


AT MR FROST'S HUT
?Dear me, dear me,? said the old man when he saw
Ivan sitting like that. He took off his glasses and
rubbed them vigorously with his beard. ?We must do
something about this at once.?
He thought for a little while and then he, Olga, the
squirrel, and Ceasar all caught hold of a corner each
and pulled as hard as they could to see whether they
could get the roof off Ivan?s neck. They pulled and
they pulled.
?I believe it?s coming,? gasped Nutty.
It was quite true that it was coming. But so, too,
was Ivan?s head. He had still some of the magic from
the Wonderful Nut left in him and now as they pulled
one way and Ivan tugged the other, his neck began to
stretch and stretch.
?Look at him,? screamed the Little White Fox, who
stood watching everything that was going on. ?He?s
turning into a giraffe.?
?Tut, tut,? exclaimed Mr Frost. ?This will never
do.?
They all let go of the roof together and poor Ivan?s
neck suddenly flew back small again, just like when
you stretch a piece of elastic and let go one of the ends.
?Woh!? he cried, for you may be sure it was all very
painful for Ivan.
?The only other way I can see is to leave the roof
round Ivan?s neck when we rebuild the hut,? said the
old man, who was very worried.
?But we can?t leave him like that,? pointed out Olga,
?with his head outside and the rest of him inside the
hut.?
?It would certainly be very awkward, most
awkward,? agreed the old man. ?And we?d have to
climb on to the roof every time we fed him. It?s a most
unfortunate state of affairs.?


And all the while Ivan cried as if his heart would
break.
?Perhaps,? Olga suggested, ?it might be worth
trying a few poultices on his head.?
It didn?t seem a bad idea, so for the next hour they
tried tying steaming hot poultices round Ivan?s neck.
Soon the swellings started to go down and after a big,
big struggle, Ivan managed to get his head out of the
hole.
?The trouble with you, Ivan,? said Nutty, ?is you?re
getting too fat. I told you to go easy on the moss.?


AT MR FROST'S HUT
Then they tried to put the house together again with
a little seccotine to help. But it was no use. No sooner
had they put the roof up than the sides fell in again.
?It?s not a bit of use,? cried Mr Frost. ?But it
doesn?t matter. I?ve often thought of moving to another
house. And we might be able to let this one to some-
body else.?
So he painted a neat little sign which said, ?This
house to let. Apply Mr Frost,? and placed it on top
of the ruins.
Now he had time to ask the others why they were
all there, and Olga told him all about the loss of the
Wonderful Nut, and how they had made up their
minds to go to Barcelona to find another.
?We thought you might be able to tell us which is
the best way to go. Nutty has the address of the
Magician, who lives just off the Market Square,
Barcelona. But which way do we go from here, that?s
the question.? Olga finished her story and waited for
Mr Frost to answer.
He looked from one to the other and kept saying
?Marvellous!? After a while he turned to Olga.
?Let me see. Barcelona. Isn?t that somewhere near
Rome??
Olga wasn?t sure, but she thought it might be.
?I wonder whether you can tell me,? the old man
asked. ?Do you happen to know whether there?s still
an Emperor in Rome by the name of Nero??
Olga told him she?d heard the name, but didn?t know
much about him.
?Marvellous!? the old man said again. ?You know,
years and years ago, oh, when I was quite young, I had
an order from the Emperor Nero to weave the biggest
and most beautiful carpet ever seen for his palace. He
said I was to carry on making it bigger and bigger


until he came to fetch it. The larger it was the better,
he said. Well, I worked on that carpet for years. It
became so large that I didn?t know where to keep it.
And still no one came for it. At last there was so
much carpet about the place that there was hardly
room to move. Carpet here; carpet there. On the
floor: on the roof. Outside the hut and inside the hut.
Here,? he said suddenly, ?come with me and I?ll show
you it.?
Of course Olga thought she was going to see some-
thing huge, but as she followed Mr Frost round to the
back of the hut and across the field, she couldn?t see
any sign of so enormous a carpet.
Mr Frost led them over to a corner and pointed to
what looked like just an ordinary sized one.
?There it is,? he said. ?Isn?t it beautiful??
?But you said it was an enormous carpet, and this is
quite a small one,? said Olga.
?Wait a minute, wait a minute.? Mr Frost laughed
and wagged his finger knowingly. ?It used to be a
very large one. The biggest carpet in the world. But
after I had waited years for someone to come and pay
for it I couldn?t go on for ever like that. So I cut a
piece off each year for interest.? He seemed to think
that very clever, forgetting that even if any one did
come for it they wouldn?t be likely to want it after
pieces had been cut off it.
?Well, you see,? he went on, ?I thought that if this
Barcelona of yours happened to be near Rome, I might
just as well take the carpet there myself and go with
you. Especially now that the house has been knocked
down.?
Olga thought it a splendid idea, and so did all the
others. It would be just like a beautiful adventure if
they all went together.


AT MR FROST'S HUT
And so it was arranged. First they would have a
few hours? sleep, and then set off in earnest to find
Barcelona. Mr Frost packed up a few things he
thought they might want on the journey, and didn?t
forget to include a small compass, though nobody
understood how it worked, because it always seemed to
point in the same direction.


CHAPTER VIH
Off to Barcelona
they had rested, they all made ready for the
long journey. Mr Frost hurried away to fetch the
carpet he had made for the Emperor Nero, and had
some trouble rolling it, because, as you know, his
carpets were made of snow, and as soon as he started
to roll it, it commenced to crack, but in the end he
managed it.
It was all very well until Ivan saw the little old man
come struggling along dragging the carpet with him.
He immediately jumped to the conclusion that he was
expected to carry them all on his back and the carpet
as well. And that started him off grumbling.
?What do you take me for, a furniture-removal
van?? he asked. ?I don?t mind one or two passengers,
but when it comes to being turned into a bus and a lorry
all in one, it?s . .
?What are you grumbling about?? asked Nutty.
?Anyway, it?s all your fault, because if you hadn?t lost
the Nut we shouldn?t have to go to Barcelona for a
new one.?
?I lost the Nut?? burst out the reindeer. ?Well, I
like that. I?ve never even had it. You?re the one who
lost it,? he said, pointing to the squirrel.
?How could I, if I hadn?t the Nut when it was lost??
demanded Nutty.
And that was too hard for the reindeer to answer, so
he said:
?I don?t know. How could you??
?Oh, be quiet,? demanded Nutty.
There was no need for Ivan to get excited. The old
man had never even thought of riding on his back. As
soon as he joined them he said that as there were so
many, the best thing to do was for all to walk.


OFF TO BARCELONA
Then another delay took place. It was Ivan again.
The date was no longer June the third so there was no
need for him to walk backwards, and he now tried
walking in the proper direction. But it was just as
hard as it had been to walk backwards in the beginning,
and the only way to get over it was for the others to
turn his legs round once again. This took some time,
because he?d been still so long that his legs were becom-
ing very stiff. They pulled and twisted one leg at a time
until they managed to put Ivan right.
?Now I think we?re ready,? said Mr Frost. ?What
we?ve to do is to walk south until we come to the first
signpost that says ?To Barcelona.? ?
He took out the compass and turned it round until
the finger was pointing south, and they all started to
walk in the direction it showed. Mr Frost held the
compass in one hand and had the carpet tucked under
the other arm.
Goodness knows where they would have arrived had
they gone on like that very long. You see, the finger
of a compass always points north, no matter how you
turn the compass round. If it didn?t the compass would
be no use at all to sailors.
After they?d walked for half an hour in the same
direction, Ivan began sniffing:
?It?s getting colder,? he said.
?Then we must be wrong,? said Olga, ?because if
Barcelona is in the south the weather should now be
getting warmer.?
Mr Frost stopped and looked very puzzled.
?But the compass is still pointing to the south,? he
told them, staring down at it.
?I never did think much of these new-fangled ideas,?
remarked the Little White Fox. ?I?m sure we must
be going north instead of south, because my whiskers
are getting all stiff with the frost.?


The little old man?s beard was also frozen into a row
of icicles, so he should have known better. He gave
another look at the compass, and was about to throw
it away in disgust, when he suddenly changed his mind
and handed it over to Ceasar.
?Here, you take it,? he told him, ?and wear it for
a wrist-watch.?
Which is just what Ceasar did, though nobody ever
heard him telling the time, for he couldn?t very well.
It was soon settled and they all turned round to
commence walking in the opposite direction. It seemed
as though this time they really were right, and that if
they kept walking long enough they would be bound to
reach Barcelona.
They walked on and on and soon they had left the
snow behind them. Every day it became warmer and
warmer. As the heat increased it became more and
more difficult to walk because, you see, they were all
dressed in their winter clothes.
Of course it?s a long way from Lapland to Barcelona.
Long before you get anywhere near the city the
weather changes completely. Instead of snow-fields
you come to beautiful fields of corn, shady woods, and
forests, and everywhere is bathed in sunshine.
It was certain they couldn?t go all the way to
Barcelona in their winter clothes. One day when it
seemed hotter than usual, the Little White Fox stopped
and sat down on a large stone.
?I think it?s time we took off our overcoats,? he said,
and started to unbutton his fur coat.
?I thought there was something wrong,? remarked
the old man. And he, too, took off his long leather
coat.
All the others did the same, except Ceasar and Ivan.
Ceasar had never been so far south before. Instead of


others carried theirs on their arms. _
Mk MW y \ W jj
�bbhmbh^^
'? ? ?J^T'
OFF TO BARCELONA
feeling hot he thought the weather was getting colder,
and kept rubbing his hands together to get warm.
As for Ivan, you couldn?t expect him to think of
bringing any summer clothes. He still wore his heavy
coat, because he had nothing else to put on, and he was
so hot in it that clouds of steam rose off his back when
the sun was shining. There was only one way to help
him, and Mr Frost did so by giving him a hair-cut all
over with a pair of gardening shears.
After that was finished they started out again. Ceasar
wore Mr Frost?s overcoat round his shoulders and the


CHAPTER DC
The Magic Organ
'T'HEY crossed bridges and streams. They walked
through forests and across wide open plains. One
day, when they were just about to enter a large wood,
they all stopped suddenly. Over the air came floating
the most beautiful music. It was soft and sweet at first
and then it grew louder, till the trees seemed to throb
with the tune. It sounded at times as though an organ
were being played ever so far off. The next minute it
seemed to be close beside them.
Olga looked at Mr Frost. His eyes were staring
straight before him, and he looked as if he could see
nothing of the things that surrounded him.
Ivan looked as bewildered as if the trees had sud-
denly turned into little boys and girls. How long they
would have stood like this it is difficult to say had not
the bullfrog begun to howl dismally, like some little
dogs do when they hear music.
That broke the spell. Mr Frost threatened to send
Ceasar to bed at once if he did not stop, and turned
to speak to Olga.
?It must be the Magic Organ,? he said. ?I?ve heard
travellers talk of it at times. Come, we must try to
find what makes the music.?
But the sound seemed to be coming from all direc-
tions at once. No matter which way they turned, it
was just the same. So they tried walking in a big
circle, and in this way entered the wood.
Very soon they came to a long lane. On each side
was a row of trees. But they did not look like ordinary
trees. Each had a piece cut out of the trunk, which
seemed hollow.
?This is the Magic Organ,? cried Mr Frost. ?Look,
each tree is shaped like an organ-pipe.?


THE MAGIC ORGAN
But what took their attention even more was a very
queer-looking man in ever such a weird dress. It had
long bell-sleeves and all over it were embroidered
music notes and flutes. He was most likely the Organist.
Besides, his hair was very long, and all musicians have
long hair.
He held a little wand in his hand and skipped
nimbly up and down the lane in front of the trees, just
like the band conductor does in front of his musicians.
Olga and the others stood watching without a word.
For some time the Organist took no notice of them.
Presently, when he came near enough to speak, he told
them it would not be long before he had finished the
tune, and then skipped back up the lane again.
Soon, with a loud crash, it was over, and the music
died away to a whisper. Then the Organist came
towards them, holding his pointed hat in his hand, and
wiping the perspiration from his forehead.
?Musicians?? he asked.
?Oh, no,? replied Olga. ?WeTe on the way to
Barcelona and heard the wonderful music.?
?Barcelona?? the Organist repeated. ?Long way
from here.?
He might have said more, but something was hap-
pening to the carpet Mr Frost was carrying under his
arm. You?ll remember it was made of painted snow.
It had been getting soft all the time the weather
became warmer, and now, as they stood in the wood
where it was very hot, it was fast melting into a stream
of water. Mr Frost, in fact, was wet to the skin.
?What?s the matter?? asked the Organist, noticing
that Mr Frost?s sleeve was all red. ?Has the queer
looking dog bitten you?? pointing to Ivan.
?What, Ivan?? said Mr Frost. ?Oh, no. Ivan
wouldn?t bite, and he?s not a dog. He?s a reindeer. It?s


?Dear me, how ignorant people are nowadays,?
replied the Organist. ?Well, I?m Gusto, and I control
the winds. That?s how I play the organ. I blow a
little wind into the trees, and you can hear the music
for miles and miles.?
?But you should hear Brother Blow. He plays all
the heavy notes. He makes the gales. Sometimes we
play a duet. We?ve a great favourite, ?The Hurricane,?
the carpet. It?s beginning to melt, and the colours are
running. It?s a carpet I?ve made for the Emperor
Nero, and I?m taking it to his palace in Rome.?
?Then you?ll have to find something to put it in, or
you?ll never get it there. Here,? the Organist added,
handing him a bucket, ?put it in this.?
Now, I must stop the story for a minute to explain
how the bucket managed to be there, because you know
as well as Ido that buckets don?t grow on trees. Well,
the truth is that some wandering gipsies, who used the
bucket to wash in, had been on the spot the day before,
and when the organ had started to play they?d been
so frightened that they?d run away and forgotten to
take the bucket with them.
So Mr Frost placed what was left of the carpet into
the bucket and squeezed as much as he could from his
coat. The Organist waved his wand and said that
would stop the carpet getting any smaller.
?Did you say he was a reindeer?? asked the Organist.
?I wonder whether he?s the fellow who brings the rain,
because if he is he must be a relation of mine.?
Olga explained that Ivan had nothing to do with
rain, and asked the Organist what his name was.
?I thought you knew.? The Organist looked a trifle
disappointed. ?Surely you?ve heard of Gusto, who
sends the winds??
But Olga hadn?t.


THE MAGIC ORGAN
by Blow with Gusto. Then, my word, it?s time to hold
on to your hats, and the ships rock and roll on the seas.?
?Wonderful, wonderful,? said Mr Frost.
?Now, you want to go to Barcelona,? continued
Gusto. ?It will take you years to get there if you walk,
and you?ll probably get lost or fall into a river and get
drowned.?
?Excuse me,? said Ivan, ?I think I?ll be going home.
My mother always warned me not to get my feet wet,
and I?d like to be home at any rate for Christmas.?
?Oh, don?t worry,? Gusto told him. ?Brother Blow
and I will make it easy for you. We?ll have you there
in half an hour.?
?In half an hour!? said Olga. ?But how??
?It?s simple. We?ll blow you there,? explained
Gusto. ?Now all stand in a circle and hold hands.
Then Brother Blow and I will work up a double
hurricane. Up into the air you?ll go, and we?ll drop
you down in Barcelona in time for tea.?
They did as they were told and stood in a circle.
?Now bend your heads together,? commanded
Gusto. ?There, that?s right. Now, you see, you?re just
like a big umbrella, and when we turn on the wind
you?ll go sailing away over the clouds.?
He rapped on the ground. ?Hey, Brother Blow,
send along a nice brisk northerly gale.?
Nothing could be seen of Brother Blow. He was
down underground, looking after the works, or what-
ever it is that has to be done to manufacture the wind.
Perhaps he has to take care of the fires. Or for all I
know the wind may be brought to him in thick gas-
pipes. Then he would simply have to turn on a tap.
There came first a gentle rustling of leaves which
grew more and more until Olga, Mr Frost, and all the
others were gently lifted off their feet. Soon it was
blowing quite a gale and they were all high in the air.
K^yjr'


Jj f JJ V Ceasar the bullfrog sniffed
jr y* /c*re getting-
-A \ s smell the onions.?
/Jx" ave been
all the onions su
\\ mat you?re not far from Spain.
Olga had just time to see Gusto the Organist waving
to them from the ground before the tree-tops hid him
from sight
The wind carried them along at a very fast speed.
The earth looked a long way off. Towns and villages
went flashing by, and soon a huge mountain suddenly
seemed to grow up from nowhere, and it looked as if
they were going to bump into it. But the wind lifted
them even higher and they skimmed over the top of
the mountain without touching it. It was covered with
snow, and Ivan thought there?d been a mistake and that
they were back in Lapland. But the mountain was
soon out of sight and the snow all gone.
They flew on like this for hundreds of miles until
?We?re getting near to Spain,? he told them. ?I can
He must have been right, too, because now they
could all smell the onions strongly, which is a sure sign


vjy < r v
CHAPTER X
Ivan Becomes a Bullfighter
MOW it is true that the wind had helped them along
~ their journey at a very fast rate, but it must have
been too difficult for Gusto to see when they had arrived
at Barcelona. Or perhaps something went wrong with
Brother Blow?s machinery. Whatever was the cause,
the wind carried them too far, and when it did sud-
denly drop it let them fall straight into the middle of
a bullring in Madrid, where the King and his people
were watching a bullfight.
The bullfighter was having a very trying time. The
bull had made a fierce rush at him and was just about
to toss him out of the ring when Ivan landed square
on the bull?s back.
That was a great surprise for the bull, who hadn?t
expected to be attacked from the skies. He was so
upset about it that he sat down and commenced to cry,
and the bullfighter felt so sorry for him that he went
up and kissed him. So they became friends.
It was a great relief to Benito, the bullfighter. After
he had made it up with the bull he came over to Ivan
and dropped on one knee.
?Most noble and valiant sir,? he said. ?I owe my
life to you. You are a bullfighter of the highest rank
in the whole of Spain. Here,? he added impulsively,
?take my golden chain. I am no longer worthy of
wearing it.?
He placed the chain round Ivan?s neck and saluted
him. The bull seemed to get an idea that Ivan was
about to start a quarrel with him and tore screaming
out of the ring.
Now when the King and all his people saw how Ivan
had saved Benito?s life and how Benito had taken off
his golden chain and placed it round the reindeer?s


neck, they all rose from their seats and hailed him with
a mighty shout. Nothing would satisfy the King but
that Ivan should walk across the ring and stand beneath
the Royal seat. It was whilst the King was bending
over the rails to ask him whether he would accept the
position of Royal Bullfighter that his crown, which
was of solid gold and covered with diamonds and
rubies, fell off his head and would have been broken
on the ground had not Ivan cleverly caught it on one
of the spikes of his horns and given it back to the King.
Of course this made him even more of a favourite:
?Dear, dear,? murmured the King, ??my crown is
getting too small for me. Get the Royal crown maker
to stretch it a little.?
After that His Majesty couldn?t do enough for Ivan.
He insisted on the reindeer living in special apartments
at the palace. Olga, Mr Frost, and the others lived in
a little house just outside.
Ivan used to have all his meals with the King and
Queen, and the Royal tailors were set to work day and
night making him a most gorgeous suit of plum-
coloured velvet. And he wore a beautiful golden sword
by his side which had a nasty habit of getting between
his legs and tripping him up.
Now I come to a very sad part. I wouldn?t tell you
anything about it if I could possibly avoid doing so, but
as I have told you the truth so far perhaps it is better
you should know.
The fact is that all this glory went to Ivan?s head.
Yes! He put on such airs he would hardly speak to
poor Nutty.
But pride always comes before a fall, and something
very unpleasant was in store for Ivan. Perhaps it served
him right; I do not know.
It happened that the King had a son. When the
Prince saw how the King favoured Ivan, he became


IVAN BECOMES A BULLFIGHTER
very jealous, and one day he spitefully suggested to
the King that it was time they had another bullfight,
especially as they had such a brave Royal bullfighter.
You see, he was hoping that Ivan might be killed.
The King thought it a good suggestion, and the
Prince sent his soldiers all over Spain to find the
fiercest bull to be had.
The great day came and all Madrid was decked in
flags. The bullring was crowded long before the time
for the bullfight, and the people waited impatiently for
the King to arrive.
Olga and Mr Frost were there, and so were Nutty,
the Little White Fox, and Ceasar, the bullfrog. And
they all felt very frightened because of Ivan. They
knew how fierce the bull was, because they had seen
him break away from the Prince?s soldiers and knock
a whole street of lamp-posts over, just to show his nasty
temper.
?If Ivan gets out of this with a whole skin, he?ll be
lucky,? said Mr Frost, sadly.
?Well, it?ll be his own fault,? answered Nutty, who
naturally felt a little bitter about Ivan.
There was no time to say anything more. The King
and Queen and the Prince had taken their seats, and
the King?s trumpeters, all dressed in scarlet and gold,
rode into the centre of the ring. They played on their
trumpets to let the people know the bullfight was about
to begin.
Into the ring walked Ivan, swaggering along in his
bright velvet costume. The trumpeters went away, and
the Queen and all the ladies of the Court threw flowers
down to Ivan, who stood bowing and blushing all over
his face.
Let us try to get over all that followed as quickly as
we can. As Ivan stood throwing kisses to one of the
young princesses a door was opened at the far end of


, r
i r\
the ring and in rushed the most ferocious bull you?ve
ever imagined. His eyes were red with anger, and fire
came from his mouth. He had heard of the new bull-
fighter and meant to show him a few things. He now
dashed round the ring looking for him. But he took
no notice of Ivan, thinking he was part of the decora-
tions. So Ivan thought he was afraid, and gave him a
playful little tap on the back. The bull just flicked his
tail round as though he were brushing a few flies away.
Then Ivan, getting bolder, gave him a real hard dig
with his sword, and the bull kicked out his hind legs,
lifting Ivan off the ground.
Poor Ivan now began to feel nervous. ?You can?t
touch me,? he called out. ?I?ve my fingers crossed.?
But the bull only understood Spanish, so he didn?t
know what Ivan said.
Poor Ivan?s knees knocked together and the bull
went right to the other end of the ring, took a good look
at Ivan, and came at him at such a speed that Ivan
hadn?t time to get out of the way.
Crash! Bang! The bull had tossed Ivan right into
the air, clean through the roof, and the King and all
his people last saw Ivan sailing over the roofs of
Madrid, into the olive groves beyond.
Olga, Mr Frost, and the others left the bullring at
once and took the first train to the spot.


r "N
CHAPTER XI
The Magician Saves Ivan
TT is very, very strange, but it happened that the
**? Magician who lived usually off the Market Square
in Barcelona, was taking a holiday in the country to
study magic. You can?t study very well in a big city,
you know. There are so many interruptions.
Well, this is the strange part. Just at the very
moment that Ivan was about to be tossed by the bull,
the Magician had an idea that he needed some help.
He was standing with his hands raised upwards and
as he stood like this he muttered a magic spell. It was
a secret one, known only to himself, so I cannot tell you
what it was. But what he wanted was a living animal
for an experiment. And the next minute Ivan came
hurtling through the air and dropped right at the
Magician?s feet.
The Magician at once began to study his Black Book
of Magic to see why he wanted the help, and he was
still studying when Olga and the others reached the
spot.
All this time Ivan had been lying as still as a log.
His beautiful velvet coat was torn to ribbons, and he
no longer looked like the brave Ivan who had entered
the bullring.
All this made Olga very sad. Indeed, they all felt
upset, and in the silence you could hear their tears
dropping with a splash on the ground.
It was this that first made the Magician look up from
his book.
?There, there,? he said, very kindly, ?just watch me
make him well again.?
He took from his pocket a little packet of greyish
powder and poured it on the ground beside Ivan.
''s^k
1))^s


4^^
Then he made some strange passes and said something
into his long white beard. The grey powder burst into
a tall bluish flame and vanished.
The Magician looked anxiously at Ivan. But Ivan
lay just as still as before.
They all thought it was brave of the squirrel. He
started at once to prepare for his return to Madrid,
and the Magician, just as Nutty was about to start,
handed him a pair of curious looking spectacles. They
had no lenses, yet when you put them on you could see
through anything, through the trees and deep under
the ground.
?Do you know how he came to be like this?? he
asked Mr Frost.
They told him.
When they had finished, he said, ?That explains it,?
and once more he read his Black Book of Magic and in
the fourth chapter, on page 36, he found what the
trouble was.
?What we need before we can do anything,? he told
them, ?is one grey hair from the bull?s tail.?
?But isn?t that going to be very difficult?? asked Mr
Frost.
?Yes, it will be difficult, but everything worth having
is difficult, and we must get it somehow,? answered the
Magician.
So they all sat down to find out what was the best
way of getting the grey hair from the bull?s tail.
Nutty sat listening to the others for a long time, and
at last he stood up to speak.
?I am the smallest,? he said, ?so I have the best
chance of getting into the bullring without being seen.
I will go back at once and see whether I can pull the
hair out whilst the bull is asleep.?


THE MAGICIAN SAVES IVAN
?Here, take these with you, young fellow,? said the
Magician, ?they will help you to find the grey hair,
and while you are wearing them you will be invisible
to other people. But, whatever you do, do not lose
them, for if you do you will never be able to find your
way out of the bullring.?
So Nutty set off, and they all gave him a loud cheer
as they saw him go. By the time darkness had fallen
he was back in Madrid and waiting for an opportunity
to get into the bullring.
As he waited, Benito the bullfighter came out with
a friend, but Nutty did not speak to him. Instead, he
put on the Magic Spectacles and rushed past the two
men into the bullring.
?What?s that?? asked Benito.
?Oh, only a rat, perhaps,? replied his friend. ?Here,
rats!? he cried to a tired-looking dog which imme-
diately became very much alive, sniffing and running
all over the place. But he couldn?t find Nutty, because
the Magic Spectacles made him invisible.
He went very carefully until he came to the centre
of the ring, where the fierce bull was being fed with
asparagus-tips on toast by the young Prince, who was
so pleased because the bull had tossed poor Ivan sky-
high.
Nutty stole up quietly and took hold of a long grey
hair in the bull?s tail. Then he pulled with all his
might.
But nothing happened except that the bull looked
very surprised at the Prince and wondered whether the
Prince was playing a trick on him.
Nutty took a deep breath and gave a harder pull.
Out came the hair and the bull, now sure that the
Prince was up to no good, bent his head down and
suddenly sent him rolling over and over in the sand.


The squirrel didn?t stop to see what had happened
to the Prince. He turned and hopped out of the bull-
ring as fast as he could, and soon afterwards was safely
back with the Magician.
?Now we?ll soon have him right again,? said the
Magician, turning once again to page 36 of the Black
Book of Magic.
He lit a fire of dried sticks and on the top placed a
large iron cauldron. Into that he poured some water
and another packet of powder. All the time he stirred
with the bough of a green tree, muttering magic words
as he did so. When the pot was boiling he threw the
grey hair of the bull into it and stirred for another ten
minutes.
Then he plucked a long hair from Ivan?s tail and
threw that, too, into the pot.
Such a gurgling and spluttering went on. Steam and
blue flames rose from the pot and looked like evil
spirits. In fact, the Magician said that the evil spirits
of the bull were gradually being beaten.
Soon after this they noticed that Ivan was stirring.
The flames and smoke died down, and suddenly Ivan
yawned and sat up. ?Is it time to get up?? he asked,
and looked round very puzzled.
?That?s the style,? answered the Magician. ?Ups-a-
daisy.?
Of course Ivan was petted and fussed over quite a
lot by Mr Frost and Olga. All of them were glad to
have him back again safe and sound, and if Nutty did
feel just a wee bit important, I don?t think any one
would say it was wrong of him. So much magic had
got into Ivan?s blood that he wanted to go back to
Madrid and fight the bull all over again:
?Just to teach him that fair?s fair, and to pay him
back for hitting when I had my fingers crossed.?


THE MAGICIAN SAVES IVAN
Olga had to remind him that they hadn?t come all the
way to Spain to fight bulls, and that they still had to
reach Barcelona to find the Wonderful Nut. And that
reminded Nutty that he hadn?t returned the Magician?s
magic glasses.
Now you remember that the squirrel had spoken of
a pair of magic spectacles which his father had
borrowed from a magician when he found the first
Wonderful Nut ?the one that Ivan had swallowed.
Nutty had been so busy plucking the hair from the
bull?s tail that up till then he hadn?t thought that the
Magic Spectacles he?d used were the very same as those
his father had borrowed, but now, as he thought it over,
the idea came to him.
?Excuse me, sir,? he said, as he handed them back,
?but did you ever lend these glasses to a gentleman who
was searching for the Nut-from-Barcelona??
The Magician looked it up in his diary and found
that it was on August the fourth, 1892.
?Why, then,? joyfully exclaimed Nutty, ?you?re the
very man we?re looking for,? and he explained the
accident that had happened to the Nut and why they
were there.
?Indeed, indeed,? replied the Magician, ?I?ll be
only too glad to help. But the nut crop has been very
poor for some years. Let me consider what?s best to
be done.?
He turned to the Gardener?s Hints to be found at
the back of the Black Book of Magic and read very
carefully. ?What we shall have to do,? he told them,
?is to plant a tree specially for you.?
?But won?t it take a long time to grow?? asked Mr
Frost.
?I must be home for Christmas,? put in Ivan.
?Oh not more than two hundred years,? replied the
Magician, as though he were speaking of five minutes.


So the clock was set, and instantly the hands went
revolving fast enough to be seen. The hours went flying
by, and the days, too. At first it seemed very strange,
for one minute it would be daylight and the next it
would be dark as night. This puzzled them for some
time, until Olga explained that when it became dark
another day was ended. It was a bit difficult, too,
because when it was dark Ceasar would start lighting a
candle, but it was always broad daylight again before
he had it properly alight. And no sooner had he blown
it out than it was dark again.
So you see, Ceasar was kept busy. If it did no other
good, it at least kept him out of mischief.
Then the Magician got to work. ?Hey,? he shouted,
?Bimbo! Jimbo! Slimbo!? and after a minute started
talking as though his servants were before him, though
none of the others could see any one.
?Bring the seed-bag,? he ordered. ?I want the seed
of a Barcelona nut-tree planted at once.?
?No, no, no,? he went on, irritably. ?You?ve planted
the seed the wrong way up. You?ll have the tree
growing downwards if you?re not careful. We?ve only
two hundred years to wait, so there?s no time to lose.?
Olga began to wonder whether the Magician had
gone mad. But the truth is that he was wearing the
Magic Spectacles and could see a lot more than the
others. He must have heard her thoughts (magicians,
you know, have strange powers of hearing), because he
handed her the glasses and told her to look.
And when she did so a most extraordinary sight met
her eyes. Close beside her two strange little elves were
?Gracious!? called out Ceasar, ?we shall all be dead
long before that.?
?Not at all,? answered the Magician. ?All we have
to do is to put the clock over to full speed and the
time will soon .pass.?


55
THE MAGICIAN SAVES IVAN
digging a tiny hole in the ground, whilst the third was
holding a tiny seed.
Mr Frost was the next to look. ?Wonderful,
wonderful,? was all he could say.
The seed was planted, and no sooner had the elves
covered it with earth than a tiny green shoot appeared
above the ground.
?I think we can leave it now,? said the Magician.
?You?d better all come along to my home and sleep for
a hundred years.?
The house, as you remember, was off the Market
Square, Barcelona, and they all followed the Magician
till at last he said the house was reached.


CHAPTER XII
The Singing House
TT was a very startling kind of house. You never
A knew what it was about to do next. As they
approached the front door, two trees which grew one
on each side of the door, bowed like a couple of foot-
men. The door-bell rang without any one touching
it, and the door instantly swung open without a sound.
The Magician led the way in and the door closed by
itself after them.
It made you feel creepy. As soon as you were inside
you felt somehow that there were dozens of eyes look-
ing down on you. The boards creaked, but not like
the boards in an ordinary house. They kept it up all
the time.
Olga listened, because she felt sure that the boards
were actually talking, and after a while she caught
what some of them were saying.
?Now, then,? said the broadest board of them all, to
a very young and slender one next to it, ?what are you
sniffling for??
?Oh, father,? replied the young and slender one,
?I?m disappointed. I thought it was the manicurist
come to trim my nails.?
?Bah!? replied the first floor-board, ?after you?ve
carried as much weight as I have, you?ll be thinking
of something more than your nails. Nails are not much
use. Wait till you get screws, like me,?
Olga thought he must be suffering from rheumatism,
like her father, who always called it the ?screws,? and
said it attacked you in the joints.
But the Magician hurried Olga on. She thought she
was being very cruel when she walked over the boards,
they all groaned so. He took her along a corridor
and opened the door of a tiny square room.


ii
THE SINGING HOUSE
?Here you are,? he said, ?this will be your room.
You?d better get to sleep as soon as you can.?
Then he was gone and Olga was alone. Now you
know that some walls have ears. The walls of Olga?s
room seemed to have eyes and tongues as well as ears.
At first, when Olga entered the room, there was silence,
but she hadn?t been there long before she thought she
could hear whispering.
Looking up at the walls she saw them all scowling
down at her.
?Who does she think she is?? asked one of them.
?The Queen and all the Royal Family, by the way
she turns her nose up,? answered another.
?Queen indeed,? said another. ?She?s only a tiny
little scrub. Not half as tall as I am.?
?I like her impudence, putting on airs before us,?
said the first. ?Let?s take no notice of her.?
Poor Olga felt very upset at having them speak so
unkindly when she had done nothing to offend.
It was no use trying to sleep in such a room as that,
as Olga quickly found out, and she decided to go back
down the corridor to the room where she?d left Mr
Frost and the others.
It wasn?t hard to find the room, because all the floor-
boards were still grumbling and groaning. Mr Frost
was sitting before the fire with Ceasar and Ivan close
beside him.
?I?d like to see any one who could sleep in such a
house as this,? grumbled Mr Frost. ?Just listen to all
the noise going on. You?d think it was a prison full of
devils. And look at that fire. I?ve seen faces in it.
They look at you and scream. Then they?re gone.
Some of them seem to be asking you to step into the
fire with them. Like the Spider and the Fly. But
they won?t catch me.?
57


ffi
He went bang into the table and knocked over a
large china dog which stood upon it. The dog smashed
into a thousand pieces, but its head wasn?t broken at
all. It barked at all the other pieces which wriggled
together and joined the head. So the china dog was
whole again.
Poor Ivan was getting excited. As he looked at the
china dog it seemed to turn into a bull and grow and
grow until it almost filled the room. Then there was
a terrific gust of wind, and the china dog was on the
table again, looking as though nothing had happened.
The place seemed full of magic. Perhaps it was all
due to the Magician who was trying a few experiments
in the next room. There didn?t seem much chance to
sleep, and Olga and Mr Frost sat down on the floor to
wait as well as they could for the hundred years to pass.
And there were faces in the fire. Nice ones and ugly
ones; kind ones and angry ones. All sorts, all sizes, all
conditions.
?Fancy spending a hundred years in a place like
this!? said Ivan. ?And I wanted to be home for
Christmas.?
The boards gave a hollow laugh, and the wide one
slapped the long slender one so hard on the back that
Nutty thought the floor was giving way.
But Ivan had seen a face in the fire, too. It looked
just like his cousin?s baby. Ivan thought it was a ghost.
He stared at it till his eyes nearly popped out and his
hair stood on end all down his back. And then he
thought he could see his cousin?s family all sitting down
for the Christmas dinner, with a place marked ?Ivan?
left empty for him.
Of course, just as you would expect, Ivan started
walking into the fire as soon as he saw the Christmas
dinner. But all he got was a very burnt nose, which
made him jump back as fast as he could.


fl
THE SINGING HOUSE
There was magic everywhere. Too much of it. Some
of it even got into the carpet. Mr Frost had left it in
the bucket, but it climbed out and started wriggling
across the floor.
?Thanks awfully,? it said. ?I?m off.? And it went
clean through the wall, although the wall hadn?t any
holes in it. The last Olga saw of the carpet it was fast
disappearing into a warren in the ground.
It took everyone?s breath away for a few minutes, as
you?ll easily believe, because you?d be a little surprised
yourself if the carpets in your home suddenly started
to turn into carpet-snakes, wouldn?t you?
?That?s the queerest thing I?ve seen,? said Mr Frost,
when he was able to speak. ?And now I?ve nothing to
take to the Emperor Nero. He?ll never give me another
order, either, when he hears my carpets can turn into
menageries whenever they like.?
Poor Mr Frost sat down to think it all out. He
wondered a long time whether he should go to Rome
without the carpet and give the Emperor the bill for
making and storing it for so many years. You can?t
blame him really, because Nero was the only customer
he?d ever had.
?Ah, well,? he said, after he?d thought for a long
time, ?we?ll see what can be done after we?ve found the
Wonderful Nut?if we?re not all changed into spiders
or something or other before that.?
Ivan had been sitting playing Ludo with the Little
White Fox and Ceasar whilst this was happening, but
he now turned very pale and began flapping his front
legs about in the air as though they were wings.
?I do believe,? he said, ?I?m changing into a
butterfly.?
And he waSj too! His front legs actually were
changing into wings.


?I don?t want to be a butterfly,? cried poor Ivan. ?I
want to go home.?
Olga and Mr Frost sprang to their feet.
?We must find the Magician at once,? said Olga.
?Why, look at Ceasar. He?s fast changing into a
hippopotamus!?
And that was true, too. The walls winked at each
other, and the floor-boards clapped as though it were
all fine fun for them.
Nutty looked as though he might change, too ?into
a cloud of dust at any minute.
?Oh, hurry!? Olga called out to Mr Frost. ?Let?s
try all the rooms in the corridor until we find the
Magician.?
So they ran along, opening every door on each side,
hoping to find the Magician before it was too late. At
last they came to a room where they found the
Magician crawling all over the floor with a candle as
though he had lost something.
?Oh, hello!? he exclaimed, looking up and seeing
them. ?Have you seen any loose magic about any-
where??
?Seen any!? answered Olga. ?We can?t move for it,
and if you don?t hurry up we?ll all be changing into a
Zoological Gardens.?
?Then you have found the magic!? said the
Magician. ?I do hope you haven?t used it all up. You
see, I left the bottle somewhere and forgot to put the
cork in.?
?Gracious! Just look at Mr Frost!? exclaimed Olga.
?He?s growing horns!?
?So he is,? answered the Magician. ?We must do
something about it at once.? So he mixed up a strong
dose of elderberry and parsnip juice and gave them all
some to drink. That put it right. The horns dis-
appeared from Mr Frost quicker than you could wink
your eye. Ceasar became a well-behaved bullfrog once


' \V \ '
V njr
THE SINGING HOUSE
again. And they were just in time to prevent Nutty
going off in a cloud of smoke up the chimney.
There was something very strange lying on the table.
No one knew what it was, so the Magician asked:
?Who are you??
?I?m a question mark,? it said.
?Well, let?s see whether we can turn you into a
comma with a nice long tail,? said the Magician, and
he poured some of the magic medicine over it.
The question mark gave a little wriggle and there
was the Little White Fox back again, his tail a wee
bit longer than before, perhaps.
There was only Ivan to be fixed up now. He was
flitting about the room, going from flower to flower on
the wall-paper.
It took some time to get Ivan to take the magic dose.
Perhaps he liked being a butterfly after all, or perhaps
he was afraid that next time he might change into
nothing at all. But it was managed, and everyone was
comfortable again.
That is to say, everyone except Mr Frost. He sud-
denly remembered that his carpet had disappeared.
?What am I to do about that?? he asked.
?Don?t worry,? the Magician told him. ?It?s taken
a short cut to Rome and by now is more than half-way
there. It?s saved you the trouble of delivering it. All
you?ve to do now is to write out a bill and post it.?
And that is exactly what Mr Frost did. Whether
the bill ever reached Rome or not, nobody ever heard.
But if it did, it was mean of the Emperor not to reply,
wasn?t it?
All this had taken some time, and the Magician,
after looking at the calendar, said the nut-tree ought to
be bearing by then. He put his ear to the ground and
told them he could hear the nuts falling, so without
wasting any more time they left the house and went
straight to the spot where the seed had been planted.
* \' W/
\- \ ' \
//1 \v\v


'?-� f
Vk
* ? /-. J
4'
t
CHAPTER XIII
At the Nut-tree
A n �l indeed, the tree had grown to a tremendous
height. All the branches had nuts on them, and
the ground was covered with them, also.
?But how are we to tell which is the Magic Nut
out of all these?? asked Mr Frost.
?I shall be able to see it with my glasses,? explained
the Magician. ?The Magic Nut is larger than all the
others. So we must gather all the largest nuts and then
I?ll easily pick out the one we want.?
Then they commenced to gather the biggest ones into
a small heap. Not a single nut could be overlooked.
But some of the nuts which had fallen from the tree
during a high gale had gone a long way from where
the tree stood. Ivan was given a large bag and told to
gather all the scattered ones.
Ivan worked very hard until he had almost filled
the bag and then, as it was very, very hot, he sat down
to have a little rest. He was so tired that before he
knew it he was fast asleep.
What a pity! Because, as he sat sleeping, some
naughty Spanish children who had come from the city
to gather nuts, saw him. And they saw the big bag of
nuts, too.
?Sh! Casabianca!? It sounded something like that,
and it was the biggest of the Spanish children who said
it. But as it was Spanish, no one could be sure. What
it meant, though, was:
?Let us take the bag of nuts and leave a bag of stones
in its place.?
They all thought it a capital idea, and soon they had
run away and left the bag of stones with Ivan.
When he awoke he saw the bag and thinking it was
still full of nuts, he staggered with it back to where the


f' ?HVi
AT THE NUT-TREE
others were still searching for the Magic Nut. They
had looked at every one, but not a single trace of magic
could they find.
?Then it must be in Ivan?s bag,? said the Magician,
?because there?s nowhere else it can be.?
Nutty was dreadfully excited now ?and so was
everyone if it comes to that. The Magician took the
bag from Ivan and emptied it on the ground.
?Oh!? said Olga, when she saw the stones. ?Oh!?
said everybody else.
Poor Ivan rubbed his eyes. He was more surprised
than any one. He was sure he?d gathered nuts and not
stones, so you can guess how stupid he looked.
The Magician grew a trifle cross. ?What have you
been doing?? he demanded.
?I don?t know!? replied Ivan.
But although Ivan didn?t know, you and I know.
And while the Magician is fitting on the Magic
Spectacles and reading in his Black Book of Magic to
see what has happened, we may as well follow the
Spanish children to their home on the outskirts of
Barcelona and see what happened to them.


CHAPTER XIV
At the Home of the Spanish Children
AJOW the mother of the Spanish children was fat.
Very fat. And she hated the heat because she was
so fat. The hotter she got the more bad tempered she
became. And this day was very, very hot, and she
was very, very bad tempered.
When the children arrived home she was mixing
some liquorice water for her husband because he liked
liquorice water and wouldn?t go to work without a
bottle of it. On this day the mother of the Spanish
children had either put too much water or too little
liquorice in the bottle, so the liquorice water was weak.
The father of the Spanish children simply hated weak
liquorice water and would be very quick in saying so
as soon as he arrived home. All this, as you will see,
was likely to make her even more bad tempered, and
when she saw the Spanish children arriving home she
shook her fist at them and blamed them for the weak
liquorice water.
?Oh me, oh me!? she cried. ?No mother ever had
such disobedient children. Cascara,? she cried to the
eldest girl, ?had you been here to watch the pudding
boiling, I should have had more time to think of the
liquorice water. I get so mixed,? she cried.
?And you, Sagrada,? she went on to the biggest boy,
the one who was carrying the nuts, ?you are a good-for-
nothing boy. Had you been here you could have gone
into the city for more liquorice.?
?But, mother,? said Sagrada, ?look at the beautiful
nuts we have gathered.?
?Away with you!? cried his mother. ?Do you not
know your father cannot eat nuts when he has no teeth?
How shall I, then, offer him nuts instead of liquorice
water??


mjk m M
? mSJ) I Af il
AT THE HOME OF THE SPANISH CHILDREN
?But mother,? persisted Sagrada. ?Just look at this
one. It is the biggest nut I have ever seen.?
And Sagrada held up the nut. You will have guessed
that it was the Magic Nut. And you are right.
The mother of the Spanish children didn?t know it,
though, and as I have said, she was in a very bad
temper. She made a rush at Sagrada and knocked the
nut out of his hand. It went rolling across the room,
down a mouse?s hole, and underneath the house.
The father of the Spanish children came home
shortly after that. He was big and very fierce looking,
with an enormous moustache, and he wore a sword at
his side. When he was annoyed he always twisted his
moustache.
That very day when he arrived home he was twisting
his moustache, so it was easy to see he was all upset
over something.
?Where is my liquorice water?? was the first thing
he said.
?There,? answered the mother of the Spanish
children, shaking all over.
?Pah!? shouted her husband, as soon as he had put
his nose to the bottle. ?This isn?t liquorice water. The
water is too weak!? And he threw the bottle at the
photo of the Spanish children?s grandmother on their
mother?s side, which hung over the fire-place, and
broke it into tiny pieces.
?Bah! bah!? he said, bleating like a sheep. ?Bah!
and again bah!?
So, you see how really upset he really was.
Things had gone wrong all day with him. He was
the chief balloon blower at the toy factory in Barcelona.
That is why he always came home very much out of
breath. And on this particular day he had burst two
of the balloons by blowing them too big, and the fore-
man of the toy factory had told him that if he did it


' I
Vf
abu / JMMI MlJ
> m %
W 111
With his big spectacles he had found where the nut
had gone, and in order to get it back he had brought
out his magic magnet and polished it till it fairly shone
in the sun.
He held it up and went ?Zip!? very gently.
The Magic Nut, which had rolled down the mouse-
hole and under the house of the Spanish children, felt
the magic magnetism and at once flew up towards
where the magic came from. But it only went crash
against the floor of the house, right under where the
Spanish people were having their tea.
The father of the Spanish children was just then
eating an onion, and the crash of the Magic Nut under-
neath where he was sitting made him swallow the onion
whole.
He sprang out of his chair and his sword rattled in
its case. You see, he thought he?d broken another
balloon and his nerves were all on edge, because he
thought he would have to leave the toy factory.
As nothing else happened, the Spanish family all sat
down again.
They weren?t left in quietness long, though. The
Magician, finding the Nut didn?t arrive, went ?zip?
again with the magnet, and not so gently this time.
again he would have to leave, as they couldn?t afford
to have him bursting balloons like that.
That was enough to upset any man, but when he
comes home and finds his liquorice water too weak,
well
Even though you are bad tempered you must have
something to eat, and so the whole Spanish family sat
down to a tea of Seville marmalade. While they are
munching away, let us hurry back to where the
Magician is trying to discover what has happened to
the Magic Nut.


AT THE HOME OF THE SPANISH CHILDREN
Crash! The Nut had hit the floor of the Spanish
people?s house twice as hard this time as it had before.
And the floor-boards on which the father of the Spanish
children had placed his chair, broke away from the
nails that held them and shook badly.
The poor Spanish people were more afraid than
ever.
?It?s our unlucky day,? said the mother.
And even the father began to think so, too. It looked
very much to him as though an earthquake was about
to happen.
He picked up the bottle of pickled onions and rushed
out of the house. His wife did the same, and so did all
the Spanish children. They all stood in the cabbage
patch at the back of the house and waited for what
was to take place next.
The Magician, standing under the nut-tree, was now
beginning to get annoyed. So he went ?zip? twice, and
the next minute the Spanish family saw their house
pulled out of the ground and go shooting through the
air in the direction of the woods. The sight made their
hair stand on end. Indeed, they?ve never yet been able
to make it lie down again, and if you ever meet any
Spanish people with their hair standing straight up,
you?ll know at once that they are related to this Spanish
family.
The house landed in a thousand pieces at the feet of
the Magician, who at once picked up the Magic Nut.
The people of Barcelona, passing through the woods
some days after, came upon the heap of ruins, and they
were able to recognize it as the house of the Spanish
family because on the top was the photograph of the
children?s grandmother on their mother?s side, all
stained with liquorice water.
They all nudged each other and said that was what


?
came of any one who burst two balloons on the same
day. But you, who have heard the whole story, know
it wasn?t fair to blame the father of the Spanish
children, now was it? Because, if the Spanish children
hadn?t stolen the bag of nuts it would never have
happened.


Off Home Again
"DUT the thing with which you and I are most con-
cerned is that the Nut had been found. And it
looks very much as though we shall have to bid fare-
well to Olga and all her friends before long.
The Magician picked up the Nut and handed it over
to Nutty, the squirrel. You may be sure he was pleased
to have it.
The only one who wasn?t pleased was Ivan, the
reindeer, who had thought that perhaps there would
have been a nut to spare for him. As the Magician
pointed out, only one Magic Nut grows on a tree, and
the squirrel reminded Ivan that if he hadn?t swallowed
the first nut there would never have been any need for
them to come all this way.
?Ah, well,? said Ivan, ?I don?t suppose there?s much
in it. And anyhow, I?m not fond of nuts. So you can
keep it.?
Nutty laughed. He knew, just as you and I know,
how really wonderful the Nut was. With it you could
find the answer to any question. Wouldn?t it be a fine
thing if you and I had one to take to school with us?
But you can hardly expect a reindeer to understand
that. Besides, Ivan didn?t go to school.
Very soon afterwards Mr Frost looked up at the
great white clouds in the skies. ?The snow-clouds are
gathering in the north,? he said. ?It?s time we were
getting back to Lapland.?
?And I must be back for Christmas,? said Ivan.
So they all started to get ready for the journey back.
Ivan said he could even smell the snow which was
falling on the plains of Lapland. The next morning


they said good-bye to the Magician, and Nutty thanked
him once again for finding the wonderful Nut-That-
Knows-Everything.
There was a big surprise, too, for Olga when the
Magician felt in his pocket for some little keepsake to
give her. You could guess and guess and yet not be
able to guess what it was. For he gave her the Magic
Spectacles.
?Take these,? he asked her, ?to remember me by.
Whatever you wish to see, you have only to look
through the Magic Spectacles and you will see it. If
you lose your way it will be easy to find it again, or if
you lose anything they will help you to see where it is.?
?But you don?t mean me to keep them, do you??
asked Olga, who couldn?t believe it.
?Of course, of course,? answered the Magician.
?They?ve become too small for me now.?
And so they parted. Out through Barcelona and
away to the north. How long they would have taken
to get home again I?ve no idea, but when they were at
the foot of a tiny hill Olga thought she would like to
try the spectacles. When she put them on she saw
right through the hill and down the other side. And
there she saw a Spanish onion merchant driving his
horse and cart.
The Spanish onion merchant was taking a load of
onions to Amsterdam where he hoped to exchange them
for a load of Dutch cheeses. It was a long journey and
he couldn?t help feeling lonely, so when Olga, Mr
Frost, Ivan, Nutty, the Little White Fox, and Ceasar
overtook him and asked for a ride, he was only too
glad to give them one for company.


i
OFF HOME AGAIN
He was such a good-natured Spanish onion merchant
that he drove them all the way home before going to
Amsterdam. They laughed and talked all the way, but
if you had happened to pass them on the way you
would have noticed that each of them except the
Spanish onion merchant was crying very, very hard.
Perhaps it was because they were so glad. Or it
might have been because they were so thankful to the
Spanish onion merchant for giving them a ride. Or
then, perhaps, it might have been just because of the
onions. I shouldn?t be surprised if it was!


Halstead Printing Company Limited,
Arnold Place, Sydney




sf*


fc * y$i


