



• v.




•
• V-Wm . -■••• Cjpi ai ■' >
• •
•
:v.
1
*
'
■
>
.
-
. 1
*
-
i ?
.
■
.
■ •
V|
-
'■% ' KW • '
V
*
-
V
„9 *
&
•
'
•
_• • i
•
.. 1
-
,„...• •
■
. ' : ■ t
' ; -
A. • ■ vjj
♦
.
'
%
.
'
, 4
■
x
*.
'
-
•
■
.
.
■
■
‘ ■
■'
i
V 1
■
,
v 1
*-
* -
- -
-
* *
• ■
-
' ■ :|
f ?•
- ■ ——•* -
•r- - .y » • '
yw>~ - — *ffr
J
- . ... . . {
I
X.
” -—■-■■■ -■■•*■■-•
■ -~i
- 4
it ■
.
X
V
•
.
.
'
,
i
•
«
•
■
■
,
.
«
A
-
■ 11 -
•
i
•
1
*
*
'
•
A
*
•
9
. •r
- \
* ' X *
.


r 3
-sy i
io
ALLAN’S SYSTEMS
NATIONAL TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION.
Looking to the insular position of a nation like Great Britain, its
Colonies and Dependencies, its administration of Government, and its
commerce, there can be no subject of more vital importance to the
Empire than Submarine Telegraphic communication.
Doubtless our Foreign rivals, viewing the subject politically, as
regards our insular position, have long solaced themselves with the
idea that the Electric Telegraph would give them a monopoly against
Great Britain ; and this sentiment still obtains to a certain extent,
from a belief fancying that all our communications with the East
must of necessity pass overland through the Continental lines of
Europe. The reverse of all this will, however, soon work itself
out, as the force of circumstances, and the steady progress of science,
will enable Great Britain, by this very means, —“ Submarine
Telegraphic Communication,” to render herself independent of the
foreigner, and draw nearer to herself, politically and commercially,
her various Colonies and Dependencies in every quarter of the
globe; and if the monster monopoly be forced aside to give full scope


and fair play to the march of Free Trade in these matters as it
now obtains in most others, we may ere long see Great Britain as
mistress of the sea, like a cunning and industrious spider, become the
centre of a widely-ramified web of Submarine Telegraphic Com-
munication with all her Colonies and Dependencies in all parts of the
world.
The new-born science is gaining on us fast, and advancing with
rapid strides into the business and necessities of every-day life.
It may, therefore, be assumed that a more general and extended use
of the Electric Telegraph will follow the same general laws as the
working of our Postal System ; and from the wonderful development
of these principles in the instance of the Penny Postage, the hypo-
thesis becomes reduced to an anticipated fact.
In regarding the Electric Telegraph as a question of political
economy, it should ever be borne in mind, that the principles which
govern scientific operations are alike universal and progressive.
We have, therefore, only to look back, as an index of its future, to
the expansion of the Railway system during the few years that have
elapsed since the immolation of a Huskisson.
A perusal of the following correspondence will shew, that the prin-
ciples therein propounded are, in every respect, conformable with
those laid down in the following extract from the Treasury Minute,
No. 235, of 22d February 1858, published with the Parliamentary
papers of the session of 1858.
“ But besides the question of cost, it appears to my Lords that
there are many considerations of equal, if not greater, importance, to
which due weight must be given in determining which of the various
plans before the Government should be adopted, and which may be
stated as follows :
“ Ist, As to the length and directness of the route in relation to
the time which messages would occupy, and the cost at which
they can be sent.


“ 2d, The security, in connection with political considerations,
which the different routes offer.
“ 3d, The importance of the several places at which stations are
proposed to he established.
“ 4 th, The effect of reducing into one grand and extensive system
of connection all the British possessions with the greatest
number of places with which it is important the communica-
tion should be maintained.
“ My Lords proceed to consider these points:—
“It is obviously of great importance to our communications
with India, that it should be as direct and cheap as possible; for
independent of the messages of the Government and the East India
Company, it is essential, when Her Majesty’s Government incur
a liability in the form of a guarantee, that every inducement should
be held out to the public at large to use the line adopted as the best
means of covering the amount of guarantee. Moreover, if the Go-
vernment were to adopt a main line which was not the best in these
respects, it is certain that, before long, a competing line would be
made by the superior route, which would deprive the guaranteed line
of its traffic.”
London, 1859,


TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION
THE COLONIES.
To the Eight Hon. Henry Labouchere,
&c. &c. &c.
Sir, —The principal object I had in view in my visit to you was
to make you aware of what was about to be undertaken in form-
ing Telegraphic Communication between Great Britain and its North
American Colonies in the first instance, and also to point out the
negative effects of the exclusive Charter granted by the Newfoundland
Government to American subjects upon such an undertaking as re-
gards British interests, in the hopes that your department might see
cause to go back from that hasty proceeding, the confirmation of the
said Charter.
* *
By the means and facilities possessed by this Company for laying
cheap Submarine Communications, you will have observed from the
paper I left with you, and at once see how it is feasible to lay lines
from this country (say Plymouth) to Gibraltar and Malta, and so on up
the Mediterranean, en route to India. Such a line would be more in-
dependent under many, as yet unseen but still probable, circumstances,
than transmitting through the present foreign systems across Europe ;
and which, besides, would create a large tax or tollage on the cost of
a message to India and Australia, as would almost preclude its
use.
* *
You would also observe, not only the vastness of the whole com-
bined, but the completeness, and, may I add, the great importance
not only to the commerce, but also to the Government of the British
Empire.—l am, Sir, your most obedient Servant,
Thomas Allan.
1 Adelphi Terrace, March 1, 1856.


TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION
WITH
INDIA.
The Great Inman Submarine Telegraph Company,
1 Adelphi Terrace, Strand, April 12, 1858.
My Lords, —In forwarding the Prospectus of this Company, the
Directors are led to believe that, apart from its merits in a political
point of view, telegraphic communication with India, carried out on
national and independent principles, combined with such economy in
the cost of transmitting messages as will render it available to the
commercial world, is a subject which will meet with the serious con-
sideration of Her Majesty’s Government.
It may at first sight appear that the scope of the Company’s ope-
rations is too extended, but it is to the scheme in its entirety that the
Directors look for those advantages they would hold out as effecting
its economy and independence.
Should Her Majesty’s Government, however, on due consideration,
be disposed to regard the undertaking favourably, it is apprehended
that it would not be impolitic to subsidise the whole extent of the
distance to India in Sections ; as it might, in the first instance, be
the wish of Government that the Section between Malta and Alex-
andria should be commenced and completed before other parts of the
Telegraphic Lines are proceeded with.
The engineering and scientific means at the exclusive control of
this Company are such as to enable the Directors, when the entire
line is completed and rendered independent of Foreign transmission,
to fix the tariff of a short message between Great Britain and India
at a charge within the reach of the many.
This satisfactory result would be attainable through the valuable
telegraphic systems of communication upon which this Company’s
operations are based. These effect a great saving in the first cost of


Sections.
Capital.
Subsidy.
Tariff.
Malta to Alexandria,
Alexandria to Aden,
Aden to Bombay,
Malta to Gibraltar, .
Gibraltar to London,
£150,000
225.000
275.000
150.000
200.000
at 6 per cent., £9,000
at 6 „ 13,000
at 6 „ 16,000
at 5 „ 7,500
at 5 „ 10,000
15/
22/6
27/6
12/6
16/6
"1
Equal to
12,000
Messages
of 15
words.
£1,000,000
£56,500
94/
construction, as also in the current working expenses consequent
upon the small number of stations that would he required.
The Directors consider that this fact alone will assuredly tend to
insure to the enterprise the support of the public at large. And they
venture also to call it to the attention of your Lordships, as giving an
earnest of relief to the burthen which otherwise would be entailed upon
Government in the management now sought at your Lordships’ hands.
I enclose herewith a statement of the proposed Capital, Subsidy,
and Tariff for each Section respectively, as the basis upon which the
Company are prepared to meet the requirements of Her Majesty’s
Government.
When the lines are completed and in continuity, the Company
will be in a position to reduce the tariff of a through message to the
extent of at least 33 per cent, on that now proposed. —I have the
honour to be, my Lords, your Lordships’ most obedient Servant,
Thomas Allan.
The Right Honourable
The Loros of Her Majesty’s Treasury.
The Great Indian Submarine Telegraph Company,
1 Adelphi Terrace, June 1, 1858.
Mv Lord, —Without entering into the considerations of political
economy involved in the proposition which 1 have had the honour of
submitting to Her Majesty’s Government in reference to the establish-
ment of Telegraphic communication with India, I beg leave briefly to
bring under your Lordship’s notice a few of the practical points upon


which the merits of the scheme may be said to rest, and which I trust
may entitle it to your Lordship’s countenance and support.
Is?, Its almost exclusively national character, its independence and
freedom from Foreign interference, espionage, or overcharge on trans-
mission of messages.
2d , Its simplicity, completeness, and continuity in system and
arrangement, —thus securing accuracy, speed, secresy, and the avoid-
ance of those painful mistakes for which the telegrams of the present
day are remarkable, principally from the messages being filtered
through so many different companies and systems.
3 d, Its importance and efficiency as a political engine in the hands
of Government, affording, as it would, a means of ready and instan-
taneous communication with our dependencies abroad; whilst, if
supported by a Government subsidy, or otherwise, it might, in the
event of war or other national emergency, be placed under special
and exclusive control.
Ath, Its commercial advantages, arising from the economy of con-
struction and comparatively small working details, whilst its indepen-
dence and continuity would render it no less advantageous as a
mercantile than as a political engine.
sth, The comparatively low rate at which the tariff may be fixed,
—thus placing the facilities presented by this medium within the reach
of the many, and securing both commercial and public advantages ana-
logous to those which distinguish our postal arrangements at present.
6th, That this analogy, as respects the advantages to be derived
by the public, constitute a ground upon which it is submitted Her
Majesty’s Government may be justified in granting a subsidy in aid
upon the principle recognised by Parliament in the votes for the
Postal Packet Service.
Feeling convinced that no project which does not comprehend in
its scope and operation the elements above described, can be really
efficient in accomplishing the great national objects demanded by the
exigencies of the times, I trust that your Lordship will be pleased to
alibi’d an opportunity for a thorough investigation of the present
scheme, which embraces, in its mechanical appliances and economical
details, those peculiar requisites which are calculated to insure a com-
plete and permanent success. —1 have the honour to be, my Lord,
your Lordship’s very obedient Servant,
Thomas Allan.
The Right Honourable
The Eakl of Derby, &c., &c., &c.


NATIONAL
TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION
1 Adelphi Terrace, Nov. 12, 1858.
My Lord, —Believing that the subject of telegraphic communication
is one which deserves, if it does not already occupy, the attention of
Her Majesty’s Government, I take the liberty of submitting to your
Lordship the enclosed plan of a general system, under the conviction
that, from the force of existing circumstances, the undertakings referred
to are beyond the capacity of ordinary enterprise, whilst, at the same
time,, they have become a national want.
Entertaining this view, I at the same time feel that, if properly
systematised as a whole before being entered upon, the nation would
derive from such works de futuro benefits analogous to our Postal
System, and which in railways have been utterly lost, it being not too
much to say that, had the latter been arranged upon any definite
system before being commenced,we should by this period have enjoyed
more ample facilities and lower rates, and, according to the late returns
of the Board of Trade, probably have saved to the country at least
one hundred millions sterling.
If these premises be correct, the simple question arises, How is
Government to give its co-operation with the least risk to itself and
the greatest advantage to the nation ? The precedent already laid
down in granting a guarantee to the Red Sea Telegraph Company
is held to be erroneous, as being all in favour of the proprietary and
against the interests of the public; and as I suppose the Government
are not likely to assume the administration of such undertakings, I


beg to submit a plan whereby the country, under other arrangements,
might derive benefits approximating to those which would accrue
were the Government to undertake it themselves.
Instead, therefore, of the Government guaranteeing to any Com-
pany a minimum and a probable 10 per cent, (as in the case of
the Red Sea), I venture to suggest that they should authorise the
issue of bonds or debentures at a moderate and fixed rate of interest
in sections of capital as the progress of the works might require, and
subject to Government control. By this means the tariff of charges
could be fixed at so light a figure as to create at once the commercial
element of extended use, and the Government thus be protected
against any payment of guarantee, whilst all the profits beyond the
guaranteed interest would be applicable to a rest or sinking fund, for
either the construction or extension of lines of communication, or the
reduction of tariff, as might be deemed most advantageous to the public.
Upon such principles, after the establishment of a system of Main
Lines, the Telegraph might be rendered self-extending, self-sustaining,
and recreative.
In conclusion, I may be permitted to observe that, possessing as I
do the mechanical and patented means for carrying out in all its
details that system of Ocean Telegraphy which I have so long pro-
pounded, and which forms the key-stone of the position by effecting
relatively a saving of 40 per cent, on the first cost of construction, and
50 per cent, on the working, I shall be happy to afford Her Majesty’s
Government such information as they may require, if disposed to
adopt the more comprehensive views on this important subject which
I now have the honour of submitting.—l have the honour to be, my
Lord, your Lordship’s most obedient servant,
Thomas Allan.
The Eight Honourable
The Earl of Derby, &c. &c. &c.


SYSTEM OF NATIONAL TELEGRAPHIC
COMMUNICATION
CONNECTING
GREAT BRITAIN WITH HER COLONIES DEPENDENCIES.
Looking to the insular position of a nation like Great Britain, its-
Colonies and Dependencies, its administration of Government, and
its commerce, there can be no subject of more vital importance ta
the British Empire than Submarine Telegraphic communication,
whether viewed as a question of political economy, or as to its
probable results.
Ocean Telegraphy will enable Great Britain to render herself in-
dependent of the foreigner, and draw nearer to herself, politically and
commercially, her various Colonies and Dependencies in every quarter
of the globe.
It is obvious that, to Great Britain, in a national point of view, it
would be invaluable to have the power of communicating directly by
sea with the Canadas, Bermuda, and the West Indies, —Gibraltar,
Malta, her Indian and Colonial possessions in the Pacific, and the
other distant seats of her commerce. One great centre of her ramified
communications being established, unity in her governmental councils
and national policy at home and abroad would be the natural conse-
quence, and could not fail still further to consolidate her power,
develop her resources, and augment her wealth.
Direct Telegraphic communication with India, and our own distant
Colonies, is not only essential to us as a people, but demanded of us
as a nation, socially, politically, religiously, and commercially ; whilst
having already triumphed over time and space, and evolved the
secret of our capacity, the inexorable necessities of commercial com-
petition seize upon us, and impose the duty of working up to the full
pressure of our power.
The practical utility and economy of the Electric Telegraph may
be measured by the capability to propel a message to a distant point
at a cost inversely to the ratio of distance. This is only to be accom-
plished by long Ocean Telegraphy, and upon a system combining
continuity of plan with the fewest possible number of stations en route ,
thereby effecting such a low rate of charge on the cost of transmission
as will render the lines a cheap, ready, and, therefore, necessary
medium for all commercial purposes. The commercial element so


created will, as a consequence, ensure the repayment of a Government
guarantee, and be so far an indemnity against possible loss.
Notwithstanding the popularity of the question, it remains a fact
that there has been hitherto no comprehensive system of Telegraphy
propounded to unite together in one web of intercommunication the
different and distant brotherhoods of political and commercial man.
The general and universal system of Telegraphic communication
now proposed is based on the fact of Great Britain being not only
the workshop of the world, but the entrepot of the world’s commerce.
Taking London as a centre, the Electric Telegraph, the universality
of whose use can only be properly secured by system, economy, and
direct communication, will ramify not only to every principal place
of business in the United Kingdom, but also extend, by direct sub-
marine communication, to every point of commercial importance
within the reach of such agency.
It is assumed that Telegraphic communication between Great
Britain and her Colonies is now a national want, which it is the inte-
rest of the Government to assist in supplying.
The Government have already, to a certain extent, acted upon this
consideration, by aiding with ships and subsidies, and incurring risks
and extraordinary expenses, and will be compelled to go much further
in the same direction to meet the necessity. If, therefore, the country
is to run the risk, it is but reasonable it should derive a corresponding
benefit. To connect Great Britain with her distant Colonies is, in fact,
somewhat beyond the pale of private enterprise, and must be regarded
as peculiarly a public duty ; in other words, as a national experiment
to overcome a national exigency and to create a national advantage.
The establishment of such communications between the Depen-
dencies of Great Britain, to be beneficial as such, should be carried
out on principles analogous to the Penny Postal, where the question
is not one of mere revenue, but that facility of intercommunication
which, by increasing the traffic, will prove a boon not only to com-
merce, but to the social structure of the empire at large ; and the
time has come when an opportunity is created by the force of circum-
stances, for the Government to reconsider the whole question under
a wider and more comprehensive range, and as a political and truly
national question.
With these views, the subject becomes one of great magnitude and
importance, and points more clearly and imperiously to its adoption
as a national work. The period is, moreover, propitious for the in-
ception of one grand system, working harmoniously upon its own
centre, and more especially, as the Patents or means to the erd are


not yet frittered away amongst different companies, but are still in
individual possession, and available to the Government.
Under these considerations, it is proposed to combine the plans of
the Great Ocean, the Great Indian and (Extension) Telegraph Com-
panies, which have been already submitted to the consideration of
Government, into one large and comprehensive system of Submarine
Telegraphy, as exhibited in the subjoined synopsis.
The lines here indicated would place Great Britain in immediate
communication with her principal Colonies, Settlements, and Depen-
dencies thousands of miles apart in the Eastern and Western Hemi-
spheres, from whence come the most precious and important articles
of merchandise, whilst to them are sent the staple manufactures of
this country.
By the existence of such means of rapid communication and
intelligence, millions would be saved to Great Britain annually upon
articles of produce and consumption, which are now lost from the
tardy and uncertain opportunities upon which the mercantile com-
munity are dependent.
To the shipping interests of the country, the facilities thus to be
afforded would likewise prove a boon of the highest value, —the
immense fortunes afloat in the distant quarters of the globe would
thus be brought almost constantly within the controlling powers of
the owners, and early advices anticipate every fluctuation of the
Foreign as well as the Home Markets, whilst the saving upon in-
surances alone would be incalculable.
As regards the protection of our distant possessions, as well as of
our own coasts, the political advantage to be thus derived would be
of the highest importance in case of sudden exigencies, as not only
affording a medium of early intelligence to our governors abroad, but of
directing the despatch or recal of our naval fleets at any given point.
Considering the great objects and interests involved, it becomes a
question whether the Government, with the view to the establishment
of one comprehensive cheap and effective system, should not adopt the
Telegraphic Correspondence of the Empire as a departmental trust;
and, like the Post Office, either as a source of revenue, or for the con-
venience and advantage of the public at large. If, however, this
should not be the case, it is submitted that the State is called upon to
encourage such undertakings by pecuniary or other support, so as to
procure an approximation to those benefits now enjoyed by the nation
under the Penny Postal System.
Thomas Allan.
1 Adelphi Terrace, London, 1858.


PLAN AND ROUTES OF A SYSTEM OF NATIONAL
TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION
CONNECTING
GREAT BRITAIN WITH HER COLONIES AND DEPENDENCIES,
EMBRACING THE FOLLOWING UNDERTAKINGS.
THE GREAT OCEAN TELEGRAPH COMPANY,*
CONNECTING GREAT BRITAIN WITH AMERICA.
Calculated , in geographical miles , with 25 per cent, of slack to cover
all contingencies.
CANADIAN SECTION.
Land’s End to
Halifax, with allowance for slack,
3000 wire distance.
WEST INDIAN SECTION.
Halifax to
Bermuda (with slack),
1100
1600
Jamaica,
2700 wire distance.
THE GREAT INDIAN SUBMARINE TELEGRAPH
COMPANY,!
CONNECTING GREAT BRITAIN DIRECT WITH INDIA.
MEDITERRANEAN SECTION.
Falmouth to
Gibraltar (with slack),
Malta,
1490
1490
Alexandria,
1320
4300 wire distance.
INDIAN SECTION.
Suez to
Perim (with slack),
Socotra,
1780
Bombay,
1670
4300 wire distance.
* See Appendix, page 46.
t See Appendix, page 46.


Gibraltar to Lisbon,
430
Perim to Aden,
150
Galle to Madras and Calcutta,
1950
Socotra to Mauritius and Bourbon,
2700
Singapore to Batavia,
780
Penang to Eangoon, .
1000
Cape Town to Algoa Bay and Natal,
1150
Sydney to Auckland,
1750
THE GREAT INDIAN SUBMARINE (EXTENSION)
TELEGRAPH COMPANY,*
CONNECTING GREAT BRITAIN, VIA INDIA, DIRECT WITH CHINA AND
AUSTRALIA.
SINGAPORE SECTION.
Bombay to
Galle (with slack),
1330
Penang,
1770
Singapore,
3650 wire distance,
CHINA SECTION.
Singapore to
Hong Kong (witli slack),
2085
1165
Shanghae,
3250 wire distance,
AUSTRALIAN SECTION.
Singapore to
Cape York, in Two Sections (with slack), 3500
More ton Bay, . . . 1750
1750
5250 wire distance.
SUBSIDIARY LINES.
9910 wire distance.
* See Appendix, page 47.


Summary of the Wire Distances, Contract Dates, and Capital of the Main Lines of Ocean Telegraphs
to connect Great Britain with her Colonies and Dependencies.
Calculated , in geographical miles , with allowance of 25 per cent, of slack to cover all contingencies.
Wire
Contract rate, including cost
Contract rate
of Instruments, Cable, and
laying all complete, Go-
vernment supplying ships.
without
CAPITAL.
Distance.
Government aid.
Sz!
>
H
Great Britain to
£400,000
O
tzi
Great Ocean Telegraph (
Canada,
8000
£300,000
£850,000
>
Company. (
■West Indies,
2700
270,000
300,000
350,000
H
Great Indian Telegraph (
Egypt,
4300
345,000
380,000
450,000
r
w
Company. (
India, -
4300
430,000
480,000
550,000
o
w
Great Indian Submarine j
Singapore, -
China,
3650
3250
365.000
325.000
415.000
400.000
465.000
450.000
5
o
(Extension.) 1
Australia,
5250
530,000
640,000
760,000
o
o
26,450
£2,565,000
£2,966,000
£3,415,000
K
S
c)
EXTEA CAPITAL FOR A SECOND LINE TO INDIA,
SINGAPORE, AND
CANADA*
g
o
>>
Great Britain to
H
O
India, -
8600
£775,000
£850,000
...
Singapore, -
3650
865,000
415,000
...
Canada,
3000
300,000
350,000
...
15,250
£1,440,000
£1,616,000
* A Triplicate line would be little
more expense than two single.
h-<
Ox


Ascension to
Pernambuco,
1755
Bahia,
Rio Janeiro,
565
1055
Monte Video and Buenos Ayres,
1625
SECOND SECTION.
SOUTH ATLANTIC TELEGRAPH,*
CONNECTING GREAT BRITAIN WITH SOUTH AFRICA AND AMERICA.
Falmouth via Gibraltar (Station on the Great Indian Line), to
Madeira (with slack), . . 960
Cape de Verde, . . . 935
Sierra Leone, . . . 1250
Ascension, .... 1490
St Helena, . . . .965
Saldanha Bay for Cape of Good Hope, 2350
7950 wire distance
LINE TO THE BRAZILS.
6000 wire distance
THE WEST INDIAN TELEGRAPH,
CONNECTING THE WEST INDIES AND STATES OF CENTRAL AMERICA
WITH KINGSTON, JAMAICA, THE TERMINUS OF THE
MAIN LINE TO GREAT BRITAIN.
PANAMA SECTION.
Kingston to
Chagres for Panama, . . 775
Callao and Lima, . . . 1610
Valparaiso, . . . . 1550
Kingston to
Havanna, . . . . 515
Kingston to
Honduras, . . . . 1050
5500 wire dif
WEST INDIES SECTION.
Kingston to
St Domingo,
Porto Rico,
St Thomas,
Leeward Islands and Granada,
Barbadoes,
Trinidad,
2200 wire distance.
• See Appendix page 48.


REASONS FOE GOVERNMENT ENCOURAGING
COMPETITION.
In lending their sanction to Acts of Parliament to incorporate
public companies, her Majesty’s Government are no doubt actuated
by a general consideration for the wants and interests of the com-
munity, and a desire to prevent exclusive action, or the establishment
of pernicious monopolies.
Applying the principle thus recognised to Submarine Telegraphy,
it is obviously but fair, after ascertaining the advantages to be derived
from the different lines proposed, both as to system and route, to place
them upon an equal footing, and afford such encouragement as may
insure to the public the benefit of free competition, and the improve-
ments concurrent with the rapid strides of science. A departure from
this principle, on the other hand, by extending direct or adventitious
support to one particular Company, would not only tend to foster
monopoly, but reinfiict all the evils now complained of in the railway
system, and mar the progress of an important branch of telegraphic
enterprise*
It being admitted that every undertaking which may facilitate the
means of communication with our Colonies and Dependencies abroad,
as well as Foreign countries, must equally affect Governmental and
Commercial interests. It is no less a fact, as proved by experience,
that such undertakings are, to a certain extent, beyond the capacity
of ordinary enterprise; and hence it is that subsidies have been
granted for the maintenance of steam postal communication with
America, the West Indies, Australia, &c.
The Government, therefore, in granting a subsidy to any Company,
may be said to sink a certain amount in the undertaking, in order
that the public may obtain the advantage; whilst, on the other hand,
in granting guarantees in favour of Submarine Telegraphs, they only
incur a risk upon the contingency of failure, and at the same time
avoid the objection so generally urged against subsidies, as having the
effect of sustaining monopoly wherever they exist.
Her Majesty’s Government, having lately established a precedent
by granting a guarantee to the Red Sea Telegraph Company, it is
submitted that they cannot stop there, otherwise a monopoly will be
created adverse even to the interests of Government itself; whilst


competition will be discouraged, if not altogether arrested, if the prin-
ciple is not extended in favour of other Companies, the merit of whose
plans may entitle them to equal support.
It should be borne in mind also that, if a Telegraphic System is to
be fully carried out, one line only will not suffice to meet the increase
of correspondence with China and Australia, independently with that
of all parts of India; and as the Red Sea Telegraph Company, in its
projected operations, will be connected with the Continental System of
Telegraphs, it is obviously expedient, as well as politic, to afford
similar encouragement and support to a second line totally indepen-
dent of the first or of any Foreign medium, and embracing all the
advantages of continuity and cheapness indicated in the plans of the
Great Indian Submarine Telegraph Company.
The evils of monopoly would thus be obviated ; the establishment
of two lines provide a security to the public against any interruption
or failure in either.
Her Majesty’s Government have already recognised this view in
proposing to sanction and subsidise a line of Postal Steam communi-
cation with Australia via Panama, independently of that heretofore
existing via Egypt and Ceylon.
The necessity for an independent line from England direct via
the Mediterranean to Alexandria will be farther apparent, when it is
considered that if no independent Line be established, it will be re-
quisite to erect extra wires through the Continent to meet the increased
traffic with India, Australia, and China, and this, too, at the expense
of British capital.
1 AdelpM Terrace, January 25, 1859.
Sir, —Adverting to the subject of our conversation at the interview
with which you favoured me a few days ago, it has occurred to me
that it may be more satisfactory if I now state more specifically, in
writing, those views which I am anxious to have submitted to the con-
sideration of the Earl of Derby.
It will be admitted that the desire to obtain the most accelerated
means of communication between Great Britain and her Colonies, as
well as the principal seats of commerce and political action abroad,
has now become at once general and pressing, and such as to demand
the earliest attention of the executive.
All the experience already acquired, however, tends to prove that
undertakings connected with submarine telegraphs are, to a certain


extent, beyond the means of mere pi’ivate enterprise, and require pe-
cuniary aid from the State, in whatever form it may be most conve-
niently afforded, whether by guarantee, subsidy, or otherwise.
With this feeling existing, it is natural that the public should hesi-
tate, as they do at present, to enter into projects of submarine tele-
graphy in the absence of such support, whilst the precedent afforded
in the guarantee granted to the Red Sea Company has had the effect
of checking investments in other undertakings of the same kind, how-
ever useful or practical their object, because unaccompanied by the
expectation of similar aid.
Under such circumstances, it is a fact that many schemes of a meri-
torious character are, at this moment, placed in abeyance from the un-
certainty prevailing as to the intentions of Her Majesty’s Government.
In venturing to assume that the Government might be willing to
incur responsibility and to afford aid by guarantee, which I hold to
be the cheaper mode, and to involve less of a monopoly than a sub-
sidy, I respectfully submit that the measure should be carried out
upon a system whereby the capital might be raised cheaply and with-
out risk, and so as to secure advantages to the public, such as they
derive under the penny postal administration.
In this case, moreover, the principle would be further demonstrated,
as, by creating the elements of extended use, profits would accrue in
proportion, and prove sufficient, not only to indemnify the Govern-
ment on account of the guarantee, but to leave a balance applicable as
a rest or sinking fund to insure the maintenance and repair of the
lines or the reduction of tariff.
In the case of the Red Sea Telegraph Company, the Government
have given an unconditional minimum guarantee of 4-g- per cent., and
a probable maximum of 10 upon a capital 60 per cent, over the esti-
mate, whilst they, at the same time, incur all the ultimate risk of
that capital, so guaranteed, in the event of ropes failing.
Instead of such an arrangement, I have proposed, in my letter to
the Earl of Derby of 12th November last, the issue of debentures as
a means by which the capital could be more conveniently raised,
whilst all the profit, as I have already suggested, would be available
to a rest or sinking fund.
If, at the same time, the lines were projected on a large and com-
prehensive plan, they might be worked out in sections, thereby
rendering the operation safer to the Government, and establishing a
principle of mutual insurance, the Government being, in this case,
their own insurers.
On the other hand, should the Government desire to avoid all con-


tingent risks, suck as the failure of the cable or other contingencies,
the contract for the lines might be so framed that the contractors
should undertake all responsibility respecting them, and be bound to
make, lay, work, and maintain them for a given period—say ten years
—under some arrangement like the following:—
1 st, That each contract should he for a complete scheme of several
sections, whereby the advantage of through or continuous traffic
should he maintained, this condition being a necessary element in
any right system of ocean telegraphy, whilst, Avithout it, in my
opinion, the principles bf mutual insurance would be void.
2dli/, That, on subscribing to the foregoing conditions, the con-
tractors should receive a guarantee of 5 per cent, upon a capital
100 per cent, over the estimate.
3 dly, That, instead of requiring the establishment of a company,
and the raising of shares, the Government should sanction the issue of
debentures, yielding 5 per cent., and pay the contractors in those at par.
4:thly, That all profits, after payment of the guaranteed rate of in-
terest and working expenses, be divided between the contractors and
the Government—those accruing to the latter, as already indicated,
to form a rest for the reduction of tariff.
s thly, That, as regards a line to America, inasmuch as a greater
risk is involved, as pertaining to one event, the guarantee should
necessarily extend over a larger surface of capital, but in such a case
the aggregate profits would be proportionably greater.
Finally, If the Government should decline to adopt the foregoing
plans, I submit that they should subsidize the lines upon a certain
scale of tariff, in which event the Great Ocean or American Line
would require a subvention of 6 per cent, upon L. 333,000, being one-
third of its capital, or L. 20,000 per annum for 25 years, and the Great
Indian Line 6 per cent, on the first division of the line from England
to Alexandria, with an understanding that, upon its completion, the
subsidy should be further extended to the remaining portion of the
route to India and China. The different Colonial Legislatures are
already prepared to subsidize a branch line to Australia.
I trust that I may not be deemed presumptuous in thus presenting
my individual views on this question ; but, impressed as lam with
the great political and national results involved in the proper carrying
out of the undertakings herein referred to, and having, from long
study and practical attention to submarine telegraphy and electric
science, acquired no little experience, I hope that what I have ven-
20
' ALLAN’S SYSTEMS OF


tured to set forth, may, in some degree, assist the deliberations of the
Government with regard to a question so prominent, and one at this
moment so very important in the eyes of the country. —I have the
honour to be, Sir, your most obedient servant,
Thos. Allan.
Lieut.-Colonel the Hon. W. P. Talbot,
Downing Street.
THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF TELEGRAPHIC
COMMUNICATION.
The agency of the Telegraph, viewed practically, may be said to
involve the same degree of relation to the postal medium as the latter
does to personal communication, and, if developed under a proper
system, cannot fail to produce results as yet incalculable in their
importance, stamping its broad mark upon the further civilization of
mankind, and uniting distant nations in an universal network of sym-
pathetic communication.
Considered as a practical operation, a telegraph between two dis-
tant points—say London and Bombay—may, according to the plan
and route adopted, and the principles upon which the undertaking is
based, be rendered so expensive to the public in the cost of messages,
as almost virtually to preclude its use.
If this be admitted, the price of the message becomes the real test
of the utility of the line, and materially affects the whole question of
traffic, inasmuch as the number of telegrams will increase in geo-
metrical progression inversely as the cost, whilst, under a false
system, wherein the number of stations are unnecessarily multiplied,
and the working expenses consequently enhanced, the line, how-
ever mechanically efficient, presents to the public but a costly
luxury, whilst, as a commercial speculation, it must collapse from its
inability to sustain itself, or create a sinking fund to repair or renew
the cables.
If, on the other hand, the system adopted as to plan and route,
first cost and working expenses, be such as may admit of a low charge
upon messages, it will follow that, from being enabled thereby to
meet the requirements of commerce and the public at large, the
amount of traffic will be increased, so as to render the lines self-sus-
taining and recuperative.
Long Ocean Telegraphy, therefore, as compared with short, or as a
span of 15 or 1600 miles is to 3 or 400, effects such a reduction in
21
NATIONAL TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION.


cost, from the small number of stations en route , as at once to meet
the demands of the public, and increase the traffic to a point of com-
mercial success.
For instance, a system by means of which a comparative saving
of 40 per cent, can be effected on the first cost, and of 50 or 66
per cent, in working expenses, will permit of the tariff of charges
being reduced one-half or two-thirds respectively, whilst, at the
same time, an increase of traffic will be created in the ratios, say
of 8 or 12 to 1.
Example—Under a system and route as adopted by the late
Atlantic Telegraph Company, the cost of a short message to America
would be, say L. 4, and the number of telegrams, say 10,000 per
annum, the gross revenue would, therefore, amount to L. 40,000,
and estimating the cost of working the lines at L. 45,000, would
shew a deficit of L. 5000 a-year;—whereas, by the system and
route adopted by the Great Ocean Telegraph Company, the cost
of a short message, in accordance with the foregoing premises,
would be one-half, or say L. 2, and the number, consequently, in the
ratio of 8 to 1, or 80,000 per annum, the gross revenue would
amount to L. 160,000, deducting L. 22,500, one-half less than the
previous statement, as working expenses, will leave a profit of
L. 137,000 towards rest and dividend.
Again, under a system similar to that adopted by the Red Sea
Telegraph Company, the cost of a message from Alexandria to
Bombay would be, say L. 4, and the number of telegrams, say
12,000 per annum, the gross revenue would, therefore, amount to
L. 48,000; and if the working expenses of the lines be estimatad at
L. 50,000, a deficit would be shown of L. 2000 a-year; whereas,
under a system similar to that adopted by the Great Indian Submarine
Telegraph Company, the cost of a short message between the same
places, in accordance with the foregoing premises, would be two-
thirds less, or L.l, 6s. Bd., and the number consequently in the ratio
of 12 to 1, or 144,000 per annum, this would produce a gross revenue
of L. 192,000, from which may be deducted, as working expenses, a
sum equal to one-half that in the previous statement, or L.25,000 f
leaving a profit of L. 167,000 for rest and dividend.
From the evidence afforded by the rapidly augmented traffic in
railways, and more especially as regards our postal service, where
the ratios of increase are inversely as the cost and directly as the faci-
lities, the foregoing figures exhibit average results much under those
to be anticipated under circumstances of more practical develop-
ment, but they may, at all events, be taken as a fair basis of calcula-


tion as to tlie probable returns under the different systems adopted,
shewing also that if a general plan of telegraphic communication
were carried out, as indicated in my letter of 12th November last,
the whole would be rendered self-sustaining and recuperative.
Considering the subject as a question of political economy, I
submit, that if a sum of Five Millions were judiciously expended
by the State on behalf of such undertakings, beneficial advantages
would accrue to the nation from increased facilities of communication,
equivalent nearly ten-fold to the outlay, whilst this result sinks into in-
significance when compared with the vast and important considerations
involved, if taken in connection with political and military objects,
in fact, rendering those lines the very heartstrings of the Empire.
In speaking of political considerations, it should be borne in mind,
that supposing a telegraph system to be established sufficiently in
accordance with the wants of the public, and at such a cost per mes-
sage as to bring the Lines within the means of the mercantile com-
munity and the public at large, still the Government despatches, from
their very character and importance, though fewer in number than
other communications, must so far outweigh the latter in value, that
it would be but equitable and right that the State should adopt, in
some manner, a share of the risk, either by advance of capital,
or an equivalent in the form of guarantee, or subsidy in aid.
It is submitted, on the other hand, that the principles upon which
Her Majesty’s Government now propose to encourage Submarine
Telegraphic undertakings are, to say the least, erroneous, having, in
the first place, the effect of inducing a baneful inflation of capital and
increase of working expenses, whilst no provision is made for the
creation of a reserve fund, the natural consequence being that
when the latter break or otherwise fail, a financial collapse ensues
from the want of resources to meet such contingencies as has been
recently evidenced in the case of the line from Cagliari to Malta.
These principles appear, moreover, to be entirely one-sided —the
nation, as an aggregate body, deriving a great advantage at the risk
of the individuals embarking in such enterprizes. Where, therefore,
Government incur no risk, it is submitted there should be at least a
species of ad valorem charge on their despatches, more especially as
their intrinsic value cannot be estimated by their mere quantity.
If it be determined, however, not to carry out telegraphic com-
munication on a national and general system on the basis indi-
cated in my letters of 12th November 1858, and 25th January 1859,
it becomes of the utmost importance that some decision should be


arrived at, or some reply vouchsafed to the many proposals made,
more especially as to the extent to which Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment will aid individual schemes, in order that there may be no
further delay in commencing active operations, as much time must
necessarily elapse before the lines are constructed or in working con-
dition.
Thomas Allan.
London, April 27, 1859.
Gkeat Indian Submakine Telegraph Company,
1 Adelphi Terrace, Strand, April 30, 1859.
My Lord, —At a period so momentous as the present, when the
peace of Europe is gravely menaced, and the necessity of securing
the most unrestricted and accelerated means of communication with
our possessions abroad, has, in the opinion of the public, become im-
perative, the Directors of this Company feel it to be a duty which
they owe alike to Her Majesty’s Government and the country —even
at the risk of being deemed importunate—once more to invite your
Lordship’s attention to the various propositions which they have from
time to time submitted with a view to the establishment of a line of
Submarine Telegraphic communication, connecting England directly
by way of Falmouth, Gibraltar, Malta, and Alexandria, with our
fortresses and dependencies in the Mediterranean, and with India.
The experience of the last few days has painfully demonstrated
the many inconveniencies resulting from an entire dependence upon
the existing continental lines of telegraph, and the impolicy of rely-
ing any longer exclusively upon a medium through which intelligence
of the most important character is distorted, and events misrepre-
sented, whilst, at the same time, it is liable to interruption at any
moment in case of hostilities with England.
Under such circumstances, I am now instructed to -acquaint your
Lordship that the Directors of this Company will be prepared, within
the shortest possible period, to commence the line from Falmouth to
Gibraltar, upon the conditions they have already named, or with such
modifications of them as I am authorised to explain, if honoured with
an interview by your Lordship or the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
—I have the honour to be, my Lord, your Lordship’s most obedient
servant,
Thomas Allan.
The Eight Honourable
The Earl of Derby, &c. t &c.


GOVERNMENT REPLY.
7431-18/5.
Treasury Chambers,
21st May 1859.
Gentlemen, — I am desired by the Lords Commissioners of Her
Majesty’s Treasury to inform you, that after full consideration of the
subject , it does not appear to my Lords advisable to entertain the
proposals which have been submitted by you, and Mr Allan on your
behalf, with reference to the construction of a direct Submarine
Telegraph to Gibraltar and Malta. —I am, Gentlemen, your most
obedient servant,
(Signed) George A, Hamilton.
The Directors of
The Great Indian Submarine Telegraph Company,
1 Adelphi Terrace.
TELEGRAPH TO GIBRALTAR.
{From the Morning Post , June 24, 1859.)
It is understood that one of the latest acts of the defunct Govern-
ment was to undertake, at the cost and risk of the public exchequer,
the laying of a submarine telegraph from the Land’s End to Gibraltar,
the cable for which is already (partially) under construction, and is
intended to be submerged during the ensuing autumn. The length of
the line Avill be upwards of 1200 nautical miles, without a break, and
the estimated cost is about £300,000. * * * It is difficult to imagine
by what emergency it can be attempted to justify so striking a devia-
tion from the rule which the Government had laid down for its guid-
ance in these matters. It will be remembered that the late Chancellor
of the Exchequer stated recently in his place in Parliament, that the
Government had determined to grant no more unconditional guaran-
tees to telegraph companies, but to confine their support to future
undertakings to an annual payment by way of conditional guarantee,
to take effect only from the laying of the line, and to continue so long
only as it remained in working order. In other words, the Govern-
ment pledged themselves not to risk public money in the construction
or maintenance of submarine telegraphs.


(Lord Palmerston’s Administration.)
Great Indian Submarine Telegraph Company»
1 Adelphi Terrace, sth July 1869.
My Lord, —As the question of Submarine Telegraphic Commu-
nication between Great Britain and her colonies and dependencies,
as well as other parts abroad, is one which, from its great importance,
must necessarily present itself to the attention of Her Majesty’s
Government, I am instructed to place before your Lordship, on behalf
of this Company, the enclosed copies of communications addressed to
your Lordship’s predecessor, containing propositions for carrying out
a line from Falmouth to India direct via Gibraltar, Malta, and
Alexandria, thus establishing a thoroughly independent route free
from the interruption and complications of the existing continental
medium, and, at the sametime, placing England in immediate connec-
tion with her most important naval and military stations in the
Mediterranean.
The propositions referred to were framed not only to meet the
views indicated by the Lords of the Treasury in their Minute, No. 235,
of 22d February 1858,* hut also those considerations of economy and
practical advantage so essential to the success of such undertakings,
whether viewed politically or commercially.
The Directors trust that on a perusal of the documents enclosed,
your Lordship will recognize those principles which should render
the proposals they have made not only advantageous to the country,
but also entitle them to the favourable consideration of Her Majesty’s
Government.
They regret, however, to observe that, up to this moment, no specific
determination appears to have been arrived at; whilst schemes of a
fragmentary character, involving a foreign medium, and not only
irrespective of any general system, but in direct contravention of the
Treasury Minute above referred to, have, in the meantime, been
espoused and favoured with pecuniary aid from the State.
The encouragement thus afforded has, moreover, thwarted the
original object of this Company, which was established to carry out
a through, direct, and independent communication between this
country and India.
The Directors are aware that the measure of which they more
especially complained, and which has been so generally deprecated
by the public as well as in Parliament—namely, the guarantee hastily
* See page 2.


granted to the Red Sea Telegraph Company, originated with the late
Government; but, under any circumstances, it must be regarded as a
check to the adoption of any general system of communication between
Great Britain and her Southern Colonies, and an embarrassment to
all enterprise of a comprehensive character in the same direction.
The Directors are therefore induced respectfully to appeal to your
Lordship on the occasion of your return to office, in the hope that you
will afford to the whole subject that full and impartial examination
which its merits deserve.
The Directors now beg to state that they will be prepared to carry
out the undertaking direct to India either as a whole or in sections,
so as, at all events, to effect an independent communication with
Gibraltar and Malta, upon condition of receiving a subsidy, as accorded
in the Steam Postal Service, or upon such other arrangement as may
meet the altered circumstances of the case.—l have, &c.,
Thomas Allan.
The Eight Hon. Lord Palmerston.
Mr Allan presents his compliments to Yiscount Palmerston, and
takes the liberty of inviting his Lordship’s attention to the enclosed
copy of a Petition recently presented by Lord Stanley of Alderley to
the House of Lords, as well as to the accompanying papers, contain-
ing a comprehensive plan of National Telegraph Communication,* with
a view of placing Great Britain in direct correspondence with her
Colonies and Dependencies abroad.
Yiscount Palmerston will at once perceive that the subject is one
which involves considerations of high interest to the elevated mind,
and requires to be regarded upon principles which, as a statesman,
his Lordship will not fail to recognize, more especially as the subject,
politically, socially, and commercially, is one of vital importance to
the interests of this country.
Mr Allan would farther observe, that, as the Patents which he
possesses form the basis of the system indicated in the paper in ques-
tion, he is ready to demonstrate that, if carried out upon a large scale,
it may be accomplished upon self-sustaining principles, not only with-
out risk or loss to the nation, but in a manner so as to realize an ab-
solute advantage, either in the shape of surplus profit or in the reduc-
tion of the tariff upon messages ; or, in fact, results analagous to those
which the nation is now enjoying under an improved postal system.
* See page 10.


Mr Allan would further be prepared to submit a plan where the
risk of the undertakings proposed would fall exclusively on the con-
tractors*, but refrains from entering upon this and other details of the
subject, in the hope that Lord Palmerston may afford him an oppor-
tunity of doing so personally at any time most convenient to his
Lordship.
In the meantime, looking to the urgency of circumstances, Mr
Allan would venture to express a hope that the Government may
arrive at an early decision as to the course to be adopted with regard
to the Indian as also the American lines. As to the latter, the
question arises,—Why not offer a handsome premium to the Com-
pany which may be the first to establish an efficient telegraphic com-
munication between England and America ?
With regard to the Indian line, via Gibraltar, Mr Allan would also
submit to Lord Palmerston that the Company with which he is con-
nected, and which was the first to indicate such an undertaking, have
much reason to complain, in the first instance, of the intervention of
the Red Sea line being sanctioned by the Government, as tending to
foster a fragmentary scheme to the injury of a more comprehensive
and useful project, whilst the one now on foot for carrying out a line
to Gibraltar, as a Government undertaking, has the further effect of
thwarting nearer home a laudable commercial enterprize, in the
maturing of which much capital has already been expended by the
Great Indian Submarine Telegraph Company.
PETITION
PRESENTED BY THE EIGHT HON. THE LORD STANLEY OF ALDERLEY,
JULY 19, 1859.
To the Right Honourable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament assembled, the Petition of the undersigned Bankers,
Merchants, and Others,
Humbly Sheweth, That your Lordship’s Petitioners have
watched with much interest the progress of Submarine Telegraphic
Science, as superadding to Postal Steam Communication the means
of more immediate correspondence between Great Britain and her
Colonies and Dependencies, as well as other remote parts abroad:
* See page 21.


That the experiments already made, and the efficiency of some of
the lines now in operation, have fully manifested not only the practi-
cability, but the important advantages resulting from such a mode of
communication :
That your Petitioners have, at the same time, to regret, that nearly
all the lines hitherto undertaken and sanctioned by Her Majesty’s
Government involve a Continental Medium, whilst no efforts have
yet been made to secure a thoroughly independent route, free from
foreign intervention or control:
That your Petitioners feel they need scarcely suggest the disad-
vantages attending such a state of things, or those
Political, Social, and Commercial, which render an independent line
from England through the Mediterranean a matter of necessity and
importance, when it is borne in mind that, under the existing arrange-
ments, our telegraphic communications with India, may, at any
moment, be exposed to interruption in the event of war :
That your Petitioners, therefore, earnestly hope that your Lord-
ships will be pleased to adopt such measures as may henceforth pro-
mote, as far as possible, the establishment of Direct Lines of Sub-
marine Telegraph between Great Britain and her possessions abroad.
(,Signed by the Lord Mayor , the City Members , and upwards
of four hundred of the Mercantile Firms of the City of
London.)
1 Auelphi Terrace, August 20, 1859.
My Lord, —The general anxiety prevailing throughout the country
on the question of Submarine Telegraphic Communication with our
Colonies and Dependencies abroad, as well as with the American
Continent, impels me respectfully to solicit your Lordship’s attention
to my letters of the 3d instant, conveying proposals in reference to
this object, so long placed in abeyance, to the great disadvantage of
our national interests.
I regret that it becomes my duty to trouble your Lordship again,
but it must be obvious to your Lordship, that if the enterprizes in
question are to be undertaken at all, the period most eligible for rais-
ing the requisite capital is rapidly passing away, whilst but a short
interval will be afforded for preliminary operations, including the
manufacture of the rope, &c., so as to enable the promoters to lay
down the lines at the proper season.
It is to be lamented, my Lord, that, notwithstanding the long period


which has elapsed since the subject was first presented to the Execu-
tive authorities by myself, upon a plan which combined efficiency with
economy, no comprehensive steps appear to have been taken, whilst
projects of a fragmentary character, and experiments vague in their
conception and erroneous in the material appliances employed, have
met with encouragement, —the natural consequence being failure and
loss of prestige.
From the interest with which your Lordship was pleased to receive
the exposition which you allowed me to offer on a late occasion as a
member of a deputation at Cambridge House, I trust I may be per-
mitted to assume that your Lordship is desirous of regarding this
question upon broad and truly national principles.
1 Adelplii Terrace, September 1859.
I regret being obliged to trouble your Lordship again in reference
to my former letters on the subject of Telegraphic Communication
with India and America, but I have a public duty to perform, which
I trust your Lordship will consider as my apology, more especially
as our operations are entirely placed in abeyance from the want of
some specific reply to the propositions addressed to Her Majesty’s
Government on this subject.
The perplexity produced by the tortuous policy of successive
Governments with regard to these matters, has, I regret to say, as a
consequence, scared away that capital which would otherwise have
been available for great and useful undertakings in Submarine Tele-
graphy, —all ordinary calculations as to the commercial profit likely
to accrue being completely upset.
A review of the past, my Lord, will account for this state of things.
First, the principle of subsidies, then of guarantees announced and
sanctioned by the Treasury, and again summarily withdrawn, although
it was known that Companies had been formed, shares subscribed for,
and preliminary operations commenced at considerable expense, for
telegraphic communication with India, upon the faith of such policy
being adhered to, and with objects in accordance with the Treasury
Minute, No. 235, of 22d February 1858. Subsequently, the doctrine
of conditional guarantees was propounded by my Lord Derby, and
again, on your Lordship’s accession to office, suspended; whilst now
private enterprize is threatened with competition by the Government
itself, who, it is said, propose to erect lines on its own account. It


is, therefore, my Lord, that the commercial spirit, which by this time
would have secured to us a direct telegraph line to India and across
the Atlantic, has been diverted into other channels, and driven from
undertakings which, however sound in their object, depended upon
circumstances so unreliable.
I therefore, my Lord, respectfully submit, that if Her Majesty’s Go-
vernment be now determined to carry out a line to Gibraltar, it should
be so notified to the public, and that such notification is at least due to
the Directors of the Great Indian Submarine Telegraph Company,
* * * * * * *
As regards the sum of £20,000, voted by Parliament for experi-
ments in submarine ropes, I venture to observe, that the amount in
question is at once too much and too little. Too much for experi-
ments that will elicit nothing not already known, and too little to
solve a problem which requires to be tested upon an extended scale.
Moreover, there is the less necessity for such an expenditure where
a public Company already exists ready and willing to relieve the
Government from the responsibility and risk, as well as any contract
connected with the rope now partially made.
Finally, my Lord, considering how long this important question
has oscillated between one department of the Government and an-
other, and been left almost entirely to the subordinate bureaux, I trust
you will allow me to state, that the country looks to your Lordship
and the Chancellor of the Exchequer as the master minds to deter-
mine upon a definite course of proceeding; and, by an intelligible an-
nouncement of the intentions of the Government, to restore that con-
fidence which has been so fatally estranged in the commercial world.
—I have the honour to be, &c.,
Thomas Allan.
To Lobd Palmerston, &c. &c.
1 Adelphi Terrace, Sept. 6, 1859.
Dear Sir, —The fact of the Government having referred to the
Commission of which you are a member, the question as to the best
description of cable to be employed in a line proposed to be laid
down from Falmouth to Gibraltar, induces me to address you upon a
subject which has occupied my attention for many years in all its
branches and details.
I cannot forbear remarking that, up to this period, the science of
Submarine Telegraphy has not made that practical progress which
might have been expected from the genius of the age. On the con-


trary, the laws of nature and the truths of philosophy appear to have
been alike ignored, and the search after right principles lost sight of
in the interests of expediency ; whilst empyricism, supplanting truth,
has lent its ready help in a mercenary struggle.
As a consequence, the lines hitherto constructed exhibit so many
disjecta membra , scattered without order or system in the Mediter-
ranean and elsewhere, and distinguished only for the complications
they involve their mal-structure and inefficient operation, every day
affording fresh proofs of imperfection and failure.
A Table I send herewith forcibly supports this view of the case,
whilst the abortive attempt made in the Atlantic stands forth most
prominently, and further establishes the fallacy of the principles
adopted in the structure of all those submarine cables hitherto essayed
in deep waters, —the process of submergence always more or less
deteriorating their working condition and value.
Although the proverb says,—“ That in the multitude of councillors
there is wisdom,” experience has shewn of late that the multitude
may also lead to confusion, and here that confusion has been worse
confounded by civil-engineers dabbling in the province of electricians,
and vice versa.
In considering the specimen of the rope marked No. 8, which you
were good enough to shew me a few days ago, I confess that I have
been vexed to think that so much expense and misappropriation of
materials should have been incurred to ignore the first principles of
mechanical science. Every sailor boy knows that the strain presses
first upon the centre thread or strand of a rope, construct it as you
may. Unfortunately for us submarines, our conducting copper wire,
(our vital function as it were,) must form that centre strand of the
rope, and the principal question is, —How to conserve its integrity
under the circumstances of submergence ? Now, the steel wires in
the specimen alluded to, inserted in the hemp strands, cannot surely
have been placed there to prevent or decrease the longitudinal strain
upon the central copper core, as, from their very weight, they must
rather tend to throw a greater strain upon it. It may be probable,
however, that the wires in question are intended to increase the
specific gravity of the hemp; for, viewed mechanically and physi-
cally, they can be of no other use, and I only regret to see the simple
element of practical science so disregarded.
I am sorry to say, also, that I consider the Government rope, as
designed for the Gibraltar line, no less fallacious in the principle of
construction than those which have already failed so egregiously. It
is, however, to be hoped that the money voted by Parliament for ex-


Falmouth to Gibraltar, .
. £250,000
Gibraltar to Malta,
200,000
Malta to Alexandria,
200,000
periraental purposes will be devoted to the one object which the
country desires, —namely, to ascertain and procure a rope whose con-
struction shall be in accordance with the true and immutable laws of
natural philosophy. No consideration of the sacrifice in abandoning
the present rope should stand in the way of this great object, still less
any deference to existing interests, which may only lead to a patch-
work operation, detrimental alike to the undertaking and the credit
of the country.
I wx'ite thus strongly, as I feel that it is not yet too late to retrace
our steps and go back to sound principles, which, if properly regarded
hitherto, would not only have promoted economy, but saved the waste
of time and money-—I beg to remain, dear Sir, yours faithfully,
Thomas Allan.
Captain D. Galton, R.E.,
Board of Trade.
Great Sdb-Makine Telegraph Company,
1 Adelplii Terrace, Sept. 12, 1559.
Sir, —1 have the honour to enclose for your consideration the ac-
companying Memorandum, suggesting an arrangement under which
a direct line of telegraphic communication with India may be esta-
blished with advantage to the country, and without risk to Her
Majesty’s Government.
In pursuance of the plan thus indicated, I now beg leave to submit
the following proposal on behalf of the Great Indian Submarine Tele-
graph Company, which they will be prepared to cany out, in the
event of the terms already offered in my letter to Lord Palmerston, of
sth August last, (copy of which is inclosed,) not meeting the approval
of the Lords of the Treasury.
That, in the present state of the money market, and notwithstand-
ing that the circumstances which have already taken place have dis-
couraged the interest, if not confidence in such enterprizes, this Com-
pany will undertake to raise the required capital of £650,000, to
complete the entire line from England to Alexandria, apportioned in
the following sections, any one of which may be first proceeded with
as Her Majesty’s Government may deem most expedient, viz. :
£650,000


That, in consideration thereof, Her Majesty’s Government shall
agree to pay to the said Company a Bonus of Seventy-Eight Thou-
sand Pounds (£78,000) per annum for five years, conditional upon
the successful laying and maintainance of the said line in working
order.
That, on the other hand, the said Company will undertake to give
all Government despatches priority of transmission, and to carry the
same free of charge. •
That the said Company will also undertake to relieve the Govern-
ment of any contract into which they have entered, with regard to a
Submarine rope intended for a line from England to Gibraltar, and
to purchase the same in its present condition.—l have the honour to
be, &c.,
Thomas Allan.
The Eight Hon. W. E. Gladstone, M.P.
MEMORANDUM
Submitted for the consideration of the Right Honourable
the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
It being assumed, that in the establishment of any public under-
taking it becomes the duty of those whose interests it is likely to pro-
mote, to take part in its initiation, and to support it in proportion to
the benefits they are likely to derive, —it is obvious that this duty is
peculiarly essential as regards the establishment of Telegraphic Com-
munication between Great Britain and her Colonies and Dependencies
abroad, which from its nature requires that there should be a com-
bination of those interests most concerned in its success ; and, in this
case, the interests more immediately concerned may be said to be
political and commercial, or, in other words, the country at large, as
represented by its Government, on the one hand, and the mercantile
community on the other. In carrying out such enterprizes, therefore,
it follows either that the Government should take the onus on itself,
looking to the public only as supporters or customers, or that private
enterprize must take the initiative, and rely upon the Government
taking its share of the burden by granting a premium on the risk im-
posed on the public company engaged in the undertaking, in the form
of a subvention in aid for the conveyance of all despatches on the
public service.


Falmouth to Gibraltar,
. £250,000
Gibraltar to Malta,
200,000
Malta to Alexandria,
200,000
As, however, all risk of capital must, under such circumstances, he
home by the Company, the subvention to be afforded must not be
estimated as bearing any ratio to the tariff to be charged to the public,
but rather as a bonus upon efficiency and success, and which would
enable the Company to charge lower rates than otherwise, and have
the natural effect of creating the element of extended use, which all
precedent teaches us cheap facilities are so calculated to encourage.
The despatches of the Government, taken in the aggregate, must
always bear but a small comparison with commercial correspondence ;
but, at the same time, their value must be estimated inversely to their
quantity. It follows, therefore, that if Government, acting for the
State, is to take its fair share in the initiation of the undertakings re-
ferred to, it will be bound to grant a liberal subvention or bonus, in a
proportion equivalent to the risk devolving on the Company, the ad-
vantages to be derived, and the peculiar value of their despatches,
which cannot be measured by their mere numbers.
These considerations are based upon the assumption that, in the
first place, the Government may decline itself to construct the lines,
and also that they may not be disposed to sanction guarantees upon
terms similar to those conceded to the Red Sea Telegraph Company.
This being the case, it is respectfully suggested, that instead of a
guaranteed dividend of 6 or 8 per cent, on the capital, for so long a
period, (as 25 or 50 years), as hereto sanctioned by the Treasury, it
would greatly facilitate the raising of that capital if an annual sub-
vention, equivalent to a higher rate of interest, were allowed, and for
a shorter period, say 10 or 5 years, accompanied with some such
condition as the following, so as to secure the subvention being applied,
in the first instance, in aiding the establishment of efficient lines of
communication ; and, next, for the creation of a reserve fund for their
continued maintainance. Namely, that after payment of working ex-
penses, all profits should be divided between the reserved fund and
dividends to shareholders, until such dividends reach 8 per cent., and
thereafter in the proportion of two to one. If Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment were to agree to an arrangement on the above basis, upon a
capital of £650,000, to complete the line from England to Alexandria,
in sections to be proceeded with in the order the Executive might
desire, viz.:—
the Great Indian Submarine Telegraph Company would, under such


circumstances, relieve the Government from the contract and ex-
penditure already incurred on account of the rope intended for a
line as far as Gibraltar; for, although as far as constructed, the rope
in question is erroneous in principle, and entirely unsuitable for the
depths of the Bay of Biscay, it might still be made available for
shore ends, and otherwise worked up by the contractors to the Great
Indian Telegraph Company.
It will also be obviously for the advantage of the public, that when
the lines are completed to Alexandria, a similar financial arrange-
ment should be concluded for a continuation throughout to India, it
being only by a through system that economy in transmission can be
secured, and, as a consequence, the traffic necessary to produce a
dividend and a reserve fund to uphold the undertaking.
It will be perceived, that, under such an arrangement as the fore-
going, the Government will risk nothing, whilst it affords a premium
to success, a result which it is clear must be of the greatest advantage
to the country at large, in all its political and commercial relations.
This premium would, in the aggregate, amount, in round numbers,
to about £400,000 or £500,000, contingent on the line working;
whereas the arrangements made by the late Government with the
Red Sea Company entails upon the country an expenditure of
£1,800,000, whether the line works or not.
A further saving would also at this moment be effected, by the
adoption of the course herein suggested, as it would render unneces-
sary the expenditure of the £20,000, lately voted by Parliament for
experiments on Submarine ropes.


APPEND I X.
ALLAN’S SYSTEM OF OCEAN TELEGRAPHY
The principal feature in this System of Telegraphy, besides the
production of electricity most effective for woi'king extra distances of
submerged wire, is a deep-sea rope or conductor, combining the maxi-
mum of conducting power and strength with the minimum of bulk,
weight, and specific gravity, thereby rendering its safe submergence
in ocean depths a simple mechanical operation.
The mechanical principle in the construction of these ropes is the
reverse of those hitherto used, the peculiarity being that the whole
metallic strength is placed in the centre of the insulating medium, —
thus forming an inextensible core, and so preserving the insulation
from injury by tension, in place of the self-destructive spiral wire
casing as heretofore.
In a cable constructed on these principles, suitable for the distance
between England and America, the core or conductor is composed of
a solid copper wire, surrounded with steel wires, in itself capable of
bearing a strain of 21 cwt. without yielding. The weight of the cable
is 10 cwt. to the mile, and under 2 cwt. in sea water; its weight,
therefore, could not in any degree injure its electrical qualities, as
the core or conductor alone is capable of bearing upwards of 10 miles
of the cable hanging vertically from the ship, before the insulating
and conducting medium could in any degree be injured by tension.
The conducting power is threefold greater than that of the late
Atlantic cable, —whilst the insulating medium is much thicker, and
prepared so as to withstand heat and pressure.
From its lightness and portability, upwards of 3000 miles can be
conveyed in one vessel; and the paying out gear being dispensed
with, it can be veered out at the rate of 8 or 10 miles an hour with
facility.


From the very great increase in the conducting power and insula-
tion relatively, besides dispensing with the iron envelope hitherto used,
a very much higher rate of signalling can be attained.
Under this system, it is calculated there will be comparatively an
economy of 40 per cent, on the first cost of construction, besides 50
per cent, on the working.
(From the Times , April 22, 1857.)
In our judgment , the Atlantic cable is constructed on a wrong principle.
In a previous article on the subject of Submarine Telegraphic Communication ,
we pointed out the errors which have already led to the destruction of
so many cables , and the simple manner in which they are remedied by
Air Allan's patents. This Atlantic cable , though , with regard to lightness
and cheapness , a step in the right direction , is still not in the right path.
If it does answer temporarily , it will not be due to the plan on which it
is made , but in spite of it. The present one, though lighter, cheaper,
and more flexible than the ponderous iron coils through which share-
holders have lost hundreds of thousands irretrievably, is still made
on the same old principle of self-destructiveness. Why is not the
new patent adopted which , by the use of a large conductor , makes the
core of the cable its strength , and does away altogether with the necessity
for outside spiral ivires ? By this patent , cheapness , lightness , increased
conductibility , and therefore certainty of electric action , are insured. Only
by the adoption of plans like these can the public ever hope for any
extensive and useful scheme of submarine communication.
(From the Alechanics' Magazine , July 3, 1858.)
During the last few months a great change has taken place in the
opinions of professional men, and of the public generally, in reference
to the desirability of using weighty and cumbrous cables for submarine
telegraphic purposes. Now, for years past, Mr Allan has urged the
adoption of the direct contrary of the heavy cables. In the very
early stages of the system, he clearly set forth the self-destructive
character of the heavy cables, should any attempts be made to sub-
merge them in waters of great depth; and to obviate the evil, in the
spring of 1853 he took out a patent for a rope, the mechanical
construction of which was the reverse of those in use, having as its
main feature an inextensible core. Later in the same year he
patented another, maintaining the same principles of construction,
but of such an arrangement of parts as to produce a rope, not only


light per mile, but of such low specific gravity that it might be laid
with facility across the Atlantic, without risk of injuring itself by the
tension resulting from its own Aveight. With these improvements,
and others comprising the production of electricity in a manner suit-
able for the purpose, Mr Allan enunciated, as Avas stated in the Time s
October 1853, the project of an Atlantic telegraph. In March 1856,
in a letter to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, not only was
the Atlantic telegraph proposition revived, but the idea of the Great
Indian Submarine Telegraph was put forth in these words, —“ It is
feasible to lay lines from this country (say Plymouth) to Gibraltar
and Malta, and so on up the Mediterranean, en route to India.”
Before the telegraph squadron sailed last year Avith the Atlantic
cable, Mr Allan stood alone in predicating the failure Avhich occurred,
and the scientific grounds for his prediction were made public.
These grounds were, indeed, clearly set forth by him in a letter
addressed to ourselves so long ago as December 1855. After last
year’s failure, men greAV suddenly enlightened; and, after the able
papers of Messrs Longridge and Brooks at the Institution of Civil
Engineers, the merits of light ropes and the utter unfitness of heavy
ropes for deep-sea purposes became universally acknowledged.
Mr Allan, and Mr Allan alone, has the great merit of introducing
the light-rope system, Avhich will now become universal. No man
ever gained a more complete or certain triumph in the field of practical
science than he has achieved in this matter. For the future, hea\ T y
cables will be used in shallow waters only. For all deep waters the
light cable will be adopted; and Ave very much doubt whether any
company whatever will be able to construct these properly without
license from Mr Allan, under his patents of 1853, Avhich virtually
give him the monopoly of what, up to the present time, are the only
practical means known of mastering the difficulties attendant upon
the construction, submergence, and working of ocean telegraphs.
(From the Mechanics’ Magazine , July 31, 1858.)
The able correspondent of the Times , last week, gave a full and
practical expose of not only the failures which have befallen the
Atlantic cable, but traces the cause and effect to the nature of the
cable itself. He states, —“Wire-covered ropes for such deep seas
as the Atlantic are not only useless, but literally almost render such
an undertaking impossible.” Also, that ropes of light specific gravity
only are suitable, which Avould enable us to dispense Avith “ all the
paying-out machines, buoys, slip-ropes, hauling-in apparatus, and all


the worthless and expensive lumber which has been foisted into what,
under a different arrangement, should be one of the simplest mechanical
operations” We are glad to revert to these remarks of an eye-witness,
corroborative of the principles we have ourselves so frequently pro-
pounded in reference to the inventions of Mr Allan in Submarine
Telegraphy.
We may here recapitulate the principles of construction, or rather
the philosophy of the submarine cable, the conditions of which are
so well maintained in the cables patented by him—namely, that
they should combine, with the necessary conductibility for the dis-
tance, the greatest amount of relative strength possible to be attained,
and that, too, in the form of an inextensible core , so as to counteract
tension, and consequent injury to the insulating medium ; and that
the specific gravity should, within certain limits, be inversely as the
depths of the sea on the intended route ; that is to say, the shoaler
the water, the heavier should the cable be, and vice versa. There
should, therefore, be three several descriptions of cable —namely, that
which within tideways will be subjected to the effects of tides and
waves, and the chances of abrasion from stones and other distur-
bances, from anchors, &c., whose specific gravity should be about 4*5,
or more ; a second part, which might be affected by slight agitation
of the bottom, of a specific gravity of 3 ; and a third part for the
deep sea, and which should not have a specific gravity greater than
T 5, although less—say T 3, would be quite enough, A rope of this
specific gravity and weight could be handled with great facility, and
paid out with great rapidity, dispensing entirely with friction-breaks
and paying-out gear, which are necessitated only by heavy ropes, the
primary cause of all the mischief in such undertakings.
It will thus be obvious that, by such an arrangement of parts as
to strength, conductibility, weight, and specific gravity, in accord-
ance with the first principles of natural science, a submarine telegraph
may be established in any depths and to any distance with compara-
tive certainty; the process being thus rendered at once simple, and
to all intents and purposes analogous to veering out a log line.
Contenting ourselves with this brief exposition of the principles
maintained by Mr Allan throughout, the correctness of which have
been so fully exemplified by recent occurrences, we trust, now that
the truth of science in regard to submarine ropes may be said to be
fairly ascertained, that no fastidious or sinister influences will prevent
the public from the benefit of his discoveries.


SUBMARINE TELEGRAPHS.
{From the Times , December 21, 1858.)
A short time since and hnt one great scheme of ocean telegraphy
occupied the attention of the public. Now, however, encouraged
apparently even by the failure of the Atlantic cable, there are at least
eight or ten fresh plans put forth. Some of the ideas are crude and
visionary in the extreme, though, nevertheless, they seem well sup-
ported ; while others, on the contrary, are not alone feasible, but so
necessary that we trust they may eventually be carried out to successful
completion. Such a one is that of the new Great Ocean Telegraph
Company, which has been established for the purpose of connecting
Great Britain with America by means of Mr Allan’s admirable system
of submarine wires. The primary object is, of course, to establish a
direct communication between London and New York by a line from
the Land’s End to Halifax, the inlet to all the telegraphic lines of
communication, not only of the Canadas, but of the United States
generally. The sea route proposed is also a very good one, though
on the average deeper than that across which the Atlantic cable has
been laid, and, we fear we may now say, lost as well. This increased
depth of water would most undoubtedly be a considerable disadvantage
to any company not working with cables constructed on Mr Allan’s
system; but, with these cables, the deeper the water the safer they
are, for their mechanical and physical attributes, combining as they
do the maximum of conducting power and strength with the minimum
of weight and specific gravity, render their safe submergence in the
greatest depths a very simple mechanical operation. Throughout we
have always had a most favourable opinion of Mr Allan’s system of
submarine ropes, and this journal was the first to point out the folly
and utter inefficiency of the old system under which the most ponder-
ous iron coils were made year after year on what may literally be
termed self-destructive principles, and, of course, were almost every
one lost in the process of submerging. The remarks which we made,
now nearly two years since, with reference to heavy wire-covered
cables, and especially upon the Atlantic cable, which was then being
made, have been so fully verified by the event that we may be excused
quoting them on this occasion : —“ The many failures of the submarine
cables, as hitherto constructed, are so notorious that it may be safely
predicted it will be found almost impossible to connect Europe with
America by means of submarine cables constructed on the principles
of those now in use. Their great weight renders the carriage of them


difficult, and the laying of them impossible, without constant risk to
the integrity of the conductors. For long distances they are deficient
in conducting power, while from their peculiar conformation they are
self-destructive in being submerged to great depths. We do not mean
to say that the present Atlantic telegraph cannot succeed, hut the
chances are much against it, and it is certain that before it has been
down 12 months it will, like others similarly constructed, be perfectly
useless.”—The limes , April 8, 1857. The enunciation of these opi-
nions at once drew forth angry contradictions from all interested in
maintaining the old system of heavy ropes, yet what has been the
result ? Now, two years have elapsed since then, and already the
heavy cable for deep water is scouted by the manufacturers, who are
all now directing their attention to producing ropes of the very lightest
kind consistent with their strength, and already the plan of a heavy
casing of outside spiral wires is being modified in such a manner as
shows the day to be not far distant when that mechanical absurdity
will be given up altogether. To Mr Allan, however, belongs the
merit of having been the first to see these evils and provide a practical
remedy for them in ropes made on an entirely different principle.


INLAND AND SUBMARINE TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION.
THE UNITED KINGDOM
ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH COMPANY.
ALLAN’S SYSTEMS.
Empowered by Act of Parliament, 14th and 15th Victoria.
(PROSPECTUS.)
The object of this Company is twofold :
First —To establish a System of Inland Telegraphic Communication
on the Principle of the Penny Postage.
Second —In connection with the Great Ocean , Great Indian Sub-
marine and (. Extension ) Telegraph Companies , to establish an
Electrical Communication to every point of Commercial impor-
tance throughout the World.
To effect this, the Company have adopted Mr Allan’s Systems in
Electro-Telegraphy, by the adaptation of which there will be compa-
ratively an economy of 30 or 40 per cent, in cost and working.


Xo. of Towns.
Jifty Messages per Day.
One Hundred Messages
per Day.
2.
£1,825
£3,650
3.
5,475
10,950
4.
10,950
21,900
5.
18.250
36,500
6.
27,375
64,750
7.
38.325
76,650
8.
51,100
102,200
9.
65,700
131,400
10.
82,125
164,250
11.
100,375
200,750
12.
120,450
240,900
The General and Universal System of Telegraphic Communication
embraced herein, is based on the fact of Great Britain being not
only the workshop of the world, but the entrepot of the world’s
commerce.
Taking London as a centre —the Electric Telegraph, whose uni-
versal use can only be accomplished by system, economy, and direct
communication, will extend not only to every principal place of
business in the United Kingdom at a trifling and uniform tariff, but
also connect, by direct submarine communication, every point of
commercial importance within a possible reach of such agency.
British interests, political as well as commercial, in all parts of the
world, will thus be brought into direct telegraphic communication
with each other, and with London as the great centre.
THE INLAND LINES
Will constitute a system of electrical communication, based on the
principle of the penny postage, to convey messages to all parts of the
United Kingdom at a low and uniform rate, —a shilling for a short
message, or some equivalent charge, irrespective of distance.
Under the operation of this principle, it will be found that the
revenue developes itself in a geometrical progression, according to
the number of towns included in the scheme. If, therefore, twelve
only of the largest towns in England sent on an average fifty mes-
sages per day to each other, the gross receipts for the year would be
as follows :
From the great increase in the number of telegrams that will accrue
under the operations of these principles, the establishment of a Me-
tropolitan District Telegraph on the same uniform system becomes a
necessary and natural adjunct, not only as a speedy distributor


throughout the metropolis, but also as meeting a growing want for
some such rapid mode of communication between the widely-spread-
ing districts of London. »
THE SUBMARINE LINES
Of the Great Ocean, Great Indian Submarine and (Extension)
Telegraph Companies will, in connection with the Inland System,
enable all parts of Great Britain to maintain direct and independent
communication with America, India, her numerous Colonies, and the
principal seats of commerce abroad, and at same time create a large
amount of traffic over this Company’s lines.
THE GEEAT OCEAN TELEGKAPH COMPANY,
CONNECTING GREAT BRITAIN WITH AMERICA.
The Company’s Lines will be constructed so as to enable Great
Britain to maintain direct and independent communication with
America, her numerous Colonies, and the principal seats of commerce
on the* Atlantic.
Such an undertaking has, therefore, a powerful claim on Govern-
ment for a subvention in aid, whose despatches alone may be valued
at nearly 8 per cent, on the capital required.
The Company, however, do not rely on this source, as the principle
and conditions of such guarantees as the Government propose are
calculated to restrict the profits to a percentage rqpch below that which
this Company estimate as the result of their operations.
Wo king agreements with the United Kingdom Telegraph Com-
pany (incorporated by Act of Parliament), secure to this Company a
direct and independent communication not only with the Metropolis,
but all the principal seats of commerce and trade throughout Great
Britain, whilst similar arrangements have been concluded in the
Colonies.
The primary object of this Company is to establish direct tele-
graphic communication between London and New York, the two
great termini or centres of telegraphic communication in the Old
and New World, by a Submarine Line from the Land’s End to
Halifax, Nova Scotia, the inlet to all the Telegraphic Lines of com-
munication, not only of the Canadas, but of the United States
generally.


Hereafter, a Branch may be carried by Bermuda to Jamaica, thence
by connecting lines to the West Indies and Central States of America.
Undertakings like the present ought to show not only a possible
but probable return on the outlay of 30 or 40 per cent., so as to
admit of at least 20 per cent, being laid aside as a rest or sinking
fund to replace the cables.
Under the system on which this Company’s operations are based,
the cost of a short message (the real test of utility) would be 50 per
cent, less, as compared with any scheme yet proposed, and the traffic,
in consequence of such reduction, probably six or eightfold greater,
insuring thereby commercial success.
By an independent and direct route starting from the Land’s End,
the cost of a message need not exceed 405., saving all the risks, de-
lays, and heavy charges consequent on forming working agreements
with other companies.
The cost of a single line complete between the Land’s End and Hali-
fax may be estimated at £300,000. Estimating the transmission at the
low rate of 12 messages per hour, and assuming 20 hours as a work-
ing day—an aggregate amount equal to 12 messages per hour, at
405., would yield £175,000 per annum, whilst the working expenses
of the line would be under £25,000 a year.
The vast trade carried on between the United Kingdom, the Con-
tinent of Europe, and Canada and the United States, renders such a
project as this an enterprise of the first commercial magnitude and
political importance.
Experience proves that the success of an Ocean Telegraph must
depend mainly on the nature and construction of the Rope. This
Company has made arrangement with Mr Allan for the use of the
Rope designed by him, which the highest authorities pronounce to be
eminently adapted for the purpose.*
THE GREAT INDIAN SUBMARINE TELEGRAPH
COMPANY,
CONNECTING GREAT BRITAIN WITH INDIA.
A telegraph to India is not simply a commercial speculation. Upon
the broad principles of political economy it may be regarded as at
* See System of Ocean Telegraphy, page 37.


once a great social agent and an engine of Government administration.
Ihe object of this Company is to establish direct telegraphic com-
munication between London and Bombay, by a chain of Submarine
Lines from Falmouth to Gibraltar, Malta, and Alexandria, thence
via the Red Sea to India, China, and Australia.
The practical utility and economy of the Electric Telegraph can
only be developed by system and continuity of action.
By a continuous and independent plan, with few stations en route ,
the cost of a message between the termini would not only be reduced
to a minimum comparatively, but the expense, delays, and espionage
of the foreign lines of telegraph across the Continent of Europe be
entirely avoided—an object the more to be desired, as any tele-
graphic system of communication with India, based upon such a
connection, mugt be practically valueless, if not mischievous, to the
commercial community.
Telegraphic communication with the various stations on the line
is also of the highest importance, politically and commercially; whilst
the forwarding of all the intelligence to and from the more distant
points of commerce in the Pacific —Ceylon, China, and Australia,
would of itself create a large increase of through traffic over this
Company’s Lines.
THE GREAT INDIAN SUBMARINE (EXTENSION)
TELEGRAPH COMPANY,
CONNECTING GREAT BRITAIN, VIA INDIA, DIRECT WITH CHINA
AND AUSTRALIA.
This company is established in pursuance of a general plan of
Ocean Telegraphy, of which the Great Indian Submarine Telegraph
forms a leading division, so as to place Great Britain in direct com-
munication with her Colonies and Dependencies, and to extend the
benefits of a cheap and continuous system, under which the cost of
a message the entire distance may be reduced to a rate that will
render the lines generally available for all commercial and public
purposes.
It is proposed that the lines in continuation of the direct route from
Falmouth 4 in Gibraltar, Malta, Alexandria, and the Red Sea, should


48 ALLAN’S SYSTEMS OF TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION.
; be extended from Bombay to G-alle, thence to Penang, Singapore,
Hong Kong, and Shanghae.
The lines to Australia will branch off from Singapore via the
Flores Sea to Cape York, thence to Moretoti Bay, there to form a
junction with a system of land lines connecting the capitals and seats
of commerce of the Australian Colonies. Or from the Point de Galle
via the Cocoas and Western Australia to Adelaide.
SOUTH ATLANTIC TELEGRAPH,
CONNECTING GREAT BRITAIN WITH SOUTH AFRICA AND AMERICA.
The object of this Company is to establish a system of Telegraphic
communication between Great Britain, her Colonies in Africa and the
Brazils, and to extend to the Southern Atlantic the advantages of the
economic principles of Ocean Telegraphy adopted by the Great Indian
Submarine and Great Ocean Telegraph Companies, and thus to
embrace the traffic pf the Brazils and British Colonies in the South
Atlantic. . .-r
The lines of communication wifi extend from Gibraltar, the first
station on the Great Indian route, to Madeira, thence via Cape de
Verde, Sierra Leone, Ascension, St Helena, to Saldanha Bay for Cape
of Good Hope ; and from Ascension, to Pernambuco, thence by Bahia,
Rio Janeiro, Monte Video, to Buenos Ayres ; whilst a branch will be
established between Gibraltar and Lisbon, thus connecting Portugal
direct with the Brazils, as also with Great Britain and the commerce
of the Eastern and Western Hemispheres.
The commercial element of traffic over this Company’s lines will be
very considerable, whilst the engineering difficulties are very light.
The right of establishing stations, wherever needful, on the Por-
tuguese territory, has been already sanctioned by the Portuguese
INDIAN TELEGRAPH,
DIES AND STATES <;F CENTRAL AMERICA
THE TERMINUS <»F THE
TO GREAT BRITAIN.




