

■■ r m
j c " $ /ZUr-~A. y\JR~*
ALLEGED SLAVERY
QUEENSLAND
19Z3




ALLEGED SLAVERY
QUEENSLAND.




PREFACE.
An article appeared in the June number of the Leisure
Hour entitled “Slavery and the Slave Trade in Australia.”
I at once began to write a reply to it, addressed to the
Editor, and on the 28th May sent the following letter to
that gentleman: “ Dear Sir, —I am obliged for your
favour of 18th inst., accompanying a number of the Leisure
Hour for June. lam now collecting materials for a short
reply to the article on ‘ Slavery and the Slave Trade in
Australia,’ and you will oblige me if you can make room
for it in your July number. Ido not think it will occupy
much more room than the article in question.”
To this I received an answer, dated May 29 th, refusing
to insert the reply on the plea that “ July is printed.” I
have, therefore, decided to publish it as a pamphlet.
T. A.


■


ALLEGED SLAVERY IN QUEENSLAND
To the Editor “ Leisure Hour.”
Sir, —I have to thank you for your friendly note of
18 th inst., accompanying a copy of the Leisure Hour for
June, in which is contained an article headed “ Slavery and
the Slave Trade in Australia.”
The remark in your note that I will not be “ offended
by plain speaking on this one subject ” would be perfectly
correct if the plain speaking were characterised by sober-
ness and veracity—but when (as in the present case) the
indictment against Queensland is largely made up of state-
ments and inferences which cannot be ranked in that
category, you can hardly be surprised that the article you
refer to has caused me some pain, as must inevitably be
the case with one whose ambition it is to stand well in the
estimation of his fellow subjects at home, a feeling that
is shared by a very large majority of his fellow colonists.
The most painful feature in the charges you have thought
proper to bring against the Colony I represent is the evident
conviction that underlies this and similar accusations that are
brought against colonists, a conviction that seems ineradicable,
namely, that on becoming colonists we have somehow
“shuffled off” every attribute of humanity, and made our-
selves capable of countenancing and even committing the
most heinous offences against every law, human and divine,
without an atom of remorse or one shadow of com-


punction. One of your contemporaries put this conviction
some months ago in the following words : “It pays the
Queensland planters to murder their Kanakas, and of
course they murder them.” Though I admit that the
brutality of this sentence has not been imitated by any
of the papers that take up the same line of argument, yet
the opinion that originated it is evidently the mainspring
of the accusations that are so freely made by the small
portion of the London Press who seem to assume that
coloured labour and slavery must be convertible terms, and
who deem it part of their mission to leave no means untried
to prevent their dark-skinned fellow creatures from earning
an honest living by honest labour, an advantage that is too
frequently denied them in their own islands. I assure you,
and those who think with you, that in judging thus harshly
of the employers of coloured labour in Queensland, you are
doing great injustice to men, the overwhelming majority of
whom are men of education and good social standing, and
who are as incapable of acting with cruelty and injustice to
their labourers, black or white, as any body of men in the
Queen’s dominions. That there may be isolated exceptions
to this rule is only saying that planters are human; but I
affirm that nothing in the shape of the gross acts of cruelty
and neglect alleged to have been habitually committed on
coloured labourers in Queensland could be possible under
the system of supervision carried out under the provisions
of the Act that regulates it ; nor would public opinion,
which is just as watchful over the rights and interests of
the labourers there as it can be here, tolerate for a moment
the abuses alleged to exist.
The truth is that the coloured labour question in the


Colony has become so intimately blended with local
politics of a very virulent type, that an uncompromising
spirit pervades every utterance on the subject, and no
assertion is too absurd, no accusation too atrocious, to be
used by its opponents in their efforts to discredit the
system and those who uphold it. When to all this is
added the uncompromising hostility of a large proportion of
the white labouring class, who have imbibed the fixed but
most erroneous idea that the employment of coloured labour
tends to lower the wages of the white man, it may be
imagined how easily unfounded assertions may be
made and gain credence in a colony constituted as
Queensland is. That the bitter spirit pervading every
utterance of the opponents of coloured labour in the Colony
should be so largely imitated by the Press on this side is
a subject of very deep regret to those colonists whoso
chief desire it is to cherish and perpetuate those bonds
of mutual sympathy and kindliness which have hitherto
prevailed between the mother country and her youngest
constitutional Colony. Surely it is a strange employment
for an enlightened liberal Press to lend itself to the task
of loosening these bonds by fanning the flame of political
and sodal rancour already surrounding this question, and
leaving no stone unturned in endeavouring to accomplish
the ruin of an industry that employs hundreds of thousands
of British capital and affords highly remunerative employ-
ment tc hundreds of ' skilled British workmen, —an in-
dustry, too which affords an opening for so many of our
dark-skinned fellow creatures to carry back to their homes
at least the rudiments of civilisation, and with their
accumulated wages to form the nucleus of future pros-


perity for those of their number who have profited by the
lessons of industry and frugality inculcated on them by
residence in the Colony, while enabling all to gratify their
friends and relatives with a display of what to them must
appear great wealth.
With these prefatory remarks I will now, with your
permission, proceed to notice the more specific and direct
charges that are brought against my Colony in your article,
leaving the general assertions and the inferences based on
these charges to fall to the ground along Avith the founda-
tion on which they rest.
The first thing to which I must take exception is the
use you have made of an advertisement copied from the
Melbourne Argus , of April 7th, 1882, in which Kanakas,
horses, drags, arc all classed together for sale, and this
you take as evidence that the same state of things prevails
in Queensland as formerly existed in America. I think that
on reflection you must acknowledge this to be ratier a
strained interpretation, as the negroes in America were
transferred for life Avith the estates on which they worked,
Avhereas in Queensland the services of the Kanakas are
only transferred for the unexpired term of their agreement,
the new employer entering into a bond to Government with
two sufficient sureties, under a penalty of £5 for each
labourer, to undertake all obligations of the for.ner em-
ployer and to provide a return passage for the labourers on
the expiration of their agreements, the transaction being
explained to the labourers and carried out in the presence
of, and certified by, a Government “ Inspector of Pacific
Islanders” (vide Clause 19, Schedule J., “Pacific Island
Labourers Act”). I think you must allow that this is


very different from the state of things that prevailed in
America prior to emancipation.*
The next assertion to be noticed is from your corre-
spondent in Sydney, who informs you that an article in
the Fortnightly Review was written by the representative
of the firm named in the above advertisement; and you say
that the title “An Exculpation,” is suggestive of the
proverb “ Qui s’excuse, s’accuse,” but omit to mention that
the article was in reply to a most violent and exaggerated
attack that had appeared in a former number of the same
magazine, and that the “ exculpation ” was a very complete
answer to that attack. Under these circumstances Ido not
think the proverb you quote is applicable. Your remarks
as to the low scale of remuneration given to the coloured
labourers, are by no means so convincing as they appear at
first sight, when the circumstances are fully considered.
Besides the actual wages, which have to be paid six-monthly
in gold, in the presence of a Police Magistrate or Inspector,
without deduction (vide Labourers Act, Part 3, Sec. 21), the
employer has to pay the whole expenses of the labourer
from the time he enters the ship till he is landed again on
his Island, to keep him well clothed and fed during the term
of his service, to pay all medical and hospital charges, “ and
in case of death, the wages to be paid to Inspector or Immi-
gration Agent” (Labourers Act, Part 5, Sec. 33). When
to this is added that the Islanders are not of much use for six
* The wording of this advertisement was certainly ill-judged,
as it gave an opportunity to those in this country, who are ignorant
of the circumstances, to found this charge. In the Colonies where
the circumstances are known and understood, no one, except the
wilfully blind, could possibly misconstrue its meaning,


months after their arrival, and that a good white man will
do more work than two Kanakas, it becomes evident that
his labour may be anything but “ cheap ”; the mischief is
that the good white man is not very often to be had when
wanted, and that the most robust white labourer cannot stand
the work of the cane field without imminent risk of disease
and death. Before quitting the remuneration question I
may call attention to a misquotation in the note at the foot
of the second column of your article, where you make Com-
modore (now Admiral) Wilson say, “ I have heard the
master of a trading vessel openly boasting, &c.,” instead of
“ I have heard of the master of a trading vessel, &c.,” as I
find it should be on reference to Commodore Wilson’s re-
port ; this little inadvertence on your part is very import-
ant, as it alters Commodore Wilson’s evidence from the
merely hearsay to the positive. To the latter I give the
most complete credence,. — to the former no credence
at all.
You now go on to quote an article from the Wide Bay
and Burnett News headed “ The Slave Trade,” relating the
deplorable event that occurred on board the “ Roderick
Dhu,” which caused universal regret throughout the Colony,
and which has given the journal you quote (one of the most
rabid of the Anti-Kanaka papers) a grand opportunity
for sensational paragraphs. But let me ask any candid and
reasonable man whether the occurrence on board the
“ Roderick Dhu ” was the necessary or even probable re-
sult of the labour traffic 1 I say decidedly not—such scenes
may and do frequently take place in ships under every flag,
in all trades, in all parts of the world, and in the present
instance occurred in spite of the most elaborate precautions


that human foresight could provide, as is proved by the
comparative immunity from such events that has character-
ised the trade during the many years of its existence. A
glance at the Act under which it is carried on would con-
vince any reasonable man that every provision which the
most earnest desire for the well-being of the labourers could
devise has been made, and as a rule with excellent results.
That there are exceptions to this rule is only saying that
the best precautions human foresight can frame are oc-
casionally found wanting.
The same writer goes on to say, “ It is of no earthly use
to deny that the ‘ boys ’ are kidnapped, or in plain English
stolen from the Islands.” I quite agree with him that it is
of no “ earthly use ” to deny it, if the object is to convince
him and others of his school that they are writing nonsense :
but I hope further on when dealing with this alleged kid-
napping to bring proof sufficient to convince unbiassed
reasonable men that no such crime is practised, at least as
far as Queensland is concerned. The violent tone of this
writer and his sneering allusion to the Premier is sufficient
proof to those who are behind the scenes that he is “ steeped
to the lips ” in the political venom which is the bane of the
Colony.
You now come to the evidence of two medical men who
were sent to report on the treatment and sanitary state 0£
the Islanders on certain estates in the neighbourhood of
Maryboro’. The report sent in by these gentlemen was, as
regards two or three of these estates, most unsatisfactory
and led to the passing of the present Act, with which I
think it difficult for the most fastidious critic to find fault.
It must be remembered that a severe epidemic had just


visited these plantations, and it would be unjust to pass an
adverse judgment on the whole Colony based on these
exceptional instances. Disinterested evidence has been
given in abundance, shewing that even under the old Act
the labourers were, on a vast majority of the plantations
treated with consideration and humanity, in confirmation
of which I may adduce the evidence of a gentleman wholly
unconnected with the sugar industry lately returned from
Queensland, who lectured at the Hall of the Society of Arts,
Arc., Adelphi, quite recently. “ These Islanders are brought
to Queensland by their own consent, to do work for which
they are well fitted. Their employers are compelled to
treat them properly during their stay in the Colony, and to
provide them with conveyance back to their homes at its
expiration. When their term of service is over one sees
detachments of them in the coast towns waiting for em-
barkation, and as they stroll about the streets linked to one
another by their little fingers (which is their equivalent to
the English fashion of arm-taking), gazing at the shops and
sights of town, well-clothed, happy and contented, the
spectator has need to wonder if these are the unfortunate
kidnapped creatures about whose wrongs he has read
occasionally in the correspondence columns of home news-
papers. The terms on which these Polynesians are
employed are briefly these :—The period of service is limited
to three years; the employer must provide the labourers
during that time with food, according to a liberal dietary
scale arranged for the purpose, and with clothes; he must
also pay them, in cash, for their labour, at the rate of £G
per year. For myself, I feel convinced that the experience
of civilisation which they obtain during their sojourn


cannot but be beneficial to them for the rest of their lives,
and also to the savage communities to which they return.
It might at first be supposed that the employment of
Polynesians on sugar plantations would have the effect of
ousting European labour, but this is not the case. The
more of this coloured labour that the planter avails himself
of, the larger is the staff of Europeans that becomes necessary.
In the Mackay district, in the north, for instance, the
experience of five years sheAvs an increase of 1,221 Europeans,
to balance that of 753 Polynesians during the same period.”
I may also refer to the speech delivered on the same occasion
by Chief Justice Sir Charles Lilley, to numerous letters that
have appeared in the Press at various times, and to the
most convincing proof of all—that numbers of the Islanders
remain in the Colony of their own free choice, many return
after visiting their native Islands, and some have been known
to come back twice to the Colony, a proof that they have
not considered themselves very badly used.
That the-death rate prevailing among them is very
large when judged by a European standard cannot be
denied; but it has still to be proved that it exceeds the
death-rate prevailing among them in their homes. One
cause of the high death-rate in Queensland is undoubtedly
the fact that owing to the absence of medical inspection
when they are shipped, a large proportion are found to bo
suffering from chronic and constitutional diseases when
they arrive, amongst which the chief are consumption,
scrofula, and a form of leprosy which is prevalent on many
Islands. I have heard it alleged that those afflicted with
disease are particularly anxious to come to the Colony in
hopes of being cured by the “White-fellow Doctor”—this


however, is only an allegation, and I do not state it is a fact
but it is certain that numbers are found on their arrival to
be suffering from the diseases I have enumerated, and some
others. The sudden change, too, from a spare and
exclusively vegetable diet, to a plentiful supply of animal
food, for which they have an extraordinary craving, may
possibly have a tendency to produce diseases of the digestive
organs in some of those who are of weakly constitutions
during the first months after their arrival.
The 24th section of the “ Island Labourers Act ” pro-
vides that “Employers are to provide labourers with
Medical Attendance ” —“ Inspector may order labourer to
Immigration Depot, or Hospital Districts may be proclaimed
(by Government) in which hospitals are to be established ”
—“ Employers to contribute towards maintenance of
hospital ” —“ Penalty for failing to send labourers to
hospital when sick not exceeding £lO nor less than £5
each.” When it is considered that a sick labourer is a drag
on his employer, and that death entails a heavy loss, it
might reasonably be supposed that the employer would use
all methods to ensure health and long life to his labourers—
but this common-sense argument is not allowed to have any
force when applied to the Queensland planter-s, because “it
used to be said by American planters, of slaves.” It seems
“ the Queensland planters have not even this check—they
have only a lease of their labourers and they may, where
the checks of conscience and religion do not interfere, take
as much work out of the labourers in their three years’ term
as possible, just as doomed horses are cruelly overwrought
before they go to the knacker’s yard ! ” It is very plain
that the writer of these sentences has no personal experience


of what he is writing about; he cannot possibly have had
an opportunity of marking the contrast between the
arriving and departing Islanders—the first frequently thin,
stooping and shambling along under the burden of his
bundle of clothing and necessaries, eyeing askance the
wonders of the new world that surround him ; the last
plump, upstanding, confident, looking straight before him,
and taking the balance of his eighteen golden sovereigns
with the air of a man who knows his rights and will have
them. The Jaunty air with which he enters the “ store ”
where he goes to purchase the “ trade ” with which he is
to return a great and wealthy man to his home and kindred,
and the gorgeous apparel in which he emerges from that
store, do not tend to remind the beholder of a horse
destined for the knacker’s yard. Neither has the writer
of the paragraph visited a plantation or farm and heard the
“ boys,” after the day’s work is over, giving vent to their
feelings of jollity by playing games, leaping, shouting, and
all kinds of noisy demonstrations, or if he has heard of it,
he probably attributed the sound to the yells of agony
forced from the “ poor fellows ” by blows from a “ cat ”
or “cowhide,” —this interpretation I have seen seriously
put upon such sounds. The writer in the Nord-A ustralische
Zeitung , whom you quote, I pass by with a simple contra-
diction, and I need not follow you into the “China
question,” which is somewhat outside the scope of your
paper, but will at once agree with you when you say that
the “ Colonial authorities and planters do not like the
words ‘ slavery ’ and ‘ slave trade.’ ” They do not like
them because they consider them inapplicable to anything
that exists in Queensland, notwithstanding what may be


said to the contrary by “ Commodore (now Admiral)
Wilson,” who can see no difference between the “ engaged ”
African and “ the native labourer recruited from the South
Sea Islands.” What the condition of the “ engaged ”
African may be I do not know, and Commodore Wilson
does not say anything about it, except that it is “ nothing
but the slave trade under a new name.” There are so
many definitions of what is meant by “slavery” and the
“ slave trade,” that it is difficult to arrive at any definite
understanding as to their exact meaning. My definition of a
slave is a man who is held to compulsory and unremunerated
labour for life, or for an indefinite time, and who is liable to
be-disposed of by sale or barter, at any time, without being
consulted in the matter. Commodore Wilson’s definition
seems to be, judging by the spirit of his report, that a
slave is any man with a dark skin who works for his living
beyond the bounds of his own country, on whatever terms
he may do so. According to my definition there is not
one single slave in Queensland. According to Commodore
Wilson’s there are many, and it is of no use wasting words
in arguing a case where the meanings attached to the same
word arc so opposite. I think, however, that nine out of
every ten men of unprejudiced minds, would be found to
put my interpretation on the word in preference to his.
I am glad that Commodore Wilson thinks “the Queens-
land Immigration Rules, for the guidance of the Recruiting
Agents on the Islands, are very good indeed,” but he adds,
“in many important respects they are a dead letter.” lam
obliged to differ totally from the conclusion he has arrived
at in the last sentence. These rules arc found to work satis-
factorily on the whole to all concerned, and more cannot be


reasonably expected. The suggestions made by Commodore
Wilson for amending them have been gladly adopted where
it was found practicable to do so.
I cannot but express surprise at the “ tabulated facts ”
printed at the end of Commodore Wilson’s report which
you quote. The statement contained in it is, as regards
Queensland, entirely misleading as quoted by you. The
number of Kanakas imported in the ten years from 1870
to 1880, is stated at 17,329; the number returned during
the same period is given at 9,610, the inference left to be
made being that the difference between these numbers
represents those who had died during that time ; but this
conveys a very mistaken impression, because those who
elected to remain in the Colony (no inconsiderable number),
should have been added, as well as those whose agreements
would expire during the three years subsequent to 1880
and this would have given a very different result.
I now come to the “ experiences ” of Baron Maclay, that
“ the voluntary recruiting is all rubbish and engagement is
all nonsense ; these people neither understand why they go,
nor where, or what they are to do or when return.” I can
only say that if this be the case when they leave the
Islands, it is wonderful how soon they acquire a knowledge
of all these things after they land in the Colony. Let the
Baron attempt to detain a Kanaka a month beyond the
expiry of his agreement, or pay him half-a-crown less than
the sum due to him, and he will soon discover whether or
not the contract is understood. In confirmation I will quote
the opinions of one who has probably enjoyed as many
opportunities as Baron Maclay of making himself acquainted
with the true state of the case, and who is quite as competent


to form a judgment upon it. In his admirable and deeply
interesting work on Hew Guinea, Captain (now Admiral)
Moresby says at page 95, chap. 7: “ The natives” (of one of
the South Sea Islands) “are well accustomed to white men
and many of them had gone in labour vessels to Queensland
and worked on the plantations—some told us they meant to
go again, an evident proof of kind treatment, and explained
that they understood the nature of the agreement made by
them with the Queensland labour vessels.” On the next page
occurs the following ; “At this latter place ” (St. Maria) “we
received a hearty welcome on landing from several hundred
savages, who wore no clothes and were armed with deadly
arrows; amongst them we saw one who was the happy
owner of a red shirt and double-barrelled gun, and he spoke
English well and told us he had spent five years in
Australia. We talked to him about kidnapping, and he
observed,‘All black man savey ’ (understand) ‘no kidnapping
now, if black man like to go he go, if he like to stop he stop’
—a valuable piece of testimony from this group of Islands,
long the principal scene of kidnapping.” Again on page 97 :
“On standing down the south side of the Island we fell in
with a ketch of 20 tons, with 21 natives on board and no
licence to carry them—the owner ns well as the master was
on board and told us that he had a cotton plantation at
Sandwich Island, and was willing to provide himself with
legal papers, but as yet had not had an opportunity; after
much consideration, the natives being evidently free agents ,
and the new Act not yet come into force, I decided on
sending Lieutenant Smith to Sandwich Island on the ketch,
and he parted company accordingly.” On page 100 Captain
Moresby says: “ Most of the women wore waist-cloths but


the men were naked—the manner of both was most kind
and friendly to us—several of the men told us they had
gone to Queensland in the labour vessels and having been
well treated by the planters, and given plenty of trade, were
anxious to go again. Our views as to the evils of the
labour traffic began to be much modified by the nature of the
natives’ testimony.”
It cannot be alleged by anyone who has read Captain
Moresby’s book that he was unduly biassed in favour of
the coloured labour system. When starting on his cruise
he was evidently much impressed by the reports so freely
circulated and so greedily swallowed by the small circle of
enthusiasts who wish to believe every atrocity-story they
hear, and believe it accordingly. In the beginning of the
cruise Captain Moresby shews much laudable determination
to root out these alleged evils, but when closer observation
and extended experience shewed him that his views had
been mistaken or greatly exaggerated, he changed them and
candidly acknowledged having done so. The truth is that
oven under the old regulations, kidnapping was difficult and
dangerous to practise—under the new Act it is nearly
impossible without speedy detection and punishment.
Successful kidnapping would imply collusion between the
captain, the Government agent accompanying the ship, the
crew, and the Government inspector at the port of arrival,
whose duty it is to institute a rigid inquiry into the events
of the voyage, compare the captain’s and agent’s logs, and
ascertain that the agreements are in form and understood
by the labourers. No advantage can be derived by these
men from breaking the law, but they would do so at the
imminent risk, in the case of the captain of forfeiting his


licence, and the bond for £SOO entered into by himself and
two sufficient sureties at the commencement of the voyage
(Par. 9, Part 2nd, “ Pacific Island Labourers Act ”), and in
the case of the agents, any neglect would be punished by
summary dismissal, while the owner, if a party to an
illegal transaction, would, by an Imperial Act, forfeit his
ship. To prove that justice is not denied in the Colonies
when evidence of infractions of the Acts is brought for-
ward, I may state that Captain Moresby seized two pearl
vessels, the “ Millanie ” and “ Challenge,” and sent them to
Sydney, where they were condemned for breaches of the
Act, but restored on appeal to the Privy Council. Another
vessel, the “ Crishna ” of Sydney, was sent to Brisbane,
condemned and sold for <£3,9oo—though defended by one
of our ablest counsel, our present Chief Justice, Sir Charles
Lilley. A captain was also sentenced to five years’ penal
servitude for the alleged kidnapping of an Islander, but
after he had served a considerable portion of his sentence
an inquiry shewed that the unfortunate man had been the
victim of a conspiracy among his sailors, and he was re-
leased.
I now come to your accusation based on the evidence of
one of the “ oldest missionaries,” This gentleman appears
to confine his remarks principally to the well worn old
generalities about the “ cruelty and demoralisation of this
trade.” The only piece of evidence given on which these
opinions are based is that a “ captain in the traffic ” had said
on seeing a handsome woman, a teacher’s wife, “ If I could
only get hold of that woman she would bring me £SO
at least in Queensland ” and does this venerable
missionary pretend that he believes everything that “cap-


tains in the traffic ” choose to tell him of the atrocities pre-
vailing in Queensland 1 These captains are generally set
down by the missionary brotherhood as anything but
estimable or reliable characters—and yet when one of them
gives utterance to a piece of nonsensical bravado, for the
express purpose probably of shocking his venerable auditor,
it is fastened upon with avidity and brought forward as
proof positive that slavery exists in Queensland ! The im-
putation it conveys is so absurdly and transparently false
that I disdain to refute it—and this is the second-hand,
slipshod evidence that is considered by you and the school
to which you belong sufficient to justify you in publishing
charges of kidnapping, slavery and cruelty against a com-
munity of your fellow subjects which abhors these crimes
as much as they can be abhorred by anyone ! Where is the
charity so loudly preached and so little practised by you
and your fellows ? It is said to “ begin at home,” and it
seems to be kept strictly for home consumption—at any
rate very little of it finds its way to the Colonics.
Your concluding remarks on the annexation of New
Guinea are highly characteristic. If you were not blinded
by “ the zeal which outruns discretion,” you would surely
have been able to see that however good a field for “Elack-
birding ” (as you elegantly call kidnapping) New Guinea
might be in its present state, all possibility of such a thing
vanishes the moment the English flag is hoisted over the
Island. It is, in fact, mainly to prevent the possibility of
kidnapping and other illegal practices being carried on, that
the Colony of Queensland is anxious to place the Island
under the protection of the flag. The evidence of one who
has had ample opportunities of judging may perhaps be


permitted to carry some weight in answer to the insinua-
tions you are pleased to make on this head. Admiral
Moresby, in his letter to the Times of the 21st May, says,
“ If New Guinea does not become a Crown Colony, but is
allowed to pass into the hands of Queensland, I, as one who
has seen something of her ‘ native labour,’ feel sure that the
rights of the natives of New Guinea and their future happi-
ness will be well cared for.” In addition to this testimony,
there is that of many disinterested men who have lately
written to the Press on this subject, some of whose letters
are before me, but consideration for my own time and your
space forbids my copying them.
To sum up—although wo are told on very high
authority that “ comparisons are odorous,” yet as perfec-
tion has not yet been attained in this work-a-day world, I
fear it will continue to be a world of comparisons for some
time to come, —I will, therefore, venture to break the rule
laid down, and alhrm that, compared with the average
English day labourer, the lot of our Island labourers is
enviable indeed. They are relatively better paid, clothed,
fed, and lodged than nine-tenths of English labourers. I
would therefore advise those avlio take so deep an interest
in his welfare to leave it to be cared for by the Govern-
ment, Parliament, and people of Queensland, who have
proved themselves quite able to look after it, and to con-
sider whether, in straining their eyes to detect blemishes at
the Antipodes, they are- not overlooking a few matters that
require attention at home. I would respectfully suggest
that something might be done by them to ameliorate the
lot of thousands of poor people, who under their eyes are
suffering starvation, misery, and degradation compared to


which the condition of our Islanders is happiness itself.
Though these people have the misfortune to be white and
to be our fellow countrymen, I submit that they have the
first claim to any surplus benevolence that may be seeking-
fitting objects to vent itself upon. Until our critics are
pleased to give some of their attention to the improvement
of these poor people’s most wretched lot, I must be forgiven
for comparing them to the lady mentioned by one of our
humorists, who neglected her household, and allowed her
own children to go about dirty and in rags, while she
occupied her time in sewing flannel waistcoats for the young
negroes of Timbuctoo.
Your obedient servant,
THOMAS ARCHER,
Agent-Ceneral for Queensland.
June, 1883.


