

SECRET
ALLIED INTELLIGENCS BUREAU
FIELD REPORT.
SUBJECT: A.I.B. FIELD ACTIVITIES SOUTH COAST- NEW BRITAIN
FROM APRIL, 1944, TO MARCH, 1945
WRITTEN BY: NGX8. T/MAJOR B. FAIRFAX- ROSS, A.I.F.
DATED: 10 APRIL, 1945.
MAP REFERENCES: GAZELLE PENINSULA PROVISIONAL 1" - 4 Miles.
CENTRAL NEW BRITAIN PROVISIONAL 1" - 4 Miles.
FIRST AUST. ARMY - ENEMY INFORMATION GAZELLE
PENINSULA 16 JANY, 45.
(Sgd.) B. FAIRFAX-ROSS.
Maj.


Basil Fairfax-Ross: 40 years’
service to Papua New Guinea
Mr Basil Edward Fairfax-
Ross, who died last Friday aged
74, played a key role in the
development of plantations in
Papua New Guinea and of its
private sector as a whole.
In 1931 he joined the planta-
tion staff of Burns Philp and Co
Ltd in Rabaul, beginning a
career of commercial, military
and political service to PNG that
was to span 40 years.
He worked as a plantations
manager and. inspector for the
company until the outbreak of
World War 11, when he enlisted
in the AIF at Rabaul.
He served in the Middle East
from 1940 to 1942 in the 2/12
Battalion, then because of his
New Guinea experience he was
transferred to field intelligence
work and served behind Japa-
ns»e lines |on the New Guinea
mainland in 1943.
#Je was in the “M” Special
Lfpit attached to the Allied
Intelligence Bureau until 1945.
attained the rank of major,
was twice ■ mentioned in des-
aqd was awarded the,"
NJedal of Freedom (USA).
*After the war, Mr Fairfax-
Rflss joined the British Ncwv
Cgiinea Development Co Ltd as
assistant general manager. He
retired in 1971. after 20 years as
general manager.
He was known, for a robustly
practical approach, to the man-
agement of plantations.
Asked once what advice he
gave young men fresh off the
boat and assigned to the running
of lonely, distant plantations, he
noted that all new managers had
something in common.
They all felt it necessary to
change the way the plantation
was run - with disastrous effects
on productivity. Six months later
they usually earned the conclu-
sion that the original method
worked rather well after all.
“After a while 1 developed a
rule when the young fellow
came in I’d tell him, Tm sending
you to Wuvulu or wherever. If
you change anything in the first
six months I’ll sack you’.”
He was a close friend and
confidante of Brigadier Sir Don-
ald Cleland, Administrator of
what was then the Territory of
PNG in the 1950 s and early
19605.
As well as his post with the
iu'uh%u.
British New Guinea Develop
ment Company, Mr Fairfa>
Ross was a nominated membt
of the Legislative Council c
Papua New Guinea (1951 t
1963), a member of the Admini;
trator’s Council of PNG (1961 t
1963), chairman of the PN(
Copra Marketing Board and
member of the Council of th
University of PNG (1968 t
1971).
He was on the board c
directors of several Papua Ne
Guinean companies, amon
them, Kanosia Estates Pty Ltc
Burns Philp Co Ltd, Boi
gainville Copper, South Pacif;
Post Pty Ltd and Allied Press Pt
Ltd.
In 1964 he was awarded th
CBE,
He was a direct descendant c
Emily Fairfax (later Mrs .
Grafton Ross), only daughter c
John Fairfax (1804-1877), one <
the founders of The Sydnt
Morning Herald.
Mr Fairfax-Ross was born ;
Springwood in 1910 and edi
xated at The Kings Schoc
Parramatta.
He is survived by his wif
Mollie, and daughters Roby
and Gillian.
m/H/nw
OBITUARY


INDEX
part i. introduction: faulty situation - own situation
PART 11. TASKS - from MAY , 19M», to OCTOBER, ISVIJ FACILITIES Ann
SUPPLY AVAILABLE.
PART 111. ORGANISATION: ARMS - CTUIPMEIIT.
PART IV. PREPARATIONS FOR IRREGULAR WARFARE.
PART V. GENERAL PLAN: DEFENCE OF LAKIPI BASK - OPERATIONS BAST
OF LAKIRI, WIDE BAY AREA - OPERATIONS WEST OF LAKIRt,
CAPE DAMP IB R AREA,
PART VI. NARRATIVE: WESTERN SECTION JUNE./ JULY, VM\-
EASTERN SECTION JUNE/JULY, UMt.
WESTERN SECTION AUG. , 19M.
EASTERN SECTION AUG./S'WW’./OCT. , liM.
PART VII. TASKS - OCTOBER, 19M, to .MARCH, 19*45*
PART VIII. PLAN.
t
PART IX, NARRATIVE (Continued)
PART X. 3UfffIAPT - TASKS FULFILLED t ACKNOWLEDGMENT.
PART XI. ADMINISTRATIONI COMMUNICATIONS - CODES - SUPPLY -
AIR DELIVERY - COMPOSITION AND PAOKINO OF DROPS -
SUPPLY BY SMALL SHIPS - RATIONS - WATCHES.
PART XII. CASUALTIES.
PART XIII. AGENTS (SECRET).
PART XIV. MEDICAL.
PART XV. CO-OPERATION WITH ANOAU.
PART XVI. LESSONS IN NATIVE GUERILLA WARFARE: NATURAL ADVANTAGES -
NATURAL DISADVANTAGES - EMPLOYMENT - PECULIAR
INFLUENCES - INDEPENDENT GUERILLA YAPPAPB.
PART XVII. FURTHER A. 1.8, ACTIVITIES GAZELLE PENINSULA: OBJECT -
FACTORS - COURSES OPEN - PLAN.
PART XVIII. SUMMARY OP INTELLIGENCE - GAZELLE PENINSULA: AIR - SNA -
LAND - HEALTH - FOOD - PRISONERS OF WAR -
BOMBING - MORALE - SERVICE TROOPS.
APPENDIX I. AUSTRALIAN PERSONNEL - RECOMMENDATIONS Eon PROMOTION -
NATIVE PERSONNEL.
APPENDIX 11. RECORD OF NATIVE SERVICES.


GAZETTEER
ATU P 72*45
AWOL P *4938
BOYALPUN L 2188
BAIBIf P 7*402
BALATANO P 5662
BAIHIMAN P. P 9565
BBRQBBPG P, L 3193
CCTAPP L 2*490
CAPS DAMPISH P 5336
" COMORAN F 7815
rt BBBCHY P 72*4*4
* OPPOPn L 7*499
DANPUR F *4518
saia p. l 2793
GUM A P 7*417
OODKA F 5*477
HBPI T 4812
HSKITTO p 3918
IP R. F 5936
IffAl F 7321
INUTOWBI F 2812
IQU P. P 3207
KAI.ANGINA L 3991
KOLAMPCJN F 7516
KILALUH P 7/>IQ
KIBP P 6526
KAMA HD PA ?T F 57**6
KALAI P 59*/*/
KOHA F 281*4
KABALBA P 5555
KBN3INA P 5767
LAKIPI P 3313
LAMAPIN P 5950
LOTSI F *4617
IiAKATOKTU L *4286
HA33AU P 5739
MSHIHGA P 5630
MONTAGU IBP; P 3236
MINIM P 6*427
MBVELO P, F 5951
HANOUNA L 4207
MANIPUR P 3318
HS3KTWSI p 771*4
MU P 6825
HALF A 3 P 692*4
MALMALU P 5755
MKLKOI P. P 65*43
HKGIOI P. P 8*455
MAMUBZ p 6572
MAIIIUHA P 65*4*4
fiALWAL L 0562
KALAKUA L 0290
PANDI P. F 0053
PAI-AG p 9585
PUAPAL P 9983
PITjK p 57/48
RATIO P 5608
PAT! P 3601
3ALI L 1*492
aiPALAWcirtn p 5747
3AJHPUW P 7809
TALAU p 5362
T Alii mo P 5669
TOJRLKL P 9182
TIMOMO F 3228
TOKAI L 3*492
TIOIH P. L 6999
VAH3KL HUP, P 2525
WANG . ? 6904
V/AJTAVALO F 6352
YALA P 3617
YAPA P. F 535*4


PART I.
INTRODUCTION
1* This report covers tho operational activities of a,l. p, from
April, 19*4*4, to March, 19*45, working as an independent Guerilla Force
from MONTAGU HAPI3OUP to lIKITPY PUID BAY on tho Mouth const of NETT BRITAIN
and in tho taak of collecting Intelligence from enemy occupied terri-
tory through agents, by patrols and native contacts in the'south coast
area of NEW BRITAIN and North into GAZKLLE pktiinsfjla, extending to the
PABAUL fortress area,
2. Earlier in 19*43, A. 1.8, had Inserted several parties in tho
WIDE DAY - OPEN BAY area and in control NEWffIgITAIN primarily for
ooaatwatching nnd air-spotting, covering sow and air movement
from PADAUT. base against Allied operations on the mainland of NEW
GUINEA and preparatory to nod during the operations resulting in the
recapture of WBSTEPN NEW BRITAIN with tho .Allied occupation of ara'/S
and CAPE GLOUCESTER.
3« It waa then planned that tho A. 1.8. field portleo should con-
verge into two groups; one on tho North ooaot of new BRITAIN nnd the
other on tho south const, it la with tho operations of tho latter
group, which became known as SOUTH COAST (IT. n, ) GUERILLA FORCE, that
this report la concerned.
ENEMY SITUATION.
1» Prior to tho eucaensful Allied landing at APAWK in December,
19*43 / January, 19*4*4, the enemy had divided the responsibility for the
defence ami protection of tho south GOA3T between Army and Naval shore
units*
2, , The Array waa allotted the task of defending the important .
possible landing areas at arawb, GAOMATA, nnd r/AITAVALO in HKNPY RRT7)
BAY; while the Nary established a chain of coastwatching and nir
warning stations equipped with radio communication. The main coast
road permitting transport by native carriers only did not provide n
land supply route, and the tnak of maintaining those garrlaonn was
allotted to Naval transport, operating mainly with barges and sub-
marines by night, as Allied air patrols were taking a heavy toll of
coastal transport attempting movement in daylight,
3* Following the success of tho Allied landing at APAWB, with
Allied air superiority firmly established, light Naval units joined
in smashing the enemy’s barge traffic on tho couth ooast west of
MONTAGU FFaPBOUR. The enemy, then realising that ho would bo unable to
supply a force sufficient to succcsofully rcnlnt any determined Allied
move to the Rost, withdrew all hlo Amy troonn from the South const,
T/ost of the nook of OA7.ItI.LE PENINSULA, where the gnrrlaon at 7AITAVALO
with an outpost at K.,uiAnunA77 remained* Generally, this withdrawal was
made in good order, and in contrast to tho disorderly retreat of tho
larger defeated force on the North coast.
U. As no further Allied tnovo to the East of APAWK took place, tho
enemy’s chain of coaatwatohlng and air warning stations remained.
These posts were manned by Naval personnel, usually between 20 and 6o
in strength and maintained by barge, in addition, each post had a
number of "kembla" (natives engaged an native police and servants by
the enemy) employed in intelligence and Unison with local natives.
5* in April. 19*4*4, this situation remained, with the enemy still
In control of the coast as far West as AWU7, nt OAPK HAMPIKP.
OWN SITUATION
1. as tho Allien did not Intend to make any immediate more Eaet
on NKw BRITAIN, the a.i.b. field intelligence parties, on the couth
coast wore grouped at i.akiri, n native village two days inland from
WATERFALL BAY. LAKIPI van selected ns a base because the area was not
known to the energy and it afforded a good xlropsltc for nir delivery.


2, Tho enemy, by this time, was awaro that A,I,D. field portion
wore working In tho area; hla suspicion wan at first aroused by
natlra reports of aircraft dropping stores by parachutes In inland
areas, and confirmed by hla capture of an A,l.r», field party In the
OAPK PAKT'IBI? area and lain subsequent investigations, no patrolled n
short cllatanoe Inland in the r,IDK DAT and CAPK ORFUPD arena and found
A, X, E, camps, but did not mnko any determined military move in
strength to destroy the a.I, 18, parties, fie chose to rely on native
reportn gathered by hla ’’kunbla'', supported by ruthless and violent
action against any natives, executing all auapected of having been in
contact with a*I,D, .
3* Delivery of 25,000 lbs* air freight LAOPI provided stores
and equipment necessary to commence the operation of the guerilla
force* some native security had beon gained by the co-operation of
the paramount chief QOI.PAK - , vrhone influence extended over tho Inland
KCL and coastal !SK HORN tribes, but the allegiance of the tninOLlia in
tho i oka I and MAI.MAL aroao was in doubt, due to the open enmity of
an ambitious ond influential native kouja of TOIIAI endeavouring with
Japanese backing to supplant OOLPAK, and with the continued presence
of the enemy in the area, these nativco were not yet convinced that
we wore sufficiently strong to overcome the enemy, or to protect them
from enemy reprisals should they co-opcrafco with uo. This situation,
accentuated by the probability that tho enemy had observed the
numerous aircraft dropping stores at LAKXPI, demanded Immediate aotlon,
h, Accordingly, tho enemy ooaotwatehlng station at PAI.MAI.IIAL was
attacked and overcome; 1/j enemy TTaval personnel were killed and 3
taken prisoner, our casualties were 1 wounded, Mono had escaped,
and tho enemy was loft guessing no to the identification of tho force
which had eliminated this poat, The snore's chain of native intelli-
gonco to the East wns immediately Interrupted by the arrest of
certain natives, in the TOICAI and LAKATOkEI areas, who were known
links in hla chain. Thu ardently pro-Japanese i;pr?'JA chose to resist
arrest and fight, and ms klllod in the resultant skirmish.
5* Thin wao followed by an attack on the enemy coafltwatcblng
station at BAIRT7 which was successfully overcome; 8 Naval end 1 Arrgv
personnel were counted dead, and from enemy' reportn it was subse-
quently indicated that a further 5 naval personnel died of woundn,
wlille our losses were nil. At least 2, however, escaped. They had
hidden’ in the adjacent bush and observed the clearing up of tho
defeated poat. They reached tho enemy garrison at I’ILIH two days
later, and were able to glvo a comprehensive report as to the slwe
and identification of tho attacking force,
6, we now had to realise that tho enemy know that wo composed only
n small native guerilla farce directed by n few Australians, and some
retaliatory action could be promptly expected,
7. It wnn at this nfcngo that the writer, who had landed in April
at WATKPFAJ.L DAT from 11, M. /•. ir.)!IL IJ2I, took over command of tho
guerilla foroc from Ccpt. (new gcij.) r.I, dkinner. who had commanded
an a*l, B, field Intelligence party and organised the initial
guerilla force.
Own situation (Continued).


PART II
TASKS - from MAY, 1944, to OCTOBER, 1944.
1, An the Allies at thin stage did not plan to move Knot of A.PAWR
In strength, tho u,a, Forces stationed there wore limited to coastal
watercraft patrols not i-;nst of Montagu juppofTP, ro wore then allotted
the following tasks by the Controller, A. I,]'., through tl'o operational
Commander In north KAhlf JNi arha a, 1,8,, commander J. c. Mcmmrn, r. a, n,
(n) To clear tho enemy from the couth const of MSN BRITAIN from
MONTAGU HARBOUR to TIBNRY PBI1) BAY) a distance of I/O miles.
(b) To contain tho enemy within the nook of OAZ'Uh 1 ' » 'NimiULA on
tho south const,
(a) To gather and report intelligence from oav.rllr ‘‘'RfiiNnULA and
CENTRAL NKTV BRITAIN,
(d) To continue coastwatohing and air warning,
(o) Counter intelligence and neeesnary ectlon to prevent the
enemy gaining information from native sources,
(f) To win the loyalty of local natives and to protect them
against reprisals by tho enemy.
(g) To assist local natives with urgently needed medical attention,
(h) To report local weather conditions for the informstlon of
Allied Air Forces,
(J) To suoeour Allied airmen forced down in tho area.
(fc) lo provide for locally, or arrange where practicable, the
evacuation of native refugees from areas dominated by the
enemy.
FACILITIES AND SUPPLY AVAILABLE.
1, owing to the grout demands of iu'Oor operations being directed
in d,i',«p,A. at this time, very limited faollltleo wore available to
guerilla operations in iTiu’.v BRITAIN and they Imd to bo made entirely
from A,1,8, resources, upon which heavy demands were already being
made in the maintenance of numerous a, C,h, field parties in w, p.a.
Our dimensions were therefore dotuminodi-
(a) Force.
The guerilla force could be increased to a number of
nafclre personnel not to exceed in requirements Q total-
air delivery freight, Inolading containers, of 3»000 Ibn.
per month,
(*>) SapPlg*
No addition to the 5,000 Iba, alp freight could bo
expected by sea, as the south Rant season had now set
In, and coastal seas would bo too rough for the small
craft available, until the change to tho north west
sonson in {September,
(o) Support,
(1) Lnndi No assistance would be available.
(2) Seat No support could bo anticipated.
Later, however, opportunity permitted units of the R. A.TT.
to give no valuable aid on two ooonalonn,
(5) Airj north of CAPK COMORAN, in the area then covered
by air operations under COMAIR NOROnLH based on


(d) Medical.
TTo general faollltlna wro n'rnllohlo for the ovnountlon
of oaaualtlen.
(•) Oonamnloationa. *
rr/T and p/t cornu nleatlono comprised a type 3 f<J for
operation at LAKIPI bnao r nnd sufficient typo ATRI4A
transmitter-receivers for outposts -md patrolnj nil
providing direct contnunlontion with vu<ip.i. burn and
with i.i.p, Hew Guinea Control viv f through
which channel all traffic panned.
F»ollitlee and Supply Available (Gont 1 naod).


PART III
ORGANISATION.
1. As the main heavy items of our equipment and ammunition had boon
delivered by air in tho initial 35.000 lbs. allotted to establish the
base at and /supplemented with .5 tons by H, y. mill, 1521 in
April and the equipment of withdrawing A.I.P, field parties, the 5000 Ibr
allotted per month could be considered almost entirely m fond for the
present.
2. A carefully considered ration soulo was worked out at approxim-
ately Z\ lbs. per day for white personnel, and 2 lbs, por day for native
personnel, including weight of con tailors; this wan variable by the
amount of native foods which could be pur oh no .‘d from local natives,
ITativo foods, though not abundant, were available in omnlJ. quantitlon,
sufficient to supply guard posts in ndjnccnt village ar' , :i:i.
3. The supply available then permitted the c.rpnnnlon nn-l organisation
of tho guerilla force an follows*-
I|* our force was organised on thlo bnolo, considerable elasticity,
however, was constantly neonooary In order to m:nt the many special
problems peculiar only to a force of this nature and In these circum-
stances, rroblcms involving native politico, tribal lint;rust, the
control of the personal discipline of foreign natlvrn in their relations
with local natives, the nlloglonce of groups of natives to a particular
influential native of their tribe, the over present and atrangoly varied
influence of native custom, ritunl, and ’‘tabu', all requiring constant
care and attention. If the trust and co-npcrntlon of the force and of
local natives vmu to be maintained In on Inland in which the oostny
remained In great strength in tho northern peninsula, and still in
military control of the control coastal areas,
5* Tho h'l consisted of the writer, cither at bsno or ’lth a f/T
operator and attached personnel moving with any patrol. The second in
coronand was stationed nt T./\r:rnt bane and wan rcsponoiblc for records
and supply,
6. The n-i platoon consisted of 5 sections, The medical sec. In
ohnrgo of a white ngt, with two native assistants. The ncc. of
two native PCO’n responsible to the 2 1/c- The plonoor poo. varied In
strength from n normal 2-) natives engaged no ooC'ro, camp dutymen, etc.,
to any indefinite number in accordance with tho demand, end in addition
carried tho temporary employment of rofugoc natives awaiting disposal
f M „Jll • - ... -■


The w/T boc. connisted of 3 white NCO'o, any of whom wort detached to
patrols as neccoo'-ry. The face Ouor-3 nco. oomnrlcrd 19 oocond clnas
native troops and its duties wore the provision of standing guard pouts
in the LAKIPI area.
7* The ft Rifle - smq platoons oonnlntcd each of 1 native pgt, and 3
oecc., each aec. having 1 native Cpl.» J native r./cpl., and n native
troops. The senior native POO was appointed f. 3,M, .
fl. This orgnnlantion provided r Kanio for- He Id. tioi nj ng nnd from
which pntroln could he aH;i afar tori!," ..’r-t acht-i.
9* The Auatrnllnn pnrnonnol at thin stage rr*r« organised an followaj-
O.C. Force i Capt, (now MnJ, ) B, FAIRFAX-J-Odd
2 l/o BQOC j Flight llcnt. C.P, IIi.iOPKI?
Patrol eomds: Lieut, (now (japt. J(i, h. BLACK
Lieut, ('now nnpt. )J,hok.hamii.*DW
Li out. C.C. iTCIIKSoII* relieved PJ\/S/Uk 1
Lieut. .T. bamphoit
Medical t Bgt, n.A. 00W
W/P j Bgt* o..i’. HOYWIIIAn
Ldg.ToX, 0, UCEAOHEPIT
Op I. A. r-OLFMAII
Aasiatanto : WOXI I!. FI HU
fi/Ogt. T.L. COHEN
Sgt. .T.r, iMfinsN (arrived ?h/6/kh)
Cgfc. 7j» A. HALL
Gpl. ,T. I„ HAHMAH
Cpl. P. LXTTi,7>
A/D. V , P. COLLIH3
in those oategoriea the Australian personnel wore detached to
patrols as nooeaenry.
ARMS.
1. - As small arms wore taken over from the withdrawing a,i.B, field
parties, some variation arose. Those portion anticipating ultlmato co-
oporation with h. n. trnrpa In this area had boon issued v/lfcli U.h. annat
•30 carbines, J»5 automatic piotolo, and Thompson », M. O'a. The additional
arms require*!, for the qvvsrilln force worn provided from imbrnllaii
sourcea, comiotlnr of ,3 )3 ’I, t, V, ri flon. »3‘' sis tola and u.»en i.l, G'e,
Platoons r*ro then organised grouping these arms to minimise any -
difficulty In ammunition supply, nmation >’ontnincd 3 oub-macliino
gunners and 7 riflemen.
2. Two np*W I . M, 0. 'n were provided, and 6 gronndo discharger oupo
for close support use, No heavier weapons wore requested owing to the
great difficulties involved in transporting them by oarriorn on patrols
often looting nevernl r>aoka over moot difficult and nountr*inous country.
EQUIPMENT.
1, All moks were lanuod with complete ’37 tyro wobblng equipment,
Joss bayonet fro/rs, ng bpyorwto had boon replaced by a 3.6 1 bush knife for
general utility, ''q'a trail an pattern muon tine and dixies,
with .light flye for patrolo, completed the no.tn equipment Decennary,
other than blank*ta, groundahootn, and ninth Inn*
prgunlaation (continued).


PART IV.
PREPARATIONS FOR IRREGULAR WARFARE
1. in thoir Initial operations at falmalmal and DAinN, our troops
had exploited the element of surprise and tho Immediate confusion of
small enemy forces by a very liberal use of small arms fire and
grenades. They had experienced returned MdG firo from a barge et
PALMALMAL, but had not yot experienced any determined cnony resistance.
Sooner or later, it was obvious that no would have to meet
trained Japanese infantry on tho ground employing light support weapons
particularly MMQ's, mortars, and grenade dischargers, of tho rlflo
grenade type and of tho 50 MM Model 09 typo, in equal and probably in
greater strength than our own.
2. An appreciation of guerilla warfare and particularly where, as in
this instance, it involves tho employment of native irregulars, readily
shows that lightly armed guerillas onnnot ho expected to defeat trained
infantry in equal strength other than when exploiting to tho full the
peculiar wholly natural advantages of tho native on hlo homo ground,
moat of which resolve into the factor of surprise, v.lth tho ndditlonol
limitation that native irregulars cannot be expected to deny a defensive
position to Infantry once heavy weapons and infantry manoeuvre can bo
employed,
3* A further limitation, in our case, was the impossibility of
successfully withdrawing any more than one or two casualties, and this
would mean days of carrying over extremely rugged country to got them
back to LAKIPI base, r/e therefore had to adopt a form of warfare in
which not more than a few casualties could be suffered at tho one time,
our native troops were "green", and encouraged by their initial
successes at PALMALMAL and BAISTf; but any decisive defeat would have
seriously lowered their morale and that of tho surrounding natlvoa upon
whose confidence the success of our varied tasks depended.
5, This was broadly tho measure of our dl sadvantngoo in field aotlonr
Clearly without very careful handling our mission could quickly have no
result other than hard work and constant defence, if not prompt defeat.
6, on tho other hand, in the task before us, tho native had several
marked advantages which could be exploited in irregular warfare. Firstly
the innate familiarity of his environment amounting to ''jungle-craft” in
a degree which cannot be appreciated by Kuropenns or Asiatics; end,
whore he is on hie homo ground, great confidence in the jungle itself.
Secondly, hie natural hunting ability end jungle cunning, a legacy from
former tribal warfare. Thirdly, as all native males are cither bowmen
or spearmen, they have a natural aptitude for quick aiming, and the
majority, with little training, can bo taught to shoot reasonably well.
7» wo therefore determined to Improve our native troopo In a-form
of irregular warfare In which they were basically export a thousand
years ago by tho introduction of modern riflnn and submachine guns in
tho place of bows and arrows and spearn.
8, A rifle range up to ISO yds# had been constructed at I.AKIBI, and
other practice ranges wore later constructed at DAWUP, ur.Pi, and
MU PIVEB, Training Ammunition was very limited owing to tho difficultly
of supply, our aim wos to teach our troopo confidence in their weapons
and marksmanship to the degree when they could ehoot 5 rounds into a
target tho size of a man's torso at IQO yds,, while aoir; became
excellent marksmen, tho average was oatisfaotory and fe*-' only failed to
become reasonably proficient,
9# Our native troops responded well to small arma training nnd to
basic field training in the terras of ‘'infantry section Lending", m
accomplishing tho task of training, much credit la duo to tho keen
interest and excellent work of our Australian noo's. anointed by the
more experienced of our native IlCO'n, some of vdion had formerly
members of tho T.P, 0. native Constabulary.


10* A few of oar natlro troops hml been trained nt a.i.r. Training
Camp at TABPAOALBA, I'jUjJRTTJIAND, and brought In with I.P. field
parties! others, both Zooaln and foreign nativco, had joined the field
partiesj many of these hod been formerly employed by the enemy, and
cootc tho first opportunity to escape to join Australian.?, At this
stage, nod, in foot, throughout our operationo we were able to gain
as many recruits an our limited ouppllen permitted.
preparations for Irregular warfare (Continuod).


PART V.
GENERAL PLAN.
1, The enemy reacted promptly to our attack on hla ooaatwatohlng
post at DAIBFT, and sent 25) reinforcements from RAHAUI. area to strengths
hio garrison at HILIM. we estimated and Inter confirmed through a
friendly agent, t.akau of KAffKUM, that the strength of thla garrison won
now approximately l\no, Tho enemy wan still gaining n good deal of
native intelligence by direct contact with tho aoin.KA and TI.MOIP tribes
and was canvassing for a native guide to J.AKIRI.
2, The first essential for our success was to maintain a secure
base without which wo could not hopo to maintoin our force, or hold tho
confidence of the natives wo had already won to our side,
3, LAKIRI base, being situated in a central position inland from
WATERFALL BAY, divided our possible activities into an Eastern and a
Western sector. To the East and Worth East in tho wide BAY area, tho
enemy was ready to actively dispute ony penetration wo might attempt,
and thus make tho natlvo political situation very unbalanced, with the
majority, in fear of reprisals, still supporting tho enemy, ?.hilo to
the west and South west the enemy garrisons at HAS3AU and AWUL remained,
ond natlvo reports were reaching uo of an unknown number of enemy
Inland behind CAPK BEUCIIBY. While the inland natives were friendly,
the coastal natives, west of ATU, tho limit of the again ascending
influence of the paramount chief GOI.PAK, were ntlll Influenced by the
enemy in the CAPK dampler area.
14, we therefore formed a general plan in throe main divisionsj-
(a) Defence of LAKIRI BAGS.
(b) operations to tho Hast of LAKIRI - wide bay ARI!A«
(0) operations to tho west of LAKIRI - CAPE DAMPIBP AREA.
DEFENCE OF LAKIRI BASE
I* LAKIRI had one great advantage In that It was a comparatively
remote inland area, little known to other thnn local natives and had
not boon violtcd by tho Japanese or nny of the enemy'o "kembis",
2. onco the enemy actually located us we could assume that he would
continue to attack until ho either defeated uo or forced us to move to
another area. W« therefore planned to boat off any enemy attack in a
series of remote ambunhen before ho actually located LAKIRI,
3. The main approaches to our position were from the gouth by the
8010 RIVER and dkpo BERG RIVER roods* from the nouth East through RAMf
from the Knat, which was the moot probable, by cither the TIOIM RIVER
or the YET.LOT RIVER roadn, the latter loading from the enemy garrison
at MILIM, and both lending through DARFUR; from the north Past by the
IP FIVER route, and a possible but unlikely approach from the west
through imfPUWBI.
1;, We therefore covered these approaches by establishing an inner
triangle of standing guard posts, established at YALA. 2 hours march
to the north East, at the igu RIVER ford, 2 hours to the East, and at
the E 313 PIVKR crossing, 2 hours to the went; the loot two also covered
the probable southern approaches,
5* Beyond the inner guard posts wo established outop posts at DANPUF
8 hours to the I’nnt, and at RAM, 7 hours to the South East,
6. Beyond the outer posts we organised and paid liberally with trade
goods native watchmen In the HERI area, 12 hours to tho East and on the
coast in tho waterfall hay area watchpoeta ouporvlocd by noLPAK, and
further to tho Kant wo pn id h watefmon in the CAPK O'-PO” 1 ') area,
7. This chain of posts was designed to give uo security and reoort
local intelligence, it covered local enemy land movement and coastal
shipping, which, at this stage won confined to occasional bargee, and
possible Infrequent nubmnrlnoo.


8. Enemy air activity was confined to froguent night ooaot patrols
by single float planeo an far weot as G.APR but. for air
security, we had designed the bnao onmn to appear from the air as
though It was a norm! natlvn village,
9. in the allotment of our native troopo it wno .decided that one
platoon would remain at nil times at base for its defence, nnd if
necessary, all patrols would, whore practicable, ImodJ.ntnly withdraw
to base to reinforce its defence.
OPERATIONS EAST OF LAKIRI - WIDE BAY AREA.
1. With the MILIH gnrrlaon approximately boo atrong, and a further
30 at KAMAhnnAW with a probable 300 to soo at WAITAVAI.O. the WIDE BAY
area wan too strong to attempt Immediate guerilla operations which
could not logically have had any result othor than prompt defeat.
2. in addition, moat of the natives wore still under the Influence
of the enemy, and in fear of his ruthlenn punishments,
3. Doubtless duo to his difficulties in supply, the enemy continually
varied the strength of his ’.vide day garrisons. In accordance with
intelligence reaching him, lie had no doubt now as to our identity,
but was Obviously doubtful of our strength, and renalnod exceedingly
vigilant.
Our plan therefore was to move slowly into this area through
the DATTPUP area in the headwaters of the BEPG BEpo PIV'-:P, concentrating
firstly on the native political situation ns we obviously could not
expect their aid unless they could feel assured tint they mere pro-
tected ngalnnt enemy reprisals.
5, Our trump card was the co-oporntlon of COM.AIP hondOf.D based on
TOPOKIHA and wo planned to play up our access to air power from the
political angle, and also to continually homos the enemy by getting
precise target information,
6, At the same time, wo planned special intelligence missions Into
QA2ELLK PBNINOtJLA,
OPERATIONS WEST OP LAKIRI - CAPE DAMPIER AREA.
1, The paramount GOLP.AIC had now regained complete control over his
people In the watepfatj, and JAGQUINOT BAY areas and re wore reasonably
certain that no enemy lend patrol* bad passed from to cast along
the coast, and that the coaot was clear for up to move ,eat nn far as
ATU.
2, Information regarding the enemy wert of AT IT was moot confused,
and ire prepared to investigate* the situation from ATU and plan
accordingly.
3, Earlier, A. 1.8, had dropped by parachutes, 100 rifles and
arrrnunltlon to natives In the LAG area who wore to conduct opportunity
guerilla warfare under the leadership of rAlA’*Al! by arrangement with
Lieut. M.II. WIGHT'S party who had panned through the n.rcn proceeding
to the North coast,
b. Confused reports were reaching as of paIAMaN’o notlvitles, nrd it
was planned to contact him and naslnt and direct hln operations.
Defence of Lftfclrt Base (continued).


PART VI.
NARRATIVE.
1, Daring the period tip to noVE-DUR, lshh, our tasks wore varied
and covered a wide area* they will thcroforo bo recorded in sections
In order to present a connected narrative.
2. From MAY to nsiTL-MBiT?. the uoiTill Rajjt oeanon prevailed on the
South const of Hid? BRITAIN* heavy ruins and frequently flooded rivers
often mode movement slow and sometimes brought It to a standstill for
several days.
WESTERN SECTION - JUNE / JULY. 1944.
1. At tho end of MAY, Lieut. (J,R, JHaok with Ggt, Mall, Cpl. Little,
with one platoon, loft LAKIHI for JACr.'tJITIOT DAY nroa where they awaited
news of a proposed attack on the ALUL garrison by a u.d. i'otrol. This
took place on JUIIK 5, and 3 enemy rare killed but the remainder of the
garrison withdrew Inland and ntrong Ui woo unknown, it was presumed
that they would ba Joined by tho mauuau garrison, and were probably in
oontaot with an unknown number of openy reported farther Inland end
believed to be striking for the North count.
2. Accordingly, our patrol proceeded to I.AU, which had been visited
by tho enemy and partly burned. Coastal movement was difficult owing
to continuing bad weather and the neooonlty of acquiring carriers to
transport food ond equipment,
3* At LAU, it was learned thot the paramount AIYOTK of MA33AU was
still in touch with the cncioy, sod contact rao hero established with
PAIAHAH and hlo louul guerillas to whom rilies had been dropped. They
had been in recent conflict with tho enemy, and had accounted for lh
enemy killed and lh "koinbln ,t killed} tho latter from the ''komhl" oertion
with the enemy poet at MAC.uaU. RAIAfMN now hod a total of MO armed
natlvco operating In small groups Inland,
14, Our patrol continued to ATU end on JUHE 17 contacted BOBAKEPA
who had a further 20 armed natives, and reported tho v*;ui. and mamoaU
garrisons to bo inland, in addition n further parts of enemy, unknown
up to thla time, from TAH3SL HARBOUR, 8 miles v/est of MONTAGU lIAPBoT®,
who had evacuated from vaiibm. HARBOUR by barge and moved .cast to
MYHIHOA and then inland.
3. A temporary patrol base was established at ATU and arrangements
made for a "drop" of essential stores* meanwhile recce patrols moved
inland and to avail whore Lieut. 0. MUTE of argau wan contacted.
Lieut, Rhlte had led the U.G. patrol to /VMJL, It wan now established
that the enemy wore Inland between the hki.Kul and torlii Rivers, and
probably endeavouring to crons the inland. The A, 1,8, force operating
on the North coast were in TV A’ contact and laying ambushes on the _
probable routes.
6, Runners wore sent to organise an attack from the north west by
the local guerillas, while our main patrol moved inland to PAira with
one sec, remaining at ATU to await stores to bo dropped by aircraft.
Tho inland country is very rugged and mountainous, and moat difficult
terrain over whicli to puxnuo the enemy,
7, on .tune 18, tho Inland guerillas after pretending to entertain
a party of approximately 30 enemy In tho khuuina area, suddenly attacked
the assembled enemy. The enemy was in the main caught by surprise,
but had prepared agnlnnt cuch an event by keeping one I .MG constantly
manned in an adjacent houna, m tho onnuinrt fight, 28 enemy were either
killed outright or died of wnundn and 5 local guerillas v/orc killed,
A patrol later bent to check. thouo fipuren found 18 enemy bodies at
the scene of the fight, while the remainder died of woundn in the
adjacent area,
8, Meanwhile, our main patrol was moving toward Ratio via KKRALOTIA,
while n section patrol rns moving Root to MAIMUNA and north along the
MKLKOI River through MAI.MAT.U to Join the main patrol nt KKPALOIIA.
Oar patrol reached Ra.TG on duilß 23. geoutro located the enemy occupying
a defensive position on i-hn north bank of tho ratio Rlvor.


9« The enemy were attacked nt 061 l hro, the following morning.
Their position was difficult to approach, and they were prepared for
the attack. Firing continued until oyis hro., when our Irooprs ;jre
withdrawn and a further recce made. By thin time, a enemy, including
2 off loom, had boon killed, and we had lost native kgt. ;>■'>!?! pa, who
had fought with oonnpiououa determination.
10. The remaining enemy raeauv/hllo had managed to move downstream to
the Junction of the HARO and HoaiOl Rivers, and contact wan loot,
Lieut, Black, who had been Joined the previous day by Lieut, ’ hltn of
ARRAU. now decided to return to ATM for stores and a munition before
pursuing the enemy further through tho rough country in thn headwaters
of the HMOTOT Rlverf bslieving, rightly, that thoy i.ould ooon have to
search for food among native gardena, and their rjovnnuntu thus traced
by native reports,
1U A ’'drop” was received at ATU on JURU 26, containing foodstuffs
and trade goods for tho purchase of local foods. Hard going through
the mountain country had oat the baro foet of oar native troopa, and
oar patrol rested at ATH until JULY 2, when reports onno to hand of a
small enemy party near fIAMUUX.
12. on July 3 we wore informed that captured documents from tho
Forth oonot proved that tho enemy had general Information regarding
oar operations. The documents also mentioned a third cooatwotchlng
station in our area which had gone off the air about one month earlier.
After patrolling tho poaslble arena wc concluded that thin must have bo
tho warty from VAlfnish HARBOUR.
13. Arrnngomenta were now made for ogt. Hall to roturn to GALi with
one dec, to cut off any enemy attempting to move Hast along the coast,
while Lieut, Blaok with the remainder proceeded toward hamuui. our
local guorillna had meanwhile killed 2 cnomy otragglcro on .rji.i 2 in
the RATIO area, and paIAHAR renortod that his men had killed 2 more on
JULY 3 in tho extremely rough country, composed of docp gorges in the
headwaters of the bai.r?CifAH plvcr, to which area thono reported at
MAMHRI were proceeding,
lh. On .JULY lh t Opl, Little fell aiok and had to remain at tUROAHUFA.
our patrol moved on, reaching purapufa on JUL’i 1/. and scouts reported
that the enemy were in an area of inncconaiblo cliffo and gorges and
were endeavouring to find a way out, garly next morning a small party
was aeon climbing n ateep slope. They veto immediately attacked, and 2
were killed, the remainder breaking away Into the gorge, Moarrvhilc.. to
the rest another group of native guerillas lutd killed 2 more cUrngglors
on JULY 17.
15* This patrol had now been out for two cnontha In difficult country
and wns ordered by the writer to return to LARIPX for rent, and- it
reached base on JUT.y 25. qo tho roturn Journey watchmen were arranged
in order that wc would get early news of any furtjwsr enoray activity.
Our activities during this period had accounted for 59 enemy killed
ami "kembln", for the loan of lof our own native troops and sof
our free native guerillas.
EASTERN SECTION - JUNE / JULY. 1944.
1. Our attack on BAIKTT In HAY had been followed by prompt enemy
action in sending 250 reinforcements to the MILIH garrison, and a
further patrol or approximately Go wool, along the couot from '.UXAVALO
to HAIFF, whore, employing n single float piano, ho had bombed the area
twice by night.
2. Thin petrol fired on natives in the BMRU area without result,
and through hla still existing connection with the neighbouring OUMA
and I wax people, the enemy threatonod violent punishments to the
general arcs for having permitted oar approach without warning.
western aeotion - June / July. 19M (Continued).


imported the altuatlon to the Jnpanooo ond PAPARIS woo tried by them
but managed to deceive them into believing that ho know nothing of
Australians in the nren.^
13* Later, following the capture of Cnpt, j. MUPPirr, the enemy, now
certain that Australlann wore in the area- again tried PAFATTI3 but he
wan able to deceive then once more. Tried Inter for the third tine hr
wna again oucoeaaful, but finally the p.c, priest Patlicr flnyorhoffer,
under torture, disclosed Information which left no doubt concerning
PAPARIO'a contact with un and he wan forced to fine In hiding to the
upper BKFOBKPO area,
U 4. JUat as the earlier success of A. 1.8, in the KOL and mrnokn areas
was greatly aided by the co-operation of the paramount golpak, we now
required the seme aid from PAPANI3 if wo wore to aucooed In the
preliminary political problem of completely divorcing tho noULKA people
from tho enemy, r;e therefore gave Pararis tho mnk of ,3gt.Mjr. oqulvnlrr
to that hold by GOLPAK, and determined that he would bn the pivot of our
politloal ingronn into wing bay,
15* on juttt? 2lu Cnpt. Dates. Cnpt, English and Lieut, .tohnson,
together with Cnpt, Bates * natives and 20 native refugees, were ovacuatcc
by H,M, a,3. "VEnDETTA 1 * from CUTAPP and Llout. j. Sampson and sgt. j.b.
Panfccn Joined our f oroo,
16. Meanwhile, our patrols were continually working from LAKIPI to
the 3outh and south Bast to tho PAM area in order to maintain the
confidence already gained, 8/ogt, cohon won doing good liaison work
In thla area,
17. Earlier. Cnpt. Batoa had made oontaot with loyal agents In the
GAZELLE areaj the 3. D. A. Solomon island Mission Teacher, j>ARrTY hapkB-
WJLLIAM living behind PUTPUT, and tho Chinese, M} mino at 3UM3UM hnd
sent out valuable Information. It wao decided to again endeavour to
contact these people and to send MI MIW small items, including a pistol,
for which he hnd asked.
18. on .TURK 28, L/Cpl. POBIR with Ptes, LELI and 01019, loft on this
mission to be carried out in their own time as opportunity permitted ther
to penetrate the enemy’s lines.
19* At the same time, a North BOUI.KA (MOPE area) native, aUANOAIWA
(alios WANKAU) the p.o. Catechist of MAPUNOA vlsltod LAKIPI and thought
that he could '’grapevino” a letter from us to the p.c. Bishop at
VUNAPOPJS near KOKOPO, Accordingly an Impersonal document was prepared
giving news of the general war situation and requesting Information of
PABAUL, This document was waterproofed and suitably hidden in a native
''kambang” (lime) gourd, and OUAROAIW.A accompanied by TAVUrPJ. TIPITPA
and 3AMARTAIP, locals of tho coastal area North of TGI., left LAKIPI on
this mission.
20. Both these missions prejudiced our security, inaemuoh as the
capture of any of the natives employed would provide tho enemy with a
guld" to LAKIPI, but wo folt sufficiently roll established to take this
risk. The enemy did, In fact, shortly capture 3AM--MTAI? an will be
narrated later,
21. At LAKIPI base, tho training of our native troops continued and
stores wore arriving satisfactorily by air delivery. We had to exercise
a otriot control over rations as wo ooald not exceed our nllottod 5»000
lbs, per month nnd largo numbers of natives were now constantly visiting
our camp, particularly for eagerly nought medical attention.
22. agt, A. 00W had established a hospital nt LAKUM and was doing
invaluable work both for the nafclvon nnd for our prestige. In treating
hundreds of natives weekly, our request for largo quantities of medlonl
stores wore being met, by D, 3,1,0, R. ft, , who wna keeping up our air oapplj
Moat valuable of nil wore the n. n , n. injections, thin compound being the
specific and almost "magical” euro for the dreaded ynwn ( frnrnboeala),
tho incidence of which wna exceedingly high nnd bad cruised many fatalltlc
In tho absence of any treatment, other than that supplied by A. 1.8, flol<
parties, since the enemy occupation, ao nows of the availability of _ft, A,
Eastern section - .tuw / July, 19hh (continued).


23. By this time wo hnd 23 refugee women nnd children at LAKIPI bnoo.
For their own protection in the event of an attack on LAKIPI and to
conserve our rations, wo decided to establish a refugee comp at KOPA,
6 miles to the west, wo hired ground, built a camp and foiled a garden
area at KOFA and moved our rofugeeo In, wo paid local natives to supply
them with food until tho camp gardens produced, and assisted thorn with
as much rice an wo could opnro from L'KTPI. Tula comp nerved a most
useful purpoae and was kept going until February, 19h5.
2) 4. Oh JULY h, the writer with Lieut, Hamilton, WOII King and 3gt.
Iloynlhan moved with ons platoon Into the upper bepobepu area nnd
established a camp at BANPUP.
25* Tho following month was an exceedingly difficult one, with the
South Bast season now at Ito height; storms, wind, snd heavy rain
continued almost without a break, and movement was generally made
Impossible by flooded rivers. Aircraft made frequent attempts to drop
us food without success as we were so frequently clouded in, and great
difficulty was experienced In getting atoms from LAKIPI ncrons the
flooded IOU, IIRKIfTO, nnd BBRODKPQ Rivers,
26, Although tho bad weather prevailed. LAKIPI being a hotter dropslto
was more fortunate and supplies wore maintained; but only by the
excellence of tho pilots of a 817 Squadron converted for dropping, which
was now supplying us,and also by the Unison maintained with the pilots
by Plight Lieut. IUP. Koch of A. 1.8. nt nAhZAB.
27. 3gt, Mjr, PAPANI3 had organised acouto and sent tho now fugitive
LAKAU of KAUKUM and other natives to gather nows from r7.DR PAY. on
JULY 5, scouts returned with news of considerably enemy activity. They
confirmed information which hnd reached us through air sightings of
renewed enemy barge activity, and their reports Indicated that the
enemy was still approximately hoo strong at fULXM, nnd that none further
reinforcements hnd recently arrived.
20, A summary of their reports clearly showed that wa still hnd a
grsat deal of preliminary work to do before wo could hope to move into
WIDK BAY area with any reasonable chance of success.
29. nearing that the enemy had visited Capt, Bates* IP Fiver camp
site, the Lulual PABU nnd Tultul KOLt of PILE Immediately went Into
hiding, knowing that tho enemy would arrest them for not having reported
the presence of Australians in the area, Tho enemy, however, resorted
to a ruse and bringing a strange "k©rahl" from PUTPUT, sent him to
contact tho i.ulual of PILE with Instructions to appear fugitive from
tho Japanese nnd anxious to find Australians, This rune unfortunately
succeeded and a following porty of "kombls" and Japs orrested paBU and
KOLI of PILE, also the Tultul of XAUKITt and tfULO of HILIP.I, who alone
subsequently escaped, while tho others wore taken to tfVITAVALQ and
beheaded. The enemy appointed new village officials and those
unfortunates with a slmllor fate awaiting them should tho enemy's
slightest suspicion be aroused, could scarcely do other than carry out
tho'eneny'a instructions if they, and perhaps their entire village,
were to avoid being ruthlessly massacred,
30. Once again, the enemy had gained tho information through L«o
Aqulnlnok who, It la only just to Bny. would with hlo family have been
promptly executed had he not co-operatcd, bat was undoubtedly genuinely
pro-Jnpaneno and causing us considerable trouble,
31. Meanwhile, tho enemy, by another ruse, had captured HAMANT.AIP nt
WAXTAVALO. This native was accompanying aUAirOAIV/A's special mission
from LAKIPI. Tho enemy forced nAUATTTAIP to disclose what he knew of
LAKIPI, and now with n guide to LAKIPI In bla hands, tho onorty In hln
usual unpredictable manner, promptly beheaded him, ve learned from
witnesses that during hln interrogation HAMAHT/vIP, with characteristic
native uncertainty no to numbers, described LAKIPI no tho largest place
he hnd seen outside PADAIJL, nnd that ho had seen "plent:/" white men
nnd "plenty more” native troopo. This caused the enen • to bnlievo that
wo wore very much stronger than was actually the case.
eastern Seotion - June / July, 19hh (continued).


3 2, "'ULU of MILIM bad encaped nnd reached oatm’UP with the returning
scouts. From him and others we were able to get precise Information ns
to the exact positions occupied by the enemy garrinona end pens thin
target Information to the Air Forces at Tornt’ipA, t w o recent sir
strikes hod been useful but bad caused no great damage to the onsn^.
Tit nlso learned that the GOUI.KA people south of "IHM, ohoo'fed by the
recent executions at I’.'AITAVAT.O, were In no mood to endanger thcumolvea by
any contact with us.
33. one amusing dlgreoolon was a "grapevine" native report of a
message to ue from the enemy commander nr. HILIM to "corns down and bo
annihilated an he was ’fed up* of being bobbed",
3h« The enemy at HILIM were occupying n large defensive position,
well camouflaged, on the YAFFT Fiver, The position was originally
designed to oppose nn attack: from the ana, but non bod rear poatn to
protect It from guerilla attacks node from the mountains behind, we
were, however, able to give good air identification. n. o. planned
to heavily attack hii.jm on JULY 17, 10 and ?o. unfortunately, bad
weather prevented the accond ami third attack, but the attack on JULY 17
was mndo in strength by medium bombero and fighters and wc worn nhortly
to learn with much satiofnotion of Its excellent rcaulta,
35* ' Meanwhile, satisfactory reports were coming in from the RAM area
and the coaatnl area gent of C.APB ORFORD. An the enemy had observed the
IP Fiver road from Capt, Pater’ cams, coupled with hln Increased strength
nnd continually ntnted intention of attacking wo now nlnood a
guard pont 2 hro, North from MANIPUR, and Lieut. nnmneon supervinocl the
digging of new defensive positlonn at IaKIFI and the recce of ambush
poaitions on the hanifup rood. ?gt, nanken end Cpl- Marteno patrolled
North to TIMOMO to maintain our llalnon with people • ent of the unis
Fiver, while n/hgt, COHEN continued to content the rvt area. Hidden
atom dumps for use in emergency were built up In tho LAKIFI area,
36, It was now clear that any false move on our part in PIPE DAY area
could hnvo disastrous moults, re could protect ourselves and withdraw
if necessary, but ws could not protect tho v/r.ng day people from tho
enemy’s reprimln which night takn the shore of a wholenale manencrc.
Our first task would be to move the people betrnon PILE nnd HT.bIM hack
from tho beach into the more secure and lit bio known Inland aroao, A
task which Involved firstly persuading them to novo, secondly finding
arsno with sufficient food, and thirdly carrying tho old people unable
to walk,
37* on JULY 11 this tank was undertaken by ngt*Hjr. PARANIO and 12
selected troops, who were to avoid all oontnet with the enemy, con-
centrating on moving tho bench natives inland, but on returning, wore
to endeavour to preferably r.rrcnt or kill if necennory, KUEP'Un of MILIM,
who was a "kombi" nco at null!, nnd without whoso co-operation or-
removal we could not hnoe to secretly approach our ultimate objective,
HILIM,
38* At tho flame time a email patrol wnn sent .yast to contact the
influential LANG?UN of GIP‘,A and his catechist gRTFSLR upon whose judgment
tha mentally harassed arKl undecided LANGFUN was now largely relying.
Wo informed them that wo held no enmity towards them, least of all that
they should jeopardise themselves on our behalf, but. strongly advised
them to move army from the bench nnd live inland, /\t tho same time
we emphasised our ability to bring down air attacks. Wo know that tho
leaser YANEK of IWAI and other local village chiefs would be primarily
guided by the decisions of LANQFUN to whom, in tho absence of oapaNlß,
they ware now looking for guidance,
3y. nad weather continued throughout July but wn had received one
drop at danour which enabled ua to plan a move forward to IF.:FI, and use
a drop site at LOTRI* Native foods wore extremely aoarce and no were
unable to supplement nnr rations.
hO, On JULY 29 tho writer, loaring Liout, Hamilton nt NAUrUR,
returned to LAKIFI for conference with Flight r.lcut. Hooper and with
Lieut, Black who had now returned from a?.UL,
Bnatorn Bootlon - Juno / July, 19V4 (rrontlnaod).


ill. The situation to tho rant appoarnd satisfactory. "I>n onery had
made no attempt to ascertain the fate of bin i;al’" : I'h’Xi.n area garrisons.
Doubtless believing that wo wore in no’w strength 3ti t;I»t = paLMALMM. nrnn,
they hnd oil endeavoured to make a cronalnn- i.o tbr 7»orth const, At
thin stage tho oncriy seemed determined t-> : -'’oint no ;,n r. n>n bid
showed no interest. In probing further v.
142. Tho situation in LAKIRI bone area too also nntlsfactory. liaison
with all posts waa working well nnd tho confidence of local natives
maintained, v> f c hnd established a limited trade exchange at which
natives oould exchange nnrniy paid to them for nervines for items of
trade, a facility which they greatly appreciated, while treatment of
the sick continued on on important scalo under 3gt. aow. we continued
where practicable to give handsome prenentn of trndt to influential
natives, and folt certain that- nil local intelligence was reaching ns
and this was duly panned to P. d.J,:', , p, c, , for distribution,
&BNPUK
U 3» on August I the writer returned to LMIIPUP bringing in addition
Lieut, Htunpson, Mgt. panken, 3gt, Hull, Cpl. Colormn and a/P Collins,
with an additional platoon, planning to novo forward to Htfkl on ilm
MILIM road. .. r —n ,
M, Lieut, Hamilton moved to lIERI with one platoon on AUO.h and
1 oownenced building a camp, Meanwhile we received a drop at LOTRI and
tho main party moved to imm on AUO.P,
Us* on AUO, 3» Hgt.Mjr, PAPANIO’a patrol returned from WIDE BAY,
having fully accomplished its Intended tank, PAP/dTi.:! had successfully
moved the RILK area people inland, had scouted K.AM. nun am and waITaVALO
positions and on return had arrested KiinkUC and 1.-,).:riAH of Mil.ld.
KO3MIAH had been employed on general duties in the enemy onmp and had
valuable information, but was otherwise unimportant,
J 46. of KU3KU3, it is only fair to record, although soaring ’•kembr*
uniform and geo’s rank, that he wna n willing capture.’, if not in fact
happy to bo arrested and brought his wife and family for good measure.
Like many others he boro uo no enmity but unfortunate olrcumstancon
had forced him to aonoolatc with the enemy, from whom ho was now
delighted to escape, an inclination no doubt ripened by the recent
bombings of MiLl’f* "c decided to trust KUcr.us, a confidence to which
he responded and became one of our moat valued helpers in ttutr bay,
k 7» from KU3KU3 and KO9MI a IT wo learned that the air attack of JULY 17
on tho Yappt Plvor position at MILIM had boon moot nuccouaful. The
number of oaounltion wnn unknown, but a barge had evacuated a number of
wounded on night JULY 17/16, Tho enemy i.-nedlntcly decided to abandon
tho YAPNT River position ond the garrison was reduced by approximately
250 who withdrew by road through WAIT WAT.') tn i.kMirT.'iT, while the
remainder, approximately 15'), moved vest of MILIM to the YAH'TA Crook
and occupied a position below tho original ULIM poot, 7.hero tho
garrison hnd been prior to its reinforcement follow in?; tho attack on
BAIEI’T,
J4B. r/e learned that in tho now YAKJiA. position the enemy hnd one
twin a/a gun, and at least six heavy tfa'o, and fourteen known LMo's.
We knew of 2 Naval officers and X Army AlTleor, indicating that a
composite garrison remained,
J|9, in addition to tho now air target at MILIM, wc hnd ascertained
that tho enemy had changed- the poeitlon of hio pout at KaMA.TIDPAIT and of
one of his posts at v/AiTAYAi.o following air attacks, ana wc woro able
to report those now positions accurately, and two additional posts at
BAITAVALO.
50, U« now planned to take some notion against tho enemy at MiLIM.
Meanwhile reports crime to hand of further enemy activity to the peat
of LAKIRI.
Santera Section ~ June / July, IDUh (nontinned).


WESTERN SECTION - AUG. / SEPT., 1944.
1. numerous native reports reaching tho north connt and passed to
ua oußgeatod eovoral onmny partloa of n. total strength of approximately
70 in tho JiKfldiNA area, "hile m o know that no; to atrogglora remained
and thot a few may have successfully roacho.i the north const, we did
not believe that any group remained in morn than section strength and
with these our local free guerillas could prob \hly deal. in aug. 3ic
received n report of lo near I'.Alb-1,1.1.
2. on AUG. 9 we heard of a small party near rUAPAL endeavouring to
move Hast. This party was reported to he firing on nny native seen, and
had caught, killed and eaten tiro native children} thin hideous atrocity
was supported by Inter reports,
3. It was essential for our security that no stragglers should get
through from the viost to MiLifi vhloh rould hove disclosed that our entirely
mythical strongpont In JAO'pJXNOT BAY did not exlot. vre bad purposely
built up n colossal ’’bluff" with regard to our strength In tills area,
on exaggeration cheeifully enlarged-by *Jr.; loc.*l nntlvea,for their awn
benefit, to such a degxoo that tho coastal .JAJJ.AAo believed UeLPAiI to
be tho central figure of an armed fores of YidiiTi-'NS of considerable
dimensions In •T/’-CIUTHOT DAY, and aom? subntance was lent to this colour-
ful picture by the operations of our free awrllias further seat with
PAIAMAB and bouakspa whose reported activities acquired Impressive
enlargement ns news spread from mouth to mouth Knat along the coast,
its knew that tho enemy believed wo had this post and could not pemtfc
him to be reliably Informed to the contrary os, at thin tine, his
re-oocupstloa of daT.maiY-M. by barge have forced our prompt with-
drawal to that arrn* in addition r,- or, re oM.I- -I lo tn’; : ."owe action
against the enemy'o ahootlng of locol notlvon,
It, Accordingly, one sec. woe despatched to ■JAI.i Immediately to
Intercept the enemy party chould it attempt to move quickly by the
coastal road, ne had to wait for atoroo to be dropped before a platoon
could move, and, when thcoc were received, Meat, Blech with Cpl. flnnman
and Gpl. T.lt.tle and ono nlatonn left. MTTPr. on aug. 10*
5. In the meantime the enemy had moved Inland and were attacked by
local guerillas who killed Jf contact woo loot with tho remainder who
had withdrawn Into the rugged headwaters of the BAXFI*JAB hlvor,
6* our patrol reached TuFT-El. on AUG, 2*4 and established a post from
which to patrol and endeavour to locate tho enemy party, a very
difficult tank owing to tho rough, mounts,} noun find oparrely populated
area.
7. The enemy were located in a small garden near KOK-MNATUNA and
worn attacked on AUG, 27} 3 were killed and 1 aormiittcd suicide. No
others could ho found but It noetned that at lead 2 must be atlll at
largo, ao wc were anxious'to finish off tin: ntrogglerc in this area,
patrolling continued inland until rSft.T, 3 vhon ilcut. Llack moved to
MALMAL to moot nnd guide an ]T.u, p. recce party which landed, from a
corvette to males a preliminary rucco of JAd illu.k BAY area, itn mission
completed, tho reaoe party left nn 7*
fl» ’Kith stores now running short, tho main body of our patrol
returned to LAKim on GK’-'T. 15, leaving the renolndor of tho stores
with cpl. "Angara and one sec* to continue the search for the ponoiblo
two enefg/ survivors. They wove finally located and killed on UIiPT, 26
and In their possession was found a valuable enemy Naval chart of the
Hast OA3SJLR area with numerous annotations conocrnlnr barge points end
landing places,
9, Ne were now certain that there were no enemy on tho South coaet
of NT!?.’ NPITAIN rest of wittr HAY, and the area West of j atctttx had boon
finally cleared.


EASTERN SECTION - AUG / SEPT./ OCT.,1944.
1» Wo now planned from UKPI to make an aggrooolvo rocoo of MII.tM
with two platoons and. If olreamstancon t-ore favourable, to attack the
enemy,
2, in support of thio move 3, o, P, A. 3, were to borrib MiLTM on AUO.
8/9/10 and H, H. A. 3. 'hIUAN" waa to shell the target on AU3. 11, Un-
fortunately, at this stage some difference arose between C, p. a. 3, and
3, o»ff, J 2, 3, r, A. O. and as MILTM was 16 miles aouth. of the air boundary
between the two Oannando, 3, 0, N. 3. 3. a, r\ refoned to allow 3,0,r.A.C,
to bomb HILIH. Thio wan disappointing an 3, 0, n. a,C. could employ
large formations of a hundred aircraft or more. However, 3, o, f.p. a, c
then arranged an at tacit by h jjeauforts oni affT. 12 which unfortunately
missed the target. IJ.'•*. A.,5, "OTAT* wes delayed ?/j hours, no we now
planned to reach MII.F! on the evening of AUW. 12,
3» The main difficulties attached to tho trip wore that few
carriers were available and wn would hare to carry 6 dnyn supplies
over the extremely exhaustive mountain tracit loading from V ,>pi acrona
the head of the njjpußr.iPM and Y'T.LOT rivers. ffc olco were informed
that It would be useless requesting nay further nlr support as. In
spite of the efforts of D, 3,i, o, f N, n,, to repair tho current, broach,
3.0, w, y„ 3.5». a, a, would not allow 3, 0. c, to bomb nttlim.
h. re left m?R! on AUO, 10 and forded the flooded bbworuso by
felling a large tree across the stream and reached MXT.I'I area In tho
late afternoon of AUO. 12, and made a roooe at dusk; In this KU3KU3
was an Invaluable guide.
5» The enemy appeared to be in a strength of approximately 15o*
There were two main sleeping houses nnJ a group of smaller bulldlngo
protected by a chain of weapon pits which onclrclnd tho position. It
was evident that we could not hone to force the position against their
greater superiority In automatic fire power; further, we had no hope
of successfully carrying back more time one or two casualties, it was
possible that we might succeed if wo could gain complete surprise and
bring tho bulk of our fire down on the two main sleeping houses while
the majority wore in bed; and thin wo planned to attempt at first
light next morning,
6. Wo split Into throo groups, ono to flro on tho houses, tho
second to flro from the flank and protect tho first group, and a third
to intercept any movement to or from the YATJKT position about 500 yds.
North; and moved close to our firing oonlt-lons in darknnno,
7. During our final approach at ’flrat light’ one of our troops
accidentally fired hio rifle before wo had reached tho commanding ground,
instantly surprise wno lost and the enemy irmodlatoly manned hla defences
and began firing. A brief firnflght orrmonood but it wno useless for
un to continue at need a dlnadyantagn anil wo forthwith withdrew to a
*rondnavnus' about ono mile west of MELTw, \ disappointment indeed
after weeks of preparations however, no harm had boon done, wo then
placed ambushes across our tracks and united all day hoping that an
enemy patrol would follow us and wo could oiu’prlna It on open ground.
The enemy, however, bonk no notion other than sporadic firing at the
bush.
8, no had hoped to capture food at MILIM and now had sufficient
only to got us back to ilkni, our radio for tho first and only time had
broken down and we had no conmunloatlon base, a little native
food wna available in abandoned gardnns and w rubbed a garden used by
tho enemy, but tho main body had to withdraw on lf,ui for more food,
no poolod all food thnt could bs spared mil reserve mnunltion. leaving
Sgt.Mjr. ,to3kp with ene platoon to live off th” lanl tnmuornrily, and
continually changing bin position endeavour to nnlp? any enemy parties
moving outside their position, ivo nxpcctod that rolnforonnonts would
again arrive from WAITAVAJ.O.
9, During the next three days tho enemy made no movement and on
AUO. 16 ggt.Mjr. PAPATU3 with Cpl. KUIAUUU, Cpl. :n?VA and rte, 31 MB I
crawled into tho enemy position and killed 3 enemy who wore observing
with binoculars from tho platform of an‘obncrvatlon tower, Tho enemy's
reaction to thio raid In the centre of bin position wan aatonlnhlnß’.


For 36 hour* ho continued firing at the ocljnoanrt bush with rifles,
light and heavy MO'a, grenade dlachnrgero and tho a/A gun.
10. Firing coaaed about midnight on AUCK 17/16 and at raiddny on
AUQ. 18 a patrol under ugt. POINT found the position abandoned, part of
tho garrison wss orncuatod by barge while tho romolnder moved by rood
to WAITAVALO. examination of bods and equipment Indicated tlmt the
garrleon hnd boon n composite force approximately 150 one
additional Jap was found dead of wounds on the rood,
11* The enemy* o evacuation had doubtless been due to th~ combined
offeots of bombing, and shelling by H.m, a,m. ”.')WAir* and by our attacks
from tho land; coupled with, no doubt, hlo loss of native contact and
local intelligence in tho area,
12. r/e gained a good deal of '’booty'* nt MILIM including in new
condition 1 x 30 ft* whole boat, 5 large rub'or assault boats, 5 heavy
duty outboard motors, 2 lighting motors, 160 blankets, 50 cases of
ammunition, 200 gallons of kerosene, Co gallons of benzine and a
considerable quantity of ncdlcol storm. in addition numerous used items
Including saucepans, moss tine, toolo, ropes, etc.. They had smashed
their radio equipment and having stripped tho looks abandoned the
following armni I Naval typo twin 25 m a/a gun and moan Mug, 213 m
HMO’s, 1 7*7 n»n Model 92 hmo, 3 7*7 m howls type LMO’s, 1 6*5 mm
Model 96 LMO and h 6.5 rm rifles.
13* ffe now decided to movo our forward baoe from nr.FI to mu Blver,
and with 200 carriers from the coastal noULkAG now elated by the removal
. of tho enemy from MILIM wo moved in two partioa./ono Kant over the
YSLLOT road and the other 3outh Bast through ff/ta and BAT’JI and north rrost
along the const in order to confirm our contact with the GTJ.'TA , KILAi.UM
and IWAI people of rrhoao allegiance re wore now certain nnr could
again come into the open,
'ilk* Meanwhile, dpi. Oolemnn and A/n Collins roturnod with two boos*
7 to LAKIPI.
15* in moat independent guerilla operations, isolated from any
friendly force, and engaging in irregular warfare against a greatly
superior enemy there comas a time when It in wise to consider how much
more can bo done without really goading the enemy into making a
determined effort to destroy the Irregulars, we had ’pulled hlo tall*
with considerable oucccnn for a long time and It roc not unlikely that
further ’tugging* might result in his determining to drive un out, n
circumstance the more likely as wo were now on the coast only 6 hrs.
march from him and wo could not hide tho proximity of our position cs
parachutes being dropped to un wore clearly visible from r-AiTAVALO and
KAMANDPAN, a loss of security made unavoidable erring to the nature of
tho terrain^
16, However, as hn had abandoned MILIM without mking any serious
effort to defend it, wo planned to shortly attempt an attack on KAMATTDPATT,
but primarily we had two important tasks to perform,
H
17* Firstly, news of the visit of the n, 0, F, recce party to JACtjUINOT
BAY on gk?t. 5/7 had spread rapidly along the coant and wo had to with-
draw all natives North of MILIM further inland to moke sure that native
contact wos completely broken so that this news could not reach tho
enemy, it was evident that our primary task would soon bo to cover
tho landing of Australian troops in JAC'JUINOT PAY area, secondly, we
had to conaldor tho security of the natives, all of whom the enemy would
now ehoot on sight,
18* Both these tasks were accomplished; native eentry groups were
organised for their own protection and no natives from MILIM to JACdJJINOT
BAY were permitted to sleep on tho bench, to minimise tho possibility
of the enemy capturing them by surprise,
19. on HKFT, 17 the writer, Lieut. 0 amps on nnd Ogt. Hail with one
platoon moved to KAMANDFAN. The only covered approach to the enemy
position followed a ’knife like’ ridge, between the MKLKOTYI and KEPMIN
Flyers, along which wo had to proceed in single file and could not follow
In UI, T’lr n«» nra W* mntr.il * " «u ~ - - * -V, k


again tho clement of surprise wna lost to uo by one of oar troops
accidentally firing hia rlflo when we wore still about 100 yards from
our first objective, o large house tho closest of three spaced about
200 yards opart in a triangle, no runbed to bring firo on the first
house, killing 3 end wounding others but wore quickly forced to ground
by rifle, LMG and 50 rnm grenade discharger fire from positions further
down tho slope. A brisk firo fight developed, our troops wore
noticeably worried by the s>j rvn grona.de discharger firo which wan falling
accurately and had doubtless been previously ranged an part of the
defensive plan, the enemy no doubt being aware of the especial value of
this type of weapon against native irregulars. The ridge afforded us
cover to withdraw to a point about 1 mile root of tho position; here wo
waited all day to ambush the enemy if ho attempted to follow us.
2o« The following morning our recce found no sign of life In the
enemy position. Pto, eulga crawled Into nn enemy latrine and hiding
there for some time onw no movement, r;e made a further recce west to
the boach and on the main road found enemy tracks leading north
indicating that tho enemy had withdrawn. Put on tho bench we found
tracks of a largo party, probably 100 airong, lending Gouth from
WAITAVALO to KAMANDF/MI. ivo suspected n ruse nnd in tho Into afternoon
moved in cautiously,
21. w« advanced to the position that we had reached tho previous
morning when our section on the right flank saw movement nnd opened fire.
The enemy now replied with greatly increased firepower. lie had brought
op a 90 mra mortar and with at least 3 50 nn grenade dischargers was
bringing down heavy fire on our position; one 7* Imm "Juki'* imo won
firing on our right flank and a number of LMQ’o nnd rifleman from the
centre of their position. An enemy section on our left flank, which had
doubtless been placed to got behind us, now commenced firing, it was
now obvious that wo were up against at least one company of trained
infantry, nnd the heavy mortar in particular was causing uo considerable
concern, wo replied with email arms fire nnd grenades, and withdrew
during the first lull, narprioingly without casualties, n fortunate
result which we owed to the cover afforded by a bolt of timber nnd logo
on the crest of the ridge. The enemy’s fire plan had been well laid
down, and his failure to Inflict any damage upon us was doubtless
because he had planned to let us advonce into tho open ground before
opening fire.
22. our withdrawal was aided by tho failing light, and we again camped
about a mile west of the position, continuing our withdrawal at first
light and returning to MU Fiver on the evening of GRPT, 20.
23. Meanwhile s/Ggt, Cohen, Ggt. aow and a/b Collins with two sections
had moved along the coast from T7ATHPPALL BAY to MU Fiver, and Sgt. aow
was now administering much-needed medioal treatment to the GOULKA people,
Zh» It was now not unlikely that tho enemy would shortly retaliate
with nn attack on ua, and we took preliminary precautions, wo split our
main atoroo into throe hidden dumps In the adjacent bush. Sgt.Hjr,
JOGRP with one platoon was placed on tho hillside above in order
to give uo warning of tho enemy’s approach, wo had a back road from
MILIM to our main position in the HU Fiver gorge, and hero Lieut, Sonnsor
and Sgt, nnnken prepared a series of throe defensive positions to oar
front.
25. At aboat 2100 hrs. on SKPT, 28 a runner from MILIM reported that
a largo enemy party had passed through MILIM. awl a few minutes later a
sentry arrived followed by a native who had been fired on at MU VIIJ.AGR.
26, we had manned our forward defensive position when about 20
minutes later the enemy moved up tho river toward us, in tho moonlight.
Fire was to be opened by Ggt. panken with our Bren LMG nnd his first
burst eent the lending enemy section to ground at lo yds. An intense
flrcflght developed and tho enemy quickly brought 3 or more 50 mm grenndr
dischargers nnd a number of LMO’s into action, our position rrao well
ohoson ns the ground prevented the enemy from manoeuvring to our flanks
and after about Jjo minutes firing ho withdrew down the river. Grenfc
credit was due to Ggt, Fnnkon who had displayed splendid soldierly
conduct.
Section - Aug./ Bopt./ pot. . Ifylj (continued).


27. ~ r e now covered the rondo leading to tho rear of our position and
with daylight wo accounted for 8 enemy killed nnd 1 "kombl” and sub-
sequently an additional 9 enemy, F.nrllor on tho previous evening we
had destroyed nil documents, lottorn and maps and hurlad our coden.
28. we expected enemy reinforcements before tho next attack and
ordered the HIT.IM platoon to prepare an ambush on the main road.
Meanwhile our recces showed that a party of enemy woo now dug in at
MU Village, and to tho Uouth Kant another party ran aotrldc the main
road near MALPA3. Thin seemed tho beginning of a determined attempt
to surround os*
29. rarller on tho night of 9?TT. 28 on unfortunate incident had
occurred when a small party of native women and children from GUMA, who
had vlalted us for medical treatment, wero surrounded by the enemy who
with ohnraotorletic bentiallty had killed '} and forced 2 women carrying
email children to load them to our position. They hnd succeeded in
surrounding the women and children by a rune; n "kambl" (j.kpwa of r.UT'T.o
feigning that he was alono and friendly* called out to them in their
ootmon language, i.rpwa was killed in tho subaequßnt fight,
30. in the exchange of fire in the darkness on© of the unfortunate
women, forced to lead the enemy, was killed and tho other wounded; the
latter and tho two children were recovered by un nnd safely returned
homo,
3X« On the following day, OKPT, 29, energy reinfbroomeoto estimated
at about 200 reached HILIM at about 2000 hrs., on route to MU. Beliovlr
HILIM clear they were moving in a body with n few forward scouts who
worn allowed to pans and our MILIM platoon opened up on the min' body
at close range; once again a brisk flrcflght devo.loped, At daylight
the enemy bad taken up a defensive position and 16 enemy and 1 "ker-ibl"
were seen dead. Poring tho day farther reinforce montn arrived and aono
remained at HILIM while others moved to MU. isolated skirmishes nnd
firing continued during the day, the enemy endeavouring to find our
position. At night enemy barges ranched hilim nnd from a barge they
eoninenoed firing a heavier weapon, probably * 90 m mortar or tho
composite 105 mm arfcy-mortnr. To avoid being trapped In the MU gorge,
wo now moved our position about one mile Inland nnd withdrew our platoon
from HILIM where ngt.wjr. .TO3KP, Cpl. W’/lAUau pud Pte, put.ba had brlmvod
most creditably.
32, on October 1 we contacted a small party of enemy Inland on our
loft flank; believing them to bo loot, we decided to pursue them but
shortly made contact with a strong enemy pnrty moving down the rlvor
from behind us; at the same time the enemy, firing ot random, wan
getting cion or to our left flonk, mo then moved about a quarter mile
North to a better defensive position on a rldgo, and issued ratlonn
and tho remainder of our ammunition.
33, During tho night more barges wero heard at mit.im anti tho enemy
moved in to our original position from the south and fast. He wao still
firing at 11X11*', seemingly at random, and was natrlde the main road to
tho South Fast nnd across the trnok leading south to tho MATPA Plvor.
T.e wore now cut off from two of our store dumps and our troops wero
tired nnd very fontnorn; In oddltlon, morn than n hundred natlvoo,
women and children had now joined us, ’7s wero no longer In a position
to oppose the enomy rhon we estimated to be now probably 700 strong.
Having distributed our rcranining food wo then commenced our withdrawal
north Moot over tho mountain track to HRPI. our progress slowed by
native refugees end footsore troopn. For two days wo could hoar the
enemy still firing on the const below un; doubtless designed to drive
all natives nut of the amn.
3l». wo bad killed 33 enemy nnd wounded many without loss to oarsolvci
Subsequently wo captured 1 enemy who had been lost after the engagement
on the night of nun*. 20, This prisoner, who later died, stated tlmt
ho was one of a party of 200 which, following our attacks on kamaHuuaH,
hnd boon sent from kOKOPO to IVMTAVALO by barge for the purpose of
destroying uo. This party was the first to attack un on UfTT. 20 and
tho p.w. stated that more than half had been cither killed or woutHlod.
Further, that they had determined our approximate position by observing
Santera Section - Aug./ Bopt./ Oct.. (Continued).


PART VIII.
PLAN.
1. wo now uuciuwd lo auuu ouo pluwoou lo cover J ; .i; .U-iluA’ uiu VoViN-HPALL
BAY areaj and a stcoud platoon to MAHQUiu to cover NOfhKJU. UhR, and tho
coast East to Bnl'cHsh 'this platoon to oatubl-iuh a chain of watch poets
as far Went as b'Apg iahiuKAN, wlxeru a further uectiou would be stationed
inland to relay news of any movement Bouth 01’ the anx>out ut HANAHrtHui
in HblfHY hAID Bj;Y, also one suction ut UaKl to ooyex* the Hti.ig road,
2. nt this stage the enemy had driven back a, I.h, irregulars on the
North coast and enemy were reported to be moving toward the headwaters
of the PAHiIX Biver North West of LAKIBI. We therefore strengthened our
tuard post at INUTUTOI*
Pt.vil. (1)
PART VII
TASKS - OCTOBER. 1944. to MARCH, 1945.
1. Having returned to IaxCIHI on o(7ih 10, wo now knew that Australian
Forces would land at JACQUINOT BAY la late October or early November,
and our first task would be to cover this landing*
a, Vie were now instructed to cease guerilla warfai’C and concentrate
entirely on covering tho coast and pass situation reports twice dally
until the landing took place.
3, After the landing we would be reculrsad to provide;-
(a) information of enemy coastal pouiilona,
(b) warning of any enemy coastal movement.
(0) topographical inf oxidation,
h. Our main role woo now completely changed, while our secondary
tasks remained the same.
i J t.vi. (13)
aircraft dropping to us, hw tmu taken part la the right oa ciA'l’. 2b
but know nothing of the subsequent migagoi.jwnta,
ib* We were able to rc-eatublioh radio communication on ud*. k unJ
one a again air fox'ces based on To<m)Kllia came promptly to our aid to
aaaiat our withdrawal and to duter the enomy from moving further South,
Heavy air strikes wore made on DOT. o, 7 and 9, with the romxlt that the
enemy on OCT. 10 once again abandoned uiliu.
3<»» At Mi bad weather prevailed and wu were unable to receive a
•drop*, and being out of food had to move to LAJCIRI, arriving there
on QOS, 10.
jijaQtorn section aua~»/ nui>t,/ , Ijdih (continued).


PART IX
1. on OOT. 23 Lieut, Black, Cpl. Hannan and cpl. Coleman with nn«
platoon moved from LAKIPI to BOYALPUn and established watohpoets
covering JACQUIBOT end waterfall BAYO.
2. On OCT. 18 the writer, Lieut. Oampson, Ogt. Panken, ngt. Movnlhan
and Sgt, Hall moved to KALAROI7IA and established mtchponte at luwmirrA
MABAU «nd BAIBIf. A *
3* Meanwhile, Sgt.Mjr. PAFANI3 with one sec, was established at
TAMKAIDAB Inland from CAPE OOMOPAB, while coastal sentry posts woro
organised at 3AMPUH, ME3ETWKI, KOLAMPON, GUMA, KILALU?!, ir/AI, and MXT.IW
whore KU3KU3 was re-established with 6 nmed watchmen, we now had a
complete chain from waterfall BAY to MILIM and thlo system worked
extremely well for sovernl reasons; primarily because the natives
realised it was valuable for their own protection and also because wo
paid them well; and In no small measure duo to tho influence of parauir
who was an untiring worker,
i J|» 3gt,Msr. JO3EP with one section was astride the HILIM road at
mi,
5* On November h»Australian troops of 6 Aust* Bde, landed unopposed,
and there were no enemy on the coast south of HKNRv: REID BAY. This we
could view with a great deal of satisfaction aa our own labours, and
the splendid work of our native troops and free natives associated with
us had now been well rewarded,
6. Meanwhile L/Cpl. POBIN, Ptea, leli and aiRIS returned with 3o
refugees from their long and difficult l\ months patrol into GAZELLE
PENINSULA aa far as the waranool FIVER, They had frequently been forced
to hide for long periods, but had contacted All MING at 3UM3OM and
DAUBY HAPK3 WILLIAM at PUTPUT and brought back most valuable intelli-
gence of PABAfJL area, of defences at V/APAHnoi and of coastal garrisons
South of f'APAmoi, numerous nlr targets were indicated and we wore
able from this information to confirm tho approximate strength of tho
closer enemy garrisons which we now estimated to bo KAMAIDdRAN 200,
WAIT/.VALO 500, JAMMER BAY hO, KBEP BAY 100, ADLER BAY 180, OUMDUM 125,
PUTPUT 300; and not less than 500 inland at LEMINGI.
7* 3gt» Hall, whoso health had now broken down, was evacuated, and
Liout, Hamilton took charge of LAKIPI from Flight Lieut. Hooper who,
with Cpl. Little, now proceeded on leave.
8. On Bor, lo Lieut, Black’s party moved from CUTAPP to KALABCXBA.,
9. 00 oot, lh wo moved west from KALABOINA to TAHO. Be were now
requested to supply a report on the possibilities of conatructlng a
jeep road from 3*M.PU7T to tho ip River, and the writer with Lieut, -
Sampson and Cpl. Ilnnnnn completed this task between Hov. 10 and nov. 29.
10. Be had reached TAMKAIDAN on Nov. 2if and established a camp, to
which we now moved nil personnel from BANG.
11. Meanwhile, Ggt.Hjr, JO3SP with two boos, had been moved forward
from HEPI to MILIHj and all inland ronda were atlll being covered
from LAKIPI base.
12. At RAMPUB we received storea by the A.l.n. V'esoel H»V. "FALUUA”
on dec. In, end supplied our wntohpostn forward to MTLT.M by rood,
13. on DEC, 29 elements of 5 Aust, Dlv, landed unopposed at SAMf'IJTT;
meanwhile rre had carried out n number of smaller tanks mooting and
escorting recce parties, etc.
lAj, Capt, Black and 3gt, panken now proceeded on leave and were
relieved by Oapt. ILL. williams and 3gt. j, l, Ollnore,
15, on dec, 29 a former T,B, 0, native constable OUIIDU joined üb, H«
had boon employed by tho enemy In FABAUL-nnd later imprisoned whore he
mot Cnpt. J. .7. niJPniY of a. 1.8. , who hnd been captured at AWUI. A n late
EmmXM (Continued).


19h3, Learning from Capt. Murphy of our prcconoc In tho aron, CRJTTOO
mad® a most adventurous escape. Ho had acquired a working knowledge of
Japanese and was employed by the enemy an an interpreter In native
court a. ire arrived with a grout deal of valuable information, which
included important intelligence concerning the onciy'o order of Pattle,
dispositions, command, food supply, fuel, aircraft, store dumps, dummy
positions, connt defencoo, prinonors, bombing clTcutn and much general
Intelligence, Higher authority from other sources woo able to confirm
a great deal of this information and many important aerial targets ware
subsequently attacked, often good results being observed. nutnxj’s
interrogation provided a really outstanding gain in much ib: s ired
intelligence from OAZBU.fi BENIDDULA.
16, Meanwhile wo wore engaged In constant short j’atrolllng forward of
MILIM watching for any enemy movement BoutU of or indication
that tho enemy was aware that Australian troops had reached CAT? COMORAN
area; and in this, Ugt, Mjr, rARAUXB anti cgt, i OXiU, both with an
intimate knowledge of the area, did excellent work, \\o were still
certain that tho enemy had no local native intclllgrnco, and tills
assumption proved to ho correct when later capture-’ documents showed
that It was hot until January 11 that the cnnmy at fAXTAVTO became
aware that Australian troops had landed on h'.p.v l-nnAlll.
17* By FEB. 5 had moved our forward post from TAfHC.MD.An through
KILALUM and MU to DPELL T'AfiMAOK,and olcncnto of 6 Aunt, Bdo, had again
landed unopposed at KIRP.
18, Our forward patrols now observed greatly Increased onoiny vigilance
and patrol activity In tho KAMANDRAD arena, Lieut, Bampaon and cpl.
Harman, with two boob, including ngt. roirx and agt, DATUM, were now
working with I H/52 Bn. as guides prior to the capture of " ' D JTDBAn.
Action had now been opened by tho enemy rdt.ii several small scale attacks
at NALONAU Creek,
19* The writer with Ogt, Gilmore and. Cpl, Coleman and two platoons
less two sections, including cgt.Mjr, jocr.i? and Ggfc.Mjr. papanio then
moved inland host along the ip Eivor and north to tho ro'.iELL (lAEA) River
where n post was established and contact mile with BAI.AYADG and TALI HI 0
areas,
20* Meanwhile a base ?raa established by cant, ?;11 liana at 3IPALATTOAN
in 6 Auat, Bdo. aroaj this formation vroa non preparing to attack
TfAITAV.AtO, As there was no longer any likelihood of the cticny moving
inland South of tho neck of gazelle, our old huso which had served us
so well at LAKIPI was now closed down and its personnel moved to the
A. 1.8. station at JAO'UJITIOT BAY.
21, V/o wore now Instructed to resume the normal a. 1.8. role of
gathering Intelligonco from enemy occupied territory and planned to -
establish a banc between BALAYAN;) and ivunio areas, in which wo had
long had a friendly contact, and Bgt, ailuor.o with cpl, Coleman and. one
platoon moved to BALAI'ANU area on MARCH 3, An unfortunate incident
occurred at kabalea where an enemy commando platoon employing a "kembl"
feigning to be friendly, ambushed our patrol killing 1 and wounding 2
native troops. The following day, together with tro platoons of l‘J Bn.,
wo sot out to seek tho enemy platoon but failed to r.nko contoot,
22, The writer was now instructed to proceed on leave, Capt,. W,M,
English arrived to take over tho field patrol and moved inland to
T AMNIO arcs, while Cnpt, H.L. Williams continued to run nor now bane
at 31PALANNAN, On Mnroh P.B the writer loft Gi ■ •-M/DG Ml for J./MUINOT BAY,
Warratlv® (continued).


PART X
SUMMARY - TASKS FULFILLET).
}r following is a nummary of tho fidf'Wnf. of nor tnnka
the practical value galoedj-
(n) v,a had maintained ourselves ns an «iitlr.''ly independent
guerilla force up to novembor, IOVI, Knga.ging in
irregular wnrfnre we had cleared the :outh roust of
GST? nriTAin ef all enemy pea to fro. 5 ? r'-jnTAGO U.‘. rr-JUR to
BMP BAT, a distance of l/o plies of coastline
won from an enemy who could at any * Inc employ over-
whelming strength against uo. ■> p ? riou.lt oi our
activity, Australian Forces wore able to land unopposed
at JAC'JUINOT BAY and subsequently at q/umin ar>J KIBF
and advance" to KALAI before Joining action v.ith the
enemy,
(b) we had gained Important Intelligence of inner a/. iii.LR
area, much of which appears on Fi?Tf AUGT, afpv
intelligence an?, ref, provisional Map ii2s3tbV': r.nl
in addition of the 7'AnAMGOI area and nut coast of
OAkKLT.B PKNI NCiri.A,
(o) T 76 had completely cut off tho enemy's local native
intelligence and prevented his learning of the landing
at .TACUJITTOT BAY on YO7. h, until JAGY, 11,
(d) our eonetwatchlng and air warning organisation bad but
fow minor sightings but provided valuable negative
intelligence, and va constantly provided weather reports.
(e) ive had won the loyalty and reaponoo of nil natives in
our area and had given then a measure of security in
orgnnlnlng an officiant ayaton of Gentries and warning,
(f) m had given medical treatment to many thousands of
natives, a number of whom would have perished without
this timely aid.
(g) had provided a great deal of topographical information,
together with tho provision of guides and local
reconnalnannou.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
1. All tbot was accomplished was due, on the ono hand* to tho
over ready willingness and co-operation of nil our Australian personnel
and to the Really splendid work and loyalty of our native troops and
agents, and on the other hand to tho exterior naclotnnoe which
recaivcdj nml which it in desired to acknowledgej-
(a) The adequate maintenance of air delivery supply organised
by J), 3,1.0,, Tl. u., and the highly ofllelent A. 1.8,
cormuj.nloat.iono system, by which means, with the co-
operation of B.n, 1,0,, llOßnoi.B, air support wan promptly
arranged from TOKOKtHA, to whloh timely aid v.o weic no
often Indebted, in addition,the annlstancc of units of
the P, A, N» shelling MILIM and other targets in V«IJDR BAY,
(b) our task waa nndc practicable by the? earlier efforts of
A. 1.8. field parties, on tho Houtli conat of tiki; BPITAIH,
whloh Included Lieut, M,II, Bright, Cnpt, (uon iaj.)
P.B, Figgis, j.leut. (now Capt.,) n,i„ TVlllin'ns, Lieut,
C.K, uohnson, Gnpt, (now Maj.) p«i. ukinnor, MnJ. A,
Pobertn, Gant. c, r>, Pates, Oapt. ;r, M, linglish, Ggt, ,T,T„
Gilmore and to their radio operntorn and nnslatanta;
also to tho ill-fated party of captain J, j. Murphy, t.n
all of whom wo were indebted for tho foundation upon
whloh oar subnequont not.lvlt.lea wore built.
(a) Acknowledgment 1b made to the work and energy of Capt.
Haj. )_P, I. nklnncr who rained the initial guerilla


PART XI
ADMINISTRATION.
1* TT« were fortunate throughout in having noat satisfactory
oomnanloatlons and supply.
COMMUNICATIONS.
1. Bass r/T communications »ere maintained by on A.y, a. 3Bk typo
teleradio, which again proved a most sturdy and reliable unit,
experience hoc proved the 387< to be suitable In oil ra r *p' , cto for baoo
operation hut too heavy for- carrying on patrol,
2. The ’Anullon’ type battery chargers worn found to bo Inefficient
units but the ’chorahorao* and ’Cooper* chargors proved most
reliable*
Our patrol communications were at all tlrrs efficiently maintained
by Badlo Corp. AT?hA trannmlt tar-mcelvcra which proved sturdy and
reliable and a moot suitable unit for transporting by native carriers.
Some of thono acts bad up to IB months continuous service in the field*
k* The only unsatisfactory feature In the apparent lock of availa-
bility of minor spare parts, particularly of volume controls and
condensers* It Is suggested that consideration mlpht bo given to the
Initial provision of aultably nolccted apnroa, together with the
necessary tools with each act. nnd most imortantJy a tenting motor to
each competent, operator, which would bo an added insurance of maintained
communication In the field,
5» It is uouoily a very lengthy process to acquire spore parts nf
any sort for radio or chargors in tho field; this la doubtless due to
difficulties in roar supply, nnd no doubt la already resolving the
attention of the authority concerned.
6* in the field It was found that In damp conditions, often pre-
vailing for long periods, moisture was tho constant cause of deficiency
In radio function. This was largely overcome by taking ovory opportunity
of ounnhinc to erpone the chassis for drying out; this generally
eufficod but on Infrequent occasions chnnnls had’to be placed in a drum
and very carefully dried out over a fire, it la presumed that the seta
are already moisture-proofed but the ingress of damp in tropical hush
is such that constant drying out must be observed,
7* It reflects credit upon tho sets that often in moat adverse
conditions our communications were so efficiently maintained,
0* The maintenance of tho note waa moot ably carried out by ngt,
C*J* Moynlhan, T,dg*Tel. c. Mo-molmrn ond Cpl. A, colomen, ell of whom ,
combined enthusiasm with technical ability nnd. general w/r efficiency,
9* Finally, It is desired to acknowledge tho efficient reception,
always courteous and helpful co-operation of the A,i,h*, n.'i,, control
station VIV,
CODES.
1. Throughout wo employed NAVK code, and found It moot suitable for
the work In which we were engaged, it nupplioo oacurity with a minimum
labour In cyphering nnd the text can bo rend even though several minor
orrora may have occurred in Its composition or trnnn'r.J.aolon end thus
minimizes 'VTM’a. Also, with practice It can bn largely reliably
committed to memory whom one table only ia In. use nnd much time savod.
2, Incoming moooagcs roro nlwnyo readily deciphered, reflecting
effloionoy in the coding staff at vi 7.
SUPPLY.
1. Our normal supply waa by nlr delivery nnd Intar by a,I.D. small
ships.


AIR DELIVERY
1. The highest standard of efficiency in air delivery was reached
when the 817 squadron, with especially fitted dropping bins, was
operating from I7ADZAB, Those aircraft were able to drop lij ’chutes and
50 ’free drone’ In two runs from low level and minimise the posslbllltlcr
of the drop being observed by the enemy.
2. Drops by Douglas transport were satisfactory in quantity but
necessitated twenty or more runs to complete delivery, usually at two
’ohatea per run and generally from a greater height than the Pl7*o.
This was obviously prejudicial to security when observed by the enemy,
Sighting of n Douglas transport flying low Inland was. In itoolf, an
indication to the enemy that dropn wore being made in the area.
3. The Beaufort, though doubtless employed by necessity only, offers
some security but Its voiy limited load can aupply small parties only.
COMPOSITION AND PACKING OF DROPS
1. This was, on the whole, moat cntlnfaotorlly md efficiently dono|
consideration of oeveral points, however, la suggested*-
(a) Normally. when ordering a store drop, rations wore
requested on the basin of, for Instance, 5 Europeans
and 7o natives. Almost Invariably the rcnultant
delivery would contain a considerable surplus of
European food in full cane lots, and an embarrassing
shortage of native foods, resulting In an almost
Immediate request for an additional drop, specifically
requesting nntlvo rations.
(b) It Is suggested that n broad basis of Jj lbs, per day
less containers for Europeans and 2 lbs, per day less
containers for natives may serve ns a guide, it
necessitates, of course, the splitting and repacking
of case lots of the more varied .European diet, but it.
lo desirable particularly where the availability of
sir delivery lo limited.
(c) Free dropping of suitable items was moat satisfactory;
drums double-bagged and rice triple-bagged. The
practice of free dropping biscuits, however, io n
mistake ns they are almost invariably crushed to ponder
and valueless; furthermore, thn tin container fre-
quently splitn and the contents quickly mould with the
Ing.roso of moisture.
(d) It la suggested that packing could be improved In the
prcporatlon for dropping of extremely fragile end
Important items such ns accumulators and charging motors.
’'lth motors, nil projecting and fragile parts should be
removed and packed separately and the whole suitably
podded; n case only la insufficient as ouch parts as
carburettors and spark plugs are frequently smashed on
delivery.
SUPPLY BY SMALL SHIPS.
I, This has boon satisfactory, but here again, however. it may be
possible to give some further consideration to packing, where the cargo
la to bo carried Inland, a container of suitable sice and total weight
not exceeding l\ o Ihn, in desirable where praotloahle.
RATIONS.
1. our general rations were moat satisfactory throughout. bhen
dropping, If a container of fresh foods (moat, butter, bacon, fruit
and broad) can bo Included it la n moat welcome variation,
2. The native "KUTIA" ration la an excellently prepared container
and la sufficient for 15 natlvca for ono day.


PART XIII
AGENTS (SECRET).
, tm»ktv ...nrs nTirTAM of British Coloroon ralnnil birth. emplsyefl
ii mis.lSy’t.S by bey A'lvontlst Mission nt rmnr near
egest originally contncteO Cnpt. Bates
l£n n J 1 ,-s? rMol^or 1110
death by natural enunon. Il.in wife and family nt TJT.Ui.
5 AH Mina, of ahlnene nationality, formerly emnloyo* Dopt.
of Agrloaltura of T.ti.a., nl»o erlglmily oontnoto.l Oopt. notes by
letter. oeoselone, regardless of pornonnl rin>-. h® ° ut
sm ssii *.
death of DATinr mark* r.Ti.i.iAM At putput.
Pt. XII. (1)
PART XII
CASUALTIES.
1. Killed In action*
at RATO, W.B* , 2lf/6Ah ngt, KOQIMARA (T-B.W, )of ORDBI, BOGIA,
MAD Am.
at KAHAIiRA,N.B. t 3/3/I*s pte. kriwkl of LAMBOM, Row Ireland*
2. Wounded in aotiont
•t KASALBA, F.J*„ 3/3A5 3fft. W?MA of XIIMWX, WAWIMO »
(l« Sf Wf NS”* HTfTle
•I * ’* *' pto. LALUIS Of SUAFPFZ* AITAPB I
o.n,w. bade.
Pt. XI. (3)
emergency ration nn it i« Anna * Uowow-r* a moot tb luab le
Indefinite!?. “ 1 lly carrleo! " nd »«« ho stored In tho buah
WATCHES.
*•**• short of the rcquialte number of watches
sf r^ radio f ke ?° QnJ f or guard HOO'a. tvotchea, although '
oSSitJiL d t f? roly lnot morc thnn six months In dranp Held
i ho p T csont availability of Isaac and replacement is
Inadequate. Koch post rcqulreo h watches; 1 lor the office rH/e *
I for the radio operator and 2 for tho guard rTCO’ e, /
Ifttidaa (Continued).


PART XIV.
MEDICAL.
1. OUT medical work wa n moat capably handled by hgt, n, a, a or. who
had formerly gained considerable experience with 1 a.0.J1. , and* within
the limits of oar requirements, run a capable dinponnori able to
perform minor operations ond temporary dentistry, n moot aooful facility
In those Isolated el rearm tancoo.
2. The oatabllshment of medical treatment was of great Importance
In winning the loynlty of tlic natives In our area. A hoapltal trna
established at LAKIJ7I and a temporary cllnio at nil our outpostn, Many
thouaando of natives received treatment, moat importantly m.a.d,
Injectlona which were also extensively given by enpt, n,TVllllamn
and the writer.
3. Yaws (fromboeaia) was the most Important disease, most particu-
larly among young children; the Incidence of chronic scabies was alno
high, both of which were effectively ourod. other than this, native
health wan at a normal ctnndnrd; the incidence of malaria actually
lessoned by clrcamntnncen forcing the natives to abandon the bench
and move to higher arena for security against tin enemy, and so avoiding,
to considerable extent, the anopholca monqulto,
U* The health of the Europeans remained generally good, a normal
deficiency, duo doubtless to exposed conditions and restricted dlot,
only being observed. Malaria woo controlled by ntebrlnc prophylaxis,
and minor complaints were generally confined to hollo and olein fungi,
with one incidence of yellow jnundlco.


PART XV.
CO-OPERATION WITH ANGAU.
1. Up to November. 19M, wo had controlled all nntlvco In our area.
This control was not in any way admlnlotrntlvo and designed only for
our own security and Intelligence and for the security of the mtiven
themselves, in the peculiar cl rcumotnncco prevailing, they had fer
social problems nnd Indeed governed their communal life rl th orcdlt.ablr
renpect for property nnd person,
2. With the arrival of ANGKU some clarification and mutual agreement
was immediately nocennnry, thin ms placed on n firm bnnle byt-
(«) A full appreciation of the Importance of and Its
tasks,
(b) That there la no real conflict between the operations of
ANOAU and a. 1.8. whoao task la of an entirely different
nature.
(0) That, where the operatives are oloacly associated. there
la everything to be gained from mutual co-operation-
3. An agreement wao reached whereby ANCAU controlled all natives
up to and in roar of our own troops, while no continued to contact
natives still in enemy occupied territory.
14, It la desired to acknowledge here the valuable 00-oporatlon of
Maj. A. Roberta, MaJ. -T. k, McCarthy, Oapt. T>. Chambers and Lieut. 0.
Kinsey of AWCAU.


PART XVI.
LESSONE IN NATIVE GUERILLA WARFARE.
1, It ncy bo of Interest to record a summary of "nr erprrleoco in
employing native irregulars.
2, Consideration munt bo given to the characteristics of different
Melanesian tribes, antre of whom are naturally warlike, while others have
a much more peaceful disposition,
3* Of those employed by ue, the natives from tho mainland of Itrn
GTJIITRA, more particularly the AITAPB - ITATTITJO people, are much more
warlike and excitable than the placid Uh’V BPITAin natives of the upittgktt,
KOI., TIHUir and 7'MJLVA tribes with which vr were concerned; thoce
people, with rare except ion’.’, who are usually r,i oat outstanding, are
generally unwarllkc with little inclination to fight; p, fact well
appreciated by tho enemy.
h. The Couth BOUOAIHVIILS people, of SIT7AI, DUITT snd PAQOVI33I areas,
do not fight as readily as the AITAPK3 and WAMIMon, but with a
characteristic coolness and determination,
5* The native in war, like any other race, produces a percentage of
brave men, with a majority of nolld aupportorn and none men who have no
stomach for fighting.
NATURA ADVANTAGES.
1, Almost all natives ponsoao an Instinct for aiming end can be
readily trained to use nmnll armn with reasonable efficiency,
2, They have an Innate jungle-craft, and a supreme confidenoe in It,
■which enables them to exploit the element of surprise, both in approach
and pursuit,
3* They are able to live ’off the land' whore there are gardens*
but emphatically WOT off the so-called jungle In which they can only-
forage for wild foods for a very short psriod, usually not longer than
hd hours.
They hare a high degree of personal mobility, unhampered by much
of the naceenary equipment and olobhlng which nneu'-nora white troops.
5, They can move quickly over very rough terrain bo Inf* much none
'surefooted' than white troops,
6, Born huntoro, they nro naturally good scouts; they understand
and can ’read' tholr environment,
7» They have a natural liking for, and enjoy drill and «lmncntnr,7
training.
NATURAL DISADVANTAGES.
1* while they can be taught a limited practical appreciation of the
elementary theory of war on the bnala of "Infantry flection rending’',
they hate only n v p ry 11mltod appreciation of the theory of wonpona and
in conooiooncc nro ulvnyc lively to fool that the entire rclght of the
enemy*n fire la being d.lr r ctcd at t.Ucvi individually.
2. They have United norvoun endurance and are quickly discouraged
by nervous a train,
3. They have lose physical endurance than white troops, and Ices
protection against exposure to wot conditions. Their bur-* feet quickly
become footaore and mint be fre intently rented,
h» They nro always nt the ncroy of tholr Imaginetloon end of thoir
varloun beliefs and "tabus’ 1 . It Is not uncommon to find a percentage
moot unreliable in darkness, due to tho Influence nf their belief 1 n
spirits, ghosts, etc..


EMPLOYMENT
1* In attack they are beat employed where they can exploit the
element of surprise and win tho fight in the first five seconds. They
will normally use ammunition liberally.
2. in the purmi.lt and ambush of small parties they are aided by
natural aptitude,
3. In defence they arc host used again with the element, of surprise,
bat should not be expected to hold ground sgaimt an energy employing
support weapons,
h* They should not ho expected to oppose trained infantry in equal
strength on ground whom tho infantry can manoeuvre,
5* on scouting patrols, native troops will frequently prefer to b«
without the company of one or two supervising white men, of whose
inferiority in Jungle-craft and stealthy movement they arc fully nrwrc,
and have much more confidence in their own ability in the Jungle. Also
they nr« conscious of n solf-lnponod hut uneasy sense nf rennonsiblllty
for the. ttoito man*
6, Their most valuable role# and one in which they «re without peer,
is in the tracking down, surprising and killing of a dleorgnnifled enemy
foraging for food on unfamiliar ground.
PECULIAR INFLUENCES.
I, While the morale of white troops la often encouraged by the
influence of religious services, etc*, the native has firm convictions
of his own. ills practices of anointing to give coursgo in bottle and
weird sororry designed to confuse the enemy, nrn nnrnle boosters In hlfl
employment in war.
INDEPENDENT GUERILLA WARFARE.
1, in the octroi employment of Independent guerilla warfare,
isolated from any land support and within striking distance of superior
enemy forces, our experience emphasised thooo doubtless well known
points:-
(a) The provision of a base remotely situated from the enemy
and n is inaccessible to him as possible.
(b) The Importance of politically gaining tho confidence of
1000 l people,
(o) The employment of surprise and immediately "fading* to
ovoid tho oneny determining actual strength.
(d) Tho determination of how much the enemy will stand before
being goaded into employing his superior strength to
destroy the harassing force,
(e) If prolonged, tho preparation for the ultimate result
which will rmmmlJy be defence and retreat.


PART XVII
FURTHER A.I.B. ACTIVITIES GAZELLE PENINSULA.
I. Tho following Is nn appreciation nf the prnhahlo shape of tho
future activities of the houth Const A, I.R. party, Thin party has now
caused all guerilla warfare an! in confined to the nvwj. '.I.R, role
of intelligence.
OBJECT.
1. To gain intelligence from central and Bunt GAZ KTJ.t?
FACTORS.
1, Australian troops now hold In strength both sides of tbs node
of OAZKLLK PBNIII3ULA and wo aro informed hy higher authority that It lo
unlikely that furthor penetration Trill, bo ottomptnd fbr none tins.
2, The enemy remains In groat strength lo Ovsfl.l.S, with the nolo
body north of the v/Alh'NilOX •• K3PAVAT River lino, o rot noted by a chain
of outpoato, probably now nil In company strength or grantor, along the
Bast coast and a large body In the control if.-tTnrn area* doubtless
the aamo on the North const.
3» The enemy is now very defence conscious pnd vigilant and wall
aware of the activities of A, 1,?,.
24, The enemy controlo nil notlvco within OA'.’ri.T.iy, many ef whom are
locolo. The locale unable to desert, owing to the inpooslblllty of
getting their aged people and children nut, are used by the enemy to
police the movements of foreign natives, holding them rcoconsibJo for
nativoH panning through the ir rronn nnO inflicts ruthless punishment,
sometimes mnssnora, on them if hie nxaplclnn is aroused,
5* There Is a largo number of foreign natives still in paBAUL area
with no family or property ties, many of whom will willingly desert at
the firnt opportunity.
6, The enemy has managed to keep the generol news of the proximity
of Australian troops nwny from natives in FABA”L, our Information
indicated that few only know that the Allies hnd rc-oooupled western
HISW BRIT A Iff* It is believed that thlo is now receiving the attention
of P• K» I>. 0. •
7, Some, possibly many, arc doubtless In hiding in tho more remote
arena of OA2SIX'S. Our experience haa shown, however, that natives who
hays not been In. recant contact with the enemy hare little or no
intelligence value.
8, There aro now very limited areas of whore it la
practicable to establish a forward base camp from which to operate, n
further complication being tho now limited air delivery and unsatis-
factory typo of aircraft available.
9, a forward post hers must nor have at least 6) nmo>l natives as
protection against the recently active enemy 'commando* platoons.
10, Natives resident on the F.ast coast as fnr North as 9UMSUM are
known to bo in hiding and have no contact with the enemy.
11, The discovery or suspicion of any A, I.P. patrols into (TAZPTT.T
will lead to prompt retaliation and naonacre of any local natives
involved,
12, Our experience has proved that tho most useful intelligence
will bo'gained from natives or agents actually in contact with tho
enemy.


COURSKS OPEN.
1. The enemy will undoubtedly remain constantly vigilant and take
active measures to prevent information reaching or leaking oat of
GAZRLLB.
2, oar course appearo to be beat confined at this ntage to very
limited movement end concentration on underground ’’grapovlnlng" through
the central area, aearchtng for uneful contaetnt at tho sumo time
endeavouring to got small parting of foreign natives out of PABAJJL.
PLAN.
1, The following plan ban therefor® been commenced, ponding further
notion against PWMTT., by Auntrnllnn troopsj- .
(a) The maintenance of n base in area for Unison
with local field Commander and supply.
(b) The maintenance of a post two dnyn north in the TALIUXO
area*
(c) Liaison with localo and by extension of underground contact
endearoarlng to build up a "grapevine".
(d) in co-operation with F,8.L.0. to endeavour to got omall
parties of foreign natives out of inner oA3Ft.t,b hy the
employment of especially prepared pamphlets.
2, Our post In the TALINIO area will provide warning of any enemy
approach through the TALINIO - POP'CA. area,
3, Some stores oan bo carried from wajtaVat.o b"en Into TAT into and
ao minimise the request for air delivery.


SUMMARY OF INTELLIGENCE - GAZELLE PENINSULA.
1. The following In a nummary of Intelligence received by us through
agents, patrols and oaoapeen, and reported earlier In detail, when
received*-
AIR.
1. indications of a number of aircraft, not exceeding 60. slightly
damaged and unserviceable but could be repaired, hidden in flouo areas
near TOBKPA.
2. indications of at least lo serviceable aircraft In TOBKPA and
VUWAKANAU areas.
3» Two twin-engined aircraft reported hidden at KP.PAVAT.
h» Six float planes reported at TOBOI and 3 near TVOTTAWATONO.
5* Some aircraft are believed to be hidden for tho purpoco of
evacuating senior officers in tho event of paBAUT, falling.
6. Some pilots remain; reported to bo attached to various units for
rations and not maintained in an air group.
7. Scattered fuel dumps reported could NOT bo identified specifically
as aviation gasoline.
SEA.
1* Our Informants had NOT sighted any surface shipping in past 12
months.
2. NO submarines wore sighted, but occasional reports Indicated
possible infrequent visits by single submarines to PABAUL.
3, Dome serviceable barges remain, and while economically used,
there appears to be no Immediate shortage of fuel for these ornft.
h, Constant reports indicated tho existence of a secret amphibious-
submarine vehlelo, capable of carrying about ho personnel. It is
believed that at least 12 of these vehicles wero on tho Couth coast and
withdrawn to PABAUL. They are HOT being confused with tho amphibious
medium tank with pontoons foro and aft.
5, A number of Naval personnel remain In RABAfTL. Reports indicate
that they ero now openly despised by Army troops, tho isolation of tho
Army being blamed on the failure of tho Navy.
LAND.
1, out reports confirmed the main southern defence line of the
PABAUL fortress area follows the general course of the tvaraNQOl and
JCBRAVAT Rivers,
2* Reports Indicated the following dispositions of the main
defensive forcoi-
(a) To the west the probable landing area in ATALIKLIKUN BAY
from KKRAVAT north to KABAIPA in held in strength, with
some heavy coastal dofonooa.
(b) io the North v.ent tho probable landing arena in LIQUATT BAY
find TALI LI BAY aro also hold In strength.
(c) To tho north heavy coastal defences remain at I'PAaD ('T.
area, while PABAUL proper, KA.PAVIA BAY end BJuinoilw DAY
to CAPK GAZRLLB appear to be lightly manned; mnnfc troops
boing withdrawn from those heavily bombed waterfronts,
but hold inland in groups covering tho general areas.


(d) TO the East KABANQA BAY and WARATTGOI BAY areas oro
held in strength with 7 heavy ooant defence guns
near PUTPUT.
(e) The main Southern lino appears to hinge on MALABOTIOA
Junction, and reports indicate largo reserved areas
at WAIPIKI, PALaßano and BTTAPAKA.
3» peporta indicate at least 30 tanka In the palabanO area.
HEALTH.
1, Reports indicate? that the general health of the Japanese in
OAZELLB remained good. There were no indications of a shortage of
essential drugs nor of any general sickness.
FOOD.
1, While Individual troops were reported to be complaining of
Inadequate rations, there was no indication of a general shortage of
food among the Japanese, and It ia believed that considerable quantities
of rice ant! tinned foods remain, Extensive "self sufficiency'* gardening
continues, doubtless to conserve food and probably also for the
provision of fresh foods for health maintenance.
PRISONERS OF WAR.
1, our last reports indicated 15 Europeans only in prison in PABAUL,
13 being airmen. lan A. 1.8, officer, and 1 civilian. They were reported
In good physical condition and receiving sufficient food.
2. Numerous reports wore received, extending over a long period.
Of the execution of Allied airmen. Earlier, some natives were permitted
to witness executions of white men, but Inter the enemy precluded native
witnesses- and in consequence reports wore vague. There ia no doubt,
however, that many Allied alrnon have been executed in PABAUL, some by
beheading and some by ''stabbing''. It was reported that a ritual was
usually followed. The selected victims were afforded an apparently
luxurious neal with attendance at a carefully laid table draped with a
white cloth prior to execution, which generally took place In the
BOTANICAL CARDENS or at MATUPI, and allegedly in retaliation for any
successful air attook,
3» Largo numbers of Asiatic prisoners of war were also reported,
Indians wore reported to be aevernl thousands, with Chinese in lesser
numbers, and some from JAVA, MALAY, BORNEO and : s m.LlPPin/«!,
Jj* The Indians were reported in very poor physical condition duo to
insufficient food, and often purposely exposing themselves in air attacks
hoping to be killed.
BOMBING.
1. Earlier, casualties were reported to bo very hoary io air attacks
but latterly few, aa moat troops hare been withdrawn from the main
target areas, and underground protection la now extensive.
2, It ia reported that a number of dummy camps and positions are
made, it la believed that the enemy la now rarely camped in any appar-
ently obvious position, Peporta indicate that camps oro frequently
selected on the banks and in the head of small crooks, hidden by timber,
and where the banks con bo readily tunnelled.
MORALE.
I. Peporta Indicate that enemy troopa in OAZNI.LE, while oonrlnoocl
that there la now littlo hopo for thorn, oro ronlgncd to their fate and
remain willing to fight to the last.
SERVICE TROOPS,
1, It is believed that a largo number of non-combatant service troops
LAUD (Continued).


APPENDIX I.
OFFICERS.
1. 0. C., ITOXfI. T/Mnj. B. FAIPFAX-ROna - April 1944 / March 1945.
2. Flight Lieut. C.IT. HOOPRR - April 1944 / Hovombor 19*44. Wan
2 l/o and in charge of LAKIRI Base; took a keen and efficient
interest In him work and rendered valuable oervico to the party
throughout. lie proved n very reliable officer.
3. NQXSS. T/Capt, 0, B, BLACK - April 1944 / January 1945. A moot
reliable officer, keen, officiant nnd a willing volunteer for any
task, no did excellent work in the a win. area nnd his conduct
throughout was most creditable,
4. VX449D9. l/cnpt, j, mok.HAMILTON - Juno 1944 / February 1945.
A very willing officer, calm and reliable in action, ho relieved
Flight Lieut. Hooper at LAKIPI in Jlovonber, 1944, nnd did valuable
work throughout,
5* VX73687. Lieut. G, K. JOHNSON - Formerly with A, X.B, field party
in CAPE ORPOPD area and remained with the guerilla force until
June, 19*44. A most reliable officer combining long experience in
the field in NE’J aUINBA with a very clear estimate of any current
oituatlon and nn accurate appreciation of native politics.
6. QX4869. Lieut, j, SAMPSON - Juno 19*4*4 / March 1945* An experi-
enced soldier, cool in notion in which his conduct wna always
excellent, Hilling nnd reliable, he gained valuable experience In
HKT7 BRITAIN and In an efficient officer.
7. 7x62690. T/Capt, ILL. WILLIAMS - Formerly rlth A. 1.8. field party
in CAPE ORFOPB and NORTH COAST arena; arrived January. 1945, to
relieve Cnpt, G.n, Black, An efficient officer, experienced in
field work and now in charge of party base.
8. VX66764. T/Capt. w. M. ENGLISH - Arrived March, 1945, and relieving
the writer, is now in charge of the field party. Keen, reliable
and experienced in A,1,8. field party work,
9. HX124608. Lieut, j.o, WILLIS - Arrived January, 1945. No former
experience but keen and la expected to prove an efficient officer
in the field.
OTHER RANKS.
1. QX35743. won. KINO, B. - April, 1944 / Doccnfcer, 1944* AP. A
p.T, instructor, he did useful work training native troops at
LAKIPI and no a relief radio operator. Hot n buolrmn nnd bent
employed in hnse area.
2. VX117350. 8/3gt, COUKH, B.L. - April, 1944 / February, 1945.
A willing HGO, did good training work at LAKIPI and n number of
useful field patrols. Pellablo In notion and a keen worker,
3. VX38860. 3gt, PANKBTI, J.D. - June 1944 / December 1944. A
reliable, calm, always willing and efficient NCO. .A good buahmnn
and capable patrol leader. Awarded the M*M, for gallantry in
action at HU plver on Sept, 28.
4. VXIO3IB, A/3gt. QOW, 9. A. - April 1944 / February A most
capable nnd efficient Medical NCO, nnd an enthusiastic worker.
5. VXIIOBO2. A/ogt. MOYHIHAN, C.J. - June 1944 / January 1945.
A most efficient tv/t operator with technical ability and outstand-
ingly conscientious, pellablo In notion.
6. vx Bgt. HALL, L.A, - June 1944 / November 194*1* Commenced
with valuable work but later broke down in health. Has an
unpopular manner and does not fit In well in n field party.


7» ROXI 3, Qgt. OILMOFK, J,L, Arrived January, I9*is, and now in
field. A very reliable TTCO with a valuable background of many
yearn experience In itkv? PFITAIG, and a capable patrol leader.
8. 11X10815. A/Cgt, LITTLK, A.P. - April l r Jl\h / Rovcmber Did
good work In training native troopn nnd In field patrols, a trained
W/T operator and useful party member,
9. 3/3509, AAdg. Tol. McDACIIIvRTT, C.M. - June IQ/.|/| / February 19U5,
A moot efficient w/t operator with valuable technical skill. Takes
an enthusiastic interact in his work,
10. 7X77095. Cpl. HARM All, J.L. - April 19*4*4 / March 13145, a reliable
and efficient RCO, and experienced soldier. Capable nnd calm in
action, old valuable work in training nnd on patrols.
11. NXW2O. Cpl, COLKMAN. A.P. - Juno 19*4*4, ntlll with field party.
A good ff/r operator with valuable technical knowledge, and Interested
in hie work.
12. 7X1363*43. Cpl. BURRO r/KU 1 J. - Fobrunry IVhU, still with field party.
A reliable and efficient tt/t operator, with useful technical
knowledge.
13. 9/6112. A/B. COLLIR3. P, P. - April 19*4*4 / December 19*4*4. Did
valuable work In training native troops and on patrol. Calm and
reliable in action.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PROMOTION.
(a) The following personnel are recommended as being suitable for
promotion to commißoloned rank, in making these recommendations
the following points have been consideredt-
(n) Typo and background for commissioned rank.
(b) Education.
(o) Leadership,
(d) personal conduct,
(e) Experience in the field,
(f) Ability to hold rank in Infantry,
All have been in the field with the writer for extended periods,
I (1) 7X30068. 3gt. pahkbn, J. 8,. U.M, a capable patrol leader
I In all respects, and competent to co'tnnnd an infantry platoon
| in the field.
(2) ROXI 2, 3gt. OILMOFK, J.L. A capable patrol leader with
many years residence in WKW GUINEA, and five years army
experience. Competent to carry commlanionod rank In AROAU
or infantry,
(3) VXIIOBO2, A/sgt. MOYNIHAR, o.j. Ruitable In all respects
for selection as a Signals officer.
(1») 7X77095. Cpl. HARMAN, J.L. An experienced soldier and
reliable in action. Competent in all rospecto for selection
nnd to command «n Infantry platoon In tin: field,
(n) The following arc recommended for promotion to the rank of A/ngt.i-
-(1) miiU7?o- Cpl. COLRMAIt, A.P.
(2) 7x1363*43. cpl, BuppcnvKa, j.
(C) vy?xlo3I0. A/Ogt, cow, C, A, , la rooomnendod for confirmation of
rank, or promotion to A/ivoil, Ho Is nn outotnndlngly capable
nodical PCD nnd an nonet to any field party.


NATIVE PERSONNEL.
A complete record of the servlcon of natives appears In
Appendix II of thla report; mention 1b h<*rn made, however, of the
outstanding services of the followlngt-
1. a/Mjr. PAPANI3 (1,, 3, M. ) r natural paramount chief of the 30ULKA
people, whose ■willing and untiring anolotanco wan of outstanding
YOlue In V7IDK BAY - .
2. s/Mjr. GOLPAK (l, 3, At. ), paramount chief of the roL and ÜBNQKH
people, *llO waa our loyal and staunch aapportor in tho vtatkpfau.
and -TACiUINnT PAY arena.
3. 3/Mjr. JOB3P (l. a. M.), our senior native IICO and « natural leader.
U, Bgt. NATIMO, n oourogooun soldier and a tireless worker throughout.
5* Qgt. MAP AMU FT (l.b.m, ), a consistently brave soldier and a good
loader.
6. Bgt. POIFI, who did valuable rooco work In WIPK BAf.
7* 3gt. OTI, a loyal and moat reliable n, G, 0..
8. Bgt. HSMA (L, 8, M,}, a moat erratio native but capable of very
brave conduct.
9» L/Cpl. POBIN (J„ n.M,), who twice patrolled In GA7.KLLS as far as
WARANOOI.
10. Pto. LXLI (L, 3, M. ), who aooompaniod L/Gpl. ROBIN.
11. pte« OIPI3, nlno accompanied 1,/Cpl. POBIN.
12. Cpl. KWTANOU (h. d. ”, ), a brave and reliable rr. C,O. .
13. Pte, BIHA (l<» 3, h, ), n eoo3, determined soldier.
li», Pte* PTJI.3A (L. 3, M,), who did outstanding rccoo work.
15. Pte. (JUNTO, who eccaoed from tho enemy mid brought out moot
valuable Infomntlon*
16. Pte, YOHANNIB (WAPAIBUT), a consistently brave soldier.
17. L/Cpl. K.TNKAJ.I (L, B.M, ), a reliable end courageous soldier.
While the following rendered consistently good cervlooj r
Cpl. AKAB, L/OpU BIDICK)P, Pto. CHIFIBI (L.O.M. ), Me. CIBCi:, CpX. OODAMITf
(1.3. H, ), Pte, KOVAKUP, Pte. MAMBA, Cpl. MAHO, Cpl. TTATTOIPI, Pto. TAKIO,
Pto, TUI7ATH, Cpl. UAlM't (h.n.M, ), Cpl. TJATICAPA.
/
M, V '
(3gd, ) B. PAIPTA.T-PO3B.
UaJ.


APPENDIX II
RECORD OF NATIVE SERVICES.
WRITTEN DY t- NOXB. T/*faJ. B. FAXFFAX-Fo3t-J, A, I. F.
DATED 1- 10 April, 19/45.
MAP PPIP. I- GErrrP.nl. Hiv-V BRITAIN Air o. ; • "TpruJT.A
bkpjkg provision/r. 1” - h >u t. s.
PERIOD I- APRIL, 19/4/4, to ftARGJT, 1?/|5.
AREA I- SOUTH GO A AT, TtT.' BRITAIN.
conthhtu *- introduction
CONTROL
HEALTH ‘
POPULATION
FOOD AND AORXGUT.TUPR
AOKNOrn.IfnOMIMT
/hiTIVEU *-
OCTOTANDINd WAR n^RVIT-5
LOYAL SERVICE
LO'IAL VILLAGES
NATIVE TROOPS - WH SERVICE.
.yffowL ■ iW -
(asJ.) c. Fairfax-rosa,
MflJ.
INTRODUTION.
1. in prior to the Allied ro-oapture of lysaviiUfl if’iTf BRITAIN,
A, I. B. inserted h number o£’ field parties into the no urn f vv -nr to cover
the operations landing to the re-occupation of a.P'\«7s and cmpk GLOUCESTER.
2. in April, 19hh, as no immediate novo further Boat woo planned by
the Allien, the a.i.b, field parties ware grouped at L .Vi IST, a remote
village two days Inland from rmTP'PWALT. PAT nod formed into e guerilla
force.
3* This force was given a number of laake, of which the most
important woroj-
(a) To clear the enemy from the south oonat of NEU BRITAIN
from UOHTAOU fTBP, to prupv pyrn b\y. p dintonce of
170 miles.
(b) To win the co-operation of all natives in Uio area, and
brenk the enemy's contact with them,
fy, This noa accomplished, rnd in addition a grant deal of valuable
Intelligence gained. The result enabled Australian forces to land
unopposed at JAC-IUINOT BAY in flnv» l?/|/(, •’nd mihannuontly nt fUMPtn
and KJKr, also unopposed.
5* The sucaesa of our work wnn made possible by the loyalty and
courage of our native troops, nnd by the co-opbrntlnn of loonl natives.
It in In acknowledgment of thin iojrnl nervic" that thin Appendix Iwa
boon written, no tint it n-»y ho pinned on pnmamnfc roctorl,
6. The foundation of this guerilla force non built of natives who had
been trained in the use of mnall nmo nt the A,1.1;. school au TpBR >• 1..L8A,
';oeecml.°nd, rod aooompnoled the A. 1. B, field parties. These, with other
natives who had joined tha field parties, were assembled at IaJCIRI when


the field parties withdrew. our force watt then enlarged by the enlist-
ment of local volunteer natives, and organised as Coy, HQ, no pi. and
8 Pi fie no.
7. . With rero Isolated exceptions, all the local natives of the KOL,
HKNOKB, 00OLKA and TIMOIP triboo, with whom we mostly wore concerned,
were novor at heart pro-go’-'-’noeo, but rer* - , vdth gm’ reason, fearful
of the ruth lore and savage re price In that thv vrould take against
then if he suspected their association with .Australians.
8. The natives rare always willing to help us nrovldod wo could
assure them of oom« protection against cnmy reprisal. s o th in respect
of obvious Justice nod In the? pursuit of our mission, it wno oar constant
core never to involve the natives until wo bad organised some protection
for them nnd they had orcpnmd ngnlnnt reprisals.
9. A small guerilla force can do lit tie i’ore than mid with surprloo,
and protect itself. The protection of the local people had to bs
organised largely on the principles of timely naming and inaccessibility.
This often involved many weeks nf politic-?! contact and overcoming the
many prshlemo Involved. Firstly, all natives were moved away from tho
readily accessible beach r.rcao ond split into small hamlet groups as far
inland no porslbl.e, Aged end nick, people hr.. 1 to It carried, next, an
efficient system of sentries organised to give timely warning of the
enemy's approach. Fond could then be gathered from the current gardens
nnd new gardens commenced Inland.
10. The natives readily responded to Ihf of nrntrics end in it
recognioed their moat valuable moons of ftoloetlon; they were confident
of evading tho enemy in the bush If protected ogalnnt surprise. The
enemy rarely attempted to move Inland and largely relied on ’'Jcccbis’ 1 for
inland contact and amenta, The "kaml.-ic”. horcvti, mre exceedingly
frightened of our native troops nnd wore rarely neon,
11. At one stage r;a had organised a system of village sentries
extending for nearly 8c mi Ten from MlMri tr , r ;c ilUkt ■ T ’ li/lf, ard this ma
a valuable aid in covering the Australian landing,
12. By this means, on the South const, re were finally able to break
the enemy's contact with natives South of the neck of OAHFT.7.S FFBINdULA,
and cut him off completely from all local int' llig'. nc.* Tiln was well
rewarded whon, later, tho enemy did not lerrn until 11 j/'V r . 1985 that
Auntrallnn troopo bad landed at .TAOAOino'f P/.V nn l| no’.'. 19/(8, two months
earlier,
13. It will be evident that In these cl reams *0 nee n we hconme very
closely associated with all nallvca In our aren, both with locals and
with foreign natives who had escaped from enemy bondage In PABAITL area,
and n brief account of tho ganeral noulrl eonUtlono prevailing during
this period may bo of internnt.
COMTROL.
1. The enemy mode no genuine attempt to govern tho natives in thin
o.ron« Ho confined himself to supporting village officials and forcing
local labour for carrying and road making, He wno not concerned with
the problems of population, health ami agriculture,
2. It was nooenu-tr.y for un to establish control over all natives
In our area, insofar as It was essential for our mutual security and
protection, other than ’.rhert fco could obviously resist, *a ’ld not
design to administer thoiv li »•••;« or social clrcumatanccij in nn . - ' way.
3. Indeed, throughout the cnomy’n occupation, in periods of un-
certainty and of uneasy refuge fioni which 1 awl user •ro night ' snlly h , '-ye
developed, the natives In this area governd Lhoir communal and Individ-
ual lives with a mon t cce dit able respect for nronr rty nnl person.
}{. in establishing our meuaare of security control ovot the natives,
vro accepted to the limit of our resources tho obligation of assisting
them primarily in matters of health, and to a loaner degree In tools
for sgrioul turs and goners! nocrnsltlffs.
introduction (Continued).


HEALTH.
1. other than the quite extensive nodical treatment which had been
given by A, I.D, field parties to those natives in contact with then the
majority had been without nod 10l non nine-, th- r nrr\v occupation. *
2. while their general health hod not deteriorated pa much as night
bs expected, the incidence of framboesin (yaws) woo moot extensive,
particularly among young children, among whom It no oo high se 75 nor
cent, a great many hod died and othere were In Hie distressing advanced
stages. Chronic sores were also prevalent and the incidence of scabies
Tory high.
3* WC established a hospital at LAKIVX and a clinic at all our
outposts, at which, between April, 19*114- and 'torch, 39b5, many thousands
of natives received beneficial treatment.
4. Our extensive requests for medicines ware adequately met by a, I.P,
and dellTcred by nlr, r;» had an enormous demand for n. A,lnjections*
and continual streams of nuffarora from frambocnla arrived at our
hospital nt LAKIPI and nt our cllnlcn at various autoonts at da imp’
IIKPI, WANO, TAHKAIDMJ, : :,IT.AI.UM and M!J. It la oatlnafced tl»r.t a total of
approximately 6,000 -T. a,u, injections wore given, nnd the .Uvea of many
natives, particularly child ton, saved,
5. The Incidence of nnlsrla was noticeably leas than normal} this
was probably duo to the natives moving Inland away from the more heavily
mosquito infested nrnas.
POPULATION.
While the rat* of Infantile mortality lo normally high, there
appeared to be o noticeable, though not markedly e.xtonalvc, dooroape In
the birth ratoj a olrcnnntauce doubtlcm attributable to ! ho unsettled
conditions.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE.
1. Other than where In Immediate proximity to the cncuqy, native
gardens wore well maintained and there was no evidence of a general
food shortage,
2. we were able to adsint to some extent in the maintenance of
agriculture by the dlnfcrlbutlon of eooentlnl tools, particularly axoc,
tomahawks nnd knlvcn, with which-we rcrc liberally supplied by A.1.r,,,
and of which the natives rare orcAodlnxly ahor*, rrloot of their implements
being worn out.
3* As supplies wore made by air delivery, rre hod very little surplus
food, but maintoined anfflclrnt to food refugeen until wc could arrange
their evacuation or hand than over to an'IAU.
REFUGEE CAMP.
ffc hod a number of native women nnd children refugees, whoa It
was unwise to keep at our main camp which might have boon attacked at
any time by thn enemy, wo therefore hired an aron of land at kopa,
felled gardens and built n ennp for theno people, r;a paid the local
villagers to supply them with native foods, supplemented by as much rice
as we could spare from r.vKCPI. Thin camp wnn maintained until re re*re
Inter able to or range prcv.lnlan for thoac pooplo with A’tOAlf.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT.
car contact with the couth coant natives, and their loyal co-
operation In achieving the valuable roeultn with which wc wore ultim-
ately rewarded, were very largely made ooanlblo by the earlier contact
of A.i.”', field rnrtJeo vho, nport from Intelligence: duties, had made
contaat with and anointed natives In the aron, ihn poroonnol of the
field portion largely comnrlnerl officern nnd M,;o*n r'iio hr.d been roll
known to the nntlveo for mho.,' years nnd included:- Copt, (now enjor)
C.D, DAVC formerly a. 1\ ). PinMJLj ’•nj. ~;id, formerly A.'KV. ,
KOKOPOf T.lcut, ».t. IK T.Fl<'-’IT who won in U\«! area In l(j/»3 with Capt. (now


uaj») f. i.. yiGUiB and I lout, (now Copt,j .liifud; ileut, d, K.
JCUHSOB and Capt. v/.u, .-.1101.1011 who had r u r.i,urly patrol leu in fig,, is;; i'r,..xhj
Copt, (now uaj. ) u, 1. oKriiNLIV; and Ugt. j.]. uli gvVb, a fox-mer resident
for many y*ara at rU'irb'i'j to the earlier voru of ell of whom wu ware
indsfatsd, und to the energy of Cupt. (now uaj. ) p. I, akINWkB who, after
leading a field party on the BCBTH od/.3T, raleeu tho Initial force on
the BOOTH OOABT.
NATIVE - OUTSTANDING [?] SERVICE
The following natives rendered service of exceptional value j-
(A) x
(]. j fi-LAIiXU oX* IaAuAIiX h, 'viXli.-. iii.i. hi u> native iu the natural
paramount chief of the doULKa u nj ThiJlf people, an
hereditary position derived from the importuned of hiu
maternal BoOLKL family, while atopu wore being taken by
the Administration to confirm his appointment, they wore
Inoornplato at the time of the jepunoau oocupution, and he
wfao subsequently appointed by the enemy, \n unenviable
office which, in order to pro tout hlu people from general
punishment, obliged him to carry out the enwiy’u ucmanda,
(2) ]ie flrot contacted Lieut. U.il. bright in IpJj 5 and later
UaJ. Bates, and uued hiu influence to prevent knowledge of
tholr prooenuo becoming known to tu>. enemy. outer, owing to
u aortas of circumstances, uoiong which wen- the pro-enemy
activities of u Philippine, Leo .-..qulninok, and the capture
of cex'tain Allied personnel, the enemy did become aware of
the praseoue of Auotraliann and .-Al'/.UIh was twlao tried for
his life but managed by firm denial to convince the enemy
that hi a accusers ware collaborating again., t him. Later,
following the enciiiy’d torture of an w.tL rrieat, thor**
remained no doubt of r.\PAN£i>’u ....ooulutiwu with ..astralianu
and he wua forced to flee Into hiding, Thu enemy now
terrorised the uoULiLv people who were in no mood to Jeop-
ardise themselves by further contact with uu.
(3) tVatilUb now joined our guerilla force ana w.a given the rank
of dgt.djr. iiu became our right hand In regaining the con-
fluence of the wUULrei. people n»ui bi. June und October,
lyglj, worked tli'cluauly in the i-.m. of organising sentries,
currying the aged end aick into s.,fer inland ur<-aa, moving
the people closest to the enemy bad: to more remote uraao
and arranging for their food, Influence.! and unourud tho
ao-opurutlon of the lesuax' douL chiefs, ana ihdeuJ the
success ox' our work in olLs; H.VX w.«a in large measure duo to
his untiring energy in the political field.
(h) xie provided u number of recruits for our force and loud
frequent recce patrols into the enemy’s urea. lie was
awarded the L. d.U. for gallantry in action at UILIM.
(5) PAKAWXB was the moat outstanding native on the south coast
during this period.
(b)
(1) CK/LPaK Of dALI, Ji.O-JJXWox’ ii-.f. *h. outsti.ndiiv, loyal
sorvloe of the paramount (j-oi.i?ak. of the AOL and gghCi.-h people
is already well knoif/n, particularly his aid to '.ustrulluna
following the full of hABIiIL, end to Allied airmen.
(k) uoLreov wau our right hand among the KoL und .U.Uii.U people
and wau a continuous worker in the malntcnauoe of uouot-
wutohlng und sentry posts.
(3) he hud thu rank uf ugt./djr. In ou.- force mu took i/srt
in uovurai patrols, lu which he was prominent in notion.
(i() it woo largely duu to hi a influence LUet we wore able to
maintain the aoourlty of our buao at isptlßl, without watch
our work could not have aucooadud.
