

SPORT
Challis House, Sydney.
Immigration Tourist Bureau,
Challis House, Sydney.
PERCY HUNTER.
Pi RECTOR,


■
.
,
*
■
-
.


We stock supplies of Naphtha, Tyres, Oils, and all
II Motor Accessories.
Repairs executed at moderate charges.
The GOVERNMENT TOURIST BUREAU
will, supply Particulars of Tiroes and Fares.
Kosciusko. Monaro, & South Coast.
BALMAIN BROTHERS.


«Bhone.— Central 2196.
0!ty 2374 Established i860.
AH Visitors to Sydney are invited to
inspect the Large Museum and Show
TOST <& ROHU
Furr if.


Alpine Sport
New South Wales


\ttQTUMUT
Mt. Kosciusko
| _ Tourist District.
\Jalbinyo . '
YARRAMCOSILLyX ReUwlvs
'
jl^Ademrn# by
jt# § c Yi MtnefclkJ
JJ 11 Pinemfor*° COOMA
# i « 3 /
i^/r. .
l (Townsend ferric/a!e
Rem%Head W%'"' *'• n -«* 0 V \crDelqety
1% 7
ft \
'i' ) a
*«& ld&


Alpine Sport
in New South
Snow-dad Kosciusko
in Winter.
»0R the first time Australians will, in
this the year of grace one thousand
nine hundred and nine, be enabled,
thanks to provision made by an
nterpnsin
nd far-seeing Govern
ment, to r
snowfields at a high
titude for the purpose of enjoying winter sport
absolute comfort. In
saying absolute comfort
here is no carelessness of diction; for Australian
avel, on the main railway lines, now rivals in con-
venience that of any
run try, and by means of
the speedy night mar
to Cooma, fitted with
uxurious sleeping-cars
and the new service of


gats — ttmt
I !
'T|'
IP fm\ I
■ ’ Rt
.o »?• )* -
■ *& x' ■ -
ter^^'Tsi
A Kiandra Boy jumping 50 feet on Ski


motor-cars projected for the winter. It wtl),
be possible to leave Sydney at 8 p.m. and
reach the Hotel Kosciusko, the palatial hostelry
■erected by the Government on the slopes of Aus-
tralia’s mountain giant, in the midst of a vast and
glistening snowfxeld, in time for dinner on the fol
The St. Moritz
ht on to of Australia.
the snow or ice, and on skate,ski, or toboggan, enjoy
exactly the same glorious sensations which now
annually fill Davos Platz, St, Moritz, Adelboden,
Montreux, and other famous Swiss resorts, with
the fashion and beauty of Europe, and to obtain
which the denizen offiMayfair must endure two
hard days and nights' travelling, including the
rigours of a winter Channel crossing. Therefore,
the Sydneyite is, owing to the recent tourist
improvements at Kosciusko, in closer touch with
the most fashionable and modern of all sports
than is the Londoner.
*1 he coming season will not by any means
Australian Al-
attract the varioi lilies ol pine pioneers,
their courts. For years, even before the use of
the ski was known in Europe outside Scandinavia,
Kiandra, the highest town in Australia, on an


A View of Kiandra and Snow Scenes at Kosciusko,


sterly spur of the Alps, has attracted a little
Election of enthusiasts from the city in lune ant
rly, and magnificent fun has been enjoyed
s bald, precipitous hills which embrace the little
ning township. Mr. C. H. Kerry, Australia’s
i'■ ‘ ■:! husiast, is the doyen of Kiandra ski- „
Merrily Across
Ed many parties merrrh ... _
the Snows.
Adaramaby over Sawyer s
the Eucumbene. Kiandra is isolated ir
ff iron
ition 4 with the outside world excej
diverted attention to tl
Kosciusko. Not that Kiandn
lid snowfie
vs nrov
A Zest to the
Enjoyment.
landra should f


■ ■>
■ ■ % !
* I J . .. _ '-" ! ' . ;_■ ry'.sX.i'.
i. - ’ _1 - '«• _
**-■ J v •- -••- -■' ■■ .. ■■■ - - : '- •' ■ •' J
Snapshots on the Sno\


a long lease of popularity among expert ski-
runners, and as a sleigh service is promised this
year to take visitors in from the edge of the snow-
line it is probable that the snowed-in denizens
will experience a busy winter. I have seen many
ski-running courses in different countries, but I
Motor Service
to the Snow.
The trip to the ski-running, tobogganing and
, skating fields of Kosciusko presents none of the
difficulties of the journey to Kiandra. A motor
will whisk travellers from the rail-head at Cooma
to the snow and the Hotel Kosciusko in time for
lunch, and the journey will traverse interesting
plain, river, and hill scenery, finishing through a
gap in the mountain range, where sturdy workmen
will be busy with shovels on the winter mornings
keeping the road sufficiently free of snow to let
1 the cars through.
This gap is known as Rennix’s, after the capable rst Glimpse
engineer who laid out the road, which at this spot, Hotel
y Plain, finally leav Kosciusko,
old mountain track, LookingTrom Rennix’s Gap
across a broach white valley, the Hotel Kosciusko,
the objective of the tour, rearing its many gables
against a Dacsground of snow-covered trees, will


■w'JbVI, ' ’ '
(i *”* — '~*~ m /"Sgjjr
1. A Lightly-clad Party on Ski. 2. The Heac Waters of the Snowy River, Mr. Kosciusko


be sighted. On the steep hills beyond are situated
the ski-running courses, and in the dip below the
hotel is the lake for skating.
Though the country-side will be deep with snow
during the winter months, a visit to Kosciusko
then will by no means be the formidable under-
taking commonly believed. The snow provides a
succession of unexpected and vivid pleasures; and
the alpine sports appealing equally to the young
and old are exciting and variable. Girls and
women can extract just as much fun and amuse-
ment from them as can men, not only on skates
on the frozen lake, but also on the toboggan
courses, or in traversing surrounding hills on ski.
The cold so greatly feared by those unfamiliar
with snow country is largely a bogey. One prac-
tically never feels cold on the snow. An inspection
of the illustrations in this booklet, reproduced from
photographs, will show' ski-runners sporting about
in their shirt-sleeves, and demonstrate that no
heavy clothing is needed. During the day the
temperature is rarely very low, and even when the
mercury is several degrees below freezing point
the air is so dry and invigorating that not the
slightest inconvenience is felt so long as one keeps
moving. The heat generated by excessive devo-


A Study in Attitudes.


tion to the fascinating sports in the snow and- ice
is often troublesome, but on no occasion, either
in Australia or Europe, have I been incon-
venienced by cold when ski-ing or tobogganing.
With a magnificent steam-heated hotel right on
the course all terrors of cold will be absolutely
banished. The atmosphere is delightfully rare, the
temperature equable, and the common experience
is not only a complete freedom from exhaustion,
but a greatly increased capacity for exertion.
The tobogganing and ski-running courses are
immediately behind the hotel, so no inconvenience
will be experienced in reaching them. Special
care was taken in laying out these courses, and
they will be found to provide excellent sport. The
longer of the two has a stretch of about 500 yards,
with an average grade of one in three, and a final
steep descent into a broad level expanse—the ideal
course. The ski, which has come to us from Scandi-
navia, is a long plank of mountain ash, from in.
to in. wide, and from 7 ft. 6 in. to 9 ft. in length,
about an inch thick at its stoutest part, the centre,
tapering to about half an inch at either end. It
is upturned in front, in order to glide over inequali-
ties in the snow, or small obstacles. The foot fits
through a broad leather strap laced across the


The Race
ALWAYS TO THE Sw


middle of the ski or shoe, the heel being left free.
Skill in the pastime is not difficult to acquire. It
is claimed for ski-running that it is the highest
advantage that any physical exercise can safely
derive from terrestrial attraction, and the practised
snow-shoer who has tried other sports will readily
admit this. Free wheeling down a mountain on
a bolting bicycle is exciting, motoring at a hundred
miles an hour along a level road has its own peculiar
sensations, ballooning is by no means tame, and
riding on the front of a flying express locomotive
makes the wind roar in your ears, and puts a tingle
in your blood. I have tried them all; but, without
hesitation, I place ski-running over a snow bank
that drops away at the rate of a foot in two and a
half far before the best of them. On your own
skill and nerve depends entirely the safety of your
passage. At a terrific pace you must steer, pick-
out your line of descent, allow for the different
conditions of snow, dodge inequalities, and preserve
a splendid balance at odd angles as the hill drops
suddenly, and perhaps unexpectedly. As you
prepare to start on the brink your ski will shoot
away, carrying you over the edge with the pace of a
racehorse, and, descending the slope, will gather
impetus. When the snow is fast, the ice-wind


1. Guests Returning on ski to the Hotel Kosciusko. 2. Sunset at Diggers’ Creek


Glorious Feeling
of Exhilaration.
Ski-running
easy to Learn.


i
1. Bovs Pulling a Sled. 2. Ski-runners Herringboning


the way, on virgin snow that shows none of the
ruts and gutters that enthusiastic tumblers have
cut on the regular courses. When a hill has been
descended there may be a bit of a flat, and then
another glorious rush down, followed by an up-
grade easy enough to permit ascending on ski.
There are a number of ways of accomplishing
this.
Excursions on
Virgin Snow.
On some snows and with some shoes, it is possible
to ski straight up a hill as on a level. But not
often. The herringbone method is the one most
commonly adopted for mounting, and here is
something else for the novice to learn. In master-
ing the herringbone, the shoes will slip downhill
backward, and the learner will be thrown forward
on to his face and hands. This is amusing only
for the onlooker. But it does not hurt, and as the
manoeuvre is almost entirely dominated by balance,
it is soon gathered in as a trophy by the beginner
who has shot the lower half of the championship
course. This movement mastered, the tourist may
roam at will among the hills up and down, and
along the level, and as he is in an unexplored
country, the snow showing not a. mark of any
kind, he has all the delight of surprised pleasure
as he opens up new and wonderful vistas, and a
Mastering the
Herringbone.


■ S ,( «' If'yV
I ll ‘.il
■s -%• .:. jM.y
H I y II
Teaching .the Young Idea to Shoot,


Qualify as
Roamers,
The Toboggan
Whizz.


Around the Hotel Kosciusko,


of those who have shot the dizzy leaps of the long,
intoxicating, frozen drop from St. Moritz to Cresta
on a skeleton, I may say at once that they will
experience nothing so dangerous at Kosciusko,
The temperatures are not low enough to give
the iced surface to the snow, except in the very
early morning, or the evening, and, consequently,
steel runners may not be used with advantage. But
in spite of this there is a splendid field for open
tobogganing on the Canadian type which may,
perhaps, be best described as three or four ski
bracketed together. On a toboggan of this style
our softer snow may be negotiated at a great
speed. 1 have tried them on Kosciusko slopes
and found them even faster than ski, and away
from gutter tracks or shutes such as are used in
America, the long sinuous mountain ash toboggan
will afford exciting sport. The toboggan, when
used off a banked track, is ridden by one person
lying prone, steering with the toe at the back.
Then tliere is the ice-skating. No description
nor eulogy is needed to recommend this sport. It
is enough to say that a dam thrown across the
neck of a pleasant gully has imprisoned the waters
of Diggers’ Creek, making an inviting lakelet
about six acres in extent immediately below


I.
s ; ¥ J
A Snowscape at Kosciusko


Beauty of
Australian
snowseapes.


V\i J$ r
C' ; ; c
Sk:-runners Sporting on the Snow.


The snow is as varied as rippling water in a breeze.
Its surface can take on many and wonderful changes
of consistency—but that is a technicality that
Interests the ski-runner more closely than the
observer of the snow’s wondrous beauty—though,
your enthusiastic ski-runner is of course the real
snow-lover.
You may play in the snow as babies play
with the sand on a sea-beach. More sedately, of
course, and with a finer appreciation of the
beauties you move into being. In ski-ing over hills
you will, enraptured, discover real snow caves,
where an aggressive bubbling creek has cut out
a track for itself, getting a fleeting glimpse of earth
and ski only to disappear again in a few yards
beneath twenty feet of snow. Here you will see
exposed a wall of snow ten, twelve, or twenty feet
high, its white powdery strata cleaner than an
ocean roller on the strand of an undiscovered
shore, and you gaze amazed that such a structure
should be at the mercy of a rainstorm or a thaw.
You may push your brake-stick four or five feet
into the snow and light a torch of a beautiful
iridescent green, changing to blue. In the timber
you may, if the gods are kind and recent falls
have been heavy, find scores of trees linked up


The Wrong Way to Shoot a Steep Snow-bank,


picturesque
route from
Cooma.
The Creel.


I .
fa
Climbing a Snow Cliff.


io miles from The Creel, is the newly built Hotel
Kosciusko, lying snugly on a hillside and facing a
broad valley.
Kosciusko’s giant form stands in the centre of a
tourist district which is fast growing in popularity
on account of peculiar and unique advantages which
make it equally attractive either during the sum-
mer or winter months. In summer the rarefied
exhilarating atmosphere of the mountain giant
affords wonderful refreshment and health-giving
change to the dweller along the coast or inland
plains.
Humped above ranges of foothills and command-
ing ridges ol rugged mountains, it sits with one or
two other sister peaks of almost equal height, right
in the heart of the Great Divide. Australia'-,
poverty of high hills is here forgotten, and the
native-born Australian traverses a new world.
Kosciusko is our highest mountain, but it does not
tower above its neighbours, a solitary finger piercing
the sky. It is a point, a slightly higher hump than
the others in a gigantic ridge that forms the back-
bone of the Australian Alps. What may be termed
the Kosciusko line—for there is about a mile and
a half of mountain ridge that is all of a piece—
is higher and more commanding than any other


In a Snow Blizzard; Crossing the Yarrangobilly River; and a Race for a Championsh p.


section of the ranges. But it achieves its final
height, not shooting skywards from the level plain,
but from the last of a succession of ridges, covering
a broad zone, which materially lessen the import-
ance of the point which has the distinction of being
the highest. It is the line of range, then, and the
zone of ever-ascending ridges, which hold the
interest for the observer. Kosciusko itself is a
mere incident in a chain of events, so to speak, and
so little distinguished from its fellows —Mounts
Mueller, Twynam, Townsend, and other peaks —
that one must take the word of surveyors that it is
the highest point in the neighbourhood.
Its remarkably grand, expansive scenery is
impressive, entrancing, memorable. On attaining
the summit, rough, rugged, granite crags and
their attendant deep, gaping, rocky gorges are
seen opening at one’s very feet; in the centre
ground the bold outlines of the nearer hills stand
clear and firm, while the distant prospect reveals
line behind line of tree-covered ranges with radiat-
ing spurs, reaching far away and retreating through
regular gradations of colouring, till the furthermost
is lost in the dim, shimmering haze of delicate blue.
It is interesting to note that the mountain
presents great interest from a geological point of


-w- ‘ 5-^J
i - . - :^^__
Rambling on Ski among the Snow-clad Hills and Dales.


view. “The hoary top of Kosciusko is notable as
being one of the very oldest spots of land in this wide
world,” says a famous geologist. “ The European
Alps are old ; the Himalayas are old ; but Kosciusko
stood proudly above the sea, when of the Alps and
Himalayas not a stone was laid above a stone.
We date the age of continents or lands from the
lime when they finally emerged from beneath the
sea. Reckoned in this way, Mount Kosciusko is
vastly older than any known land on the earth
to-day. The highest mountains are, it goes without
saying, not always the oldest. The Australian
Alps show no crags and peaks rising io altitudes of
eight to ten thousand feet, and clothed in eternal
snow. Bui their very age can account lor this.
Millions of years of wear and tear have smoothed
down the crags of Kosciusko and rounded its peaks.
We have 10-day, so to speak, the ruins of a moun-
tain. The giant slabs that are tossed in endless
confusion on the highest point of land in Australia
are all (hat are left to tell of the days when its
head pierced the clouds.”
Linked indissolubly with the uplands of Kosciusko
is the name of Professor David. To his great
knowledge and tireless loving labours we are
indebted for much of the information possessed


**, i» ■» V;
The Hotel Kosciusko in Winter,


concerning the geological history of the mountain;
while his breezy descriptions and cheerful enthu-
siasm have had the effect of greatly assisting in
popularising the district as a leading Australian
tourist resort.
The Hotel Kosciusko is situated at an altitude
of nearly 6,000 feet, and lies within the winter
snow-line. It has been constructed quite recently
by the Government, and is a substantial two-
storied edifice of granite, quite modern in every
respect, and capable of accommodating 100 guests.
It has spacious rooms, and is heated throughout
by a service of steam pipes. Its appointments are
quite complete and of the latest type, hot and cold
water being laid on throughout the building, and
all arrangements possible being provided for the
comfort and convenience of guests.
Many people are puzzled regarding the clothes
they should wear in the snow. The main thing to
remember is that moving about in a glorious
atmosphere, in temperatures not exceptionally low,
one does not feel the cold greatly; so that a lot of
heavy garments are not required. Plenty of
woollen underwear is essential. For skating on
the fine lake close to the hotel, ladies will be able
to wear smart and becoming costumes such as
The Hotel
Kosciusko.
What to wear.


f—
H
1. The Hotel Kosciusko; a Party of Guests on Ski. 2. Skaters on the Lake


make the winter scenes on the open-air rinks at
St. Moritz, Davos, and other fashionable Swiss
resorts so brilliant and varied. But ski-running
and tobogganing are other matters, and in dressing
for these sports fashion and smartness must be for
once overlooked, and comfort only considered.
The most comfortable and convenient ski or tobog-
ganing dress consists of a good sweater, bloomers, a
short skirt of smooth-faced tweed or serge. It is
important to select a smooth material as a rough
or hairy surface holds the snow crystals and quickly
becomes wet. Rubber boots, colloquially known
as gum, will keep the feet absolutely dry, and they
may be worn over two pairs of stockings. An
experienced lady ski-runner recommends the
wearing of a thin pair of, say, cashmere hose, and
over these a thick knitted pair, the tops of which
are folded over the boots. This fold keeps the
snow from dropping down the boot when the
wearer falls or plunges into deep snow. To prevent
sunburn on the snow it is wise to wear a close
cap with a good motor veil. Stout leather boots
are required for skating.
Men need no special wear with the exception
of gum boots. These are essential. They should
have plenty of woollen underclothes, and for


On a Kosciusko Slope in June; Warm Sunshine; Temperature, 20 Fahr.


preference, smooth-faced tweed clothes. Every
yne would be well advised also to include m'th
kit a stout waterproof ulster in case of snowstorm;
For many of the excellent snow photograph
published in this booklet the Immigration an
Tourist Bureau is indebted to the courtesy o
iroprietors of the “ Sydney Mail,” by whose well
known operator, Mr. George Beil, they were tal
m the grounds described; and to Mr. C. H. Ke
JAM
'J I*


I ■■■ 111111111 I
X
1* Learning to Ski A Buster.” 2. The Hotel Kosciusko, Summer.


MOONT KOSCIUSKO MOTOR SERVE
PETERSEN 4 CJEKSTKUP, COOMA,
A DAILY LINE OF MOTOR-CARS
THE CREEL, for MOUNT KOSCIUSKO.
.
FARES : 20/- Single, 30/- Return. «
Cooma-Bcga-Eden Service:
FARES
Single, AO/- Retui
FARES; 35/- Singl
WE ARE THE PIONEERS OF PUBLIC MOTOR-CARS IN THE DISTRICT, AND
invite your support Garages a t Sega and Cooma.
GOVERNMENT TOURIST BUREAU
PETERSEN & GJERSTRUP, Challis House, SYDNEY
Cooma and Bega.
' - =T\ fc


Li'j\ii-MiM - Jf
: i *
I I
I -Sa( I
1. A Heat in the Ladies’ Ski-running Championship. 2. A Toboggan Race


Route and Fares
Mt Kosciusko.
Rail—
SYDNEY to COOMA, at daily,
Saturdays excepted, arriving next day at
a.m., returning from Cooma at
p.m. daily, Sundays excepted. Fares—-
675. rod. and 395. nd., Ist and 2nd
class return; special' tourist ticket, 555.
and 375. 6d., Ist and 2nd return, on the
certificate of the Tourist Bureau. Round
ticket, Sydney to Cooma and return
from Tumut, or vice versa, 585., Ist, and
395. 6d., 2nd, available for 2 months
and break of journey.
Motor Car-
Leaves Cooma at 9 a.m. daily, arriving at
The) Creel at noon (lunch). Leaves
The Creel at 1 p.m., arriving Cooma at
4'45 P-m. Fares, 20s. single, 30s. return.
Coaches for Hotel Kosciusko connect
with the cars at The Creel. Fare, ss.
each way. Light bags only will be con-
veyed by the Motor, and other luggage
by coach, for which a small extra charge
will be made.
It is requested that where possible
notice be given to the Tourist Bureau
of intention to travel by Motor.
Tariff at Hotel Kosciusko—
12s. 6d, per day, £3 3s. per week.
Materials j or the Alpine Sports may be hired at the Hotel.
Charges .-—Skates and Ski: Is. per day, Vs. 6d. per meek.
Gum Boots : Is. per day, Ss. tid. per week. Toboggans t
Large, Is. 6'd. per day; Small, Is. per day.


Cost or Specimen Trip
“ " T0 “ “ Occupying a Period
Hotel Kosciusko. of eight days.
-ai tfr-
Raii Fare ... ... £2 15 0 ... ist class return, Sydney-Coorna, on
Certificate from the Government
Tourist Bureau.
Motor Fare ... ... 1 10 0 ... Cooma to The Creel and return.
Coach Fare ... ... 0 10 0 ... The Creel to Hotel Kosciusko and
return.
Accommodation ... 3 3 0 ... Per week, at the Hotel Kosciusko.
Meals en route ... 0 9 0 ... At Cooma and The Creel.
’Bus Fare 0 2 0 ... Cooma Station to Hotel at Cooma
and return.
£8 9 0
Sleeping Berths ... £0 10 0 ... Sleeping berths cost to/- each way.
Materials for Alpine Sports may be hired
at the Hotel at the following rates; —
Skis and Skates ... i/-per day, or 2/6 per week.
Gum boots 1/- ~ „ 3/6
Toboggans Large, 1/6 per day; Small, 1/- per day.
The cost per day of an extended trip is proportionately
reduced, as the travelling charges remain the same:
'thus an 8 days’ trip costs approximately 21/- per day,
and a 21 ~ ~ ~ 14/-
Visitors from Victoria should travel by the Mail train leaving Melbourne
at 6*15 a.m., to secure the Cooma connection at Goulburn.
Fares, Melbourne to Cooma:—
£6:0:0 First-class, £4:9:11 Second-class return.
Similarly on the return journey the Branch Line Train connects with
the Mail from Sydney at Goulburn.
Sydney: W. A. Gullick, Government Printer.—l9lo.


1508
00247877


Mount Kosciusko
Ai 13 tral ia’3 Winter Playgroi ind
The Hofei Kosciusko at an
altitude of 600 0 feet is
16 hours From Sydney
by fast commodious train
and speedy motor
