



INTRODUCTION.
IN offering my new Catalogue to the stockraisers and users of Windmills in general, 1
do so with the greatest of confidence of meeting with their appreciation. For nearly
a quarter of a century I have made the construction of Windmills a special study, and
the experience I have gained in that time, not only in the building of the mills, but in
the erection and observance of the smallest detail in connection with same, has given
me the opportunity of producing the many valuable points contained in my mills only.
No amount of time and expense has been spared in making exhaustive and costly experi-
ments, and as a result I can confidently claim to have made more improvements, and to
have done more than any other man to bring the windmill to its present perfection,
that this is the case is fully borne out by the fact that there is scarcely a mill made at
the present day but has borrowed some of my inventions. There is an old saying that
imitation is the sincerest flattery ; such being the case, my mills are well acknowledged
by rival makers to be the standard.
Owing to the Great Success attending the sale of my Patent Steel Windmills
Steel Water Troughs, Pumps, &c., I am now giving my whole attention to the con-
struction of same, and have just erected a new and extensive factory close to Queen's
Bridge, Melbourne, on the south side of the river, specially designed for the more
favourable production of my special lines, years of study and practical experience in
the workshop and erection enabling me to produce and supply a much better article
than ever before has been offered to the public. The increasing demand, from year to
year, for my mills has caused me to erect more powerful and efficient machinery, till
now every part of my mill is produced by a specially-designed machine, which not only
enables me to produce a more faithful reproduction of parts, but enables me, taking
into consideration the superior construction, to defy competition. My intimate know-
ledge of the cheapest and best markets, together with a good knowledge of the
requirements of my customers in general, places me in a favourable position to supply
all orders entrusted to me. I shall be glad to answer all enquiries by post, and give
every information in my power.
Twenty years’ experience in the manufacture and erecting of Windmills and Pumps
pi ices me in a position to produce a most perfect machine. The opportunity to detect
and remedy any defects of construction during my connection with this line of business
adds considerably to the value of more recent productions. So many improvements
have been added, which could only have been suggested by actual practice, that the
small mills now made by me will perform a much larger quantity of work in porportion
to their size, the qualifications of which are fully borne out by the testimony of those
who have used them.
For the more recent improvements I have lately been granted Royal Letters
Patent for Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland, South and West Australia, and the
United States of America. These improvements, I have no hesitation in saying, must
place my mills to a greater advantage.
The Geared Mill has been constructed with the object of gaining power by means
of cog-gearing. The Windwheel is allowed to travel at a high rate of speed, using the
full force of the wind, while at the same time the Pump-rod is worked at a moderate
rate, thus saving the wear and tear of the pump. These Mills are fitted with alternate
strokes. By using one or the other they can be applied to any ordinarv pump.
The fact that other makers have accepted my mill as a standard, and are copy-
ing same as near as they dare, speaks volumes in its favour. If von have water to lift,
it will be to your advantage to call or write me your requirements, when the benefit of
my long experience shall be placed at your service.
From the position of my works, being close to the shipping and railways, I am
able to attend to the despatch of all orders personally and promptly. My factory is
readily to be found, and is within easy walking distance of the General Post Office,
beiing only about too yards from Queen’s Bridge.
Your correspondence is solicited, and inquiries invited.—Yours, &c.,
jhmes Alston


Jt!&
r ■
A
9
I
1
1 f
7
ISisais J
X
.
6
-«a«slal^
**■
. ;■: , ; : SjAMtS ALSTON -
v 1 PATENTS
j.*Sf STEEL 55 STEEL
. S WIND S3 WATER-
—
—
_.., Tgf«"I»S.VALVES.Rl«s.,
; >r ’ : -'•:•■• M &ALL RC«JS4Te&m'P
: ■-- ft a * WATERING STOCK V
i HOUSE CAROtN
jy -
j ames Alston
<*
u
J
"* K«E i—
manufacturer
1
ano importer.. ‘ ' i
life* e* . .
7
wmsrnmmmi
■— ■ Ti ~'/"" > "■ ' i
©P THE
, f 1 ~" u "
gH
L
VltW
■
••
LARGEST WINDMILL FACTORY IN THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE.
ABOUT 100 YARDS FROM QUEEN’S BRIDGE, MELBOURNE, VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA.
b
C7=


“ LEADER” REPORT.
A FLOURISHING INDUSTRY.
Alston’s Windmill Factory.
About twenty-five years ago Jlr. James
Alston first turned his attention to the
manufacture of windmills. Australia,
with its arid stretches and periods of
PACKING YARD.


drought, offered a good held for such manufactures, but it required enterprise of no mean
order for a local man to start such an industry in the face of the world’s competition.
mills and watering appli-
ances with rare industry,
and having remarkable
inventive faculties, trade
increased so largely that
WHEEL BUILDING WING.


eight years ago he found it necessary to remove his factory to its present location
in Melbourne.
Since then the business has expanded rapidly, Ids output last year being
over 1,100 windmills complete, in addition to a large sale of patent stock water troughs,
hotel and stable troughs, pumps, valves, ball taps, etc. Experience has proved that
Alston’s windmills, from the small “ Dot” to the huge 25-ft; wheel, are without
superior in the world.
Year after year the proprietor has thought out and applied improvements, until
he can proudly claim that his double crank action steel windmill distances .ill com-
petitors. It is certainlv the most important improvement ever made in windmills.
Another special feature of the Alston mill is the windmill is carried on a fixed axle,
fitted with steel roller bearings. This fixed axle, allows the weight of the windwheel
to be carried past the centre line of gravity, doing away with the overhanging strain
and wear of the spindle. The bearings are of chilled metal, so hard that you cannot
cut them with a file. The framework of the windmill is made of special toughr steel.
The sails are all cut and blocked by special machinery. The whole mill is carried on
a steel ball bearing, making it sensitive to the lightest wind and able to stand the
strongest gale. Its fame has travelled far. In addition to supplying mills all over the
TCRXIXO SIKH'.
Commonwealth, Mr. Alston has large orders from India, South A rica, and elsewhere.
This is the kind of industry Victoria needs to attain prosperity.
In his work of providing all requisites for watering stock, fields, gardens, or
houses another of Mr. Alston’s triumphs is the patent steel-frame galvanised stock
water tromdi This is the most simple, cheap and effective article imaginable. It is
made in all sizes, and so arranged that it can be packed in small compass and carried
cheaply It can be put together by anv handy man, with the use of a serew-wrench,
no rivet’s or solder being required.' It will last a lifetime, will not leak when filled, will
not crack when empty, nor corrode with hard water. It is an improvement on Alston s
original trough, which latter has been copied throughout the world.
A walk through Alston’s manufactory is at once interesting and instructive, re-
vealin''- the secret of the proprietor’s success. The buildings coyer an acre of ground,
every part being occupied with busy workers, while the system is simple and perfect.


Many thousand of pounds’ worth of machinery are used, most of the tine
machinery being specially designed for the work by Mr. Alston himself. There are auto-
matic saws which cut through cold steel bars with the utmost ease,'shearing, punching
and drilling machines, lathes of all sizes, presses, two magnificent rolling machines,
eight tons in weight each, a marvellous little bending machine, two Otto gas engines
and electric motors, circular saws for wood, and dozens of other ingenious machinery
for the work required. Raw material in the shape of some hundreds of tons of the
best steel is stacked at the south end, while the moulding shop, complete in every
particular, and with a special furnace, occupies the west end. Men are busily em-
ployed here, as in other parts of the factory, for every portion of the mills is made on
the premises.
Outside the main building a forest of mill towers stand, over 200 being set up.
These will all vanish in little more than a month, their places being taken by others.
Towers are made up to 70ft. in height, and the diameter of the mills ranges from 6ft.
to 25ft. These latter will raise water from a depth of over 400 ft. Once erected, the
mill practically costs nothing except a few pence monthly for oil. Some of Alston’s
mills have been in constant use for over twenty years, and have not entailed a penny
outlay, except for oil, as many testimonials show.
Another feature which is noticeable is the easy way in which the mills are
packed for transport. The largest size can be placed in an extraordinarily small com-
pass, being built in sections, which pack readily. Every mill, before being sent out, is
set up in working order. Then each part is numbered and marked before being taken
down, so that any ordinary person can set it up.
The two great causes which have led to the remarkable success of the industry
-are, first, the improvements thought out and perfected by the proprietor; and second,
the marvellous machines designed by Mr. Alston for the making of the various parts of
the mills. These implements perform a maximum of work in the most perfect manner,
with a minimum of labour. It is the machine more than the man which achieves
success in manufacture. By this means the best mills in the market can be supplied
at prices which defeat the keenest outside competition.
Of course business ability and energy are also factors in the wonderful progress
of the industry. Mr. Alston makes windmills as a special line, not as a side show.
The result is not only beneficial to the proprietor, but advantageous to labour and the
PART OF TOWER BUILDING SHED.


State generally. A large wage fund is provided, while customers save money, and at
the same time get the best mill obtainable.
A PEEP OVER THE ROOF OF FACTORY
OSTLY experiments are con-
staidly being carried on by
' me, and improvements
added; but no new designs are placed
on the market until they are thorough-
ly tested with the most severe
tests. The mills are erected in my
yard, and allowed to run continuous-
ly for months in all weather. They
are fitted with special testing pumps,
and are made to exert greater strains
than they are ever likely to be sub-
jected to in actual work. The mills
are observed under different condi-
tions and pressures of wind, and
nothing is allowed to pass unless
perfectly satisfactory. Ido not ask
the purchasers to buy my mills and
do the experimenting, but fully
guarantee my mills to do all that is
claimed for them.
AN EXPERIMENTING PLANT


THE origin of the windmill is lost in the oblivion of the past. Early writers record
the employment of windmills in Europe in the 12th century. For centuries
the windmill was the most important source of mechanical energy, and
was of rude and primitive construction. Being
built as a fixture, they were adapted to work
when the wind blew from one direction only.
The first improvement seems to have been in
mounting the mill on a movable base, so that
it might be turned to face the wind by means of
a long pole, which was used as a lever, project-
ing from the back of the mill; the sails of the
wheel, which was formed of four arms with a
skeleton frame, were covered with canvas. The
later improvements, at the beginning of the
present century, were of more importance, and
consisted in tire making of the top portion to
revolve by means of a small tail wheel, so that
it faced the wind automatically ; and the
making the sails of narrow slats, resembling
Venetian blinds, set in a frame-work actuated
by weighted lever, which opened by centrifugal
These mills were extensively used throughout
force as the speed of the mill increased. These mills were extensively used throughout
Germany and Holland for grinding and draining purposes, also in France and Great
Britian; the largest windmills being found in Norfolk, where the wings described a
circuit of 100 feet diameter. At the best these were cumbersome and costly struc-
tures. With tire advance of science the windmill received the attention of engineers
in different countries. America, with her vast tract of new territory, opened up a
demand for small pumping plants for lifting water for stock ranches, and to meet
which a light mill made of slats of timberof circular form, with a self-regulatingdevice
of umbrella principle, came greatly into use. Those being made in the most part of
wood, soon showed their weak points, and something of a more substantial nature
was demanded. The advent of the iron age opened up a solution of the difficulty, and
the more modern iron or steel mill
came into existence, and has come
to stay. About twenty years ago
I invented and patented the all-
steel windwheel of circular form,
the sails of which were made
curved in form, giving great
driving power. This was found
so vast an improvement that it
was copied by different makers
throughout the world, and to-day
is the standard form of windmill
sail with nearly every maker.
Since then I have devoted my
whole attention to the manufac-
ture and improving of the wind-
mill, and have the honour of
having Royal Letters Patent
granted me for my numerous in-
ventions. The success that has
attended my efforts has been par-
ticularly gratifying, for year after
year my business has increased,
and thousands of my now famous
labour-saving devices have been
forwarded to all parts of the Commonwealth and South Africa. The value of the
windmill, and the supply of healthy water, cannot be overestimated by stockowners.
The windmill is the medium by which the home and the farm can be beautified, and
it adds pleasure and comfort to the landowner. It is a necessary adjunct, a labour-
saving device, and above all a valuable investment, for it riot only lightens the labour
of the producer, but it puts value on to his estate. The windmill is unceasing in its
labour —it works day and night, week days and Sundays, and its maintenance is
infinitesimal, a few drops of oil serving to keep it in perfect repair.


TERMS: Prices quoted in this Cata-
logue are for Goods delivered
at Melbourne Free on Rails or Steamer.
Orders should be accompanied by remittances
or references.
NOTE.
Additional sizes, and improvements in the construc-
tion of my mills are constantly being added.
The weights and capacities given are approximate
only.
In sending orders customers are requested to state
their full address and give instructions whether
goods are to he forwarded direct or through a
forwarding agent.
I wish most particularly to impress upon intending
purchasers that I devote my whole time to the
manufacture of Windmills and their connections.
Purchasers are requested to give the fullest particulars
of what the windmill is required, to do. My
experience of over twenty years in the manufac-
ture and erection of Windmills places me in a
position to advise as to the best size of mill and
connections to use.
In this pamphlet I publish a few of the Testimonials
taken at random from thousands received from
those who have used my mills.
Kindly send your orders as early as possible to pre-
vent disappointment Every season I have to
disappoint, some owing to the rush of orders as
the hot weather sets in.


Che latest and ]Vlost important improvement in WmDmills.
ALSTON’S paTENT
oiible Crank Action
Steel Windmill.
Obviates the
overhanging
strain of the
Pump Rod and
Pitman,
and the
twisting strain
of the
Rocker Arm
and Frame,
as found in all
other makes of
Windmills
Gives a direct and
central lift of the Pump
Rod, and an even
wearing of the
Bearings,
and increases the Ife
of the Mill fourfold.
10-ft. MILL, DOUBLE-CRANK GEAR.
Do not buy a Windmill until you have Inspected this new Invention.
YOU NEED NOT BE AN ENGINEER TO SEE THE ADVANTAGE
YOU WILL NOT BUY ANY OTHER.


Some Points to Consider before
* Buying a Windmill* * *
nN purchasing a Windmill one of the first points one has to consider is where he
can get the best value for his money—where he can get a machine that will best
perform its duty, and will give the longest wear; one that is simple in construc-
tion and not liable to get out of repair, and, in case of an accident, can he repaired
at least expense, and duplicates procured. All these points can confidently be claimed
for the Alston windmill. They have been in use for a great number of years, and the
testimony of the thousands of users clearly demonstrates the fairness of this claim.
The practical experience gained by years of study on the part of the inventor and
manufacturer has resulted in the production of a mill so simple in design that a novice
can understand at a glance, so perfect in construction that it will run in the lightest of
winds and stand the strongest of storms, so graceful in appearance that it beautifies
the landscape where it is erected, and so profitable an investment for the purchaser
that its owner grows rich without exertion, have freedom from worry, and have
pleasure in recommending it to others.
The double crank action recently patented throughout the Australian States,
New Zealand, and the United States of America is one of the most important improve-
ments that has been made in windmills of
late years. It does away with the twisting
and overhanging strain that is common to all
other geared mills. It gives a direct and
central lift of the pump rod, and causes an
even wearing of the bearing, prolonging the
life of the mill.
The photo block clearly shows the
simplicity of the invention. The pitman pin
which lifts the pump rod is lifted at both
ends instead of one, as is the case of all
other makes. A double crank is formed by
extending the gear-wheel spindle and keying
a crank on the other end, and using a double
pitman instead of one only, doing away with
the usual twisting strains.
The difference between the two methods
can easily be demonstrated by taking a stick
and hanging a load in middle of same. First
try to lift it by one end, then by both. The
latter is just the advantage the recent inven-
tion gives to the Alston windmill. When
buying a mill do not overlook this point. The
gears are the most perfect, the patterns for
which have been procured at considerable
cost, ensuring long wear.
The windwheel is made of special tough steel bars, so designed to forma frame-
work light but strong. The spokes are well trussed and securely fastened to the bub
by bolts which are secured by lock nuts. The rims which carry the sails are firmly
secured to the spokes by bolts, making a wheel that cannot buckle or give way under
any wind strain.


The windwheel is carried on a
fixed axle (another special feature in the
Alston mill), which admits of the wheel
being carried out past the centre line of
gravity. The spindle is fitted with im-
proved steel roller hearings (4), which
reduces the friction to the minimum,
and provides a hearing that will retain
the oil for a long period, doing away with
a lot of attention.
The spindles of the Alston mill
are made of the best cold rolled steel
shafting—the best that money can buy.
The windwheel centre (5) has
the pinion cast upon it, doing away
with the necessity of keying same,
thereby reducing risks of keys working
loose.
The crank spindle bearing is of
chilled metal, as hard as tempered
steel —so hard that you cannot file them.
They will last a lifetime.
Gearwheel with Double Crank.
The sails are really the power of the windmill. It is upon the amount of sur-
face exposed to the wind, and the form of the sail, that the whole work done by the
mill depends. The sail of the Alston windmill is the most perfect, and is copied by all
rival makers throughout the world; it is rather interesting to note the report ot these
makers, some of whom claim to be the biggest
makers in the world, who state they have
spent no end of time in making experiments
with every conceivable shape of sail, to find
that they have adopted an exact copy of my
sail which I invented and patented nearly
twenty years ago. The sails of the Alston
mills is made with a curved surface on scien-
tific lines and is well calculated to give the
best results. They are produced by special
machinery, they are attached to the rims of
the windwheel by strong steel brackets by
means of small galvanised bolts which are
riveted up after erection. This method allows
of a single sail being put on at anytime with-
out having to disturb the frame of the wheel,
and also admits the mill to be packed in a
very small space for transport.
The turntable is the most important point
in all mills. The Alston Self-adjusting Turn-
table, fitted with ball-bearings, is ahead of all
others. The cap of the steel tower (6) is made
saucer-shaped, into which a bowl-shaped
casting (3) loosely sits, forming a ball and
socket joint, which is free to adjust itself to the
weight and position of the body of the mill.
In this bowl-shaped casting a ball track is cast
in chilled metal to receive the tempered steel
balls upon which the whole mill turns. A
second loose ring (2) forms the upper ball
track, and sits loosely on the top of the steel
balls. This ring is made saucer-shaped on the
top, and receives the bowl-shaped end of the
main casting (1) of the mill, thus making an
extremely sensitive self-adjusting turntable,
which allows the mill to turn around to the


least change in the direction and force of the wind, and ensuring its safety in a gale.
This is another point in favour of the Alston Mill. No matter how faithfully the rest
of the mill may he built, if the turntable is faulty disaster must occur.
The mill is made to regulate by a hinged vane. This, too, is an important
feature in a windmill, as it is upon the action of the vane in conjunction with the
sensitiveness of the turntable that the governing
qualities of a windmill depend.
The Alston Mill is fitted with a vane that
governs the mill with greater regularity than
any other. It has no springs or balance weights
to get out of order, it faces the windwheel to the
lightest wind, and allows the same to maintain
a regular speed under all wind pressures, and will
not race in a gale, neither will it shut itself upand
cease working, as many of the imported mills do
when the wind is high, but it will keep on
working at an even pace in all weathers. This
is another point which has won the admiration
of its many thousands of users. The next point
of consideration is a proper tower to carry the
mill. These are made all heights to suit the
different localities. They are made of special
quality angle steel, hundreds of tons of which
is specially imported for the purpose. In con-
structing the tower for the Alston Mills, there is
no stinting the material, but ample weight (if
material is allowed to provide a tower that will
not wreck in any storm, but is a marvel of modern
engineering, light and graceful in appearance.
These are the main points which call for
special mention.
There are others that might be given, but
suffice it to say that every detail of construction
has been carefully thought out, and no expense
has been spared in designing and making of special
tools for their production, so that the purchaser can rely upon getting the best that
can be produced, and should
have no difficulty in arriving at
a decision as to wherehecanget
the best value for his money.
The Alston 190!! Patent Double
Crank Windmill hasmoregood
points than anyot her mill on the
market. It is the result of years
of study and experimenting,
and now is offered at a lower
price than any other.
If yon have water to lift, it
will pay you to write your re-
quirements, when the benefit of
over twenty years’ experience
will be given you in advising
and quoting you for a pumping
plant that will give you more
than satisfaction, and one that
will reflect credit on the maker.
The gear Wheels of the Alston
mills are made of strong pro-
portions with large wearing
surfaces. They are moulded
on special moulding machines
ensuring greatest truth inform
and the greatest satisfaction
in use.
A TRUCK LOAD OF MACHINE MOULDED GEAR WHEELS
OX ROAD FROM FOUNDRY TO FITTING SHOP.


ALSTON’S PATENT
Single-Crank Geared Mill
Price —Six=ft. Mill, £5 ios. ; Seven-ft., £6 ;
Bft., £6 ios.; £l2,
THIS MILL lias been designed to meet the demand for a small cheap Mill for
small requirements, such as pumping from a shallow well, or lifting small
quantities from moderately deep wells. They are strong and faithfully
constructed from the best of material, and the general construction of the
working parts is similar to the well-known “Dot” Mills.
The windmill is made to revolve on a fixed axle of ample strength,
and made of the best steel. The bearings have extra long surface, assuring long life
and steady bearing. The spindles of the gearing are all made of steel, and the faces
of the gearing, are full width, ensuring long wear. The mill is very light running, and
perfectly self-regulating in all weather. It is fitted with a very sensitive turntable,
making it readily adjust itself in the slightest wind, and safe in the strongest storm.
The governor is of the simplest, having no balance-weights or springs to got out of
order. The oft., 7ft. and Bft. mills are geared three to one—giving the best speeds
for working the pump —making altogether a very perfect machine.
STEEL TOWERS TO SUIT THESE MILLS.
20ft., £3 .. 30ft., £4 .. 40ft., £5 .. 50ft., £6
STEEL TOWER FOR TEN FEET SINGLE CRANK MILL,
20ft., £4/10/- .. SOft., £6 .. 40ft., £8 .. 50ft., £lO


ALSTON’S PATENT
DOUBLE CRANK Bft. STEEL
WINDMILL.
Price, £io.
£TpilllS is my latest improved mill. It is fitted with my patent double crank action,
latest improved steel roller bearings on main axle, self-adjusting steel ball-
.i. bearing turntable, ensuring perfect regulating in all winds. The windwheel is
of the newest type, being made with double steel spokes, well bracketed. The
rims are of the best mild steel, making a wheel that will not give way under the
strongest wind pressure. The galvanised sails are of the most perfect form; they arc
attached to the rims of the windwheel by small galvanised bolts and nuts, which are
riveted up after erection. The pumping motion has tw T o alternate strokes of 5 inches
and 7 inches, and is geared 3 to 1, giving a nice even motion to the pump of about 25
to 27 strokes per minute. For small requirement this mill has no equal. It will run
in the lightest wind, and will stand the strongest storms, and will last a lifetime with
ordinary care. The weight of the mill is 2501b5. It packs in a small space for
shipment.
STEEL TOWERS TO SUIT THESE MILLS.
20ft. .. 30ft. 40ft. .. 50ft.
£4 .. £5 10s. . £7 .. £S 10s.


ALSTON’S PATENT
DOUBLE CRANK 10ft. STEEL
WINDMILL.
Price, £l5.
CIIIS mill is fitted with my
new patent double crank
action. The windwheel is
of the newest type, being made
with a light steel frame. The
sails, eighteen in number, are
made of galvanised steel,
blocked by specially designed
machinery, ensuring perfect
duplication. These are bolted
to the rims in a secure manner.
The main castings are neat
and strong in design. The
pumping motion, Tin. and 9in.
stroke, is given by a strong
gearing, being geared 2% to 1,
giving a nice even motion to
the pump of about twenty-five
strokes per minute. The bear-
ings are all long, providing for
proper lubrication. The
spindles are made of the best
cold rolled steel, ensuring long-
life to the mill. The main axle
is fitted with the latest im-
proved steel roller bearings.
The whole is carried on a self-
adjustable turntable, fitted
with steel ball bearings, mak-
ing the mill sensitive to every
change in direction or force of
wind, and perfectly safe in the
strongest gales, making alto-
gether a very neat and durable
windmill. The weight of this
mill is 4401b5.
Steel Towers to suit this Mill.
50ft.
£lO 10s.
£(> 10s.
Throws a good stream in a gentle breeze.
Werribee, May 31st, 1904.
Mr. Alston.
Dear Sir, —I have the mill erected, and she is working splendid. I had very little
trouble in raising the stand and fixing the mill, and she throws a good stream of water
in a gentle breeze, considering she draws about 18ft. and forces it 30ft. to top of tank.
Enclosed please find cheque. Yours faithfully,
a. j. McDonald.


ALSTON’S PATENT
DOUBLE CRANK 12ft. STEEL
WINDMILL.
Price £2O.
THIS Mill has all the latest improvements,
being fitted with my patent double
crank action and a self-adjusting ball-
bearing turntable of great strength, which
cannot get out of order. It is extremely sensi-
tive in action, ensuring perfect regulation in
all weathers, whether a gentle breeze or a
hurricane
and of the
best cold-
rolled steel
shafting,
perfectly
true and
straight.
The main
axle is fitted
to run in the
latest im-
proved steel roller bearings, designed to
carry the oil for a longer period than any
other class of bearing. These roller bear-
ings reduce the friction to a minimum, mak-
ing it the lightest-running mill in existence.
The gearing is extra heavy, perfect in design
and well proportioned. It is geared 2 1 . i to
1, and has two strokes, 8 and 10 inches. The
wheel is built in such a manner that it is
almost impossible to get out of order, each
piece or part tending to build up a light and
graceful structure. The spokes and rims
are of steel, securely* bolted to the
hub, and yvell braced with tie rods.
The sails are of galvanised steel,
cut and
blocked out by special
y. These are bolted to the
machinery'
rims by means of galvanised steel
brackets, which are also produced
by specially designed machinery, thus ensuring the perfect duplication of parts. The
sails are placed at such an angle as to give the greatest possible driving power to the
wheel. The vane is full size and well proportioned, so as to ensure the proper work-
ing °f same in heavy weather. The general construction of the pumping gear is the
very simplest, and there is nothing complicated or likely to get out of order, making
altogether a thoroughly reliable, complete, powerful, light-running windmill, that will
do more yvork than any other mill of its size. These mills run yvhen others stand
still; they pack into small packages for-shipment, reducing cost in freight to the
loyyest. Approximate yveight, 800 lbs.
Steel Angle Towers
to suit this Mill.
£9 10s,
£l4 10s.


Alston’s Patent 14ft. and 16ft. Patent
Double Crank Steel Windmills.
PRICE—I4ft., £32 ; 16ft., £35.
£ttAHESE are the most modern design
of windmills in existence; every
,_L part and movement lias been
thought out and scientifically construc-
ted. The mechanical construction is the
simplest, and is similar to that used in
my other mills, which have made a name
for themselves throughout the world.
They are fitted with ray patent double
crank action, double pitman and self-
adjusting ball-bearing turntables and
steel roller bearings. The gearing is the
most perfect and well proportioned, the
patterns for which having been specially
cut and imported at great cost. It is
fitted with different strokes of Tin.,
9in., llin., or 13in., which can be given
to the pump rod by simply shifting two
pins. All the spindles are made of the best
cold-rolled steel shafting, beautifully
cold-rolled steel shafting, beautifully . , „ _ ,
finished, and the bearings of main axle are fitted with steel rollers, these reduce
the friction to a minimum, and from their special formation will retain the oil lor a
lon<>' period The windwheel is the strongest made; the spokes and rims are of steel,
built and braced in such a manner as to give the greatest stiffness. The sails are made
of galvanised steel, cut and blocked by special machinery, and bolted to the rims by
means of galvanised steel brackets, which are also made by special tools. The angle at
which the sails are fixed to the wheel gives the greatest driving power. The turntable
is of the latest design, being perfectly self-adjusting, and cannot bind. It is fitted with
large steel balls, on which the whole mill turns, making it very sensitive to every change
in the direction and force of the wind, and perfectly self-governing in all weathers. All
parts are extra strong, and all castings subject to heavy strains are made of cast steel.
All parts are marked by letter or number, and all duplicates are interchangeable,
and can be had at all times. The general construction is such that it can be readily
taken into small parts, making it easy of transport and favorable for shipment, it is
speciallv suitable for irrigation or deep well pumping, and I claim it to be the
strongest, most powerful, most complete, and lightest-running mill in the world.
Approximate weight: 14ft., 1200 lbs.; 16ft., 1300 lbs.
Steel Towers to suit these Mills.
30ft. ... 40ft.
£l4 ... £lB


Alston’s Patent 18ft. & 20ft. Patent Double Crank WINDMILLS
PRICE —18ft., £45 ; 20ft., £5O.
THESE mills resemble in all particulars the 14ft. and 16ft. mills, and} all the
points described in their case apply to these mills, but they are much heavier
in construction, and from their larger diameter are much more powerful, and
are suitable for the heaviest class of work. They are fitted with alternate
strokes of 10-inch, 12-inch, 14-inch, and 16-inch. The gearing is specially heavy, and
there is nothing in existence to compare with this mill for strength. All the parts
have been well thought out, and a great margin of safety and weight has been allowed
for all possible strains. They have a large sail surface, and extra strength has been
allowed in the making up of the wheel, so that it is impossible for this mill to give in
the severest weather. Approximate weight —18ft., 1900 lbs.; 20ft., 2000 lbs.
Steel Towers to suit these Mills.
20ft., £l4. ... 30ft., £lB 10s. ... 40ft., £23 10s. ... 50ft., £29 10s.
I have sixteen of your mills on this estate.
The Manor, Werribee, 21st November, 1904.
Mr. James Alston, South Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —I have sixteen of your mills on this estate, from 6ft. up to 18ft. in
diameter. One and all run well, give no trouble, and stand the fierce gales splendidly.
The double crank on the 18ft. mill has given every satisfaction up to the present.
About the first week in January, I will want three 12ft. mills, particulars will be sent
later on. Yours truly, P. CHIKNSIDE.


Gauge of Iron.
14
12 in. wide, 6 in. deep,
per ft.
s. d
1 6
16 ,, 8
,,
2 0
20 ,, 10
2 6
24 „ 12 „
5 J
2 9
28 ,, 14
3 6
32 „ 16 „
> >
4 0
ALSTON’S Patent Steel
STOCK WATER TROUGHS
THE principle of the invention is very simple. The curved sheets are joined
together hv means of iron hands, which so act upon same as to draw m the
outside sheet and force out the inside sheet, making a perfect joint.
Directions for making a Joint.
Place the Coupling over and around the end of section of Trough, then lap the
end of one sheet inside the other about two inches, with a little thin white lead or
paint between them, and screw up the nuts.
One of the chief points in watering stock is to provide drinking frontage, as an
obstinate beast will often take possession of a short trough and keep others from
drinking for hours. These Troughs are cheap, strong, simple, and durable; a little
paint or tar will make them last a lifetime. They are unaffected by the heat or damp;
will not shrink, warp, crack, or rot; they are easily put together by an inexperienced
person, andithe only tool required is a screw wrench. In transport they occupy a
very small space, as the curved sheets fit one inside the other, and are therefore,piot
liable to injury. As an Irrigation or Mining Flume it is unequalled; its first cost and
cost of erection is much cheaper than any other styles of Flumes.
MILES IN USE THROUGHOUT THE STATES.
Steel Water Trough as supplied to the Leading Stock Runs of Australia.
jK t J*
PRISE
LIST
aiston’s Patent Black Steel
Painted Water Troughs.
Ends per Holding
pair. Capacity.
12 10
d. s. Per Foot.
10 23^gals.
15 4 „
- 20 6K „
4 0 25 OJ4 „
5 6 30 12 ~
6 0 36 17 „
Trough,
Alston’s Steel Framed Calf
Feeding
Similar in design and construction as the Stock Trough fully described on following
pages 20 and 22. 16in. wide, Bin. deep, body of trough 22 gauge, galvanised
sheets, fitted with cleaning out valve.
PRICE LIST.
Height 24 inches. Length, 6ft., 20/-; 12ft., 31/6; 18ft., 42/9; 24ft., 54/-; 30ft., 65/-.
Height 12 inches. Length, 6ft., 18/6; 12ft., 29/-; 18ft., 39/6; 24ft., 60/-; 30ft., 60/-.


Length.
£
R.
d.
Length.
£
F.
d.
Length.
£
s.
d.
Length.
£
R.
d.
6 feet ..
1
2
0
'42 feet...
4
14
0
72 feet .
. 7
14
0
104 feet ..
10 14
.0
12 ,, ..
1
14
0
48 ,, ..
5
6
0
78 .
. 8
6
0
152 ,, ..
15
0
0
18 „ ..
2
(i
0
54 ..
5
18
0
84 ,, .
8
18
0
200 ,, ..
20
0
0-
24 ..
2
18
0
60 ,, ..
()
10
0
00 ,, .
9
10
0
300 ,, ..
30
0
O'
30 „ ..
3
10
0
66 ,, ..
7
2
0
96 ,, .
10
2
0
400 „ ..
40
0
O'
ALSTON’S PATENT STEEL FRAME
GALVANISED
Stock Water Trough
That will Last a Lifetime
That will not Leak when Filled
That will not Crack when Empty.
That will not Corrode with Hard
THIS Trough has been designed to supply a cheap and reliable article, and is-
offered as an improvement on my original patented Trough that has made a
name for itself throughout the world. This Trough is made with a strong
steel angle frame carried on legs, keeping the body of the Trough clear of the
ground, allowing free circulation of the air around it and preventing corrosion.
The construction of the framework is clearly shown in the block. The bracket
is made of strong steel angle, bent at the top corners so as to form a bridge to carry
the Trough. The lower ends of the legs have pieces of steel angle riveted on them,
giving them a firm support on the ground. The edges of the Trough are protected by
bar of steel angle along its full length. The ends are made of galvanised steel sheet,
cut and blocked into shape by special machinery. The body of the Trough is made of
curved sheets of galvanised steel. The size of the trough is 20 inches wide and 10-
inches deep (22 guage galvanised sheets) and holds about 6 gallons of water per foot.
The height of the Trough is 14 inches.
DIRECTIONS FOR SETTING
UP THE TROUGH.
Thread the ends of the side bars over
the ends of the screwed clip, and lay them
out along the ground on which the Trough is to stand. Place a bracket at every
joint, and pass the ends of the screwed clips through the holes, and enter the nuts on
the ends. Take the curved sheets and spring them under the side bars. Allow the-
ends of the sheets to lap about an inch. Place an inside hoop over the lap, level the
Trough, and then screw up the nuts tightly. Before putting the sheets together, paint
the ends that are to form the lap with a little thick paint. This will make a perfect
joint. The ends of the Trough are put in in the same manner as the joints are made,
using an inside hoop inside the flange of the end.
PRI6E LIST.
Troughs Complete, with one pair of ends, and fitted with Cleaning Out Valve.
36 ~ .. 4 2 0 Lockup Cover for Ball Tap, 10s. extra
Quotations for Heavier Gauges on application.


Length.
£
s.
d
Length.
£
s.
a.
Length.
£
s.
<i.
Length.
£
s.
a.
6 feet ..
1
9
0
42 feet ..
6
8
0
72 feet .
. 10
10
6
100 feet .
. 14
0
0
12 ,, ..
2
5
6
48 „ ..
7
4
6
78 ,, .
. 11
7
0
200 ,, .
28
0
0
18 „ ..
3
2
0
54 „ ..
8
1
0
84 ,, .
. 12
3
6
300 „ .
42
0
0
24 „ ..
3
18
6
60 „ ..
8
17
6
90 „ .
. 13
0
0
400 ,, .
56
0
0
30 ..
4
15
0
66 ,, ..
9
14
0
96 „
13
16
6
500 „ .
70
0
0
ALSTON’S PATENT STEEL FRAME
GALVANISED PORTABLE
NO RIVETS OR SOLDER REQUIRED.
Stock Water Trough
That will Last a Lifetime
That will not Leak wh
That will not Corrode with
Screw
THIS Trough has been designed to supply a cheap and reliable article, and is
offered as an improvement on my original patented Trough that has made a
name for itself throughout the world. This Trough is made with a strong
steel angle frame carried on legs, keeping the body of the Trough clear of the
ground, allowing free circulation of the air around it and preventing corrosion.
The construction of the framework is clearly shown in the block. The bracket
is made of strong steel angle, bent at the top corners so as to form a bridge to carry
the Trough. The lower ends of the legs have pieces of steel angle riveted on them,
giving them a firm support on the ground. The edges of the Trough are protected by
bars of steel angle along its full length. The ends are made of galvanised steel sheet,
cut and blocked into shape by special machinery. The body of the Trough is made of
curved sheets of galvanised steel. The size of the Trough is 24 inches wide and
32 inches deep (20 gauge galvanised sheets), and holds about 0 gallons of water per
foot. The height of the top of Trough is 26 inches.
DIRECTIONS FOR SETTING UP THE TROUGH.
Thread thejends of the side bars over the ends of the screwed clip, and lay them
ouTalong the ground on which the Trough is to stand. Place a bracket at every
joint, and pass the ends of the screwed clips through the holes, and enter the nuts on
the ends. Take the curved sheets and spring them under the side bars. Allow the
ends of the sheets to lap about an inch. Place an inside hoop over the lap, level the
Trough, and then screw up the nuts tightly. Before putting the sheets together,
paint the ends that are to form the lap with a little thick paint. This will make a
perfect joint. The ends of the Trough are put in in the same manner as the joints
are made, using an inside hoop inside the flange of the end.
PRI6E LIST.
Troughs Complete, with one pair of ends, and fitted with Cleaning Out Valve
30 ~ .. 415 0 66 „ .. 914 0 96 ~ 13 16 6 500 ~ ..70 0 0
36 ~ .. 511 6 Lockup Cover for Ball Tap, Ten (shillings Extra.
Quotations for Heavier Gauges on application.


Width.
Depth.
Length.
Price.
20 in.
10 in.
8 ft.
£3 16
6
•20 ,,
10 „
10 „
4 3
6
20 „
10 „
12 „
4 10
6
24 „
12 „
8 „
4 5
6
24 „
12 „
10 „
4 13
6
24 „
12 „
12 „
5 1
6
ALSTON’S
Hotel or Stable Door Trough.
Will not leak when full
Will not crack when empty.
The above Cut shows a really first-class Trough for standing in front of a
Hotel or at a Stable Door. This Trough has been specially designed by me for the
above purpose. It is made of curved steel sheets % of an inch thick. The ends
are put in with my Patent Joint, and the
whole mounted on a steel angle framework
firmly braced, and made any height re-
quired. The sides are protected with a bead
riveted along the edges. Oil one end is fitted
ai Voxck-ioip (coAter for ItealUl tap*
PRlCES—Complete with Cover.


Alston’s Patent Steel Pig Trough.
THIS is really a first-class Pig Trough, and has many advantages over the old
style of wooden trough. It will not warp or crack when exposed to the sun, and
will not leak when filled. The pigs cannot chew them, as is the case with the
wooden ones; they do not sour, and are easily kept clean; the body is made of sheet
steel, the ends of cast-iron; the edges are protected by bars of steel angle riveted along
•"**• ■ ’""V; '*'
-■
each side, and bars are riveted across to prevent the animals lying in them in the
hot weather. They are painted with a good coat of water-proof paint, making
altogether the best trough for pig-feeding in the market.
PRICES
4 feet long .. 12 inches wide . . 14 gauge .. £0 16 0
Most persons, when asked for their mental picture of the wind, describe it as a
horizontal stratum of air practically uniform in velocity. In reality neither of these
characteristics is a part of the description of the wind. Investigations into the
internal movements of the air currents, made by Professor S. P. Langley in America,
and by others abroad, have shown conclusively that the wind is made up of innu-
merable commingling and conflicting currents, much like the multitude of scarcely
perceptible wavelets which unite to make up a huge billow. These component
currents move in various directions, vertically as well as horizontally, and with
velocities quite their own. The constant variation in velocities may be detected by
anyone who will watch a cup-anemometer whirling in a gale of wind. A little
patience will soon detect the cups at a full stop for an appreciable period, while the
gale whistles by. Meteorological instruments have detected distinct upward and
downward movements in ordinary winds, and some of those who are investigating
bird flight and the vast subject of aeronautics are convinced that the soaring power
of a bird is due to its instinctive recognition of these upward currents, and to its
ability instantly to make use of them in order to secure or retain altitude. Much in
the same way as billows move in one general direction, a given wind usually follows a
uniform course; but if it meets a terrestrial obstruction it is at once retarded at some
points, and a mingling of forces results. A hill obstructs the wind much as a dam
retards water. The current in the stream is more rapid on the surface than at the
point of contact with the dam. In the'same way, the anemometer on a mountain top
may indicate a certain velocity, while the clouds above, moving in the same wind,
will be observed to be moving much faster.


Alston’s
w Improved Bali Taps.
The Ball Tap is one of the things that helps to make
stock watering a success. They are so simple in action
that anyone can understand
nf has merely to be connected
pipe, and needs
( | 3l
attention, and have been improved in construction. They are made of the best
gun-metal full weighted, and have full clearance in the waterway. They are fitted
with strong copper balls, making a first-class article.
PRICES,
Size. Price,
| inch -£0 7 0
1 „ - 0 12 0
\\ inches -0180
I’i jj
1 2 6
1 10 0
2 10 0
4 0 0
6 0 0
SHOWING BALL TAP PITTED IN THOUGH.
CANNOT PRAISE IT TOO HIGHLY
Mr. Alston. Avoca, 25th May, 1901.
Dear Sir, —In answer to your question as to how the “ Dot ” Mill has acted that
I bought from you more than two years ago, I must say that I cannot praise it
too highlv; it has been working ever since without a hitch, and appears as if it would
till there is a blue moon. Of course the stream is not strong enough for extensive
irrigation, but for a garden or watering stock it cannot be beat.—l am, yours truly,
THOMAS BANXESTEK.


For general requirements, such as lifting water
from a well into a tank alongside, and the tank
is not placed higher than the platform of the
mill-tower, the ordinary single cylinder pump
with an open top pipe and pump rod working
inside the pump, will be found to give general
satisfaction on account of its simplicity, and
the little attention required to keep it in
working order. But in cases where the water
lIeSS SUPS has to he lifted to greater heights or distances
ggStiSap away the double cylinder pump will be found
HswS sJSp of the greatest value. This style of pump does
away with the stuffing box, which is a source
Sfearj of annoyance in the ordinary force pump; the
block shows the general construction of the
pump. The lower cylinder (1) is similar to
S|p||B|giii the ordinary cylinder, being fitted with the
usual pump bucket and lower valve. A
„ second cylinder (2) of a smaller diameter is
bhowmg Bore place(l a j K)VO the j ower o ne, this is fitted with
„ a packed plunger which can be adjusted with-
ritted in Bore. ou t taking the pump to pieces, it also carries
a leather cup making it tight under all
pressure. This second cylinder divides the work between
the up and down stroke of the pump rod, making it double-
acting and giving a constant flow through the pipes. On the
up stroke of the rod a portion of the water in the lower
■cylinder (1) is discharged through the delivery pipe and a
portion is taken into the top cylinder (2). On the down
the rod begins to rise the valve F
closes, and the bottom valve G
__ opens and allows the air in the
„ ~ ,pipe to rise into the cylinder again,
C o£ on the down stroke of the rod the
Pump. valve G closes and valve F opens as
before: and so this is repeated till the air is
exhausted which was in the pipe and water has
taken its place. Now the pump bucket and
valves act upon the water in exactly the same
manner as they have done upon the air, and
the water is lifted through the pipes to where
it is required to be delivered.
ALSTON’S IMPROVED DOUBLE
CYLINDER PUMP.
PUMPS.
The Cylinder Pump is the most simple and efficient form
of pump in existence. It is one I use in preference to any
other that has come under my notice. It is a good, cheap,
and reliable pump; well made, simple to understand, and
easy to repair when new leathers are required.
Bear in mind that the Cylinder is the pump proper. No
matter what shape, or how attractive the outside of a pump
may be, the whole work is done by the Cylinder.
This cut shows a vertical suction of one of my cylinder
pumps. This very clearly shows the inside of same. Ais
the Cylinder; B, the suction pipe leading into well ; C, the
delivery pipe leading to tank or outlet; 11, the pump rod
which is attached to mill overhead; K, the pump bucket
which screws on the pump rod; F, the valve in pump bucket;
G, the bottom valve of pump. Suppose the pump to be
fitted and the mill set in motion, the pump rod moves up
and down. In lowering the bucket, valve F opens and
allows the air in the cylinder to pass through it; the moment
Doable Cylinder Pump.


Alston’s Brass
Cylinder Pump
fitted with Stuffing
Box and Brass Rod,
J 5- extra.
Alston’s Improved
Single Cylinder
Pump.
stroke of the rod the water in the top cylinder
is discharged through the delivery pipe.
The pump is secured to steel tower or the
timbers in the well by two lengths of pipe
(3 and 4), one of these pipes being closed at
the top acts as an air chamber, the other
can be used as a delivery pipe, or as an
extra air chamber when the pump is used
forcing horizontally, in which case the
delivery pipe (6) may be used, (5) shows the
pump rod working through guides, (7) the
frame work of tower, and (8) the suction
pipe.
ALSTON’S (Bored or Drilled AVell)
BRASS PUMPS.
These pumps are specially designed
for working in Bore Holes. This system is not
generally known in this country, but from
the success which has attended the large
number of bored wells upon which my mills
have been erected, I have no hesitation in
predicting a very large adoption of them as
their merits become better known. By this
system greater depths can be reached at
considerably less cost as compared with a dug
well, and a more permanent and purer supply
ensured. Although comparatively unknown, it is a very? ancient method of obtaining
a supply of water. The principle is a simple one. A hole is bored in the earth by a
set of well-boring tools to a depth below water level sufficient to
ensure a permanent supply. If the sides of the bore are of
a soft or loose nature it is necessary to protect the hole from
falling in by using a casing; this is made a little larger
than the outside diameter of the bore pump, and is lowered
down the bore, the joints being made as it
is lowered. The pump is lowered into the sSll
bore with the suction pipe screwed into it. The
pump rod is made long enough to project above
the top of the pump and each length of pipe HH
as it is lowered into the bore. The pump rod
is screwed together first, then the pipe, till
the full length is put together ;
the whole is then hung by a strong H|fH|
pipe-holder, bolted to a plank at
the surface, the pipe is carried
above the height of where it is
desired to deliver the water, and
a tee piece used to convey water to
the tank.
113
Alston’s Bored or Drilled Well Bore Pump.


0 ,i 31c ~
i ~ 5
8 „ 5
ALSTON’S IMPROVED SINGLE BRASS CYLINDER PUMPS
2 inch .. 134 inch .. .. 110 0
214 „ ■■ „ 115 0
3 ~ .. 134 and 1 inches 2 0 0
3)-j> ~ •• 1*;„ 2 210 0
4 ~ .. 2 inch .. .. 3 5 0
„ .. 2K .. .. 4 0 0
5“„ •• 2>| „ .. .. 500
SJ-o „ ... 3 ~ ~ .. .. 6 0 0
(i ~ .. 3}4 j) ... .. 7 0 0
7 „ .. 4 „ -... ... 9 0 0
8 „ 5 „ .. .. 11 0 0
10 „ 0 14 10 0
ALSTON’S (BORED OR DRILLED WELL) BRASS PUMPS.
D C\™n t der° f Sli!e of Fipe. Size oi Bore. f
3 inch .. 1 10 0
2 inch .. 134 inch
2,4 „ 14 „
3 „ ..1,4 „
01 •)
3 „ .. 1 15 0
334 „ ■ 210 0
44 ~ 3 0 0
334,. ..2
ALSTON’S IMPROVED SURFACE DRAW PLUNGER
DRAW PUMP
2 inch .. 234 inch
2M « •• 3
3 „ ..
334,. -.4 „ ..
Other Sizes on application.
ALSTON’S IMPROVED SURFACE
DRAW PLUNGER BORE PUMP.
These pumps are made to fit inside
a tube of larger diameter than outside
measurement of working barrel of
pump, thus allowing the plunger and
lower valve to be drawn to the sur-
face without disturbing the tube in
bore, saving a deal of labour and
risk when renewing the leathers.
ALSTON’S STUFFING BOX & ROD,
By the use of this simple appliance
an ordinary Cylinder pump may be
converted into a force pump and made
to deliver the water to a higher level
at a distance, the stuffing box being
screwed into the top of an ordinary
pipe Tee and the branch of the Tee
used for the' delivery pipe.
PRICE LIST.
ALSTON’S IMPROVED DOUBLE BRASS
CYLINDER PUMPS.
D^- l o{L fJ vei Size of Pipe. Price,
Cylinder _
2 inch 134 inch 4 0 0
14 ~ 410 0
„ lie „ 415 0
a „ 2 „ 5 15 0
4 ' „ 2 „ 6 16 0 Single Stuffing
41 i „ 24 , 8 0 0 Cylinder Box
5~ ~ 213 „ 10 10 0 p^ p . Rod ‘
o ~ ~ ru ru u
54 ~ 3 ~ 12 0 0
Alston's Improved Surface Draw Plunger
Bore Pump,
314 inch .. 210 0
3 5 0
4/4 !) 4 5 0
54 ~ .. 710 0


RETENTION VALVES.
A Retention Valve should be CSI at rest, and preventing anything
used on all suction pipes. It -sHI from getting into the pump to
ensures the more satisfactory stop its working. They are made
working of the pump by keeping 0 f ( , ast j ronj with brass valve,
the pipe full while the pump is seat and clack.
Size of Pipe ... inch inch 2 inch 24 inch 3 inch
Price 7 6 7/6 10 - 20 - 25 -
ALSTON’S...
Steel
Angle Ladders,
For Wells.
THESE Ladders will be found a safeguard against
accidents in wells where climbing has to be done
to get at the pump for repairs. Prevention is
better than cure; a few shillings spent in a secure
Ladder, such as the one shown, may save pounds and
perhaps a limb.
They will be found a very strong and durable
style of Ladder for fixing in deep wells, where the
pump has to be placed some distance down the well.
They are made of strong angle steel riveted together,
and the ends punched for small bolts, so that a
Ladder any length can be made by bolting the
sections together. Pieces of angle are riveted on
the sides about every twelve feet for bolting to timber
in the well. They are painted with a water-proof
paint, making a very durable article.
PRICE
Is. 6d. per foot,
ALSTON’S Improved Steel Deep
Well PIPE HOLDERS.
PRICE LIST.
Length of
Size of Pipe, Screwed Ends. Price.
% and 1 inch 2%, inch 1/- each
Ci „IK „ „ 1/6
)) 1/2 !, 0/2 ~ I/O ~
2 „ „ 4K „ 2/
3 ?) 3/o n 5 ~ 3/-
Ibis very simple device will be found invaluable
in fixing pipes in wells. They are made of the best mild
steel. From their form they'have great holding power,
gripping the pipe evenly all round. It is impossible
for them to slip.


press Extracts...
The PastoraliMs’ Review, 16th September, 1901.
“Water will not run up hill” is an old saying, but nevertheless water will
ascend a pipe to almost any height when it is acted upon by means of a good windmill
1 1 • i.i 1 .1 ..I .1 1 1 1,. ( 1,,, ..l.A.mAfd nnu-nr
and pumj). The wind that does the work costs nothing, and is the cheapest power on
earth. Water is procurable by sinking wells at moderate depths in many parts of the
Commonwealth, and the first cost, which is practically the only one of a windmill, is not
Royal Show, Melbourne.
great, in fact, it is the cheapest of all pumping plant to erect, and when erected requires
little attention. Mr. Alston,windmill manufacturer, has turned out thousands of these
labour-saving machines within the last few years, and so great has the demand become
that he has found it necessary to build larger premises, and has secured a block of land
of over an acre, close to Queen’s Bridge, where he is building one of the largest wind-
mill factories in Australia. The fame of the “Alston” mill is known far and wide.
Wherever they are once introduced they command the market, and numbers are being
continually shipped to the neighbouring colonies and South Africa. Besides wind-
mills, Mr. Alston makes a number of other specialities in connection with the
watering of stock, house, or garden. His patent steel water-trough is also well known,
and is a very simple and valuable invention, by the use of which troughs of any
length can be put together in the paddock by any handy man with a screw-wrench.
Mr. Alston’s exhibits were as numerous as they were worthy of special attention.


Dalgety's Review, 2nd May, 1904.
Windmills were shown by different makers, the exhibits from the factory of
Mr. James Alston coming in for a large share of attention. Their sizes ranged from
5 ft. to 20 ft. Galvanised steel towers were shown carrying those Of larger dimensions.
Large groups of spectators gathered round the glass casing of a pump, where, through
the glass, the valves could be seen working and the water rising at each thrust of the
rod. By means of the double crank action, which gives a direct central lift to the
pump rod, and so tends to an even wearing of the bearings with a big increase in the
life of the mill, Mr. Alston claims to have made a vast improvement in his mills, a
claim that seems fully justified.
Country Press Supplement .
AT THE SHOW.
ALSTON’S WINDMILLS.
There is no machine that money can buy that will improve a farm orearnmore
money for its owner than a good windmill. It beautifies the landscape, takes the
drudgery of lifting and hauling the water out of his hand, and gives a much more
bountiful supply to all the beasts, the garden and the household requirements than he
could, even if ho devoted his whole time to it alone. It is ever ready, and responds to
the least breath of wind, day or night, Sunday or Monday. The new improved wind-
mill, for which patent rights have been granted to Mr James Alston, of Queen’s
Bridge, Melbourne, is a great advance on anything that has before been offered in
Australia. The main improvement consists in the use of a double crank, whereby the
pump rod pin is lifted at each end, instead of one end only, as is the case with all other
makes. The Alston New Patent Double-Crank Steel
Windmill is the most up-to-date of anything in
existence; it is fitted with steel roller bearings and
steel ball-bearing turntable, making it very sensitive
to the lightest breeze, and yet safe in the most violent
storms. Thedouble crank does away with all twisting
and overhanging strains common to all other makes ;
it gives a central and direct lift of the pump rod, and
causes the crank spindle to lie evenly in its bearing,
without any tendency to lift at either end. The bear-
ing surfaces are of chilled metal, hard as tempered
steel—so hard that you cannot touch them with a file.
The steel of which the f ramework is made is of a special
tough nature, imported specially for the purpose. The
towers are of steel angle, also specially imported. The
sails are all galvanised, and nearly every part of the
mill is made by specially constructed tools. All parts
are made in duplicate, ensuring perfect fitting, and at
the same time enabling the maker to turn out a much
superior article, and at a price to defy competition.
Mr. Alston’s windmill factory stands on the river
Yarra bank close to Queen’s Bridge, and is the largest
windmill factory in Australia, a visit to which would
well repay anyone interested, or should they be unable
to do so,'a catalogue will be posted to them on appli-
cation. Another special line which Mr. Alston has
recently patented is his steel-framed galvanised stock
trough. This is finding great favour with sheep and
6ft. “Dot” Mill, Bush Outfit.
cattle owners. It is very portable, durable, and cheap, and will not crack, rust, or
rot, and can be put together by the use of a screw-wrench by any handy man, no
solder or rivets being required.
The Queenslander.
ALSTON’S PATENT WINDMILLS.
In this age of progress labour-saving appliances are the order of the day; and
anything calculated, so to speak, to “run on its own oil,” is worthy of the. attention
of the whole of the industrial world. In this respect what can be more simple and
efficacious than an ordinary windmill, the motive power that has endured from the
early days of civilisation? Certainly the method leaves little or nothing to be desired,
but the up-to-date windmill just about carries the same advantages over the original
mill as the present-day locomotive does over the old steam engine of the days of
George Stephenson. A windmill that gives necessary motive power with the slightest


atmospheric pressure, and careers evenly on its circular course in the teeth of a heavy
gale, is an especial blessing to husbandmen and all those engaged in the tillage and
cultivation of the soil. Like most other machines, the windmill has been improved
from time to time, and at present, in point of effective mechanism, leaves little or
nothing to be desired. Whilst the construction of windmills is an important adjunct
to the work of almost every iron-working establishment in Australia, it is seldom that
any one firm devotes exclusive attention to this class of business as a sole manufacturing
line. Nevertheless, a case in point occurs in connection with the windmill works and
steel foundry of Mr. James Alston, of Queen’s Bridge, South Melbourne, where patent
steel windmills are made and fitted up in all their parts in enormous numbers, and
can be found running on various parts of the continent, from Port Phillip to the Gulf
of Carpentaria. Anyone acquainted with the comparatively dry interior of Australia
will readily comprehend the value of an effective and unbreakable windmill in a
country where the conservation and distribution of water means a good deal, and
where the precious fluid can only be used for stock watering purposes on the basis of
just enough and very little to spare. A serviceable windmill erected on a dam, a
river bed, or a soakage well, with the usual accessory water troughing, has often
proved the salvation of small sheep farmers in drought-stricken areas, even when
large adjoining squattages were in a state of desolation.
As previously stated, Mr. Alston makes windmill building a speciality, and has
acquired a name and fame for his industry which cannot he set aside. Already eight
gold medals, four silver medals, and numerous money prizes stand to his credit, while
the “ Alston ” patent steel windmills are in evidence on almost every show ground of
importance throughout the Commonwealth. Mr. Alston has had twenty years’
experience in the construction and erection of windmills of all sizes. The application
of niodern science and modern machinery in their construction has given the “Alston”
a high position among windmills. Mr. Alston claims to be the largest manufacturer and
supplier of windmills in the Australian States, and he will be pleased to advise
any farmers or settlers who con-
template the erection of strong,
durable, easy-geared, light-run-
ning windmills, carrying the latest
improvements up to date, and
will also forward illustrated cata-
logues free on application.
The Station, Farm , and Dairy,
13th May, 1903.
THIS YEAR’S PATENT
DOUBLE-CRANK
STEEL WINDMILL.
One of the many important ex
hibits in the machinery section
was that of Mr. James Alston,
of Queen’s Bridge, Melbourne.
The Royal Show has been federal
in its live stock competitions for
many years, and it is only in the
fitness of things that the machi-
nery sections should follow suit,
especially so since the institution
of the Commonwealth. Alston’s
windmills are famous in Victoria,
and they stood out to the breeze on
the ground in great style. Several
were mounted on strong steel
towers, 30 feet and 40 feet high,
whilst one was only slightly ele-
vated above the surface of the
ground so as to permit of the 16ft. Geared Double Crank Mill on 50ft. Steel Tower,
ETXSS&'T a “ •'" TI “
greatly admired. Among the special features of Alston’s patent steel windmills
are the double crank motion and double pitman, which give direct and central
lift of the pump rod, and an even wearing of the bearings, at the same time


doing away with the overhanging and twisting strains of the rocker-arm and frame
common to all other make ot windmills. The wind-wheels are built with a light,strong
steel frame, whilst the sails are of galvanised steel, blocked to shape by special machinery.
The spindles are all of the best cold-rolled steel shafting, perfectly true and straight.
The hearings are of full length and chilled surface, fitted with proper means of lubrica-
tion and the main shaft is fitted with best steel roller hearings. The whole mill is
mounted on a self-adjusting ball-bearing turntable, making it sensitive to the lightest
breeze, and safe in the fiercest gale. Altogether it is a complete, reliable, powerful,
light-running windmill. Another exhibit on this stand worthy of mention is the
latest improved Alston’s patent steel frame galvanised stock trough, which should be
of special value to stock-owners, as it is a light, portable, durable, and cheap article.
The Ironmonger.
JAMES ALSTON.
WINDMILLS,
The exhibits of this firm are not easily overlooked by the visitors to the show.
One arrival at the ground one has only to look around, and the sight of the Alston
windmills, of all sizes, from (i feet to 20 feet diameter, mounted on tall and graceful
steel towers, turning in the air, immediately arrests attention. The efforts of Mr.
Alston to cater for the requirements of those who have water to lift for stock or
irrigation purposes have, we are informed, met with undoubted success, and the
specimens of this class of goods shown by him are such as must command the admira-
tion of the most critical.
Federal Fastoralist.
After a quarter of a century’s development, the Alston mill is to-day the
universally recognised standard from one end of Australia to the other, Tosay thata
mill of any other make has reached the same level of excellence to-day as an Alston
had attained ten or fifteen years ago, is to give it the highest possible praise; higher,
J 2ft. Windmill Plant at Mr. E. J. Rogers,
North Murchison, Vic.
U It tin. [IUPiNUXL JMiIIOC, IIIJiUA I ,
indeed, than in any but a few instances
it would deserve. The career of the Alston
has been one long series of improvements,
so that the small mill of to-day will per-
form a much larger quantity of work, in
proportion to its size, than would have
been dreamed of a few years ago. The
demands for his mills has increased
so persistently from year to year that Mr.
Alston has found himself compelled togo
on erecting more and more powerful and
efficient machinery, until to-day every
part of one of his mills is produced by a
specially designed machine. Thousands
of the Alston mills are now in use through-
out Australia and South Africa, and are
giving the most thorough satisfaction, as
the testimonials constantly coming to
hand amply testify. We would strongly
urge upon our readers to convince them-
selves of the superiority of the Alston
by personal observation and inquiry.
Especially we would counsel them to
refuse to allow themselves to be persuad ed
into buying mills of foreign make. These,
as a rule, are supplied in cases contain-
ing so many pieces of iron-work, supposed
to be capable, when put together,, of
assuming the form of a windmill ; but
never having been fitted together, they
are liable to the defect that should one of the parts be lost or broken, months must
elapse before duplicates can be procured. The Alston mills are all fitted together at the
Melbourne factory by thoroughly skilled workmen, and all parts are made in duplicate.


Australasian's Show Report, 1903.
JAMES ALSTON.
Tli is well-known manu-
facturer exhibits windmills
varying in diameter from 6ft.
to 20ft., engaged in lifting
water, A small mill named
the “ Dot,” mounted on a steel
tower 30ft. in height, is working
a 2in. brass pump, capable of
lifting enough water forahouse
and small garden from a 50ft.
well. The 20ft. mill is fitted
with an 18in. galvanised steel
irrigation pump, throwing a
large stream of water, and
able of irrigating a large block
of land. Mr. Alston’s latest
improvement in connection
with windmills is the double
crank action, which has been
patented throughout Australia,
New Zealand, and America.
This invention does away with
the overhanging and twisting
strains of ordinary windmills,
and gives a direct and central
lift of the pump rod, and an
even wearing of the bearings.
These mills are fitted with steel
roller and steel ball bearings.
The governor is very simple,
having no springs or side
weights to get out of order,
Another exhibit is the patent
portable stock trough, fitted
with steel frame which protects
it from the stock. It packs in
a small space, and is put to-
gether with a screw wrench,
no solder or rivets being re-
quired. A collection of pumps,
ball valves, Ac., complete an
interesting exhibit .
Stack of Steel Towers in Store Yard
The Farmer and Grazier, Sydney, 1!>04
ALSTON’S WINDMILLS,
Amongst the many machines of practical use to the farmer or grazier there is
none so valuable or useful as the windmill. There is no machine that monevcanbuy
that will pay for itself quicker, improve the landscape, and, at the same time, the
condition of the live stock, lighten the labour, and relieve the anxiety of the owner,
than a good windmill. There is no windmill in existence than is so simply constructed,
so perfect in its construction, so durable or cheap as the Alston windmill. For over
twenty years Mr. Alston has devoted his attention to the study and requirements of
windmills. Years ago he introduced the main points found in r.he many imported mills,
and can lay claim to more inventions in this particular line than any other man. The
small mills shown by him at the Royal Show at Sydney must have been an eye-opener
to many who thought they knew all about windmills; the immense advantage of his latest
improvements, the self-adjusting turntable, the double crank action, and double pitman,
and other minor improvements, giving it a distinct advantage over other makers.


Sydney Town and Country Journal, 1904.
ALSTON PATENT STEEL
WINDMILLS.
Tliis firm had again a very creditable
display of steel windmills of different
sizes, varying from Oft. to 20ft. in diameter,
suitable for all requirements, from the
supplying of a small household with a
proper water supply to the flooding of an
irrigation farm. These mills, which are
the most up-to-date of their kind upon
the market, are fitted with steel roller
bearings and ball-bearing turntables,
making them very sensitive to the lightest
winds, and perfectly safe in the strongest
gales. The mills are fitted with a double
crank action, for which Mr. Alston has
been granted Royal letters patent for
New South Wales, Victoria, South
Australia, West Australia, New Zealand,
and the United States of America. This
latest improvement gives a direct and
central lift of the pump rod, and does
away with the overhanging and twisting
strains common to all other makes of
mills. The fame of the Alston windmills
I4f t. Mill at Mr. Wm. Johnson's Spring Park Estate,
Essendon Pumping: from a spring in creek to house in the
distance, through 2376 of pipe, with a rise of 150 feet.
is so far-spreading that upward of a thousand of them were supplied to different parts
of the Commonwealth last season. Another exhibit that attracted much attention was
the new Alston,patent steel framed stock trough, which also has been patented through-
out Australia. This trough must prove of special value to stock-raisers. It is constructed
of a sheet of strong galvanised steel, curved and set in a steel angle frame, by which it
is carried clear above the ground. It is very portable, and packs into a small space, and
can be put together by any handy man. Moreover, it is perfectly watertight, and is
remarkably cheap. Mr. Alston’s factory, which is the largest of its kind in Australia,
is situated on the banks of the Yarra, near Queen’s Bridge, Melbourne. All particulars
and catalogues can be obtained by’writing to that address.
Testimonials Taken at Random from Thousands
Received.
A Superior Useful Article at a very Reasonable Cost.
Mt. Franklin
Estate, Franklinford, February 16th, 1907.
Mr. James Alston, Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —After having my windmill erected for over two years, it gives me
great pleasure to be able to express to you my entire satisfaction with the plant, both
as regards endurance and utility. I have have had no expense whatever with the
mill since erection, and whilst fully appreciating the benefits it has conferred on me
by giving me a clean, copious supply of water to 1113- house, garden, and stables. I
have no hesitation in recommending your windmills to anyone who requires a
superior useful article at a very reasonable cost. —I am, yours faithfully,
W. F. DOUGALL.


The Stone, Wood, and Steel
Age in Tank Towers.
Working- Six Years and Not a
Penny Spent On It.
Lancaster, August 15th, 1907
Mr. James Alston.
Dear Sir, —The mill works very well
indeed. The first one I got some six
years or so ago, has never had a penny
spent on it but for oil, but I notice it has
stopped pumping just lately, no doubt it
wants a new leather. You will have the
size of this small pump in you books;
please post me a leather if you think that
is what is wanted for it. —Yours truly,
JAMES S. McLEAN.
WOOD.
10ft. Mill—3oft Tower, erected for Mr. W. Hunt
Kyabram.
Your Mills have been a Perfect
Boon to Me.
Palmerston, via Wagga
September 4th, 1907
Mr. James Alston.
Dear Sir, —Your mills have been a
perfect boon to me. I have never tired of
praising them. I have never had one go
wrong, and they require very little atten-
tion. —Yours truly,
W. J. HULL.
Mill, 40ft. Tower, erected for Mr. McDougell,
Kynetoi).
STEEL.
Alston’s Btt. Double (Jrauk Steel Windmill, on 45ft.
Sleel Tower, pumping into 2,000 gallon Tank, on
Steel Angle Tank Stand. 30ft. high, for house-
hold requirements. Made and erected to the
order of P. Mclntyre, Ksq., Murdeduke.


A COMPLETE WATER SUPPLY.
An 8-ft. Double Crank Alston Patent Steel Windmill on a 50-ft. steel tower. Two 1000-gallon tanks
on a 35-ft. steel tank tower. Erected for W. Nicholl, Esq., Nicholl’s Hotel, Casterton, Victoria.


ANOTHER COMPLETE WATER SUPPLY.
A 10-ft. Alston’s Patent Double Crank Steel Windmill on a 50-ft. steel tower. Two 1000-gallon tanks
mounted on a 34-ft. steel tank tower. Erected lor G. Grant, Esq., Albion Hotel, Casterton.


The Alston Patent Steel Windmill in North Queensland
An 18ft.
Alston
Mill on
the Road
to Well
Site.
Out of a total of Forty Mills working here we find the Alston far the best.
Bective Estate, Tamworth, December 13th, 1907.
James Alston, Esq., Windmill Manufacturer, Maffra Street, South Melbourne, Vic.
Dear Sir,—The last consignment of four mills forwarded brings the total of
your mills at work on this property to 32, and as these vary in size from 10 to 20 feet
in diameter, according to the work they are required to perform. You will see we have
had a fair opportunity of testing their capabilities, and may state that where abundant
water is to be got by sinking, as is the case here, there need never-be any trouble in
furnishing a supply of water for stock in all seasons if these mills are employed. Out
of a total ol forty mills working here, we find the Alston far the best, it is simple,
durable and works in a light wind, and with the large supply tanks, we are never
without water.—Yours faithfully, Trustees in the Estate of James S. Vickery,
Per JAMES F. VICKERY,
Erecting
a 40ft.
Tower
for a
JBft. Alston
'Windmill.


The Alston Patent Steel Windmill in North Queensland
Putting on the Wheel of an ISft. Alston Mill.
Stood a Gale that Blew Down Other
Mills in the District.
“ Kirk Bank,” 190 High St., Malvenp Vic
4th July, 1907
James Alston, Esq.,
Moray Street, Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —We wish you to forward
us to “ Mahrigong,” c/o of the N.Z.L. &
M. Ag. Coy. Ltd., Townsville, Queensland,
as under: —One of your Alston 18ft. double
crank windmill with your latest improve-
ments,also strong steel tower (four posts)
30ft. high, and all complete : but without
pump, piping, or rods, as we have these on
the place. This will be the sixth Alston
mill we will have in Queensland On
“ Mahrigong ” we have 18ft. and 16ft mills
at work, and our manager reports that
they are the best mill that we can get,
having stood a gale that blew down other
mills in the district. He also says he lias
no trouble with them, or the only trouble
is in turning them off when the tanks are
full. —I am, dear Sir, your faithfully,
J. G- BROWNE,
for Browne Bros., Narada Downs, QTand.
Consider it the Best Bit of Improve-
ment I have put on my place.
Oakleigh, Jackson’s Waterholes,
April 2nd, 1907.
Mr. James Alston.
Dear Sir, —Enclosed please find cheque
for £l7 2s. 9d. for Dot Windmill. It has
given me every satisfaction, and I con-
sider it the best bit of improvement I
have put on my place.—l remain, yours
trulv, ' R. HERBERT.
Working Most Satisfactorily.
Cyanide Works, Mount Egerton,
13th May, 1907.
Mr. James Alston,
Manufacturer and Importer,
2-26 Maffra St., S. Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —The windmill which you sup-
plied us with at Pitfield is working most
satisfactorily. If you’ll forward account
to above address we’ll remit you cheque
in settlement of same. —Yours faithfully,
J. W. (iLOVER & CO.
Hoisting the Vane of an J Sft. Mill into
Position.


Going- Splendid Ever Since
One of Six JSft. Mills recently
erected for Messrs. Ramsay
Bros., Oondooroo, North Queens-
land, pumping from deep bore.
The 1 6 Mills you supplied
have all given satisfaction
Mileura Station,
Valgoo, 29/7/1907.
Mr. Jas. Alston,
226 Maffra St., South Melb.
Dear Sir, —Please forward
another of your OGft. geared
windmills with 20ft. tower,
addressed to us as above, care
of Dalgety a Co., Geraldton,
W.A., to forward on. This
will make the 15th mill you
have supplied us with, and
they have all given great
satisfaction.
We are,
Yours faithfully,
WALSH & SONS,
Alstonville,
July 25, 1907
Mr. H. Foster, Rous’ Mill
Dear Sir, —As you will see by
cheque, I have been waiting for
your bill for some time. We got
the mill started on the 23rd May,
and it has been going splendidly
ever since. 1 oil it about once a
week, and stop it when all the
tanks are full—that is all the at-
tention that it needs. It is an Bft.
mill, and is pumping about 50ft.
for sixty head of cattle. Find
cheque for the sum of £l5 11s. en-
Yours faithfully,
JOHN J. KING.
Another One of the Six.


In Use Over Nine Years, and
Still in good Working Order.
White Peak Station,
via Geraldton, W.A.,
2/8/1907.
James Alston, Esq.,
Melbourne
Dear Sir, —Please send me the
price of one of your 6ft. Dot Mills,
with 20ft. tower and pump, to raise
water about 30ft., also rods for same.
I have already purchased your mills,
and the same have given entire satis-
faction. The first one I bought from
you has been in use over nine years,
and is still in good working order,
which speaks well for the workman-
ship.
Yours sincerely
Still Another of the Six.
E. F. LACY.
The Team Going Out With Another.


Some of the Alston Patent Steel
Windmills in South Australia.
Sold and Erected by H. C. RICHARDS,
Adelaide.
ICft. Alston Has not Cost One Penny
Patent Back in Three Years.
Geared Mil], ~ T) . . ~ _ .
erected for Rippletiide ,” Modbury S.A.,
A. Nicasse, . 4th November, ’O7.
Edwards- El. C. Richards, Esq.,
town, South Elyth Street, Adelaide.
Australia, Dear Sir, —The Alston Bft.
irrigating Double-crank Windmill we pur-
three acres of chased from you in November,
garden and 1904, has given us entire satis-
lucerne. faction. We feel in a position to
speak of its faultless working, as
it has stood the test of three
c- , j'ears’ hard work, and during the
r ‘f'iii whole of the time it has not cost
j us one penny except for oil. The
Steel W tnd- mill works with the slightest wind,
milt on a iUtt. j u fact the writer has stood at the
Steel 1 ower, foot of the tower in an apparently
erected on a “ dead calm,” and yet the mill at
stone base- the top of the 30ft. tower has been
ment tor working steadily all the time. We
irrigating cannot speak too highly of this
near mill, and have not the slightest
Adelaide, hesitation in recommending it to
*'”* anyone.—Yours faithfully,
(Signed) JOHNSON BROS.
The mill referred to is the second
I erected in this State, and is
pumping into a 16,000 gallon stone
tank, and waters two acres of lu-
cerne besides 170 orange and lemon
A 6ft. Alston trees and garden, about five acres-
Patent Single ! n al ' height from water
Crank Wind- luvel to tank )s 4ott -
mill,pumping RICHARDS,
for stock
wate Jufm- . I Could Not Have Got
near Millicent
South a Better One.
Australia.
Park Farm, Booroorban, N.S.W.,
28th March, 1906.
To James Alston, Esq.,
Dear Sir, —The mill suits me;.
1 am sure I could not have got a
better mill. It is perfect in work-
. ing and adjusts itself in tire
r till strongest winds so well; and lias
oflm been the cause of vou selling two
Patent Mill, nii]ls t 0 my neighbors, and you
® r ££ te “A or will have an order soon for an-
tcu atVey ' other, through seeing my mill at
Salisbury, work. My tank contains 4000
yards.
tor stock Yours faithfully,
watering.
CHARLES LEE.


Some of the Alston Patent Steel
Windmills in South Australia.
Sold and Erected by H. C. RICHARDS,
Adelaide.
It Could Not Be Better.
Etheldale, Germauton,
May 10th, 1906.
Mr. ,T. Alston, Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —Enclosed please find
cheque for £4l in payment for
windmill. I trust same is correct.
I have given the mill a good trial
and am thoroughly satisfied with
it; it could not work better.
Following your instructions, I had
no trouble in erecting the mill.
Wishing you every success, I re-
main, yours faithfully,
li. HAMILTON.
Could Not Have Worked
Better.
Amphitheatre Station,
Amphitheatre, Victoria, July 2, ’O6
Mr. .las. Alston, Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —I am enclosing
cheque, value £2B 25., for mill pur-
chased from you in May, 1905, and
am pleased to say that it has
given me every satisfaction, and
could not have worked better.
Yours truly,
K. W. LAIDLAW.
Two Kaffirs, under my
directions, Erected the Mill.
“ Yarraweeah,” Brandfoot,
0.R.C., South Africa,
9th June, 1906.
Mr. James Alston,
South Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —The 12ft. 1903 mill I
ordered in 1904 has worked splen-
didly ever since. I irrigate with
it a garden of about two acres and
large orchard, and also have an
unlimited supply for stock and
household requirements. It is
greatly 7 admired, and I am sure
many others would get them if
you had an agent here with a
supply of mills on hand. Two
kaffi rs, under my direction, erected
the mill.
Yours faithfully,
1). E. COLE.
Kft. Patent
Back Geared
Alston Mill,
erected for
I. Wheaton,
Esq.,
Edwards-
town, S.A.,
irrigating
three acres.
20ft. Alston
Double Crank
Steel Wind-
mill on a 40ft.
tower, erected
for the South
Australian
Government
at Parrilla,
pumpingfrom
a here 270 ft.
deepfortown-
ship and dis-
trict supply.
J6ft. Double
Crank Alston
Patent Steel
Windmill,
erected for
R. Mietchfce,
Croydon W est
near Adelaide
S.A.,
irrigating five
acres of
vegetables
and lucerne.
7ft. Alston
Single Crank
Mill, erected
on a bush
tower for
R. Hayes,
Richmond
Homestead
Blocks, S.A.,
watering one
acre of
lucerne,


A Most Perfect Machine.
Geres, Carrathool,
Jan. 16th, 1906.
James Alston, Esq.,
X %L-:
Dear Sir, —In reference
to the windmill we pur-
chased from you some four
months ago, I wish to state
that the mill is giving the
greatest satisfaction, and
altogether is a most perfect
machine for the work it is
is intended for. Your 10ft.
mill is a sure permanent
worker. The only conserva-
tion we have for watering
stock is a trough that holds
■ ■
%
700 gals, of water; out of
that trough we have watered
500 sheep, 14 head of cattle,
and 14 head of horses, and
have never been short of
water one day since the mill
has been erected. There
has not been one dav since
Patent Steel Windmills and
40ft- Steel Towers, erected for the
South Australian Government for
township supplies, pumping from deep
bores-
I Oft. 1903 Mill pumping out bore 130 ft. deep, supplying F. W. Luxmore's Homestead,
Point Vincent.


the mill has been erected that it did not
fill this trough, besides keeping a small
earth tank full of water for fowls and pigs,
also a permanent supply for house and
garden. There are two or three more likely
buyers in this vicinity for windmills, and
for the benefit of purchaser and seller I
will do what lean to further your interests.
We are, yours truly,
KOOK BROS.
Astonishing; the Quantity of Water
these Little Mills will Draw.
“Hatfield,” Finley, N.S. Wales,
November Ist, 1907.
James Alston, Esq.,
2-26 Maffra Street, South Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —I have had the windmill
erected, and for the last six or seven days
it has been working more or less to my
entire satisfaction. It is astonishing the
quantity of water these little mills will
draw from a well, say, 125 ft. deep. When
1 gave you the order for this mill, I let a
contract to excavate a small tank of 1,000
yards. There is now sufficient water in
the tank to water about 4,000
sheep, and yet the water I r "
notice is daily increasing in
bulk, and taking into con-
sideration the hot dry weather
we are having, there must be
a great quantity of water lost
by evaporation, &c. Please find
cheque for £37, which 1 here-
with enclose.- Yours faithfully, ,
C. M. ATKINSON.
I Feel Sure That It Would
Work a Pomp Twice the
Size.
Wimmera, Richmond, N.Q.,
November 17th, 1906.
Mr. James Alston, Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —Would you kind-
ly send per post leather cub
and valve leather for 3iu. brass
pump which I purchased from
you at the Sydney Show in
1904. lam pleased" to say the
mill I bought then has gone
very satisfactory ever since,
and 1 feel sure that it would
work a pump twice the size.
Yours faithfully,
ROBT. HARDER.
12ft. Alston’s Patent Double-Crank Steel
Mill on 40ft. Steel Tower, erected for the
South Australian Government at Sherlock,
pumping from a bore 278 ft. deep.
7ft. Single-Crank Alston Mill, erected for F. W. Mant,
Boliver, South Australia, watering 500 sheep.


A Corner of the Foundry at the Alston Windmill Factory.
A Section of a 400-ton Stack of Steel Angles used in the construction of steel
towers for Alston Windmills.


A View of the Packing Shed at Factory.
A Stack of Milts and Towers ready for loading.


Has Never Once Got Out of Working Order.
Clear Oaks, Richmond.
November 4th, 1906.
Mr. James Alston
Dear Sir, —About 2 %, years ago I bought one of your Bft. geared windmills with
piping. 1 put it in a well 50ft. deep, and it has given every satisfaction, and
never once got out of working order. Now I want you to quote price for an Bft. mill
with Ihjin. piping and check valve, to raise water from a well 50ft, deep, delivered in
Sydney. If you think 1 Cm. piping too large, quote price for whatever you think
most suitable.
Yours sincerely,
JOSEPH ONUS
In the Trough Packing Shed,
A Perfect Wonder
Canary
Mr. Jas. Alston, Queen’s Bridge, Melbourne
Dear Sir, —The windmill I purchased fro
way it works, very little wind drives it, and
strong wind. It is one of the very best on
and, P. 0., via Pyramid Plill
14th February, 1901
ijn you last year is a perfect wonder; the
it is marvellous the way it regulates in a
the market. Anyone who has water to
i3ll Ullll V V 4 11VA • 11 I. UIIV V_/ 1 I II V IV I > t/V'Ot Ull I 1 I V mill l\> I . a » l 1 • ouv till-' imo " ‘ c ’
lift I would strongly advise them to see your mill before getting any other. If you
wish to make use of this letter you may do so.
Yours faithfully,
HENRY STIRLING.


Giving Every Satisfaction, and Working Splendidly.
Coronga Peak, Byrock, N.S.W., July 9th, 1905.
Mr. James Alston, Queen’s Bridge, South Melbourne.
Bear Sir, —I am in receipt of your letter of sth inst., advising despatch of two
brass couplings for pump rods, which have since come to hand. 1 have also to advise
that the 10ft. mill, 1903 pattern, supplied by you, is giving every satisfaction and
working splendidly.
Yours faithfully,
JAMES S. BEES,
Bft. Double Crank Alston Mill on 30ft. Steel Tower, pumping for house and garden.
Consider It The Best Mill For Its Size in the District.
Meramie Warren, K.S.AV.,
14th October, 1905
Mr. James Alston.
Bear Sir.—l have pleasure in reporting to you that I have erected the Bft.
windmill, supplied by you to Mr. H. C. Antill, and it is working splendidly, raising
the water some 40ft., and doing the work of one man. I consider it the best mill
for its size in this district. I find the tower both firm and strong, being well braced
and firmly anchored.
Yours faithfully,
EB. S. ANTILL.


12ft. Alston
Double-crank
Windmill on
a 60ft. Steel
T ower.
pumping out
of the River
Yatra, at
Toorafc, to
Tanfc on the
hill in the
distance.
12ft. Alston
Patent
D< üble-crank
Windmill,
40ft. Steel
Tower,on the
Mooki
springs
Station,
N.S.W.,
pumping
from a well
90ft. into four
5,000 gallon
tanks.
The tanks
are protected
from the sun
by a frame-
work shade
covered with
boughs.


A 12ft. Double-Crank Mill, erected at Little River,
for Mrs. McNaughton.
the wind ought to have an Alston mill, lie
the wind up top will lift the water. And I
farmyard.
Throws a Good Stream
in a Gentle Breeze.
(leelong Road, AVerribee,
May 31st, 1904.
Mr. Alston,
Dear Sir, —I have the
mill erected, and it is work-
ing splendidly. I had very
little trouble in raising the
stand and fixing the mill,
and it throws a good
stream of water in a gentle
breeze, considering it . .
draws about 18ft. and
forces it 30ft. to top of
tank.
Yours faithfully,
a. j. .McDonald.
Off She Went Like a
Motor Car.
Armidale, N.S.W.,
June 20th, 1904.
Mr. James Alston
Queen’s Bridge,
Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —I have erected
the Bft. “Dot”.mill, and
it is working splendidly.
With the help of my own
men I put the tower to-
gether and erected it, built
mill on, oiled it, and off
she went like a motorcar;
and I think any man on
the land who can raise
can sit down and smoke his pipe while
consider the mill looks very neat in a
Yours, faithfully,
GEQ. P. H. JACKES.
Cannot Be Improved Upon.
Spring Park,’ Essendon, November 28th, 1904.
Mr. J. Alston, Windmill Manufacturer, South Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —I have had three of your mills. They have all worked splendidly.,
especially the 14ft. mill of your latest patent. It lifts the water 30ft., and then
forces it a distance of 36 chains to a height of over 100 feet. It never goes wrong.
1 think your latest gear patent cannot be improved upon; it works very smoothly
and effectively. . , , .
Yours respectfully,
WILLIAM JOHNSON.


Erecting a 20ft. Alston Patent Double-Crank Windmill.
There are Over Twenty
of Your Mills on this
Estate.
AVerribee Park, AA’erribee,
December Ist, 1904.
Mr. James Alston,
South Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —1 have pleasure
in recommending your wind-
mills to anyone requiring a
good useful mill, and one that
will pump in a very light wind.
There are over twenty (20) of
your mills on this estate, and I
can honestly say that there has
not been one pound spent on
them for repairs this season.
All that is required is a little
attention and oil, together with
an occasional new leather. I
am confident in my own mind
that your mills are the best
value on the market at the
present time. I am talking
now from practical knowledge
and experience. The last 20ft.
Double Crank Action Mill
erected by you on the river
bank at the pumping station is
doing excellent work.
Yours truly,
GEO. T. CHIRNSIDE.
His Attorney, A. R. Hastie.}
I Was Never So Well Satisfied with Any Machine
“ The Mains,” Learmonth, November 23rd, 1003
Air. Alston
Dear Sir, —lam enclosing cheque for mill, etc., and hope you will get it all right.
The mill is working splendidly. I was never so well satisfied with any machine on
the farm, and am only sorry I did not get one sooner.
I am, yours truly,
AV. BREWSTER.
Has Worked Five Years, and is as Good as New.
Ambathala, Charleville, Queensland, February 12th, 1902.
Mr. James Alston, Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —It is now more than five years ago that you sent me one of your 6h>ft.
windmills. 1 had no trouble in erecting it, with the help of my stockman, on a pole
we brought in from the bush, and supported with four fencing wire stays. It has given
the greatest satisfaction, and abundance of water for house and small garden, and
never given the slightest trouble since it was put up. It goes as well as ever, and is
apparently, with the pump you also sent, as good as new. Hoping this may interest
you. My neighbours’ mills of other makes are a source of constant trouble.
Yours faithfully,
J. FRED. WILLIAMS.


We Wondered it You Had Found Out Perpetual Motion*
Netherby, June 11th, 1902.
Mr. J. Alston.
Dear Sir, —I have refrained from writing you with reference to 10-ft. geared
mill which we have had erected about five months, in order to give same a fair test,
and I have much pleasure in stating that the mill has given me every satisfaction ; in
fact, we are delighted with same. During the time it lias been erected our troughs
have only run dry twice, and we have about forty head of stock drinking at same.
1 roughs hold about 000 gallons. I have heard of numerous complaints in connection
with mills of other makers. The great feature (amongst many good ones) in connec-
tion with your geared mill is the little wind it takes to drive same; in fact, at times
we have wondered if the firm of Alston has found out the secret of perpetual motion.
Anyone in tin 1 district I may know of likely to require a windmill I shall have great
pleasure in recommending one of yours. —1 am, yours truly,
JAMES STAPLEDON.
A Complete Pumping Plant at Little River.
The Mill is Light, Yet Very Strong.
“ Hatfield,” Finley, N.S.W., July 31st, 1902.
Mr. James Alston, Moray Street, South Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —I have now given the little
fair trial. The mill is light, yet very strong
place. 1 am well satisfied, and very pleased
have felt the benefit of having an abundance
12ft. windmill I got of you last May a
, and quite ornamental to have about a
with the whole turnout. Now that we
of water about the place for stock, etc.,
etc., I feel surprised we have been so long without one. —Yours faithfully,
C. M. ATKINSON.


Driving the \ 2-inch Pomp with a Moderate Breeze.
Mr. James Alston, Melbourne. Ardmona, February IBth, 1901.
Dear Sir, —Re the 12ft. mill that we purchased from you last September, we are
pleased to be able to state that it is giving us complete satisfaction, driving the 12-in.
pump you sent with it at a good rate of speed even with a moderate breeze. We have
irrigated the (5-acre piece with the above plant three times during this summer, and.
have had no trouble with the mill. In conclusion, we may add that if we had invested
in a plant like this five years ago, we would have been more than recouped the cost, of
it during that time in the increased returns irom the six acres alone.
mrs faithfully,
VOI'NC BROS
Has Not Cost Me One
Single Penny
iragee Hotel * Dairy Farm
May 17th, 1901.
James Alston.
I have much pleasure in
bearing my testimony to the
efficiency of your Patent Iron
Windmills. The one 1 pur-
chased from you about three
years and six months ago has-
given me entire satisfaction.
In fact, during the time it has
been erected it has not cost me
one single penny or one
moment’s trouble or expense,
and it is likely to last for years
without repairs.
Yours truly,
HENRY W. POYXTZ.
I Find Very Little Wind Will Set The Mill Working.
Melrose, Numurkah, June 28th, 1901
Mr. Alston.
’ ’ Dear Sir,—The windmill I purchased from you some months ago has given me
entire satisfaction. Mv well is 104 ft. deep. 1 find very little wind will set the mill
working 1 have a mill of another maker on an underground tank working side by
side, and yours will work with very much less wind. I have not the least hesitation
in recommending your mill to anyone, who has to haul watei.
Yours faithfully
J. C. ROCKLIFF.


Strongly recommend Them to the Alston.
To Mr. J. Alston, Floradin, 30th June, 1901.
\[i answer to your enquiry about the Windmill X bought ftoxn you last year
whether it is good or bad ? 1 am pleased to tell you that it works to my entire
satisfaction ; it is some of the best laid out money 1 have ever spent on my farm. I
have been asked if it is the best Mill in the market; that 1 cannot say, but it they
are all as good as mine there is no doubt about them being first-class Mills. All the
Mills I have seen of your make are quite as good as mine. I raise the water from
mv well to the tank, 150 ft., and the Mill has pumped with a good wind 2,000 gallons
of water in twelve hours, which 1 think is very good. Ido a lot of irrigation in my
garden, as well as water all the stock I can carry on 320 acres of land. There have
been some very heavy gales since 1 put the Mill up. and it acted splendidly, not the
slightest mishap. Anyone in want of a Mill 1 can strongly recommend them to the
Alston. —Yours truly, WM. THOMSON.
A Modern Suburban Water Supply. The Most Profitable Improvement that can be
put on a Property. Supplying the House and Garden with a Bountiful
Supply at less than Quarter the Cost of City Rates.
Works Splendidly with a Very Light Wind.
Baala Creek, via Numurkah, July 6th, 11)01.
Mr. James Alston, Queen’s Bridge, Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —I have much pleasure in informing you that the 8-ft windmill I had
from you last April has given every satisfaction. It was very easy to erect, and works;
splendidly with a very light wind. In fact. I desire no better. —Yours respectfully,
• ‘ TUGS. HARRIS.


Small Mill Does the Work of a Steam Engine.
Malvern, Victoria, August 21st, 1901.
Mr. Alston, Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —The “Dot” Windmill you put up at my works has pumped the
"water out of my clay-hole. My engine has been pumping every time I worked it, and
there has not been a winter for twenty years that the water has been out. I had to
put the windmill off; no water. It would have paid me if I had given double as
much for it. It is a noted fact that it is the best money yet laid out on my clay-hole.
I have been able to get the very best grindings of clay from bottom of hole, which, as
every potter knows, is the best and purest, and saves the shifting of about from 8 to
10 feet from surface. I conclude by letting you know I am greatly pleased.
I remain, yours faithfully,
J. CAHTLIDGK.
Experimenting Ground at Rear of Factory.
Has Given Me Entire Satisfaction
Twickenham Street, Echuca East
Bth December, 1900
Mr. J. Alston
Sir, —The Bft. geared windmill that you sent me some two and a-half years ago
has given me entire satisfaction, as the time saved in raising water with it, instead
of the horseworks, as foimarly, has more than paid for it three times over, and I am
a firm advocate for them, they being both simple and effective.
Yours &c.,
, B. W. COCKS.


1 he Money Expended 1 hereon is the
Best Investment on the Place.
1
I
Legislative Assembly,
31st May, 1899.
Jas. Alston, Esq.
Dear Sir, — The windmill of yours which
has been in use on my place for the past
twelve months gives complete satisfaction.
It is a 12ft. wheel on 30ft. tower, with
pump and pipe, raising water
125ft., and during the past summer (one of
the driest ever experienced in the district)
watered 120 head of cattle, besides supply-
ing garden and household purposes, and
from my experience feel sure could safely
depend on mill watering 300 head of cattle.
After twelve months’ experience of the
mill I have no hesitation in stating that
the money expended thereon is the best
/v
/ Y>
! /X
!// V
u
Yours truly,
T. KENNEDY, Cobram.
—a /f'‘ [/ |\® yj\
v \i '/ ■
'o5pfy'
fM
14ft. Windmill
on 40ft. Steel Tower
rumping riant.
Ete. / r\
M. I ■ c A
The Best Mill I Have Ever
Seen.
| A
\
i A, / N / i \v \
a
Yarram 1
’ark, Watgania,
- i, \
\ Vickliffe Road,
9th May, 1899.
r'/
iX
v .. *
Mr. James Alston.
■ " ! - - ft'
1
Dear Sir, — I have much pleasure
in certifying to the excellence of the
8ft. geared Patent Windmill, with
.20ft. Tower supplied by you. During
the drought in ’98 this Mill supplied
■over 2,500 sheep, 30 head of cattle,
and some ponies, with water for over
three months It was pumping
from a well 30ft. deep into a supply
tank 10ft. high, and the slightest
wind seemed to make it go. 1 can
m i
y f
' £
1
[
* a it .
, . ... tern mat
recommend this class of Mill to any- .
one as being about the best Mill I % tu fM5, ton Fatent Double Crank Mill on 45ft-
have seen. Your patent Iron Troughs Steel Tower, supplying water for household
also gave everv satisfaction requirements at ’VIount Side Estate, The water
Yours truly,
E. J. SIMMONS.
Bft. Alston Patent Double Crank Mill on 45ft ■
Steel Tower, supplying water for household
requirements at Mount Side Estate. The water
is pumoed into 2,000 gallon Tank on Steel
Angle Tank Stand, iOft. high. To the order
of C. D. Mclntyre. Esq., Mount Side,
W inchelsea.


Bft. Mill, 50ft- Steel Tower, Elevated
Tank on Timber Tower.
Four of Your Windmills at
Work for Several Years.
Paligolet, Darlington,
June sth, 1899.
Mr. James Alston.
Dear Sir, —I have had four of your
Windmills at work for several years,
and they give me entire satisfaction.
One, a Oh*ft. geared Mill, on a 35ft.
tower, which delivers the water 52ft.
from bottom of well, into three
2,300 gallon tanks, and supplies
water for 2,200 sheep and 70 head
of cattle and horses, and it keeps a
good supply of water always in the
tanks. Other two direct acting (left.
Mills deliver the water about 40ft.
into tanks and keep a good supply of
water. One, the Dot Geared Mill,
6ft., delivers water 26ft. from bottom
of well, goes with the slightest wind ;
it is the cheapest Mill for the work
it does that I know of. I have much
pleasure in recommending your mills
to anyone who may require wind-
mills.
Yours truly,
JAMES MACONOCHIE.
The Best Investment I ever made.
Murrabit,
15th June, 1899.
Mr. J. Alston.
Dear Sir, —-It affords me verv great
pleasure to add my testimony in favour of
your Patent Iron Windmills. The Bft.
geared mill I purchased from you about
eighteen months ago lias given me every
satisfaction. A very slight breeze sets it in
motion, it runs smoothly and easily, and I
consider the amount expended in its pur-
chase was the best investment I ever made.
.jiiAß | I remain, yours truly,
' E. KIRKPATRICK.
Simple in construction.
Koorat, 15th July, 1899.
Mr. James Alston.
Dear Sir,-—We have used a number of
your Mills on our “Mount Koorat ” and
“Sister’s” Estates during the last few
vears, and we find them very satisfactory,
being simple in construction, easy to erect,
and requiring only ordinary attention to
make them do all the work that is claimed
for them.
Yours faithfully,
BLACK BROTHERS.
A 6)£ft. Mill supplying a suburban
residence with water.


Bft. Mill on 20ft. Tower, Supplying Water for Stock on Mr. J, MacGregor's
Dalmore Estate, Pafcenham, Victoria.
The Best Investment on the Farm.
Mr. Alston
Sir, —1 have very much pleasure in
windmills. The one you supplied to me c
satisfaction. It is a 32ft. mill. The well
supply of water for eighty head of dairy c
Wangoon, April 14th, 1896.
testifying to the excellent qualities of your
iver four years ago continues to give entire
is 95 feet deep, and there is an abundant
attle. Last year, when the dams in another
paddock went dry, I had nearly double that number; in fact, the mill is capable of
watering 250 head of stock It never goes out of order. Very little wind is sufficient
to drive it. When the tanks are full it stops. Altogether it is the best investment
on the farm, and I can confidently recommend any farmer to get one —I remain, Sir,,
yours truly, " JOHN GLASGOW.
Mr. Alston
Wangoon, October 6th, 1904.
Dear Sir, —I am pleased to state that the mill supplied by you twelve years ago
continues to give satisfaction. All it has cost in that time is a little oil once a fort-
night, and it is in perfect order yet.—Yours truly, JOHN GLASGOW.


10ft. Windmill Plant, erected for Mr. Malcolm Fraser, Shepparton.
It has Pumped Water 126 ft. for Six Years, and has not Cost a Farthing
for Repairs.
Mr. Alston. Stanhope, Rochester, February 22nd, 1907.
Dear Sir,—The 10ft. geared mill I purchased from you six years ago has given
me such great satisfaction that 1 feel quite justified in writing to you. 1 may say
that it has been going almost continuously ever since it was erected, pumping water
for stock and for irrigating the garden. The well is 110 ft. deep and the tanks 16ft.
126ft.,altogether, and up to the present it has given no trouble whatever, and has
not cost one farthing for repairs during that time, and I consider it hy far the best
monev spent on the farm, and nobody can estimate its value till they have one.
Wishing you the success your enterprise and workmanship deserves—l am, yours
faithfully, A. EDNEY.


10ft. Mill, 30ft. Steel Tower, erected for Mr. David Fraser, Shepparton.
Watered 400 Breeding Cows with Cah es at Foot through the Summer.
“ Tarrone,” Koroit, loth May, 1890.
Mr. James Alston.
Sir, —I have much pleasure in certifying to the general excellency of your
Patent Windmills. Those erected on this property have given great satisfaction, and
have proved thoroughly reliable in supplying the stock with clear water during the
summer months, even through a stretch of almost calm weather lasting as long as a
week. The latest improvements you have made in the mill are of great value,
especially the saving of wear and tear by the automatic stopping gear. I may state
that one mill, through the summer of 1889, watered 400 breeding cows with calves at
foot. With mills instead of tanks and dams the loss entailed by weak stock being
bogged is entirely done away with. —Yours truly, W. BOYD.


A Rural Pumping Outfit.
DON'T POOL AWAY YOUR TIME AT THE PI MP HANDLE.
Fooling it is for a man to attempt to raise water for stock or garden by means of
a hand pump. Windmills are to be obtained now so cheap that it is simply a folly-
rank folly—to waste one’s time at the pump handle. The windmill will not only do
the work cheaper, but it will do it better,
employed about the farm. The first cost
All that is required is to oil it occasionally
and the farmer’s time would be better
if a windmill is practically its only cost,
to keep it in working order for years. Mr.
James Alston, near Queen’s Bridge, Melbourne, is continually sending out these
small, cheap, and effective water supply plants, to the more wideawake of our farmers,
and the general adoption of these simple water-lifters must be only a matter of time.
Thousands of the Alston windmills are at work throughout the colonies, giving the
greatest satisfaction, and it seems a pity that their uses are not more generally
known. Some people think they cannot afford to buy one. But if the truth was
known to them, they cannot afford to be without one. The wind costs nothing.
6ft. Dot Mill, supplying Homestead of Mr. Donald Campbell, Millicent, S.A.


. CLIPPINGS..
DON’T FOOL AWAY YOUR TIME AT THE PUMP HANDLE
X/[y Friend, —Are you aware that you are constant!}' allow-
j ' ing a valuable power to mil to waste? While you
are at work or pleasure, and while you are asleep this
power is running to waste, past your door and over your
roof. The wind that rustles the leaves on your trees, that
raises the dust on your roads, that carries the thousands of
tons of merchandise in ships to our shores, the wind that
bears destruction in its course in the gales—is a most valuable
servant when used by means of a good windmill. This I claim
I can offer you to a better advantage than other firms in the
States. The experience of 20 years in the construction and
erection of Windmills —the application of modern science
and modern machinery in their construction —has made the
Alston Windmill the premier. The fact that other makers
have accepted my Mill as a standard and are copying same as
near as they dare speaks volumes in its favour. If you have
water to lift it will be to your advantage to give me a call or write me your require-
ments, when the benefits of my long experience shall be placed at your service.
EXTRACTS FROM LECTURE BY MR. POTTS TO DAIRYMEN.
WATER SUPPLY.
One of the greatest drawbacks we have to contend with in the production of
high-class butter and cheese is a bad supply of water for our cows, audit effects every
farmer, whether he devotes his energy to dairy farming or other forms of agriculture.
Not only is it a matter of concern to his herds, but it also includes himself, his wife
and family, and the products he raises. Failing an adequate supply from roofs, a well
is usually sunk. It is not possible to give adequate directions to all, as to where and
how far to sink for water. Surrounding geological formation, and other consider-
ations purely local, must be dealt with. However, a few good general rules may prove
useful to you. Never select a site for a well where it is likely to be contaminated to
any degree with surface or underground drainage, containing sewage or other
objectionable matter. Avoid, if possible, tapping a supply of water coming from a
mineral spring or formation containing lime, magnesium, or other similar salts.
These give a hardness to the water, which is readily recognised by the amount of soap
required to soften it. The deeper the well, the colder the water, and the less organic
life or bacteria, be they wholesome or otherwise. All wells should be so built round
as to avoid the possibility of any surface drainage or washings bv heavy rains getting
into them. These contaminate the water. It is a common sight to see a well covered
in and protected (?) from the sun and air—a cover for the production of slugs, spiders, and
all lo w forms of life. This is wrong. It should be open to the cleansing and hygienic
action of both. Sunlight and ventilation are essential. Cows are very susceptible to
bad water, and this is evidenced in the poor quantity of the milk. Dams, lagoons,
ponds, and other places where the water stands and is liable to become foul or stagnant
are objectionable. Milking cattle should not be permitted to drink foul water, and
the fresher it is the better. Even some slow streams do not suit. The water for a
dairy cow should be good enough for any man to drink. It will pay infinitely better
to sink rvells and erect windmills for a proper supply of water for milkers. This is
the best, and a running stream or creek next.
In the Alston mill the form of the sail is well calculated to give the greatest
driving power to the mill; each sail forms a strengthening piece to the whole,making
a solid wheel. Another special feature of the mill, differing from all others, is that the
axle does not revolve with the wheel, but is fixed to the main body of the mill. The
mill centre, the bearings, and the pinion which works the pump rods are cast in one
.piece, and revolve upon the axle in the same manner as a cart wheel turns upon its
axle. There are no keys to get loose, which reduces the risk of the mill getting out
of order, simplifies the construction, and reduces the number of wearing parts to the
very least. There is no more complication in the mechanism of this mill than there
is ip a cart wheel or farm gate.


Price [ist.
Alston’s Patent Steel Windmills « Towers
Size of
Wind wheel.
Single Crank
Single Crank
Single Crank.
Length Price With With With With
W eight op OF Mill 20ft. 30ft. 40ft. 50ft.
of Mill. g TROKE only. Tower. Tower. Tower. Tower.
Inches. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d.
hV>-§Vo 510 0 810 0 910 0 10 10 0 11 10 0
160 lbs. 5}4-G}4 510
180 lbs. 6 0
200 lbs. 5)4-6 6 10
10 Feet 400 lbs. 7-0 12 00161001800 20 0 0 22 0 0
bingle C rank.
Fe ®* I 185 lbs. 38 0 0 112 0013100 15 '0 0 116 10 0
Direct Acting.
8 Feet 920 lbs
Direct Acting,
n ?i F n t I : 250 lbs. I 5-7 10 0
Double Crank.
10 Feet
410 lbs, I 7-0 15 0
Double Crank
12 Feet
Double Crank
800 lbs, I 8-10 20 0
14 Feet
Double Crank
1200 lbs. 7-9-11-13 32 0
16 Feet
Double Crank.
1300 lbs.
7-9-11-13 35 0 0 145 0 0i 49 0 0 53 0 0
18 Feet
Double Crank.
45 0 0 59 0 0 63 10 0 68 10 0
14-16
1900 lbs.
20 Feet 200 0 lbs. 50 0064006810 0 73 10 0
Double Crank. 14-16
The Alston Steel Windmill Towers are towers of strength—made of the best
material that money can buy, and a large margin of weight is allowed in
their construction to insure them against the severest strains of the strongest
gales. They are made of black steel angles, painted with a waterproof paint,,
and all parts that bury in ground are galvanised.
Prices for Galvanised Towers (throughout) will be given on application.


JAMES ALSTON, Queen’s Bridge, South Melbourne.
PLEASE FILL IN AND RETt 'RN.
Particulars of Requirements of a Windmill
For Mr.
Address.
What is the depth of Well ?.
What is the depth of Water in the
Well ?
What height above surface level of
Well has the water to be lifted
into tank or reservoir ?
What distance from Well will _ the
tank be placed into which it is
intended to pump ?
What quantity of water do you require
lifted per day ?
What height will the bottom of
Windwheel require to be placed
to be above all obstructions to the
wind?
If you intend to pump from a Dam
or shallow Well, how far from
the edge of same can the Mill be
placed ?
Also, what is the depth of water in
the Dam or shallow Well ?
Please Note
The Mill and Pump may be set at a distance from the water to be
pumped, but the pump snould not be fixed i- ore than 25 feet above the
As the Windmill derives its power solely from the wind, it should be
placed above all obstructions to ensure its proper working. If near a
Wf building the wheel of the Mill should be placed not less than 8 or 10 teet
above the roof. . , , ~.
It is desirable to send me a rouch sketch plan showing the relative
position of the site for Mill, the Tanks, the Well, River or Dam from
which it is intended to pump.
Kindly make any further Remarks on other side.


I HE following are the sitzes of CYLINDER
PUMPS recommendted to be used with
the different sizes WINDMILLS at the
different depths
Diameter
of
Windwheel.
6 ft. “ Dot ”
8 ft.
° 1 V . 5 J • ■
6J ft. dire’t acting
6J ft. geared
8 ft. direct acting
8 ft. geared
8 ft. 1903 pattern
10 ft.
12 ft.
14 ft.
16 ft.
18 ft.
20 ft.
Pumping
12 ft.
Size | Gals,
of [ per
Pump. hour.
Pumping Pumpimg Pumping
25 ft. 50 ft.. 100 ft,
Size Gals. Size Gials. Size Gals,
of per of jper of per
Pump, hour Pump htour. Pump. hour.
2Jin. 150 2 in. 90
3 in. 250 2Jin. 150
2Jin. 180 2 in. 90
3 in. 270 2 in. 120
3 in. 220 2Jin. 120 2 in. 90
2Jin. 300 2Jin. 150 2 in. 100
3Jin. 350 2Jin. 200 2 in. 120
5 in. 750 3Jin. 400 2Jin. j 200
7 in. 1,900 5 in. I ~000 3Jin. 490
8 in. 3,000 6 in. 11.,500 4 in. 700
lOin. 4,500 6 in. |1,,700 4 in. 800
lOin. 5,000 7 in. 21,500 5 in. 1,100
12in. 6,000 lOin. 13’.,000 6 in. |1,500
I I I
Pumping
iso :
3 Jin.
3Jin.
4 in.
5 in.
umping
200 ft.
2Jin. 250
2Jin. 350
3 in. 400
3Jin. 500
4 in. 650
IN deciding as to what sice Windmill shcould be used, the local average
pressure of the wind must be taken into) consideration. A small mill
in a strong wind would do as much wcarfc as a larger one in a lighter
wind. Therefore, if the proposed site is mot favourable for a fair wind
pressure, it would be wisest to use a sice larger mill than mentioned in the
table to do the work. If the water has tto be forced into a tank some
distance from the well, allowance should hee made for friction in the pipes
and bends by using a sice larger mill than sset out on table.
In deciding the height of Tower to he used, allowance should be
j made for the anchoring same to the ground,, of about nine inches, to bury to
every ten feet of tower. The mill should Ihe placed above all obstructions.
If near a building, the bottom of windwheeil should be placed not less than
ten feet above the top of roof.
FURTHER PARTICULARS ON
APPLICATION.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
, n/bz-fR


