

ALTERATION OF
CONSTITUTION.
FEDERAL
REFERENDUMS.
The Case
FOR
and
AGAINST.
By Authority :
L. F. JOHNSTON, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.




COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
The Referendum (Constitution Alteration) Act 1906-1936,
REFERENDUMS-
to be taken on Saturday, 6th March, 1 937,
on the Proposed Laws —
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION (AVIATION) 1936
(the text of which appears on page 19 hereof)
and
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION (MARKETING) 1936
(the text of which appears on page 22 hereof)
PAMPHLET containing —
The ARGUMENTS IN FAVOUR OF the
Proposed Laws authorized by a majority of
the Members of both Houses of the Parliament
who voted for the Proposed Laws and desire to
forward such arguments;
and
The ARGUMENTS AGAINST the Proposed
Laws authorized by a majority of the Members
of both Houses of the Parliament who voted
against the Proposed Laws and desire to
forward such arguments.
The Arguments FOR .. . • Pages 5 to 1!
The Arguments AGAINST .. .. Pages 12 to 18
V. F. TURNER
Chief Electoral Officer for the Commonwealth.
Canberra,
30th December, 1936.




The Case FOR the Proposed Laws.
No. 1.-AVIATION.
An argument in favour of a proposed law for the amendment of the
Constitution, namely, the Constitution Alteration ( Aviation ) 1936.
PROPOSED AMENDMENT.
The proposed amendment of the Commonwealth Constitution is that a new
power should be conferred upon the Commonwealth Parliament to make laws "with
respect to “ air navigation and aircraft ”,
THE PURPOSE OF THE AMENDMENT.
The whole object of the amendment is to enable what is obviously a national
problem to be dealt with by the national Parliament. In 1900, when the Constitu-
tion was established, nobody except a few singularly prophetic authors had thought
of that conquest of the air with which we are now so familiar. You will, therefore,,
not find in the Constitution any express reference to aviation or aircraft at all.
To determine what the Commonwealth’s existing power is you have to discover
implications in words which have no express relation to flying at all. Thus it is
that the Commonwealth enjoys some control of flying for military purposes under
its Defence power; some further control over aircraft engaged in inter-State
trade and commerce by reason of its inter-State trade and commerce power, and, as
the High Court has recently decided in what is known as the Goya Henry Case,
some further control within the limits of any international air convention to which
the Commonwealth may be a party. But, except in the three respects which we
have indicated, the power to regulate aviation remains with the States. _ The
matter can be conveniently illustrated in this way. If John Jones, an aviator,
takes an aeroplane journey from Mildura to Melbourne or from Albury to Sydney,
or from any place in Australia to another place in the same State, his activities
cannot be regulated by the Commonwealth except to the limited extent to which
they may be touched'by some international convention. But if the same John
Jones continues his flight across the border into some other State, his operations
will then possess an inter-State character and he will be subject to Commonwealth
jurisdiction. If we were still living in the horse and buggy age this would not
matter since inter-State traffic would continue to be relatively trifling in volume
when compared with intra-State or local traffic. But, as the least airminded
pedestrian knows, aeroplanes have to-day achieved the most phenomenal speed
and may, in another few years, have made the existing records almost snail-like
in comparison. Doesn’t it seem to you quite ludicrous that an of
transport so flexible, so incapable of being kept within narrow geographical
limits, should be still, in many ways, subject to six different sets of laws in the
six different States of Australia and to a further set of Commonwealth laws?
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE AMENDMENT.
The development of the air is vital to the development of a great country like
Australia. Even to-day you may, by the kind offices of two air liners,
breakfast in Brisbane, transact some business and have lunch in Sydney, and take
your dinner at ease in Melbourne. Such mobility does not lend itself to the
limited treatment of State law. Moreover, for every Australian who flies to-day
there may well be fifty or a hundred flying in another twenty years. This will


mean more and more machines, more and more air routes, more and more need
for effective air regulations and strict supervision of flying machines of all sorts;
in a word, the orderly control on a nation-wide and uniform basis in the vital
interests of public safety of an essentially nation-wide means of communication
and trade.
NOT A PARTY ISSUE.
On the question of this amendment the parties in the lederal Parliament
were almost unanimous. This is not difficult to understand. On three occasions,
at the Premiers Conferences of 1920, 1929 and 1936, every State Government, in
substance, agreed with the necessity for increased Commonwealth power over this
important subject. In the Report of the Royal Commission on the Constitution
in l l 929 an amendment of the Commonwealth Constitution was recommended m
terms identical with those now presented for your approval. All the experts
who appeared before that Royal Commission were in favour of Federal control
of aviation. The reasons for this somewhat astonishing unanimity are not far
to seek The usefulness of an aeroplane to the public depends upon tlm accuia y
of its design, the skill and care of its manufacture, the efficiency of its maintenance,
constant supervision of its air-worthiness, the skill of its pilot, the adequacy oi
ground organization, the due observance of the rules of air navigation; m a word,
upon all those factors which, as one witness before the Royal Commission saiu,
“necessitate supervision of the product from the drawing-board, through ah the
process of manufacture to the finished article, and then throughout the hte of
the machine It is, on the face of it, absurd and dangerous tnat there should
be any limit set to the authority of the National Parliament to protect the
interests of the public of Australia at every stage and in relation to every factor.
THE OPPOSITION TO THE PROPOSAL.
Why then, you may ask, is there any opposition to this proposal? Let us
attempt to answer that question very briefly. In the first place, there arc some
people who will automatically oppose any suggestion that the National x amainent
should be given increased national powers. To them, national interests, national
safety national progress, all mean less than the observance of what they occasionally
describe as “ State rights ”. On this particular subject, as we have pointed out,
the State Governments themselves are not opponents of the amendment. Opposi-
tion of ffie kind we have referred to, therefore, can come only from those who have
failed to realize that we live in a world of vast growth and rapidly increasing
complexity, and that in such a world it is an act of great folly to regard any
Constitution as immutable or, for that matter, any system of government as eternal
In the second place, a few members of the Federal Parliament have put forward
the view that the passing of the amendment will be in some way injurious to
the interests of State railways. Their view is that as the aeroplane is a competitor
of the railway, and as the railway is controlled by the State, the aeroplane ai.so
should he subject to control by State law in the interests of transport co-ordination.
This view is readily intelligible but becomes less tenable cveiy year, as t e
aeroplane becomes faster State boundaries pass more rapidly beneath it in
the course of its lightning flight. It may very well he that some day both
Commonwealth and State Governments will require to make a concerted and
joint effort to deal with the transport tangle. But the real question which you
have to answer now, in 1937, is whether you think that is a good enough reason for
permitting the air-worthiness and efficiency and control of some aeroplanes to be
within the jurisdiction of the States while the air-worthiness and efficiency and
the control of others, flying through the same air, can be subjected to an entire.}
different set of rules by the Commonwealth.


CONCLUSION.
We submit to you that the irresistible conclusion is that Australia must arm
itself with a national power to deal with what is unquestionably a national
problem. An affirmative vote on this Referendum will indicate that Australia
desires such national power and realizes the enormous possibilities which _ res me
in the whole business of aviation. A negative vote will be a curious, and indeed
astonishing, announcement to the world that Australia regards this problem,
which most countries are thinking of not only nationally, but internationally, as.
a merely parochial one.
Federal regulation cf aviation means the greatest simplicity and
certainty, and the greatest safety in flying.
We urge you to vote YES.


No. 2.—MARKETING.
An argument in favour of a proposed law for the amendment of the
Constitution, namely, the Constitution Alteration (Marketing) 19SS.
PROPOSED AMENDMENT.
It is proposed to add to the Commonwealth Constitution a new Section 92a,
as follows: —
Marketing “ 92a. The provisions of the last preceding section shall not apply
iaws. to laws with respect to marketing made by, or under the authority of,
the Parliament in the exercise of any powers vested in the Parliament
by this Constitution.”
PRELIMINARY,
As the Constitution now stands, the Commonwealth Parliament has a number
of limited legislative powers, one of which is its power, contained in Section 51(1.),
to make laws with respect to “ Trade and commerce with other countries and
among the States”. As the result of certain decisions by the High Court of
Australia, it was, for a number of years, thought that this Commonweajth power
was not subject to the provisions of Section 92 of the Constitution. Section 92
is the section which provides that “trade, commerce and intercourse among the
States, whether by means of internal carriage or ocean navigation, shall be
absolutely free”. Consequently it appeared that if the Commonwealth Parliament
passed a" law which affected • trade and commerce between or among the States,
that law could quite validly interfere with the freedom of inter-State trade. Now
this may seem to you an uninteresting and even unimportant argument. If you
read on, however, you will find that, so far from being uninteresting or
unimportant, the problem which we have now opened up is of vital practical
significance to all Australia. To prove this, let us remind ourselves of a little
modern history.
A LITTLE HISTORY.
After the war, the production of dried fruit in Australia increased tremen-
dously. Many returned soldiers were settled on irrigated areas in South Australia,
Victoria and New South Wales, and later in Western Australia. Their efforts
literally bore fruit so successfully that Australia found itself with a large export-
able surplus. This surplus was sold abroad, principally in England, at prices
which were quite naturally largely controlled by the prices at which the competing
products of low-wage foreign countries could be sold. Australia is not a low-wage
country; its standards are high; its determination to preserve and raise these
standards is legitimate and strong. It was decided, therefore ; to establish a
system by which dried fruits sold in Australia should be sold at an Australian
price which would have some relation to Australian costs of production and
would, therefore, be a slight offset to the relatively low export prices. At first,
this scheme was established by State law, to the complete satisfaction _of each
of the three State Parliaments concerned, and of every political party in them.
Trouble then manifested itself. Constitutional flaws were found in the State
Acts. It was realized that if any producer could send his product into another
State without hindrance and there sell that product at the artificially created price,
he could, with the aid of others, so glut the market as to destroy fair price levels.
The realization of this fact led to the establishment of something which may now


be regarded as fundamental. There can be no effective control of marketing
of products in Australia unless there can be control of inter-State transactions
in those products.
By 1928, however, it had been realized, as a result of legal decisions, that no
State Parliament was in a position to exercise effective control over inter-State
trade. The established position at that time being that the Commonwealth
Parliament was not bound by Section 92, the States concerned eagerly turned
to the Commonwealth Government and asked that it should pass a law relating to
inter-State trade in dried fruits which would be supplementary to, and give
effect to, the State schemes of control already in operation. The Commonwealth
Government agreed, and the result was the Dried Fruits Act 1928. Until a few
months ago that Act was the salvation of the dried fruits grower and of the
large schemes of repatriation and land settlement existing in the dried fruit
areas. Then the blow fell. The Privy Council decided that the decisions of the
High Court which had been relied upon were wrong in law, and that the
Commonwealth Parliament had no power to pass an inter-State trade or commerce
law which interfered with the absolute freedom of that trade or commerce. From
the moment that decision was pronounced, the whole dried fruits marketing
scheme became invalid. Not only was the Commonwealth law unconstitutional,
but the State laws, which had depended upon the supplementary Commonwealth
law for their effectiveness, were reduced to equal futility.
This tragedy was not confined to the dried fruits grower. In the course of
time, dairy products had, on the model of dried fruits, been subjected to marketing
legislation, both State and Commonwealth; legislation which had proved essential
to the solvency of the dairy farmer and to that extent to the solvency of Australia,
which pays its debts abroad by means of the commodities it exports. Wheat had
also been brought under discussion and an analogous scheme worked out and
partially established for it in 1935. When the Privy Council spoke, all these
schemes toppled to the ground. The means of giving to the Australian farmer a
home-consumption price were destroyed. Alone of all sections of the Australian
community he was left unprotected to face the icy blasts of world competition.
A GAP IN THE CONSTITUTION.
Naturally we offer no criticism of the legal accuracy of the decision of the
Privy Council. That tribunal is composed of lawyers of the first rank, and it
discharged its legal duty to interpret the Australian Constitution with its usual
learning and impartiality. But the result of its interpretation must give every
Australian who values complete self-government in his own country food for
thought. If you desire to control the marketing of any commodity (eggs, butter,
wheat, fruit, or what you will), in a country like Australia, it is clear that you
must be in a position to control three elements: —
1. The marketing of that commodity within a State;
2. The inter-State marketing of that commodity;
3. The export marketing of that commodity.
Before Federation every Australian colony had full power to deal with all three.
Thus, the colony of South Australia could deal with wheat produced within its
own boundaries, wheat coming in from Victoria and wheat going to England.
But after Federation, as we now learn from the decision of the Privy Council,
the power to control the passage of any product from one State to another
substantially disappeared. If the Commonwealth cannot interfere with the free
movement of wheat from one State to another, and the State similarly cannot
interfere, it follows that we have achieved the remarkable result that the joint


powers of the Commonwealth and, say, the State of South Australia in 1937, are
less than the powers which were possessed by the colony of South Australia in
1899. Such an anomaly is inconsistent with adult nationhood. If Australia is
to be an equal partner in the British Commonwealth of Nations, there should
reside in some Parliament or Parliaments in Australia adequate power to deal
with every aspect of our national life.
A PAIR DEAL FOR THE FARMER.
We hope that it is not necessary to advance any laboured argument to support
the proposition that the Australian farmer is as much entitled to the Australian
standard of living as the Australian manufacturer or the Australian wage earner.
Our manufacturers have very properly been given the benefit of the Australian
tariff, which is designed to eliminate or reduce the effects of w r orld competition.
That tariff, by assisting the manufacturer, has assisted the growth of a nation.
The same tariff, acting concurrently with an enlightened system of wage-fixing
tribunals, has given to the Australian wage earner a standard of living which
nobody will regard as perfect but which could never have been achieved without
the special protective measures which we have mentioned, ihe sense of justice
and fair play which exists in the average Australian mind will surely make it
impossible for the manufacturer and the industrial wage earner to deny to the
farmer the protection which they themselves continue to enjoy.
THE MEANING OF THE AMENDMENT.
The amendment now put forward has been carefully drafted to achieve what
has been described above as a desirable result, and to go no further. It seeks
merely to give to the Commonwealth Parliament such a limited measure of
exemption from the provisions of Section 92 as will enable it to continue to do
what it did for the primary producer from 1828 onwards with the consent of
practically every Parliament and party in Australia. In substance, the meaning
of the amendment is that while the legislative powers of the Commonwealth, as
such, will remain exactly what they are to-day, any law made under them for
the purpose of establishing or supporting a marketing scheme will not be liable
to be declared invalid simply because in some way or other it interferes with
the absolute freedom of inter-State trade or commerce. If the amendment is
approved, marketing schemes will continue to involve the co-operation of Common-
wealth and State Parliaments, since the Commonwealth Parliament will continue
to have power to deal only with inter-State trade, and will continue to have no
power whatever to control trade and commerce within the boundaries of a State.
If you will appreciate this fact, you will at once understand that this amendment
is not one which is desigeed to aggrandize the Commonwealth at the expense of the
States, but is simply one to permit of a co-operation between Commonwealth and
States’ in the field of marketing which is at present, in the light of the Privy
Council’s decision, constitutionally impossible.
V7HAT ARE THE OPPONENTS SAYING?
The opponents of this amendment fall into five groups. We shall say only
a few words about each.
1. Those who frankly disapprove of the farmer getting a home-consumption
price for that portion of his product which is sold in Australia. Most of the
people in this group are those enjoying the benefit, so to speak, of a “home-
consumption price ” for their own goods or their _ own services. They are,
therefore, Mean People, and you should not be associated with them.


2. Those who (like some who opposed the amendment in the Commonwealth
Parliament) believe, or profess to believe, that the amendment does not go
far enough in the direction of increasing the powers of the Commonwealth
Parliament, and who demand that the Constitution should he so amended as to
confer full and unrestricted trade and commerce power on the Commonwealth.
Our answer to these people was, and is, that the people of Australia are being
asked to deal with a serious crisis in the history of Australian primary production,
and that we are not prepared to imperil a successful dealing with that crisis by
going further with our amendment than is absolutely necessary. In any event,
we say to the people in this group that there is some merit in the old adage that
“ half a loaf is better than no bread
3. Those who aver that Section 92 is “ the corner-stone of the Constitutional
Edifice Such an expression is admirable rhetoric, but it completely begs the
question. If the effect of Section 92 as it now stands and without the modification
suggested in our amendment is to perpetuate an injustice to a large and vital
section of the Australian population, then calling it a corner-stone will not obscure
the fact that it is simply an instrument of injustice. We refuse to believe that
injustice was ever designed by the founders of the Constitution to be an essential
ingredient in the great system of government which they were setting up. The
simple truth, of course, is that in 1900 nobody thought of organized marketing.
If the draftsmen of the Constitution had thought of it they would undoubtedly
have provided that some government in Australia should have power to deal
with it.
4. Those who believe that marketing schemes constitute an undue tax upon
the consumer. But who is the consumer? Sometimes he is the farmer himself,
and the farmer wants this amendment badly. Sometimes he is the dweller in
the cities. If you are a metropolitan member of the group known vaguely as
“ consumers ” ask yourself whether you are getting any advantage from the
special Australian standards that have been set up in relation to wages or
conditions of work or hours of employment or tariffs or bounties. If you are,
how can you decently say that the man on the land is to be denied any share
in what you enjoy?
5. Those who say that the Commonwealth Parliament can easily and
adequately assist the farmer by paying him a bounty either out of the proceeds
of general taxation or out of the proceeds of some special excise, like the Flour
Tax. Strictly speaking, the Common-wealth Parliament can do this if its members
will vote for the necessary legislation. But do you, the fair minded people of
Australia, think that, by making the farmer dependent upon the annual financial
whim of Parliament yoii will be giving him that security and stability which,
for two generations, you have thought proper to give to the manufacturer and
the industrialist. If all he had to go on was an annual bounty, no Australian
manufacturer could extend his business or lay plans for the future. Industrial
development would entirely cease. Yet it is seriously suggested by some people
(probably at their wits ends to find some excuse for opposing this much needed
Constitutional change) that what is seen to be necessary for secondary industry
is quite unnecessary for primary industry. Could absurdity or unfairness go
further ?
CONCLUSION.
May we in conclusion point out again that there is here no invasion of
State Rights. The States cannot legislate for the Australian marketing of goods
without the help of the Commonwealth, and that help cannot be given unless
this amendment is carried.
We urge that you take a national step forward and vote YES.


The Case AGAINST the Proposed Laws.
No. 1.-AVIATION.
The case against the proposal of the Lyons Government to take control of
aviation away from the States has been stated by a number of eminent authorities.
Mr. R. G. Menzies, K.C., Commonwealth Attorney-General : —“ The problem
to-day is largely concerned with road and rail transport but to-morrow it will
undoubtedly include air transport. lam opposed to the proposal to transfer full
power over aviation to the Commonwealth ”.
That was Mr. Menzies speaking as Acting Premier and Minister for Railways
for the State of Victoria on 28th May, 1934, in opposing a similar proposal to
that which he is now putting before the people. Why has Mr. Menzies changed?
In 1934 his brief was on behalf of the States. He then knew that to transfer
aviation powers would endanger the finances of every State Government.
201. MENZIES’ “ YES-NO ” POLICY.
In 1934 Mr. Menzies declared: —“ If the whole power to legislate with respect
to aviation is to be in the hands of the Commonwealth then to that extent the
States are entirely dependent on the legislation which the Commonwealth
Parliament may choose to pass in future. The States might find themselves
dealing with intra-State transport by road and rail but the Commonwealth may
be dealing with it by air ”.
The Lyons Government plans to hand over air transport to the Imperial
Airways Trust. A “Yes ” vote will enable the Commonwealth to give absolute
preference to air transport. It will mean dearer freights, and dearer fares for
the people of every State in the Commonwealth. Mr. Menzies knew that, when
he was Minister for Railways in Victoria. That is why he opposed the transfer
of aviation powers in 1934. What has made him change his attitude?
The revenue lost will not go to the Commonwealth Treasury. It will go
into the coffers of the overseas Imperial Air Trust. This same Imperial Air
Trust has already become a sinister influence in the political life of this country.
It is significant that the change of front by the Lyons Government has only taken
place since high executives of the Imperial Air Trust visited Australia. Again—
why?
SIR JOHN LATHAM OPPOSES ALSO.
Sir John Latham, now Chief Justice of the High Court, was
in the Lyons Government in 1934 .(the same Mr. Lyons), and agreed that the
powers now requested should not be handed over. He said:—
“ I can say for the present Commonwealth Government that we have no wish to insert
our fingers into a machine with so many sharp knives revolving in so many different
directions. That is to say we have no intention of interfering with the transport problem.
Our view is that it would be better for the States to control this matter.”
That is the position at present, But the Lyons Government now wishes
to grab control for the Commonwealth. Mr. Menzies has replaced Sir John
Latham. Every elector should demand to know what is behind this sudden
move.


The present proposal is not put forward for the purpose of permitting the
Commonwealth to become a competitor with the State Railway Services, # but,
what is infinitely worse, it is designed to make the Imperial Air Trust, with
privately subscribed capital, a serious rival of the State services. Any loss upon
whose workings is your responsibility.
STATES THAT SUPPORTED “ NO ” CASE.
In February, 1934, a similar proposal to that now before the people was
defeated by a majority of the States at a Premiers’ Conference. The States
knew that the proposal was loaded.
Mr. A. G. Manning, Attorney-General for New South Wales: —
“ I have considered the possibility of the Commonwealth becoming a com-
petitor with the State Railway services and it is a subject the importance of
which cannot be overlooked ”.
Mr. P. Collier, then Premier of Western Australia: —
Mr. Collier agreed that complete control of aviation in the hands of the
Commonwealth would lead to a conflict with the State Governments with respect
to transport facilities.
Mr. S. W. Jeffries, Attorney-General for South Australia: —
“We suggest that this additional power should b© applicable only to traffic
regulations, licensing of pilots, structural inspection of aeroplanes and such
matters which concern the safety of the public. We wish, however, to retain
power to control transport within the State ”.
Mr. A. G. Ogilvie, K.C., Premier of Tasmania: —
Mr. Ogilvie, on behalf of the Tasmanian Government has asked the people
of Tasmania to vote “No”. Mr. Ogilvie realizes that a “Yes” vote will
endanger the livelihoods of thousands of workers.
RAIL EXPERTS REALIZE DANGER OF “ YES ” VOTE.
The Commissioner for Railways in New. South Wales, Mr. Hartigan, declared
at Goulburn on 25th September, 1936; —
“ If it had not been for the Transport Co-ordination Act the Tramways might not have
been in existence to-day. We may soon have a serious competitor in the aeroplane—a
competitor that cannot be treated lightly ”.
Mr. F. C. Garside, Assistant Commissioner for Railways in New South Wales
at Werris Creek on 7th November, said: —
“ I am of the opinion that the best interests of the community w r ould be served by
co-ordinating rail and air services and in view of recent rapid development the time to
consider it is now ”,
The Lyons Government is anxious that the States should not co-ordinate
rail and air services. The Imperial Air Trust is also opposed to co-ordination.
That is the reason for the “ Yes ” campaign.
WHAT A “ YES ” VOTE WOULD MEAN.
(1) It would wreck the State railway systems.
You, the electors, have £311,486,688 invested in railway equipment upon
which interest must be paid.
There are 79,145 employees in the State Railways. Their livelihoods are at
stake.
In the United States air traffic is ousting rail transport and the Federal
Transport Co-ordination Act has been passed to prevent bankruptcy of railways.


Mr. Eastman, United States Co-ordinator of Transport, states that nationali-
zation of air transport has become necessary.
The Lyons Government is giving a monopoly to an Imperial Air Trust.
That would wreck the railways.
(2) It would bankrupt country towns.
Business in country towns benefits directly from the purchasing power of
railway workers.
Aviation transport, as in America, would divert purchasing power from
country centres.
Loss of railway purchasing power would be disastrous to the country business
man.
It would mean loss of employment in the towns.
(3) It would mean dearer freights and dearer food.
The State railway systems could not withstand any serious drain upon their
revenue owing to loss to air transport companies,
Reduced revenues could only be met by higher rates. Such increases would be
passed on to the consumer in the form of dearer food.
(4) It would pave the way for Imperial Air Trust.
The Lyons Government left Kiugsford Smith, Ulm and other famous
Australian aviators on the beach.
The Lyons Government has agreed with Downing Street that the Australian
air monopoly should pass to the Imperial Airways Limited.
Once the States forfeited their right to regulate air transport the Imperial
Trust could obtain a complete monopoly and the States would be powerless.
Every time a Lyons Minister goes to Downing-street, Australia loses.
Why?
THE REFERENDUM IS HOT NECESSARY.
The Lyons Government has no case for a Referendum.
(1) It still has authority to enforce all international regulations governing
aviation.
(2) Since the Goya Henry case it has introduced new regulations which are
working satisfactorily.
(3) It has not asked the States for their assistance to overcome any difficulties.
(4) Safety regulations are in full force.
(5) The Government already possesses full powers on all matters of defence —
including aviation.
(6) The expenditure on this referendum is not necessary and there are far
more important problems requiring urgent attention.
(7) The Lyons Government has treated the smaller States shabbily. It
refuses to amend the Constitution to deal with major issues.
Why is it so anxious to amend it on an issue which will not benefit
Australia and can be used to create financial havoc?
The present position is absolutely safe for the people of Australia. A
“No ” vote will not alter that position. A “ Yes ” vote exposes Australia
to the dangers shown above.
For the welfare of Australia —vote NO.


No. 2.—MARKETING.
VOTE NO!
1. This is not “only a lawyer’s question”. You are vitally concerned. A
u Yes ” majority will give a few people power to tax the many without their
consent. Monopolies, wielding legal authority and controlling credit, will coerce
small farmers. Farm employees will get nothing. Wage-earners will see the
value of their wages shrink as prices are artificially forced up.
WHO PAYS THE INCREASED PEICES?
2. Prices do matter. Many consumers are not wage-earners. Many wage-
earners have no work. Many Who have work are sweated. Many workers are
nor awarded the basic wage. To-day the basic Avage buys less than 30 years ago.
The Avage-earner and the consumer lose ground all the time. If “Yes’" wins,
they will be still worse off.
3. But where part of the increased cost is passed on, Avho pays it? The
producer of other commodities. The wheat price rises. This hits the butter
producer. Up goes his price. Now the wheat-grower feels it. Up goes his price.
The “ unsheltered ” export industries suffer most. Every passing-on stops Avith
them. They have no home market to tax. They sell at the world’s price. If
Yes“ wins, some producers will be taxed to enrich others.
WHAT DOES IT MEAN?
4. The important words of Section 92 are “absolutely free”. They mean
what they say. Nothing can lawfully hinder the free moA T ement over State frontiers
of Australian products. As Sir Isaac Isaacs has said “Australia is one indivisible
country for the purposes of trade, commerce and intercourse between Australians
5. The important word of the amendment is “Marketing”. Just what that
means no one knows. But it appears to cover every form of control thad has
yet been used—fixing quotas and setting up pools based on compulsory acquisition
or upon some indirect means of compulsion. ( See the opinion of Mr. Fullagar,
K.C., and Professor Bailey quoted at page 1453 of Hansard .) The people are
not asked to extend the Commonwealth’s legislative powers as set out in Section
51. The Commonwealth Parliament will have no power in relation to fixing
quotas, setting up compulsory pools, and protecting consumers, farm-labourers
or minority producers. All the Commonwealth is asking is authority, in spite
of Section 92, to stop goods crossing a State frontier—in or out.
6. Take dried fruits. The growers tried to force up the home price. They
tried to create an artificial scarcity —by combining to sell overseas as much as
possible and as cheaply as they could, and to compensate themselves at the expense
of the Australian consumer. Without legal power to coerce producers who
might prefer to sell as and where they like, the scheme could not work. The
States gave this coercive power. But the States could not stop a grower sending
his fruit from one State to another and so defeating the artificial scarcity.
At this point, in 1928, the Commonwealth first took a hand. It passed a law


preventing the free movement of fruit over State boundaries. In doing this it
relied upon McArthur’s case. This held that Section 92 did not mean what it
said: that although the States could not stop trade at their borders, the Common-
wealth could. Though in Sir John Latham’s words this “decision occasioned
great surprise ”, the Bruce-Page Government acted upon it. But now McArthur’s
case is dead. The decision in James v. the Commonwealth has killed it.
WHY—AND WHAT DID THE PRIVY COUNCIL DECIDE?
7. “ Yes ” men appeal to prejudice. “ Put back the law ” they say “ where it
was before the Privy Council spoke. Isn’t the High Court good enough for us?”
The Lyons Government did not think this last year. It could have legislated
to prevent appeals on Section 92 going to the Privy Council. As the High
Court said, this could be done under Section 74 of the Constitution. The
Government chose to have the Privy Council as the second string to its how.
It feared that the High Court would overrule McArthur’s case. If that had
happened, the Government itself would have appealed. The High Court judgment
in James’s case made this plain. Judges Evatt and McTiernan say —“A clear
majority of the present High Court is of opinion that the Commonwealth is
bound by Section 92, But it has been made quite clear to the Court during the
argument that, whatever decision is given, the unsuccessful party will appeal
for a final determination of the question before the Privy Council ” (52
Commonwealth Law Reports, page 602). In these circumstances the High Court
did not upset McArthur’s case. The majority thought it wrong but preferred
that the Privy Council should say so.
8. The Privy Council did what the High Court itself would have done. The
Privy Council agreed with the majority of the present High Court, with the
framers of the Constitution and with the judges who first interpreted the
Constitution. “ Absolutely free ” means “ absolutely free ” —and continues to
mean that unless the majority vote “ Yes ”. Keep that freedom by voting “No ”.
PRESERVE A FUNDAMENTAL LIBERTY.
9. “ But ” says the Government “ if Parliament cannot prohibit interstate free
trade, there is a ‘gap’ in the Constitution”. If Section 92 is a “gap” so are
Sections 28, 41, 80 and 116. The first secures us an election at least every three
years. The second protects universal suffrage. The third ensures trial by jury.
The last guarantees religious equality. All these so-called “gaps” are constitu-
tional safeguards. Section 92 is one of them. Preserve it by voting “No ”.
10. When the Commonwealth legislated for dried fruits, it did not protect the
consumer or the farm employee or the minority growers. It merely fastened
together a collection of State laws. Food control laws are like a crazy quilt, the
States applying the material and the Commonwealth finding the thread.
WHAT DOES THE U.A.P. REALLY THINK?
11. The Lyons Government is now a Composite Government. Last Parliament
it had a clear U.A.P. majority. All its ministers were from the U.A.P. The
U.A.P. believes that Section 92 should bind the Commonwealth. In 1933 the
Lyons Government was anxious to get McArthur’s case overruled. Sir Robert
Garran was sent to persuade the High Court that Section 92 binds the Common-
wealth {see Vizzard’s case, 50 Commonwealth Law Reports). The case was
disposed of by another point; but if the High Court had accepted the Government’s
argument, food control would have ended in 1933. But now many U.A.P.
members sitting behind the Government are silent. If they said what they
thought, they would probably repeat what Mr. Menzies said in 1930.


12. In August, 1930, Mr. Menzies was in the Victorian Assembly. He spoke
upon the Marketing of Primary Products Bill. His speech will be found in Volume
182 of the Victorian Hansard. “I am prepared” he said “to oppose this
legislation in season and out of season, on any clause and at any time”. He was
as good as his word. “It is ludicrous ” said he “to suggest that you can put
up the prices of important commodities of the kind I have mentionad without
reducing what the ordinary consumer will be able to buy week by week with his
wages or salary
MR. MENZIES GOES TO SCHOOL.
13. Mr. Menzies’ colleagues have not his sense of humour. The Victorian Bill
proposed to set up growers’ pools to control every kind of primary product. On
24th September, 1936, Mr. Ihorby—Assistant Minister for Commerce—said that
the policy of the Lyons Government is “ embodied ” in the following resolution
by Mr. Corser ( Hansard, page 502) “ That in the opinion of this House it is
desirable that constitutional alterations be provided to permit of the organization
of primary producers on an Australian basis with complete sectional control
of internal and external marketing of each primary product, such control to be
exercised exclusively by the organized producers of each commodity enabling them
to speak with one voice and authority in regard to any arrangement that may
be deemed by them necessary to conserve their own interests”. Control of each
primary product! Exclusive control by the producers! Control through organi-
zations speaking with one voice and authority! Control to effect any arrangement
which producers may deem necessary to conserve producers’ interests!
Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.
14. No trade union was ever given power to fix the price of labour. Tribunals
regulate wages and hours. No tribunals control the prices of food. Let us
hear Mr. Menzies on this. In his 1930 speech he said:—“l have yet to learn
that when a scheme is promulgated under which one man is to profit and another
to lose, the only man who has a right to a say in the matter is the person who is
going to make the profit ”. Mr. Menzies learns quickly. Out of office in 1930
he supported a proposal to control prices. In office in 1936 he opposed it. Those
who wish to follow him will prefer as a guide Mr. Menzies free in 1930, to Mr.
Menzies conscript in 1936.
15. Of course, the Government has not yet tried Mr. Corser’s full plan. But
the power has been in doubt. Give them the power beyond any doubt and you
remove the brake upon their policy. Remember that it does not affect primary
products only. Boots and clothes can be controlled as well as raisins and butter,
lor the schemes there will be no responsibility. The States escape responsibility
under cover of “ producers’ self-government ”. Producers are entitled to govern
themselves but not to govern other people. “ Who ” asked Mr. Menzies in 1930
will control these 1 self-governing units ’ ? ”.
WHY SLIGHT THE AUSTRALIAN MARKET?
16. We support full Commonwealth power over marketing. Tha Lyons
Government denies that this national problem demands a national solution—
equitably treating all concerned in production and consumption—producer,
employee and consumer. The producer must not regard the Australian market as a
secondary consideration. As the Commonwealth Statistician on 19th February,
1929, told the Industrial Peace Conference, we normally consume most of our own
6938.-2


food. From 1917 to 1927 we consumed 64 per cent, of our agricultural produce, and
80 per cent, of our dairy produce. Remember that “ agricultural produce ”
includes wheat and dried fruits. Improve the position of the wage-earner aud
you extend the Australian market. Reject this proposal and you dear the way
for a national and equitable solution of our marketing problems.
WHITTLING AWAY DEMOCRACY.
17. Once again democracy is attacked. There is never a bold, frontal attack.
That would alarm us and we should unhesitatingly resist. But little by little
control over the things that matter is stolen from the people. By delegating to
unrepresentative, irresponsible authorities the reality of power our “ elected
persons ” evade responsibility. Here, under the cloak of technical and ambiguous
language, upon the pretext of an emergency is another attempt to whittle away our
self-government. Those who believe that responsibility should accompany power
will vote “No ”.
18. Protect the freedom which the Constitution guarantees: Defend the
“ Seamless Garment ” of Australian unity: Resist every attack upon
Democracy.
VOTE NO!
(The majority authorizing this argument comprises Members of the
House of Representatives only.)


The Proposed Law relating to AVIATION is as follows: —
A Proposed Law to alter the Constitution with
respect to AIR NAVIGATION AND
AIRCRAFT.
BE it enacted by the King’s Most Excellent Majesty, the Senate,
and the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of
Australia, with the approval of the electors, as required by the
Constitution, as follows:
1. This Act may be cited as Constitution Alteration ( Aviation )
1936.
2. The Constitution is altered by inserting in section fifty-one
after paragraph (vi.) the following paragraph:—
“(vi.A.) Air navigation and aircraft:
Preamble
Short title.
Air navigation
and aircraft.
STATEMENT showing Section 31 of the Con-
stitution, with the proposed new paragraph
(vi.A.) —in black type —inserted.
51. The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution, have
power to make laws for the peace, order and good government of
the Commonwealth with respect to: —
(i.) Trade and commerce with other countries, and among the
States:
(ii.) Taxation; hut so as not to discriminate between States
or parts of States:
(iii.) Bounties on the production or export of goods, but so
that such bounties shall be uniform throughout the
Commonwealth:
(iv.) Borrowing money on the public credit of the Common-
wealth :
(v.) Postal, telegraphic, telephonic, and other like services:
(vi.) The naval and military defence of the Commonwealth
and of the several States, and the control of the forces
to execute and maintain the laws of the Common-
wealth ;
(vi.A.) Air navigation and aircraft:
(vii.) Lighthouses, lightships, beacons and buoys:
(viii.) Astronomical and meteorological observations:
(ix.) Quarantine:
(x.) Fisheries in Australian waters beyond territorial limits:
(xi.) Census and statistics:
(xii.) Currency, coinage, and legal tender:
(xiii.) Banking, other than State banking; also State banking
extending beyond the limits of the State concerned,
the incorporation of banks, and the issue of paper
money:
Legislative
powers of the
Parliament.


(xiv.) Insurance, other than State insurance; also State
insurance extending beyond the limits of the State
concerned:
(xv.) Weights and measures:
(xvi.) Bills of exchange and promissory notes:
(xvii.) Bankruptcy and insolvency;
(xviii.) Copyrights, patents of inventions and designs, and trade
marks:
(xix.) Naturalization and aliens:
(xx.) Foreign corporations, and trading or financial corpora-
tions formed within the limits of the Commonwealth:
(xxi.) Marriage:
(xxii.) Divorce and matrimonial causes; and in relation thereto,
parental rights, and the custody and guardianship of
infants ;
(xxiii.) Invalid and old-age pensions:
(xxiv.) The service and execution throughout the Commonwealth
of the civil and criminal process and the judgments
of the courts of the States:
(xxv.) The recognition throughout the Commonwealth of the
laws, the public Acts and records, and the judicial
proceedings of the States:
(xxvi.) The people of any race, other than the aboriginal race in
any State, for whom it is deemed necessary to make
special laws:
(xxvii.) Immigration and emigration:
(xxviii.) The influx of criminals:
(xxix.) External affairs;
(xxx.) The relations of the Commonwealth with the islands of
the Pacific:
(xxxi.) The acquisition of property on just terms from any State
or person for any purpose in respect of which the
Parliament has power to make laws;
(xxxii.) The control of railways with respect to transport for the
naval and military purposes of the Commonwealth:
(xxxiii.) The acquisition, with the consent of a State, of any
railways of the State on terms arranged between the
Commonwealth and the State:
(xxxiv.) Eailway construction and extension in any State with
the consent of that State:
(xxxv.) Conciliation and arbitration for the prevention and
settlement of industrial disputes extending beyond the
limits of any one State:
(xxxvi.) Matters in respect of which this Constitution makes
provision until the Parliament otherwise provides:
(xxxvii.) Matters referred to the Parliament of the Common-
wealth by the Parliament or Parliaments of any State
or States, but so that the law shall extend only to
States by whose Parliaments the matter is referred, or
which afterwards adopt the law;


(xxxviii.) The exercise within the Commonwealth at the request
or with the concurrence of the Parliaments of all the
States directly concerned, of any power which can at
the establishment of this Constitution be exercised only
by the Parliament of the United Kingdom or by the
Federal Council of Australasia:
(xxxix.) Matters incidental to the execution of any power vested
by this Constitution in the Parliament or in either
House thereof, or in the Government of the Common-
wealth, or in the Federal Judicature, or in any depart-
ment or officer of the Commonwealth.


The Proposed Law relating to MARKETING is as follows:
A Proposed Law to alter the Constitution with
respect to MARKETING.
BE it enacted by the King’s Most Excellent Majesty, the Senate,
and the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth af
Australia, with the approval of the electors, as required by the
Constitution, as follows: —
1. This Act may be cited as Constitution Alteration
( Marketing ) 1936.
2. The Constitution is altered by inserting after section
ninety-two the following section: —
“ 92a. The provisions of the last preceding section shall not
apply to laws with respect to marketing made by, or under the
authority of, the Parliament in the exercise of any powers vested in
the Parliament by this Constitution.”.
Pr»a*sW<?.
Sh*rt MUe.
Marketing l*w«.
STATEMENT showing Section 92 of the Con-
stitution, with the proposed new section 92A.
in black type —added.
92. On the imposition of uniform duties of customs, trade, com-
merce, and intercourse among' the States, whether bj means o
internal carriage or ocean navigation, shall be absolutely free.
But notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, goods
imported before the imposition of uniform duties of customs into
any State, or into any Colony which, whilst the goods remain therein,
becomes a State, shall, on thence passing into another State within
two years after the imposition of such duties, be liable to any duty
chargeable on the importation of such goods into the Commonwealth,
less any duty paid in respect of the goods on their importation.
92a. The provisions of the last preceding section shall not
apply to laws with respect to marketing made by, or under the
authority of, the Parliament in the exercise of any powers vested
in the Parliament by this Constitution.
Trade withhi Mio
Commonwealth
to t* free
Wurkßtlnq Irws.


At the Feferendmns ©®di voter should indicate his
vole separately in relation te EACH Proposed Law as
follows:
(а) If HE APPROVES of the Proposed law —by
placing the number 1 in the square opposite the
word 4 Yes ”, sod by placing the number 2 in the
square opposite the word “No ” ; or
(б) If HE DOES NOT APPROVE of the Proposed
Law —fey placing the number 1 in die square
opposite the word “No ”, and bv placing the
number 2 in the square opposite the word “Yes.”


L. F. JOHNSTON.
Commonwealth Government
Printer, Canberra, F.C.T.
