

AMATIVENESS;
OR,
EVILS AND REMEDIES OF EXCESSIVE AND
PERVERTED SENSUALITY;
INCLUDING
WARNING AND ADVICE TO THE MARRIED AND SINGLE.
BY O. S. FOWLER.
PREFACE.
Every human function is perfect when exercised m harmony with its
primitive constitution; but when perverted, occasions suffering pro-
portionate to the happiness its right exercise centers. . . ,
P Pre-eminently is this true of the sexual function. It was instituted
to pSpeTuate oAr race, but has been perverted to a depraved use, more,
nrobablv, than any other faculty, and occasioned more misery.
P It is high time its ravages were staid; but who is there to come up to
* help of the Lord’ and of humanity against this b-ighting curse (r
nulmt—that ordained watch-tower of morality and exponent of sin, is
comparatively mute concerning it, at least, touching its worst f Ql ™ s
Tn omission utterly unjustifiable. The medical profession whose duty
it is to sound the alarm, and diffuse knowledge, is almost silent, yet
pockets the wages of sins and sufferings which it should obviate. Law-
yers live on the fees rendered by this propensity, more, probably, than
from any other crime perpetrated by our fallen nature ; besides being
infinitely above (? below) attempting its remedy. Ihe moralist is
Sentandthe philanthropist is dumb. Most of the self-constituted
watchmen on the walls of the public safety, are dead dogs, seeming
afraid to touch this vile thing. A mere moiety attempt to arrest this
Sy cuS, yet the aggregate effort is
TxirPfl with the evil. Nor can more be said of the mode. Hut not lor
Eie None beard the lion in hie den. Of the few recent produc-
tions on this subject, none have effectually probed this festeung bile t
its core or anointed it with an effectual remedy. Nor can this be dona
but by understanding the primitive constitution of this element, and
,h ?SnlVy o «r t 1 - »
its ravages. It points out the remedy ; and the Author claims to be its
humhle g expositor. Long has he seen and sighed over this monster dis-
ease and wretchedness. He hoped to have escaped both the woe of
silence and the odium of utterance by its effectual exposition from some
other Quarter. But he has seen nothing which did full justice to this
subject. Not that he would disparage the earlier efforts of that noble
orrritln in this cause Dr. Woodward, from whom he so often quotes.
He was almost the first among distinguished men to open the battery
of pacts upon this enemy of all good. Above all praise are his noble
efforts inXs forlorn cause. But his ‘Hints to the Young,’.have not
sufficiently explained the rationale of the injury sensuality inflicts, or
attempted to reach more than a single form of lust. Nor, even if it bad,
would'this work be uncalled tor ; because our thoughtless youth need
‘ line upon line,’ and the married require ' precep upon precept. Th*
work may find its way where las has not gone. I acts, &c., to 1 oung


Men,’ we cordially recommend. They have done good ; yet they occupy
ground less comprehensive and scientific than that assumed here.
Mrs. Gove has awakened attention to this sin and shame of too many of
her own sex ; yet we endeavour to grapple this goring monster ‘ by the
horns,’ and expose the why and how of this frightful evil. To dissem-
inate knowledge is our object. Information is the required preven-
tive. Our misguided youth dream not that they are sinning, nor sus-
pect the direful consequences that impend, till their ruin is well nigh
complete—till their bark of life is stranded on the quicksands of in-
flamed passion, or dashed to atoms by the billows of lust in one or
other of its forms.
The married, too, need warning. Thinking themselves entitled to a
perfect glut of indulgence in wedlock, they little suspect it as the cause
of their physical diseases or mental alienations. Nor has the warning
voice probably ever before been raised in their ears.
Let not the erring think that we come to scorn or deride. We proffer
pity for your folly, and ointment for your self-inflicted wounds. So
far from casting reproaches, we would put you again on the feet of self-
respect, and the road of restoration.
Those who object to the presentation of this subject, or think it un-
called for, err in judgment. They may sit supinely if they will, and
even bark, but shall neither hinder us from snatching from the fires of
lust those half consumed brands within our reach, nor wrest from us
the joys of doing good, or the thanks of suffering humanity.
INTRODUCTION.
‘The crying sin of our race,’ says our author, ‘ in every age, and in
almost every nation under heaven, has been excessive or unlawful in-
dulgence in sexual pleasures.’ lie gives a melancholy account of the
{irevalence of this form of evil in his own country. It would appear from
lis statements, that in some cities in America, this evil prevails to an
alarming extent. Even public prostitution is now no longer unknown in
the cities of the United States: while private or select prostitution is ex-
ceedingly common. He tells us, that even pretended widows, who profess
to live by industry, and who are members of churches, visit places of
worship only to mark and entrap men by their looks and smiles, and
other wily arts. He speaks of solitary sexual crime, or self-abuse, as
still more prevalent: as pervading, in fact, every nook and corner of
the land. He assures us, that the remarks which he makes on the pre-
valence of this form of crime, are grounded on facts which have come to
liis own knowledge. His professional practice and extensive observation,
he says, give him access to sources of information, and to individual
histories, which extort the reluctant declaration, that people in general
have not the faintest conception of the fearful extent to which this vice
is practised.
It would seem from some of our author’s statements, that certain
forms of sexual vice prevail to a greater extent in the United States,
than in our own country, especially self-abuse. The facts ho gives on
this subject appear almost incredible. He assures us, that if we were
to catechise every boy we met on this subject, we should find, that
nine in every ton, from eleven years old and upwards, and that one-half
of those from seven to eleven, are guilty of this unnatural crime: and
that of those still older, the proportion is still greater. He assures us,
that he himself has known hundreds ruined by this crime before they
were thirteen years of age. He says that the schools are especially
nurseries of this vice: and that it is often practised by scholars in
companies. He assures us, that in making these statements, he speaks
only what he knows, and testifies what he has seen.
In reply to those that think that nothing should be published on this
subject, for fear of corrupting the minds of youth, he quotes the words


of Dr. Woodward, who says. * I have never conversed with a lad twelve
years of age who did not know all about the practice, and understand
the language commonly used to describe it.’ Our author assures us,
that this Dr. Woodward is a cautious and discreet man, and one of the
best authorities that he could quote. Dr. Woodward has published a
work on the subject, entitled, Hints to the Young. W. C. Woodbridge,
the celebrated advocate of education in the United States, speaks of
this solitary vice as * spreading desolation throughout our schools anti
families, unnoticed and unknown.’ Mr. E. M. R. Wells, a distinguished
teacher in Boston, gives similar testimony to the prevalence and mis-
chievous influence of this vice. The higher schools and colleges, Mr.
Fowler says, are more afflicted with this vice, than even the lower
schools.
The following letter was written by Mr, Fowler in 1841, to the author
of Facts and important Information for Young Men.
‘ Philadelphia, Sept. 8, 1841.
‘Mr. G.—Dear Sir ; Your letter and book are received. lam right
glad you have taken hold of this subject. Much as reform is needed in
other matters, no reform—no, not even that in reference to alcoholic
drinks—is demanded half so much as reform in reference to this soli-
tary vice. To this conclusion my practice, which, you know, has not
been limited, and my means of information, which have been varied
and extensive, have led me reluctantly but inevitably. And what is
most deplorable, unlike other forms of vice which prey upon the coarse
and the vulgar, this is even more likely to attack those of tine feelings
and ardent temperaments, and otherwise unblemished morals. They are
not aware that this is one of the greatest sins they can commit.
I have of late seen this evil to be so alarming, and its ravages on
the intellect, and morals, and health, so fearful, that I have contem-
plated preparing a work on the phrenological organ of Amativeness, to
consist mainly of the physiological, intellectual, and moral effects of
this vice ; but I rejoice that you are before me in this matter.
* I could give you a vast number of facts that have come to my know-
ledge. A few days ago, a young man, who had been a gentleman, called
upon me, in a state of mind and body truly wretched—the mere wreck
of a man. His head was affected and painful, the back part of it in
particular; and his mind was literally distracted with those horrors
which this indulgence always induces. His mind was flighty, his appe-
tite destroyed, and the tones of his voice the very personification of
grief. Both his head and his conversation gave evidence of superior
talents in ruins. Fifty times in the course of an hour, did he exclaim,
*0 my God, what shall Ido ! lam mad, I know it. What can Ido V
‘ In laying open his case, in order that I might give him advice, he
mentioned his having been much addicted to this habit, and would often
bring his hands to these parts —an invariable sign of their being in a
fevered state, either by secret indulgence, or indulgence with the other
sex. His anxiety was, to escape the mad-house and regain self-controul;
because on this lie had always prided himself. On inquiring of him as
to the prevalence of this evil, he said that nine-tenths of his acquain-
tances w T ere given to it.
* On inquiring of one of the physicians in Brockley Alms House,
Ph ;i adelphia, as to the number of its inmates who were brought into
the insane department by its instrumentality, he started at once upon
his feet, and spoke with great energy and emphasis of its influence in
inducing derangement, and narrated several very affecting cases. _ In
my visit to that institution, a few days ago, I saw several insane patients
who were brought there by this vice, and whose hands were tied, to
prevent self-pollution.
‘lf it is facts that you want, I assure you they exist in abundance
in every degree of aggravation. Let the young be warned, for most of
its victims fall a prey to it ignorantly. Let us have light, especially la
3
INTRODUCTION'.


our institutions of learning ; because there, the absence of exercise, the
seclusion from female society, and the character of their studies,
especially those that cultivate (vitiate) the imagination, all tend to in-
duce and increase the evil.’
The following is from Dr. Alcott
‘We believe that there is not a town in New England whose bills of
mortality, from year to year, are not greatly increased by this fearful
and wide wasting scourge. We believe that a majority of our diseases
and infirmities—our aches, our pains, and our deformities too—after the
age of puberty, are either induced or aggravated in this way.
The following is from Dr. Snow, of Boston :
« Self-pollution is undoubtedly one of the most common causes of ill
health that can be found among the young men of this country, hrom
the observations that I have been able to make, I am satisfied that the
practice is almost universal. Boys commence it at an early age ; and
the habit once formed, like that of intemperance, becomes almost un-
conquerable. In boarding schools and colleges, it obtains oftentimes
without an exception. Hence the many sickly students, and the many
young men of the most brilliant and promising talents, who have
broken their constitutions and ruined their health, as it is said, by
hard study!’
Mr. Fowler adds, that even females do not escape the infection of this
horrible vice. He says,— . , .
‘ They may be less infected, yet women, young and modest, are dying
by thousands of consumption, of female complaints, of nervous or
spinal affections, of general debility, and of other ostensible complaints
innumerable, and some of insanity, caused solely by this practice. Un
this point, Dr. Woodward again thus speaks out :
< About two years ago, a young woman, aged twenty-two years, came
under my care, in a state of the worst form of insanity, She was
furious, noisy, filthy, and, apparently, nearly reduced to idiocy, She
had been in this condition many months, and continued so for some
time while with me. She was pale and bloodless, had hut lutle appe-
tite, frequently rejected her food, and was reduced in flesh and strength.
Finding her one day more calm than usual, I hinted to her the subject of
masturbation [self-pollution], and informed her that, if she practised it,
she could not get well —if she abandoned it, she might. She did not deny
the charge, and promised to follow my advice strictly. In two or three
weeks from this time, she was perceptibly better ; her mind improved
as her health gained ; and both were much better in the course of a few
weeks The recovery was very rapid in this case. At the end of six
months she had excellent health, was quite fleshy, and became perfectly
sane : and has continued so, so far as we have known, to this time.
‘ Not long since, a case of periodical insanity came under roy obser-
vation, the subject of which was a young lady. The disease had existed
ten years without any material change. Suspecting that masturbation
was the cause, I directed her mother to ascertain, if possible, and inform
me. Some months after, I received intelligence that my patient was
better, and that my suspicions of the habit were confirmed by the o
servation of her friends. The case is not without hope, although of so
long standing, if the cause is removed.
‘Three or four similar cases have been under my care recently, m
which individuals of the same sex have been reduced to the same de-
graded state. They are now, and will coutinue to be while life remains,
a melancholy spectacle of human misery, without mind, without deli-
cacy mx modesty, constantly harassed by the most ungovernable passion,
and under the influence of propensities excited to morbid activity by a
vice far more prevalent than has been supposed. A large proportion ®
the * bed-ridden’ cases, of which there are so many in the community,
will be found to have originated in this cause.’
4
INTRODUCTION.


Mrs. Gove, in her Lectures to Ladies on Anatomy and Physiology-
subjects which every woman should understand thus discourses con-
cerning its prevalence among her sex: —
‘ About eight years since, my mind was awakened to examine this sub-
iect by the perusal of a medical work that described the effects of this
vice when practised by females. This was the first intimation I had
that the vice existed among our sex. Since that time I have had muc i
evidence that it is fearfully common among them.
< There is reason to believe that, in nine cases out of ten, those un-
happy females who are tenants of houses of ill-fame, have been victims
of this vice in the first place. Were this the peculiar vice of the low
and vulgar, there might be more excuse for the apathy and false deli-
cacy that pervade the community respecting it. But it invades all
ranks. Professed Christians are among its victims.
‘Our boarding and day schools are sources of untold mischief. A
short time since, two sisters, ladies of the first respectability, informed
me that, when very young, they were put to a female boarding-school,
where this vice prevailed, and the practice was explained to them.
They were blessed with parents who were willing to converse with and
warn their children, and they escaped the contamination.
One of her correspondents writes that she ‘ became addicted to solitary
vice about the age of nine years.’ ‘ Facts and important Information
to Young Women, &c., a work which we recommend cordially, details,
many instances illustrative of the prevalence of this vice.
‘My own practice and observation,’ says Fowler, as to its prevalenco
confirm and considerably exceed these statements _ I have one infallible
test which I often applv without the knowledge of its subjects, and theie-
by detect many who little suspect me of knowing their secret practices.
Called to prescribe for a young woman, and knowing from this sign what
caused her complaint, I sought an interview with_ her‘mother, to whom
I disclosed my suspicions. She said she thought her daughter innocent,
but knew she had slept much with an elder girl who was addicted to it.
I asked her what she knew concerning its prevalence. She said a girl
in her neighbourhood had just died from its effects, and that the female
operatives in a neighbouring factory practised it almost universal y ; as
she learned from one of them. She named other factories in which it
was hardlv less prevalent. I know little girls below their teens, who
thus abuse themselves, and, from my application of the test named
above, am constrained to believe the practice alarmingly extensive
among the fairest portion of creation ! 1 sicken at the thought. Uh .
woman, ‘who hath thus bewitched you that ye should thus depait
from the paths of delicacy, and health, and happiness .
‘ But I forbear, simply alleging that the plague JS all around and all
among us. None of our daughters or sons are safe, however carefully
we may guard them, till we cast out ‘ this accursed’ plague from
among us. And being a common enemy, it can be extirpated only by
community of effort. Single hands can do but little. Nothing but com-
bined, concentrated, and long continued exertion, can avert the wide-
spread and insidious contagion. Come, up and be doing,
his race every lover of his own dear children. Even for calces, it
on no other account, gird yourselves to this disagreeable but mdispen*
sable work of philanthropy and reform, till we duve this common
enemv from our midst.’ , .
We have reason to believe, that this form of crime prevails, to a con-
siderable extent, in our own country. We shall not enter into the par-
ticulars on which our painful belief is grounded ; but we know enough
to satisfy us that instruction on this subject is exceedingly necessary.
We have little or no apprehension that the work we are laying befoie ie
public will prove injurious to any : while we have on the other hand
the fullest assurance that it will prove beneficial to multitudes. ■ «
unhappy creatures who indulge in this vice, have not in genera., the
6
INTKODBCTION.


least idea of the injury they are doing themselves, either in body or in
mind ; and we see no way by w r hich they can be instructed but
through the press. Preachers will not meddle with such matters ; and
parents are unwilling to speak on the subject to their children ; and
even the public lecturer is afraid to notice it, The press alone remains,
and great indeed would be our guilt, should we refuse to employ the
press in such a work, while so many are suffering so grievously for
want of the instruction which we are able to impart.
We expect to be abused by some for laying this work before the pub-
lic : but we are justified in our own mind ; and we have no doubt, that
if our readers will give the subject due consideration, they will see, in
the end, that we rather deserve their thanks for what we are doing,
than their rebukes.
CHAPTER I.
EFFECTS.
Happiness is the one constitutional object and proouct of every function
of our being. Yet every function is capable of a painful action. Nor are
these two forms or products of the action of our respective functions*
chance comers and goers, but all are governed by inflexible law. That
function is necessarily pleasureahle which harmonizes with the prim-
itive constitution, and fulfils the legitimate design, of the faculty
exercised, and is normal or natural. That action of any function is
painful which violates or departs from its normal, primitive institution
or end, and is called abnormal which means unnatural.
Of course, these natural .axioms apply with significant emphasis to
the element before us. To fulfil the legitimate ends for which this was
ordained, is to be happy in its exercise ; not to fulfil it, and especially
to depart from it, is to suffer in and by its exercise. Now excessive
indulgence, promiscuous, and matrimonial, and solitary, violate this
function and cause pain. We come now to consider the evils conse-
quent on these its perversions.
To enumerate the tithe of the evils consequent on excessive sexual
whether promiscuous, or matrimonial, or solitary indulgence, all one in
substance, would fill a world with volumes, as it already has with woes,
and keep it full. We shall develops, first, some of its destruction of
health, and generation of physical evils and sufferings ; next, its destruc-
tion of the moral tone or stamina, and its production of propensity and
depravity in forms without number, and aggravating beyond descrip-
tion. To enumerate a few.
IT INJURES HEALTH.
To dwell here on the importance of health as a means of enjoyment,
and its essentiality to every form and degree of happiness, would take
us too far from our subject. Suffice it to say, that whatever impairs
the health, or engenders disease, is proportionally fatal to happiness,
and prolific of suffering.
Now, that excessive sexual indulgence injures the health, and in a
pre-eminent degree, appears from the following, among its other effects.
IT EXHAUSTS THE BODY.
Those at all acquainted, experimentally, with the nature of this func-
tion, need not be told that few things are equally exhausting ; and
readers of ‘Love and Parentage’ will remember our exposition of the
cause, namely, it was instituted to transmit the entire mentality and
physiology of parents to offspring ; and since the latter take on them the
existing conditions of the former, and these only, it becomes absolutely
necessary that this function should call forth, in a powerful degree of
action, all the mental, all the physical, functions of parents, as the
means of their transmission to offspring. Now this intense and simul-


taneous action of all the functions of our nature in this indulgence, of
course proportionally exhausts. A hard day’s work does not equally
prostrate and fatigue. The Fallow buck, after this passion has subsided,
is so tamed down by exhaustion, that he can be approached and almost
caught by hand.
IT ENFEEBLES THE MIND.
Frequent indulgence in any of its forms, will run dowm, and run out,
any one, of either sex. Those who would write, or speak, or study,
must either forego excessive indulgence, or intellectual exertion, or else
die. Powerful constitutions will stand an immense drain before they
finally break, but terrible indeed is the result.
Mere animal temperaments are less injured, because, by supposition,
their vitality is abundant, and its drain by other functions is slight;
nor do they enjoy this function as do those more highly orgrnizcd, and
hence are proportionally less exhausted. Such live, to be sure ; so do
brutes. Carnal, grovelling, sensual, low-lived animals, Jiving mainly
on a single pleasure, when their nature serves up so many ! Let such
revel in lust, because capable of little else. But (hose highly organized
must partake rarely, else it will excite to destruction, and proportion-
ally exhaust. Besides, they can expend their less abundant, perhaps
deficient, vitality to better advantage. Frequent indulgence must
necessarily be lustful, and therefore debasing to their higher feelings.
Those whose intellectuality and morality are feeble, may spend their
surplus vitality on this passion with less injury, yet cannot cultivate
their higher faculties while they thus revel in Just. Let such remain
all animal and revel on. But for those who have already too little
vitality to sustain their higher faculties —for such to rob all their nobler,
god-like elements of vitality, just to spend it on a sensual, debasing
passion, is physical, mental, and moral suicide. Red-faced, bloated,
coarse-grained, gouty subjects—it matters little what becomes of them.
About as well go to Texas and be shot as any way, or stay and kill them -
selves, because worth little any how. But for light-built, fine-skinned,
fine-haired, spare-built, sharp-featured, light-eyed persons of either sex,
to indulge, even in wedlock, as often as the moon quarters, is gradual but
effectual destruction of both soul and body ; because they already work
off vitality faster than their feeble vital apparatus manufactures it. This
excess of expenditure over supply, occasions their sharpness. A sur-
plus vitality would render them fleshy. Now to add the most, powerful
drain of all to their already spare supply, must sooner or later, accord-
ing to their vigour of constitution, render them bankrupts of life.
It will not kill you outright. It will first weaken the garrison of
life, and thus open the door for disease to come in and attack the
weakest part, and complete the work of death in the name of other dis-
eases. As bees, by swarming too freely leave portions of their hive un-
protected, and thus allow the deposit of those destructive worms wliich
a full supply of bees would have prevented, so this indulgence drains
the system of vitality, and of course leaves the weaker organs especially
debilitated, till disease, thus invited, sets in, destroys the feebler organs,
and ends in death ; attributed, however, to consumption, dyspepsia,
gravel, nervous, heart, and other affections, according as this or that
organ is naturally most feeble, but rarely to its true cause. Ask any
medical man, conversant with diseases having this origin, and he will
tell you that no other cause of disease equals this, either as to number,
or aggravation, or difficulty of cure. Hear Dr. Woodward on this
point- . .
« That the evil is wide-spread and exceedingly injurious, cannot be
denied or doubted. A great number of the ills which come upon the
young, at and after the age of puberty, arise from this habit, persisted
in, so as to waste the vital energies and enervate the physical and
mental powers of man.
« Nature designs that this drain upon the system should be reserved
7
IT ENFEEBLES THE MIND.


to mature age, and even then that it be made but sparingly. Sturdy
manhood, in all its vigour, loses its energy and bends under the too
frequent expenditure of this important secretion ; and no age or con-
dition will protect a man from the danger of unlimited indulgence,
though legally and naturally exercised.
‘ In the young, however, its influence is much more seriously felt;
and even those who have indulged so cautiously as not to break down
the health or the mind, cannot know how much their physical energy,
mental vigour, and moral purity, have been affected by the indul-
gence.
*No cause is more influential in producing insanity. The records of
the institutions give an appalling catalogue of cases attributed to it.'
A doctor in Brooklyn thus writes to the author of * Facts, <fec., to
Young Men.’
Brooklyn , Dec. 19, 1840.
* In my own practice, I think I have seen the following results of
masturbation* —involuntary emissions, prostration of strength, paralysis
of the limbs, hysteria, epilepsy, strange nervous affections, dyspepsia,
hypochondria, spinal disease, pain and weakness in the back and limbs,
costiveness —and, in fine, the long and dismal array of gastric, enteric,
nervous and spinal affections, that are so complicated and difficult to
manage.’
Dr. J. A. Brown, of Providence, writes to the same author as fol-
lows :
‘ That it is an evil of vast magnitude, no physician who has been in
the habit of tracing effects to causes, can for a moment doubt. I, sir,
could tell of hundreds who labour under incurable maladies, produced
by this practice ; and I do not believe that I have a better faculty for
obtaining such information than many others, who are, and will be,
dumb on this subject.’
Another physician writes that ‘ seven-eights of all the bodily ills and
diseases of the people, are caused, or greatly aggravated, by self-abuse,
or excessive legal indulgence.’
Nor is this all, nor the worst. The loss of this secretion is the loss
of vitality itself. We saw, in Love and Parentage, that it embodied the
very quintessence of parentage, in order thereby to impart this quintes-
sense of parents to offspring. To dwell on this point, however impor-
tant, is unnecessary, because so evident. Now it is a well known prin-
ciple of physiology, that when any organ is especially over-taxed, it
robs the other parts of the system of vitality to supply its own tax-
ation. Thus, overloading the stomach causes mental lassitude and
muscular debility, because the stomach withdraws energy from the
brain, the muscles, and wherever it can find it, to enable it to discharge
its burden. Now overtax this secretion, and it withdraws energy from
all the other-parts to re-supply the draft. Doing this frequently, di-
verts the energies permanently from the other organs to this. As those
who get into the habit of being bled frequently, soon get full of blood,
because they overtax the blood manufacturing energies by this drain,
so that an undue amount of vitality goes to blood; so the frequent
withdrawal of this condensed vital secretion, causes a drain from all the
other parts and organs to re-supply it, and thus frequent indulgence
causes the very life’s blood to run out thereat. Well has Wisdom
said, ‘ Give not thy stkenoth unto women.’ And he who does, must
expect to be weak every where else.
IT INFLAMES THB WHOLE SYSTEM.
But, great as is the evil, especially to growing youth, consequent on
this drain of vitality, that inflammation, always and necessarily conse-
quent on excessive indulgence in all its forms, is much more prolific of
* Self-abuse,


Loth disease and suffering. Whoever indulges often, and weekly is
often, in wedlock or out of it, will experience an unnatural heat, ten-
sion, tenderness, irritation, swelling, perhaps soreness, in these organs,
of course resulting from their inflammation.
The immediate cause of this inflammation is two-fold. First, intense
action, in its very nature, engenders inflammation, and what action
more intense and inflammatory than this? Secondly, in order to ensure
intense action in this function, so as thereby highly to endow its pro-
duct, a larger amount of nervous tissue is found ramified upon those parts
of this apparatus more immediately brought into action, than upon al-
most any other portion of the body. This contrivance is indispensable
to pleasure, and this to the endowment of offspring. Nerve alone gives
pleasure, but inflamed nerve gives pain, and pain proportionate to its
quantity, and the degree of inflammation. Now, frequent action neces-
sarily inflames, and thus both weakens these organs, and engenders dis-
ease in them, and throughout the system. It fills the whole being,
mental and physical, full of wild, excited, preternatural, irregular,
abnormal, painful action. And inflammation thus caused, is harder to
be reached, and more difficult to be subdued, than disease of any other
portion of the body ; because, while inflammation of the lungs, of the
heart, of the stomach, of the bowels, muscles, head, &c., can easily be
reached through the intestinal canal, or else by external application,
diseases of these organs, especially in women, can be reached or cuied
only with great difficulty. _ _ .
We have seen that excess produces inflammation, particularly in these
organs. Now inflammation, in its very nature, proportionally weakens
and destroys. This law of organization is too well known to require
proof or illustration. Excessive indulgence, of whatever kind, neces-
sarily inflames, and therefore weakens and diseases the sexual appara-
tus; and hence that falling of the womb, fluor albus, and other lemala
complaints, as well as prostration, or or irritation, or pria-
pism, or gonorrhoea, &c., of males, which excessive indulgence always
and necessarily creates. Nor, once effectually impaired, does this ap-
paratus ever fully regain its former tone and power. As with a dislo-
cated joint, or affection of the stomach, or lungs, slighter, and stil,
slighter, occasions of disease renew the chronic complaint, so indulgence
otherwise not injurious, now renews the disease, and re-impairs the
health, besides enfeebling both this function and its product.
Allow here a single remark relative to the effect of indulgence,
whether promiscuous, matrimonial, or solitary, upon offspring. It was
showm, in Love and Parentage, that power of sexual passion contributed
to the endowment of offspring, and its feebleness left them proportion-
ally the less endowed. Now nature has provided for the retention of
this secretion till the action and pleasure of this function rise higher and
higher, and becomes most exalted prior to its discharge, in older that
this condensation of energy and function may be imparted to offspring.
Now frequent indulgence allows it to escape prematurely , or befoie this
action rises to its highest pitch, and thus prevents that pleasure of its
subject so essential to the endowment of offspring. _ Indulgence even
goes so far sometimes as to cause involuntary emissions, or at least on
slight incentives, which of course weakens both the pleasure and the
product of this function. _ Thus excessive indulgence cuts off the very
pleasure sought, by diseasing its apparatus.
XT DETERIORATES THE SEXUAL CHARACTERISTICS.
We have seen that over indulgence, in all its forms, plants disease in
the sexual apparatus. Now if this disease ended here, it would do great
injury but it goes farther, and does more. It deteriorates the sexual
°That is, it impairs the manhness of the ma e and the
feminineness of the female. Now the entire manhood of the man, all
his nobleness, dignified aspirations, efficiency, and manliness, are created
9
IT DETERIORATES THE SEXUAL CHARACTERISTICS.


by, and depend upon, this his mental and physical sexuality. So do
all the beauty, grace, refinement, purity, elegance, fascination, and
charms of woman, as explained in section four of ‘ Love and Parentage/
This is certain. Now in and by this injury of the sexual apparatus,
over-indulgence proportionally impairs the manhood and power of tlie
former, and the beauty, sweetness, and charms of the latter. This re-
sult is necessary and universal.
Destroy the sexual apparatus of animals by emasculation, and wit-
ness the effects. Compare the stallion with the gelding. What becomes
of the proud and lofty prance, the noble bearing, the perfect form, the
physical stamina, the free, bold, neighing, resolute, powerful horse?
his neighing subdued, except as partially renewed by the arrival of the
sexual season. His arched and thickening neck unstrung. His lofty
prance exchanged for the steady jog. His mien humbled. His free
spirit chained. His physical power greatly subdued. No longer the
horse proper, but lowered, mutilated, and the mere shadow of that
noble animal. Compare the bull with the ox. You find results every
way similar ; as also by comparing the ram with the wether. What
but the perfection of his sexual nature gives the bull his force and
power of endurance over the ox, even enabling him to endure what
would kill two oxen? Why can the former be easily tamed and sub-
dued, but the latter never ? Why a small bull whip a large ox ? Why
can the stud perform twice the labour of the gelding ? The perfection
of the sexual apparatus alone makes the difference. This principle
applies throughout the animal kingdom, and is equally trueof man. I
once knew a eunuch,.rendered so by his own hands. His voice effem-
inate and hackled. His tones pining, and whining, and complaining.
The bass, strong voice of manhood merged into the most diminutive
manner of speaking imaginable. His look sorrowful and hapless. His
motions slow and feeble. His very existence a burden. And all be-
cause his sensuality, mental as well as physical, was gone. No more the
man ! A mere thing.
Now, by a law of things, whatever impairs the physical sexuality,
thereby impairs the mental sexuality ; and as over-indulgence does this
therefore, whoever gives way to this passion, proportionally impairs his
manhood, and becomes the ox or gelding ; or else effaces the charms of
the feminine, The man lays down his nobleness, dignity, power, and
manhood, and is no longer bold resolute, determined, aspiring, digni-
fied ; but becomes depreciated, irresolute, undetermined, tamed, and
conscious of his degradation. No longer comprehensive in planning;
efficient in executing, correct in judgment, full of thought, strong in
intellect, courteous in manner, noble in mien, and gallant to women ;
but he becomes disheartened, uncertain in his plans and inefficient in
their execution, and a drone to himself and society. So too the
female, diseased here, loses proportionally the amiableness and grace-
fulness of her sex, her sweetness of voice, disposition, and manner,
her native enthuiasm, her beauty of face and form, her gracefulness
and elegance of carriage, her looks of love and interest in man, and to
him, and becomes merged into a mongrel, neither male nor female, but
marred by the defects of both, without posessing the virtues of either.
No more the woman till her female organs are restored, and her accom-
panying mental sexuality thereby re-established. This principle fur-
nishes a very excellent hint to those who would retain or restore their
beauty, to preserve or restore this apparatus —a means of promoting
Vauty much more effectual than all the padding, bustles, and fashion-
able attire in the world.
IT DISEASES THE WHOLE SYSTEM.
If the diseases consequent on this inflammation were confined to that
apparatus in which it originates, it would do great damage, as just seen,
but it does incalculably more now ; because it plants disease in the very
10
n DISEASES THE WHOLE SYSTEM.


bowels of the frame. We have seen, in section three of ‘ Love and
Parentage,’ how perfectly reciprocal the relation existing between this
pparatus and the heart, lungs, liver, stomach, kidneys, secretions,
excretions, and each and all the vital organs and functions, in order
thereby to propagate them all. Hence, whatever diseases it, thereby
diseases them also. Disease in no other organ is equally prolific of dis-
ease in all the others. This is the physical citadel of health or of suffer-
ing, by capturing which you take all the others ; and they captured,
life itself surrenders to death. Common parlance designates some clouds
as * weather-breeders.’ This is a disease-breeder—a true Pandora’s box,
the opening of which engenders all sorts and degrees of pains and
sufferings that ‘ flesh is heir to.’ Dr. Woodward, than whose opinion none
is more entitled to consideration, remarks concerning it as follows :
‘ Consumptions, spinal distortions, weak and painful eyes, weak
stomachs, nervous headaches, and a host of other diseases, mark its in
fluences upon the one ; loss of memory and the power of application,
insanity, and idiotism, show its devastating effects upon the other,’
‘ In the spring of 1837, I was consulted by the father of a young
woman who had, for four years, been in the worst possible condition of
health. She bad consulted many eminent physicians, who had pre-
scribed remedies and regimen for her without benefit. On first seeing
the patient, I was impressed that the cause of her illness had not been
understood, which had rendered all remedies unavailing. Upon in-
quiring of the patient, I found that she had been the victim of self-
pollution. I cautioned her to abandon the practice, prescribed soma
remedies, and saw her no more.
‘ More than a year from the time of seeing her, I heard directly from
her parent, who sent me word that she had entirely recovered her
health, and energy of mind, and that my prescriptions had entirely
cured her.’
IT IMPAIRS DIGESTION AND CIRCULATION.
It thus robs the system of its required nourishment. Vertigo, and
heaviness about the stomach, &c., necessarily follow this excess, be-
cause it robs the digestive apparatus of the energy required to carry
forward this function. It produces a gnawing, fainting, distressed,
sunken, gone sensation along the whole alimentary canal, is a frightful
cause of dyspepsia, heartburn, &c., and thus robs the system of its
very life and soul.
An isolated example. Many years ago, an intelligent, well-educated
man was brought to the lunatic asylum, in Hertford, the victim of self-
abuse, and rendered nearly idiotic thereby, as well as raving perpetually
for food, which he would consume voraciously most of the time if
allowed. His keepers, however, refused food unless he would stop the
Eractice. The struggle was terrible. His rampant appetite, aided by
unger, finally compelled him to desist, and ho recovered.
Nor does the heart escape. Indeed, it suffers among the foremost;
as those will recognize experimentally who are at all subject to weak-
ness, or palpitation, or enlargement, or uneasiness of this organ. Nor
can those thus affected indulge much without essentially increasing
their malady. The kidneys in particular are increased thereby, and
hence it causes the gravel.
IT DERANGES THE BRAIN AND NERVOUS SYSTEM.
But its ravages on the brain and nervous system embody its most ter-
rible consequences. To behold one physical organ after another fall a
victim to this devastating passion, as house after house is consumed by
the devastating flames, is indeed terrible. To lose limb after limb of
the body, or large portions of the heart, or lungs, or sight, or hearing,
&c., is irreparable, and inexpressible by words ; but to lose one after
another of the mental faculties is inexpressibly greater, because thes®
n
IT IMPAIRS DIGESTION AND CIRCULATION.


constitute the man. As Watts replied impromptu to Mrs. Rowe, when,
she rallied him for his personal diminutiveness—
'• Could I in stature reach the pole,
Or grasp creation in my span,
I’d still be measured by my soul :
The mind’s the standard of the man.’
Whatever enfeebles or deranges the brain and nerves , thereby impairs
the very personality and entity of the man himself. Now, we have
already seen, in section three of ‘ Love and Parentage,’ that this indul-
gence is most exciting, exhausting, and irritating to the brain and ner-
vous system j that excess produces inflammation and disease j and also
that nervous and cerebral disease both produces depravity, and renders
its victims most miserable, where there is no other cause or occasion.
Behold in this * wheel within a wheel,’—in the fact that this indulgence
inflames the whole body, and especially the brain and nervous system,
—the reason why this excess causes more insanity than any thing else
except intemperance which it generally accompanies. Of the 128 males
in the Me Lean Lunatic Asylum in Charlestown, Mass., in 1838, twenty-
four where brought there by a single form of this vice. The report of
the Worcester Insane Hospital for 1836, rates intemperance as the most
prolific cause of insanity, and this passion as the second, of which it
then had twenty-six victims. In 1838, of its 199 male patients, 42, or
almost one-fourth, were the victims of solitary indulgence. A superin-
tendent of a French Lunatic Asylum says, ‘ It is more frequent than
is imagined, the cause of insanity, particularly among the rich. No
cause,’ says Dr. Woodward, ‘ is more influential in producing insanity.
The records of the institutions give an appalling catalogue of cases
attributed -to it.
But, when it does not go so far as to induce complete idiocy or insa-
nity, it so far vitiates the nervous system as to leave its subjects com-
pletely miserable —self-abuse particularly so. Section three of ‘ Love
and Parentage’ fully demonstrates the physiological law that disordered
nerves produce mental misery ; and as this passion deranges the ner-
vous system, we see why its subjects are nervous, fidgety, easily agitated,
fearful, afflicted with terrible dreams, melancholic, depressed in spirits,
and most wretched, as well as partly beside themselves. In describing
its effects, Dr. Adam Clarke writes thus :
< The sin of self-pollution is one of the most destructive evils ever
practised by fallen man. In many respects it is several degrees worse
than common whoredom, and has in its train more awful consequences.
It excites the powers of nature to unduo action , and produces violent
secretions, which necessarily and speedily exhaust the vital principle and
energy; hence the muscles become flaccid and feeble, the tone and
natural action of the nerves relaxed and impeded, the understanding
confused, the memory oblivious, the judgment perverted, the will in-
determinate and wholly without energy to resist; the eyes appear lan-
guishing and without expression, and the countenance vacant; appetite
ceases, for the stomach is incapable of performing its proper office;
nutrition fails ; tremors, fears, and terrors, are generated ; and thus the
wretched victim drags out a miserable existence, till, superannuated,
even before he has time to arrive at mans estate, with a mind often de-
bilitated even to a state of idiotism, his worthless body tumbles into
the grave, and his guilty soul (guilty of self-murder) is hurried into
the awful presence of its Judge !
‘ Reader, this is no caricature, nor are the colourings overcharged in
this shocking picture. Worse woes than my pen can relate, I have
witnessed in those addicted to this fascinating, unnatural, and most
destructive of crimes. If thou hast entered into the snare, flee from the
destruction, both of body and mind that awaits thee. God alone can
save thee. Advw, warnings, increasing debility of body.
12
IT DERANGES THE DRAIN AND NERVOUS SYSTEM.


mental decay, checks of conscience, expostulations of judgment, and
medical assistance, will all be lost on thee : God, and God alone , can
save thee from an evil which has in its issue the destruction of thy
body, and the final perdition of thy soul.’
‘ Facts,’ &c., ‘ to Young Men,’ narrates the history of a young man
of high talents and standing, promoted to an important post of honour,
which he once filled satisfactorily to his constituents, and who had
amassed considerable wealth, and was engaged to be married, as fol-
lows :
< But his health began to fail. His constant complaint was, my
nerves are weak’ —* my hands tremble’— 4 my wrists ache 4 my knees
are weak’ —‘ I have bad dreams,’ &c. He was advised to take out-door
exercise, ride on horseback, and take strengthening remedies, with a
nourishing diet. But all this did no good. The symptoms increased. He
soon became dyspeptic and hypochondriac ; and then followed, not only
the aches and pains that were consequent upon such a state of the body,
but all those ten thousand imaginary physical and mental diseases that
flesh is heir to. Every remedy was used, but to no purpose. He gave
up his business, broke off his engagement with his lady, sought every
opportunity to hide himself from the gaze of his friends and the world,
and seemed to be determined to die.
‘ Thus he remained, a most wretched devotee to the suicidal practice
of self-pollution. Professional advice, and that of his friends, who
knew the cause of his sickness, had no effect upon him. Sometimes,
indeed, he would desist for a few days, but it seemed to be only to ga-
ther new strength, that he might pursue his ruinous career with greater
energy. About two years ago, he was attacked with palsy of the whole
of one side, and which continues to this Nocturnal emissions,
priapisms, gleet, or a watery discharge from this organ, and aches and
pains, with frightful visions, horrid dreams, and idiotic manners, all
now present themselves as the sad result of this disgusting, criminal,
and soul-destroying habit. He is now a mere pest to his friends ; and
though but comparatively few persons are aware of the cause of his
wretchedness, it is nevertheless true, and can be attributed to none other
cause than the indulgence in solitary vice.
‘ Other cases might be referred to, if I had time, of a less revolting
nature ; for when the indulgence is only occasional, of course the effects
are not so alarming. But even then the effects are bad—for there cannot
be a single indulgence in this way, without producing injury to a
certain extent.’
Of another it narrates thus :—•
‘ A few years ago, I had under my care and instruction a most pro-
mising youth. His talents were of the highest order, and he hade fair
to take a prominent stand among the first scholars of our country. He
entered college, and was considered one of the first scholars of his class.
It was soon perceived that his constitution was breaking down. Medi-
cine did him but little good. Soon after he graduated, he became
melancholy, and finally was deranged ; and his friends were under the
necessity of conveying him to a hospital. It was not until this event
that the cause of his complaint was ascertained. It was evident that
he had been in the constant habit of criminally indulging himself in
secret. In a few months, he partially recovered, and visited his friends.
He has, however, been sent to to the hospital again. He is a most melan-
choly object, for in his lucid moments he is demented, a mere wreck of
that superior genius which he once was. When I meet him in the
street, I find that idiotic, lascivious smile which is common in those
cases where the individual has been in the constant habit of beastly
indulgence. . ,
‘ A young man was under my care from one of the southern cities.
He was an object of pity ; he had become so accustomed to this vicious
indulgence, that he had been known even at the dinner table to practise


it. He was extremely irritable, and would often be taken in a fit,
(spasms,) which would continue for hours. His physician did not
understand his case, nor was I sensible, at the time, that his bad habits
had produced his partial insanity. He would often disclose some of his
practices to his associates, when he was insane, which he would much
regret when he had recovered his reason. I have understood that, since
his return to his friends, he has but partially recovered. He is de-
mented, and is unfit for the common avocations of life.
‘Another young man, who was under my care not long since, is
obliged to leave his studies, and is just going into a decline ; and self-
pollution is the cause. I have conversed with him, and he is sensible
of his error, but I fear too late.’
A letter from Mrs. Gove, narrating its writer’s experience, describes
its effects on the mind as follows :
‘At about twelve years of age, my health began to fail; I became
dyspeptic and nervous. I often awoke in the morning bathed in tears ;
and the most indescribable and horrible sinking of spirits was my por-
tion during the forenoon. If I committed any little mistake or fault,
the recollection of it would haunt me for days, and make me super-
latively wretched. I became pale as death, weak, feeble, and ema-
ciated. I had severe palpitation of the heart, pain in the side, and
many symptoms of consumption. I had also, much of the time, dis-
tressing pain in the head. I had much dizziness, and my sight would
often become entirely obscured, especially when I stooped and rose
quickly.’
‘ It renders them,’ says an English author, ‘ stupid, dull, and melan-
choly, and destroys all their vivacity, cheerfulness, and health; it brings
on consumption, weakness, barrenness, and all that dreadful train of
nervous complaints, which makes them timid, whimsical, and ridicu-
lous.’
Another patient writes thus :
‘My enthusiasm is sensibly diminished ; my perceptions are very
dull; the fire of imagination much less vivid ; every passing event
appears to me like a dream; 1 have less power of conception, and less
presence of mind. In a word, I feel as if I were wasting away, although
my sleep, appetite, and countenance are good.’
‘The empire which this odious practice gains over the senses,’ says Tis-
sot, ‘is beyond expression. No sooner does this uncleanness get posses-
sion of the heart, than it pursues its votaries every where, and governs
them at all times, and in all places. Upon the most serious occasions,
and in the solemn acts of religion, they find themselves transported
with lustful conceptions and desires, which take up all their thoughts.’
Dr. Woodward gives the following from a letter written by a pa-
tient :
‘ Having endured so long under this blighting, withering curse, my
constitution, naturally very strong, is broken down, and my mind, as
well as body, completely enervated. lam haunted day and night with
lascivious thoughts and dreams ; suspicious of my friends and disgusted
with myself. My memory has lost its power—unable to fix my atten-
tion—my mind is filled with terrible forebodings—fear of insanity, and
at times it has cost me a continual effort to retain my reason. It is with
difficulty that I walk, or stand, or even sit erect. An inclination to lie
down and sleep, which desire I am sensible I have indulged too much :
—my sleep never refreshes me ; —I rise in the morning weak and weary,
to drag out another miserable day. 0 how often have I wished for
death, or rather oblivion, or anything to terminate my woes. I have
of late been much annoyed with constant little twitchings or spasms in
various parts of my body, and frequently my face. * * * Would
to God I had known what I now know when first I was tempted to this
health , life, and soul-destroying. vice. I feel that I cannot hold out
much longer.’


Behold in the following auto-biography of a patient, the mental an-
guish and derangement this practice engenders. After saying that he
commenced the practice at about fourteen years of age, and had kept it
up, at intervals for many years, he writes—
During the whole of this time, I have suffered the most intense and
unmitigated misery. Although blessed by nature with an excellent
constitution, and with a kindly, cheerful disposition I have become
dyspeptic, gloomy, and unsociable. lam wretchedly timid and irreso-
lute my mind very weak, and filled with imaginary terrors. In fine, 1
have suffered so much in body and mind, and seeing no prospect ot
being restored to health and usefulness, that I am sunk in despair, and
am daily contemplating suicide. It is the anguish my death would
cause mv mother and sister, whom I devotedly love, and for whom 1
would wish to live, and whom I would wish to maintain, that mainly
But w'hy detail more 1 These are the constitutional effects of this sin.
Behold the mind a wreck—the soul undone !
IT ENGENDERS DEPRAVITY IN ALL ITS FORMS,
But all this, most terrible as it is, is not the worst. Amatiyeness
being situated in the midst of the animal organs , and this indulgence
tending necessarily to inflame it, its inflammation of course inflames,
diseases, and perverts them also. Section three of Love shows that
the morbid, painful, diseased action of the propensities constitute de-
pravity; and this section shows that this excess diseases both the cere-
bellum and the body, with both of which the animal propensities are so
intimately related, that whatever deranges the former, thereby perverts
the latter, and thus causes depravity. Or thus : Excessive indulgence
inflames the sexual organs, the whole body, and Amatiyeness, located
in the cerebellum, in particular, and this inflames and depraves the
whole animal group of organs, and thereby creates sin m all its forms.
Corresponding with, and explained by, this, is the fact that lust, the
world over, is the concomitant and parent of all other sms. In what
portions of our cities, towns, and villages is perpetrated the most wick-
edness t Wherever are congregated the votaries of Venus. Where will
groggeries be found the most abundant, the most frequented ? In the
streets and lanes of wantonness. Where are you most liable to be
robbed ? There also. And by whom \ Its inhabitants. W hat but
prostitution could make woman, aye, amiable woman, swear and he,
and cheat, and drink, and carouse, and rob, and even murder in
what part of Boston was that recent tragical murder of Mrs. Bickford
committed 1 In Old Town, the ‘Five Points of that godly city.
By whom ? A libertine. On whom ? A lewd woman. In short, the
dens of prostitution are every where the dens of crime in all its forms,
in all its aggravations. And what is true of these masses, is true of
those individuals which compose them. Who are our defaulters, our
swindlers, our gamblers, &c. % Frequenters of lewd houses always. No
equal incentive to dishonesty and criminality exists. bortunes are
yearly stolen by clerks, agents, &c., and covered by false entries,
simply to obtain the means of gratifying this passion. How much,
the Judgment alone can reveal. Though intemperance will soon run a
man down, and wring his last cent from him to feed those fatal flies
which are consuming soul and body, yet it is a pigmy compared with
this giant robber. It will drain the last cent, and then pursue its victi m
night and day till he becomes literally desperate, and is almost com-
pelled to lie, steal, forge, rob, any and every thing to procure the
wages of this sin. Do as great a business as he may, he rarely becomes
rich. But see how many fortunes it has squandered ! No one who goes
after strange women’ can be good, honest, and true ; but he vvho does
will commit almost any other form of sin. I his passion will sow the
seeds of depravity in the purest of souls ; and convert those most irre-
proachable into demons. This is stay'e truth, apply it where >uu w.ll


Moralists I behold in this relation of perverted sexuality to universal
depravity, your first work of reform. As long as this passion is thus
uncontrolled and perverted, so long will all other forms of depravity bo
rife, and all forms of virtue be trampled in the dust! Ministers may
preach till doomsday against any and all other vices without effect, till
they preach moral purity and in all its forms. It is a matter of perfect
surprise that so few ministers preach against this sin in any of its forms,
especially against self abuse. Most of them, though posted on the
moral watch-towers of society, are ‘ dumb dogs,’ that ‘ will not bark/
touching this, the very key-stone of the arch of depravity. Is it not
high time that some moral champion should stand forth to proclaim
this vital truth ? Lawyers will not do it, nor doctors, except a few
noble Woodwards ; nor Ministers. Shall then this monster be left un-
disturbed to feed on the physical and mental carcases of his prey 1 God
forbid ! If the ministerial profession will so far prove recreant to their
high moral trust, and the other professions follow their example of
silence, help must come from some other quarter; for this age of reform
must begin reformation here. And the Author is free to confess, that an
overwhelming desire to prevent iniquity in its other forms, as well as
this, and by sanctifying and properly directing this propensity, to pro-
mote general moral*excellence and obviate general corruption, mainly
dictated these pages. He wishes, by ‘Love and Parentage/ to aid in
rendering after generations letter hy nature —more intellectual, more
pure and holy in soul, and elevated in aspiration, and by this work, to
stay licentiousness, public and private, by showing the superiority of
moral purity over sinful propensity, in order thereby to promote moral
purity and all other virtues on the one hand, and on the other, to pre-
vent this vice, and thereby all other forms of human depravity
and woe.
IT PERPETUATES AND RE-AUGMENTS ITSELF.
We have seen that excess begets inflammation, and that inflamma-
tion creates desire. Hence every new indulgence only re-augments the
cravings of this propensity. As an inflammation of the stomach causes
a morbid hankering after food, the gratification of which still farther
increases both the disease and the craving, so excessive sexual indul-
gence fevers these organs, so that they call still more loudly for gratifi-
cation, every new indulgence of which re-augments the inflammation
and consequently the power of passion, till, like the letting out of
waters, it rises and rushes till life itself is emptied out thereat, and
both body and mind swept on to remediless destruction and woe! In-
dulgence is fuel to these already consuming fires of perdition. This pro-
pensity being to the sexual apparatus precisely what appetite is to the
stomach, since as eating, so far from satisfying the ravenous cravings
of the dyspeptic, only increases them, by re-inflaming the stomach ; so
sensual indulgence first inflames the sexual apparatus, and this re-
increases both disease and desire till the entire system is drained of
energy, and its victim dies.
This passion inflamed by indulgence becomes the horseleech of life
and happiness, crying perpetually, louder and louder, ‘give, give,
give, GIVE,’ but never enough; or the gluttonous tape-worm, the
more it is fed, the more insatiate its ravages, till, after having devoured
all the other powers and faculties of its miserable victim, it ends only in
a death of all deaths the most horrible. Like the falling, perhaps, of an
icicle on Mount Blanc, which gathers size aud force as it descends, and
now rolls heavily and rapidly down the steep sides of yonder towering
cliff, anon bounds from peak to peak, sweeping their snowy sides and
tearing up huge trees and rocks in its resistless course, till, leaping
yonder yawning precipice, it plunges into the deep abyss, dashing to
atoms both itself and all its prey, scattering ruin and death in all its
course.
16
IT PERPETUATES AND RE-AUGMENTS ITSELF.


Nor does this principle govern one form of sensual indulgence merely,
but all its forms. It is inherent in all forms, and appertains alike to
matrimonial, promiscuous, and personal indulgence in all their stages.
Animals, one and all, before their first indulgence, experience only a
moderate power of this impulse ; but afterwards become uncontrollable.
The less it is exercised, the more easily can it be held in check.
Beware, then, oh youth! how you unchain this roaring lion till
walled in by wedlock ; else propensity will haunt and goad you night
and day, clamorous for indulgence, yet never satisfied till your rum is
complete. Indulge but once, and you will have no peace of your life,
but will be dashed hither and thither with those waves of passion into
which ‘ one false step’ plunges you. If you have no regard for the sin
committed, yet regard your own subsequent peace and happiness for
Mark ; we do not put this matter on its moral turpitude , but on its
necessarily consequent evils and sufferings ; first, because the latter in-
volves the former, and is the cause or rationale of all sin—the reason
why sin is sinful, as well as the measure of the sinfulness of sin—and
because we thus appeal to the two strongest, and even the governing
motives of human nature ; namely, first, to its love of happiness, and
secondly, to its dread of suffering. Not that it is not most sinful. It is
morally wrong in exact proportion to its miseries, which we have just
seen to be so frightful.
CHAPTER II.
THE EFFECTS OF PROMISCUOUS INDULGENCE, MATRIMONIAL EXCESS,
AND SELF-ABUSE, COMPARED.
Thus far, our inquiries have related to the constitutional effects of
excessive sexual indulgence in its collective capacity, or indiscrimin-
ately in all its forms. But this hydra monster assumes many ioims,
three of which deserve consideration.
1. LICENTIOUSNESS.
That promiscuous indulgence is most sinful, is evident from that
terrible penalty affixed to its perpetration. To be eaten up by piece-
meal, with sores and ulcers, nauseating and loathsome beyond descrip-
tion—to lose bone, and muscle, and nerve by inches, and literally be
eat up alive , besides being simultaneously tortured with agony the most
excruciating mortals can endure, affixes nature’s seal of proportional
moral turpitude upon its cause. Consequences thus direful show that
their cause must be a sin proportionally aggravated Quacks may
essay to cure it, but its virulent poison still lurks in the veins for life.
Calomel may give immediate relief, but the grave alone can entirely
eradicate it. Sin ye who will, but ye who sin must suffer. God is just,
and but visits his'violated law with meet retribution. .
Nor does this curse of curses cease with its author, but is justly en-
tailed upon his children, and his children’s children, ‘ unto the third
and fourth generations.’ See yonder maimed and hobbling object of
pity his limbs distorted, his joints dislocated and racked with pain, his
life tormented with running sores, his mind feeble, and passions un-
governable! All this is but the wages of his fathers licentiousness.
A physician once remarked to the Author, that a more prolific cause of
scrofula, consumptions, and kindred affections did not probably exist,
than this sin of parents ; adding, that it often broke out two or three
generations down, and could rarely be eradicated from descendants.
Oil! how great the crime of thus cursing posterity, instead of blessing
it with all the endowments conferred by virtuous love ! _
Nor do many know how prevalent this disease is in its various forms.
Its victims keep their own secret as long as possible, and doctor them-
selves, except when their case becomes desperate : and then confide it
17
LICENTIOUSNESS.


only to their medical adviser, whose very profession obliges him to
keep the secret. Oh ! how many thousands of our young men have
ruined their constitutions, and become invalids for life, solely by means
of this disease, or attempts to cure it. Indeed, its prevalence at the
Sandwich Islands actually threatens the extinction of that nation ;
which, at its present rate of mortality, it is computed to affect in about
sixty years!
The fact that several thousand copies of a little work of less than
twenty pages, on the cure of venereal diseases, are sold evert/ month at
one dollar per copy, and that other works of this class sell in proportion,
shows conclusively that there are several thousand new victims every
month! No patient wants more than a single work, yet twenty
thousand per montu* does not equal the sale of these works, and of
course falls far short of the number of victims, for none but venereal
patients will pay thus dear for so small a book, of no manner of interest
to those not thus afflicted. All this, besides all those who indulge with
other than harlots by profession ! Almost incredible, but nevertheless
true!
We thus see that nature , as well as the Bible, condemns licentious-
ness; so that disbelievers in the latter are yet bound by nature’s in-
flexible laws to continence, except in wedlock. But a point thus self-
evident, need not be urged. Beware then, oh passionate youth, how
you commit this sin! even though you neither ‘ fear God nor regard
man,’ yet at least regard your own happiness, and induce not so ter-
rible a curse!
MATRIMONIAL EXCESS.
But this is not the only form of sin assumed by this propensity. It in-
vades married life, and sows the seeds of misery within the hallowed pale
of wedlock. Reference is not now had to those who, though married, seek
foreign indulgence ; but to those who know their own legal companion
only. This will surprise many who are married, because they think
themselves entitled to any desired amount of indulgence. Far other-
wise. Nature cares nothing, knows nothing about human enactments.
Excessive indulgence between husband and wife produces all the con-
sequences shewn in the last chapter to result from excessive Amative-
ness. A miserable victim of connubial excess is hardly less miserable
than the victim of licentiousness. A newly married husband once
called upon a medical friend of the Author to prescribe for what he
supposed to be venereal disease, contracted from his wife. Soon after,
she called on the same errand ; both accusing each other of having given
the disease. The doctor told both that their hymeneal excess had in-
flamed and diseased both, and prescribed moderation.
But what stamps effectually the seal of nature’s reprobation on ex-
cessive matrimonial indulgence, is its destruction of the health of woman.
Is it not a most prolific cause of those distressing female complaints
which bury half of our married women prematurely , and seriously impair
most of the remainder ? Testify, Drs. Sherwood, Banning, Hollick, Ben-
jamin, and others, in this line of practice; are not these complaints
alarmingly prevalent, and occasioned mainly by excessive indulgence?
Do not thousands of our women die annually in consequence ? Speak
out, ye weakly, nervous wives, now dying by wretched inches of these
diseases, and say whether your sufferings were not caused mainly, and
have not been aggravated to their present painfulness, by the frequency,
the fury, the almost goatishness, of your husband’s demands ? I say
fury, because though‘frequency is bad, yet harshness is worse ; nor do
husbands always consider how exceedingly tender, and how liable to
consequent inflammation and disease, this apparatus is. Many a hus-
band has buried more wives than one, killed outright, ignorantly, yet
effectually, by the brutality of this passion. Reader, if thou knowest
• A single house in New York sells some 8000 copies per month !
18
MATRIMONIAL EXCESS.


none such, thou knowest not the cause of all the deaths that transpire
around thee! And yet, the pulpit, the press, the lecture room, are silent
in view of this vast, this wicked waste of life—of even the infinitely
valuable life of woman!
And tens of thousands of those whom it ooes not kill, it nevertheless
effectually despoils, by impairing both their sexual organs, and their
health, as well as minds. More : it cuts off the very pleasure sought.
As over-eating diminishes appetite, and thus curtails the gustatory
pleasure sought, so excess here engenders those diseases which cut off
this very pleasure. By causing the prolapsus uteri, albus, &c., it ren-
ders this intercourse utterly repugnant mentally, and painful physi-
cally ; thus inducing the penalty in the direct line of the transgression
IT PREVENTS AND IMPAIRS OFFSPRING
Whatever enfeebles or diseases the sexual apparatus, of course im-
pairs its products, or else prevents offspring altogether. That over-
indulgence causes barrenness, has even been canonized into a proverb,
which all will recognise in this connexion. An amorous husband who
partakes thrice as often as the sun rises, never had but. two children by
his wife, ; both of which received existence on his return of only an
hour from an absence of some weeks, and his immediate recall and
absence for weeks longer. Another pair, who partake as often, have
no children, and deserve none. Excessive indulgence is one great cause
of sterility, partly by diseasing these organs, and thus impairing their
functions, and partly by disturbing the seeds of life before fairly rooted.
Nor this merely : It also impairs many which it does not destroy.
By obviating the enhancement of pleasure lent by novelty, it tames
down this function, and of course its product; while rarity facilitates
their endowment by promoting parental ecstasy, in harmony with a
law already demonstrated. As we cannot have children without having
mothers, so whatever impairs the latter, deteriorates the former.
IT DETERIORATES WOMAN IN THE ESTIMATION OF MAN.
Besides, lust carries with itself the feeling of degradation. He who
indulges frequently, even with his lawful wife, cannot hut associate her
in his own mind with this debased feeling to which she administers.
He first debases her by his brutality, and then despises her for being
debased. It is a law of mind that this excess should produce contempt
for its partner. Reader, did you ever hear the libertine speak well
of woman as a sex ? This fact is apparent; and you may always
measure the sensuality of a man by his disrespect for the sex, and his
moral purity by his estimation of a woman, this is a perfect thermo-
meter of moral purity. Its reasons are obvious. First, rogues suspect
all mankind of being rouges ; liars, of being deceptive, and the sensual,
of sensuality. Secondly, he has been mainly conversant with woman
as a sexual thing, and not as a pure, refined, and affectionate being.
Her sexuality mainly is what he has noticed, and this he detests in
himself, and therefore in her.
Woman thus abused, also soon comes to feel herself humbled, broken
down, and sunk in the scale of self-respect, by being put to so low a
use. And let the sensual husband remember that knowing ones can
read his treatment of her in this respect by these and kindred signs—
that is, in her downcast, selfdegraded looks and mien. But over this
saddening picture of woe let us draw' the curtain of silence while we
shed tears of pity over her sufferings. Woman fallen ! Her loveliness
engulfed in the fiery sea of lust! Her angelic purity and perfection
converted into corruption! The angel become the animal— a mere
sexual thing! And all by violating a plain law of nature. Meet
punishment for so sensual a sin!
Much has of late been said as regards the elevation of woman on the
out hand, and her natural inferiority on the other. M ithout disturbing


this mooted question, further than to say that she is equally perfect
with man in her sphere, which is equally elevated with his, that she
is as perfect as the God of nature could render her—allow special
attention to be called to the one specific cause of her disrepute. It is
wan's sensuality. How does the Turk regard woman ? As a mere
thing , destitute of a soul, and of all intrinsic merit. Now look at the
one animal end to which he puts her, and put the two together.
Wherefore the harem ? Simply to feed his sensuality. And this very
sensuality breeds this contempt for its object. The same holds true of
all mankind, and governs individuals as well as masses. The libertine
always despises his ‘ bird’ after he has sated his passion, and because of
such indulgence. Sensual indulgence begets disgust for its object. This
is a law of mind, and is as true in wedlock as out of it. Hence, other
things being equal, in proportion as a man indulges sensually with
woman as a sex, does he despise the sex, or as an individual does he
underrate her individuality. Nor, say what you will, can woman ever
be raised to her true dignity, or be properly appreciated, till licentious-
ness is superseded by true love. Moral purity will elevate woman in
exact proportion to its prevalence, while licentiousness, in and of itself,
and by virtue of its own inherent nature, sinks her in the scale of
valuation in exact proportion as it rises. This is cardinal truth, and
shows those who labour for the elevation of woman, where to begin, and
what obstacle alone prevents success.
We might mention many more evils that grow out of matrimonial
prostitution, but are not these amply sufficient to stamp it as most in-
famous in its nature, because most direful in its consequences 1 Indeed,
I regard its magnitude as scarcely less than that of promiscuous
indulgence, because its evils are substantially the same, and scarcely
less aggravated, and partly because so much more prevalent. It offers
much greater facilities and temptations. It costs nothing in and of
itself—though many a husband has paid out more in the form of
doctors’ and nurses’ bills, &c., than his licentious neighbour has for
promiscuous indulgence. It is almost universal in married life, and is
burying its victims ten to one faster than its twin sister, promiscous
intercourse. Mere sensual indulgence as such, in wedlock or out of it,
in and of itself, sensualizes the mind, debases the feelings, and engen-
ders depravity in all its other forms. It is fire to the nervous system,
which, diseased, irritates all the propensities, and depraves the entire
being ! Mark, ye husbands whose demands are frequent, the increased
irritability, and fretfulness, and crossness of your wives the next day,
and learn from these principles both the cause and cure.
We must not omit to mention the double injury occasioned by in-
dulging while she is fulfilling her maternal relations. At these periods
she almost always loathes it—proof enough that it is then wrong.
Besides, it withdraws that vital energy required by her precious charge.
It also sensualizes that charge ; it partaking by sympathy with its
mother’s feelings. Nor have I a doubt but that the seeds of much of
the sensuality of mankind are sown by paternal indulgence before birth.
Then, at least, should the mother’s mind be kept as pure and elevated
as possible, and her physical stamina promoted, not drained of to feed a
sensual passion.
Husbands, be entreated to mark well this entire chapter. In this
particular you are mainly in fault. Your wives could not impose upon
you in this matter if they would, and rarely would if they could. But
do you not often insist on compliance, and almost compel it, when very
disagreeable to them ? You thus inflame their female structure without
giving them any pleasure in return, but only repugnance —all pain !
Oh! be not thus cruel! Wait at least for reciprocity ; and then
guard carefully against all pain and injury. Would that these truths
might reach every married pair in Christendom
20
IT DETERIORATES WOMAN IN THE ESTIMATION OF MAN.


But we have not reached all the evil forms, if the worst form, of ex-
cessive and perverted Amativeness.’ However prevalent both licentious-
ness proper, and legalized licentiousness, private fornication I regard as at
least equal to either, and much more prevalent than the first named.
Our youth by wretched thousands, aye millions too conscientious to
violate the literal law of chastity, seek in solitude that same gratifi-
cation which constitutes sensuality itself. The two differ in nothing
except in the substitution of an imaginary partner for a real one—in
the complete absence of that love which alone can sanctify this indul-
gence and in its being all sensuality, as well as, if possible, a still more
unnatural and effectual violation of nature s laws. Do not both con-
sist equally in warp and woof, of sensuality ? Is not the same pro-
pensity indulged in both ? Are not the same feelings exercised, and m
the same way, saving that its partner, so mdispensible to both, is
imaginary here, but real there ? Is not the kind of gratification sought
and°afforded alike in both? Are not both precisely alike in debasing
the character ? The same feelings, the same organs, the same action m
these organs, the same evacuations, except that private prostitution is
necessarily inore completely gross and lustful, as well as more injurious
?o the organs exercised ; besides the far greater number of its subjects,
and the far greater frequency of its indulgence. Is licentiousness de-
basin'* and polluting to the soul, and is not even more so .
Does ft not create even a greater degree of shame, and self-abhorrence,
and vulgarity ? Does the former disorder the sexual apparatus, and
does not the latter equally, probably more? Does the former often
produce impotency, and does not the latter much more frequently?
feoes the former derange the nervous system, and does not the latter
equally and fill the entire system full to bursting with a wild, burned,
fevered excitement, which rouses every animal passion, unstrings every
nerve and produces complete frustration and confusion. Does the
former drain the system of animal energy, and waste the very essence
of its vitality, and does not the latter equally rob every organ of the body,
every faculty of the mind, of that vital energy by which alone it lives and
acts? In short, it is hardly possible to name an evil which appertains
to the former, which does not also characterize the latter, whilst the lat-
ter bv being so much the more accessible, subjecting its possessor to no ex-
pense (but that of life) and no shame, because perpetrated in secret, is
therefore the more wide-spread, frequent, and ruinous. Nor is it con-
ridered a sin; (shame on those pretended moral watchmen who
nounce it;) and therefore not opposed by the terrors of conscience. Nor
does that almost insuperable barrier of native modesty created m the soul
of every well-constituted youth against licentiousness, avail much here,
because its natutal stimulant, the presence of the other sex, is not
present to bring it into action. It is also practised at a much earlier
ao-e and while the system is yet immature, and all the strength required
for growth, thus sapping the constitution in its infancy, and hence the
more completely irreparable and fatal. Nor is it scarcely less fare-
nating than sensuality proper, though less so than that
banquet of love described in ‘ Love and Parentage. Both are made
un of sensuality, and neither call forth any of the higher elements of
our nature while love calls them all into intense action m connexion
SM-e, which it sanctifies, and the pleasures of which it
in lf S asked^my 6 serious Opinion as to the comparative evils °f these two
forms of ‘ excessive or perverted Amativeness.’ considered collectively,
oc T.rr...irin<r the oreatest ruin in our age and nation, and causing the
greatest amount of suffering and woe, I should answer unhesitatingly,
as the result of my extensive observation and mature conviction, pri-
vate a tion-—t en to one ! And this is opinion
of all who have examined this subject. If asked which I should pie r
a Jiild of mine to practice, (Oh merciful God ! deliver me from so


dreadful a dilemma,) my unequivocal answer would be, * Rather let mr
dear child die, be it even by revolting suicide. Any other cup of bitter-
ness sooner* Nothing, oh fond parent, can render your beloved
offspring more completely wretched.
CHAPTER III.
SIGNS OF SENSUALITY IN ITS VARIOUS FORMS.
* Satan never keeps secrets.’ * Murder will out.’ And so will sensu-
ality. We can tell the rake, and designate the wanton ; and say truly,
who has known the other sex, and how; as well as who seeks solitary
gratification, and who is pure. The signs of all these things come to the
surface, and cannot he disguised.
To transfer all these signs to paper is impossible ; nor can a fraction
of them be fully given without too ranch digression. Many of them,
the ‘ natural language’ of the faculties discloses, which a Phrenologist
alone can fully understand.* If, by casting her eyes over a congrega-
tion, the lewd woman can easily select her patrons, why cannot we also
discern them? We can, by the following, among other indices :
1. Carrying the hands frequently to those organs by way of chang-
ing their position ; or sitting with the former partly enclosing the latter;
because the latter, being inflamed by over-action, are uneasy, and the
former are carried to, and move them about, to give relief. Such, if
married may know only their own companion, but it will be both
lustful and excessive. If unmarried, they either abuse themselves, or
seek foreign indulgence, which may be distinguished by a slight dif-
ference in a certain position often assumed by each, which the natural
language of Amativeness perfectly explains.
The amorous man has also a lascivious expression of the eyes and
lips, and always manifests sexual curiosity when he observes females ;
and often turns to look at them. Or, when any thing is said about the
other sex, he acts or laughs as if something very curious or wanton, or
vulgar, had been said ; and relishes it, because he always looks at every
thing through glasses of lust. Or else he unequivocally condemns and
denounces every thing appertaining to this subject, especially by way of
obviating this evil, so foul and filthy ; because to him it is so. A rake
can easily be marked by these and kindred signs.
Reader, is it expedient to give the indices of wantonness in woman ?
It is not. Yet they are equally, if not still more apparent.
The solitary libertine may be known, partly by these signs, and, in
addition, by the following :—ln conversation, he never looks you full
in the face ; but averts his eyes, especially downward, as if ashamed of
himself. He also avoids meeting the glances of females, yet steals
every opportunity to look at them, and intently observes, particularly
those portions which constitute and characterize the sex. Though very
shy of females, and all in a tremor while in their presence, when others
are by, yet when alone he is forward, and gross in his advances, and
apt to take liberties ; and is silly and sickish in their company, as if
prompted by a mean passion, instead of being actuated by that love
‘ which maketh not ashamed.’
Mark well this fundamental difference between the conduct of those
who are actuated by true love, and by lust in any of its forms. * Love
* Human character was made to be read without mistake ; and in spite of all
attempted concealment. And Phrenology can read it. Yet this department
of this science most Authors have comparatively neglected ; partly, probably,
from its difficulty, and partly on account of the expense of the illustrated en-
gravings. But vol. viii. of the American Phrenological Journal will present
this subject somewhat fully, and furnish its readers with signs and clews of
character little suspected, and perfectly certain in their application.


ami Parentage’ points out the heaven-wide difference between the two,
and shows in what it consists. Now, precisely this difference obtains
touching the manners, carriage, expression, every thing, of his conduct
towards women, whose Amativeness is pure or perverted.
The private sensualist may be further known by his pallid bloodless
countenance, and hollow, sunken, and half-ghastly eyes, the lids of which
will frequently be tinged with red ; while, if his indulgence has been
carried very far, he will have black and blue semi-circles under his
eyes and also look as if worn out, almost dead for want of sleep, yet
unable to get it, &c. lie will also have a half-wild, half vacant stare
or half-lascivious, half-foolish smile, especially when he sees a female.
He will also have a certain quickness yet indecision of manner; will
begin to do this thing, then stop and essay to do that, and then do what
he first intended ; even in such utterly insignificant matters as putting
his hat here or there, «fec. The same incoherence will characterize his
expressions, and the same want of promptness mark all he does. Little
things will agitate and fluster him. Nor will he be prompt, or resolute,
or bold, or forcible ; but timid, afraid of his own shadow, uncertain,
waiting to see what is best, and always in a hurry, yet hardly know
what he is doing, or wants to do. Nor will he walk erect or dignified,
as if conscious of his manhood, and lofty in his aspirations, but will
walk and move with a diminutive, crying, sycophantic, inferior, mean,
self-debased manner, as if depreciated and degraded in his own eyes;
thus telling you perpetually by his shamed looks and sheepish manner
that he has'been doing something low, mean, contemptible and vulgar.
His secret practices have impaired both his physical and mental man-
hood, and thereby effaced the nobleness and efficiency of the masculine,
and deteriorated his soul, besides having ruined his body. Be entreated,
oh foolish and wicked ! not thus to dethrone the man and enthrone the
moreover, be dull of comprehensson, incorrect, forgetful,
heedless, full of blunders of all sorts, crude and inappropriate in his
jokes, slow to take the hint, listless, inattentive, absent-minded, sad,
melancholy, easily frightened, easily discouraged, wanting in clearness
and point of idea, less bright than formerly, and altogether depreciated
in looks and talents compared with what he would have been if he had
never contracted this-soul-and-body-ruining practice.
Pain at or near the small of the back, is another dark symptom. It
at least shows that the sexual apparatus is diseased, because the nerve
from them enters the spinal column at this place, so that their inflam-
mation renders it proportionally tender and painful. Sexual excess in
any of its forms will give this pain. True, other causes may have de-
ranged these organs, and given this pain, yet this is the great cause.
Some victims of this passion have running sores on the small of the
back, and are generally tender there * „ T
Many other signs evince carnality, yet these must suffice. Nor am 1
quite clear in giving even these, becaue they will expose so many of my
erring fellow-men, now unsuspected ; the Christian and the Phenolo-
gies! course being to hide sin instead of prolaiming it. Yet, again
such are dangerous, and ought to be exposed—at least, allowed to tell
their own carnal story. Let every sensualist, especially private liber-
tine, remember that he is marked and known, and read by all men who
have eyes and know how to use them This exposition is made, in
part to shame them out of degrading vice, into moral purity and
virtue.
* Some of those symptoms arise from other causes ; and some persons will
indulge in forbidden courses without exhibiting others of them, there is
great langer, and ought therefore to be great care, in judging of men s char-
acters from those signs,—Ed.


CHAPTER IV.
REMEDIES.
Thus much of these evils. Next their remedies. All the penalties
of nature’s violated laws are not wholly incurable. A ‘ healing balm
is kindly furnished for such wounds as are not mortal. Though it may
be impossible, after these evils have become aggravated, for their subject
to be as healthy and happy as he would have been if he had _ never
sinned, yet our merciful Physician has furnished at hand both palliatives
and restoratives, by the judicious and thorough use of which he may
become as sound in body and as strong in mind, as he ever has been ;
perhaps better because he is yet immature. When the consequences of
this vice have not gone so far as to impair or destroy the stricture, a
comparative cure is attainable ; and even though the organization itself
is seriously affected, yet, as nature restores a broken bone, or flesh
wound, so here, she will often repair breaches apparently irreparable.
Though as a broken bone, or a sprained joint, is more liable to subse-
quent 5 injury than if it had never been impaired, yet, as long and as far
as life and constitution remain, they hold out the blessed promise of
recovery and happiness. Unfortunate reader, however foolish and
sinful you may have been, never despair; first, because discouragement
greatly impedes cure ; and secondly, because the constitutional tendency
of your disease is to render you more gloomy and disheartened than you
need be. Be it that your case is bad, you regard it as much worse than
it really is. If it were fatal you would be now literally dying. The
flag of truce is yet flying. Because you have entered the broad road, you
are not compelled to go down to final ruin. The door of escape is yet
open. Few cases are desperate. Most men can be well nigh cured.
Listen then to the means of salvation.
Though there may be, doubtless, growing in our woods and fields a
specific cure for your, as for most other, ‘ ills that flesh suffers, yet
rely not on medicines, especially those generally prescribed by physi-
cians. They do not understand these complaints, but generally aggra-
vate them. You must cure yourselves. Nor is the task easy ; it re-
quires effort, perseverance , and temporary self-denial. You must do, in-
stead of passively folding your arms, to which you are inclined. Be it,
that a cure requires hard work, are not life, health, happiness , worth
working hard to obtain ? If in the Niagara rapids, and certain to be
precipitated over its yawning precipice in case you remained passive,
but could save yourself by powerful effort, would you fold your hands ?
Would you not tax every energy of life to its utmost 1 What will not
man do for his life? And your life is at stake, and is the prize of effort.
I hear your eager enquiry, What shall Idoto be saved V I answer,
ABSTAIN TOTALLY.
The least indulgence weakens hope, and is like paddling the canoe
down the Niagara rapids, instead of towards its banks. Gradual eman-
cipation, like leaving of drinking by degrees, will certainly increase
both indulgence and suffering. This is true of oW bad habits is a law
of things, and especially applicable here. ‘ Now is the accepted time ;
behold' now is the day of salvation.’ Some of my cotemporaries advise
occasional indulgence. From this I dissent, and totally and unequivo-
cally condemn all indulgence, every instance of which both augments
passion and weakens resistance, by subjecting intellect and moral senti-
ment to propensity. If you cannot conquer now, you never can.
Make one desperate 'stand and struggle. Summon every energy ! Not once
more! stop short!! ‘Touch not, taste not, handle not,’ lest you
‘ perish with the using.’ Flee at once to perfect continence— your only
city of refuge. Look not back towards Sodom, lest you die ! Wdiv
will you go on to commit suicide 1 Oh ! son or daughter of sensuality!
are ycuof no value ? Are you not God- like, and god-endowed, born in
REMEDIES. —ABSTAIN TOTALLY,


your Maker’s Image, and most exalted, both by nature, and in your
capabilities for enjoyment? Oh! will you, for a low-lived animal
gratification sell the birthright of your nature—all your intellectual
powers, all your moral endowments, all your capabilities of enjoyment,
and crowd every avenue and corner of both body and soul with untold
agony ? Behold the priceless gem of your nature ! Oh! snatch it from
impending destruction. Total abstinence Is life ; life animal, intel-
lectual moral. Indulgence is triple death ! Resolution deter-
mination to stop NOW AND FOR-EYER—is your starting point;
without which no other remedial agents will avail anything. AB-
STINENCE OR DEATH is your only alternative. Stop now and for-
ever, or abandon all hope. Will you ‘ long debate which of the two to
choose, slavery’ and ‘ death,’—and such a death—or abstinence and life ?
Do you ‘ return to your wallowing,’ and give up to die« . .
No ! . Behold and shout the kindling resolve ! See the intoxicating,
poisoned cup of passion dashed aside._ Hear the life-boat resolution :
«I wash away the stain of the past in the reformation of the future .
Born with capabilities thus exalted, I will yet be the man ; no longer
the grovelling sensualist! Forgetting the past, I once more put on the
garments of hope, and press forward in pursuit of those noble ends to
which I once aspired, but from which this Delilah allured me. I will
rise vet! On the bended knees of contrition and supplication, 1 bow
before Jehovah’s mercy seat. On the altar of this hour, I lay m y
vow of abstinence and purity ! No more will I sacrilegiously prostitute
those glorious gifts with which Thou hast graciously crowned me . I
abjure for ever this loathsome sin, and take again the oath of allegiance
to J duty and to Thee ! Oh ! ‘ deliver me from temptation ! Of myself
lam weak ; but in Thy strength lam strong ! Do Thou work in me
to ‘ will and to do’ only what is pure and holy. I have served the lusts
of the flesh,’ but oh! forgive and restore a repentant prodigal, and ac-
cept that entire consecration of my every power and faculty to Inee.
Oh, gracious God, forgive, and save, and accept, and thine shall be the
gl< ‘Trise a V !Uf vow is recorded before God ! I will
keep it inviolate. I will banish all unclean thoughts and feelings, and
indulge only in holy wedlock. 1 will again ‘ press forward in the road
of intellectual attainment and moral progression ; and the more eager y
because of this hindrance. I drop but this one tear over the past, and
then bury both my sin and shame in future efforts of self-improvement,
and labours of love. As mourning over my fall does not restore, but
unnerves resolution and cripples effort, I cast the mantle of forgetfulness
over the past. I have now to do only with the future. Nor must I -
main a moment passive and id le. I have a great work before me, first to
repair my shattered constitution, which is the work, not of a day, but
of my life; and also to recover my mental stamina and moral standing,
and if possible, to soar higher still. What shall Ido first i
REGAIN YOUR HEALTH.
Your sufferings and losses grow mainly out of the injury it has sus-
tained, and to regain it, is indispensable to both effort and enjoyment,
and to your salvation from the consequences of past sms, and pre-
vention of future ones. .v
In effecting this restoration, you have mainly to obviate that inflam-
mation already shown to have chiefly engendered your sufferings, and
proved disease. Reduce it, and you both forestall farther and
give to Nature, your great physician, an opportunity to repair the
br ßy h what means, then, can this inflammation be reduced? By what
ever will relieve it when created by any other cause. Ot all he means
of reducing inflammation, I regard the application ot Cold Water


as the most efficient. Venereal excess deranges both the circulation
and the skin, both of which, water, especially in the form of a shower
or hand hath, will do more to restore than almost any other restorative
agent. Wash your whole person every morning, summer and winter ;
and follow with friction. I recommend the hand-bath to begin with, as
enabling you to regulate it according to your feelings. Dash on the
water quickly, so as to produce a partial shock, but stop instantly on
the first sensation of chill. Then follow actively with a coarse towel,
or flesh brush, and rub briskly, till you produce a delightful glow.
Otherwise it will only injure. Every other morning, if your system is
low, may be often enough. Consult your own feelings. Make it
agreeable, and it will be beneficial, and also kill desire, especially for
the time.* Both the warm and the steam bath, say once per week will
be found excellent.
Another excellent remedial agent will be found wetting one end of
a long bandage, and putting it on or below the s .1 of the back, and
then wind the remainder several times around the y; or else lay on a
wet cloth, and wind a woollen bandage over it, so as by keeping this
place wet and warm to sweat out the disease there located, which has
already been shown to be its principal seat. A similar wet cloth and
covering worn upon the sexual organs themselves, will also be of almost
equal service, and for a similar reason. So will the sitting bath in
warm or cold water, (as is most agreeable,) especially for female patients,
as well as for all afflicted with female complaints—sitting from one fourth
to three-fourths of an hour daily.
Both to kill desire, and to restore health, a frequent laving of these
organs in cold water will be found most beneficial, especially when de-
sire arises ; which it will banish. An acquaintance whose Amativeness
affects him much, says he has found great relief from shaving the or-
gan, or the back of the neck and base of the brain, letting the hair from
above partly cover the shaved portion, and then frequently washing it
in cold water. He adds, that the cool air on the organ thus allowed, is
most agreeable. Binding a wet cloth upon the nape of the neck will
also both relieve and cure. The reason of this has already been given.
Galvanism, and magnetism, and Sherwood’s magnetic pills, have
effected some surprising cures of this disease, and especially of female
complaints ; yet the former, being a powerful tonic, must not be used
too freely. Still, except in some cases, physiological prescriptions and
preventives will generally be found to work a more effectual cure than
those medicines (of which I unequivocally disapprove) used by the
faculty.
AVOID ALL STIMULANTS AND IRRITANTS.
Inflammation being the chief cause of your difficulty, everything
calculated to increase it, is unequivocally bad. Hence, abandon wholly
and at once, tea, coffee, tobacco, and all stimulating meats and drinks.
Otherwise, your struggle will be much more doubtful, tedious, and des-
perate. Any other fire burning in the system will augment this. Tea,
coffee, and tobacco, the last two in particular, are powerful narcotics,
and, like opium, though soothing at first, only ultimately re-inflame ,
and are of themselves sufficient to keep up both the disease, the desire,
and the inflammation you would conquer. They even often induce
them, by causing an irritated, craving state of the nervous system,
* To digress sufficiently to give direction for bathing, would be inconsistent.
The rules and directions for bathing most beneficial in other cases, are best in
this case. The Author has never seen this subject p'e<ented to his liking but
will present it fully in the American Phrenological Journal, for 18t6.f
t We intend to publish extracts from the American Phrenological Journal, in penny number*.
We have already published the following uniform with this work :— ‘ Matrimony,' Levs anb
Parentage'‘lntemperance and Tight Lacing' &c., for list «ee Btalagoucs. A sponge bath
i*M good as either shower bath ?r hand bath. —Kd.


•which aggravates desire from the first, by inflaming the nervous system,
and of course the base of the brain. It is a settled physiological fact,
that whatever stimulates the body, thereby proportionally irritates the
base of the brain, Amativeuess in particular, and thus causes lust, as
well as sinful propensity in general. By this means it is that all in-
toxicating drinks cause both lust and depravity. It is their stimulating
property which does this, and whatever stimulates the body, thereby
stimulates the whole base of the brain, in conseqence of that most inti-
mate relation existing between the two, and therefore excites this
passion, and more, probably, than any other. Now te‘a, coffee, and
tobacco, all stimulate, and of course excite both sinful propensity in
general, and lustful desire in particular. The quid and the cigar have
made sensualists and onans by the legion. Nor is coffee free from a
like charge, and tea is also injurious.
This is not all theory. It is sustained b y facts. An acquaintance of
the Author, whose passion, professor though he is, is yet so rampant
that he can govern himself only with the utmost difficulty, says, that
after he has restrained himself for months, and got desire under sub-
jection, a few cups of strong coffee will set him literally crazy after
the sex, so that slight temptation will induce indulgence, and then, the
helm carried away, self-control is out of the question till this passion
has run him through and out, and brought him up debilitated and all
on fire by excess, and penniless, after having squandered the savings of
months, perhaps years of industry. He also recommends cathartics, yet
their effect can be only temporary. Ultimately they must debilitate the
system. He says nothing saves him but * total abstinence/ from
both indulgence and from all stimulants.
Besides : why make ‘ flesh of one’ passion ‘ and fowl of another V
Why not sweep the hoard ? Break away from all bad habits. Conquer
every lust, and be the man, for in nothing consist the true dignity and
glory of our nature more than in self-government. ‘Even if thy
right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee.* Much more
may you abandon that filthy and confessedly injurious habit of tobacco-
eating and burning ; else it may yet shipwreck your hopes. Come,
arise in the might of manhood, and conquer this, as a means of over-
coming that.
And ye daughters of loveliness ! whom this feeling has injured, but
who would return again to purity, health, and happiness, sip no more of
the beverage of China ; no more of the drinks of Java ; for both will
only add fuel to those polluting fires you wish to quench, as well as
perpetuate the disease you would subdue. Try the experiment, if you
doubt this logic. Compare a month of abstinence with one of tea and
coffee drinking. Already your system is all alive with feverish excite-
ment, which these drinks enchance, and this deepens your gloom and
your misery. If you would be yourself again, cut off this right-hand
gratification, as a means of overcoming that. And if you ask what you
shall drink at your meals, I say, nothing is best; yet cocoa, chocolate,
or warm water seasoned, or bread coffee, rice coffee, pea coffee, corn
coffee, etc., &c., will be good substitutes, as they do not inflame, and
are palatable.
For a similar reason, meats, mustards, condiments, peppers, spices,
rich food, gravies—every thing heating and irritating—will only add to
existing inflammation, and increase both desire and disease. Do not
keepers of horses, who wish to fire up this passion in them, do it by
feeding high ? Farmers do the like by the female, in order to create
the required desire. Do not men and women, by the licentious thou-
sand, live luxuriously for the express purpose of kindling this disease?
Go and do the opposite, ye who would produce opposite results !
Some kinds of food, as already specified, excite amorous desires ;
while others, as rice, bread, fruit, vegetables, &c., do not ; and may
therefore be eaten, yet sparingly, because you are yet weak, and because
27
AVOID ALL STIMULANTS AND IRRITANTS*


over-eating, even of the plainest food, is injurious. We have also seen
that sensuality is apt to excite appetite and derange digestion. Coarse
or Graham bread, with fruit, or rice, or sago, or tapioca, or potatoe
starch pudding, &c., will tend to obviate inflammation, and allow the
system to rally. In regard to regimen, Dr. Woodward remarks thus :
' ‘ The regimen must be strict, the diet should be simple and nutritious,
and sufficient in quantity ; it should be rather plain than light and
abstemious; no stimulating condiments should be used ; the suppers
should be particularly light, and late suppers should be wholly avoided.
All stimulating drinks, even strong tea and coffee, should be discarded ;
cider and wine are very pernicious ; tobacco, in all its forms, not less
so.’
As to suppers, I recommend none at all. A full stomach induces
dreams, or the exercise, in sleep, of those organs most liable to spon-
taneous action, which in this case is Amativeness, which produces
libidinous dreams, with accompanying night emissions, which weaken
and disease equally with indulgence. No supper at all also allows the
dinner to become fully digested, which facilitates sound sleep—nature’s
great restorative. Never fear starvation. We all eat twdee too much.
The gluttony of our nation is one great cause of its sensuality, which
fasting will of course tend to obviate. Try the experiment. A friend
thus afflicted has found great relief therefrom. Above all things
KEEP DOING.
«Idleness is Satan’s workshop,’ in this respect pre-eminently. Keep
your mind employed, and lewd feelings can find no entrance ; but, un-
occupied, they rush in unbidden, and renew former associations and
habits.
But be very careful not to over-do —especially, overlift. As you re-
cover, you are in great danger of considering yourself stronger than you
really are, and thus strain your back and bring on a relapse of your
night difficulty. Mark this caution.
Graham’s recommendation to touch these organs as little as possible,
and to bring up children thus, I cordially endorse, because contact
necessarily promotes both desire and inflammation.
WEDLOCK.
‘Love and Parentage’ showed that this function depended on a prim-
itive faculty, and was therefore spontaneous, and no more to be sup-
pressed by force of will than appetite. Its excess can be restrained,
but its promptings are constitutional, and indispensable to perfection of
character. Nor should they be wholly eradicated, only rightly directed.
The marriage state constitutes their ultimate terminus, and only virtu-
ous direction and exercise. Nor will, probably, any thing equally with
this ordinance of nature recall this passion from its wanderings, and
sanctify it to virtue. Pure spiritual love furnishes a substitute for its
obscene gratification, which both satisfies this faculty and prevents per-
version. But this position is too self-evident to require comment.
CHAPTER V.
PREVENTION.
An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure —here pre-eminently.
Not to begin is the only safety. Nor is this prevention difficult. Nature
has taken effectual means to secure this end. That wall of native mo-
desty which she has thrown around every well-constituted youth is
ample protection. They only require to be put on their guard. They
would not fall into these habits unless coaxed into them, nor then if they
once suspected them of being either wrong or injurious. Such know-
ledge would furnish an all-powerful stimulant to modesty, and render
it effectual. They now suspect no harm, and intend no more wrong


than in eating. To know that self-abuse is virtually on a par with sexual
intercourse in its corrupting influence on the mind and in its injury of
the health would awaken Conscientiousness to joint effort with modesty,
and save nearly all. But ignorance lulls conscience and persuasion
and imitation overcome shame, and they enter the broad road and soon
And that death is in the practice. The simple knowledge of the fact
that these practices sap their capabilities of enjoying the fame pleasure
in wedlock would also prevent personal indulgence, as in ‘Love and
Parentage’ it was shown to be a preventive of licentiousness. Diffus-
ing appropriate knowledge , and circulating appropriate books, on tms
snbieSfwill work an effectual cure. And I anticipate great good from
the means and efforts now in progress touching this matter.
THE PREMATURE DEVELOPMENT OF AMATIVENESS,
however the great hot-Mbuse of sensuality in all its forms. Nature
has taken special pains to postpone the development of this instinct till
sufficient strength to guide it the moral senti-
merits power enough to sanctify andjutrain it, and the body sufficient
maturity its drain with i*nity. Is not this postponement
a most beautiful provision ? If it lad made its appearance as early as
the others it would have withdrawn those energies from the system re-
curred for growth, yet have! done no good. As it is, however, nature
Snones the matrimonial d&ires till the subject is prepared to regulate
this instinct, and convert ft into a means of incalculable enjoyment.
At nreciselv what age it should develope itself, it may be difficult to
sav P but certainly not till from the eighteenth to the twentieth year;
and’ then it is held in effectual check by native modesty for a const-
able time before it acquires sufficient impetus to make love outright
and finally takes yearKo ripen into a state prepared for marriage
lea^ould lt to U God and 1 humanity that nature were allowed to have her
perfect work in this respect. But alas ! our youth are reared m a hot-
‘Ld of Amativeness. This impulse is developed several years before its
‘ time an? hence, mainly, its perversion. Ye who labour and pray for
'• the banishment’of lust and the moral purity of man, mark well
the CAu fOF causes of man’s carnality in all its forms. It is the
.A Itpiat STIMULATION, and the PREMATURE DEVELOPMENT of the SCX-
ial instinct. Mark the following incentives of premature love, and its
,Va” e i
sales are t g • tales girls are allowed and encouraged
rlrX g w haVe I seen girls not twelve years old, as hungry
or novefas they should be for their dinners! A sickly sen-
♦•)mpntali«un i« thus formed, and their minds are sullied with impure
desires Every fashionable young lady must of course read every new
novel though nearly all of them contain exceptionable allusions, per-
novel-reading womkn ! for they cannot have pure minds or unsullied
stimulating diet still more prematurely developes this pas-
sing Bv heaSng up and fevering the body, it of course fevers the pro-
pensities,' but none more than this. We have
teas, coffee, mustards, spices, &c. stimulate it m adults
of course induce precocious sexuality m children. On this account,


on no other, these things, coffee in particular, are utterly unfit for the
young. Rather feed them on what will allay this impulse, instead of
prematurely exciting it. Nor can we expect the world to become pure
morally till a correct system of dietetics is generally practised. A heat-
ing diet, after all, is the most prolific cause of ‘excessive and perverted
sexuality.* Parents, mind how you feed your children. Youth, obsei've a
correct regimen. Married and single, who would reduce this feeling eat
and drink cooling, calming articles only.
CHAPTER VI.
ABORTIONS, MADAME RESTELL; TREATMENT OF THE ERRING; GENERAL
CONCLUDING ADVICE.
The one ultimate end designed to be secured by this propensity, is
offspring. Hence, it should be exercised only by way of carrying out
this its legitimate destiny. To exercise it merely for its own s ke—to
trifle with it as a means of sensual gratification, and then destroy its
products—is a violation of its laws, and must necessarily subject the
offender to suffering.
Nature has taken the utmost pains to place the seeds of life as far as
possible from the reach of destruction, and has also planted them in such
intimate proximity to the very life of the mother, that their destruction
cannot be effected without seriously impairing her health and shorten-
ing her life. No way has ever yet been invented, no way probably ever
will be discovered, of artificially producing miscarriages without seri-
ously impairing the mother’s constitution. Infanticide is revolting and
wicked ; and since it cannot be effected without committing suicide t
more or less, according as it impairs and shortens the mother’s life, it
becomes one of the greatest crimes man cam possibly commit. We
shudder at the infanticides committed in the eastern world ; but this
crime is scarcely less prevalent in our own country. It is committed
there after birth, but before it here ; yet the end attained is precisely
the same, namely, the destruction of human life. If abortion is effected
by drinking any poisonous drug, that poison which is great enough to
destroy the life of the unborn infant, is great enough to effectually
debilitate the mother, from whom alone the child receives the poison.
Indeed, a lower degree of poison is requisite to arrest the life of the
child than of the mother, simply because the former is more delicate;
but so intimately are they inter-related, that neither can be destroyed
without thereby impairing the life of the other.
Nor can this destruction be effected by reaching the embryo through
that apparatus in which it is formed, without injuring and diseasing
this apparatus, the consequences of which have already been pom trayed.
This is too clear to require comment.
‘ Better ruin my health than suffer the deadly shame to which expo-
sure will subject me,’ says one whom some strong gust of passion has
caused to fall. This odium is indeed withering and unrelenting, but
the destruction of health is worse. The dilemma is indeed terrible but
life is sweeter than this odium is bitter, and health will give more
happiness than exposure will occasion misery, while the latter w ill in
part be offset by the joys of maternal love.
But the wife has no such excuse. She may have others—the pains
of maternity, the unwelcome increase of family, inability to support
them, injury of health, <bc., &c. These excuses are mere trifles com-
pared with that injury of her constitution which abortion will cause.
No excuse can justify infanticide and partial suicide combined. Be-
sides, most of these objections can be obviated. The pains of mat rnity
we shall show how to obviate in our work on this subject announ ed in
4 Love and Parentage.’ That founded on inability to support chi dren
can be obviated by living more simply. But, be the objection what it
may, nothing can justify the destruction of human life , and who rex


perpetrates this violation of nature’s laws, must suffer its terrible con-
sequences.
MADAME RESTELL.
In view of these truths, what shall we say of Madame Restell’s life-
destroyfhg and murdering business 1 She is destroying the lives of both
mothers and embryo human beings to an incredible extent. Few pass
through her hands without having their constitutions broken up, and
many die in consequence of the mortal wounds she inflicts. If human
life should be protected by, law—if murderers should be punished by
law’s most severe penalties—she surely should be punished, and her
deathly practice be at once arrested. And yet behold her patronage,
her riches, and her utter contempt of law in her ability to bribe its
administrators.
She proffers a passport to lust, and in effect says, to our youth and
to all: ‘ Indulge your carnal passions, and if its natural consequences
follow, come to me and I will hide your sin and shame, and make you
as if it had not been.’ But beware! A lie is on her tongue and a
dagger in her hand. A certain beautiful and healthy young woman,
who had been seduced, was taken to Restell, to be delivered of the fruits
of her sin. She almost died during the operation—and many do die in
and by the treatment itself— but returned home, her bloom departed, her
flesh wasted, her constitution destroyed, a vital artery tapped and
bleeding, and after lingering thus a few months, died. This is but a
sample case. Oh, daughter of passion ! beware how her flattering pro-
mises of deliverance encourage you to sin! In virtue alone is there
safety and happiness.
TREATMENT OF THE ERRING.
Far be it from us to pander, in any form, to this sin. If we regard
one form of virtue as more holy than any other, it is moral purity. If
we regard one sin as more black and hideous than any other, it is this,
because so prolific a cause of crime, and so terrible in its consequences.
If we have one ‘ desire and prayer to God,’ it is that we may be instru-
mental in staying the current of lust, as well as in sanctifying that
function of our nature to which this work, in common with ‘ Love and
Parentage,’ is devoted, by promoting connubial love —its legitimate
terminus. We reason, we beseech, and show ‘ a more excellent way.*
But when our fellow beings have fallen, we would not crush them in
consequence. * A bruised reed shall he not break.* We would rather
apologise. We would say to beholders: ‘ These unfortunate mani-
festations of carnality doubtless had a physical origin. Ignorant of the
laws of Physiology, these erring sons of passion, and these daughter*
of frailty, had lashed up this feeling by heating meats and drinks, by
novel reading, by blasted affection, by giving their minds to this class
of subjects, till this propensity became uncontrolable, and in a moment
of its preternatural action, they sinned. They were, in all practical
respects, deranged. A fevered state of their bodies had wrought up this
passion to an insupportable pitch of tension, and they sinned in conse-
quence. They were more sick physically, than depraved in motive.
‘ They knew not what they did.* And the licentious of our land requred
to be cured in body as the* means of restoring them to virtue. We have
demonstrated that this passion is induced by a disordered physiology,
quite as much as by depravity of intention. There is a certain epidemic
disease, the subjects of which, when recovering, are tormented with a fury
of lustful desires which will cause the most virtuous in the world to stray.
Now suppose a similar physical derangement had caused them to say and
do in anger many hard things against us, which we knew they would
not have said and done if they had been well; should we lay up against
♦hem these wrathful ebullitions —the offspring of disease? No; but
should attribute all to sickness —to temporary derangement or alienation
of mind, and pity, not blame relentlessly. Precisely thus should w©
regard much of the sensuality of mankind. It is the legitimate and
31
MADAMS RKSTELL. —TREATMENT OB TUB ERRING,


necessary offspring, to all practical intents and purposes, of mental de-
rlnaemeht induce! by physical disorder. Its subjects are sinful, but
they are also sici, and their physical derangement occasions their moral
de This t doctrine will find opponents, but no rcfuters. The fact is indis-
putable, that certain meats, and drinks, and regimen create passion.
Ignorantly they have kindled up the fires of lust till they aie
goaded on to indulgence by a power of passion well nigh irresistible.
As the lustful feelings of those recovering from the fever above men-
tioned had a physical cause, not a moral origin, so with most of the sons
and daughters of lust. In the case of the fever, nothing but the strait-
iacket or the absence of the other sex, could prevent indulgence.
Goaded on by its fury, nothing will stop those before pure minded, and
even the aged-who before were past the natural period of these im-
pulses, from committing rapes ; or, if females, from proffering the most
wanton solicitations. So in kind, though less in degree, with the dissolute
of both sexes. They are not irresponsible for their conduct, but are
principally guilty for having thus inflamed their bodies, and thereby
? rS| ° But this they did ignorantly. As he who murders while
£Sted is more guilty for getting drunk than for the murder, so
these sinners sin ignorantly. Shall they then be cast out of society and
crushed in consequence of their ignorance of what few understand ?
InfoVm them and you save them. And this is mainly what is required
to stay licentiousness. Enlighten betokehand, not rebuke afterwards.
Circulate suitable works, and encourage properly conducted lectures, and
you achieve the most glorious results attainable by man.
CONCLUDING ADVICE.
In conclusion, let every son and daughter of humanity investigate the
laws , and study the science , of this department of our nature, and then
obev them Let every youth keep this propensity under subjection till
H can be awtu y and happily excised in wedlock Let the affectum,
never be trifled with, and let that wall of native modesty kindly thrown
hv nature around this propensity, never suffer a breach, hut be
till it is supplanted by the still more effectual preventive and enclosure
of spiritual love. Let no one ever indulge this passion with the opposite
sex /or the first time, till married, because this throws wide open the
flood-gates of lust otherwise easily kept closed, and most difficult to re-
shut-nothing equally firing up this passion. And let us all preserve
and regain our health, and keep our bodies in a cool and vigorous state,
and then cherish that holy, sanctifying aspect of love which raises us
above lustful propensity, purifies and elevates the soul, and stamps a
high intellectual and moral impress on posterity.
Printed by G. Turner, Stoke-upon Trent, and may be had of all Booksellers
