

GIVE HIM A HELPING HAND
New South Wales.
Amelioration of the Conditions
of Sick and Wounded
Australian Soldiers and Sailors.
AUSTRALIA DAY AMELIORATION COMMITTEE,
Challis House, SYDNEY.
69147


With the Compliments of
THE
AUSTRALIA DAY AMELIORATION COMMITIEE.
Challis House, Sydney,
I7tu July, 1916.


Amelioration of the Conditions
of Sick and Wounded
Australian Soldiers and Sailors
The Australia Day movement originated in a public meeting held on
16th June, 1915, at the Sydney Town Hall, when the following resolution
was passed :
“ That in the opinion of this meeting, it is desirable, in view of the
extent of the casualties in the Australian Expeditionary
Forces, that a united effort be made in each State with the
object of raising funds (1) to enable the Red Cross
Organisation to provide comforts and nursing assistance for
sick and wounded Australian soldiers and sailors, and (2) for
the general amelioration of the conditions of such soldiers
and sailors.”
The appeal was enthusiastically responded to in New South Wales,
and resulted in the subscription of something over £780,000.
It was originallv contemplated that both objects of the resolution
—[a) the provision of comforts and nursing assistance, and (6) the
amelioration of the conditions of the sick and wounded soldiers and sailors
—should be responsibilities of the Red Cross Society. Before long,
however, it became evident that the burden placed upon the Red Cross
Society was so great that it would be. in the interests of all concerned
in the Australia Day movement, and particularly of the sick and wounded
men returning to Australia, if a section of the responsibility could be
transferred to other equally capable hands. Representations to this
effect were made at a meeting of the Australia Day Executive Committee
held in the Lord Mayor’s room on the 10th September, 1915, an( i, after
mature consideration, it was unanimously decided that a delegation
representing the Australia Day Fund should confer with a Committee
appointed from the Red Cross Society “ with a view to ailiving at a
workable scheme for the distribution of the fund.”
A conference, representative of both bodies, accordingly met in the
Premier’s room, when it was decided to recommend that a special Committee
be brought into existence, to be styled “ The Amelioration Committee,
and to be charged with carrying out that part of the creative resolution
which related to “ the amelioration of the conditions of sick and wounded
soldiers and sailors.”
69147


Ratifying action on the part of both the Australia Day Executive
and the Red Cross Society was immediately forthcoming, and the
Amelioration Committee, with command of a fund of £200,000 (£170,000
earmarked from the Australia Day Fund and £30,000 from the National
Relief Fund), commenced its work without delay.
The personnel of the Committee is as follows :
The Hon. Mr. Justice Ferguson (Chairman).
The Hon. W. A. Holman, M.L.A.
Miss Consett Stephen.
E. Owen Cox.
J. J. Cohen, M.L.A.
Alderman D. Guihen.
T. W. Garrett,
E. B. Harkness.
*TKa QuyiM..
The services of Mr. F. C. Covers were made available by the Govern-
ment as Executive Secretary. The headquarters of the Committee are
established at Challis House, opposite the General Post Office, Sydney.
Naturally, the first subject that engaged the attention of the Committee
was the form amelioration should take —the method of distribution. After
careful and earnest consideration, it was decided that it would be unwise,
in the absence of any assurance of additions to the Fund, to attempt to
undertake to provide for the permanent future of returned wounded and
invalided soldiers. This function, it was felt, would be beyond the
capabilities of any voluntary fund, and should be left in the hands of the
State or Commonwealth Authorities, to be dealt with as a matter of
national obligation. Confirmation of this view is to be found in the recent
decision to initiate the “ Repatriation Fund,” which has for its object the
making of permanent provision for wounded and invalided soldiers.
It may not be out of place to mention that the Committee, in con-
sidering what should be the method and scope of its operations, examined
amongst other suggestions one for the purchase of annuities for returned
men ; but as an annuity of 10s. per week would involve an expenditure of
at least £5OO, and £1 per week £l,OOO, the whole of the fund at the disposal
of the Committee would provide for only 200 to 400 men, and even then
it would be an inadequate permanent provision. The Committee there-
fore decided that amelioration should, as a general rule, take the form
of payments based on weekly maximum allowances'—having due regard
to the special circumstances of each case—and this method has been
closely followed.
- Already to this date, 17th July, 1916, during the nine months
since the initiation of the Amelioration Committee, 3.800 soldiers
and sailors, representing upwards of 80 per cent, of the returned
men, have received assistance from the fund, the payments to date
totalling £39,000, embracing 22,000 individual payments.


From this it will be seen that, while attempting to deal inadequately
with the permanent future of the men, a few hundred of them might
have been assisted, thousands are being provided for by the Committee’s
present method.
Having decided, therefore, that the form of amelioration to be pro-
vided by the Committee must be provisional only, the method of
administering the fund within these limitations was thoughtfully discussed.
It was finally decided to take the basis of a fixed living wage as a practical
maximum in every case, without respect to rank, with the reservation
that each case should be dealt with individually on its merits, giving
due consideration to the nature and extent of the disability of the
individual and his actual needs. Scales were then adopted for—
(a) Single men.
( b ) Married men.
(c) Married men with families.
(d) Single men with dependents.
No fixed limitation as to period was laid down, the intention being, so
far as the funds w r ould permit, to assist returned soldiers until they were
able to obtain permanent employment through the various channels in
existence, or until permanent provision should be made for their future
by the national organisation which, it was felt, must sooner or later be
brought into operation, and which is in fact now being brought into
existence in the form of the “ Repatriation Fund.”
It must be remembered that amongst the returned wounded and
invalided soldiers are many who do not want to remain in hospitals, con-
valescent homes, or rest homes. The nature of their disability is often due
chiefly to the effect of their injuries to nerves and system, and what the
men in such cases need is the opportunity of getting about amongst their
fellow-men under normal conditions without the necessity of having to
undertake unduly heavy work, or even any work at all, until their nervous
and physical equilibrium is regained and their general condition restored
to something akin to normal.
Ihe method of amelioration adopted by the Committee enables them to
do this; they can come and go untrammelled, live where it suits them
best to live, with friends or otherwise, with the assurance that there is
always a helping hand between them and want.
As far as the information that reaches the Committee goes, there is a
general feeling of gratitude among the men for the help that has enabled
them to tide over the period from their return to the time when they are
equal to undertake employment again. Naturally, there are cases of
dissatisfaction; some expect the Committee to do what its funds will
not permit it to do, and some can never be satisfied. Unfortunately,
too, occasional attempts at misrepresentation occur, but the Committee’s
method of verification, which has been greatly facilitated by the cordial


assistance of the Military Authorities, is simple and expeditious, and,
while practically ensuring the detection of imposition, it enables applicants
to receive assistance within an hour or two —often even less—of their
applying at the Committee’s Offices.
Another phase of amelioration has been found to work well where a
little financial assistance will give a man a start on lines enabling him to
make his own living. In cases of this kind, it is the practice of the Com-
mittee to commute into moderate cash payments the amount that would
ordinarily have been paid to the applicant for some time to come in the
form of weekly allowances. By this means the Committee has been able
in many cases to provide immediate cash assistance to an extent which
has enabled men to start in little businesses, and so obtain their livelihood
by means congenial to themselves.
For the guidance and general information of our sick and wounded men,
it was some time ago decided to issue to each of the troops on incoming
transports at Melbourne a small printed card indicating clearly and con-
cisely the separate functions of the Amelioration Committee and other
of the more important Patriotic Funds of interest in this connection.
This Guide Card, as it is called, is enclosed in a suitable envelope, beating
a general invitation to seek the aid of the Committee, and is so arranged
as to fit an ordinary-sized coat pocket. It is felt that this arrangement
will ensure the spread of useful information in the right quarter, and will
appreciably indicate the desire of the Committee to aid those for whom
its funds are properly available.
A congenial rendezvous for the men is provided by the Anzac Buffet in
the same building as the offices of the Committee, adjacent to the State
War Council’s rooms, and the Returned Soldiers Employment Bureau.
It is felt that by meeting here good comradeship is engendered, and a
feeling of esprit de corps encouraged. The men compare notes and
hear of what one and another are doing, and by degrees most of them find
their way into some sort of permanent employment. The Committee are
deeply grateful to the Mosman Voluntary Aid Detachment, who have so
whole-heartedly and self-sacrificingly ministered to the men’s material
comfort in this department.
It would not be meet to close these remarks without paying a tribute
to the Voluntary Workers who have devoted so much of their time, and
who have so tactfully assisted the Executive Secretary in carrying out
the onerous duties attaching to the administrative work of the Committee.
SYDNEY: WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, IQI6.
