

AMENDMENT OF
CONSTITUTION
FEDERAL
Referendums
THE CASE
FOR...
AND
AGAINST


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
Eeferendum {Constitution Alteration ) Act, 1906-1913,
REFERENDUMS
To be held on SATURDAY, the 11th day of
DECEMBER, 1915.
Pamphlet showing the Textual Alterations and Additions
proposed to be made to the Constitution by the Proposed
•Laws, and containing The Argument IN FAVOUR OF
the Proposed Laws, authorized by a Majority of the
Members of both Houses of the Parliament who voted
*
For the Proposed Laws, and The Argument AGAINST
the Proposed Laws, authorized by a Majority of the
Members of both Houses of the Parliament who voted
Against the Proposed Laws.
R. C. OLDHAM,
Chief Electoral Officer Jot the Commonwealth.
Melbourne,
16th September, 1915.
81098 A




rages
ARGUMENT FOR • ■ ■ 13 to 50
ARGUMENT AGAINST • ■ 55 to 62




Statement in relation to the
Proposed Laws.
The PROPOSED LAWS, relating to the LEGISLATIVE
POWERS OP THE PARLIAMENT, which have been
PASSED by an ABSOLUTE MAJORITY of both HOUSES
OF THE PARLIAMENT, and which are to be SUBMITTED
TO THE ELECTORS on SATURDAY, the 11th day of
DECEMBER, 1915, are entitled as follows :
1. “ Constitution Alteration (TRADE and COMMERCE) 1915.”
' 2. “ Constitution Alteration (CORPORATIONS) 1915.”
3. “ Constitution Alteration (INDUSTRIAL MATTERS) 1915.”
4. “ Constitution Alteration (RAILWAY DISPUTES) 1915.”
5. “ Constitution Alteration (TRUSTS) 1915.”
6. “ Constitution Alteration (NATIONALIZATION OF MONOPO-
LIES) 1915.”
THE TEXT OP SECTION 51 OF THE CONSTITUTION and the
TEXTUAL ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS proposed by the said
proposed Laws to be made to the Constitution are as follows: (the words
proposed to be omitted being printed in ERASED TYPE, and the words
proposed to be inserted being printed in BLACK TYPE). The marginal


note In black typo opposite each alteration or addition has reference to
the proposed law by which that alteration or addition Is proposed to be
made.
hi. The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution, nejrigiatiro powers oi
have power to make laws for the peace, order, and good tho parli *‘ m'nt-
government of the Commonwealth with respect to:—
(i.) Trade and commerce with-ethor ooun-
&io9, ■ and-ameag-tbe-Stetes-r
No. I.
TRADE AND
COMMERCE.
(a.) Taxation; but so as not to discriminate between States or
parts of States:
(iii.) Bounties on the production or export of goods, but so that such
bounties shall be uniform throughout the Commonwealth :
(iy.) Borrowing money on the public credit of the Commonwealth:
(v,) Postal, telegraphic, telephonic, and other like services :
. (vi.)' The naval and military defence of the Commonwealth and of
the several States, and the control of the forces to execute
- and'maintain the laws of the Commonwealth :
u‘ ! ' (vii.) Lighthouses, lightships, beacons and buoys :
(viii.) Astronomical and meteorological observations :
(ix.)~Quarantine :
(x.) Fisheries in Australian waters beyond territorial limits s
(xi.) Census and statistics :
(xii.) Currency, coinage; and legal tender :
(xiii.) Banking, other than State banking; also State banking
extending beyond the limits of the State concerned, the
incorporation of banks, and the issue of paper money;
(xiv.) Insurance, other than State insurance; also State insurance
extending beyond the limits of the State concerned :
(xv.) )Veightg and measures:
(xvi.) Bills of exchange and promissory notes;'


fxvii.). Bankruptcy and insolvency: - - ' •'
(xviii.) Copyrights,' patents of inventions and designs, and trade-
marks ;
(xix.) Naturalization and aliens:
ehri—ewpefutioHS—f&HHed—withia —the
No. 2. —COR-
PORATIONS.
Corporations, including—
(a) the creation, dissolution, regulation, and
control of corporations;
(b) corporations formed under the law of a State,
including their dissolution, regulation, and
control ; but not including municipal or
governmental corporations, or any corpora-
tion formed solely for religious, charitable,
scientific, or artistic purposes, and not for
the acquisition of gain, by the corporation
or its members; and
(c) foreign corporations, including their, regulation;
and control:
(xxi.) Marriage :
(xxii.) Divorce and matrimonial causes; and in relation thereto,
parental rights, and the custody and guardianship of infants V
(xxiii.) Invalid and old-age pensions :
(xxiv.) The service and execution throughout the Commonwealth of
the civil and criminal process and the judgments of the
; ; r Court* of the States :
(xxv.) The recognition throughout the Commonwealth of the laws,
the public Acts and records, and the judicial 'proceedings
of the States :


(xxvi.) The people of any race, other than the aboriginal race ra aiiy
State, for whomitisdeeracd accessary to make special lavs;
(xxvi’.) Imnvgration and emigration:
(xxviii.) The influx of criminals :
(xxix.) External aflairs :
(xxx.) The relations of the Commonwealth with the islands of the
Pacific;
(xxxi.) The acquisition of property on just terms from any State or
person for any purpose in respect of which the Parliament
has power to make laws;
(xxxii.) The control of railways with respect to transport for the naval
and military purposes of the Commonwealth :
v xxxiii.) The acquisition, with the consent of a State, of any railways of
' the State cm terms arranged between the Commonwealth
and the State;
(xxxiv.) Hallway construction and extension in any State with the
concent of that State :
(xxxv.) GeneiUaSea-aad-aFbltfaUeß-fe-^fee—pr©_
fepates-esteadiag boyond-feo-limits-of
GH-y-ese-State-f
No. 3.
INDUSTRIAL
MATTERS.
Industrial matters, including—
(a) 'labour;
(b) employment and unemployment;
(c) the terms and conditions of labour and employ-
ment in any trade, industry, occupation,
or calling;
(d) the rights and obligations of employers and
employees;
(e) strikes and lock-outs;
(f) the maintenance of industrial peace; and
(g) the settlement of industrial disputes ;


(xxxv. A.) Conciliation and arbitration for the
prevention and settlement of indus-
trial disputes in relation to employ-
mentintherailwayservice of a State:
No. 4.
RAILWAY
DISPUTES.
(xxxvi.) Jdatters in respect of which this -Constitution makes provision
until the .Parliament otherwise provides,:
(xxxvii.) Matters referred to the Parliament of the Commonwealth by
- the Parliament or Parliaments of any State or States, but
no that the law shall extend only to States by whoso
Parliaments the matter is referred, or which afterwards
adopt the law:
(xxxviii.) The .exorcise within the Commonwealth, at the request or with
the concurrence of the Parliaments of.all the-States directly
concerned, of any power which can at the establishment of
this’Constitution bo exorcised only by the Parliament of the
United Kingdom or by the Federal Council of Australasia:
(xxxix.) Matters incidental to the execution of any power vested by
this Constitution in the Parliament or in cither House
thereof, or in the Government of the Commonwealth, or in
the Federal Judicature, or in any department or officer of
the Commonwealth :
(xl.) Trusts, combinations, monopolies, and
arrangements in relation to—
fa) the production, manufacture,
or supply, of goods, or the
supply of services, or
(b) the ownership of the means of pro-
duction, manufacture, or supply
of goods, of supply of services.
No. 5.
TRUSTS.


51 A.—( 1.) When each House of the No> 6 ._
Parliament, in the same session, has national-
HaTvonansatiov
•I llocopoliea.
by Resolution, passed by an absolute majority. of iZATiON OF
its members, declared that the , industry - or monopo-
business of producing, manufacturing, or sup- LIES *
plying any specified goods, or of supplying any specified
services, is the subject of a monopoly, the Parliament shall
have power to. make laws for carrying on the industry or
business by or under the control of the Commonwealth, and
acquiring for that purpose on just terms any property used
in connexion with the industry or business.
(2.) This section shall not apply to any industry or business
conducted or carried on by the Government of a State or any
public authority constituted under a State.


The PROPOSED LAW, relating to the TERM OF SERVICE
OF SENATORS, which has heen PASSED hy an ABSOLUTE
MAJORITY of both HOUSES OF THE PARLIAMENT, and
Which is to be SUBMITTED TO THE ELECTORS on
SATURDAY, the 11th day of DECEMBER, 1915, is entitled
as follows-
v" “ Constitution Alteration (SENATORS’ TERM OF SER-
’VICE) 1915.”' :
THE TEXT OF SECTION 13 OF THE CONSTITUTION and the
TEXTUAL ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS proposed by the said
proposed Law to bo made to the Constitution are as follows: (the words,
proposed to be omitted being printed in ERASED TYPE, and the words
proposed to be inserted being printed in BLACK TYPE). ■
13.-As-seeH-as-may-lie-ajteF-tiie-Se}iata-iti : 6t-sHeet%
Rotation of
fet'imtora.
efteh-SMe-Htto-two-dasscK—
fee^eeß4-efa£'6-^-tfce-^^ya^ea-of-'six-yem;
iHHg-e#-tli6i^teHa'of-seFvieer
iiltcr jiii l tlißGoliitioii of* _ sIkiII I
mnafum, '
vlvv IXvil*


13. As soon as maybe after each first meeting of
the Senate following a dissolution thereof, the
Rotation of
Senators.
Senate shall divide the senators chosen for each State into
two classes, as nearly equal in number as practicable ;and
the places of the senators of the first class shall become
vacant at the expiration of three years and two months, and
the places of those of the second class at the expiration of
six years and four months, from the beginning of their term
of service ; and afterwards the places of senators shall
become vacant at the expiration of six jears and lour months
from the beginning of their term of service.
The election to fill vacant places shall be made within one
year before the places are te become vacant.
For the purposes of this section the term of service of the
senators elected in the year One thousand nine hundred and
fourteen shall be, taken to have begun on the first day of
October, One thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and the
term of service of a senator elected to fill a vacancy there-
after occurring in rotation shall be taken to begin on the day
bn which the place which he is to fill becomes vacant, and
the term of service of senators elected at an election next
after a dissolution of the Senate shall be taken to begin bn
the day of the first meeting of the House of Representatives
after the dissolution.


THE CASE FOR THE AMENDMENTS.
On 11th December next, the electors will bn asked to rote on the air
proposed amendments of tha Cornm-mweMlth Constitution. The proposed
ndraerits are sot out separately. The electors'may vote ■“ Yes J ’ or “No *
l n each case. ‘ , - -
Wo;urge them to vote‘‘.Yes’’for all of them. .
Th ; s is aPo -pie's Question. The Commonwealth Const'tuMon and the
Comm mwealth Pa liament are,the instruments by which the peoi la’s will
is carried out. The Constitution sots out thp pxtont of the .people’s power
to govern themselves. The parliament is the servant who does the pe -pie’s
wi 1 The people' have -the power to take to themselves more power to govern’
themselves than the Constitute n'now sets cut. If the people thus increase
their own powers, Parliament —their servant—can better serve them.
It shook! never be forgotten that Parliament is the servant of tho 'people.
The people create it and intrust it with power. The people can destroy it
and punish it if it abuses that, power. . ,
Bat Parliiment cannot bo intrusted with powers which the people have
not taken to themselves; : The iraast pp aniendetl. .
WHY TH2 HEPERENDUMS OUGHT TO BE PUT NOW.’
The necessity for amending the Constitute mis now so-obvious that tho
BOTH PARTIES
Pi.at>jgp fo
AiUSSD.iIENi OP
COsSllltmOjl.
Liberal Party made >t part of t.hejr programme when before
the electors la-1 year. The Jiabgur Party has hint advo T
catcd it. This shows beb'er perhaps than anything else
how strong p ibtc opinion is in favour of amendment of
the, .Constitution. -T at b*th pp.l tical parties sho hi have made it part of
ti-eir progra ■■in®, and fledged them elves -to submit the amendm-nts
necessary to the people at the earliest opportunity, snows that imt only is


amendment of the Constitution required, but that it is a matter of great
urgency. Yet the people are now told that the Ileferendums ought to be
postponed until after the war. , - -•
And this brings us. to the argument upon which the opponents of
these amendments rely to defeat tlrera. For they do not propose to
deal with the merits of the amendments as such. Realizing that a frontal
attack is hopeless, they hope to snatch a victory by a dank movement.
They say that these amendments of the Constitution which are
absolutely necessary for the effective working of the Federation
and the protection of the people ought not to be made during the war.
They ray that the Referenduras will arouse party strife. They say that,
at eucli a time as this, when the Empire is engaged in a life and deatii
struggle, there should be a cessation of party strife. They say that all over
tho Empire. political parties have agreed upon a truce, ai.d that we .ought
to do the same. And therefore they Say we ought not to ask the people to
approve' tho proposed amendments of the Constitution." That, shortly, is
the argument upon which they reJy to defeat the proposals at theßeferendum.
And practically that is the only argument they intend to put forward! They
say “ We will not discuss the merits of these proposals to amend the
Constitution. This is not the time to do so. Cease party strife.’ Lay aside
your Referenda proposals until after the war.” _ ■’ ■
Now, as this is the only reason they advance .why these proposals for tho
amendment of tho Constitution should not be approved by the people, wc aro
entitled to examine it very closely. -- ■ ,
OUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE WAR.
First let us state what in our opinion is the right attitude of political parties
during this great war. We believe fervently that party strife should cease ;
that all sections should work together for the general good of tho defence of
the Commonwealth and the Empire, and the defeat of our enemies. Wo
believe, further, that it is only,by such united action" that we can hope to
achieve victory and avert ihe more calamitous of the consequences of this
war. ■’ That is our creed, and we arc now, and have been since the outbreak
of tlio war, ready and anxious to act up to it. And since ■
deeds alone count in this great crisis, let what we have done
towards enabling Australia to defend herself by land arid
eea, both before the war, and since, speak for ns And’ in'
AUSTRALIA* :
DEFENCE POLICY
AND THE LABOUR
PARTY.
patting these proposals before the people we are acting in strict accordance
(Legislative Powers of the Parliament-
Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


with a sound policy, for we contend that amendment of the Constitution is
not a party question, but a national one ; not a politician’s; but a people’s
question. Our opponents charge us with being desi-dus of stirring up party
strife. Let us now l.iok at the matter calmly, impartially, and in the light
of facts that cannot be questioned, and see whether this charge can be
sustained. If not, then it must recoil upon the heads of those who made it.
And we confidently ask the people, having considered our argument and the
facts adduced in support of it, to judge between us and our; opponents as to
wh ch party has been and is now most desirous of abandoning party warfare
and doing only those things that are necessary for the general good of the
community.
SOME PLAIN SPEAKING. .
When the war broke out, Liberal Governments were in office in fho
Commonwealth and in three of the Siates. The Cook Government had
succeeded, after mouths of effort, in precipitating a double dissolution of both
Houses. I s avowed reason for doing this was to obtain a working majority
in both Houses. When war broke out, a proposal was
made to the Cook Government for a party truce. • Two
alternative suggestions were put forward. Both would
have allowed the Cook Government to remain in office.
the coos
GOVERNMENT AND
A PARTY TRUCE.
These proposals to “cease party warfare” were-coritemptuously rejected
by the Liberal Government. Mr. Cook said that the “Commonwealth
must exercise her powers of-self-government,” war or no war.' Sir William
Irvine ridiculed the suggestion for a truce, and said It had always been the
practice of the British Government to hold elections during war time.
“The elections must go on,” he said; “a party truce was impossible.”
The proposals were rejected: the elections were held; the Liberal Party
was defeated. Now they say that to amend the Constitution is to raiso
party strife 11 ' ‘ ‘ ,
BY-ELECTIONS AND PARTY STRIFE.
In Great Britain and every other Parliament of the Empire, parties Lave
agreed not to contest by-elections, in order that there should bo no party
strife.’ But the Liberal Party has 'declined to fallow this excellent example.
In December, 1914, when the war had been raging fiercely for months—
Mr. J. A. Arthur, Minister for External Affairs, died, and the Bendigo seat
became vacant In every other part of the Empire parties had agreed not
(Legislative Powers of the Parliament-
Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


do contest each ofcher’s>eeata>duiiiig tho war, but although only three months
.hml e apsed since the General Election, and the circumstances of Mr. Arthurfs
•death were particularly sad, the Liberal Party contested tho Bendigo seat
3T-ELECTIOHS-
THE LIBERALS
Ai*D FARTV STRIFE.
and fought the election upon party lines I Yet now they
jwy there should bo a rtruce to pa’-ty warfare.
’When the date Mr. Jolley, M.P, for Grampians, died,
.on’y a -few weeks after Lis old friend and schoolfellow,
•Mr. Arthur, and tin- Grampians seat became, vacant, the Liberal Party again
contested Vte seat upon.strict party lines and won it. Yet now they say tho
;peoplo Should not bare an opportunity .of approving these amendments of
the Constitution because the Referendum will create party strife. ■ ,
Three State elections have been held since the war began, and in each
case a Lilitral Go'ernment was in office,.aud no attempt wiu made to avoid
party warfare. Tho Liberal Government of Victoria went to the coun'ry
in November, 1911:.; the Liberal -Govertimaht of South. Australia in .March
dast; the liberal Government of Queensland last ,M *y. All these'elections
were conducted on strictly party lines, and party feeling ran very high.
Did any Liberal Government suggest a party truoo I Not one. The Liberal
Members in tho .Federal Parliament helped their State -colleagues, and
LIBERAL STATS
PARTIES ADD
PAH*V STRIFE.
mot one word was heard, from tbo Liberal Party m
tho Federal Parliament about the cessation of party
.strife 1 ! The f». te are overw|iHluimg. Wherever an oppor-
tunity of furthering party interest has been afforded In
Federal or State spheres, the Liberal Party, has eagerly seized it. They
have rejected w.th ridicule and contempt any suggestions for a party truce
-as long as they thought they served their interests better by party
Yet when the Interests of the people demand an amendment of the
Constitution, and Vested Interests are menaced, the Liberal Party cries but
aloud that “party strife is unpatriotic.” • »
Wr are very reidy to avoid party strife, but we do not propose to allow
the opponents of the amendments of the Constitution to shelter behind tbo
war to servo their party purposes. We are not to be deterred from taking
s ich steps as are necessary to protect the interests of the people merely
because those who have always opposed these proposals, but dare not now
-do so openly, talk about “ party strife.” We were not only ready, but
desirous, of considering-any amendment;* of the proposed alterations of the
•Constitution that the Liberal Party might put forward, but they did not
.oiler any, although they were .invited by the Attorney-Qeuacal to do so.
(Legislative Powers of tho Parliament— .
/ , Argument FOB the Proposed Laws.)


EEFERENDUMS NOT PARTY QUESTIONS. THE PEOPLE’S
GUARANTEE THAT IT WILL NOT BE USED FOR PARTY
PURPOSES. • -1.-’’ ' ■
And this brings us to another point. How can a Referendum upon tl e
pr posed amendments of tho Constitution necessary to give the people
more power to protect themselves be a party question) -The amendment of
the Constitution is a great national question. To whom will these amend-
ments give power 1 To the people. How will the new powers be exercised ?
As the people decide. But i t may be asked what guarantee
have tho people that the Labour Party will not use these
powers for purely party purposes ? They have the best
guarantee in the world. The Labour Party will, befoi’e
THE PEOPLE’S
GUARANTEE: THE
BIGHT OF VETO.
using any of the new powers, pass the Initiative and Referendum Bill,
which gives the electors power to veto any measure of which they do not
approve. That is the final and complete answer to ail such criticism.
The amendments will give the people more power to protect themselves,
and tho Initiative and Referendum Bill will place the control of these new
powers—and all others—absolutely in their hands, ‘They will thus be able
to say, “ Thus far and no further,” whenever they think fit.
EVERY PARLIAMENT IN THE EMPIRE HAS THE POWERS WE ASK
FOR. THEY ARE NECESSARY FOR THIS WAR.
- It is said that in every other part of the Empire there is a complete
cessation of party strife. We have already shown how the Liberal Party in
Australia have never hesitated to wage party warfare when-
ever an opportunity to serve party interests arose. But
apart from this, contrast the position of the Federal Par-
liament with the Parliament of Groat Britain, or that of
any of the other self-governing dominions. We are at war
and the Commonwealth Parliament is charged with the
great task of defending the country. To effectively perform
COHMONWEALTH
CHARGED wlfll
GREAT TASK OF
CARRYING ON WAR
BUT HASHOPOWER
OVER CAPITAI,
OR LABOUR.
its supremely important functions the Commonwealth must have complete
control of all the resources of the country, and of every person in it In order to
grapple with the tremendous issues arising out of the war, it is essential that
the Government charged with the responsibility should have absolute
authority over Capital and Labour. But the Commonwealth has no control
over either 11 That the Government which is carrying on the war should be
powerless to deal with the greatest forces of the modern world seems incred-
(Legislative Powers of tho Parliament—
Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


ibJe. but it is nevertheless absolutely true. When our opponents say that
there is a party truco in every btherpart of the Empire tiny ignore this vital
fact. ‘ Every other Parliament in the Empire has the powers we are asking
Jfor. : These Parliaments can protect the interests of the people if they
choose. They can limit the profits of these,unscrupulous persons who are
heaping up.war4ortunes, regulate prices, and deal generally with Trusts
and Monopolies. They can deal with Strikes and Industrial Disputes
generally. But the Federal Parliament of Australia, in the greatest crisis
of the modern world, when the entire fabric of civilization is cracking with
the frigh ful strain, is powerless to deal with capita! or labour; power-
less to prevent exploitation of the people by capital; powerless to maintain
industrial peace I ! Surely to ask for some of the same powers possessed by
every other self-governing dominion, as well as Great Britain herself, in order
that wo may protect the country, is not to wage party strife. -
THE WAR MAKES AMENDMENTS MORE NECESSARY.
Our opponents admit that amendment of the Constitution is necessary,
but they urge that amendment ought not to be made during the war. But
surely since the war creates new and complex problems, tho power to grapple
with these is more urgently needed now than at other times. The war is
largely responsible for the greatly increased cost of living; it has already
caused much unemployment. As time passes, this must inevitably increase.
It is obvious that these and all other troubles arising out of the war mu-t be
dealt with, and they can only be effectively dealt with by giving tho Govern-
ment, which is'carrying on the war,'sufficient power to protect the people,
and toVjrganizo the resources of the community.
This war has already raged over a year. We hope it will soon lie over, but
there are no signs of an early collapse oh the pact of our enemies. And wo
cannot afford to contemplate what would happen to us if they wore successful.
We must, then, fight on until victory is achieved. For through victory only
can a lasting peace be obtained. But this may take years. Are we then to
THE WAR MAT
LAST FOR YEARS.
ARE THE'PEOPLB
TO WAIT FOR EVER
FOR RELIEF, AND
THOSE WHO PREY
UPON THEM TO BE
GIVEN LICENCE TO
GO ON DOING SOP
wait for years before the Constitution is amended ?
Are the' producers of this country who voted for Federa-
tion because they were guaranteed a. free market all.
over Australia, but have found this guarantee a mere
scrap of paper, to wait fo<- years ? Are the people now
exploited by Tru-ts and Monopolies to wait for years for-
relief? Are the Labour organizations who have been urged
to abandon the strike and seek relief in the Arbitration
Courts,-but have tinio and again,-after protracted and
(Legislative Powers of the
Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


expensive efforts to , obtain justice, seen the fruits of their labour*
snatched from them by . legal technicalities, by injunctions, prohi-
bitions, and . other, devices .by . which capital contrives to ..defraud
labour of its. just rights, to wait , for years 1 Is not. industrial peace
absolutely essential to a successful prosecution of this war? Did not
tho strike on the South Wales coalfields gravely imperil the -Empire
and threaten it with imminent disaster? But how can industrial, peace b*
insured when employers have tho means of setting the awards of the Arbi-
tration Courts aside by recourse to technicalities and expensive and pro-
tracted litigation 1
But in any case, how can the submission of those constitutional question*
cause party strife ? Wo do not invoko the turmoil of a general election a*
did our opponents; wo do not disturb tho community by contesting by.
elections. Thelssue to be decided is not whether Labour or Liberal candi-
dates shall be returned, but whether certain proposals to increase the self-
governing power of the people shall be approved. When these are approved
the people can say how far they shall be used, as they do in regard to all
others. • .
THE WAR AND THE COST OF LIVING.
Wo are fighting a great war, tho greatest tho world has ever seen. Millions
of men have died ; many millions have been maimed, wounded, or suffered
from the frightful horrors of modern warfare. This war is a life and death
struggle in which Germany or the British Empire and all free nations must
go down for over. It is a war against military despotism, a war for liberty
and tho right of every community to govern itself as its people think fit. ,It
is a war in which every one of us must do our part to the very uttermost.
No one must be allowed to shirk his duty, and no one must be allowed
under cover of this war to exploit his fellow citizens. This is a matter of
supremo-importance, for to exploit the people is to lessen their efficiency.
Yet It is certain that this awful war that has brought death and suffering to
millions already ; that has plunged tho peaceful world into a very inferno ;
has ruined industries; made countless thousands homeless and destitute
has brought to some huge fortunes.
Wo must speak plainly, for this is a time wh»n plain speaking is not oftly
» virtue but a duty Many have made, and are still making, great fortunes
out of this war; many more are making higher pro Its than in peace time;
and, despite protestatisns to the cintrary, surprisingy few great companies
and capitalists have been seriously affected by the war.
(Legislative Powers of the Parliament— - .
Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.J


There has been a great drought, and this, of course, has caused much loss,
and so affec-cd those engaged in primary production. But, leaving aside the
effects of the drought, the facts show.that profits have suffered very little,
an/* that, in many cases, they are higher than before the war.
ITow, wp all know how the. cost of living has increased bo that it i* with
the utmost difficulty tint the hulk of the community are able even with the
greatest economy to make both ends meet, and miking every allowance for
the effects of the drought, there cm be no doubt whatever that this is due
very largely to manipulation of the market by unscrupulous persans at the
expense Of the community. These persons frequently pose as patriots.
They subscribe £5O to Patriotic Funds, and fleece the public of £5,000 by
high prices I ; ....
The best proof the poorde are being-exploited is found in the fact that the
increase in the cost of living is greatest in those States where regulation of
prices has not been effective, e.g., Victoria. -
But even in those Sta f es where regulation of prices of necessary cotnmodi-.
ties has been operating, -hug* war fortunes have been compiled. For instance,
a witness giving evidence before the Necessary Commodities Commission in
WAR FORTUNES
And the cosr or
LIVING.
New South Wales quite recently told the Commission that
his profits were 14 per cent., and that he did not call this
a high rate; that many other companies were making
more. And there is no doubt that this is so. They cou-
ceal their profits by hiding them away in Reserve Accounts and by other
ingenious devices ; but even on their own showing it is plain that, notwith-
standing this dreadful war, they are doing very woil.
And it is these people who are responsible for the cry “Stoo the Re'er-
endums!” “Let there be no Pany Strife.” What they mean is: “Let
there be no interference with ns; let us alone so that we may exp’oit the
THE CRY or THE
EXPLOITERS-“STOP
THE REFEREHDUMSI
LEAVE US ALO-SS I”
people.” What a barefaced, impatient attempt to fjol
the electors this is. Under cover of war they are dipping
their hands drop into the pockets of the people. They
are making huge profits at the expense of the community.
They know the Refen-'ndums will enable the people to pro-
Icct themselves, ami bo they cunningly fan this cry of “ No Party Stride
during the W«n” Bat these proposals rai e no party strife. They are
national in their nature. Tln-y ore necessary for the protection of the people
durii g the war; they are npress ,'ty in order that the utmost efficiency of the
Commonwealth be available to prosecute this Aar.
(Legislative Powers of ihe
Argument FOR tbo Proposed Laws.)


WAR FORTUNES AND THE AMENDMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTION.
Wo have seen how men who are making great fortunes by exploiting tho
community during the war are endeavouring to persuade tho people not to
give themselves the power to prevent these commercial harpies fleecing them.
Wo cannot emphasize tins fact too often. Every effort will be raad« by inter-
•estod people to defeat the propos 'd amendments of tho Constitution. The
Referendums threaten many great Interests; they threaten profftmongers,
exploiters and the great vested interests of capital generally, and these will
do everything within their power to defeat the proposals.. But they dare
not do so openly, and therefore urge the electors .to vote against the
Referendums because we are at war! Surely the electors will not allow
themselves to he fooled by such a transparent hypocritical device as this!
The fact that every exploiter In Australia is joining in this chorus ought
THOSE WHO ARE
BEHIND THE CRY
OF "STOP THE
REFERENDUM"
WERE ALWAYS
AGAINST IT:
THEY HAVE GOT A
NEW CRY; THAT
IS ALL.
to be enough to expose its hollowness. The men who ask
the people not to accept tho Referendums on 11th December
because we are at war are tho same men who fought
viciously against the Refeiendilms in 1911 and 1913 when
there was no war. They have always been against the
proposals to amend tho Constitution, and they always * ill be.
They have a new excuse each time, but their real reason
remains unaltered. They are against the Referendums
because they place power in the hands of tho people to protect
tiismsalves; because they give' the Commonwealth power to deal with
exploiters, to deal with high prices, to insure reasonable wages and conditions
of labour. “The Referendums oujiht to be postponed until after the war!”
That is the bunch of carrots that Vested Interests are dangling before the
elector. In 1911, they tried tho “ Unification ” dodge ;in 1913, they spoke
of “ the spirit of tho Constitution.” They said the Constitution did not want
amending. But the vote in favour of the proposals in 1913 frightened
them. They seo that these cries are stale. Public opinion in favour of
am ndment is too strong, and the-e gentlemen know it. And so they seize
upon this new cry. They know their only chance of defeating the proposals
is to side-track the public ; to make them think that to amend the Constitu-
tion during the war is “unpatriotic.” What they are really trying to do is
to cover their real objection to the amendm nts under the mantle of patriot-
is n. But the only knd of patriotism they understand is that whkh Oils
their pockets and empties those of thj people.
(Legislative Powers of the .
„ Argument FOR the Proposed taws.)


AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION NOT A PARTY QUESTION.
But in any case, how can it bo unpatriotic to ask tho people to say “ Yes”
or “No” to these proposals to amend th« C institution ?■ How can going to
the booth for a few minutes on one day to put a X opposite “Yes” or “No”
■on the six proposals on the ballot-papr-r, affect our vigorous prosecution of
this War 1 On the contrary, by preventing the exploitation of the peop e,
by reducing'tho cost of living, by insuring industrial peace, it will very
greatly help to defeat the enemy. The Amendment of tho Constitution is
not a general election. The personal element does not enter into it at all.
The issues are not'party ; they are impersonal and natioiial.
The elector goes to the booth. He has carefully con-
sidered the questions; and ho votes as his conscience and
reas m suggest. How can this impair the efficiency of tho
HIGH PRICES AND
UNEMPLOYMENT
IMPAIR NATIONAL
EFFICIENCY.
nation to prosecute the war? But high prices, unemployment, industrial
unrest, impair our national efficiency very greatly. Think what high
prices mean to fie wives of those at the front who freely risk their lives
that wo may be free, and to the widows ami mothers of those bravo men who
have fallen. Yet, although high prices a<o largely due to rings and corners,
the capitilistic press does not denounce them, or does so only with its tongue
in irs cheek, while it lashes itself into fury against tho Referendums, which
are the only’means of preventing this shameless exploitation of the people.
HIGH PRICES AND NATIONAL EFFICIENCY.
We are at war, but tho rest of the community must work to produce
wealth in order to maintain our soldiers and sailors. Wo must provide
equipment and munitions ,to make them efficient as a fighting force. We
inusjt produce much wealth in order to meet the tremendous expenditure
incurred through the war. The war has already cost very many millions
and, its cost is growing greater with every p issing day. This sm ill communi'y
cannot carry this huge financial burden unless every man works. The
com ii.unity must not only bear tho cost,of the. war, .it must also rnain-ain
itself. The people must earn their daily bread, and in order to do this the
great majority mus't seek employment frpm those who control the means of
production; they must buy the necessaries of life at the. prices those who
have cornered them choose to.fix. ... . .. .
We are at war, but the Capitalist Insists upon his profits,
the money-lender upon his interest, the landlord upon
his rent. Interest has risen, the cost of living has risen,
employment is becoming scarce. : Do these things which
VMR AND THE
CAPITALIST.
affgpt tlio great mass of the people every hour of their lives not distract tho
(Legislative Powers of the Parliament—
- Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


people's attention and impair the efficiency of the community a thousand
time« more than going to the ballot-box fur a few minutes on one day ? , A
sovereign in August, 1915, will only purchase what 14s. Bd. would buy 18
months a: o. That Is to say that the price of Labour has fallen ; But the
price of Money has risen: Interest is higher. Who suffers Who pays ?
Always the people pay! And those who are exploiting them, who live
luxuriously, who draw fat dividends, say, “ Do nothing to help yours. Ivea
while the war/lasts.” They are all right. But what about the, great; mass
of the people ? Po-tpone the Referendums until after the war! The war
may last for years ! ■ But if it finished to-morrow, those who now oppose the
Referendums would find some oth t reason why the people. should not be
pro ected, why the Referendums should be again postponed, • The time is
never ripe for reform M
THE FARMERS AND THE REFERENDUMS.
The farmer when ho voted for Federation believed that he was guaranteed
a free market by the Constitution, but he finds t hat he has been living in a
fool’s paradise and that the solemn guarantee of the Constitution is but a
“scrap of paper.” Is lie to wait for ever for relief 1
If.the Referendums are approved he will have that free, market which
he was told he would have when he voted for Federation. We are giving
him an opportunity to go to the ballot-box in December to get this free
market, and we are told that the Referendums ought “to bo postponed
until after the war.”
VESTED INTERESTS TRY TO SIDE-TRACK REFERENDUMS,
“Postpone the Referendums until after the war!” What a flimsy
pretext for side-tracking the Referendums this Is ! The’ war was raging
wi.en the Federal elections were held. • At that tinie it lookdd as' if Paris
was doomed and triumphant'Germany was going to Sweep everything before
it.- - It seemed as though in its fell swoop Calais would 'be 'seized and Britain
invaded by the Huns. Why were the elections not postp'oiied ? The war
was raging when the Victorian and South Australian arid Queensland elec-
tions were held. ■ Why were they not postponed ? ' The' reason is plain. In
each of these cases the Liberal Government were in office and wtc deter-
mined to get a further lease of office. And so we heard nothing of post-
poning the elections. The people are asked to believe that there was nothing
unpatriotic in holding the elections io which strong party feeling was rieces-
sarily roused. But now that it is proposed by the Labour Party to give -the
people an opportunity to grant themselves more power In order to protect
(Legislative Powers 'of the Parliament^'
’' ’ Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


themselves Vested Interests, which have grown fatter through the
war, professes to bo shocked at the proposal. “ The time is not ripe ”is the
objection of Vested Interests to every reform. The “time is never ripe” to
give the people their rights; but it is always ripe to give the exploiters of
the people further privileges.
“NOT, NOW.*'
It is said that no amendment of the Constitution should be made during
the war. Sir William Irvine—who ins always held that the Cinstitution
ought to he amended, but always found reasons why amendment should
be postponed —speaking on tho 15th September of this year, said, “I am
strongly of the opinion that the powers of the National Parliament of
Australia must be strengthened. From what has hap-
pened during the last year I am more convinced
tuan ever that the somewhat loose-jointed Constitution
which we entered into fifteen years ago will need to be
sufficiently strong for the great work we have to perform
during the war, and more especially those heavy respon-
sibilities which we will have at the close of the war.
Jilthough lidding these views, I feel none the less strongly
SIR WILLIAM
IRVINE SA.S
CONSTITUTION
NEEDS AMEND-
MENTS TO ENABLE
COMMONWEALTH
GOVERNMENT TO
CONDUCT THE
WAR.
that to'bring forward the proposed amendments of the kind, and in a
manner calculated to throw the people of this community into violent
antagonism with one another, is the most unpatriotic thing which can be
done at the present time."
What sort of argument is this ? The Constitution ought to he amended,
hut do not do it now ! “ I am more convinced than ever that the Constitution
ought to be amended”—hut do not do it now! This was Sir William
Irvine’s cry in 1911. It was bis cry in 1913. In . 1911 he said that the
amendment of the Constitution was not a party question and that he was
in favour of three of the six amendments. But he later found a reason for
voting against them all. In 1913 he said he believed in the amendments,
but ho would not vote for, them because Labour was in office. In 1914 ho
was in office himself, but he refused to submit the amendments to the people.
He has always believed in the amendments, but has always had an excuse
for not putting them. Now he s*ys the necessity for amendment is grea’er
than ever. And then to crown everything we have th s amazing admission set
out in the clearest words: that “It ought to be amended to enable us to deal
with the great work we have to perform during the war” —but do not doit
now. “I b-lieve in the amendment of. the. Constitution”—but do net amend
it now. “It is very necessary ” —it is, in fact, “essential”: —he says, “but
(Legislative Powers of. the Parliament—
Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


’jygt do not do it now." Speaking at Ballarat? in May of this year, ho said the.
CfOiwtitutfon ought to bo amended so 1 that there-shtafl bo only “ one taxing
authority “-—that is, tho Constitution onght-to bO'-anip.ndbd so that -tha
greatest powers that the States possess should be taken from them and
handed over to tho Commonwealth! Ho said tho financial position of
HAST EXCUSES
BUT ONLTOSa '
REASOH.
Australia was such as to make seven taxing bn d borrowing
authorities a grave public danger. He siiid there should
bo only one. “The Constitution,” ho says, “must be'
amended.” ’ Hot ho says do not amend it now. But if apt
now, when? When bowayin office-in 191-t ho was asked to put th®
Referendum* to tho people at the general election, Ho said that ho believed,
that amendment of tho Gunstitation was necessary, .The necessity was
greater than over,- but ho would not' pat tho amendments at tho election.-
He said that the Referendums ought never to bo taken at tho time ofa.
general election—but between elections 1 He said the Cook Government*
it elected, would put them to. tho people at tho earliest opportunity, j Yet
when'wn propose to give tho people an opportunity to say “ Yes’’ or : “No’’
undisturbed by: tho personal. clement which intrudes into .every general,
election, ha says— Dd not put the amendments now; it is unpatriot.io.il.
What spurious patriotism this is, that, seeing tho National Government,
hampered at every turn, unable to protect tho people, and so “ unable," to>
use Sir William Irvine’s own words, used only a few weeks ago," to do tho.
great work that lies before it”—upon which our very national existence
depends—declares that thing unpatriotic which it is absolutely imperative to
do without a day’s delay! . It,is unpatriotic to amend tho Constitution ia
order to protect tho people’s interests, but it ia the height of patriotism to
permit Unscrupulous exploiters to fleece th» people. Fair play tor th& peopla
is unpatriotic I Further opportunities tor Privilege and Vested, Interests ia
the only true patriotism! t
ANOTHER SPECIOUS CRY..
AMENDMENTS NOT HEEDED BECAUSE DEFENCE POWERS
SUFFICIENT.
, Another argument pat forward by those who aro trying to throw dust in tho •
eyes of tho people is that there is no need for the amendment of the Consliiu*
tion, because tho Commonwealth- Parliament lias all tho powers it wants;
under the Defence Power. This is £t very specious cry, and those interested,
persons who ate using the war as a, cloak for exploiting tho people eagerly
seize upon it in order to serve their own purposes. Eat it is a false cry..
(Legislative Powers Of tho Parliament-
- Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.).


There is no doubt that tho Defence powers of the Commonwealth are very
wile, but it is certain that they do not extend to any of (he matters covered
by the proposed amendments. And those who -say to the contrary are
endeavouring ter fool; the electors, . For exjMiiplc, punier.
the Pcfenco power, or any other it now possesses, the Com-
mon wealth coAd not give tho producer a guarantee, of
-Trading freely -between thsefitaiss; it could mat prevent the
WHAT THE
COZMOUWEALTiI
CANNOT NOW 80.
wheat;.me »t, .or other pro tees. ;, it could Mt jnako-a general
company law to protect shareholders and the general public; it could not
prevent 'exploitation of the people by ivgulallng prices ; it could not limit
profits during the wav, "and so prevent the piling op of huge war fortunes - r
' 'it coald not deal 'effectively with any industrial dispute that paralyzed the
imlustrlcsofthc country ; it could not tbal with Trusts and Combines ;it
•oodjd not ' nafwnaiizd "or control a monopoly even if it -were bleeding tho
nation white.
Butin erder to protect the people, the Commonwealth might to have
the power Jo do all these things, and it cannot wage this war effectively
unless Jt ias Tfiem. (these powers are absolutely neecssary during this
war. * In-fact* they are much mere necessary during the war than in timo
of pca£e, bccavuio tiu; national strain is greater,tti,d wo - cannot ; at our, peril
'allbrd to allow thb;community to
s ;dr paralyzed by a great industrial, disturbance. <
THE HEED FOR AMEHDMEHT.
The F. ilernh principle will be in danger if tho people do not carry tho
proposed amenshaentp/ ‘KtteCM years, have passed since .thefionnuonweallh
Parliament began its work. In these years Australia lias made-great progress.
She has grown tremendously,, and the. Federal garroewt,.cramps her great
limbs. Matters which fifteen years ago concerned only separate States now
-concern the whole people. .Trade which was formerly• confined within,the
limits of one-State has; now spread over- the--continent., . What were, local
interests only aro now national interests. Tho States sometimes put local
interests before tiio nation's interests. In mttny matters,,the. States aio
powerless to protect the people, because their authority is confined within
i heir own herders. The arm of the Commonwealth can . reach to every part
of Australia, hut it is paralyzed by the Constitution. Power is divided so as
to be usch-ss. Those who have it cannot use it, and those that could use it
.have not got it.. Tho Constitution must be amended. The people ought to
3)0 able.to direct the Federal Parliament to do the work', that the States
.eapnpt do, but until the Constitution is amendedthey,cannotdo so!
(Legislative -PowerseMhe-Pariianwat-
Argument FOR the Preposed. Laws.)


No. 1.—TRADE AND COMMERCE.
Secti9iLM.r^(h)^.£L , ado.;rand.’i;iOjnitterc&. ;^b
> o&eg-eotHtfatei-—aad- wneHg-fee Sktt-es;
PROPOSED
AMENDMENT
This aniehdmeut is known as the Trade and Commerce’-amendment.' Ib
is the same as tlie amendment submitted to thepeople at the 191 1-lU‘fercnilum,
and is not limited as was the corresponding amendihmit. w'iOlS. It will
give the CommomVealth Parliament power'to make laws with respect tp hot
only, trade and commerce between the States and with foreign countries only
as at present, hub also over trade andl commerce within’any State of [Australia,
which it has not at present.
THE ..KEYSTONE OF THE COMMONWEALTH’S POWERS:
- This'amendment is -vitally-mccessary.. - The, Trade and< ConSwprco.;jKpter
is tbe ! keystono' ; o£ the Chmmonwealtlvs .powers.. ,WithcuL);Otvei; spx,cr 5 px,cr
and Commerce within a State it will he almost impossible to-pass effective
legislation with respect to Trusts, Combines, antLMouopolics. Wi thout power
over trade and commerce within a State, it v. ill bo quite impossible to prevent
one State excludingthe -peopkrtf the otheiVStates from a share in its wheal,
meat, butter, and other produce.
DEFECTS QF THE PRESENT POWER;
The'prC&miSrdivJsian of power-between the Commonwealth and the Stales
is minaturial. Itisimpossible,-as Sir William Irvine .said on. Jflth October,
1910,• “ to divide the commerce of the community into two jiarls, ond-to say
{hat one part’sbali he under the government of one Parliament and another
part undcftailbther Parliament, . it is just as impossible in to
draw a line of demaveation based cn local geographical conditions as jfcwquld
lie to commit to the cave of one physician a man s body and to the caip of
another physician his limbs. Each is really part of ouo .organic whole,.and
the result of the attempts has been perfectly endless litigation .and
uncertainty.’ 1
The, present division is mischievous. The man who wants to obey the lavr
•locs not know wdiidi law toohey the man who does nob want to obey ttv»
law is helped to dodge from one jurisdiction to another.. In 1909, Parliament
(Legislative Powers of'-thaPariiamoßt-
-Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


passed a Seamen’s Compensation Act. Wilson, a seaman on hoard tho-
K alibi a f was hurt at his work, and claimed compensation. The High Court-
(aid thjtfc ho W£i9_not entitled to any compensation for his injury. Whyl
Merely because tho Kalibia was engaged in trade and commerce withmiti e
limits of a single State All tho Judges agreed in this, and the law which
tlie-Comraonwcalth Parliament had passes! was declared to bo void It was
just waste paper.
Until this amendment !s made the guarantee in the Constitution that
trade between the States shall be absolutely free is only a scrag of paper.
When New South Wales seized the wheat crop for the use of her own people
only, tho farmers and the people in tho other States pointed
to tho plain words of Section 96 of the Constitution, that
trading shall ho absolutely free; but tho High Court ruled
that these words did not mean what they say. If the
A SCRAP OP
PAPER.
people had imagined that it would be possible for one State Government to say
to its sisters, “ Hold ! this food belangs'td the people of my State, and to them
only ; your people ; may go hungry, but mine shall be filled," they would
neyer have voted for Federation. If the Commonwealth Parliament had
the power overtrade and commerce that it Is - now seeking, it could pre-
vent any State; acting in this way,
LOCAL TRADE AND COMMERCE.
It is said that the Commonwealth would use its extended power to control
purely local details of trade and commerce. But Canada has the power we
are seeking, and uses it as it should bo used, for national purposes. Why
should wo not do as she has done i By Section 99 of our Constitution tho
Commonwealth Parliament Is strictly forbidden fa exercise the trade and
commerce power in such » way as to give preference to one State or one
part of a State aft tho expense of another. Tilis would
compel the Commonwealth to leave to the States the duty
of legislating for special conditions. It must be borne in.
mind that even if this increased power is given to the
Commonwealth,’ there will be nothing to prevent the
POWER TO BE
USED FOR
RATIONAL
PURPOSES ORLY,
States regulating their own trade and commerce. The only check Will be
that where there Is an Inconsistency between the . State laws to to trade
and commerce and the Commonwealth law as to trade and commerce* the
Commonwealth law will prevail If the State should order One thing and
th» Commonwealth should order the opponfc things the
must be obeyed, (Section 109,)
(Legislative Powers of the Parlfamdnt-
Argument FOB the Proposed Laws.)


No. 2.—CORPORATIONS.
Section 51.— (±t.).
tyafetg—w—fiaaafriajr—
Corporations* including—
(a) the creation* dissolution, regulation,
and control of corporations;
(b) corporations formed trader the law
of a State* inclnding their dis-
solution* regulation, and 1 con- 1
trol; but not including muni-
cipal or governmental corpora-
tions* or any corporation formed
solely for religious* charitable*
scientific, or artistic purposes*
. and not for the acquisition of
gain by the corporation or its
members; and
(e) foreign corporations, Including
their regulation and control :
PROPOSED
AMENDMENT.
Thepropesed diaencbten-fc- BCekS to give the Commonwealth Parliament
p6wer to iriakc£ as they are usually railed* Companies,
At tlio, pros cut' it - has only thts veriest shadow of a power. When the
Constitution was .accepted it was understood that Section &1 (s.s, sat.) gave the
Commonwealth. Parliament complete-control over companies. I’hewords of
ihe Constitutive seemed so very clean that not even the lawyers had any doubt
(Legislative Powers ol the Parliament-
Argument- FOR the Proposed taws.J


that the Cwmmohwipltb’a powera, .oyer cqmpajhes;.wcre,..vcry
'But the High Court, in Ifwlc&ftJParker j. Mooi head, iii spite of. the apparently
chair' words of thethin^litution,mid that the
at all over tho behaviour cf Compamts-oncc tbey were established. This
means, in plain language, that the National Parliament has no control at all
ov«r the spe rations bf ? tho great in
Australis. 1 Or, in'other words, tho ■CommonwcaTthTailidn.ent’lias i'.o contTcl
over the‘poWers which control the‘means of production to Which' the pebplo
look for employmeut to earn their -daily brood; and Which'determine • tho
"pncCstbe peojile pay for the necessaries of life. In short, t6o Commonwealth
has’ hcf'power over the greatest ferce in-thc.modcnr \torid; ’
MODERN INDUSTRIALISM IH THE HANDS OF COMPANIES, BUT
COMMONWEALTH. JIAS HO.POWER :OVER THEM.
Tho great nndertakings of the mcdmvworld are alnmst invariably carried
■On hy'eonipuniea.'i Over .£250,'000,000 arc invested in Australian -companies.
tPhat ir-dt}:6ay r 'tiiat about 75’ per ecntn of all the' capilal 'hel l, byrprivato
enterprfeeini this country is in the hands of -coihpajiies. »Tho sphere of their
oprratiohs'in many cases ver several States. And the tendency of
-nrodcrar times isf-10, widen this still mpre. It seems ’incredible, but it is
new rtl mk-BS u bsolul eiy true,tbat neither the States nor the Common wealth
have any rcalrpo*w!«ver‘ the capital- employed’ ami. industrial
enterprises in Australia. Ihe Statftjaws arc not up to date; they do not
protect shareholders or the general public, and in any case they cannot apply
to the great companies who-c operations extend beyond one State. For the
-laws of a State only operate within its own borders,
- The Commonwealth must have power to control companies because
companies control nearly all the capital invested in industries upon which
the great mass of the peop’c arc dependent for a living. The control of
comjtanies is a bread-and-butter question, for companies not only employ 7D
1 er cent, of all labour, but fix the prices of the greater part of what thq
whole community lives cn. Companies control wages and
prices, therefore (ho community must he able to control
companies. Trusts and Combines are usually composed
of companies working together for their mutual benefit
and the people's detriment, and in order to effectually
control Trusts and Combines wo must have power over
the companies that compose them.
COMPANIES CON-
TROL NEARLY ALL
CAPITAL, THERE-
FORE PEOPLE MUST
CONTROL THEM.
Wo must have power to pass a general Companies Law, not merely because
it is convenient, bat also because it is necessary to have the law uniform.
(Legislative Powers’ of tlic”Parliament :
Argument FOR tho Proposed: Laws.)


Tinless the Commonwealth can make laws as to Corporations, a number of
andCombilies "will slip through' the; fingersof the law.' If we arc ,lo
have poorer to'deal must be 'able to deal With »ho
members oftheCombine. ’wc must bo able to'regulate the edra panics Wbieh
are its members, as.well as’the individuals “who arcTts ihSmbefs.
3t,is ,eompaipes to-whom tlm people have to look for employment; it is
companies .who manufacture and.scll most.of the .things, wc,cat, drink, wear ;
tmt the National Government has no po;.ver at all over companies. -.They
do wlat.thoj-please, charge what they please, and jmako, extort ionato
profits, and the. people have no power over, them.., If o GpYcrnßieut,;that
represents the people does not control companies, :3
people. Th's amendment will give us the power we require.
CORPORATIONS EXEMPTED;
; Prom; the proposed-power certain -Corporations! will; bo. exempttxbk'Tho
Commonwealth Parliament'will have' no “power over ‘Municipalities,; over
G o vcrnmcntal*Corporatioris, : Over Religious Rodies/o ret Corporations formed
for charitablopurposes faucb as nor over- Corporations fbrmed.for
scientific and"artistic purposes’ These -Corporations e-vist - for -publia
good, and not for private gain. Tho Commonweal tie series forlpo wrr; only
ovcr'Coiporations which exist for private gain. 'lf wanbt this poWcrin ordtr
that it may make such-Corporatioiis also serve tho-pub’.ic goal.
(Legislative Powers of the Parliament
Argument' FOR tto Proposed. Laws.)


No. 3. — INDUSTRIAL MATTERS.
Section 51.—(sxxv.)
fl* f-j - . . m -
Industrial matters, including—
(a) labour;
(b) employment and unemployment;
(c) the terms and conditions of labour
and employment in any trade,,
industry, occupation, or calling ;
(d) the rights and obligations of em-
ployers and employees;
(e) strikes and lock-outs;
(f) the maintenance of industrial peace;
and
(g) the settlement of industrial disputes:
PROPOSED
AMENDMENT.
This amendment deals with matters of the utmost importance to every-
citizen of the Commonwealth. Industrial unrest has been for many years
CAUSES OF
industrial
UNREST.
tho most notable feature in modern civilization, and in
spite of tho war it still manifests itself. High prices and
low wages aro the immediate causes of this unrest. ' Theso
causes exist hero as elsewhere. They aro not peculiar to
Australia. They ariso out of Modern Civilization, and they must be dealt
with. Wo desire to get at tlio causes of industrial unrest. Wo want to
remove these causes as far as we can. We want to provide, means for tho
impartial settlement ol industrial disputes,
Tho first is a very difficult business. It will tax the energies, the patience,
and the resources of the wisest men. But it can be done. Wo believe that
(Legislative Powers of*the*Parliament—
Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


wo are on the right road, and that step by step wo shall bo able to remove
the causes of industrial unrest, by insuring to the workers a fair and reason-
able reward for their toil, and to theconsumers protection against extortionate
Trusts. ; For the second, we are for thejettlement of industrial disputes by
compulsory arbitration.
An amendment of the Constitution is necessary for both these purposes.
Under itspresent powers the Federal Parliament cannot make any law on
industrial matters, and its power in regard to prevention and settlement of
industrialdispatcs is very and hedged about by many technicalities.
WHAT THE COMMONWEALTH MAY DO HOW.
All that the Commonwealth Parliament can do How is to make laws fer-
tile prevention and settlement of. industrial disputes extending beyond the
limits of any State, “by a Conciliation and Arbitration Court.” This power
was meagre enough, every one knew ; but the High Court's decisions have
reduced it to a mere shadow.
The’Court cannot prevent disputes. It has to wait till
a dispute arises. Even then it cannot act.' It mnst wait till
the dispute spreads from one State to 1 another. Justice
cannot be got except by striking first, extending the strike
to another State, and then going to the Court.
Alf ABSURDITY .
AND A MENACE TO
THE COMMUNITY.
This is a continuous menace to the community. The Court’s decision
does not always settle the matter in dispute. The Court cannot make its
Common Rule. That is to say, the award will bo binding upon
those workers and employers only who come before the Court. . This means
that the employer who is brought to the Court may have to pay higher
wages than 5 his"competitor who was hot brought to the Court. This leads to
One of two things. Either there is grossly unfair competition, or so many
parties must Be brought to the Court that justice is delayed. - In one Cise,
500 employers' were brought to the Court. If each had insisted on putting
Lia case, settling that one dispute would have taken a year.
There must bo some authority in Australia that can do justice in industrial
matters. There must bb some power to protect the public from suffering,
and to keep the wheels of industry moving, because employers and employees
cannot settle their differences without fighting.
THE STATES UNDER THE NEW POWER.
The States will retain all the power they hare at present. But them must
be some power-to prevent unfair competition between the States. Take the
boot trade, v Some .years ago the Judge of the State Arbitration Court in
(Legislative Powers 6! the Parliament-
Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


Kcw Couth Wales was asked to fix a minimum wage for bootmakers. Ho
fixed tho same wage as tho'Victorian minimum. Ho admitted that it was too
. low a wage. But ho pointed out that if he fixed a higher wage, ho would bo
larking, Victoria a present of the, bootmaking industry. Unfair competition
between manufacturers in the same State is wrong,' aiid" it‘is quite' as wrong
when it exists between manufacturers in different States.
Th« State Arbitration Courts and W.ages Boards will not be disturbed.
not waatpowpr .t.Ordp justicc ia cMcs- r vvbcrc tho State X’ourlp and
Boards.canjdo justice. ...Wo do not want to, settle disputes
which the fitato'Courts and Boards can settle. -We want
to-be-able to do -justice,- to disputes, where the-Stato
STATt jkISIjNAU
WIU. EE MAIN.
Courts and Wages Boards are now powerless. We want to supplement the
State Courts. aim! Boards, not to destroy, them.
INDUSTRIAL CONDITIONS HOT UNIFORM.
Tt is urgfid that if the Commonwealth Parliament gets this power it will
be obliged to make industrial conditions Uniterm throughout Australia# . This
lacAtcosninoss.
-RtIXSE -.*
COSSIDEBSD IS -
FIXING WAGES.
” -■— ... -, .. „ .—o - * . ~ -
l is tv mistake. Even our' hamstrung Arbitration Court
klwaya takes into consideration local conditions, ’ and
•varies its awards so,that the man who works under” more
trying conditions and lives at greater expense, for food,’
clothing, ami fusing, gets more .than, tinman who works more easily anil
lives more cheaplyv
Another objection is tLat’cne Court--caiinoli-deal wiili all .tho different
industrial conditions of Australia. - Wo do not propose that onsX'ourt shall
"deal "with all the different industrial, conditions of.Australia* We. ssy there
’at present exists some machinery for securing- industrial peace and ’justice.
Some of it i* State j some of it is .Federal; all of it is imperfecti. Wo think
this imperfection should be .remedied., To this end,.wc,could ; increase tho
powers of .the present Arbitration Court,-and,create local tribunals to , deal
•with local troubles which the States cannot now deal >vith. :
STATS RIGHTS AGAIN.
“But what about State blights 2” say our opponents.
aThift is an-old objection which wd’kiisvfei 1 kskihg—ArC not the State
Pi'rliamints servants of the Australian people ! Is the’servant to 'prevent
his hiaster from doing what he thinks'right T' 'Are ‘S{«tc"Rights'greater
than the People’s Bights'}
{Legis!aU*e,PQwers-of- the Parliament— .■
Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


No. 4.— RAILWAY DISPUTES.
Section 51.—(xjptv.A.). Conciliation and arbi-
■- tration for the prevention and settlement of
disputes in relation to employ-
meht -in ■ the railway • service ot a State;
PROPOSED
AMENJDMENT.
(NEW SUB- '
SECTION);
This amendment'will give power to the Federal Parliament: to deal with
industrial disputes on State railways or tramways through the Conciliation,
and. Arbitration Courts’ It will not do mdro-ibaii tlilvc. lt wi 1 .not .give
the Commonwealth Parliament power to fix fares and freights on .Slate
railways or interfere in their management or take,the railways oyer." It
confines Parliament to dealing with industrial dispu'cs on State railways anil
to dealing with them through the Conciliation and
begins and ends there.
THIS PROPOSAL NOTHING NEW.
In the early days of Pcdciation,..Parliament thought it had. power, to, bring
railway disputes under the Arbitration Court. ; In 1901 an amendment.on
the Arbitration, Pill was .carried,.,bringing., railway disputes under the
Arbitration" Court. The High Court, however, two years later, decided that
Parliament could not deal with railway servants.
Parliament 1 should, however, have this power. All citizens. ■ of-.tho
Commonwealth arc vitally concerned in' keeping the wheels going.- If a
dispute happens on the railways of any State it affects not only that State
. and its people, hut o'tber States and their peoples. Every one might suffer
because the people of the State immediately concerned could not keep the
wheels running.
■The railways arc the veins and arteries of the system of
land .defence, of Australia. \ Unless those veins and arteries
are kept,, unclogged by industrial disputes, the system of
land defence may be dangerously impaired.
THE DEFENCE Of
AUSTRALIA.
The Federal Court will in this matter supplement, not destroy, the work
(Legislative-Powers (he-Parllament— ■
vArgcmect< FOR -the:Proposed Laws.)


of those State Courts which hare power to deal with railway disputes. Those
Courts will not be interfered with. But not all States kavo such Courts,
Victoria has none, and we all know thattbis led to tho#Victomn Railway
Strike,
Tho Commonwealth Ls nofc asking for a wide general power to regulate ths
conditions of employment in tho railways.' It does not seek,'as some foolish
people say it docs, to fix fates on tho railways; It wants nothing more than
the power to keep the wheels going. It wants to bo able to protect thfetfholo
people from suffering through a purely loojl clispjite.
(Legislative Powers of the Parliament-**.;
Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.}


PROPOSER
AMENDMENT.
(NEW SUB-
SECTION).
No. 5.—TRUSTS.
Section Trusts, combinations, monp-
polies, and arrangements in relation to- .
(a) the production, manufacture, or
supply of goods, or the supply
of services, or
(b) the ownership of the means of
production, manufacture, or
supply of goods, or supply of
services.
This proposal gives the Federal Parliament power to legislate with respect
to Trusts, Combines, and Monopolies in relation to tho production, manufac-
ture, or supply of goods or the supply of services in any part of the Common-
weal! h. It will not enable tho Parliament to deal with Commercial and
Trading Trusts, Combines, and Monopolies* The Trade and Commerce
amendment is needed for that purpose;
Trusts and Combines have revolutionized the world. Fifty, or even 25,
years ago, th*y were few in number, and exercised very little influence. But
their growth, especially during the last decade, has bean phenomenal, and
to-day they largely control tho- world’s production and distribution of wealth.
the power or
TRUSTS AND
COMBINES.
All Trusts am not had, hut all must be controlled by law,
for their power for evil is tremendous.. Their power is
world-wide. They are the rulers of the world. They fix
prices. They control the necessaries of life and charge- the
people what they please—and daily their power grows greater. . Never has
their power hem felt more acutely than during the present war. Some people
are so foolish as to deny tlio existence of Trusts, but the bulk of thinking
jnen and women know only too well that they exist, for they have felt their
power. At the outbreak of this war the States—three of which had Liberal
Governments— legislated to prevent tho oppressions of monopoly. Those
Jaws failed because tho separate State* bad insufficient power, and the power
of the Trusts cannot be curbed unless this proposal Is carried. If tho Trusts
ern’defeat this proposal by theory “ No Party questions during tho war,”
fho rule Of tho Trusts Will bo prolonged. Civilized man can live only if he
(Legislative Powers of the Parliament-
Argument FOR the-Proposed Laws.)


isa ac cess to laud and other means of production. ;Ifthese; are - ; monopolized
*y combinations of'great capitalists, he can -only live upon." aufTeramp.'- He
must work upon their terms,vandmust; buy. the necessaries; oflife at their
juriees. l 110 is atiheirmercy. •
THE COST OF LIVING AND THE TRUSTS.
The increased cosh of living is the one great"question forced-upon the notice
of all civilized people". - 1 t-ahhuts all Classes, r hut the poor feelifc most.' What
; >s its cause! The cost of living has risen throughout the ' wortd. »iln< every
civilized land there arc Trusts, and where the Trusts are most powerful there
the cost of living has increased the most. At no period have the Trusts
exerted their power as they have daring this crisis.
• i ,Tho : -!^sts ;> 4i!P..>npro-.ppxd?lul in. America than, In ahy, ; other { country.
PiC;CosB: of lining lws v incrcascd much faster in America than elsewhere.
What more convincing proof can" there be that tho ,ppwer of .the Trusts ,w the
dominating factor in the increased cost of living! And we have copied the
American Constitution. These facts should make every Australian think
very hard. ‘
It" may he eahl that the Trusts have not got sttcli'S hold here asTn-America.
As wo'have fotind to our eostw’Thocost 01 liringhas
increttOeti Enormously,' and keeps "on increasing,- and -’its increase has never
hech as great as it has during the year of the wari *
Are we going to wait until the Trusts get as strong here
as in America! Suppose the country by small-.
pox or plague, wliat do we do ? We do noß’wait' until it’
we HDir’icf how
gets a good hold, hut strive with ail our miglit'Bb destroy-it in its early
stages; •‘We’ have power to deal■ with which is not here ; hut
against"the Trusts, which are here, wc are powerless; The mouthpieces of
the Trusts declaim" that this proposal is a party question. r " But no one
knows better than they that ibis proposal is aimed at'them. They know
that, and they leaf that. During the war they have shownrtheir strength,
relying da our weakness.' Let us cure lkat weakness;-
THE COMBINES OF AUSTRALIA.
The Trusts arc hero and at ; that much we do
It is ne t easy to get particulars as to the power of Combines.
They naturally shrink from puWicUy.r.t^yhat theyjdesiljOii?.
THE TRUSTS ABB
BEBE.
to be.ieh^lope—that:.is what tlicy ai'e- now uskiiig', •-“•'When- information is
Bought they cither refuse to attend the inquiry or decline to answer questions.
Legislative Powers of-the Parliament:--
Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


* Jsy'«yery device possible to ilioselwhp have money and influence they baffle
■inquiry. ,Boit is not easy to get particulars' of the Trusts here any mora
•than in America.-’ But wc do know enough to make us-realisc that therefls
much that we do not know, but which wo can easily'imagine. Our im-
aginations should have been -stimulated by our experiences during the war.
The American'Beef Trust, the greatest in the world, Is here, and is
.actively at work.* Yet some-people say there arc no .Trusts hem., ; Let
every one consider lon-a-moment- the.prices which have,been extorts ! from
him during the .war. Then let him ask himself whether the eonrol of Trask*
jshould bo deferred until aftor the war.
Tu ortler to show haw futile it is to attempt to deal with'Trusts and Com-
bines and Monopolies wiibotrrfull powers, to follow then* wherever they are,
to dig them out of their burrows, to deal witli Uicm' whatever disguise they
put on, to control them whatever shaper they aSsUniCj wo invite tho electors
to look at our own experience and that of the United BtatesV’
THE ANTI-TRUST LAWS AND THE TRUSTS.
■ Oar experience has been,but short. Theirs has boon long. Rut Ihelosson
i? the.same in both eases. The American Federal .Congress,
as it is called, cannot deal with a .Commercial Trust inside a Stiite. Kor-
ean ours. It cannot deal. with an Industrial Trust at alb Ivor can purs.
The American law prohibits all Combines that restrain trade and ull
attempts to monopolize trade. Our Anti Trust Act, tlKnrgli its language
differs, is based on the American law.
r The AmerieaiL AntbTrust Law baa* been in existenceoven.tvycnty years ;
it lias been set in force very frequently. Many convictions
have been secured. Not one Trust has been repressed. Oa
the contrary, the Trusts , have, during the period the Act
-has been- in-, operation, increased, in number and ' pbwer
ASII-TBUST
LAWS USELESS.
almost, beyond, belief. They, laugh< at the ..law. When, after many years'
litigation, the great Standard .Oil Trust was fined and dissolved by, tho>
•Supreme Court of America, it was thought the people had won a "great
victory. Legally, the Trust was dead. Actually, it was never more alive.
Those who run it are richer literally by millions of pounds as the direct
result of the conviction."
° Hon. J. VeWbit,' WemJiCTof ilie Viet.ori.Mi tegislafivd Counei], «i!d (HeMml.pjr. 1165 »iH 1168 L
Tl,h Monstro;« Triul tisr (MtlEg s relaclUsi coatrol -over the foalstcEs «l th« British »r«»il g
vtbtli H the trusts w;ra to jet a firm fo»;ing la Australia wHat w»ull>.»Jps3? •
{Legislalive. Fojvers of, the Parliament;--
Argument FUR the "Proposed Laws.)


THE COMMONWEALTH IS HELPLESS/
Our Anti-Trust Law has not checked one Trust. There are more Trust#
now than when it was passed, and their power is greater. These Trusts grow,
and we can do nothing because the Constitution prevents it and the States
are powerless. And so the Trusts exploit tho people without let or
hindrance. 'No wonder they demand that they shall bolet alone—-at any
raid during the war.
THE STATES AREPOWERLESS.
This is generally recognized. Mr. Glynn, M.P., Liberal
Qeneral, in his : memorandum admits this fact, and recommends an amend- ’
meat of the Constitution to enable ns to deal .with Trusts, Combinations,,
and Monopolies in restraint o£ Trade in any State or part .of the Common-'
wealth.-
Sir William Irvine, speaking on the pjnposals ,in 1910,. in reply ,to Sir-
John Forrest, who contended th;«- tho-Sfcatcs could deal with these Ttqstfo
siad ‘‘ The States cannot; that is tho whole point.” Sir John Forrest,
surprised at this, asked again; “ Not with .the operations of. a Trust within
a Suite?” to.which Sir William Irvine replied, “No; the Whole evil of
the position In. the United States Is that the individual Stales are quite
powetless.”.
Less than the powers we ask for is- useless, ,
TRUSTS EXPLOIT
PRODUCER AND
CONSUMER ALIKE.
,J Here, then, is tho position. The, greatest danger#' Grid;
threaten modern civilization - are Trusts and CorhbiftesV
They monopolize opportunities; they crush out competition;
they prevent tho primary producer getting the value of
his produce; they exploit and levy toil on the whole people. They have
exploited and levied toll on them/'especially’ during the wan There is no
law hero to control them. Tho Federal Parliament cannot make-such a
law; the Constitution prevents it. The States cannot deal with Trusts.,
American experience and our own prove it. Unless (he Trusts are to rule,
the people, we must amend the Coiistitatfon so that the people may rule,
the Trusts. And can it ho said that because wo are, at war wo are td
continue the slaves of the Trusia during the war t
(Legislative P.owers of the ..
Argument FOR "the Proposed Laws!)


No. 6.—NATIONALIZATION OF
MONOPOLIES.
Section 51 A.—(l.) When each House
of the Parliament, in the same ofMono i« ,li:3 -
session, has by Resolution, passed by an
absolute majority of its members, declared
that the industry or business of producing,
manufacturing, or supplying any specified
goods, or of supplying any specified
services, is the subject of a monopoly, the
Parliament shall have power to make laws for
carrying on the industry or business by or
under the control of the Commonwealth, and
acquiring for that purpose on just terms any
property used in connection with the industry
or business.
(2.) This section shall not apply to any
industry or business conducted or carried
on by the Government of a State or any
public authority constituted under a State.
PROPOSED
AMENDMENT.
(NEW
SECTION).
• Tins proposed amendment will give the Parliament power to purchase, oa
Just terms, any busino-s which, in the opinion of the Parliament, is a
Monopoly, and run it as a Commonwealth concern for the benefit of the
emnmuni y. It expressly excludes from the sco[>e of the power all badness
run by any State Government, municipality, or public authority. This makes
it quite clear that the amendment deals only with Monopolies run by prhv f '
enterprise.
(Legislative Powers of the Parliament—
Argument FOB the Proposed Laws.)


THE TWO VITAL CONDITIONS.
The first point to be noted about the proposal is that it
applies to monopolies only, and not to all businesses; the
second, that tho Parliament can only acquire the business of
such Monopolies on just terms. These two conditions
insure (1) that tho power cannot be used to give effect to
a policy in which all private businesses would be national-
ized ; and (2) that the Parliament cannot take the property
of any Monopoly without paying its fair price.
THE STATES CAR
ACQUIRE ANY
PROPERTY
WITHOUT COMPEN-
SATION: THE
COMMONWEALTH
MUST FAY THE
MARKET PRICE.
This point needs special emphasis. It is of fundamental importance. A
State can compulsorily acquire any property within its own borders at any
price it pleases. It need hot’ give a penny for compensation. But by
Section 51, sub-section xxxl of the Constitution the Commonwealth can only
acquire property on just terms —that is, at a price agreed upon between the
parties, or, if they cannot agree, then the High Court must fix a fair prico
after hearing evidence.
THE PARLIAMENT TO DECIDE WHAT IS A MONOPOLY.
TOO CANT DEFINE
A MONOPOLY, BUT
TOO KNOW ONE
WHEN TOO SEE
ONE AND FEEL
ITS GRIP.
We now come to another point. ' It is a very important
one. Tho amendment provides that the Parliament is to
decide what is a Monopoly, To this, great objection is
taken by our opponents. They say Parliament is not the
proper tribunal to do this ; that it gives Parliament too
wide a power, and that Monopoly ought to be defined in the
Constitution. Let us examine their argument quietly.
First o£ all, remember that if “ Monopoly ” were defined in the Constitution,
the High. Court would interpret its meaning. Judging from. the. Court’s
interpretations of other words in the Constitution, it would bo impossible to
prove that any business was a. Monopoly. Fdr example, in the “Vend”
case, where it was proved that persons who controlled over 90 per cent,
of the coal supply of Newcastle had agreed with the Shipping Combine, "ho
controlled over 90. per, cent, of the freight, that they would sell coal to
nobody but them, an.d,.tho; Shipping Combine had agree! to buy no coal
from anybody but the vend, or carry anybody else’s coal, the Court held
that there was no Monopoly.
It seems quite clear, therefore, that if such an interpretation is to limit
tho people’s power, no Monopoly could over be dr alt with.
(Legislative Powers of the Parliament-
Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


MONOPOLY CANNOT BE DEFINED.
, We know a Monopoly when we see one or f* el its grip, but we cannot
define it in such a way as to include every possible form in which Monopoly
may manifest itself.
Why should not Parliament decide what isa Monopoly ?
It is surely as Well able to do so as - any’other tribunal.
It represents the people. It is what tho people make it.
Every three years at most it springs from the people. It
A PEOPLE’S
QUESTION
is charged with instructions to do the people’s business. It knows the evils
from which tho people suffer, and the remedies the people c insider suitable.
Remember, this question of nationalizing monopolies is a people’s question.
By what better means then can it be dealt with than by the direct repretr
sentatives of the people, specially charged to do the work in tho way the
people do-iro ? If the power is to bo of any use to the people, Parliament is
not only the best, but the only tribunal to exercise it,
OBJECTIONS ANSWERED.
“ But,” say the critics, “ Parliament may abuse this great power." Why
should Pari ament abuse this power? The Parliament represents the people,
and uses its power as directed by tho people. What the people want the
Parliament docs; what the people do not want Parliament will not do. The
Federal Parliament will use the powers as the people wish, and no further.
The State Par.iaments possess this power. Wny have they not abused'it 1
The Federal Parliament, elected by the people on tho widest franchise in
the world, will not abuse it.
WHAT IS A MONOPOLY.
There remains but one more objection to which reference need'ho made.
How is Parliament to determine wh 'tier any business is a monopoly? Our
critics say Parliament is quite unsuited to the task. The answer to’their
object!m; is very simple. ' Parliament makes, and has always teen in tho
habit of making; such’inquiries as these long before'Our time. Parliament'
has several ways of doing .this business. The way in w hich
it usually makes these'inquiries is by referring the maVer-
to a Royal Commissi <n or Committe-of Inquiry, or more
probably to the Inter-State Commission. This body calls
for evidence, makes diligent inquiry in every direction, and
COMMISSION WILL
HEAR EVIDENCE
AND REPORT TO
PARLIAMENT.
reports to Parliament. Parliament then discusses the matter in tholhjht; of
• (Legislative Powers of the Parliament-? .
Argument FOR the;Proposed Laws.)


the evidence before it, the public know what this Is, and the press criticises
it; public opinion makes itsi-lf felt. Monopolies may assume a thousand
shapes ; the people, who must be protected from all, can instruct Parliament
to deal with such as these as they please, when and how they think fit.
WHY NATIONALIZE MONOPOLIES AT ALL ?
But our critics say that'wo can'control Monopolies without nationalizing
them. No doubt it is quite true that some Monopolies could be otherwise
controlled if wo had the power, hut certainly not all.
At the present time wo cannot control any Monopoly in any way. And
tbo electors should note that those who object to Parliament having the
power to nationalize Monopolies also object to tbe other amendments which
give Parliament power to control them. As a matter of
fact, the power to control may be useless unless it is
backed by the power to nationalize. There is no power to
nationalize in America, and the Trust knows that it can
A RESERVE
POWER,
safely evade tbe law. If it evades controlling laws then nothing can happen
in America. If this power is given to our Parliament, it will keep the Trusts
on their good behaviour. If this power is given to our Parliament, it will
have power to check and control the Trusts who are taking advantage of the
wqr to plunder us. The power to nationalize is like a policeman —its mere
presence keeps order.
WHY WE MUST HAVE FULL POWER.
It is savl : “It is agreed that the Commonwealth must have more power.
Very well—give it just as much power as it needs,” That sounds easy, but
it is most dillicult. All the powers that we at present have had been surpris-
ingly cut down in practice. Mr. Deakin’s Government carried a Trade Marks
Act. Part of that Act dealt with Workers’ Trade Marks. The High Court
by a majority ruled that the Commonwealth Parliament could not make a
law as to Workers’Trade Marks, although the Consiitution in plain words
said the Parliament had power to make laws as to Trade Marks;
The Commonwealth Parliament never doubted that it had power to make
laws as to Companies. Bub when the High Court came to consider a law
which Mr. D akin’s Government carrie I they said that Parliament had no
power to regulate companies that had already commenced business.
(Legislative Powers' of the "Parliament—
’ Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


WHO IS TO HAKE*
LAWS—THE HIGH
COURT OR THE
PARLIAMENT 1
There are numerous other .cases. With the. restricted
powers wo have now the real government is in the hands
of the High Court and the Privy Council. Over the
Parliament wo have a High Court whoso decision can
prevent us from doing even the things which the Constitution seems to have
clearly intended us to do. And over the High Court wo have the Privy
Council sitting in England, which has a different view of the Constitution
altogether. All this means that the capitalists and vested interests are,free
to do what they please. In reality the people do not govern at all We
want power to protect the people. Now—We want power to protect tho
peoplo while the war is on. We want powers to organize Australia’s
resources. We want powers so wide that wa neeJ not run to lawyers to
know what we can do and what wo cannot do.
THE POWERS THE STATES WILL HAVE IF THESE AMENDMENTS
ARE APPROVED BY THE PEOPLE.
It is said that if i hese amendments are carried the States will have no
powers left. This is quite untrue. The powers remaining to the S ates will
be numerous and vi-ally important. We append a list of some of them, so
that the electors may judge for themselves how little truth the e is in such a
statement. As a fact, the scope of the powers remaining to the States, if
these amendments are carried; would be much wider and more important
than those then possessed by the Commonwealth.
Land and settlement, agriculture, Ac.
Education—primary, secondary, and higher.
Public health and morals.
Social relations.
Manufacture, except as to Combinations and Monopolies.
Industrial law generally, except as regards labour and employment.
Criminal law generally.
Civil law generally—contracts, torts, real and personal property,
inheritance, dro.
Liquor and licen.-ing.
State Constitution and Government,
Municipal and local government.
State Railways (except arbitration for industrial disputes).
State works and undertakings.
State monopolies.
(Legislative Powers of the Parliament-
Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


State taxation. -
State insurance within the State.
State banking within the State.
State public service.
.A; Iministration of justice and legal procedure.
Police.
In addition to the exclusive powers over all these vitally important matters,
the f?tato Parliaments will bo able to legislate in regard to trade and commerce,
corporations, labour and employment, combinations and monopolies, and all
■other matters ..not exclusively vested in the Federal Parliament. None Of the
proposed amendments vest exclusive powers in this Parliament, therefore,
so far as the field is not covered by Federal laws, the States can legislate
freely on all such matters as wall as those in the list above. This-shows
4iow unfouu'hd is the contention that tho carrying of these amendments will
moan tho unification and tho destruction of the powers of tho States. Tho
carrying of these amendments will enab'o tho Governments of Australia to
protect the people as they have never been protected before. They will
enable tho Governments of Australia to organize tho resources-of Australia
for peace and for war as they have never yet been organized. It is the war
that makes it essential that these powers shall be granted.
THE POSITION SUMMARIZED.
Hero, then, we leave tho question. Wo have done our part; it is for tho
electors to do theirs. Tho responsibility, is theirs, and in their hands alone
is the remedy.
The Federal Constitution, adopted in order to enlarge the self-governing
powers of the people, actually fetters them. They cannot protect themselves
against the greatest dangers which menace civiliz-d man. In regard to tho
things that really matter, they are powerless. Tho wages and conditions of
labo-ir, the opportunities for employment, tho cost of tho necessaries of life,
tuv the things that mould the daily lives of the overwhelming majority of
mankind. They arc tho things that really matter to us all. And yet with
respect to them the Constitution binds the people, and they are helpless.
Such a position is intolerable.
Tho people must have these powers. They mast bo made to control Trusts,
to insure to all a fair and reasonable wage, to insure the primary producer a
fair and reasonable price for his produc--, t i protect themselves against tho
extort on of tho Trusts, and to maintain Industrial Peace.
Powers of the Parliaments v-- i
Argument FOR tho Proposed Laws.)


The proposed amendments will enable the people to do all these things.
And, as for the way in which the new powers should bo used, to what extent,
and by whom, Labour or Liberal, that is quite a separate matter, and one
which lies in the hands of the people themselves. Nothing prevents the
peo, lo from clothing themselves with those powers—save that'they, should
make up their minds to do so.
Above all, the people must remember that the cry “ No Party questions
during the war ”is the cry of the monopolist and of his mouthpieces. T£
the proposed amendments are carried, the people will hare power to control
the monopolist. They have not that power at present. If the ; proposed
amendments are the monopolist will still b 3 master, and we
shall still have to do his bidding and pay whatever toll he chooses to levy.
(Legislative Powers of the Parliament^"
Argument FOR the Proposed Laws.)


SENATORS' TERM OF SERVICE.
Section 13* At>'Soou*Qf) inp.y-be ■ uftcr notation ct
at—the-esptfa&eH-of- throo-ycaro, aa4-tkfi-plaees-ei'
.fittd-afteFwaFfis-tke-plaees-ef-SBiiafeaFS-skatt-b&eaffta
tke-espiFariaH—9t^i&—yea¥3-tFefft—^9
be -matte
wittHH-one-yeay-befere-tke—pkeetr-aFG-to-beceffle
¥aeank
-FeF-the-pHPpesea-eg-tkts-s&ettea—tbe—term—of
fiftFvi-ea-af-a-seaateF-sbaU-be-taksH-te—begkf-ea-tke
fe-’sfe-day-Bf-J ; aly-Ml9Vria*-tke-day-9f-bi&-eleetie%
eseepfc-ift-the-easee-ektks-feet-eieetieH—aad-ef-tke
eteettea—aest-aftei—
wkea-it-skall-be-takeK-te-b&gtH-ea-tke-fiFSt-day-ef
jaty-pFseec-liftg-tka-da-y-af-kis-aleetiea.
13. As soon as may be after
each first meeting of the Senate s “ ator3,
following a dissolution thereof, the Senate
shall divide the senators chosen for each
State into two classes, as nearly equal in
number as practicable; and the places of
the senators of the first class shall become
vacant at the expiration of three years and
PROPOSED
AMENDMENT.


two months, and the places of those of the
second class at the expiration of six years
and four months, from the beginning of
their term of service ; and afterwards the
places of senators shall become vacant at
the expiration of six years and four months
from the beginning of their term of service.
The election to fill vacant places shall he
made within one year before the places are
to become vacant.
, Por the purposes of this section the term
of service of the senators elected in the year
One thousand nine hundred and fourteen
shall be taken to have begun on the first
day of October, One thousand nine hundred
and fourteen, and the term of service of a
senator elected to fill a vacancy thereafter
occurring in rotation shall be taken to
begin on the day on which the place which
he is to fill becomes vacant, and the term of
service of senators elected at an election
next after a dissolution of the Senate shall
be taken to begin on the day of the first
meeting of the House of Representatives
after the dissolution. ,
This amendment has be<*n necessitated by the recent double dissolution.
Tho H ouse of Representatives is supposed to have a normal life of three
years, hut if tho next General Election is to take place at tho same time as
the next periodical election of senators it must happen before 30lh June,
1917. The liou<e must be dissolved before the cud of April, 1917, after a
life of only two years and.a half.
(Senators’ Terra of Service—
. Argument FOR the Proposed Law.)


It was undoubtedly the intention of the framers of the Cons' itn tjnn that
there should be triennial Parliaments, but as the Constitution stands at
present that is practically an impossibility if the elections for both Houses
are lo be held on the same day.
At present, after a double dissolution, the term of the
now Senate is cut short by a period which may be anything
up to twelve months, because the Constitution dates-the
beginning of the term back to the 30ih June before the
election. _ And the term of the House of Representatives is
AMENDMENT DOSS
NOT LENGTHEN
LIFE OF THE
PARLIAMENT
also always shortened by a term of two months, because, owing to the time
occupied in electoral preliminaries, a general election cannot be held till two
months after a dis-olution, • '
The amendment provides for this (1) by making the terms of tho
Senate and of the House of Representatives, after a double dissolution,
begin on the same day, and (2) by aching two months to the three years’
interval' between ' Senate-elections. - It will lengthen the life of the three-
years Senators, by,, two .months, and of the six-years Senators by four
months.
-It will not lengthen tho span of the House of Representatives at all; that
remains at a maximum of three years. -In'actual practice, the life of the
Parliament will al*ays be a little less than three years.
This section has already been amended. In 1907 the Deakin Government
esked the people to extend the life of the then existing Senate for sis months,
*nd the people agreed. ;
(Senators’ Term of Service-
Argument FOR the Proposed Law.)


The Proposed Amendments relating to the
Legislative Powers of the Parliament.
No. 1. — TRADE AND COMMERCE.
PROPOSED . Section 51. — (i.) Trade and Commerce witb-othea?
AMENDMENT. eenatrief),-aad-ameßg-4be-States:
No. 2.—CORPORATIONS.
Section 51. —(xx.)
GoHiHisiweaUk ;
Corporations, including—
(a) the creation, dissolution, regulation,
and control of corporations;
(b) corporations formed under the law
of a State, including their dis-
solution, regulation, and control;
but not including municipal or
governmental corporations, or
any corporation formed solely
for religious, charitable, scien-
tific, or artistic purposes, and not
for the acquisition of gain by the
corporation or its members; and
(c) foreign corporations, including their
regulation and control:
PROPOSED
Amendment.


No. 3. — INDUSTRI MATTERS.
Section 51. (xy.xv.) Gougiliatiaa-auA-arbitrarieg
Industrial matters, including—
(a) labour;
(b) employment and unemployment;
(c) the terms and conditions of labour
and employment in any trade,
industry, occupation, or calling;
(d) the rights and obligations of em-
ployers and employees;
■(e) strikes aM lock-outs ;
(f) the maintenance of industrial peace;
and
(g) the settlement of industrial disputes ;
PROPOSED
AMENDMENT.'


No. 4.—RAILWAY DISPUTES.
PROPOSED
AMENDMENT.
(NEW SUB-*
SECTION.)
Section 51.—(xxxv.A.) Conciliation and arbi-
tration for the prevention and settlemej t
of Industrial disputes in relation to em-
ployment in the railway service cf a State :
PROPOSED
-AMENDMENT.
(NEW SUB-
SECTION.)
No. 5. — TRUSTS.
Section 51.—(x1.) Trusts, combinations,
monopolies, and 'arrangements in relation
tbr—i
(a) the production, manufacture, cr
supply of goods, or the supply of
services, or
(t) the ownersliip of the means of pro-
duction, manufacture, or supply
cf goods, or supply of services.


No. 6.—NATIONALIZATION OF
MONOPOLIES.
PROPOSED
AMENDMENT.
(NEW
SECTION.)
Section 51 A.—(l.) When each House
of the Parliament, in the same Monoi)Clc3 -
session, has hy Resolution, passed by an
absolute majority of its members, declared
that the industry or business of producing,
manufacturing, or supplying any specified
goods, or of supplying any specified services,
is the subject of a monopoly, the Parliament
shall have power to make laws for carrying
on the industry or business by or under the
control of the Commonwealth, and acquiring
for that purpose on lust terms any property
used in connexion, with the industry or
business,.
(2.) This section shall not apply to any
industry or business conducted or carried
on by the Government of a State or any
public authority constituted under a State;


The Argument against the Amendments relating
to the Legislative Powers of the Parliament.
Just now, when anxiety and grief reign in almost'every household, when
feeling and emotion'are supreme over reason and judgment, the people are
being coerced Into the arena of party strife and contention to decide vital
changes in our Australian Constitution.
THE GREAT IMPERATIVE.
Never, surely, in the history of our country was there a necessity sd
im|ierative today aside every divisive proposal, and to concentrate the whole
mind and energies of the nation upon the supreme problems of saving our
Empire and preserving our civilization. At the present time fundamental
woiid changes are in progress. New forces are stirring. - The whole horizon
has already, assumed.: a ;diflere,ntvaspect. -Everything Is at issue— our
existence as a free people, our ideals, institutions, traditions and systems of
government are all in the crucible. To divert the mind of the nation from
considerations raised by these fatefuhevents and plunge it into the cauldron
of party cbm. ct over issues of comparatively minor import argues a
complete and dangerous misconception of our personal and national duty.
WHAT OTHERS CAN DO IN WAR TIME.
In this respect the National Government of Australia furnishes a
shocking example to the world. The Governmenis of the Empire ami our
brave Allies have laid aside all-party, political questions and have bound
■themselves during the continuance of the war to apply themselves solely to
matters pertaining to the, safety of the nations. National Governments
have been formed. The civil resources are being mobilized
and the thought and enterprise of the various communities
and countries are being directed to promoting the public
A BAD
EXAMPLE.
welfare. The Australian Government, on the other hand, by it 3 notion
piesents a striking contrast to this patriotic development. We furnish the-
one tragic exception. While our naval and mditary captains lad out our
young forces to preserve the inviolability of the Empire, our pelitiral.
leaders ate faring forth to a faction light and stirring into activity the>
embers of party feeling and strife.


UNTIL A MORE CONVENIENT SEASON.
In these circumstances you are a-ked by your vote to defer your decision
on the questions raised in the Referendums to a more convenient season. A
decision of tho people to bo of any value must tie .the result
of deliberate and careful consideration. Such considera-
tion is impossible when the mind of the people is centred-
in the Clinches at Gallipoli. Mutters of internal adjust-
ment seem p.-dtiy and insignificant when measured by .the
smaller
THING SHOULD
GIVE PLACE TO
GREATER.
■ ear'ul .forces which are laying .waste half the .world and ibhreatemug the
future of its civilization. It is no time do concern .ourselves with methods of
government when the Empire and the Allies are lighting for tho rights of
States to govern themselves at all, and to work oat their own, destinies
along the lines of their own traditions. Our Constitution wiis framed in the
calm and quiet, atmosphere of a .specially .cleecld Con vention .after years of
A SUITABLE
ATMOSPHERE
FOB lA DELICATE
task.
discussion in the several States. It as the.result of a be-
hest thought of that day To ask .the people to rev iso
this .carefully balanced machinery on party lines with the
whole Em pire in a death grapple is to invite them do take
risks, which .may mean aiationaldisaster.
NATIONAL STRESS INIMICAL.TO CONSTITUTION MAKING.
In morn peaceful times the discussion of the internal distribution of the
legislative and administrative powers would be a matter of proper concern.
But this is not-the timo to consider with chat careful scrutiny, which is their
du<s, the merits of proposals which are destructive of that Federal principle
EXTENT, AKI
RANGE OP
ALTERATION
PROPOSED.
'which -lies at the base-of the compact’made 'between,the
commoting States. Electors are not in the state of mind
that would permit the cbwa critical survey oftueasuies
which, if adopted, would strip the States of . all authority
over trade, commerce, and industry'; and abclli-sh ail
distinction between matters of national and local concern, besides seriously
impairing, the States’control of their railways. The mind perplexed with
thoughts of war cannot apply itself to tbo full consideration of'the vexed and
involved problem of vesting the powers of government for' a whole continent
in a central authority. Tne nation, fighting for Its very existence, has
neither time nor inclination to weigh and consider a scheme to empower
the Federal Parliament to nationalize the agencies of production and
distribution, and sat up a'SocialLrtie rojima ovsr Australia.
(Legislative Powers of the Parliament — .
Jjgumsnt AGAIN ST ih# Eroptpsofl Laws ).


THE NATION GAINS 'EY W ITING;
No* King can lost by awaiting the issue of the , war. This will be the
third time in lour years that proposals to amend the Constitution have been
: submitted to the people. .On the two previous occasions
' thoy were rejected. The same party—the Lab mr par'y —•
.which, now submits tbe amendments oi 1915, submitted
the amendments of 1911 and of 1913. "The oljjects which
CHOPPING AND
CHANGING.
it was stated the proposed amendments would achieve—-the alleged
constitutional defects which it was said they would remedy—-were the
same in 1913 and 1913 as they are now. Yet ea each occasion the
proposed amendments have materially varied in term and substance. With
each successive submission the amendments themselves have been .amended.
These rapid changes ol front give no semblance .01 hope of,
permanence. Had the people adopted tirepropo als of 1.911,
events indicate thut 1918 would have revealed the need of
the farther of those very amendments thmu-
KO FINAUTT
IB SIGHT.
selves and another refeiendi.. . that purpose. Even that would not have
been the conclusion. The year 1915 would hare revealed to these ivst esa
innovatoi-s a further need, emailing again another referendum. What
prospect of permanence can the adoption of the present proposals assure us 1
A COSTLY BUSINESS.
The cost of the last separate appeal was £BS,(PC. Tim estimated cost
of this is £lOO,OOO. Incidentally, this is about the price
of 20,000 new rifles. At a time -when the whole financial
resources of the nation are being mobilized for war.
emergencies with a war bill of £50,000,000 for the year,
with unemployment rife and tbe effects of the recent
Bin.ES r.
BEFERENDOas.
drought still adversely effecting Mir revenue*, is it note wicked and profligate
use of party power to cast public moneys to the winds in this wanton way !;
DISFRANCHISING THE SOLDIER.
Test another, and certainly not the least cogent, reason for postponement
is the absence on war duty ol over 100,000 eligible voters. We bad one
Constitution when they left our shores. If the referendunts bo carried,
they will return to find another'.' A great and fundamental change will have
taken place in their absence. They of all others are entitled to vote in the
(Legislative "Powers of the Parliament—
Argument AGAINST the Proposed Laws.)


decision of matters relating to the Constitution, for are they not engaged
at the risk and sacrifice of their lives in defending it, together with our
democratic institutions, from the raiding of the Prussian autocrat? They
have establi.-,hed an additional claim to vote by their
suffering and their sacrifices. To radically alter, in their
absence, the system of government they have gone out to
PATRIOTISM
PENALIZED.
defend is to commit an act of unfaithfulness to them and to perpetrate an
injustice amounting to a scandal.
When this was first pointed out to the Government, they proposed to
provide facilities for voting in the trenches—presumably, if and when the
Turks permitted them.' The scheme has since been discarded as impractic-
able. ' The result will bo that while the citizens'here are being compelled
under pains and penalties to record their votes, 100,000 6f
our soldiers abroad and 77,000 sick and invalid at home,
deprived of the postal vote-an army of over 175,000
DEMOCRACY
DENIED. ;
voters—-are deliberately prevented from expressing their opinions on these
grave questions.
EXPLOITING THE WAR SENTIMENT.
An unfairandinsidious attempt is being made to connect these proposals
with .tin* present conflict, and to exploit the war sentiment in their favour.
They are declared to be necessary for the “organization of, society ” and to
“protect the welfare of the nation.” With this.end, in view, \ye are told
that they are not party measures at all, and should not be so regarded.
Unfortunately for these specious, pretensions, the records are available; and
they prove with deadly exactitude,that the Ileforondums are the Alpha and
Omega, of Xabour party ’ propaganda. The Prime Minister has stated that
“The referendums would be a party issue”
.Similarly, the Attorney-General, Mr. Hughes, reminded
Mr. Holman thatr;
ARE THEY PARTY
PROPOSALS » ~
• “It had been resolved in Conference that, in order to givet-£I(-ct
to the programme there decided, upon, it- -was ncossary to-i-mako
amendment* in t» o Con-tifnth n.”
(Legislative Powers of the Parliament —
Argument AGAINST the Proposed Laws.)


The official reports of the recent Inter-State Labour Conference show that it
■was still considered the chief Item of their party programme and fur. fished
the final answer to this contention.
COVEHN3ENT
co'nvicts itsrlp
OF NEGLECT
Moreover, if these proposals are genuinely needed for the
prosecution of tho war, the Government must be charged
with criminal neglect for having so long delayed them.
"War proposals, which meander leisurely on after a year and
and a half of conflict before taking definite shape and effect, surely lose all
claim to their designation. Before these proposals could affect the progress
of the war its .final courses, will in all likelihood be sec far beyond the.
influence of the Referendum?... There is nothing in them all that can deflect
the course of the war in our favour by so much as a hair’s breadth ; nothing
that could build another ship of war or add another regiment to the fearless
fighters in tho Dardanelles. This is an excuse and not a reason; a
subterfuge and not a fact.
The powers necessary to wage efficient warfare and to
do all things incidental thereto are contained in section 51,
sub-section vi., of the Constitution, which reads thus :
EXISTING POWERS
SUFFICIENT.
Tbo Parliament- shall, subject to th : s Constitution, have power to make
laws for the peace, order, and good government of the Commonwealth, with
respect to:
- The naval and military defence of • the Commonwealth arid of thb
several States, and tile control of the forces to execute arid maintain the
laws of the Cominonwealth. ‘
In addition to this express power over defence on sea. and land, the
Constitution enables legislation on all matters its execution,
Mr. Hughes recently declared, in discussing the validity of the Enemy
Contract Annulment Act, that:
“The defen-e powers of the Commonwealth were most-elastic.
He would, indeed, be a bold man who would set a limit to them,
.particularly at such a juncture as this.”
(Legislative Powers of tho Parliament—
Argument AGAINST the Proposed Laws.)


This matter coakl have been put ip the test long ago, had the Govem-
GOVERNMENT
DECLINES TO TEST
POWERS.
ment been in earnest.. They could have secured tbe
opinion of the High Court on the extent and range of tbe
power contained in the above section of the Constitution.
The machinery stands ready for the purpose in the
■Judicature Act 0/1910, fashioned by tlieir own bands as follows:
Section 88.—Whenever the refers to the High
Court for hearing and determination questions of law as to the validity
•of any Actor enactment of the Parliament, the High Courtshall have'
Jurisdiction to lioar and determine the matter.
The Government kss not availed Use!! of this power,
nor has it feUewod toe precedent el the Imperial Govern-
ment In inviting the Lerd Chief Justice to Us aid.
AN IMPERIAL
PRECEDENT.
Lib'-rals have always been prepared to give tbe Government, without
question, every shred el power necessary for the efficient conduct o! tho
War. They have cordially assisted them to pass a series of War Measures,
culminating in the suspension of Habeas Corpus, and conferring complete
and plenary power on the Executive of the day. They are willing to help
th'em further, if the need be shows. Unless and until the Government take
the -course suggested, the public must -conclude that .'th® -war is being used
to forward their party proposals.
Meantime, lot the following quotation from tbe Loudon Times be the final
answer to the Government's attitude':—
“Undoubtedly,!! the Labour proposals are forced,
Australia will be plunged into a violent contest, and
the stream of abuse, innuendo, and recrimination which
has already flooded the House of Representatives will
AS OTHERS
SEE DS.
overflow tlie whole of Australia. Meanwhile, In the trenches at Gallipoli,
Australians will be fighting for freedom under an alien sky. The
contrast may not seem as strange to tho Australian .leaders as it does
to us, but is it worth while ? ”
NO CREATION OF NEW POWERS.
In this connexion wc may also usefully remember that no new powers W.ll
be brought into being. The proposals, if carried, will be a costly and
dbegisltrtlve Powers of tho Parliament-
Argument AGAINST the Proposed Laws.)


doubtful readjustment o! powers nlready In existent. • J&. Jisher and liis
labour Premier taufitves in •five <ff the six States now ‘exercise and control
practically the whole political power of the Commonwealth. Between
them they can sorely co-operate to protect the people and prosecute'the war.
WHEAT CASE.
Another reason of put forward is the .necessity for the restoration
t S Tree Trade between the States, which is h3d ho havebeen destroyed by
the recent "High Court decision in the Wheat case.
The trouble experienced in this regard arose out of the
4rougbtj-ond long before these proposals could tiring legis-
lative relief, supposing it to he possible, Nature will have
provided an ample store for all, and the motive to restrict
HARD CASES
HAKE BAD LAW.
trade will hare given place to an overpowering desire to promote it. Similar
conditions may not recur for many years, and alter the war is over ample
opportunity may be availed of for the purpose of considering adequate
proposals for preventing a recurrence and for wisely and 'effectively safe-
guarding the interests of all the people of Australia.
Of all the objects (sought, the attainment of this has mow, thanks-to the
hreakingtff the an anostmf the States, become the least argent.;
empire charges.
During this period of world-wide upheaval the public should not "be worried
and wearied with a general discussion of the •natarc and bearings of these
proposals. As Mr. Uoyd George recently affirmed :
. “You cannot argue under shell Are. One tight is enough at
one time. Better the -party flßg ishonld suffer than the nation’s flag
ho-shot (down.”
If these proposals be carried in any'shape now, the 'war may change their
incidence entirely. Everything is being altered. The whole’horizon of the
western world is changing, and these changes are likely to be fundamental
and profound. The Prime Minister has declared that:—
“Only an earthquake would prevent the Refer.
enJum.” ’
THE FISHER
EARTHQUAKE.
(Legislative Powers of the Parliament—
Argument .AGAINST the Proposed Laws.)
f. :: . . •


Unfortunately, tho “earthquake” is here and now in actual and active
convulsion. These world changes will to a certainty involve the Empire
within their sweep! Structural political changes are struggling to . birth,
and the relations of tho whole Empire may be sensibly affected. As
Edmund Burke says:—
“ War never leaves, where it found a nation.”
The Dominions are surely—and it may ho unconsciously—establishing a
claim, written in their own blood, to a more prominent and permanent place
in tho Imperial counsels. After the war the whole perspective
will be different. To interfero with the Constitution now may
retard and hamjier, if it does not prevent, these larger Empire
readjustments, which in all probability will begin at the centre.
To wait will enable us to win through the more safely with
THE ONLY SAFE
COURSE.
these greater constitutional proposals.
UNITED WE STAND—DIVIDED WE FALL,
Nor must this appeal be misunderstood. It is not against change at any
time and in any circumstances, but against change NOW. Alterations may
bo required when the war is over,'and it is freely admitted that some are
already due. The purpose of this appeal is to suggest that they are not so
urgent or pressing that they cannot be postponed, pending the conclusion Of
the war. Liberals are for any changes necessary to the wise development of
the Federal principle of tho Constitution, and will be ready to consider them
when the principles of free government have been vindicated hy the sword.
It is a pica for unity and consolidation, sothat the whole energies of the
nation may ho applied to tho defence of our'civilization.
THE VITAL
QUESTION—AN
AUSTRALIAN OR
GERMAN
CONSTITUTION.
Tlie people of Australia are, therefore, asked to declare that
the present is no time to revise our own forms of government on
party lines, when a conflict Is being waged to decide whether
our future system is to be Australian or German in character.
On this matter the appeal is confidently made to electors of all
shades of politics to give a negative vote, so that when Halit
again breaks through the war cloud, with minds free from
worry and with the new experience thus gained, the great problems of oar
owu self-government may bo fairly and impartially considered.
(Legislative Powers of the Parliament-
Argument AGAINST the Proposed Laws.)


The Proposed Amendment relating to Senators’
Term of Service.
{No argument against this proposed laio teas received Ou-
tlie Chief Electoral Officer.)
•jdntj s Wlill»in Appl*t» w dulHck, Oovetuin*Wi ! WWtW.'“49ll»






