

AMENDED RULES
OF THE
SYDNEY
Marine Benefit Society
Sydney:
F. W. WHITE, PRINTER, 39 MARKET STREET WEST
1890.




AMENDED RULES
OF THEE
SYDNEY
Marine Benefit Society
F. W. WHITE, PRINTER, 39 MARKET STREET WEST
1890.


INDEX.
PAGE
Article I —Name, Objects, and Place of Meeting ... 3
Article ll—Nights of Meeting 3
Article lll—Order of Business 4
Article IV —Admission of Members ... ... ... 5
Article V —Fees and Dues ~ 7
Article Vl—Officers —Their Elections and Duties ... 11
Article VII —Committees 17
Article VIII —Members... ... ... ••• ••• 18
Article IX —Buies of Order 23
Article X—Medical Laws ... ... ... ... 24
Article Xl—Miscellaneous 29


AMENDED RULES.
Article I.
Name, Objects, and Peace of Meeting.
Rule 1. —This Society shall be called The Sydney
Marine Benefit Society. Place of Meeting:
Society’s Hall, Wynyard Hotel; or any other place
that the Committee of Management or the Society
at any meeting may hereafter decide upon.
Rule 2.—The objects of this Society shall be for
the ensuring sums of money to be paid on the death
of a member, or member’s wife or child ; for render-
ing pecuniary assistance to a member when sick and
unable to follow his business or employment; for
supplying medicines and medical attendance to
members and their wives and families, subject to the
provisions and restrictions hereinafter provided.
Article 11.
Nights of Meeting.
Rule 8. —This Society shall meet for the trans-
action of business every alternate Monday evening,
not earlier than half-past 7 o’clock (public holidays
excepted) and shall close not later than half-past 9,
unless an extension of time shall have been moved,
seconded and carried prior to the hour named.
Seven members shall form a quorum for the trans-
action of formal business only ; and under no circum-
stances shall new business of an important character
be entertained, unless fifteen members are present.
But no important business shall be debated later
than 10 p.m.


Rule 4. —The quarterly meeting of this Society
shall be the first meeting in January, April, July
and October, of which due notice shall be given by
advertisement in one or more of the daily papers,
the same to be considered a sufficient notice for all
members within the circuit of the Society’s doctors
and known to be in Sydney at the time named to
attend. The roll to be called at 9 p.m. All mem-
bers neglecting to answer the call shall be fined one
shilling, unless a satisfactory apology in writing be
made, and duly accepted by the members present,
members sick and inmates of public asylums and
hospitals excepted. But all members shall have the
right to appeal against this or any other fine imposed
by these By-laws, provided that such appeal be made
not later than one month from the date of fine being
imposed.
Rule s.—lf the regular meeting of this society
should fall on a public holiday, the members present
at the previous meeting may decide, by resolution, to
hold the meeting on the night before or the night
after the aforesaid public holiday. But if a public
holiday be proclaimed unexpectedly, and no meeting
intervene, the President may summon the members
by circular for whatever night he may deem best in
the interests of the society: provided that such
meeting shall not be called more than six days from
the aforesaid public holiday.
Article 111.
Order of Business.
Rule 6. —The business of the Society shall be con-
ducted in the following order, viz :
1. Opening the meeting by the President in
accordance with the prescribed form.
2. Reading the minutes of the previous meeting.
3. Reception of communications.
4. Stewards’ report of the sick members for the
past week.
5. Expenses incurred since last meeting.


6. Has any Brother a friend to propose as a fit
and proper person to become a member of
this Society p
7. Initiation of candidates.
8. Has any member anything to advance the
interests of this Society ?
9. Report of Standing Committee.
10. Report of Special Committee.
11. Nominations and Election of Officers.
12. Unfinished business.
13. New business.
Article IV.
Admission op Members.
Rule 7. —No person shall be admitted into this
Society except he is a seaman and can produce a
certificate of discharge, or the proposer certifies that
the proposed candidate is a seaman.
Rule B.—Any person desirous of becoming a
member of this Society must be duly proposed and
seconded by two financial members, stating his name,
age, residence, and occupation, and if married or
single, which shall be entered upon the records of
the Society ; the candidate shall deposit with the
Secretary, as proposition money, one-half of the
entrance fee, prior to receiving an order upon the
Doctor for examination; the balance to be paid
within one month from date of nomination, and if
residing in Sydney, or within the harbour of Port
Jackson at the time it shall be imperative for him to
attend the Society the first subsequent night of
meeting for election and initiation ; furthermore,
should a candidate, after having passed his examina-
tion, and known to be in Sydney during the time,
fail to attend the Society’s meeting during one
month from the date of nomination, for election and
initiation, the proposition money shall become
forfeited. But, should any person wish to become a
member of this Society, who, from the nature of his
occupation is prevented from attending the Society’s
meeting for an indefinite period, he shall be admitted


to membership in accordance with the following
conditions : he must be duly proposed and seconded
after the manner prescribed in the foregoing part of
this rule, and produce a certificate duly signed by
one of the Medical Officers belonging to the Society,
and pay the full amount of entrance fee, and sign
the usual declaration as contained in Eule 9, after
which the Society may ballot for and elect him at the
first subsequent night of meeting : always providing,
that each and every candidate admitted under this
privilege, shall attend the first subsequent meeting
they are in Sydney and not engaged at their usual
occupation, for initiation, or all moneys they may
have paid into the Society will become forfeited, and
their name will be erased from the Society’s books.
The name Sydney, whenever used in these by-laws,
to signify the city of Sydney, and those suburbs
where medical attendance is provided for members of
this Society. Any candidate being rejected by the
doctor or the Society, the proposition money shall be
returned.
Eule 9.—Each and every person desiring to obtain
admission to membership in this Society shall be
required at their initiation to make and duly sign
the following declaration :
I, A. 8., do solemnly and unreservedly pledge my honour as
a man, in the presence of these witnesses, that I have
given a correct statement of my name and age, and
that I am free from any bodily or constitutional disease,
and also that my wife (if married) is free from any
bodily or constitutional disease, and that I will be at
all times conformable to the rules and usages of this
Society ; and should I at any time be found guilty of a
breach of the same, or of having given a wrong state-
ment of my name or age, or a wrong statement as to
bodily or constitutional disease of myself or wife (if
married) I will suffer my name to be erased from your
books as unworthy to hold a seat amongst you, and
cease to have any claim against your Society.
Eule 10. —Should it become known hereafter that
any member has gained admission to membership in
this society under false pretences, of whatever
character, he shall be charged with the same; and if


proved he shall be liable to expulsion, on a vote o£
the majority of members present at any regular
meeting of the society.
Article V.
Fees and Dues.
Rule 11.—The initiation fee of this society shall
be as follows:
£ s. and.
16 years and under 20 ... 0 6 0
20 „ „ 25 ... 0 8 0
25 „ ~ 28 ... 012 0
28 „ „ 30 ... 016 0
30 „ „ 33 ... 1 0 0
33 „ „ 35 ... 1 4 0
35 „ „ 37 ... 110 0
37 „ „ 39 ... 1 16 0
39 „ „ 40 ... 2 2 0
No candidate above the age of forty will be accepted
but as an honorary member, and shall pay ss.
initiation money and ss. annually.
Rule 12.—Each and every member of this society
shall contribute one shilling per week, which, together
with the initiatioji fees, shall be placed to the credit
of the general fund, from which no moneys shall be
voted, working expenses excepted.
Rule 13.—Each and every member of this society
shall contribute, in addition to the weekly contri-
bution, the sum of one shilling per quarter, which,
together with all fines and forfeitures, shall be placed
to the account of the Contingent Fund, from which
may be voted all moneys for the following purposes,
viz.: —lst Distress Gifts : Such distress gifts shall
not exceed two pounds, and the second application
for relief to one and the same person, within the
period of one month, shall not be entertained. 2nd
Gratuity to members who may be in actual distress
through shipwreck, such gratuity not to exceed five
pounds; and the second application for relief to one
and the same person shall not be entertained within


the period of three months. All applications for
relief must be made in writing and duly signed by
the member requiring relief, and countersigned by
the secretary. 3rd All Moneys for Miscellaneous
Purposes: But should the amount required exceed
the sum of five pounds, notice of motion shall be
given, stating the amount required and the object for
which it is intended, and to lie on the table seven
days previous to being entertained, and then carried
by a two-third vote.
Rule 14. —Each and every member shall pay for
his wife’s registration to the Funeral Fund, according,
to her age, as follows :
s. and.
Under 25 years ... .. ... 2 6
25 to 30 years ... ... 3 6
30 to 35 years ... ... 5 0
35 to 40 years ... ... 7 6
Children ... ... ... 1 0
And any member registering a second wife, after
haviug received benefit for a former wife from this
fund, shall pay to the said fund the sum of two
pounds (£2) in addition to the entrance fee, and
shall be eligible to receive benefits therefrom after
twelve months from the date of her being registered.
The society shall not register any man’s wife whose
age is over forty.
Rule 15. —Each and every person on becoming a
member of this society shall be entitled to and re-
ceive medical attendance and medicines from the
date of entrance, by registering themselves for that
purpose in the list of any one of the Medical Doctors
of and belonging to the society.
Rule 16. —Each and every financial member of this
society shall, at the expiration of tw r elve months from
the date of entrance, be entitled to and receive, in
case of sickness or disability, the sum of one pound
one shilling per week for the first six months, and
ten shillings and sixpence per week for the next six
months; after which time, should a member be
unable to follow his usual occupation, he shall, upon


a vote of the society, receive any sum not exceeding
the following scale, when the capital of the society
shall amount to —
s. and.
£SOO 2 6
£IOOO 5 0
£ISOO 7 6
£2OOO 10 0
And be allowed to do any trivial matter towards his
support, except public begging. Should the super-
annuated member be seen intoxicated, or engaged in
any game of hazard, or not adhering to the medical
officer’s directions, or failing to obtain and submit to
the secretary a monthly certificate as to his con-
tinued incapacity to support himself, from the medical
officer, or if residing beyond the limits of the City
of Sydney, from a duly qualified medical practitioner
or magistrate, shall forfeit his claim to any further
superannuation allowance. It is to be understood
that no member shall be entitled to this super-
annuation fund until he has been a contributing
member five years. All fines, arrears, and debts of
whatsoever kind shall be deducted from the first and
subsequent payments of sick pay or of funeral
donation.
Rule 17. —Should any member of this Society,
who has been a contributing member for five years,
become permanently disabled from following his
usual occupation, and having received benefits in
accordance with the foregoing rule, the Society may,
with his consent, vote him a lump sum, such sum in
no case to exceed fifty pounds sterling. Moreover,
any member receiving a lump sum as aforesaid, shall
abandon all further claim upon the Society, and
cease to be a member thereof.
Rule 18 —Upon any member of this Society being
shipwrecked, and in consequence thereof placed in
distressed circumstances, and has been a contributing
member for twelve months, and not over thirteen
weeks in arrears, such member may obtain relief, on


the presentation o£ a written application for the
same, in any sum not exceeding five pounds (£5).
Eule 19.—Upon the death of a member’s child
under the age of sixteen years, and who has been
registered to the Funeral Fund of this Society for
not less than twelve months, and who is the child of
a financial member, he shall receive the sum of one
pound (£l), hut should such child have been
registered for two years, the sum of two pounds (£2)
shall be paid, such payments to be made in accord-
ance with Friendly Societies’ Act, part 3, section 20.
Eule 20. —Should the wife of a member die, and
upon receiving a certificate duly signed by a qualified
medical practitioner, he shall receive a sum of money
in accordance with the following scale: —
£ s. and.
1 year ... ... ... 10 0 0
2 „ 10 10 0
3 „ 11 0 0
4 „ ... ... ... 11 10 0
5 „ 12 0 0
6 „ 12 10 0
7 „ 13 0 0
8 „ 13 10 0
9 „ 14 0 0
10 „ 14 10 0
11 „ 15 0 0
Providing that in all cases his wife has been registered 1
upon the Funeral Fund not less than twelve months,
and the member is financial at the time and in com-
pliance with the Eules.
Eule 21.—Upon the receipt of a certificate signed
by any duly qualified medical practitioner, magistrate,
or coroner, certifying as to the death of any member
of this Society, there shall be paid to his widow or
child, or next of kin, or to any person or persons
duly nominated by the deceased, in writing, and
entered in the register kept for the purpose, a sum
of money in accordance with the following scale,
always providing that the deceased has been a con


tributing member for the period of twelve months,
and not more than thirteen weeks in arrears at the
time of his death :
£ s. and.
1 year ... ••• 20 0 0
2 ... ... 21 0 0
3 ” 22 0 0
4 ” 23 0 0
5 ” 24 0 0
6 ” 25 0 0
7 ” 26 0 0
8 ” 27 0 0
9 ” 28 0 0
10 29 0 0
11 „ 30 0 0
But should there be no relation or assignee, the
Secretary shall see that the deceased is decently
interred, and all funeral expenses incurred shall be
defrayed from the funeral donation.
Rule 22.— After the death of a member, and his
funeral donation paid, his widow, child, or assignee
have no further claim upon the Funeral Fund, but
the widow of a member shall be entitled to medical
attendance and medicine for herself and children so
long as she shall pay to the Society six shillings and
sixpence quarterly in advance ; in all cases the widow
must comply with this law within three months after
the husband’s death, and the Secretary shall inform
her of this rule within seven days after her husband’s
death, and supply her with such other information
as may be required ; for neglect of this duty the
Secretary shall be fined the sum of one pound (£1).
Article VI.
Officers —Their Elections and Duties.
Rule 23.—The officers shall consist of a President,
President’s Adviser, Vice-President, Secretary,
Assistant Secretary, Treasurer, four Visiting
Stewards, Sentinel, and three Trustees, all of whom,
with the exception of the Trustees, shall be elected
every six months, viz., at the last regular meeting in


June and December, and installed the first regular
meeting in July and January; candidates for the
various offices may be nominated the night of meet-
ing previous.
Rule 24.—At the election of officers, if sufficient
members do not offer themselves, voluntarily, to fill
the various offices, the roll shall be called, and all
those declining to accept office when their names are
called, shall be fined one shilling; if, after the roll
has been called there are any offices unfilled, the
members holding those offices at the time shall be
asked to retain office for the ensuing six months, and
if they agree they shall receive such extra remunera-
tion as the members in meeting assembled shall
decide. Provided that any member having held
office for six months, shall be exempt from fine under
this rule for twelve months thereafter.
Rule 25. —It shall be the duty of the President to
preside at every meeting, and enforce due observance
of all the rules and regulations of the Society. He
shall move no resolutions, and shall give no opinion
upon any matter before the meeting, unless a
resolution has been duly carried asking him to do so.
He shall also see that all the officers perform their
respective duties, and duly attest all books, and all
bills to be paid by the Society, and perform all other
duties as the Society or his charge shall require. For
wilfully permitting a breach of any of these By-laws
he shall be fined the sum of ten shillings.
Rule 26. —It shall be the duty of the President’s
Adviser to attend all meetings and occupy the chair
immediately to the right of the President, with
whom he shall advise on all important business
during the meeting.
Rule 27. —It shall be the duty of the Vice-
President to render to the President such assistance
as he may require, and in the absence of the
President he shall perform his duties, and further, if
at any meeting the President and Vice-President be


absent the members may, by a vote, elect a chair-
man, who shall fulfil the President’s duty.
Eule 28.—1 t shall be imperative of the Secretary
to be punctual in his attendance at all meetings at a
specified hour, or for such neglect he shall be fined
five shillings. Should he be absent during the whole
time of meeting he shall be fined ten shillings, unless
a sufficient cause be shown at the time, of which the
members then present shall be competent to judge.
He shall so keep his books as to show clearly a list
of the names and residences of the members, the
monthly amount due and paid by each member, the
dates of all disbursements made through his instru-
mentality, and of all sums invested with his know-
ledge. He shall submit all books, documents, &c.,to
the Auditors for their inspection at the Quarterly
Audit Meeting, or, if requested, at any Special
Meeting. He shall keep his contribution book so
indexed as to show clearly every member’s contri-
butions, fines, levies, &c., which shall be open for
the members’ inspection every meeting night. No
contributions, fines, levies, or any moneys to be
entered in any temporary book or sheet, under a fine
of ten shillings. He shall notify all meetings when
ordered by the President, and shall attest all moneys
to be paid at a regular meeting, no more than one
payment to be entered on one voucher, and shall pay
over to the Treasurer all moneys received by him
within twenty-four hours, taking his receipt for
the same. He shall be prepared at the half-yearly
meeting to furnish a detailed account of the income
and expenditure, the balance struck, as to exhibit
clearly the state of the funds. For any neglect of
same he shall be fined one pound. He shall, more-
over, execute promptly all the other duties implied
in the several rules, or such other duties as the
Society may direct He shall find security in the
sum of one hundred pounds (£100) within twenty-
eight days of his election in such Guarantee Office
as the Society may direct, such security to be re-
newed within twenty-eight days of re-election, He
shall be in attendance in his office to receive contri-


butions, &c., every Monday and Friday, from 7 till 9
P' m y public holidays excepted. For such services he
shall receive such remuneration as the Society may
deem fair for his services.
Rule 29. The Assistant Secretary shall assist the
Secretary, under whose directions he shall act. He
shall render such assistance to the Secretary in the
performance of his duty as he or the Society may
require of him.
Rule 30. —It shall be the duty of the Treasurer t°
pay all orders drawn upon him by the President,
attested by the Secretary, and none"otherwise. H e
shall receive all moneys of the Society, aod hold th e
same until the expiration of his term, unless other'
wise ordered 4>y the Society. He shall keep a full
and correct account, corresponding with the Secre-
tary, of all moneys received and expended, filling in
the butts of all cheques, vouchers, &c. He shall give
the Society an account of the funds at each meeting,
and deliver up, when legally called upon, all moneys,
books, papers, and other property belonging to the
Society, to his successor in office, or to whom the
Society may appoint. He shall hold the Society’s
banking vouchers, and bank all moneys in hand over
ten pounds, in the name of the Society’s Trustees,
who shall inspect the said vouchers at least cnce a
month. He shall receive not less than one guinea a
year as salary, and he shall find security in the sum
of one hundred pounds (£100) for the just per-
formance of his duty: such security to be renewed
at the end of each term before re-election. All
bonds from Treasurer, or any other officer, from
whom the Society requires security, shall be duly
signed, sealed, and delivered over to the Trustees
within twenty-six days from the date of their election
or re-election, under a fine of £l.
Rule 31.—1 t shall be the duty of the Visiting
Stewards on duty to attend all meetings of the
Society ; introduce all candidates for initiation and
put the following questions to persons before being
balloted for: —Questions —lst, Do you of your own


knowledge know of any hereditary or constitutional
disease of yourself or wife that would exclude you
from the benefits of this Society ? Have you been
refused at aoy time during the last six months from
any other benefit society ? Are you aware, that if,
at any time, it may be proved that you have answered
any of these questions wrongfully, you will be liable
to be expelled from the Order, and shall forfeit all
claims you may have had from becoming a member ?
The Stewards, on their regular turn, shall visit the
sick, or find a brother member as substitute, at least
twice a week, and report on the same at the first
meeting following the visits. They shall take the
sick pay to the sick brothers, and carry a book,
which the sick members shall sign, and date the
visits made by the Stewards, or substitute, wno, aEter
having made the required visits, shall deliver the
said book to the Treasurer. The Treasurer, if he
finds the sick have been visited as required in this
rule, shall pay the substitute the sum of
eight shillings. But should the Stewards or substi-
tute fail in performing their duty as required in this
rule, they shall not be entitled to the eight shillings.
Rule 32. —It shall be the duty of the Sentinel to
allow none other than the members of this Society
to enter the meeting-room, except such as are about
joining the Society, without the permission of the
President.
Rule 33.—Three Trustees shall be elected annually,
by ballot, at the last meeting in December, who shall
perform the following duties : —lst. Hold in their
names all funds and investments of the Society.
2nd. Pay over to the Secretary at the next meeting
all moneys which they may from time to time receive
as interest on all capital invested by the Society.
3rd. Sign all cheques for moneys to be drawn from
the bank, which are voted by the members at their
regular meetings, on an order signed by the President
and countersigned by the Secretary, and none other-
wise, keeping account of such withdrawals in a book
provided for the purpose, and examine the Society’s


banking account at least once a month. Candidates
tor the office of Trustee must make declaration as to
their perfect solvency before they will be accepted as
Trustees of this Society. Moreover, should a Trustee
of this Society get into pecuniary difficulties of any
kind his seat shall be deckired vacant, and another
Trustee immediately elected in his place. If eligible
candidates cannot be procured amongst the members
the Society may elect eligible persons outside the
Society. For wilful neglect of duty, or making a
false declaration, a Trustee may be removed from
office, and, if a member of this Society, fined, as the
Society may think fit.
Eule 34. —All officers and members performing
any duty for the Society may, upon a vote of the
members at any regular meeting, be paid such sums
as the members then present may deem a fair
remuneration for such services, such remuneration,
if paid quarterly, to be paid at the first meeting in
the quarter for the past quarter, provided the duties
have been faithfully performed. All fines, for
neglect of duty, levied upon any officer of the Society
receiving salary to be deducted from his salary
before payment is made.
Eule 85. —The seat of any Officer may be declared
vacant for neglect of duty two consecutive meetings
(unless a satisfactory apology has been accepted by
a vote of the members present at any regular
meeting) after a w r eek’s notice has been given. In
all cases the majority shall decide by ballot at the
meeting as to the vacancy. Moreover, should the
seat of any Officer be declared vacant, or should any
Officer resign, another member shall be immediately
elected to fill the vacancy. Further, should the seat
of any Officer at any meeting be vacant, the meeting
may appoint a member for the time being to fill the
vacancy; and such member, if he desire it, shall be
entitled to receive the emoluments pertaining to the
chair which he occupies for the time being. And
such emoluments may be increased or reduced by a


vote of the members present at the time of the
election of the Officers.
Article VII.
Committees.
Rule 36 —The Committee of Management of this
Society shall consist of the President, Vice-President,
President-Adviser, Treasurer, Secretary, Assistant-
Secretary, and the Visiting Stewards. The place of
meeting shall be at the Society’s Office, or elsewhere
when required. Five shall form a quorum. The
President shall have the casting vote only.
Rule 37. —Special Committees shall consist of not
less than five members, who shall be elected by a
majority of the members present at a meeting when
required ; but the Society may appoint one or two
members, where more would be unnecessary, to per-
form any special duties for the society ; such member
or members to be deemed a Special Committee within
the meaning of these By-laws.
Rule 38. —There shall be appointed an Auditing
Committee, consisting of not less than three mem-
bers, who, when appointed, shall furnish written
reports of all accounts in connection with the society
for the past three months, and sign the half-yearly
and annual balance-sheets if found correct, if one
of the Auditors be absent from the audit, the two
remaining shall furnish the written reports to the
society. Each Auditor shall be entitled to five shil-
lings for each audit.
Rule 39.—The Officers of this society shall form a
Medical Committee, to hear all complaints against
the Doctor; and if the committee consider the com-
plainant has just grounds for complaint, they shall
cause the Secretary to summon the members of the
society to decide the matter. Should the committee
consider there are no just grounds for complaint, they
shall recommend the brother te withdraw the same ;
but should he insist on having a summoned committee
to decide his case, he shall pay ten shillings and six


pence to the President before such meeting shall be
called; and should his case be sustained by the
meeting so summoned, the ten shillings and sixpence
shall be refunded.
Rule 40. —All Reports of Committees, except
Progress Reports, shall be made in writing, and
signed by a majority.
Article VII.
Members.
Ruie 41 Every member shall upon removing his
place of residence give notice to the feecretary
within two weeks, or be held liable to a penalty of
two shillings and sixpence for every such neglect,
and shall be held wholly responsible for all conse-
quences that may arise through such neglect.
Rule 42. —Any member charged with any fraudu-
lence or misappropriation of any moneys of this
society, or of any felonious or disgraceful crime, he
shall be immediately suspended from all benefits ; and
if convicted by any judicial tribunal, shall be expelled
without any formal notice.
Rule 43.—A1l members on shore shall make them-
selves clear on the books at least twice a year, viz.,
on the quarterly nights in July and January, or be
fined the sum of five shillings. Members at sea, on
the aforesaid quarterly nights must make themselves
clear on the books within twenty-four hours after
arrival in Sydney, and being paid, or be liable to the
same penalty as shore members. All fines and
levies to be deducted from the first and every pay-
ment of his contributions.
Rule 44. —No member shall be admitted into this
society’s meeting while in a state of intoxication
under any pretence whatever; but should such
member be inadvertently admitted and the said
member prove troublesome to the meeting, he shall
be asked to retire ; should he persistently decline to
retire he shall be fined 10 shillings, and the meeting
-shall then adjourn.


Rule 45.—Any member of this society allowing
his arrears of contributions to exceed twelve weeks
he shall be notified with the same in writing by the
Secretary, stating; the amount due, with sixpence
added. Should the member then fail to comply with
the above notice prior to the expiration of the
following night of meeting, the aforesaid member
shall be declared unfinancial, and forfeit all claims
on the society for the period of three months from
the date of making himself good on the books of the
society ; or should a member allow his arrears of
contributions to exceed fifty-two weeks, and if
residing or trading within the limits of the Australa-
sian colonies, he shall be notified with the same in
writing, stating the amount due, with one shilling
added ; should he then fail to comply with such
demand within the period of thirty days from the
date of such notice being posted, the society shall
have power to expel the said member, alwavs pro-
vided that should any member allow his arrears to
exceed twelve months he shall not be reinstated
unless on the production of a certificate signed by
any of the society’s doctors, certifying that he is in
good health ; and he shall also sign a declaration (if
married) that his wife is in good health, the same to
be submitted to and finally carried by the society'*
before his name can be again placed on the books.
Rule 46. —Upon the death of a member of this
society who may have been employed on shipboard,
and at sea at the time of his death, it shall be com-
petent for his wife or child, or next of kin, or
assignee to produce a declaration made before a
magistrate or J.P. before the gratuity can be paid.
Rule 47. —When a member dies, and it is proved
that his wife has been living apart from him during
six months previous to such member’s decease
(through her own misconduct), living in a state of
adultery, or following any evil practice, she shall not
be entitled to his funeral donation, and in the absence
of a will, it shall be considered to be the legal claim
of his next heirs or successors.


Eule 48. —If any dispute arise with regard to any
matter arising under the laws of this society, such
dispute shall be referred to a special committee or
Eegistrar, who shall have the power to call upon such
evidence as they may deem necessary to enable them
to investigate the matter, pro and con , and report at
next night of meeting, such report to lay on the
table seven days, and, if then finally adopted, the
decision of the committee or registrar shall be binding
upon all parties concerned without appeal.
Eule 49.—A1l contributions, fines, penalties, or
other sums due to the society by any member may be
recovered by summary application to two Justices of
the Peace, at the instance of the Trustees ; but any
member may, at any time, withdraw from the society
hy delivering to the Secretary thereof a written
notice of his intention to do so, and paying all sums
due by him to the date of withdrawal, when all con-
tributions or benefits shall, as regards him or his
family, cease and determine.
Eule 50.—Should any member bring a charge
against any Medical Officer of this society, which, on
investigation he shall be found to have made any
wilful misstatements, or being actuated by any ill
feeling towards the Medical Officer, he may be fined
by the society any sum not exceeding one guinea.
Eule 51.—Any member of the society becoming
sick or unable to follow his usual employment in
consequence thereof, and is desirous of receiving the
sick pay allowed by the society, shall produce a
doctor’s certificate, and write, or cause to be written
thereon, his correct place of residence, and forward
the same to the Secretary’s office within twenty-
four hours after receiving it, or be fined the sum of
five shillings. Neglecting to send the certificate foi
over forty-eight hours, see the following rule.
Eule 52 Members’ sick pay shall commence
from the date of the doctor s certificate, which shall
not he dated back more than two days, provided
such member has been sick four days, for no member


shall be entitled to sick pay until the fourth day
after being declared on the funds; and further,
provided such sick member has forwarded the
doctor’s certificate to the Secretary within forty-
eight hours after having received it. The date of
the sick certificate of any member, who resides with-
in the jurisdiction of any of the medical officers of
this society, and who has not forwarded the certificate
to the Secretary within the forty-eight hours, shall
commence, not from the doctor’s date, but from the
date on which the Secretary receives it. Country
members’ certificates must be forwarded to the
Secretary by the first opportunity, by mail or by
some other as quick dispatch. Country members
failing to send their certificates as before said, shall
be liable to the fines and forfeitures of the Sydney
members.
Eule 53. —When any member of this society is
rendered incapable of obtaining his livelihood,
through sickness or accident, he shall acquaint the
Medical Officer of the same, or any other medical
practitioner duly qualified by the Medical Board of
New South Wales ; and if he considers the applicant
has come by disease or accident, through no improper
cause, he shall give him a sick certificate. (See
appendix D.) This excepts such members as the
following rule deals with.
Eule 54.—Any country members who require sick
pay, shall furnish the society with a certificate from
a duly qualified medical practitioner, if he be within
ten miles of one; if at a greater distance, a genuine
certificate from a magistrate or clergyman, counter-
signed by some respectable person, shall satisfy the
society. If a doctor, magistrate, or clergyman
cannot be found within ten miles of a sick member,
a sick certificate from some other responsible person,
countersigned as above, shall be sufficient for the
society to pay sick pay upon Funeral Donations
shall be paid on doctor’s or coroner’s certificates
only, except in cases where a doctor’s or coroner’s
services cannot be obtained.


Rule 55.—When any member has been several
times sick, without an interval of over twelve months
between the dates of such sicknesses, the actual time
of such sickness shal 1 be counted as one period,
although the time may extend over several years.
Rule 56.—Should any member, whilst in receipt of
sick pay from the funds of this society, be found
intoxicated, gaming, or performing any work of
labour, his sick pay shall be immediately suspended
by the Secretary until the next meeting night, and
the Secretary shall give notice to such member to
appear on the same meeting night, when the case
shall be investigated, and he shall be dealt with as
the majority of the members then present shall think
proper; and should any member know that any sick
member is violating this rule, or otherwise imposing
on this society, and neglect to inform the Secretary
thereof, he shall be fined in every instance the sum
of ten shillings, and be suspended from all the
benefits of this society until such fine is paid.
Rule 57.—A1l members of this society shall enter
in a book, kept for the purpose, the name of the
person they wish their Funeral Donation to be paid
to; or, failing to do so, the Funeral Donation shall
be paid over in accordance with Rule 21, Article V.
Rule 58.—N0 member, or person claiming through
or under a member, or under these rules of what-
soever kind, shall have any claims on the funds of
this society, which shall arise from suicide, or
attempted suicide, or intoxication, or any offence
which in the practice of life is not considered moral.
Rule 59. —Members residing beyond the circuit of
the Medical Officers of this society, shall receive
such remuneration in lieu of medical attendance and
medicine as the members at any special meeting may
decide upon.
Rule 60.—That this society shall have the power
of making levy on all its members, at a summoned
meeting, in case of emergency, such levy not to ex-
ceed five shillings per quarter; and any member not
paying the same within three months after receiving


notice to be suspended from all benefits until such
levy is paid.
Article IX.
Rules oe Order.
Rule 61.—Any member wishing to speak must
rise and address the Chair respectfully; no member
shall be allowed to interrupt the speaker by any
expressions, except through the President, and in
explanation of a point of order. No member to
speak longer than ten minutes, nor more than twice
on any motion or amendment without permission of
the President, and consent of the meeting, except
the mover of the motion or amendment, who will be
called upon by the President to reply, after the
debate is closed, first to the amendment, then to the
motion. No member to speak after on the subject.
Rule 62.—A motion must be seconded and
repeated from the Chair before it is debated.
Rule 63.—0 n the call for a division the majority
shall decide.
Rule 64. —When a member is called to order he
shall take his seat until the point is decided by the
presiding officer.
Rule 65. —All members must obey the ruling of
the presiding officer when called upon to do so, or he
shall be fined for the first offence sixpence, and for
the second offence one shilling, but should the
member consider the ruling wrong, he or any other
member shall have power to move “ that the decision
of the Chair be not sustained.”
Rule 66.—When two members rise to speak at
the same time, the presiding officer shall decide who
is entitled to the floor.
Rule 67.—While a member is speaking,, no one
shall interrupt him, except for the purpose of calling
him to order, or of asking the presiding officer’s leave
to explain words or circumstances which are mis-
interpreted by the speaker, under a fine of one
shilling ; a member, when allowed to explain a mis


understanding of language—language which be may
have used in debate —shall only have the right of
explaining the actual misunderstanding of his
language, and shall be strictly prohibited from going
into the debate on the merits of the case.
Buie 68.—Any member requiring information
about any matter connected with the society must-
ask respectfully through the Chair for it; and should
the officer, whose duty it is to supply the information,
be unable to do so, the member may move a resolu-
tion in writing, that the information be laid on the
table at next meeting; but no debate will be allowed
as to why the information cannot be supplied at
once, except those matters provided for in rule 28.
Buie 69. —Smoking is strictly prohibited during
the hours of meeting in the society’s room ; any
member violating this rule shall be fined sixpence.
Buie 70.—Any member using threatening language
towards, or striking a brother in the meeting-room,
shall pay a fine of ten shillings, and be expelled
from the room.
Buie 71. —All members must remain seated (if
there is sufficient sitting accommodation) while the
meeting is in session, except those members address-
ing the meeting.
Buie 72. —Charges against any officer or member
of this society must be submitted in writing, or they
will not be recognized: always excepting the Visit-
ing Stewards’ report upon sick members committing
a breach of any of these By-laws.
Buie 78. —Should a resolution be tabled at any
meeting, which, if carried, would be contrary to any
of these By-laws, the mover must also table anew
or amended By-law before the aforesaid resolution
can be debated.
Article X.
Medical Laws.
Buie 74. —There shall be one or more legally
qualified medical practitioners elected annually as


medical officers of this society ; they shall receive for
their services such remuneration as they and the
society shall contract and agree upon, such remuner-
ation to be paid quarterly ; each and all of them
shall be at liberty to resign at any time during their
term of office by giving one month’s notice ; should
any or all of them desire to leave at the expiration
of their terra of office, one month’s notice will be
required. This society shall also be at liberty to
dispense with each or all of their services by giving
one month’s notice of their intention to do so.
Rule 75. —It shall be the duty of the Medical
Officer to examine carefully every candidate for
membership; to ascertain if he is subject to any
hereditary, constitutional, secret, or periodical
complaints, and shall certify, iu writing, to the same,
and when requested by the Secretary, make examina-
tion and report; give their opinion or attend at the
society’s Hall, or elsewhere, on any case connected
with the society ; they shall also render medical and
surgical aid to every member, without distinction,
who shall make application for the same, provided
their names are on the list submitted by the Secre-
tary, or on production of an order duly signed by
the Secretary, and none others.
Rule 76. —The Medical Officer shall, in cases of
sickness or accident, attend members, members’
wives, and all the members’ children, not exceeding
the age of sixteen years ; he shall be accessible in
all cases of emergency, at any hour, and be at his
home at specified hours (as per agreement) to receive
patients, and when they are unable to attend on him
he shall visit and prescribe for them at their place
of residence, the same being not more than three
miles from the Town Hall ; he shall also give the
patient a visitors’ list, which must be duly filled up
with such information required therein, and signed
by the doctor attending the patient, together with
the signatures of the Sick Visitors, and the date of
such visits made by them.


Rule 77. —It shall be imperative on the doctor of
this society to attend in all cases of midwifery in
preference to all other midwifery engagements which
may not be with members of the society on receiving
due notice thereof, fourteen days before accouch-
ment; but in case of emergency or mishap, one
hour’s notice shall be sufficient; in such cases he
shall receive one guinea, in addition to his usual
salary, provided he attend when called upon ; but if
he should not attend when called upon, or send
another qualified surgeon in his stead, he shall forfeit
the above sum, and any sum not exceeding three
guineas may be deducted from his salary for the
purpose of reimbursing the member for expense
incurred by calling in another doctor ; if no doctor
is called in, no extra expense is supposed to have
been incurred, but should any member neglect to
give the required notice, he shall forfeit the
physician’s services.
Rule 78. —Any member requiring the Medical
Officer’s services for his wife in an accouchment case
shall pay the whole fee (one guinea) to the society.
Rive shillings of it shall be paid to the Secretary, at
least fifteen days before the accouchment, and the
remainder shall be paid in one or more payments,
within three calendar months from the date of the
first payment. Nevertheless, should any member
fail, through sickness, accident, or want of employ-
ment, to pay any portion of the said fee, within the
specified time (three months) he can appeal to the
society for assistance to pay the remaining portion
of it; but an appeal of this kind shall not, in any
case, be entertained that is made alter, the third
meeting from the date on which the unpaid portion
of it became due. Such unpaid fees, if voted, shall
be considered as distress gifts, and shall be paid
from the Contingent Fund. In cases of mishap
or premature birth, the member’s payment of
twenty-one shillings (215.) shall commence from
the date of the doctor’s bill to the society for the
same, which, if the birth has been premature, or due
notice has been given of it, shall be paid to the


doctor by tbe society. Moreover, should any member
who has employed the society’s doctor in an accouch-
ment, mishap, or premature birth, fail to pay the
whole or any portion of the said fee (215.) to the
society, the society shall, after twelve months from
the date on which the fee became due, add the
amount due to the society to the indebted member’s
arrears, and should arrears and unpaid fee amount
to over fourteen shillings, the member so indebted
shall be unfinancial.
Rule 79.—The Medical Officer shall give every
member whom he places on the funds of the society
a visitor’s list, to be filled up by the medical officer
and the society’s visitors, and every time he visits
the patient countersign the list and report thereon
the patient’s state, and furnish each sick member
with a weekly certificate during the time he is on
the funds, which certificate must be forwarded to the
Secretary not later than 8 o’clock on each regular
meeting night Any wilful negligence on the part
of a sick member will preclude him from receiving
his sick allowance for that week, and in no instance
shall ignorance of the rules be deemed an excuse.
He shall also grant each sick member permission to
leave his residence at such times as he thinks bene-
ficial to the member’s health. Any member leaving
his abode without such permission from the Medical
Officer, shall be fined one pound. When he con-
siders the patient so far recovered from infirmity as
to be capable of resuming his occupation, he shall
grant him a certificate declaring him off the funds,
such certificate and visitors’ list to be forwarded to
the Secretary within twenty-four hours after the
same being filled up, or be fined five shillings.
Country members and members out of the colony
and inmates of public asylums and hospitals ex-
cepted.
Rule 80. —Should the Medical Officer wilfully
neglect to attend on any urgent case (except mid-
wifery engagements, for which see special rule) at
any hour, after having received due notice to attend


on the said urgent case, and a reasonable time for
him to attend on it is allowed to elapse without his
paying the required attendance, he shall be fined in
any sum not less than one guinea nor more than
three guineas.
Rule 81.—In the absence of the Medical Officer
he shall provide a duly qualified substitute to perform
his duties. For such neglect he shall be fined in any
sum not exceeding three guineas.
Rule 82.—Any member using unbecoming lan-
guage or otherwise insulting the said Medical Officer,
the Medical Officer is requested to report the same
to the Secretary in writing, who shall notify the
Medical Committee to investigate the matter, and
bring in all evidence (in writing, duly signed by the
witnesses), to the society for decision.
Rule 83. —One or more duly qualified dispensing
chemists shall be appointed on such terms as the
society may decide, and shall be elected by ballot.
They must give one month’s notice in writing to the
Secretary before resigning their appointments.
Rule 84.—The chemist shall supply all members
as returned by the Secretary, together with their
wives and children up to the age of 16 years,
with medicines and other requisites in the items
of agreement duly entered into with the society, the
Secretary to send a return of members immediately
after the last meeting night in the quarter, or be
fined one pound.
Rule 85. —The chemist shall, for every neglect of
duty, be subject to a fine of not less than five
shillings, by a two-thirds vote of the members present
at any regular meeting, and for any gross repeated
offence he shall be subject to removal by a two-thirds
vote of the members present at a special meeting
called for that purpose, one month’s notice of
removal to be given in all cases.
Rule 86.—Patients shall provide clean bottles for
any medicine they may require.


Buie 87.—Should this society, or any portion
thereof, affiliate with any United Friendly Societies’
Medical Institute or Dispensary, these medical laws,
where they clash with the By-iaws of any Medical
Institute or Dispensary the society-is affiliated with,
shall be superseded by the By-laws of the Medical
Institute or Dispensary to which the members are
returned. But, in all cases where the society deals
direct with the doctor or chemist, these medical laws
shall remain in full force.
Article XI.
Miscellaneous.
B-ule 88. —Any member making known the Pass-
word ceremony or other private matters of the
Order, beyond the society’s place of meeting, to
others than those that are members, or speaking on
the society’s business in such a tone of voice as to
be heard by the outside public, shall, for the first
offence, be fined two shillings and sixpence, and for
the second offence ten shillings, and the third offence
he shall be expelled, as two-thirds of the members
present at any regular meeting may determine;
should any brother neglect to report another who
has violated this rule, he shall be liable to the above
penalty.
Buie 89. —These amended By-laws shall take pre-
cedence of all former By-laws, and no alteration or
addition shall be made to them, except at a special
meeting duly summoned for that purpose, and proper
notice been given at least fourteen days before
action, and then carried by a two-third vote.
Buie 90.—Should any circumstance hereafter arise,
to which none of the foregoing rules apply, or can
satisfactorily settle, such circumstance shall be
brought before the members in meeting assembled,
who shall deliberate upon such occurrence, and
decide it according to evidence. The decision thus
arrived at shall become a By-law, which shall be
written into the society’s minute book, and shall be
equally binding on all the members as any of the


foregoing rules; but should any circumstance as
aforesaid become of constant occurrence, a rule shall
be registered to deal with the matter.
Eule 91. —These By-laws shall rescind all former
By-laws, and come in force and take effect on and
after the Ist of July, 1890.
This is to certify that the foregoing are the New
and Amended Eules of the “ Sydney Marine Benefit
Society,” which said New and Amended Eules were
passed and agreed to at special meetings called for
that purpose in accordance with the Eules thereof,
at the Society’s Meeting-room, Wynyard Hotel,
corner Clarence and Erskine Streets, Sydney, on the
2nd and 16th September, 4th and 18th November,
2nd and 9th December, 1889, 20th January and 3rd
February, 1890, and finally adopted on the 3rd
March, 1890.
In witness whereof our names are attached, this
28th day of April, TB9O.
FEED MacDONNELL
MAEK PEI ME
CHAELES LAWSON
Countersigned—
CHAELES OSTEEGAAED,
Seci’etary.
I hereby certify that the foregoing New and
Amended Eules of the “Sydney Marine Benefit
Society,” at Sydney, are in conformity with law.
(Signed)
ALEXE. OLIYEE,
Eegistrar of Friendly Societies in New South Wales.
Dated this Ist day of May, 1890.


APPENDI.
FORMS OF CERTIFICATES, &c.
(a) See Rule 8. —
SYDNEY MARINE BENEFIT SOCIETY.
Sydney, 18
To Dr You will please to make medical
examination of the bearer, Mr with a view to
his admission as a member of this Society.
Secretary.
(b) See Rule B.
SYDNEY MARINE BENEFIT SOCIETY.
Sydney 18
Having personally examined the bearer, Mr
I find that he is a person to become a member of
your Society.
(Signed) Medical Officer.
(c) See Rule 75. —
SYDNEY MARINE BENEFIT SOCIETY.
Sydney, 18
To Dr You will please to place
Mr ! upon your list of Sydney Marine
Benefit Society’s members that are entitled to your services,
and charge for it in your account.
(Signed) Secretary.
(d) See Rules 51 and 53. —
SYDNEY MARINE BENEFIT SOCIETY.
Sydney, 18
This is to certify that Mr • of your
Society is afflicted with and is unable to
follow his usual employment.
(Signed) Medical Officer.


(e) See Rule 79. —
SYDNEY MARINE BENEFIT SOCIETY.
Sydney, 18
This is to certify that Mr of your
Society has recovered, and is able to follow his usual em-
ployment.
(Signed).. Medical Officer.
Note.—lf the Sick Member should be in the country, the
two last certificates can be signed in accordance with Rule 51.
(e) See Rule 79. —
SYDNEY MARINE BENEFIT SOCIETY.
Sydney, 18
This is to certify that Mr of No.
street, under my care, is still unable to follow
his usual employment.
(Signed) Medical Officer.
(g) See Rule 33. —
TRUSTEES’ DECLARATION.
I, A. 8., a duly elected Trustee of the Sydney Marine Benefit
Society, do hereby make declaration that I am in a perfectly
solvent condition; and should my estate at any time become
involved, I hereby pledge myself to immediately resign my
position as Trustee of this Society.
(Signed)




