

pern Piw)
The Premiers of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South
Australia, Tasmania, and Western Australia in Conference assembled,
having fully considered the amendments suggested in the form of
resolutions by the Legislative Council and by the Legislative Assembly
of New South Wales in the Bill drafted by the Australasian National
Convention, 1897-8, unanimously agree as follows :
1, With regard to the Resolutions—
“ («) rEPRESENTATION IN THE SENATE,”
The Premiers consider that at the joint sitting of the two
Houses for the purpose of settling disagreements between
the Houses, the decision of an absolute majority of the
total number of the members of both Houses should be
final;
And it is agreed that Clause 57 of the said Bill should be amended
so as to read as follows :
57. If the House of Representatives passes any proposed law,
and the Senate rejects or fails to pass it, or passes it with amendments
to which the House of Representatives will not agree, and if after an
interval of three months the' House of Representatives, in the same or
the next session, again passes the proposed law with or without any
amendments which have been made, suggested, or agreed to by the
Senate, and the Senate rejects or fails to pass it, or passes it with
amendments to which the House of Representatives will not agree, the
Governor-General may dissolve the Senate and the House of Repre-
sentatives simultaneously. But such dissolution shall not take- place
within six months before the date of the expiry of the House of
Representatives by effluxion of time.
If after such dissolution the House of Representatives again passes
the proposed law with or without any amendments which have been
made, suggested, or agreed to by the .Senate, and the Senate rejects or
fails to pass it, or passes it with amendments to which the House of
Representatives will not agree, the Governor-General may convene a
joint sitting of the members of the Senate and of the House of
Representatives.
The members present at the joint sitting may deliberate and shall
vote together upon the proposed law as last proposed by the House of
Representatives, and upon amendments, if any, which have been made
therein by one House and not agreed to by the other, and any such
amendments which are affirmed by an absolute majority of the total
number of the members of the Senate and House of Representatives
throo fifths ef the members present end voting thereon shall be taken to have
been carried, and if the proposed law, with the amendments, if any, so


carried is affirmed by an absolute majority of the total number of the
members of the Senate and House of Representatives throe fifths of the
members present fmd voting thereon, it shall be taken to have been duly
passed by both Houses of The Parliament, and shall be presented to
the Governor-General for the Queen’s assent.
2. With regard to the Resolutions—
“ fb) The 87th clause, known as the Braddon clause,”
The Premiers have given full consideration to the objections
which have been urged against this clause, and have
also considered other proposals which have been
suggested for the purpose of giving some security to the
States that a reasonable amount of the revenue collected
in the States shall be returned to them, while, if possible,
avoiding excessive burdens of taxation, a prolonged
system of bookkeeping, uncertainty as to the amount of
the surplus to be divided, and uncertainty as to the
method of distributing the surplus amongst the States.
The Premiers consider that all the other proposals are open to
more serious objections than those which have been raised
against the clause as it appears in the Bill; but with a view
of meeting the objections, as far as possible, consistently
with the safety of the States, the Premiers are of opinion
that the operation of the clause should not continue after
a period of ten years if The Parliament then desires to
repeal or alter it; and that, in addition, power should be
granted to The Parliament to deal with any exceptional
circumstances which may from time to time arise in the
financial position of any of the States; and for the
purpose of giving effect to these opinions—
it is agreed that Clause 87 should be amended to read as follows :
87. During a period of ten years after the establishment of the
Commonwealth and thereafter until The Parliament otherwise provides
of the net revenue of the Commonwealth from duties of customs
and of excise, not more than one-fourth shall be applied annually by
the Commonwealth towards its expenditure.
The balance shall, in accordance with this Constitution, be paid to
the several States, or applied towards the payment of interest on debts
of the several States taken over by the Commonwealth.
And that the following clause should be added to the Bill to follow
Clause 95: —
During a period of ten years after the establishment of the Com-
monwealth and thereafter until The Parliament otherwise provides ,
The Parliament may grant financial assistance to any State on such
terms and. conditions as The Parliament thinks fit.
3. With regard to the Resolutions—
“ (c) The Capital of the Commonwealth,”
It is considered that the fixing of the site of Capital is a question
which might well be left to The Parliament to decide ;
but in view of the strong expression of opinion in relation
to this matter in New South Wales, the Premiers have
modified the clause, so that while the Capital cannot be
fixed at Sydney, or in its neighbourhood, provision is
made in the Constitution for its establishment in New
South Wales at a reasonable distance from that city.


And the Premiers have therefore agreed that, instead of the
following Clause 124 —
CHAPTER VII.
MISCELLANEOUS.
4—lt The seat ef G-evepee+eet ef the GeittHieewealth skald he determined
hv The Prtehfti»e»t aad shad he withie territory vested m the deann^a-wealthr
ddatid eaeh 4efee?miaatiea The Paddasasat shall he saHasaeaed te aieet at
saeh plaee wlthhi the Oeaeaieaweatth as a majority ef the hteveeaess ef the
States es ia the eveat ef aa erjaal division of opioioa aateag the ftevepaeps as the
(fevesaep 44eaesal shall dit-eeri
the following clause should be substituted :
1 24. The seat of Government of the Commonwealth shall be deter-
mined by The Parliament and shall be within territory which shall
have been granted to or acquired by the Commonwealth and shall be
vested in and belong to the Commonwealth , and if New South Wales
be an Original State shall be in that State and be distant not less than
one hundred miles from Sydney.
Such territory shall contain an area of not less than one hundred
square miles and such portion thereof as shall consist of Crown lands
shall be granted to the Commonwealth without any payment therefor.
If Victoria be an Original State The Parliament shall sit at
Melbourne until it meets at the seat of Government.
4, With regard to the Resolutions—
“(//) The Boundaries of States,”
The Premiers consider that the fullest protection should be
given to the various States and that no alteration of
territory should be made without the consent of the
people as well as of the Parliament of the State affected.
And have therefore agreed that Clause 122 of the Bill should be
amended to read as follows :
122. The Parliament of the Commonwealth may, with the consent
of the Parliament of a State, and the approval of the majority of the
electors of the State voting upon the question , increase, diminish, or
otherwise alter the limits of the State, upon such terms and conditions
as may be agreed on, and may, with the like consent, make provision
respecting the effect and operation of any increase or diminution or
alteration of territory in relation to any State affected.
And also that the last paragraph of Clause 127 should be amended
so as to read as follows :
An No alteration diminishing the proportionate representation of
any State in either House of The Parliament, or the minimum number
of representatives of a State in the House of Representatives, or
increasing diminishing or otherwise altering the limits of the State,
or in any manner affecting the provisions of the Constitution in relation
thereto , shall become law unless the majority of the electors voting in
that State approve the proposed law.
5. With regard to the Resolutions—
“ (e) Inland Rivers,”
“ (/) Money Bills,”
“ ( g) Judicial Appeal from States,”
The Premiers after fully considering these proposals do not find
it practicable to recommend any alteration in the pro-
visions contained in the Bill.
3


6. With regard to the Resolutions—
“ ( h ) The alteration of the Constitution,”
The Premiers agree that, where there is a difference of opinion
between the two Houses as to whether the people
should have the opportunity of deciding if any alteration
should be made in the provisions of the Constitution,
one House should not have the power to prevent the
question being decided by the people. They have there-
fore endeavoured to provide a means whereby, after full
discussion and reasonable delay, the matter may be
referred from either House to the electors. The
Premiers are unable to agree that the decision should
rest on the result of a National Referendum, it being
considered of vital importance that any alteration in the
Constitution which the States have agreed to accept
should only he made if a majority of the electors of
the Commonwealth and also a majority of the electors
in a majority of the States determine that it is proper to
make such alteration ; and in order to give effect to such
views—
The Premiers have agreed that (including the amendment before
suggested), Clause 127 should be amended so as to read as
follows :
ALTERATION OF THE CONSTITUTION.
127- This Constitution shall not be altered except in the follow-
ing manner :
The proposed law for the alteration thereof must be passed by an
absolute majority of each House of The Parliament, and not less than
two nor more than six months after its passage through both Houses
the proposed law shall be submitted in each State to the electors
qualified 4o vote for the election of members of the House of Repre-
sentatives.
But if either House passes any such proposed law hy an absolute
majority and the other House rejects or fails to pass it or passes it with
any amendment to which the first-mentioned House will not agree, and
if after an interval of three months the fir st-mentioned House in the
same or the next Session again passes the proposed law hy an absolute
majority with or without any amendment ivhich has been made or agreed
to by the other House, and such other House rejects or fails to pass it,
or passes it with any amendment to ivhich the first-mentioned House
will not agree, the Governor-General may submit the proposed law as
last proposed by the first-mentioned House and either with or without
any amendments subsequently agreed to by both Houses to the electors
in each State qualified to vote for the election of the House of Repre-
sentatives.
When a proposed law is submitted to the electors the vote shall
be taken in such manner as The Parliament prescribes. But until the
qualification of electors of members of the House of Representatives
becomes uniform throughout the Commonwealth only one-half the
electors voting for and against the proposed law shall be counted in
any State in winch adult suffrage prevails.
And if in a majority of the States a majority of the electors voting
approve the proposed law, and if a majority of all the electors voting
also approve the proposed law, it shall be presented to the Governor-
General for the Queen’s assent.
4


Aft No alteration diminishing the proportionate representation of
any State in either House of The Parliament, or the minimum number
of representatives* of a State in the House of Representatives, or
increasing; diminishing or otherwise altering the Utils of the State ,
or in any manner affecting the provisions of the Constitution in relation
thereto , shall become law unless the majority of the electors voting
in that State approve the proposed law.
With regard to the Resolutions—
“(*) Number of Senators,”
The Premiers consider that the number of the Senators for each
State as fixed in the Bill—namely six—is a reasonable
one —
And have agreed that no alteration should be made in the clauses
relating thereto.
Provision for Queensland.
The Premiers have further agreed that, in view of the peculiar
conditions of Queensland, it is advisable that permission
should be given to that State if it joins the federation at its
establishment to provide for the division of the colony into
electorates for the election of the Senate, reserving power
to the Federal Parliament to make the system of election
uniform throughout the Commonwealth; and the Premiers
agree that Clause 7 of the Bill should be amended so as to
read as follows:
Part ll.— The Senate.
7. The Senate shall be composed of Senators for each State,
directly chosen by the people of the State, voting, until The Parliament
otherwise provides, as one electorate.
But until the Parliament of the Commonwealth otherwise provides
the Parliament of the State of Queensland , if that State be an Original
State , may make laws dividing the State into divisions and determining
the number of Senators to be chosen for each division, and in the
absence of such provision the State shall be one electorate.
Until The Parliament otherwise provides there shall be six
Senators for each Original State. The Parliament may make laws
increasing or diminishing the number of Senators for each State, but
so that equal representation of the several Original States shall be
maintained and that no Original State shall have less than six Senators.
The Senators shall be chosen for a term of six years, and the
names of the Senators chosen for each State shall be certified by the
Governor to the Governor-General.
Mode of giving effect to Agreement.
The Premier of New South Wales expresses his willingness to
take steps for the passage of a measure through the Parliament of New
South Wales providing for the reference of the Bill, as proposed to be
altered, to the vote of the electors in New South Wales as soon as
conveniently may be.
The Premiers of the other colonies are of opinion that after
the people of New South Wales have accepted the Bill as altered it
should be submitted to the Parliaments of their respective colonies
for reference to the electors.
5


The Premiers are also of opinion that it is desirable that the
decision of a majority of the electors voting in each colony should be
sufficient for the acceptance or rejection of the Bill.
South Australia to be at liberty to take the referendum at the
next general election for the House of Assembly.
GEORGE TURNER, Chairman.
G. 11. REID.
JAMES R. DICKSON.
C. C. KINGSTON.
E. BRADDON.
JOHN FORREST.
Melbourne, 3rd February, 1899
On the conclusion of the business of the Conference the following
resolution was unanimously adopted, upon the motion of the Right
Honorable G. H, Reid, seconded by the Honorable J. R. Dickson,
viz. :
That this Conference desires to express and place upon record
its high sense of the most valuable services rendered by
the Chairman of the Conference during its deliberations.
By Authority: Robt. S. Brain, Government Printer, Melbourne.
6




LA ? f* —•> ■
iooK ■
3 1508 00234042 5
