

America and Ireland.
Ireland’s Dilemma.
By FREDERICK HARRISON.
PRICE, ONE PENNY.
To be obtained at
H. Cook and-Co.,
Printers,
200 Castlcreagh Street. Sydney.




THE IRISH DILEMMA.
MR. FREDERIC HARRISON AND
THE THREE GROUPS.
“London Morning Post,” April Ist, 1917.
To the Editor of the “Morning Post.”
Sir, —Englishmen welcome with en-
thusiasm the entrance of the great Re-
public into this tremendous war, not
merely because we are now fighting side
by side, rather because it manifests that
the common cause is that of Civilisation,
Humanity, and Peace. But does this
glorious comradeship in arms quite jus-
tify American politicians, however emin-
ent and friendly, thrusting themselves in-
to our municipal politics at a moment of
intense crisis? As an Englishman I won-
der to see my stalwart friend Roosevelt
and so many leaders of American intel-
lect and statesmanship re-echoing the
stale sophisms of our enemies during one
of the most inveterate trials to which
Britain has ever been exposed.
What would Americans do if we in-
tervened in one of their dilemmas, say,


if our ex-Ministers, doctors, and preach-
ers were to summon them with passion-
ate appeals to raise up their twelve mill-
ion of coloured citizens to equal human
dignitv—to wipe out the national stigma
on the Commonwealth, that every man
or woman born with a dark skin is born
into shame, exclusion, and the life of a
Pariah race,?
Our American friends, in our almost
desperate crisis at home, repeat the un-
real, untrue, malicious taunts of our en-
emies within and without the United
Kingdom. When they tell us to give
the Irish “nation” autonomy—where is
the Irish nation? Our very dilemma is
that there are three sections of Irishmen,
each repudiating, contradicting, and, if
we let them, eager to fight each other.
“The Home Pule Act!” cry one group,
though they and all men of sense know
that the Act of 1914 is impracticable as it
stands, and must in any case be revised
under the urgent stress of war. “No
Dublin Parliament for us!” cries Ulster
—Ulster, far the richest, most civilised,
most vigorous element in Ireland, the


only element which joins us in war and
is not openly malevolent. And now a third
faction breaks in with a cry. “Away
with Redmond and his lot—traitors all to
the Independent Republic—Down with
British uniforms, officials, laws!”
Our difficulty is—and has been for a
generation to know which of these three
groups we ought to regard as the strong-
est, most permanent, which' of them is
the Irish nation. All three furiously
claim to be the real Irish nation. Their
relative _ strength and their attitude to
Britain is constantly varying under new
conditions. War, rebellions, elections,
speeches of Britons and of Irishmen, in
or out of Parliament, transform their de-
mands and their policies from year to
year, almost from day to day. Which
of the three are we to believe? One is
our warm friend in the battlefield, in
Parliament, at home. The other two are
hostile, refuse all help, lot, or part with
us, seek to do us every mischief they can
devise, spread abroad every calumny
they can invent. Which is the strong-
est, which is the most truthful, which is


really Irish! If we left them to light it
out it might end in a long-drawn battle.
If it were a mere matter of taking votes by
open manhood suffrage it seems now that
Sinn Fien would double the other two.
Even if we could find the real voice
of the Irish nation, why is Ireland to
have its own Parliament more than Scot-
land or Wales? Scotland is a real nat-
ion—an united nation. It is one, not
three, not torn by historic antagonism of
race, religion, and class. Wales, too,
is a nation, and Wales is one, not three.
In Scotland, as in Wales, diiterences
about churches, language, and customs
are mild, friendly disputes; they are not
sources of secular enmity and distrust.
Scotland and Wales do not howl aoout
Edward I. and Cromwell, though they
were severely punished by both. Eng-
lish peasants do not burn to avenge
Gurth, the Saxon, whom Normans op-
pressed, whom Red and White Rose
barons used to slaughter. But your lyri-
cal Irishman will not rest until the lineal
descendants of Brian Born have a green
flag all to themselves.


Why is Ireland to have a special Par-
liament which Scotland and Wales do
not seek? We have shown that we are
ready to give Ireland its own House when
Irishmen can agree to take it. But two
out of three Irish parties cry out, “We
won’t have your Parliament Bill. It is
dead 1’ ’ Ireland has already 103 repres-
tatives in the House of Commons —vastly
in excess of its due proportion. At W est-
■ minster Nationalist members occupy as
much time as all the rest; they complain,
obstruct, and vilify our Government in
our sore need. Yet they still cry out for
more Parliamentary representation, and
they use the excessive representation they
have got in such treasonable ways as in
any other country but ours would have
sent them outside or to gaol.
These are the men whom our American
mentors tell us we must “placate.” They
seem to think that if we only started the
Act of 1914 all would be smooth in Ire-
land; that 250,000 Irishmen would enlist
the next day. It is far more likely that
if we started the Act and withdrew a
strong hand Ireland in three months


would be in a state of chaos, the three
groups at open war. And as soon as Sinn
Fein recruits got arms in their hands
they would turn them against us and pro-
claim the Republic—as they did a year
ago.
How can responsible statesmen abroad
repeat that most false of all the Potsdam
lies, that Ireland has been treated as Po-
land was by Russia, or as the Czechs are
by Austria—Austria that will not open
its Parliament at all, which has hanged
two thousand Bohemian patriots, to say
nothing of hecatombs of Servians, Bos-
nians, Roumanians'? Why, for two gen-
erations Britain has sacrificed her men
and her own interests to do justice to
Irish demands. Her purse, her policy,
her Parliament, her Government have all
been strained to meet Irish claims, to re-
store Irish welfare. Ireland has never
been so wealthy, so prosperous, so hope-
ful, as she is to-day. When war came
Ireland was treated as being outside it,
as if it were a spoilt and unmanageable
son who must not be crossed. It was al-
lowed to rest and grow rich in sullen


scorn of all that Britons and trite Irish-
men were bearing in war. This to the
eternal shame of the Irish name, which
Britons—and which history—wall never
forget or excuse. To the eternal shame
also of those besotted politicians who
treated Ireland as a timid fool might
treat a dangerous lunatic whom he was
afraid to touch and hoped to coax. It
was with them—“ The Old Watchwords
and the Old Party!” They are using the
same battle-cry to-day.
I write this as a Nationalist myself,
half Irish in blood—as one who for fifty
years has publicly urged the Irish cause;
and in fifty years has lived to see full
justice done at last to Ireland. In 1880
I was a Gladstonian candidate (for Lon-
don University), but I could not quite ap-
prove any one of the three Home Rule
Bills, of which the last was the most
faulty and unpractical. I am an old Na-
tionalist still, for Scottish and Welsh
nationality as w r ell as English. All my
life I have desired to see an Irish Na-
tional Government in Ireland, free from
interference from Westminster. But to


day, a war for life and death, rebellion,
treason, the criminal folly of Dublin
Castle, and the late Ministry, have alter-
ed or postponed a real Irish settlement.
Ireland has now become an enigma of the
Sphinx; and till a new (Edipns appears
it is sheer mockery to call out: “Tell us
the answer!” Can we by arms force
Ulster Presbyterians to submit to the in-
trigues of Romanish priests—Romans,
the foes of our Allies, the creatures of
our enemy. Can we leave Ireland free
from our restraining hand, and so ready
to stab us in the back? Can we hand
over the government of Ireland to the
internecine, inter-racial, jinter-elerical
strife of three factions who love to crush
each other? This would indeed outrage
English commonsense, which is not wont
to give ear to sentimental rhapsodies
about ancestral dreams, nor to trust rhet-
oric as to heroes in myriads ready to
start from the soil of their fathers as
soon as the foreigner has left it. —h ours,
etc.,
FREDERIC HARRISON.
Bath, April 30.
