

Itk,UlOLliJ PAMS.




AMERICA’S
GREATEST PREACHER
SKETCHES OF THE
LIFE AND MINISTRY
OF THE
Rev. T. De WITT TALMA6E, d.d.; ll.d.
OF BROOKLYN, NEWYORK, U.S.A.
Compiled from Authentic Sources, and Revised to the Latest
Dates, including Particulars of the Destruction by Fire of
Dr. Talmage’s Tabernacle, on May 13th, 1894.
(With Portrait.)
“As a preacher the Rev. T. De Witt Talmage has attained
the greatest renown of any Christian minister of the world of
to-day.”—London Christian Herald.
MELBOURNE:
M. L. HUTCHINSON, PUBLISHER,
305 & 307 Little Collins Street.


PREFATORY NOTE.
The following pages are an attempt to furnish a short concise
.sketch of the life and labors of the Rev. Thomas Dk Witt Talmage,
D.D., who is now on a visit to these colonies.
It may be mentioned as some proof of Dr. Talmage’s universal
reputation that so cautious an entrepreneur as Mr. K. S. Smy the, who
hitherto never engaged Literary, Artistic, or Scientific Stars without
first hearing them, had arranged for the visit to Australia of Dr.
Talmage, without seeing or hearing him, relying solely upon the
wonderful popularity of the great preacher, whose sermons are circu-
lated by millions wherever the English language is spoken.
It should be noted that Dr. Talmage’s Lectures have not been
published, and therefore must be heard to be appreciated.
July, 1894.




The Rev. T. De. Witt Talmage, D.D.; LL.D.


Rev. ®t. (palmage:
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
fHE study of what one writer terms “ the romance
of biography,” is at all times full of great interest.
Whether the subject is one, who, by dint of
skill or ability has raised himself above the
•common level of mankind, or who, by the display of
remarkable genius or wonderful gifts has made himself
famous in the world, the fact remains that we all desire
to learn something of his past career, and by following
the story of his life, glean some information which will
enable us to form a fairly accurate idea of what the man
is, and why he has reached his present enviable position.
Hence, in particularising the life work of the celebrated
pastor of Brooklyn Tabernacle, we have to deal with
one of the most celebrated characters of the age, a man,
whether we regard him as a preacher, an author, a
lecturer, or in any other way, is remarkable as reaching
the highest pinnacle of fame, and with the exception of
the late Rev. C. H. Spurgeon, has attained the loftiest
position accorded to a Christian minister in modern
days.
In a short sketch like the present, it is, of course,
impossible to do more than furnish the reader with a
correct reply to the question often asked “ who and
what is Dr. Talmage ? ” To detail at length the story
of his life would be to fill several volumes. Enough,
however, will be given in the following pages to satisfy
the merely curious enquirer, as well as to gratify the
taste of others who are desirous of having in permanent
form some reliable account of the labors of a deservedly
popular man, one who has been more praised and more
abused than generally falls to the lot of most celebrated
persons.


Birth and Education.
It has often been remarked that obscure towns and
villages more frequently give birth to distinguished men
than large and populous cities, and a glance over the
history of contemporary celebrities will show how
frequently this has been the case. The subject of this
sketch was no exception to the rule.
Thomas De Witt Talmage was born in a small
village called Bound Brook, in the State of New Jersey,
U.S.A., on the 7th of January, 1832, and was the
youngest of twelve children, none of whom besides
himself and one of his brothers, who was a well-known
missionary in China, appears to have reached any
public or prominent position. From the sketches of his
early life, which are found scattered through his sermons
and books, it seems that his parents were poor but hard-
working people, who had a hard struggle to rear and
educate their large family. They were genuine
Christians of the best kind, free from bigotry or sancti-
moniousness, and it is a noteworthy fact that all the
brothers and sisters became Christians at an early
period.
But although young Talmage was so brought up, he
seems at first to have had no inclination to become
either a preacher or a prominent leader in the Church,
his ambition being to become a distinguished lawyer,
and the course of his ambition was early bent in this
direction. He studied law for some time, and ultimately
graduated with honors in the University of New York.
But his parents were particularly anxious to see De
Witt, as he was familiarly called, a Christian preacher,
and other circumstances leading him towards the
pulpit, he entered upon a course of study at the Theo-
logical Seminary in New Brunswick, in the year 1853.
Upon these studies he entered with zeal and earnestness,
passed with satisfaction through the whole of the
prescribed course, and was duly licensed by the Presby-
tery, the members of which at that time had little
thought that the young student before them would in
after years become the minister of the largest Presby-
terian Church in America.


Called to Belleville.
In the year 1856, Dr. Talmage accepted the pastorate
of the Presbyterian Church in Belleville, in the State of
New Jersey. The field was small, and not particularly
promising to the young preacher. But throwing all
his energy into the work, he speedily attracted large
congregations, and underwent various experiences
which in after years he was able to turn to account. It
will, however, surprise most people, who have heard the
now popular preacher speak to thousands of people
with rare eloquence for a couple of hours, without note
or manuscript, to learn that during the whole of his
ministry at Belleville, he was unable to preach or
lecture without having the written sermon before him.
Dr. Talmage tells us that for several years he wrote
two sermons and one lecture every week, the mere
physical exercise of which entailed great demands on
his time, but the labor, great as it was, has borne fruit
in after years, because as everyone knows, Dr. Talmage
is just as tacile with his pen as with his tongue, and
has published many hundreds of pages which have been
read with delight by tens of thousands of readers in all-
parts of the world. But notwithstanding this handicap
the young preacher won great fame in and around
Belleville, and his services were often in requisition for
special appointments, which requests were acceded to
as far as possible. His ministry in this place appears
to have been a very happy one, and he has furnished
many pleasant reminiscences of his three gears’ labor
which might be quoted did space permit. But,
agreeable though his ministry had been, the young
divine yearned for a larger sphere of labor, as he felt
that he was not destined to spend his whole life within,
the narrow limits of Belleville.
Removes to Syracuse, N.Y.
In his 28th year an opening was found for Dr.
Talmage at the Presbyterian Church in Syracuse,
Onandaga County, in the State of New York. It was-
then a flourishing town of some 35,000 inhabitants, but
since grown very much larger. The change, too, was-
very great from his smaller charge at Belleville. Here


he had to face larger and more intelligent audiences,
and was surrounded by not a few censorius critics who
resolved to oppose him, and did oppose him. But the
preacher was determined not to be daunted by all the
obstacles placed against him, he went on with his work
fearlessly, neither courting the smiles of friends, nor
fearing the frowns of foes, and his labors were crowned
with abundant success. Crowded congregations at-
tended his ministry, and we are told “ that he preached
with a fervor and power that deeply stirred the hearts
of the people.” Gradually the opposition weakened,
former enemies became friends, hostile critics ceased
their warfare, and Dr. Talmage’s fame became noised
abroad, and invitations to other pulpits became of great
frequency. It appears that while he was at Syracuse
he determined to break off the habit of preaching from
manuscript, and relying solely upon extemporaneousness
in the future. It had been decided to light the church
with gas, and on the Sunday evening that the building
was first so illuminated, the preacher entered the pulpit
with only a few notes, intended as the introduction to
his first extempore discourse. After reading for some
eight or ten minutes he began to feel that the words
required would not come, and he had just reached his
last page of writing and Avas wondering how he could
possibly fill up the remaining portion of the allotted
time when
THE GAS WENT OUT!
which the preacher then regarded as a providential
event. He crawled down from the pulpit in black
darkness, firmly resolving never again to trust to paper,
and from that day to the present he has never used or
needed manuscripts.
In 1861-2 Dr. Talmage’s popularity had greatly
increased, and numerous vacant churches on the look
out for rising preachers begged his acceptance of their
requests. Month after month invitations poured in
rom all sides, and the period was one of great anxiety.
To accept all the invitations was impossible, to refuse
any of them was to offend certain people, or congre-
gations who each felt that theirs was the one that he


should in future minister to. At last he decided to
accept the offer of
The Second Reformed Church, Philadelphia,
and in 1862 he began his work in the “Quaker City.”
Here for seven years he preached, lectured and worked,
and his popularity increased with marvellous rapidity,
until his name became known throughout all parts of
the United States. His sermons were the theme of
general conversation, his almost daring originality, his
quaint illustrations of common subjects, together with
his earnest and fervid eloquence created a profound
sensation. Residents of Philadelphia who had not
heard Dr. Talmage were regarded as curiosities, while
strangers who visited the famous city thought that their
journey thither was incomplete until they had listened
to the popular pastor of the Second Reformed Church.
They too carried the news far and near, and from Maine
to Florida, from San Francisco to New York everybody
was talking about the wondeful preaching of Dr.
Thomas De Witt Talmage of Philadelphia. As might
have been expected, the gifted preacher was deluged
with invitations from all parts of the States. But
although many of them were accompanied with
pecuniary offers of the most tempting kind particularly
those from Chicago and San Francisco, Dr. Talmage
refused one and all.
In 1869, to the surprise of everybody including his
most intimate friends, Dr. Talmage announced his
intention of his desire to
Remove to Brooklyn
and accept the pastorate of the Central Presbyterian
Church in that City, then a small and most insignificant
charge, a good building with a very small congregation.
But Dr. Talmage had a firm faith in his power, and results
here since justified that his decision was the right one.
Then, as now, Brooklyn was the “ City of Churches,”
and many gifted preachers were drawing large audiences.
Henry Ward Beecher was then a power of strength at
Plymouth Church, and other less popular men were in


charge of leading churches. But nothing daunted, Dr.
Talmage commenced his work in Brooklyn in March,
1869. The building of the Central Presbyterian Church
was a large one, but it very soon became too small to
accommodate the crowds who desired admission. Week
by week the interest to hear the new preacher increased,
and not only was the building filled to suffocation, but
crowds outside vainly sought to get even standing room.
After much consideration the office bearers of the
Church finding that the work was of a permanent nature
decided to erect a building that would accommodate
3,000 people. While the new building was in progress
Dr. Talmage paid the first of his many visits to Europe.
The First Brooklyn Tabernacle
Was opened by the pastor, who preached an able
discourse from the words “ Compel them to come in,”
but the words seemed hardly apropos , because as far as
the building was concerned very large numbers were
compelled to stay out. The Tabernacle was afterwards
enlarged, but still was not large enough.
Oh the 22nd of December, 1872, as the usual large
congregation were assembling for public worship, the
building was found to be in flames. Dr. Talmage
spoke to the assembled crowds, and inter alia remarked,
“ Well, the building never was large enough ! Now the
people will help us to build a more roomy structure.”
This wish or prediction was fulfilled, and on the 22nd
January, 1874, the largest Protestant Church in
America was opened. It seated 5,000 people, and
1,000 more could find standing room, but large though
it was, the building was always filled with attentive
listeners.
It is, however, pleasing to record that it was not
only curious people who attended Dr. Talmage’s
ministry, but his labors resulted in large additions to
the church membership, which now numbers 4,000
persons, men and women who have aided their pastor
in his work, and who have succeeded in accomplishing
no small amount of good.


In his work at the Second Tabernacle Dr. Talmage
found a congenial sphere of work. It was not alone
the crowds who attended the Sunday preaching that
encouraged him to persevere, but it was the association
with people who were willing to help him, the members
of his church who gladly supported their minister, and
the new converts zealous to assist him, who did more
to carry on the work than all the outside sensation
that followed Dr. Talmage’s footsteps. It was this
internal church work which never came into the light
of common day, that after all was the basis upon which
was built the great work which, radiating from Brooklyn
Tabernacle as a centre, spread its influence far and
wide, and is felt even now.
A man so popular as Dr. Talmage could not
confine himself, even if he had desired it, to a mere
building in Brooklyn. His sermons were every now
and then printed, and copied into papers all over the
States. Arrangements were then made to have certified
copies of one of the weekly sermons regularly printed
by 3,000 newspapers in America and England. This
plan worked well, and by means of it Dr. Talmage
often addressed fully twenty millions of readers.
A Popular Lecturer,
It is possible that the Pastor of Brooklyn Tabernacle
is almost as well known on the lecture platform as in
the pulpit, for he has lectured all over the States, as well
as in England, Scotland and Ireland. These are on
Social topics, and have not been published, so they will
be as fresh to Australians as if never before delivered.
On one occasion Dr. Talmage was announced to
lecture in Dayton, a large town in Montgomery County,
Ohio, At seven o’clock in the evening a large audience
had assembled, but no lecturer was on hand; instead, a
telegram came from Indianopolis : “Missed connection.
Cannot possibly meet engagement.” But the people at
Dayton had resolved not to be beaten, and so secured a
special train. The audience waited in the Opera House
hour after hour. It was ten o’clock when Dr. Talmage
appeared on the stage, and he spoke to the assembled


crowd until after midnight, when thoroughly exhausted
by the long wild ride and the lecture, he was glad to
secure a much-needed rest.
During one of his journeys west, Dr. Talmage paid
a visit to Salt Lake City. It was during the lifetime of
Brigham Young, but the doctor was unable to see the
Prophet of Mormondom. He picked up a lot of miscel-
laneous information about Mormonism. He summarises
the whole thing up in these words : “ I find no difficulty
in explaining the philosophy of Mormonism. There is
a large class of people all the world over who seem to
delight in being deceived; the Mormons have merely
turned gullibility into a religion,”
In Boston, Chicago, San Francisco, Detroit, Buffalo
and other large places Dr. Talmage has lectured to large
audiences. Indeed, the demands for his services have
always been far in excess of his ability to comply with
them. Many people, and not a few critics, consider that
Dr. Talmage appears to more advantage as a lecturer
than as a preacher. On the platform he can give full
vent to his refined wit and humour, his delicate satire,
and can say things and speak on subjects which would
be inappropriate in a pulpit. At any rate his lectures
have always attracted large crowds, who have listened
spell bound to the utterances of the gifted speaker.
Dr. Talmage as an Author.
The published works of Dr. Talmage number about
20 or 25 volumes, most of them being sermons collected
and bound. These have all # been reprinted in England,
where the sale has been enormous. Other works are
“ Around the Tea Table,” “ Crumbs Swept Up,” “ The
Abominations of Modern Society,” “ The Marriage Tie,”
“ The Night Side of New York Life,” and “ The Great
American Atheist Answered.” Under the title of “ Daily
Thoughts and Readings ” one admirer has collected 365
striking extracts from the popular preacher’s sermons,
and arranged them for every day in the year. Another
has published “ One Thousand Gems,” selected from
the works of Dr. Talmage, which gives a fair idea of his
manner of preaching and writing.


But his magnum opus is undoubtedly “ The Life of
Christ,” which has just been published. To gather
materials for this volume Dr. Talmage specially visited
the Holy Land, so as to make himself familiar with the
scenes of New Testament history rendered memorable
during the earth life of our Saviour.
The Second Tabernacle Burnt.
This second disaster to Dr. Talmage’s church and
people took place on Sunday morning, October 13th,
1889. The pastor, who resides about a mile from the
Tabernacle, was on the roof of his house and witnessed
from there the destruction of his much-loved building.
The church, however, took prompt steps to rebuild the
place, and in less than a fortnight the work was begun.
It was during the time occupied in the re-erection of the
structure that Dr. Talmage visited the Holy Land, going
via Rome, Athens—where he preached on Mars Hill near
the spot where the Apostle Paul delivered his famous
discourse —Alexandria and Cairo. He spent some
weeks in Palestine and Syria, collecting a host of
material, which formed the substance of many sermons
and lectures later on.
Returning to England, Dr. Talmage received a
special invitation from the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone,
M.P., to spend an afternoon at Hawarden Castle.
The venerable statesman and the distinguished American
preacher enjoyed a long conversation together, and the
visit was highly prized and valued by both gentlemen.
Early in February 1890 Dr. Talmage reached home,
and on the 6th of that month addressed 10,000 people
in the Armoury of the Thirteenth Regiment in Brooklyn.
So great was the desire to hear him that many hundreds
of people were unable to gain admission.
The Third Tabernacle
Was opened on Sunday morning, April 26th, 1891. It
was an immense structure, occupying the whole block,
a frontage of 118 feet by a depth of 200 feet, with a
corner tower 160 feet high, and cost over 150,000 dollars
(^"3 o , oo °). Besides the audience room which seated


5,000 people, there was a large lecture hall, together
with Bible Class and reception rooms, and a study for
the pastor. The auditorium was in the form of a Greek
cross, its greatest length being 150 feet. On the floor
there were seats for 3,100 people, while another 500
could be accommodated with chairs or find standing
room. The huge gallery seated 1,500 persons, the
whole being so arranged that everyone in the building
could see and hear the preacher. The means of exit
were so numerous that the room could be emptied in
four minutes.
Publisher’s Note.
We are indebted to an old friend living in Brooklyn,
but belonging to another congregation, for the papers
giving the particulars relating to Dr. Talmage’s 25th
Anniversary celebrations, and the destruction by fire of
the Tabernacle in May. He says :—“ The impression
the papers convey is not exaggerated of the great
assemblies and the scene of the fire. I was present at
both meetings, and was eye-witness of the fire. . . .
There is certainly great cause for thankfulness that it
did not occur half an hour earlier, or thousands of lives
would have been sacrificed ; and if it had happened on
either of the two reception nights there would have
been few lives saved.” . . “ There is room to show
deep sympathy for the Tabernacle people and their
pastor.”
The Silver Anniversary.
On the evenings of May 10th and nth of this year,
the Church and congregation of Brooklyn Tabernacle
celebrated the 25th Anniversary of Dr. Talmage’s
pastorate. The greatest interest was excited, and on
both evenings not only was the vast building at the
corner of Greene and Clinton Avenues filled to the
doors, but a great crowd assembled outside. The Mayor
of Brooklyn presided on the first evening, and General
Benjamin F. Tracy on the second. Congratulatory


telegrams were received from all parts of the United
States; and from the Earl of Aberdeen, Governor-
General of Canada. From England, the Right-Hon.
W. E. Gladstone, M.P., the Bishop of London, Arch-
deacon Farrar, D.D., Canon Wilberforce, the Rev.
Thain Davidson, and Professor Simpson sent messages
or letters. Count Bobrinskoy, of St. Petersburg, in
Russia, forwarded a telegram from friends in that great
Empire.
At the first meeting the Rev. Sylvester Malone,
D.D., a popular Roman Catholic clergyman, and the
Rev. Dr. F. De Sola Mendes, the celebrated Jewish
rabbi, both addressed the great audience, and each
spoke in highest terms of Dr. Talmage’s worth and
work. Inter alia Dr. Malone said: “Your worthy
pastor is the friend of all. Where did he ever drop
the word that would be offensive to any Catholic priest ?
I have never read of it, nor has any other Catholic ever
read of it. My religion has never been insulted by him.”
Dr. Mendes, in the course of a long speech, said; “This
is the first time I have ever spoken in a Christian
church, and I must confess that 1 am surprised that I
do not feel myself more strange than I do. We Hebrews
feel gratefully at home when it comes to honoring Dr.
Talmage. What can withstand the blasts of Dr.
Talmage’s clarion eloquence? Drooping souls are
uplifted, ignorant souls instructed, crooked souls
straightened, weeping souls comforted, cheerless souls
made happy, and happier souls made happier yet.”
Other speeches were made by numerous ministers and
distinguished citizens, including the Hon. William M.
Evarts, the famous statesman, the Hon. Joseph C.
Hendrix, the member for Brooklyn in the Congress,
ex-Mayor Boody, the Rev. Dr. Banks, of the Methodist
Episcopalian Church, the Rev. Dr. Lansing, of Boston,
the Rev. Dr. Gregg, Murat Halstead, the distinguished
journalist, and many others. Each meeting was closed
by an earnest and eloquent speech by Dr. Talmage.
The proceedings all through were of the most enthusi-
astic character, and the daily press of Brooklyn devotes
many columns in reporting the meetings.


Total Destruction of the Third Tabernacle.
It is painful to know that the Silver Anniversary-
celebrations were concluded (so to speak) by a great
calamity. On Sunday morning, May 13th, the Taber-
nacle was occupied by the largest congregation ever met
within its walls. It is stated that fully 6000 people
were assembled. Dr. Talmage occupied the pulpit, and
preached what was destined to be the last sermon de-
livered in the building. He selected the words,
“ Behold thou art fair, my love,” as his text. The
discourse was one of rare power and eloquence, replete
with brilliant word painting, and all the elements of
pathos and earnestness. In the course of his remarks,
he said ; “We believe in the salvation of all men who
accept Christ by faith, be they sprinkled or immersed,
worship they in cathedral or log cabin, believe they in
Presbyterianism or Episcopacy, dwell they under
Italian skies, or in Siberian snowstorms, be they
Ethiopian or American. All one in Christ, one Lord,
one faith, one baptism, on the way to one Heaven.”
The sermon was concluded in these words;—“ Ride on,
King Jesus ! Ride on ! Thou Conqueror, we strew flow-
ers in Thy way. We strew branches on Thy path.
Ride on, oh Christ, ride on ! and one song shall employ
all nations, and they shall sing “ Worthy is the Lamb
that was slain ! ”
After the congregation had been dismissed, a few
friends who had lingered in the building, detected a
sudden rush of hot air. On investigating the matter, it
was found that the back of the organ was on fire, and
within an incredible space of time the whole of that part
of the building burst into flames, which spread with
great rapidity, and speedily reduced the beautiful
building to ashes. The Hotel Regent, adjoining the
Tabernacle, caught fire, and was destroyed; several
private houses in the vicinity were also burned, while
the Summerfield Methodist Church close by, narrowly
escaped destruction, but was greatly injured. The fire
brigade was late in arriving, and when they got to the
scene of the fire, it was found that the water supply was
defective. The total loss altogether amounted to


$1,227,350 all of which happily, was covered
by insurance.
As might have been expected, Dr. Talmage was
greatly affected by the catastrophe, but feelings of
thankfulness were expressed that the fire had not broken
out sooner, because had it done so, the sacrifice of
life must have been appalling. Looking at the burning
building, Dr. Talmage exclaimed,
“ I Regard My Pastoral Work as Done ! ”
and later on, expressed the determination not to erect
another building unless $280,000 in gold were collected
before spade was put in the ground. The Tabernacle
was heavily in debt, but it was found that the insurances,
and the value of the ground would suffice to pay every
claim in full, and when this is effected, arrangements
will be made for raising funds towards a new building.
Speaking on the subject, Dr. Talmage says : “ I
will never go ahead again until $280,000 are actually in
hand in the trust company. If it can be had or got, the
path will be plain, if not, the path will be equally plain.
The fire will light the way. Understand me. I’ll always
preach. A hall in this city or New York will do to get
the people. The people who get my words through the
press will still get them ; but I’m through with debt for
ever. If the $280,000 cannot be raised, lam through
with pastoral work. No more debt for me.”
En route to Australia.
After consultation with the officers of the Church,
it was decided that the pre-arranged tour in Australia
should not be deferred, and on May 14th, Dr. Talmage
left Brooklyn for San Francisco, via Columbus and
Jackson in Mississippi, where he delivered some of his
famous lectures. He left San Francisco on May 30th,
and reached Auckland, in New Zealand, on Thursday
afternoon, June 21st, and lectured the same evening to
a very large audience. On the following Sunday
evening he was announced to preach, and the largest
congregation that ever assembled in Auckland for
public worship gathered together. The building was


packed with an eager crowd, and a still larger number
were unable to gain admission. To these Dr. Talmage
first preached in the open air, and afterwards he
delivered a second sermon in the church, which was
listened to with rapt attention, and created a profound
and lasting impression.
It has been arranged that during his absence from
America, Dr. Talmage will write regular letters re-
cording his travels, and the impressions formed during
his trip. These will be published simultaneously in
numerous journals in the United States, and will
certainly form interesting and instructive reading.
Press Opinions.
The following is an extract from the Free Press,
a daily paper published in Easton, Pennsylvania. It
was written some years ago, but furnishes a fair idea of
Dr. Talmage’s power : —“ We thought last evening, as
we looked over Mr. Talmage’s audience, now hushed
so that we could hear the clock’s solemn ticking keeping
time to the speaker’s utterances people seemingly
afraid to breathe, lest they might lose a word —we
thought to ourselves, here is the perfection of oratory;
here is dominion, absolute and undisputed. The attempt
to do anything but listen to those sentences —now short,
sharp, and ringing, and now drawn out with a plaintive-
ness that will linger after his voice has died away—is
so vain that it needs only to be mentioned to show his
power.”
Another journalist furnishes the following remarks :
“ Dr. Talmage started with a narration of incidents told
in Scripture in connection with the text. His voice is
conversational in tone ; he talks just as he would if at a
fireside, describing scenery visited in foreign travel.
With his hands folded behind his back, he leisurely
promenades his long platform, about which there is
neither railing nor the usual pulpit frontage to intercept
a full view from the audience. He has neither manu-
script or note of any kind. Walking up and down,
facing now one now another section of the house, his
unaffected narrative proceeds. He passes from pleasing


narration into entertaining history. He throws on an
imaginary wall before us a map of ancient Jerusalem
and the country surrounding, and while pointing to the
entertaining features of it, also discloses with marvellous
clearness the characters of the personages involved in
his theme. So exhaustive in research, so vivid in
delineation, are his views of the storied country and
people that it might be concluded it is as a recounter of
history that Dr. Talmage commands and delights his
great audience.”
Other criticisms could be added did space permit,
but all unite in according high praise to Dr. Talmage’s
marvellous pulpit power and gifts of eloquence.
Concluding Observations.
Dr. Talmage has been for many years a leading
Temperance advocate. His vigorous denunciations of
the evils of the Drink Traffic have probably never been
equalled, excepting perhaps by John B. Gough; but with
Dr. Talmage there is less of that frothy declamation that
usually characterised Mr. Gough’s orations, due mostly
to exaggerated imagination. Dr. Talmage has personally
visited, in company with members of the police force,
some of the vilest dens in New York and Brooklyn, and
gets his experience from actual observation.
During all the early years of his ministry, Dr.
Talmage was a great smoker, but finding that his health
was being affected he was compelled to give up the
habit, and for about 20 years he has never touched
pipe or cigar, and tells us that he feels all the better
for it.
In personal appearance Dr. Talmage is moderately
tall and well built. His features are familiar to most
people, as his portrait has appeared scores of limes in
the illustrated press. His face is clear and expressive,
with deep piercing eyes, a large lofty brow and all the
elements that denote the scholar and the gentleman.
His past earnest exposures of vice and wickedness has
reared up hosts of adverse critics, and the comic press
of America for years amused their readers with carica-


tures more or less repulsive, Puck and The Wasp often
issuing colored cartoons of the most ridiculous character.
The doctor has, however, lived down much of this
opposition, and is now regarded with respect wherever
his name is known or his abilities appreciated.
Dr. Talmage is, without doubt, the most popular
preacher of the present day, and the most gifted lecturer
that appears on the rostrum, and the earnest wish of
the tens of thousands of people who have profited by
his ministry, has received advantage from his books,
enjoyed his lectures or perused his weekly printed
sermons, is that he may live long to delight large
numbers of people with his wonderful gifts, and charm
immense audiences with the display of his marvellous
oratory.
M. L. Hutchinson, 305 & 307 Little Collins-st., Melbourne.


1 1
J3
■T M
fill
r
national
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA


AUSTRALIAN
fflumii Provider Society
ESTABLISHED 1849.
THE OLDEST /MUTUAL LIFE OFFICE l/l AUSTRALIA.
HEAD OFFICE, SYDNEY.
Intending Insurers are invited
to note —
i. That the Society is the Wealthiest and Most
Prosperous Australian Life Office, and is one of the
Largest in the British Empire.
2, That it offers to Insurers a More Liberal Contract,
and shows Better Results, than any other Office in
the world.
3. That it makes a Much More Stringent Reserve to
provide for its Liabilities, and at the same time declares
Larger Bonuses, than any other Australasian Office.
4. That No Other Australasian Office can offer Life
Insurance at So LOW a Nett Cost.
5. That No Other Australasian Office can keep a Policy
in force (should the Premiums be unpaid) for So Long
a Period by application of the Surrender Value.
6. That No Other Australasian Office declares a Bonus
Every Year.
ACCUMULATED FUNDS - TWELVE MILLIONS STERLING.
ANNUAL INCOME - - TWO MILLIONS STERLING.
TWO MILLIONS STERLING.
VICTORIA BRANCH OFFICE-459 COLLINS STREET.
N. MAINE, Resident Secretary.
