

AMONGST THE PACIFIC ISLANDS ,
During a cruise amongst the many islands of the Pacific, New
Caledonia was, of course, one of my chief resting places. The
stay was not lengthy, but it served to give me one more illustration
of the method in which the white man deals with his black
brethren, A dead man was found, and the usual expression fol-
lowed, “ It was only a Kanakaand there the inquiry ended. It
is true that the French convicts have little cause to love the natives
of New Caledonia. The Kanakas make excellent policemen, and
if a prisoner escapes from gaol it is rarely that he escapes being
hunted down and taken, dead or alive. These native policemen
appear to prefer dead to alive, since they receive the reward of a
napoleon given by the Government to the capturer. The arrange-
ments in this respect seemed to me to be somewhat mysterious.
There is no particular reason why the body of a dead convict
should be worth more than the body of a living felon, save and
except that if he be killed there is no more trouble with him. His
rations are saved. The observation of these facts, however, brings
one to another conclusion. If escaped convicts are mercilessly
hunted down by native policemen, who have a decided preference
for dead to alive, and if they do escape finally they must face 1500
miles of sea in open boats, and then are almost certain to be cap-
tured when they land, and handed over to the colonial authorities,
what becomes of the argument against the establishment of penal
settlements in these islands ? France, like England, will have
reason to regret the day when this kind of rubbish-shooting was
attempted. Every nation should provide its own dust-bins. But
the danger to us seems purely chimerical. The number of French
convicts who could by any possibility reach Australian territory
would not amount to one-tenth of the number of London pick-
pockets who visit Paris every year. But is London to be


abolished because it produces a fine assortment of well-trained
thieves ?
Enough of this. The present paper is intended to be a descrip-
tion, and not an argument. On March 1, having received an invi-
tation from the officers of a French gunboat, I left Noumea for
Tahiti. After an uneventful voyage we steamed in between
Tahiti and Moorea, The scenery is magnificent. High peaks
covered with verdure tower above a pellucid sea. Tropical
vegetation of the most luxuriant kind meets the eye everywhere.
After passing through the channel between the two islands,
Tahiti and Moorea, we came in sight of Papeite, nestling on the
shores of a perfectly sheltered bay, amid glorious trees and tropical
plants. It was not until the afternoon that the atmosphere became
cool enough to enable us to land. On my way to Government
House I was invited to visit the tomb of ' Pomard IV., the “ old
queen,” as she is endearingly termed by the natives. This tomb is
situated about two miles to the west of Papeite, on the coast. The
work is of coral, in the form of a flat-topped pyramid, with the
simple inscription of P. IV., the date being given on a stone at the
front side. There was an altar, of which but few remains exist.
It was employed for human sacrifices in the olden times. These
remnants are melancholy. Cannibalism never prevailed in Tahiti,
but some mysterious charm was supposed to attach to the offering
of the eyes of human victims for royalty to taste! Human
nature, in its fear of the future and its frantic search for possible
safeguards against unknown evils, is the same everywhere.
Other reminiscences presented themselves. The tree under which
Captain Cook was wont to sit and read still exists ; and a rock on the
sea edge is pointed out as the vantage ground whence ancient navi-
gators strove to see whether the coral reefs continued to rise above
b
the level of the sea. They were disappointed; the reefs retain
their level. The insect, as is well known, dies on exposure to the
air, and its work is finished. Travellers in Tahiti must not be
particular about hotel accommodation or restaurants. Of hotels
there are none, and what are known as restaurants might
better be described by any other name. The sojourner in Tahiti
is constrained to take a cottage and furnish it, whether he like the
expense or not. The traveller who desires to stay but a few weeks
finds this state of things a little inconvenient, but there is no
remedy. After all the cost amounts to very little—something less
than two shillings a day —but the trouble of finding a suitable


place, and the delay involved in settling oneself in it, are not con-
venient to voyagers who are accustomed to deposit their baggage
.at a hotel door, and feel themselves at home. The inconvenience of
compelling a man to carry his house on his back is tolerably obvious.
In Tahiti you cannot take a place for less than a month. When
the Panama Canal is opened, competition will doubtless increase
facility of accommodation. The other issue will no doubt be an
increase of charges, but this inconvenience is nothing in comparison
with the other.
As to the condition of the people, I can only say that it is the
■old story. The island has greatly changed since the old Queen died.
The place is losing its native character very rapidly. The natives
have taken to drinking hard, and this must speedily reduce their
number. Indeed, the native population is decreasing annually,
though the number of half-castes is the means of recording an
annual increase in general population. The island, in fact, has be-
come little better than a calling-place for men-of-war of different
nations. What the crews do when they obtain their liberty, and get
■“ on the spree,” may be better imagined than described, as the re-
porters say. Fatherless children abound: their parents on the
male side will never be known. The natives of Tahiti were always
famed for good looks ; but these half-castes are remarkably pretty.
Judging from the number of these waifs and strays of humanity,
one might imagine that destitution would be prevalent on the
island. Such is not the case. Each member of a family is entitled
to some property in land; but as a rule they live together as families
and an occasional “ little stranger” —the offshoot of our boasted
civilisation —makes little difference. The pure native of Tahiti has
the long straight hair of the Malays, from which race he is sup-
posed to be descended. Probably the climate accounts for their
much greater stature and lighter colour. They live the easiest of
lives—and it is reasonable to suppose that hard work takes some-
thing out of a man. Tattooing is not allowed here under French
rule, and the splendid physique of the natives is seen to the best
advantage. The men are, as a rule, better-looking than the women,
but the latter have nothing to be ashamed of.
The majority of the inhabitants are Protestant. The French
tried very hard to make Tahiti a Catholic island. Indeed, it was
on the pretence of replacing some Catholic priests, to whom the
queen had given a quiet hint that they were not required,
that the French admiral came down from the Marquesas and an-


nexed the island in 1843. The annexation was, as is usual in these
cases, totally unjustifiable. Theisland was finally taken possession
of on the "round of the king’s incompetency—a very convenient
plea—and the king appears to have been quite satisfied. He had
good reason for his content ; but the mass of the population, so far
as I can gather, did not appreciate annexation. The people seem
happy enough ; but there is reason to believe that much of their
happiness is now fictitious. Drink produces a gaiety that is not
healthy. The love of dress in girls brings about results that need
not be particularised ; every dweller in large towns knows all about
it. Fifty years hence the pure blood in Tahiti will be the same
miserable remnant that it is in Australia.
Two days after my arrival I called at Government House. I
found the Governor the most amiable of men. He informed me on
my leaving that he would be happy to have my company during
his official trip to the Taumotu and the Marquesas Islands. I
accepted the offer. Before leaving I had a long conversation with the
Consul. From him I gathered that almost the only disease from
which the natives suffered was elephantiasis, or fdfd. Sometimes
white men are attacked by it. In a severe form elephantiasis is
incurable in the case of natives. The limbs attain enormous pro-
portions, and sometimes are swollen to a size as great as the body
itself. In the case of Europeans, the disease can be cured by the
patient leaving the country and proceeding to some distant and
different climate. In the words of a recent writer, “ earthquakes
are almost unknown, and hurricanes of rare occurrence” in this
happy land.
On the morning of April 4 I received notice that the Governor
was leaving that day at 4 p.m.,and a punctual start was made. The
Governor, myself. Captain Martell, and Captain Ducoeur, constituted
the passengers. Fakarava, the nearest of the Taumotu Islands, was to
be our first halting-place. About forty-eight hours after our depart-
ure the well-known cocoanut trees of the South Sea Islands showed
their heads above the horizon, and land soon appeared. We skirted
the reef some time before the entrance to the lagoon presented it-
self, and we anchored some four miles away from a village, which, for
this part of the world, may be termed large. The island of Fakarava
has only of late attained any importance. It is 32 miles long and
about nine miles broad at the centre. As is common with coral islands,
there is a lagoon in the centre, and an outer belt of land about 800
yards across and less than 15 feet above the water’s edge. This


island owes its recently-won honours as the seat of a Resident to the
swamping of Anaa, an island to the south of Fakarava. Anaa waa
visited by a tidal wave in 1878. More than 100 persons were
drowned; the destruction of property was very great. The Govern-
ment came to the conclusion that another island, a few feet more
above the level of the sea, would be most suitable for a Resident.
At Fakarava the Residence, which is, of course, the main structure,
seems to have been constructed in view of a tidal wave. It is well
built, and supported by strong stone pillars. The cottages about
were also very well constructed. They were clean, too. Copra and
pearl-shell compose the chief export of the island, and they are
both remunerative to the grower or finder. On these coral reefs
water is the chief difficulty; but drinkable stuff may be obtained by
digging a well below the surface.
On the 6th of April we left for or Barclay de Tolly, Is-
land, one of those next in importance to Fakarava of the same group.
The voyage lasted 48 hours. There is nothing worthy of note
about this island, except the great neatness of the cottages and
church. The means of trading are the same as in the case of
Fakarava. The men are all well dressed in shirts and trousers, and
the women in the ordinary dress known to civilisation. The chil-
dren can write, and are acquainted with the first rules of arithmetic.
In fact,most of us came to the conclusion that, although these South
Sea Islanders may be termed savages by Europeans who know little
or nothing about them, their method of living, their dress, their
primary knowledge, and their intelligence would put in the shade
many a village in Europe. The missionaries do not as a rule make
mischief. In this respect they are generally maligned. They deserve
every credit for their efforts to civilise these islanders. Improved
dwellings, improved cultivation, and, above all, improved morals are
very noticeable.
On April 9 we left for Takumd, taking the chief of Raroia and
Takumd with us. The island was reached the same afternoon. This
island presents at a distance the appearance of great beauty. The
growth of trees is luxuriant. But, as commonly happens, the illu-
sion is somewhat dispelled by the ugly undergrowth and the barren-
ness of the reef near the water’s edge. Soon after dawn on April
10 we were off the island of Fan<jatau. Here we had some barter
with the natives. Two canoes came off through the surf as we were
slowly steaming along the edge of the reef. Natives for whom
there was not room in the canoes came swimming about, water to-


these people being apparently just as familiar as wood. The dis-
tance from the shore to our vessel was about 300 yards. When the
canoes arrived their occupants produced shark-hooks, other fish-
hooks, and cord made out of cocoa-nut fibre. The shark-hooks
were made from small branches of trees bent into a suitable form
and of sufficient strength to resist the desperate struggles of a cap-
tured shark. Some of the smaller fish-hooks were made of mother-
of-pearl, others of tortoise-shell, very artistically fashioned. The
fibre-made cords were of course used as fishing-lines. These simple-
minded people had but one price for everything. A dollar was the
only kind of money they understood. However, they had to put
up with less, and seemed quite satisfied with the result. In ex-
change for their goods they accepted worn-out clothes worth much
less than a dollar. In exchange for an old coat and a pair of
trousers on its last legs I secured articles of the nominal value of
five dollars. These were two shark-hooks, some fish-hooks, and
about 200 yards of cocoa-nut cord. This cord can advantageously
be made into hammocks.
The natives’ canoes were made out of thin slabs of wood sewn
together with the fibre. They resembled Canadian canoes, except
that they were furnished with outriggers. Their appearance was
very graceful. The natives were all refreshed with biscuits—a
great luxury to them. Then was given the order to clear the
decks. The canoes were filled. Those for whom there was not
room in the canoes swam ashore, holding their clothes or packages
of biscuits up with one hand whilst they swam with the other.
They managed this task so cleverly that I did not see one bundle
get wet. We called on two other islands, Takama and Puka-Puka.
The first-named resembled the others we had seen, except that it
was more difficult to land at. Our whale-boat had to be caught by
the natives on an incoming wave and hauled on to land. When
we arrived at Puka-Puka it appeared to be uninhabited. Clouds
of birds flew around the ship, screaming in a most inquisitive
manner. No other signs of life appeared. This island is one of
those which are rapidly filling up in the centre. In the course of a
few years the whole area will become solid land; but it is said that
no drinkable water is to be had, and if this difficulty be not over-
come the island will of course remain the desert that it is now.
The trade done by the natives of this group is in pearl and pearl
shells, copra, and mats. The latter they make very cleverly. On
some of the islands enormous clam shells, sometimes weighing


8001 b. If the clams be alive they are a formidable enemy
to pearl divers. The story goes that one man was obliged to cut
■off his foot in order to prevent himself from being drowned. He
had been caught by the shell-fish, and used the only resource left
to him. The clam may be disabled by cutting the ligaments at the
jointure, but this cannot be done under water. This quiet enemy is
more dreaded than the shark.
After leaving Puka-Puka we turned northwards, on our Avay
to Nukuhiva, one of the most northerly of the N.W. group of the
Marquesas. The voyage occupied about 36 hours, and we arrived
on the morning of the 14th. The Marquesas are a group of islands
extending over a very considerable area. The middle line may,
however, be fixed at about 10 degrees south. They were discovered
in 1594 by Alvaro Mendana, and derived their present name from
the Marquis of Mendoxa, then Viceroy of Peru. The group was
visited by Captain Cook, and occupied by the French admiral,
Dupetit, in 1843. They have since remained in possession of the
French nation. In 1850 a proposal was made to deport French
criminals to these islands, but the idea was abandoned. The pro-
cess of annexation involved very slight difficulty. The island of
Dominica revolted in 1880, and a force was sent to maintain
authority. The result was of the ordinary kind ; the ill-armed
natives could make no resistance against disciplined troops. One
advance in civilization may be recorded ; they knew that the French
troops could not be resisted, and capitulated without firing a shot.
Up to date these islands have attracted very little attention. They
have proved of slight importance, commercially or politically. It
is thought, however, that when the Panama Canal is opened,
much more trade will be done by the group, and that things will
become livelier. Cotton can readily be grown, and this important
industry ought to have a future, if labour can be found, or the much
vexed labour question solved in any shape or form.
The island of Nukuhiva is one of the southernmost of the N.W.
group, and is one of the largest and most important of the Mar-
quesas. It is about 17 miles long, by 10 broad. The harbour on
the south, towards which we steamed, was almost indistinguishable ;
but gradually we made out the two rocks, termed the Sentinels,
situated at the entrance to the bay. Most of the Marquesas are
difficult of access, on account of the number of bays, which are not
easily discovered. The view on the approach is very fine, and more
particularly struck the imagination after the monotony of the flat


group we had left behind us. Nukuhiva, like all the Marquesas, is*
composed of extinct volcanoes. The highest part of the land is
generally in the centre, or thereabouts. Valleys descend to the sea,
divided by precipitous hills. The highest point of the island may
be about 6500 feet. The place is hilly enough everywhere, a fact
soon appreciated when one has to ascend and descend the precipitous-
sides, as we speedily had to do. The same evening we left for the
island of Masse, somewhat to the north. As usual with this group,,
the harbour was difficult to find ; we passed it once without noticing
it. The coast is very precipitous, the average height being about
1500 feet, and the aspect in no way picturesque. On landing I
found that the only way to the top was by means of a zig-zag path
up the side of the mountain. Not a drop of drink was to be had
until I came upon a hut, where the Governor’s lunch had been
“ cachdd.” I and one of the officers unearthed a bottle of wine, and
over that refreshment discussed the question whether we should
go further inland or remain in the neighbourhood of this unexpected
o o
resting-place. We sauntered about, admiring the woodland scenery
around. Viewed from the anchorage, the island appears only a
barren rock; on the table-land, the fertility of the soil becomes
evident. The grass was splendid, and I learned from a competent
authority that 4000 cattle could be depastured upon it. The scene
was calculated not a little to remind one of Robinson Crusoe’s ex-
perience on his desert island. The birds had no fear of us, they so-
seldom see any of the human race.
The population of this isle may number half a dozen, and even
of these two are Chinamen. At some bygone epoch the place was-
well populated; but the inhabitants of another island came over, and
killed nearly all of the occupants. They ate them also. The bones
were not eaten, and these were deposited in graves, which are still
to be seen. Transport will always be a difficulty until the island
grows in importance. At present it is quite out of the range of the
trading schooners. The difficulty of approach must, too, always
prove a difficulty in the case of this island. The fatigue I endured
in getting down the cliff made me wish heartily that I had never
gone up.
Next day we visited another of the islands, but stayed only a
short time, proceeding to Uapou, the most remarkable of the group.
The name of this island is often spelt Ouapou, and it is otherwise
called Adam’s Island. We reached Uapou at dusk, but long before
sunset we could see the marvellous peaks that crown the main range


of mountains. The island is of the usual volcanic character. Masses
•of basaltic rocks form vast precipices. Many of these fire-rent
peaks are nothing else than isolated obelisks, and are perfectly in-
accessible. Their effect, starting up from the main body of rock,
and only slightly covered with vegetation, is such as nothing in the
Dolomites could equal. Indeed, the island has the advantage of
that region, inasmuch as gorgeous vegetation forms a beautiful fore-
ground to a most weird scene. Seldom have I beheld a more striking
picture than that presented by these obelisk mountains in the full
moonlight. Some of us took a three hours’ walk amongst these
strange peaks, and as we wandered in and out of the valleys and
over the intervening ranges, with the moonlight streaming through
the branches of the trees, we thought that no scene could in its way
be more perfect.
About midnight we reached a native village, and were afforded
lodging by a German, who had been a resident of the place since
1837. This hospitable person’s history is noteworthy. In the year
just mentioned Melbourne was a village, and regular communication
with these islands was unknown. Our German friend lived amongst
savages, who ate men and women on every opportunity, and who
considered a young girl's hand or foot as the tit-bit of the feast.
My host gave me a manuscript embodying the memoirs of his life.
The paper is about 800 pages in extent, but is entirely unfit for
publication on account of the details of these native orgies with
which it abounds. It is a curious manuscript. Well-nigh half a
century spent in comparative seclusion has led to a peculiar style
of composition, in which English, German, French, and native words
are mixed up in gr«at confusion. Savage life, in what the savages
no doubt considered its palmy days, is depicted here. The South
Sea Islander is remarkably superstitious. It is rarely that one can
be found who will venture out of doors, such is the fear of the
tupapau, or ghosts. One funny example of this dread occurred
to me. During our midnight walk we had been resting behind a
knoll, when we heard the sound of horse hoofs. Wondering who it
was, we rose, and immediately saw a native fling himself off his
horse as quickly as possible, and hide himself behind the animal.
It appears that he had been persuaded with much difficulty to lead
some horses to the harbour for the Governor’s use in the morning.
The feeling of a superstitious savage must have been rather queer
when at the solemn hour of midnight, “ when graves give up their
dead,” he perceived our white figures, blanched by the cold moon-


light. Were he a Catholic he would no doubt have invoked all the
O
Saints in the Calendar to protect him from the awful tupapaus.
In the afternoon of the day following this ghost adventure, our
steamer made for the other side of the island, in order to pick up the
Governor and suite. Embarking was not by any means an easy
matter. The waves beat heavily on the shore, ** swilled with the
wild and wasteful ocean,” as Shakspeare puts it. Eventually these
eminent men had to be launched into the surf by means of native
canoes or pirogues, and from these fragile craft they were transferred
to the whale boat when calmer water was reached. As soon as the
Governor was on board we set sail for Nukuhiva, which we reached
on the following morning, and once more re-passed the Sentinels.
Taiohae, the capital of Nukuhiva, is a pretty little village, but can-
not by any stretch of the imagination be regarded as a great metro-
polis. In fact it consists of but twenty houses. Most of these are at
the water’s edge, and the background slopes gently upward until it
merges in the mountains beyond. The supposition is that the valley
in which the “ capital” stands has been the crater of an extinct
volcano. This theory may be somewhat fanciful, but it is strength-
ened by the appearance of the mountains beyond. Abrupt and
sharply-cut summits surround. The natives resemble the Tahitians
in shape and, to a great extent, in colour. Most of them, however,
are slightly darker, and their appearance is much more savage.
This aspect is mainly to be accounted for by their practice of tattoo-
ing. They tattoo across the face and over nearly the whole body.
The lines across the face are mostly about two inches wide, with a
small space of skin left untouched between, and it is usually the
fashion for the men to leave half their forehead, the left side, un-
touched until they become incapable of working.
The general test of incapacity for work is failure to perform the
duty of striking the fruit from the bread-fruit trees. This is by no
means an easy matter. It demands strength and great quickness of
eye, for if the fruit fall on the ground and is not caught in a net at
the end of a long stick the food is rendered useless. This tattooing
of the body is a remarkable business, costing much time and,strange
to say, much money,or thevalueof money,also. The fashion of tattoo-
in or is that followed in New Zealand. Great art is shown in the
process. Two years are required to finish this business of disfigur-
ing, and the cost amounts to about £BO, or its equivalent. Of course,
all cannot afford so much outlay on the noble work of rendering
themselves ugly. The monied men are distinguished by the colour


on their skins. The left hand is usually not tattooed, being, in fact,
the despised member of the body. The females tattoo their arms as
far as the shoulders, and their legs as far as the knees, and add slight
blue marks on their lips and foreheads. Further particulars on this
subject may as well be omitted. The women of these islands seem
to have no conception of the quality known as modesty or shame.
The tattooing; instruments resemble small combs of different sizes
and shapes. When they are in use they are covered w ith the soot
of a burnt nut mixed with oil. This compound is tapped into
the skin with a light hammer. Four square inches of tattooing is
considered a good day’s work. The tattooee has by no means a
pleasant time of it. He or she is put on the lowest diet in order to
prevent inflammation, and is kept apart from the rest of the tribe.
However, tattooing in the Marquesas Islands will soon be a thing of
the past. The French Government has prohibited the practice. A
young man with marks on his face is seldom to be seen now-a-days ;
but in former times it was the custom of the women to run after the
best tattooed man on account of his good looks. He had no trouble
in the way of courtship—the women courted him. Probably the
ladies of Nukuhiva will in due course change their opinions as to
manly beauty.
My first day on shore at Nukuhiva enabled me to speak English
once more. I had not used the language for a fortnight. I fell in
with a Swede of the name of Fisher, a storekeeper, who in-
vited me to stay with him for a few days. Our steamer, the Yire,
went round the island in the meantime. I slept too long, and was
carried away by the steamer towards a place known as Comptroller’s
Bay, some ten miles to the westward. As the exact number of
horses required had been ordered the night before for the Governor’s
excursion, I had only the choice of walking whilst the others rode
or of staying on board the steamer. I decided to walk back to
Fisher’s, a distance of fiftaen miles, across the mountains. When
about a quarter of the distance had been accomplished I fell in
with the Governor’s party, who were resting at a house and receiv-
ing the natives in audience. The presents made by the natives
were rather curious. They consisted mainly of tapa, a native
cloth, bunches of human hair, cock feathers, and tufts of gray hair
cut from the beards of old men. This latter luxury, strange to
say, is highly prized by the natives. The most plausible reason
for this remarkable preference is that owing to cannibal customs
old men were a few years ago very scarce. The rarity of the


article enhanced its value, and gray hairs rose to a premium. Even
now the women plume themselves upon the possession of a bunch
cut from the beard of an old man. They wear it in their hair,
surmounted by a kind of crown composed of carved tortoise-shell
and tortoise-bone. This latter rarity is only made on one of the
islands further south, named Fatuhiva. They value each crown at
a price equivalent to £l2, and inconsequence of this “figure” one
does not see many.
The walk over the mountains was very picturesque. I followed
a steep zigzag path up to a height of 4000 feet. The chief attrac-
tions of the island are visible from this route. The waterfalls, in
particular, are wonderful. More than one falls 2000 feet without a
break. A splendid view is. obtainable from the highest point of
the island, which I reached after three hours’ arduous climbing.
The Vire looked like a speck upon the waters, thousands of feet
below. My admiration of the scene was put an end to by a heavy
shower, and I lost no time in making the descent and seeking
shelter under a protecting palm-tree. After a most romantic walk
I reached my friend’s house, who was profoundly astonished at my
re-appearance. Life in Taiohae is pleasant enough save for the
presence of a small black sandfly, which bites ferociously, brings
blood, and leaves a most irritable spot. Compared with these in-
jects, mosquitoes are delightful companions. The paymaster, who
had crossed the island, had been bitten so severely on the hands
and face that he wore all the appearance of a sufferer from a recent
attack of smallpox. Another officer was bitten in the foot, and
incautiously scratching it the spot changed into an ulcerous sore,
which was not healed for weeks. There is a balance everywhere.
All is not pleasant even in these lovely islands. It happens, how-
ever, that these flies only frequent one or two of the group. The
mosquito attends to the rest.
On Monday morning (April 22) a wild goat hunt ‘took place.
A party of twenty-five started at day-break for the rendezvous
where the natives had been ordered to beat the mountains. The
plan was to drive the goats down the valley into a sort of cul de
sac. When there they were left the option of jumping into the
sea or running the gauntlet of our party, who were posted on the
high ground to prevent their escaping. Sometimes a single
wretched victim would bolt over the stones and bushes, sometimes
they would rush in groups. It was all one, they went to their


doom. When some fifty had passed on the promontory, which
jutted precipitately into the sea, the word was given to close up.
The chase was anything but easy ; the way ran along the side of a
mountain, where we experienced the utmost difficulty in finding a
safe footing. The angle of the hill was about 45 degrees, the grass
was slippery, and constant sliding stones increased the danger of
being tumbled head-foremost some hundreds of feet on to a rocky
shore, or into a foaming sea. The experiment was one that, having
been once begun, must be finished; but it is one that few would
care to repeat, I attempted to carry a young kid with my left
hand to save it from starvation on the rocks; but as this act of charity
would probably have involved breaking my neck,the Good Samaritan-
ship had to be abandoned. Everything comes to an end at last
I got off with little damage, except a few cuts, and shoes torn to
fragments. The finish was satisfactory. With few exceptions the
goats preferred capture to taking the jump into the sea ; which,
however, they had to take very shortly afterwards. No sooner were
they caught than their feet were bound together, and they were
thrown into the sea, to be picked up by the steamer’s boats, which
had come round for the purpose. We found that we had taken
nearly forty animals, all in splendid condition. When once on
board they speedily became very tame ; man or animal, in presence
of superior force, generally does become tame. Pitching them into
the sea did not seem to do them any harm, except perhapsthat it may
have precipitated a few ‘ confinements.” Several births took place on
board, and the little ones became great pets of the crew. This af-
fection did not, however, prevent the gradual diminution of the
happy family; every other day a gap was made in order to serve
the tables of the steamer, and in a fortnight but three remained.
These were landed at Tahiti, and used for milking.
The evening of this goat hunt the schooner brought tho
European mail, and the Governor received the despatches for
which he had been waiting. Two days afterwards we started for-
the island of Tahuata, our party including Stanislaus, son of the-
Queen of Nukuhiva, who undertook to act as interpreter to
Governor during his tour. Stanislaus has a pretty daughter, who*
is nominally Queen of Tahuata. The capital is Vaitahu. On this
island there was some hard fighting a few years ago. The graves of
the French officers who were killed may be seen some distance up a.
Vou Vlii_ No. 48


valley. It is important to note that all the different tribes in these
islands live in separate valleys. Before French civilizing influence
made itself felt, continual warfare went on between these tribes
Of course the victims of the defeated party were duly eaten. The
manners of these people are singularly easy. During the short time
we stayed here we wandered down the valley of Vaihahu, where a
native told me that I could have anything I wanted on payment; his
wife and his chickens were equally marketable articles.
J. C. Bell.
(To he continued).
