



Ex Libris
M. & R. Disney Davidson




il' *
j: 0 «
/I)
~S~2 :/0 '■
The f[?] [?]
*/? -X
, ? 7 A*" 7 v






nX:
At
V V
K
J* CLARKE, ( Late Journeyman and to J Gather cole)
OALEM DE RE r
No. f, Elizabeth Street, Hans! Square. KNIGHTSBRIDGE,*
EGS Leave to inform the Ladies, that he has ere&ed a Machine for Glazing all Kinds
of Dreffes, Bed Furniture, Window Curtains, &c. without taking to Pieces, in a Stile of
Elegance and Brilliancy, far fuperior to any yet offered to their Attention,— The Machine is
made on fo peculiar a Conftruftion, that it will not injure the fineft Lawn Papers
Cleaned and Glazed. L, S. D, *. If brought Starched. L* S. D
A Lady’s Great Coat or flounced { A Lady’s Great Coat or flounced
G0wn................... o
A Plain Gown .................
A ditto Pettic0at................ o
A flounced ditto ................ o
2
1
i
I
Furniture of a four-poft Bed
m m
o
6
o
6
o
t Gown .................. o
A Plain Gowa ........ ......... o
A ditto Petticoat ................ o
A flounced ditto ................ o
i
i
o
t
o 15 01 Furniture cf a four-poft Bed
* m
O 10
6
o
9
o
6
Window Curtains, Chair Covers, Field Beds, Coach Linings, Stc, equally rcafonable.
The ftri&eft Attention will be paid to the CoLounsj to preserve them equally as Lively as
when New. "*
Orders taken in for all Kinds of Diftilled Waters.
* Queen and New Street, leads from the Terrace. B romp ton, to Hans’ Square 5 and North Street^
and Hans’ Street, leads from Sloan Street, to it.
1
r
:4
j*
V \
sm
Bills this fize (and Paper) PRINTED for 6d, per 1000, at No» go, Bifhopfgate Street, within j




AN
AUTHENTIC and INTERRESTING
NARRATIVE
-v
'OPT HE LATE EXPEDITION
BOTANY BAY,
AS PERFORMED BY
COMMODORE PHILLIPS,
A tI D
The Fleet of the SEVEN TRANSPORT SHIPS
under his Command;
v
CONTAINING
A ciramvftantial Account of their perillous Voyage,
Difleniions on Board, and fafe Arrival
On The COAST of NEW HOLLAND;
~. ,1. i'r , _
WITH PARTICULAR DISCRETIONS OF
Jackfon’s Bay & Lord Howe’s llland.
T. he Reception they met with from the Natives, their
Curtoms and Manners; Progrefs of the Settlement, Laws
«tnd Government eflabiifhed for their furthur Improvement*
„ ~— ■ *•■■■ i -. .*
Written by an Officer juft returned in the Prince cf VVairs
Tranfport, who vifited that Spot with C tptain Cook and
Dr. Solan ier, in their celebrated Voyagesround the World
L O N D O N ;
Printed by W.BAILEY, 50, Bifhopigate-Street within •
H, LEMOINE, Bifhopsgatc Church Yard, and 1
J. PARSONS, 21, Patcrnofter-Row.
MDOCLXXX IX.
Price SIXPENCE,




PREFACE.
* : #: , ; | f f -| _ * / *;£ | j % r • j 'V f * f \<%ty-•. i ; ■* | #*■* > ; *?- ■* ■„■•
“T 1 1 employment and prefer vat ion of
j Convicts. has always been the p cu-
liar objectpf political concern in every
well regulated ftate. In they
iiave never been expatriated, but con-
Itantly. fent to lome ddlant lettlemmt or
For, above a vcentury,
America hasbeen the place to which fuch
unfortunate objects have been relegated;
mh linee the unhappy-civil war,i govern-
■ Wool deems to have been at a lols whi«
ther tafend theirfelons. To keep them at
home has .been found inconvenient, as
too great a number employed together.
(^e ?u £ r? e P ur P°^ e °f an Y reformation
.heWes endanger tly| quietnefs of civil
■■ octety# 11 Tor feme, timd fuch unhappy
:C9 ft vicls as have infringed the laws of
their country, have been employed at
p raiieworks for the.fer vice
of and for purpofe
large hulks of old hien of war, ha v e been
itaiioned there dpr tlieir recqpdon ; but
2 time


time which difcovers all things, in a few
years, (hewed the abfurdity of this fcheme
for EngMfhmem are not like foreigners,
they are born free, and whatever their
crimes tfiay be, while on Englifh ground
they cannot forfeit their natural right fo
as tobecbme flaves, and akho’ confined
in the trammels of apparent ilavery, they
know their birth right and that a few
years will rekore them to the full enjoy-
meet of it ; Thus circumflancedit is not
if their morals was not much
mended ; they were bad fubje&s before
they came there, and moft, #hen liber*
;ated, turned out worfe members of foa-
my than before their confinement.
tj t | YX ViiP* t iKJ ■* % *"*" ■ * .** . * '” *
i The multiplicity of laws which are
only to be compared in their effedt to no
lawsat all, asthe dikributors of thole laws
can always find feme to countenance their
partiality, having for thefe late years
mu Implied the number of felons to fucha
deo rec that e very jail was full of convifts
tidiom any pi It where to tranfport
lliem for their own reformation and the
public lairty; a plan was at lak cfdopted
which, while it gave them an opportunity
’ Of


of reforming, and as it were renewing
their ruifpent lives, at the fame time. ,
rut off all hopes of i f turning to their old
affociates in iniquity- The unfrequented
traft thither, the advantage ot lolituCtc,
the neceffity of cultivating thedand lor
their own <4 uupmt; the profpett ot their
connecting among themfelves for their
mutual defence, were thought fufhcient
realons to put the plan in execution; per-
haps the diltant idea of replacing Lo * colo-
nies mioht operate fome way towards it.
However that may be. BOTANY BAY.
anlfland on the coall ot New Holland,
firlt difeorered by Captain Cook, was
the dellin’d fpotp by our iegiflators. for
Se feclufxon of thele badsuhjetts. Accor-
dinoly fevea vellels were engaged by
CTOvernment in'the mbnthof Januaiy 1707,
for the purpofe of conveying male and
female convicts to this dillant fettle?
ment.
The command of this fleet was given
to Captain Phillips, who immediately
hoifted his broad pendante as Commodore
•Of the fquadron; he had the peculiar in-
dulgence from government to chufe all


his own officers. Every article which
could be thought of ufe to the fettlers
was put on board by government, and
the account of his voyage which has been
lately authenticated by official advices,
is here offered to the public for their fatis-
fa6hon as well as thole who have any
concern with thole exiles. •


AN
INTERRESTING NARRATIVE
OF
BOTANY BAY, &C,
* J -
JL HE Public Curiofijy had been excited to
fuch a degree, to fee this globe,
that feveral committed robberies in order to their
• # - ;
being tranfported thither. Even fome folks apparent-
ly well fetled in their circumftances, invited by the
extroordmary care of government to provide for
the convi&s, became candidates for their paffage
to Botany Bay, and, as it was the wilh of the Mi-
hW'ry to render the fcitleh(ent as convenient and
comfortable as poffible, many artificers were enga-
ed to go over. It was an opportunity not to be
mi fled by thofe wo were difFatisfied at home, and
it has been confidently aflerted, that a confiderable
Linen-Draper in the neighbourhood of Kenfington
laft an amiable wife, four children, his (hop, and
fo much as would latisfy his creditors, to cultivate
the fertile foil of New Holland, in the Southern
Hemifphere. 1 To
%% £l M ■ /V J fi * * X -m. i * r '*■ 4 • T ; %


t To the Gencrofity and public Spirit of this Nd*
tion, ihdie o||pms who bad forfeited every title
to indulgence, were provided with every neceffary,
and mod amply fupplied wl.h fulHcient quantities
of all forts of provilion for three years. They had
alfo live dock, feeds of all forts, furgeons to at-
tend them there, 1 Houles--ready framed for fetting
up, and all forts of tools that were thought necef-
fary were fent in abundance, fo that if they confi-
der rightly, they are under very advantageous cir-
cumdanccs, fir it. they travel at their country's ex-
pence; fecoud, they begin a new life, for had they
ftaid act. home, it is. ag reatchaacg if n i ne o a t ofTtti
had net been hanged before the end of fevenyears,
f-%
* '. • • * r i I jht • ■ M
/ > I • • .* * s . - v 7 '■ | ■ %| | 4
The fleet was equiped in April 1787. and after
having jading of the didbreut ar-
ticles for the voyage, went round to. Portfmouth
where they embarked the convias, witfi three com*
panics of marines, to atl as guards during.the voy-
age. and upon the ifland when landed. V
.% . * * " * *" J ' ' • * ’ ‘ f
r
They left St. Helens with a fair ..wind on the 2 <td ?
oT May, and in a few days cleared the channel •
they were all in good health and fpints when they ‘
failed and by the vi pile nee of the officers, the utn
moft decorum was obferved on board. Ever mind-
ful of their happinefs, his majefty ordered them a:
chaplain; the gentleman chofen for this purpofc?
was the Revd, Mr. Charles Thompfon, and we
are happy to affert they will hear the gofpd in its
original purity and found-efs He, was but a
fickly man, fiutltit hoped he will live to‘aive a
good


good account of his charge, and at the laft day be
able to fay, “ Behold o Lord here lam with
thou haji committed to my care”
>- . *
Since their departure feveral flying reports have
prevailed, but no certain account to be depended
upon has appeared before this. At one time it
was related they were feen in the utmofl mftrels,
afterwards, that the expedition had totally miscar-
ried, and that the whole fleet had perifhed in thole
diftant feas; but the friends of the exiles are now
relieved by the arrival of the Prince of Wales,
and the Borrowfdale both which Ihips came off
Dover Sunday 22d of March, 1789, and brings
the following advice of the new fetters*
' , - *■ - \
The firft land they made after palling Scilly was
the ifland of Madeira; there the commodore ex-
plained to the people by comparifon the nature of
the climate to which they were going, as he obser-
ved they were then in the fame latitude north as
Botany Bay was fituated fouth, that is in 33 degrees*
After watering, and taking in luch live flock as
was neceflary, they departed oh the 23d; of July,
they touched at Teneriff and the Brahls; nothing
material happening till they reached the Gape of
Good Hope, which they effe&ed on the 29th. of
September; the Ships of War, Tranfports and
Victuallers, being all in good condition and the
company in good health. Here thsy made fome
flay to fupply themfelves with water, live flock,
and other provllions for the Ihips ufe ; _both on go*.
(Botany Boy) % [B ~ vernment
' - ' - irz tJ _


verhment account and their own private cdnv,e’.
niency having now to encounter an unfrequented
pafTage of 5987 miles, through a fea navigable but
at a certain feafbn of the year*
They failed from here Wednefday, Nov. 13 th.
and continued their couple with a very unfavoura-
ble wind and a heavy foutherly fwell till the 21ft.
when they found themfelves in 39 Deg. South Lat.
and 4of Longitude Eaft. Some ftiort time of
bad weather interrupting their courfe, the commo-
dore thought fit to remove to she Supply, and di:
vided the fleet into three divifions, taking withhim
all the carpenters, faWyers, blackfmiths,farmers,
Slip-wrights, gardeners, and other artificers, that
could be fele6fed among the tranfports to prepare
a reception for the reft of the fleet, at the place of
deftmation, leaving orders for the Alexander;
Scat borough, and Friendfhip fnow, Under the
command of Lieutenant Shortlahd to keep compa-
ny with him if poflible, and the remainder of the
fleet to come up with all difpatch under the direc-
tion of Captain John Hunter of the Syrius, but the
firft divifion retarded the commodore’s progrefs fo
much, that he did not gain fight of the land till the
14 of January, 1788. They had loft fight of the
laft divifion ever fince a week of their failing front
the Cape, nor came they in fight during the whole
paflage to Van Dien an's land, daring all which
time they had pretty fair wind but with heavy rol-
ling Teas to the fouthward
*-' w %. • / > .
t*- -t. ‘ v ’■ . ■ v'
, They arrived in fight of the Bay January 19th,
but


but were fixteen days off It, before they could get to
anchoi, fo powerful and rapid were the currents
that they were often carried thirty miles to the
louthward in the courfe of a night,
' - *j . , % * - \ ‘ v |
%
,° n ' he Supply entering the Bay. the natives
alarmed, ran along the beach in feemmg areat
terror, and made much confufed node; & they
feemed very frightened, fo much that they took
their canoes out of the water upon their backs and
ran off with them into the country, together with
their fifljjng tackle and children, fame bolder
than the reft, ventured to come down nearer the
ship, brandiftung fuch wretched implements of war
as their riide uncultivated way of life enabled
them to produce, particularly fpears of an amaz-
ing length, armed with filh bone at top, and club
fticks, and wooden pumellers of a vaft weight,
being loaded with thick wooden fogs. They were
ofcfcrved to put them levies into threading pof-
tufes, calling out often in harfli notes Warraw!
War raw! Warraw!
This Ifland is Gloated in gg degrees South
latitude, upon a large track of land, named New
extending from Prince of Wale’s ifland
in 16 degrees, to Dieman’s land in 41 degreef
(outh,
The governor Commodore, with Lieutenants
Ball, and King, and L. Dawes of the marines
with other inferior officers, rowed towards them
in two boats; as they approached, two or three
of the natives feemed to retreat a little backwards
. but


but feme bolder than the reft continued to threaten
and throw large Hones, many of which came too
near the boat; fo continuing to annoy their land-
ing, they rowed a little farther off along fhore,
and landed at fome fmail diftance from them,
pndcavouring in order to find water, but in this,
they were; difappointed, however pot from any
material moleftation from the natives.
'» * J ! . »■**•■< . 1 ' .
Towards fun fet they reimbarked in tbeir boats
and rowed towards the place where they left them
oppofite the (hip, when thsy attempted to make
them under (land by the mpft fignificate Cgns what
they wanted, which they at laft underftood, and
on their laying down their arms, conduced thpm
to a fine rivulet of running fpring water, which
dilcharged itfelf in the Bay. Here they partook
<)f the plealing ft ream, drank fuccefs to the new
colonies and the fafe arrival of the remainder part
of the fleet.
' V '• i ■ -■ "-c *
m •* ~ M '
The natives who had in fmall bodies beheld their
«.•‘s\ I . . * ,
approach, and been cplle&ing together, began tp
a flume a more formidable figure by their numbers,
and they feaied they jncant.to difpute the peoples
landing, but a gun firing without (hot, ftruck fuch
a confternatipn among them that after fetting up a
loud yell they all to a man fled into the wood, but
they foon returned back again, leemingly more corn-
pole d, and upon fome friendly fignsmade by the
commodore, yvere prevailed on to accept fome
trifling prefent, fuch as glafs beads necklaces, and
other trilling articles, but they were obliged to
retire after they had laid them cn the ground, for
T ! • • ? • ‘ vhc


the fat/ages were too (by to come near our folks to
pick them up.
’ ► t ,* »■ ■ -
P%-* ... . r - . ‘ .• T i , ■’
They flill appeared watching the (hips in view
and the operations ofthepeople with much Teeming
attention. The boats being then employed in
catching fifh, many of them came down nearer
the edge and Teemed to be more familiarized. Tome
came u> near as to receive Tome prefents of
after which they grew more and more familiar. .
in the evening the commodore with his party
returned on board ; and the next day the three
tranfports he had outfailed appeared in view,
After they had came to an anchor and the ufual
congratulations had palled on each fide, the com-
inooore enquired into the ftate of the cattle, and
provifion Sec. when it was found the hay on board
was nearly exhaufted.
The Commodore therefore immediately order-
ed a fmall party of officers and men on (hereto go
and cut grafs, while himfeif, with a chofen band,
mace a defeent towards the fouth coafl of the Bay,
the former vifit having been confined to the
northern fide; here, as in his former interviews
with the natives, Commodore Phillips ufualiy
laid his mu&et on the ground, and advancing
before it. threw them out prpferns. A green
branch held up or their canoes thrown down, were
fimilar figris obferved of amity between them.
*** ... * _«* - -v - . "•: •• v, 91 ' '
Baring thefe intercourfes, the feamen ufed to
drefs up the inhabitants with fhreds of cloth and
11 - ; / : : ” ‘ bits- ■


bits of coloured rags, and when they found them
feives fo ornamented they would burftinto fits of
laughter, and then run like mad hollowing and
howling into the woods. Let the fine ones of theft
days recoiled that fome centuries back, their own
anceftors in this Ifland were in the fame* ftate of
fimplicity. It is true they imitate them yet in one
particular, thatispaint; but the difference in the
application of it differs widely. ?he former ufed
to (lain their bodies all over, or cover them with
rough oil paint, while our more delicate ones only
adorn their pretty faces with red and white more
aptly laid on.
' ;i •' %- • : ‘v- •’ r v z. * l-t v "' - ~ :
The marines one day forming before them, they
Teemed to like the fife, but fled at the found of the
drum and never would ftay near it while it was
beating. They feemed very covetous of hats and
ftole two or three off the peoples heads, they were
anxious to know, being entirely naked themfelves;
whether our people were men or women; point-:
ed to their women with fignificant geflures & made
them underftand if they were inclined for mirth
they flionld not approach tnem with impunity.
The appearance of this part of the country not *
promifing fo favourably as was hoped, the com-
modore with a party and two Boats coafted along
the fhore for about twelve or fourteen miles; they
examined two rivers, one in a north di-
reftion, which they proceeded about fix: miles;
the other in a fouth weft. As they advanced up ,
the fir ft; numbers of the natives feemed fiflhing in
their canoes, while others were employed srefling
the


the fifli on itsbanks; they ran away on our peple*
approach, howling and making a ftrenge noife,
they wese obferved for the firft time to have dogs,
they are of the wolf kind, with long fhaggy hair
When they found our people did notmolefi them,
they ventured to come near us in their Canoes and
and when the boats were returning down the river
they ran after them along upon the beach and
fometimes hopped abreaft of the boats calling out
as uftul warraw, war raw, the country was here
obferved to be very low and marfhy, but very fit
for growing rice. The fouth weft river afforded
the fame profpe£f as the other. Here and there ap-
peared the natives miferable huts, proofs of their
firoplicity and ignorance. In fomeof thefe our
people left their hats, and trifles, and fome morfels
o provisions, but difplaced nothing nor took any
thing from them. The country in all thefe direfti-
ons appeared to be very mountainous, and fo un-
promising as to induce the commodore, after a
council with his officers, to proceed a little further
Accordingly on the 23 the whole fquadron weighed
anchor, and brought to in good moorings at the
entrance of a cove near port Jackfon, of
New-Holland. found upou an hafty furvey more
favourable for the new fettlements than Botany-
Bay, there being a more plentiful! fupply of wa*
ter, and the foil approaching nearer to the nature
of the European.
v ; 4-- . ■-T • v
%
_ 1
The Supply was the firft of the fleet which anchor*
eo in the cove, with the governor on board; the re-
mainder not being able to work out of the bay that
day


day on account of the violence of the weather, ar-
rived the day following; and anchored all fafe iri
one of the fineft harbours in the world.
7 / - - i ■ • .t. * »; >
/ '■ - ;J*>' - .1' ->-’ ’’/■"*• * *
The Supply was then ordered for Tea in order to
find what place would be mod convenient to make
the fettlement upon. On this occafion Lieutenant
King was appointed fuperintenflent with orders to
land on Norfolk Ifland. the detachment which
was fent with him confided of a midfhipman from
the Syrius, Surgeon’s Mate, a Sail-Maker to
build tents, two Marines, one of whom was a
farmer, nine male convitls and fix women, all
which was fafely landed next day, together with
fix month’s proirifion, implements in husbandry,
every fort of feed they had with them in the ftorei
with the frames of two houfes to put together im-
mediately.
This Ifland is every where fortified by nature
with fteep inacceflible rocks. and wafhed with
fuch a furious furf, that the people could not land
that nor the next day; the boats were fix days
employed in finding a fafe landing place to Ihorc
their provifions; and here unfortunately the
Supply left her quarter-mafter, Richard Jay, a
man defervedly regretted. After overcoming all
the difficulties, the place was not judged to be
fuitable for a fettlement; foon the Bth of March
they left Norfolk and fleered for an Ifland they
had the honour of difeovering, which happned
onfunday, March 17th, 1788, when the licuten-
ant landed and took poffeffion of it in the name
his Britannic Majefty, dilplay’d the cnglilh
enfigti


enfign, and called it Lord How’s , in relpefl
to the firft Lord of the Admiralty; the north
point of it they named Phillips s Point, in honour
of the governor; the firft Bay on the north fide
Callam’s Bay, another, Hunters, from the name
of the captain of the Syrius; and the third, Prince
William Henry s Bay, in memorial of his Majefty's
third lon. A large Bay at the back of the Ifland#
they called Ross’s, from the lieutenant governor
of the colony; and a fmali Cove at the north end,
Collins’s, in honour of the chief judge of the lettle-
ment. Two very high mountains on the fouth
end, are diflinguifhed by the names of Mount
Gower and Leg-bird, thefe may be feen twenty
leagues off A fmali Ifland in the middle of the
Bay goes by the name of Blackburns Isle, from
th e mafter of the Supply. The fouth point, Point
King, from the fuperintendent of Norfolk Ifland.
A deep vahey near the fame place, Erskine’s Valley ,
in honour of the well known councellor. The
rocks that fecure the north-eaft fide are detached
from the ifland by a volcanic eruption, they are
called the Admiralty Rocks ; and a tall rough roefe
of a great height, about twelve miles diflant, a
very good mark for feamen, or very convenient
to ere£l a light-nouie upon, is called Ball’s
Pyramid, in memory of Lieutenant Ball, who firft
difeovered it : this Angular rock may be feen as
far as 18 leagues oft.
On their firft landing they were very agreeably
furprifed with the fight of numbers of the fineft tur-
tles they had ever feen, Beeping on the beach
four of which fufficiently loaded the boat. The
[Botany Bay ) C coaft


coaft is very well furnifhed with fifb. and the flap's
company got as much as they could drag in a few
minutes. Upon a farther examination the I hand
was found to abound with pigeon, and different
forts of wild fowls, fome of which are peculiar to
that Ifland, particularly a fpecie which referable the
guinea hen make; the hen is all white, but the
cock's wings are beautifully varied with a delight-
ful blue. They weigh about four pounds, they
cannot fly* and were eafily run down by the tea-
men, The pigeons were caught in fuch quantities,
as to be ftiared among ail on borrd. The princi-
pal vegetable produce of this Ifland is the cab-
bage palm tree, Bamboo, and mangrove, with
a curious fpecie of elder. In fome places grows
famphire, wild celery, parfley, fomethinglike en-
dive, and the grafs is every whereas four as forrei.
After taking in a ftore of water and vegetables,
they failed for port Jackfon where they arrived fafe
on the 19th of March, and were kindly welcomed
by their friends who were now altogether and uni-
ted in friendfhip to forward the national undertak-
had been delegated to perform.
The ground having been marked out, a portable
dwelling Hotife for the governor, and an h|fpital,
Toth of which had been conftrutled in England,
together with the officers marquees, tents for the
booths for the workers in (mail
wares, wli| fetup out of hand. Store houfes and
babitatioh|%gre planned out, and proceeded on
with the expedition, but now all the care
which had been previously taken in England for the
prefer


prefervation of this infant colony was found to be
very Ihort of affording every neceflary which tneir
exigencies then required.
The moment commodore Phillips had made
good the landing of the marines, and fome lines
of limitation were marked out. the convifits were
gradually lent on Ihore in fmall parties, the artifi-
cers firft with thofe belonging to the ffiip, procee-
ded to cut down wood to form their habitations.
This fervice continued for fome time, during the
hours of day, and in the ev eniig the workmen and
convibts returned on board, only leaving a compa-
ny of marines and a detachment of teamen to guard
the works as they approached towards completion.
It was curious now to fee the variou separations
as they went on, bufinefs now fat on every brow,
and the whole to an unconcerned fpe6lator at lei-
fure, to contemplate it would have been highly pic-
turesque and amufing. in one place a party cut-
ting down wood: a fecond, fetting up a black-
fmith's forge; a third, dragging a large load of
Hones or provifions: here an officer pitching his
marquee, with a detachment of troops parading on
one fide of him, and a cook’s fire blazing on the
other,
■ ■
JV. - »
The natives when they dhcovered that their vi-
fitors were likely to flay, (hewed evident figns of
difiatisfa6lion, and feetnedjrot unwilling to pre-
vent the preparations if they could have
colic hied force and who could blame
them? could the bloody deflruc-
C 2 tion
if
■Hi


tion and havock chriftians have carried into the
different quarters and harmltfs territories of the
globc% they would rather have wifhed to remain
in their ftateof nature, rude and uncivilized than
become the flaves of fuch imperious and political
. . » ) *
mailers.
* &
Gonfi dering the length of the paifage which was
thirty lix weeks and the number of people on boaid
the fleet, with the want of leveral neceflaries
which the care of government could not upply,
as fuch an undertaking had never been carried into
execution, it is not a little furprifing that out of
two hundred and twelve marines, they loil only
one; and that of ieven hundred and twenty five
convifts pur on board, but twenty four penned
in the expedition, though the papers mention for-
ty which is not the truth about forty children were
born during the trip which fbews that the trace of
Basket making is not cnofined to terra firma. but
may even be carried on in Neptune’s dominions.
A > «' '
The fuperior advantage of Jackfon’s bay having
induced the governor to fix on that place for the
fettlement of the colony; commodore Phillips as
foon as the preparations on fliore allowed of fome
relaxation, ordered all the convifts to be landed,
and ordered his eommiffion appointing him govern-
or to be read to the people, and alio the abridg-
ment of the code of laws by which the lettlement was
to be governed, to be read. By this, the fettlers
were informed that four courts would occafionally
be held to decide all matters o&whatever nature
; they


they might be, according to the nature of the of-
fence ultimately and without appeal.
Thefe couits are iniiituted under the following
denominations, viz.
A Civil Court, A Military Court,
A Criminal Court, An Admiralty Court.
The people being all affembled together, the go-
venor in a m Id and humane manner animadverted
upon their former conduQ; which occafioned them
to be fenc to this place, ob/erving that the human-
ity of the Englilh laws yet gave them an opportu-
nity to expiate their offences and fo much to their
advantage that while their fituaticn had placed
them beyond the reach of temptation, it alfo affor-
ded them room to become good, and even opu-
lent men, as many of the firff fettlers in the weftern
world had been convidi like tbemfelves, nor could
imputed to fuch as reformed and became
uieful members of fociety, thereby repaired
the breach which their miicondubf had made.
» * *
He al(p informed them that it was intirely in
their power to atone to their country for the wrongs
done at home, that nothing but a new repetition
of their former demerits could draw down upon
them the le verity of thole laws of which he was in*
vefted with the difpenfation, and he hoped that no
other admonitions than thofe which their own con-
ferences would fuggeff would be neceffary to effe£fc
their reformation, happinefs, and profperity, in
this new country. but


But fuch is the depravity of human nature that,
neither lenient meafures, whippings,imprifonments
and degradations could operate upon the callous
hearts of feme of thefe wretches, fo far as to pre-
vent theft; more rigorous meafuers were therefore
adopted, and, after a formal trial in the criminal
court, two of them were executed at the gallows in
one day, and icon after two more made theirexit in
the fame ignominious manner, verifying the old
faying “ the gibbet ieldom looles its right.
Three of the convi&s being induced from the
profpedl of the country to try their fortunes in an
excursion, met but with an unfavourable recept-
ion, for two of them were killed by the natives,
and the third, after fubfifling on mots for fome
time in the woods, returned almoft ftarved to
death; notwithftanding the hardlhtp he had buf-
fered to deter others from the like emigration,
the governor ordered him one month’s imprifon-
ment, and at the end of which a fevere whipping,
, , ' , ■ : / # ■ .
The governor, befides the above fettlement,
formed a colony on Norfolk Ifland, as before ob-
ferved, where he left Lieutenant King and two
petty officers, with fix month’s provifion. The
f cltlcrs left with him were thole who were judged
the bell difpoled, they confided only of nine men
and fix women, and when the Prince of Wales
came away, were tbs bell doing of all the reft.
While the fleet were under w r ay to the place of
their deftination, two ftrange fail appeared juft in
the offing; and foon after, the governor was
waited


waited upon in Sydney's Cove by a party of
Frenchmen, thele proved to be part of the com-
pany of two French frigates which had failed
from Europe in Auguft 1785, on a voyage of dif-
coveries to the ■ South Seas. They were in
fome diftrefs for (lores and provifions, and had
loft two boats and their crews at the Navigator’s
Ifland. They remained five weeks at Botany-
Bay, during which time, they paid feveral vifits
to the commodore, and the moll polite rec iprocai
civilities palled between them, as the diftance from
each was but ten miles acrofs the country.
During this time the convjfils were imployed in
fuch neceflary works as their fituaiion required,
fome cut down timber for fences, others fawed out
fhingTes for covering, and fome were lent about
the country coliefiling provender for the cattle,
as the foil produced very indifferent pafture al-
though in the midft of their hammer. An aver-
fion to labour, however foon induced fome of the
new fettlers to temper with the French for their
palfage to Europe, but be it known, to their ho-
nour, that though in want cf hands, they would
not liften to any propofal from them, fo that their
projefils were lo far fruflrated; however the
French officers liftned to the propofal of two
fair fhop-lifters, who were miffed two days after
the Frenchmen had tailed.
The nativesmen and women go quite in a Hate of
nature, and without the leaft defence againft the
weather. The men are all tall and upright, but not
gracefully made; the women are particularly auk*
ward


ward in their gait and ftoop very much, which is
oweing to an habit they have of Handing upon one
Jeg, with the foot on the other limb reftingon the
joint of the knee, and in this manner they are ob-
Served to Hand for a long time together, only
changing the point of fupport now and then for
relief. Their colour is of a dingy copper; though
Captain Cook, was apt to think they were rather
of a deep chocolate drawing hard towards a black,
which he attributed to their doth and deficency in
cieanlineTs, wearing greafy fkins loaded with dirt
all the year round upon their bodies. Of their
want of clcaniinefs we have had fufficient proofs,
but we are of opinion, all the wafhing in the*
world would not render them two degrees lefs
black than an Afilean negro. At fome of our
firft interviews, we had feveral droll inftances of
their miftaking the Africans we brought with us
for their own countrymen.
Their featuers are broad and ill framed, their
nofe is broad and flat, their lips wide and* thick,
and their round and large. From a naffy
practice of daubing themfelves all over with ftink-
ing fifh oil, they fmell fo loathfome that they arc
very difguftful. The men have thick rough beards,
and the hair on their heads is fuzzy, and ftuck fall
of fifh bones, flicks and bits of (hells, which are
faftned with fome glutonous fubflance, and this
is the only ornament they affume, except another
ftill more prepoflerous habit, and that is only ob-
ferved to be worn by a few diftinguiihed amongft
them . °
- < - ■ ♦ i . ?
In


In their perfons, they are far from being a flout
trace of men though nimble, fprightly and vigor-
ous. The deficiency, of one of the fore teeth of
“ the upper jaw, inentoned by Dampier, has been
feen in almpft the whole of the men; but their
organs of fight, fo far from being defective, as
that author mentions thofe of the inhabitants of the
*■ -
weftern fide of the continent to be, are remarkably
quick and piercing* Moft of the women w. re
obferved to have two joints cutoff from the little
finger, but whether a mark of honour or difgrace
could not yet be learnt. They appear, however*
from the fimplicity of their manners, to have few
ideas of order or fubordination among themfelves;
and if they have any notions ofaworfhip s they
.are more than the fight and obfervation which has
byet been made can affertaim They fecm however
t 6 pay fome refpefil to a black-bird, fome what
like a raven, for when one of the officers pointed
his piece at one of thefe birds, fome of the natives
prefent threw themfelves in the way of the gun,
though they were well aware it would have killed
them or done them much hurt if it had goue off*
Of the ufe or benfit of cloathing, thefe people
appear to have no comprehenfion, though their
v fufferings from the climate they live in, ftrongly
point out the neceflity of a covering from the
rigour of the feafons. Both fexes, and thofe of
.all ages, are invariably found naked. But it muff
not be inferred from this, that cuftom (o inures
them to the changes of the elements, as 10 make
them bear with indifference the exu«ams of heat
{Botany Bay) 1| and


and cold; for the fettlers have had vifible and
repeated proofs that the latter alxedls them fevere-
I y, when they are feen fhivering, and huddling
themfelves up in heaps in their huts, or the caverns
of the rocks, until a fire can be kindled,
Fifti is their principal food, and this, as well as
flefti they eatfcarce warm through; notwithfland-*
ing they fit round the fire at the time of their meals. -
They were not remarked to be difpofed to thiev-
ing; and it were to be wifhcd their new neigh-
bours, with their enlightned maxims, had always
obferved the fame rule ofhouefty, then their
diftant fhores would have been unmolefted with
numbers that it is to be feared will fpoil this good
quality of theirs, and hereafter turn their tormen-
tors., if not their murderers! They certainly:
fhewed evident marks of discontent when they"
found their vifitors likely to flay among them.
Notwithftanding the difregard they have in-
variably fhewn for all the finery they could deck,
them with, they are fond of adorning themfelves
with fears, which increafe their natural hideoufnefs.
It is hardly poffible to fee any thing in human
fhape more ugly, than one of thefe favages thus
Icarefiied, and farther ornamented with a fiifh bone A
ftruck through the griftle of the nofe. The cuftom *
of daubing themfelves with white earth is alfo fre-
quent among both fexes; but, unlike the inhab-
itants of the iflands in the Pacific Ocean, they*
rejeft the beautiful feathers which the birds of their
country afford.
Their


1 heir but are formed of boughs and covered
with bulhes and earth, and nothing more rude
in conftrutlion, or deficent in conveniency, can
be imagined. They confiftofonly piecesotbark
laid together in the form of an oven, open at one
end and very low, though long enough for a man
Ik at full length in. There is reafon, however,
to believe, that they depend lels on them for fhel-
ter, than on the caverns with which the rocks
abound.
Their weapons confift of a long fpear of hard
wood which they throw with fuch fkill, as fome-
times 9 to kill a bird in a tree; their fhields are
made of the outfide of fome hard wood with the
bark on, which is almoft made
, _ i
fire. They always carry lances with which they
ftrike filh, and feldora fail to kill.
Exclufive of their weapons of offence, and a
few ftone hatchets very rudely falhioned, their
ingenuity is confined to manufacturing fmall nets,
in which they put the filh they catch, and to filh-
hooksmade of bone, neither of which are unlkii-
fully executed. On many of the rocks are alio to
be found delinations of the figures of men and
birds, very poorly cut.
The lines they filh with is formed of the filla-
ments of bark beat into a thread, and their wants
being few, their inftrument are not numerous.
They are frequently found cutting wood, with a
ftone fharpened at one edge, and round at the
back for the hand to hold by; fomeiiraes they have
'dg , m


*■ hm ' i « <-**
as l b J r C lT S L n - Wh!c!? Rrh are « derpicable
k, ’ • b !," IS nolhln S more ‘han a large
S,, 'of bark tied up at both ends with vine fticlfs
i hen- dexterous management of then,, added to
mu'dlat TeadT’th W ,‘ Ch th 7 ? adtile > and the bold-
els that leaQs . thf ™ (everal miles into the onen fen
iff M S ’ h 'f hly defervin g of admiration!
i f 3 i° e cn dom feen without a fire in it to
drefs the fid, by, as foot, as caught: fire they pro
cure by attnton; aftrong proof, of the goodnefs
ofprovtdence in pointing out to thefe natives the
tons “ bliJ taininS th£ “° ft efe “ ial f-P-
-contrive or
Fi(Sing, indeed i," , ” w,ih <!>'*>••
"“A *.in SVlit
the chief part of a fubfilknce, which, obfervatiof
has convinced us, nothing fiiort of the moft n in
ful laoour, and unwearied afliduitv ran * P 3 n -
When filh arefcarce, which Cens’
S , WalCh the moment of our hauling the
fe ne, and have more than once been known to
plunder its contents, in fpite of the onrmfiJ ,
thofeon the (pot to guard it; and this evenUter
having l
O


har.ng received a part of what had been caught
cue t ° n L r tr e K at ‘ in,es is to fh - • muf-
' ,’1 ? f ‘ he bare fight is not fufficient, to fire
'XI ,hJ K if’ Which has feldom failed of dis.
L■ . <=>• ™ huhert0 * bllt how long the terror
ich u excites may continue it is doubtful.
! dcas , the y entertainof futurity, is un .
fubft ances in a raw ftate, unlefs pre/Ted hv
extream hunger, but indifcriminately broi them
and their vegetables, onafire, which lenders hrT«
Man innocent food, though in their raw ft a !
many of them are of a poifonous quality asanool
ttSsaespein"
wards If JTI , twenty.four hours after-
Chew and fpit it out again
better W bu' t f* b « f •»<*' pork they rlfthlr
to ta3e a fe’coud'Hme? be bro “§ ht
fc *
They killed three of our mm In ,t ,
two of whom were gathering k -f r ? woods >
but their hodi. 8 r S bullies for thatching,
th : hoftilb d , S T Cre found and buried. After
this hoftihty. they became very Ihy. and did nil
for feme time, approach the colony. d not *
were off W °ZT
9r«» ■ ,bi i.bf.S t ™£
Of


of ten large affemblies of the which were
noticed together, all had one of their front teeth
out; from whence may be inferred, that thefe
were dillindive marks to know the particular cl als
to which the parties belong. The women appear
conftantly without the leaft covering; the men
fectn to poffefs fotue jealous notions for though
they permitted the failors to decorate their wives
with gilt and coloured flips of paper, they never
would leave them behind, when they were about
to depart. In the early interviews between the
fettlers and natives, the women always appeared
defended by ftrong parties of men in front, armed
in their ufual manner with lances. Captain Cook
relates, that only a few of thefe people prefented
themfelves to him, and therefore he concluded that
the country was thinly inhabited. But in this
matter he was much miltaken, as frequently
tribes of three or four hundred came down toge-
ther. Towards evening they have often been feen
lometimes to the amount of feventy or eighty, fet-
ting roond a fire in the open air, and numbers of
thele fires were nightly obferved near the coaft,
on commodore Phillips’s arrival; but they were
lighted up at a greater diftance afterwards. Ihe
women who had infants carried them generally
on their fhoulders; but few of thefe came within
the observation of the JEnglifh lines, according to
the date the limitation was in, when the (hips left
that coalU
The only domeflic animal they have is the dog,
which in their language is called Dingo, and a
nood deal re fern hies the fox dog of England.
5 ■* 1 hefe


Th.de animals are equally lhy of us, and attached
to the natives, one of them is now in the poffefii-
on or the governor, and tolerably well reconciled
to his new mailer. As the Indians fee the dislike
of the dogs to us, they are fometimes mifchievous
enough to fet them on lingle perfons whom they
chance to meet in the woods. A furly fellow was
one day out (hooting; when the natives attempted
to divert themfelves in this manner at his expence.
The man bore the teazing and barking of the dog
at his heels for tome time, but apprehending at
length, that his patience might embolden them to
ufe ftill farther liberties, he turned round and (hot
poor dingo dead on the fpot.* the owners of hint
then fet off with the utmoil expedition.
The bufinefs offifhing is not confined to the
men alone; their women are as expert at it as
themfelves, and underhand managing the canoes
full as well, they can alfo dive and in clear water
bring up any thing from the bottom though at a
confiderable depth; but in this exercife the men
are moft amazingly expert, and frequently go down
to the depth ofa hundred feet to fetch up fhell-fiH|
or fifh wounded with their lances. In winter tha
fifh retire from thofe feas, and proceed to the
northward. How the poor inhabitants can then
fubfift is not easy to discover, and jufily excites
aftonifhment,
" ; f { •' j: ■ ■*' e . ,
When the governor and his officers presented
these people with necklaces, or any other piece of
finery, they greedily took them; but so fhort was
their pleasure of poffeffion, that they fcarce ever
kept


kept the gift beyond a day, and all their ornaments
Was found from time to time dispersed about the
woods and unregarded. One of the natives Tub-
tnitted to be lhaved and have his hair dreffed, but
he fhewed no figns of aftonifhrrient as might be ex-
pelled from the operation, nor did it excite any
degree of wonder in his companions. In their fits
of levity they are observed to laugh to an immoci-
rate degree without any evident figns wherefore.
Whether they ever ferioufly meant to expel their
new comers is uncertain; but they were frequent-
ly found in large bodies advancing in an hodile
array, and as often as the fettlers appeared, loft
their courage as their approach became nearer.
The terror of our guns killing fo precisely the ob-
je&aimed at, is the great fcource of fear. One of
the three unfortunate convifls who was found
killed in the woods, had his body quite covered
from herd to foot with fmall arrows or darts. They
once ventured to throw a fpear at a party of the
feamen; but as it miffed the aim and failed in the
intended effeft, they feemed very anxious to dif-
own any hoftile intent, and ftruck the man by
whom it was thrown.
1 ' . , •
It appears from various circumftances that have
beeti obferved, that thefe people are at war one a-
mong another; and what induced the fettlers to
think fo, is, that they have more than once been
feen affembled, as if bent on an expedition. An
officer one day met fourteen of them marching
along in a regular indian file through the woods,
each man armed with a fpear in his right hand, and
a large


a large done in his left; at their head appeared d
fchief, who was dillinguifhed by being painted,
Though they were in the proportion of five to
one of our people, they pafled peaceably on*
c ' j . ; v . ‘ r
the Commodore and his people firft fet
foot in this country, they thought but little of iheir
weapons, and were inclined to hold the fpear of
the natives ter y cheap, but fatal experience looq
(convinced them that in fkillful h rids.it was not a
trivial thing, that the wound infh&ed bv this
weapon is often tnortal, afid that the dexter ty and
.(kill of the Indians in throwing it is truly ad mi table
befides more than a dozen convi&s who have unac-
countably difappeared, two, who were eiU ployed
as rufti cutters up the harbour, were (frorft what
baufe we are yet ignorant) moft dreadfully mangled
and butchered by the natives. A fpear had pafied en-
tirely through the thickeft part of the body of one
Of them* though a very robuft man, and the (kull
of the other was beaten in. Their tools were ta-
ken away, but fortie provifions which they had with
them at the time of their murder, and iheir cloaths
were left untouched. In addition to thismisfor-
\v V v
tune, two more convifls, \vho were peaceably en-
gaged iii picking of greens, on a fpot very remote
from that where their comrades fuffered, were un-
awares attacked by a party of Indians, and before
they could effeft their escape, one of them was
pierced by a fpear in the hip, after which they
kocked him down, & plundred him of his cloaths.
The poor wretch, though dreadfully wounded#
made fhift to crawl off, but his companion was car-
ried away by thefe barbarians, and his fate doubtful.
(Botany Bay) JE, until'


Until a foldier, a few days afterwards, picked up
his jacket r*,nd hat in a native's hut, the latter pier-
ced through by a fpear.
Thefe fpears are of various length and Chapes?
fc me of them arc armed at the end with a (tar cut
cut of fifh bone, and ten feet long, others arebarb-
td like a fifh gig. while feme are only limply poin-
ted, the point being hardened in the fire,
in repairing them they are not lefs dexterous than in
throwing them. A broken one being given by a
gentleman to an Indian, heinftantly (hatched up an
€>yfier iheli, and converted it with his teeth into a
tool, with which he prefently fafluoned the fpear,
and rendered it fit for ufe; in performing this ope-
ration the foie of his foot ferved him as a work-
board. Nor are their weapons of offence confined
to the fpear only, for they have befides long wood-
en fwords. fhaped like a fabre, capable of infli&ing
a mortal wound, and clubs of an immence fize*.
fmall targets, made of the bark of trees, are likewife
now and then to be feen among them.
Nothing has puzzled more than the condu& of
the men towards the women, and the carriage of
the women in general. But few of the latter in
proportion of ihe former have been feen by the
fettlers, andfuchas have appeared have been fome-
tunes kept back wi:h every fymptom of jealous
fenfibilny- and fometimes offered with every ap-
pcarence of courteous familiarity. Cautious, how-
ever of alarming the feelings of the men on fo ten-
der a point, they have conftantly made a rule of
treating the females with that diilance andreferve
which


which thev judged rnoft likely to remove any im«
preffion they might have received of our intending
ought, which could give offence on fo de icate a fub-
jc£l- And fo fucefsful) have theirendeavoursbeen,
that a quarrel on this head has in no inflance yet
happened. he tone of voice of the women,
which is pleafingly, foft and feminine, ftri-
king contrail to the guttural pronunciation
of the men. Of the othe charmesof the women
juftice obliges to m ntion, that, in the opinion of
feme among'l the officers, they fhew a degree of
timidity and bafhfnlnefs, which are perhaps, infe-
parable fromthe female charaderm itsrudeft date#
It has been mentioned before that the euftora of
cu bing off the two lower joints of the little finger
of the left hand, obferved in the fociety ifUnds, is
found here among the women, who have for the '
mo ft part undergone this amputation. Hitherto
voyagers have not been able to traceourt caufeof
thisufuage. At firft they fuppofed it to be peculiar
to the married women, or thofe who had borne
children; but this conclufion mud have been erro-
neous, as they have no right to believethat celibacy
prevails in any inftance, fome of the oldelt of
the women are without this deftinOtion; andgirlsof
a very tender age aie marked by it.
Notwithftanding the mild treatment which the
Commodore, (now the Governor) ffiew'd to the
natives, there is fome realon to luppofe they will
not long remain quiet, and that familiarity will
breed contempt between th-? lenders and natives,
the later ol whom, being by f.rthe er,
& a will


mil perhaps make fome cflcQusl efiPo
ihemfelves from their troublefpmp guefts.
f v . i,
The plan of the fettlement is to build a large
town with ihe materials carried from Engiand and
fuch fluff as the countiy affords; but upon fearch
no tree yet has been difcovered that affords wood
of any texture or fubftance fit lor building. In
digging to try the foil, they found an earth, from
which they rhadefuch excellent bricks, that feveral
houfes are already builc. They have alfo found a
dry marl or ckalk,from whence lime has been pro-
duced.
The principal ftreet in the new town, is laid
down here to be 200 feet in bredth, and all the
reft of a correfponding proportion; but the firft
work of importance with them now, is the rafing
of fortifications for their mutual defence.
y
The poor convi&s were in a wretched ftate, for
want of bedding; a very fhameful negled at home.
Some of thofe who were placed at the head of the
different daises of workmen, behaved extremly
well; one of the four who was hangeds after his
condemnation flsd to the woods, where he re-
mained for feveral days; but at length returned,
almoft ftarved to death, to meet his fate, and the
governor ordered his immediate execution. A
rock, at foihe diftance from the fliore, is fixed up-
on as fort of prifbn; whither offenders are lent,
and being expo fed to the weatlier ; with np other
food than bread, fometimes produces reformation
and amendment. Abe
/ ■ V. .■ »
: 1 * • ■ H■ ■


The expedition to I ord How's Ifland, is likely
to he attended with vcvv profitable effedls to the
new colo v. as it is, in every refpetl, luperior to
Botany B v. having one of the fineft and capacious
harbours in the whole world. Some of the rocks
which furruiind it are of an incredible height,
and here die birds find an afylum as well as the
fifli winch abound very plentifully in the harbour.
This ifland abounds with large quantities of fine
turtle, wild fowls, pigeons, and all forts of Guinea
fow s very iarge ai d heavy, and beautifully
variegated wnh diff rent colours, The cabbage
pahn tree wi d celery, fampbire, wild forrel,
en hve. fuccory cr<»ls. is found almoft every
whe e. The natives refemble thofe of new Hoi*
land; tbf ir large ft hr ufes, if they deferve that
iiime. ate juft h’gh enough to let up right in: their
onl fm r are is an oblong veffei, made of the rind
of the cabbage tree, by only bending it up and
tying up the ends with final! (wigs, the long ends
of which rot being cut oft, lerve for a handle.
Their travelling furnitu"e confifts of a fmall bag
made like a cabbage net. which the man carries
on his'bark hv the help of a fmall firing, which
being tiecj in a loop, hangs about his neck; it
ufiiahy contains a large lumpof paint like rofin, a
few hlh hooks made of bone, fome lines made of
the filaments .of bark, a ftiell or two to ferve in
* t
cutting anv thing, a few points to arm their darts
with, and their ufual ornaments, which includes
tne whoie inventory of the riche ft man among
them*
Some


Some large birds fometimes appear about the
Bay, but their kind are not vet afleruio'd.
Hawks, pigeons, plovers, quails, ducks, and teals;
befides a few birds of fhowy feather, and no vs,
are more numerous, but very flhy Bream and
mackerel are. the raoft plenty of any fitb but none
are fo delicate as thofe caught in he Eur >pean leas.
The inhabitants make great fetch afar pv amid-
icai fliell fifh, but for what purpole is nor known.
Sometimes whales and (hark aye di[covered in
thofe leas.
Of animals, they have plenty of opoffums and
polegars, but the raoft remarkable animal is the
tanguroo, a quadruped as large as a fheep, the
head neck and /boulders are frndll in pro onion
to the remainder of the body; the tail is iong and
thick towards the rump, and goes off towards the
end in a point; the four legs, in general mealure
only eight inches long, and are kept bent dote
under the bread;, and feem to be only ufed far
digging in the ground, for the animal never walks
but leaps like a frog in an erc£t pofture; the hind
legs are near twenty-two inches long, and lerve to
make a feat for the bottom of the animal, which is
always difeovered in that pofture when he is not
leaping along; the fkin is grey of a moqfe colour
with fliort fiSky hair; the ears are fhaped like the
hare, and the flefh is like venifon, but rather of a
brackifti tafte. One of thde animals is on board
#
the Prince of Wales, and alfo a living dog from New
Holland. *
In


tri the courfe of the day the weather is noticed
tovary fornethnes 30 degrees in twenty-four hours
ditferen ce in the barometer. Thunder and light-
ning, and fudderi fqalis, are very common, even
in the New Holland rummer. The foil is rich,
although none of the plants brought from home,
or thofe purchalcd for cultivation at Rio Janeiro,
or the cape, came td maturity, and feeds failed
Hill more* A field of peas was nurfed with the
utmoft care, but turned out very indifferent. A
little rice* wheat, and barley, is fewed in the fpot
the fettlers have already cleared; but it looks but
indifferent.
Of rivers, none of any fize have yet been dif-
covered; fmall narrow rivulets and fhallow ftreams
are found in many parts about the Bay and Lord
How's Ifland, and particularly round the Cove*
The grafs is fo thin and poor, that thirty-four fheep
out of forty, of the public (lock which were landed
died before the fhips came away. The cows,
which were reduced during the voyage, did not
meet with a much better fate; three of them,
through the unpardonable neglefl of their keepers*
ftrayed into the woods, and though five hundred
men were fent in puriuit, and penetrated fifteen,
miles up the country, the fariheft excurfion made
yet by the colony, no trace of them could be
found; the opinion refulting therefrom, was, that
the natives had driven them farther up into the
country. The hogs are the belt growers here*
and have multiplied exceedingly, which promifes
fomc rccompence for the lots of the horned cat-
tle.
The


The trees afford no great variety. Three or
four different kinds are grown to a great heigth.
The cabbage tree is the fiirfl in point of utility,
for ir affords a good vegetable fuftenance, which is
like to be very much wanted, for Inch was the
unpromifing face of things, when the Prince of
Wales left Port Jackfon, that the Fifhburne and
the Golden Grove vi&uallefs were proceeding for
the Cape of Good Hope, to procure frefh pro-
vifion for the colonies. Of the deftination of the
other veflels the reader muft take notice they had
failing orders as follows; the Charlotte went over
to China to take up tea for the Eaft Indin Com-
pany, and the I ady Penryn fallen to the North-
Weft coaft of America, on the fur trade, and with
' * - "»
the Alexander and Friendship came round Cape
Horn, but the Lady Penryn is expe&ed to make
through the Streights of Magellan.
The difad vantages attending this new fettlement,
feemed to be. tne great diflance from the mother
country, the want of the New hemp; the
deficiency of large rivers in fuch an extenfive ter-
ritory; and the badnefs of the timber. On the
other hand, the natural goodnefs of the foil; the
finefs of the climate; the probability of mines*
fro m the fpecimens of the ore which has been feen,
and thecommercialand political advantages arifing
from the fituation of New Holland, are confider-
ations which will induce government to profecute
the under taking with vigour and refolution.
The public curioft ty having been excited to t
coofiderable degree, it would be unpardonable to
leave


leave the reader without laying before him the
following ftate of the colony, as every thin ? relat-
ing to it appears to be looked upon as objects of
general concern*
Cattle landed at Port Jackfon, in New Holland.
t Stallion, 3 Mares, 3 Colts.
1 Bull, 3 Cows, 1 Calf.
4 Rams, 40 Sheep.
2 Boars, 26 Sows,
Five of the latter were killed by lightning,
which alfo killed fome (beep of the governor’s pri-
vate ftock. Thelofsof many more of thefheep was
entirely owing to the want of food, for where the
pafture was good there was but little of it, and.
where there was much it was a ftrong four grafs
and the cattle would not touch it. ihe hones
thrive on account of their beiug carefully attended
and regularly worked. The cow that ftill remains,
being more carefully looked after becaufe fhe was
with calf, has efcaped the fate of her two com-
panions as obferved above; fhe has fince calved
and is now very well to promife.
The fpots which has been allotted for the garden
wears yet but a faint appearance; radifhes and
turneps promife berter than other vegetables. The
peas and beans looked but indifferent. Parflcy,
balm, a fort of fage, and feme other European
herbs, were found wild. Some uncommon fhrubs
have been noticed, but as their virtues are yet
Bay) F. unknown


unkonwn, it would be hut wafting paper to de-
fer! be them here, as their virtues will be hereafter
• V t
drawn forth.
The efbeQs of lightning are dreadful m this
climate. It was vifible on every bill in the ftonn,
which afFe&ed the cattle. Three earthquakes were
felt during the firft fix months of abode there, and
from the lace of the mountainous parts there is
realdn to e>;pe6l volcanic eruptions.
♦ \ •• , t
Such is the general appearnce and date of
things in this country; would it were better for the
lake of the unfortunate, who are perhaps doom'd
to end their days in it, but they have this confola*
tion, if they reflefl, that they areunderthe imme*
diate direction of alt disposing providence.
Who fees with equal eye, as God of all
A heio perifh or a fparrow all.
* ■ ■
The latitude of Port Jackfon is 33 deg. 52 tn,
longitude 151 caft; it was named Cumberland
County, by Governor Phillips, on the 4th of June,
a memorable day, which was paffed in the mod
chearlui manner pofiiblc 3 in honour of his majefty s
bit til.
A.
On the morning, the Reverend Mr. Charles
Thompfon preached a Term on to ail the people
afiembied; after which, bis majedy’s fliips, Sirius
and Supply, fired three royal falutes; each fob,
dier had a pint of porter, every eonviff under dif.
pleasure. was pardoned; ’ each man had a pint of
* ’ rum


rum, altd each woman half a pint; and wood being
plenty, they made bonfires in in the evening accord,
jng to the old cuftom in England; all the officers
able to attend, flipped with the governor, and the
evening concluded in the greateft harmony poffi*
ble. '
v
V A
Pld England farewel, fince our tears are in vain.
The feas ftiall divide us and hear us complain;
To Botan y Bay , or o'er all the world round.
Shall coriifort for Engliftimen always be found.
Tho’ billows on billows, between us fliall roar,
Remembe r an Englishman thinks on hislhore;
His mind, : like the compafs that points in the chart,
Still points to his country he loves in his heart.
V v «• t > . ♦
Our forfeit* id lives we accept at your hands.
And blefs tts ie condition, to till diftant lands;
With a wilh for our country we banifh all forrow;
For the wretched to day may be happy to-morrow.
FINIS,


















