

ANNO PRIMO
VICTORIÆ REGINÆ,
No. 16.
By His Excellency Sir John Franklin, Knight Commander
of the Royal Hanoverian, Guclphic Order, Knight of the
Greek Order of the Redeemer, and a Captain in Her Majesty's
Royal Navy, Lieutenant-Governor of the Island of Van
Diemen’s Land and its Dependencies, with the Advice of the
Legislative Council.
AN ACT to make provision for the Support of certain
Ministers of the Christian Religion and to promote the
Erection of Places of Divine Worship .
W HEREAS it is expedient to make provision by Law for the support
from the Colonial Public Revenue of certain Ministers of the Christian
Religion and for encouraging in the manner hereinafter mentioned the
erection of places of Public Worship and of Ministers’ dwellings for
persons professing that religion.—BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED
by His Excellency Sm John Franklin Lieutenant-Governor of the
Island of Van Diemen’s Land and its Dependencies with the advice of
the Legislative Council that whenever after the passing of this Act any
sum of money not less than Three hundred Pounds shall be raised by
subscription for the erection of any such place of worship in any part
of this Colony—or in cases where the minister shall be entitled to a
salary from the Public Revenue for the erection of any such place of
worship together with a minister’s dwelling—or any sum of money not
exceeding Three hundred Pounds for the erection or purchase of a
minister’s dwelling alone in respect of any existing place of worship in
the building of which any public monies have been expended—then in
case it shall be made to appear to the Lieutenant-Governor that there
Preamble.
Principle of pub-
lic contribution
towards places of
worship and
ministers’ dwell-
ings.


are resident within ten miles of such intended or existing place of
worship a number of free adult persons not less than two hundred if in
Hobart Town or Launceston or not less than eighty if elsewhere who
shall have subscribed a declaration in writing that they frequent or
intend to frequent such place of worship and are bond fide members of
the denomination for whose use such place of worship was erected or is
intended to be erected —it shall be lawful for the Lieutenant-Governor
to cause to be issued from the Colonial Treasury as a contribution from
the public funds such sum or sums of money (not exceeding in any
such case the sum or sums hereinafter respectively limited) as shall be
equal to the amount of such subscription subject to such regulations for
ensuring the due outlay and appropriation as well of such contribution as
of the amount of such subscription as he shall think fit from time to time
to establish either specially in each case or generally applicable to all cases
as to him shall seem most expedient—PßOVlDED that (in respect of
every place of worship intended for the Church of England the Church
of Scotland or the Church of Rome) no contribution shall be lawful
towards the erection of any such place of worship only but that the
erection of a minister’s dwelling also shall be indispensable in all cases
where the Lieutenant-Governor shall require it.
11. AND BE IT ENACTED that the amount of such contribution
from the Colonial Treasury shall in no case 4 (without the express
previous consent of the Legislative Council testified by a vote of that
body) exceed the sums next mentioned respectively that is to say—
towards the erection of a minister’s dwelling only in any such case as
aforesaid the sum of Three hundred Pounds—towards the erection of
a place of divine worship only the sum of Seven hundred Pounds—
towards the .erection of any such place of worship together with a
minister’s dwelling (in cases where the minister shall be entitled to a
salary from the public revenue) the sum of One thousand Pounds or
(in cases where the minister shall not be so entitled) the sum of Seven
hundred Pounds—PROVIDED that in every place of worship towards
the erection of which any such contribution shall be applied for there
shall invariably be reserved and set apart as free sittings for the
accommodation of the poor not less than three sixteenths of the entire
number of sittings and shall have the words “ free sittings” painted in
legible characters thereupon or opposite thereto—PROVIDED ALSO
that for the accommodation of persons unable in the judgment of the
wardens to pay the lowest regulated rate of seat rent one sixteenth of
the entire number of sittings in each church shall be excepted from the
operation of any general scale for fixing the rates of seat rents which
shall be established by the wardens and' may in each case be let at such
rent as shall appear to them expedient—PßOVlDED ALSO that no
part of any such contribution shall actually be advanced in any case
until such reservations of three sixteenths and one sixteenth respectively
shall have been satisfactorily guaranteed—AND PROVIDED ALSO
that in case in any year the sittings included in this last-mentioned one
sixteenth or any of them be not so let it shall be lawful for the wardens
to allow them to be used as free sittings for that year.
{' ' ,
111. AND BE IT ENACTED that’ every place of worship and
minister’s dwelling (whether now or hereafter erected or now in progress
of erection) in the building of which respectively any public monies
shall have been expended whether by contribution under this Act or


otherwise shall with their respective appurtenances be and continue to be
for ever dedicated to the purposes and holden solely for the uses and be
appropriated to the service of the particular religious denomination for
which respectively such buildings were erected originally.
IV. AND BE IT ENACTED that for every place of worship
belonging to the Church of England the Church of Scotland or the
Church of Rome there shall in the last week of every month of De-
cember be appointed for the year commencing on the first day of Janu-
ary then next ensuing three church or chapel wardens of whom one
shall be appointed by the minister of such church or chapel for the
time being and two by a majority of the seat-holders at a meeting to be
convened for that purpose by such minister or by any three seat-holders
and to be holden on such day in such last week of December and at such
hour and place as shall by such minister or three seat-holders be specified.
V. AND BE IT ENACTED that at every such meeting there
shall also be elected by the majority of seat-holders present three trus-
tees who shall during the year then ensuing be deemed and taken to be
the persons in whom the property in such church or chapel and in the
minister’s dwelling and their appurtenances respectively shall be vested
and in case of the death resignation or departure from the Colony of
any such trustees before the expiration of the period for which they
shall have been so elected it shall be lawful for the minister for the time
being or for any three seat-holders to convene a special meeting of seat-
holders for the election of new trustees (or a new trustee as the case may
be) to supply the vacancy or vacancies so created during the remainder
of that period.
VI. PROVIDED ALWAYS that nothing contained in either the
preceding or the said third section respectively shall affect any existing
trust or right whatever and that if any such election of trustees as
aforesaid or the mode prescribed for their election shall be inconsistent
with the customs or usages of any religious denomination such customs
and usages alone shall be followed and no other.
VII. AND BE IT ENACTED that in estimating the majority
of seat-holders at every such meeting as aforesaid and in taking the
votes of seat-holders at such meetings (which votes shall be given in
person only) every individual shall be entitled to one vote in respect of
each seat or sitting holden by him—PROVIDED that no person shall
in any case have more than five votes —PROVIDED ALSO that no
person shall at any meeting be entitled to vote in respect of any seat or
sitting the rent of which shall be then due and unpaid.
VIII. AND BE IT ENACTED that the wardens for the time
being of every place of worship shall have power from time to time
(subject to such general rules as shall be from time to time established
for that purpose by the seat-holders at any such annual meeting in
December) to fix the amount which shall be payable for the rent of pews,
and seats in such place of worship and the amount of fees which shall
be payable for vaults and tombstones and to let such pews and seats
(subject to all existing rights therein if any) in such manner and to
such persons as they the said wardens shall think fit—and to appoint
suspend and remove all church officers and servants employed in or
about such place of worship (the minister’s clerk excepted who shall
For certain places
of worship
wardens to be ap-
pointed.
Trustees to be also
appointed.
Proviso. Saving
of all existing
trusts and rights.
Votes of seat-
holders.
General powers of
church or chapel
wardens.
3
]° VICTORIA. No. 16.


in each case be appointed and removed by the minister only) and
generally to manage the temporalities of every such place of worship
and to provide such articles as may be necessary for the proper celebra-
tion of divine worship therein—and to fix the salaries or other
remuneration of all such officers and servants (including such clerk as
aforesaid) and to pay the amount thereof respectively and of all repairs
of buildings and other expenses which circumstances may from time to
time render necessary by or out of such rents and fees as aforesaid or
out of such other funds as may come to their hands —AND for the
better collection of all such rents fees and other funds the wardens of
every such place of worship for the time being may sue and recover
judgment in their own names or in the names of any two of them
in any Court of Requests nor shall any of them merely by reason of
his being a plaintiff" in any such suit be prevented from becoming
a witness therein.
IX. AND BE IT ENACTED that in the month of January in
each year the wardens who shall have been appointed for the year
preceding shall cause a true and particular account of their receipts
and expenditure during that year (from the first day of January to the
thirty-first day of December both inclusive) to be published in the
Hobart Town Gazette under their hands or the hands of two of them
for general information.
X. AND BE IT ENACTED that in case any vacancy shall
occur at any time in the number of church or chapel wardens so
appointed as aforesaid by the death absence or resignation of any one or
more of them such vacancy shall be supplied by a new appointment or
appointments as soon after the happening of such vacancy as con-
veniently may be—AND every such new appointment shall take place
in the same manner as far as shall be practicable as if it were had at the
ordinary period and every such new warden shall (in respect of his
continuance in office) be deemed to have been actually appointed in the
month of December previous—PßOVlDED ALSO that in respect of
such continuance in office he shall not be deemed or taken as personally
liable for any act or acts done or omitted to have been done before the
date of his actual election—AND PROVIDED ALSO that where any
such vacancy shall in any year arise after the month of June no such
new appointment shall be necessary but the powers which by this Act
are given to the wardens may during the remainder of the year continue
to be exercised by those who remain.
XL AND BE IT ENACTED that the wardens for the time being of
every place of worship shall upon all matters before them have each
one vote and two of them shall form a quorum and in the event of
a difference in opinion between such wardens on any occasion the votes
of any two of them (where three are present) shall be binding upon all
or in case of an equality of votes the minister’s appointee shall possess a
casting vote —AND the wardens of each place of worship shall have
power from time to time to make bye-laws (such laws not being
inconsistent with this Act) for their general guidance which laws shall be
equally binding on and shall be observed by their successors until
abrogated or altered by such successors.
XII. AND BE IT ENACTED that whenever at any time after the
completion of any such place of worship as aforesaid (whether now or


hereafter erected or now in progress of erection) intended for members
of the Church of England the Church of Scotland or the Church of
Rome it shall be made to appear to the Lieutenant-Governor that there
are resident within ten miles thereof not less than the number of free
adult persons mentioned respectively in the aforesaid first section and
not less than such specified number (either eighty or two hundred as
the case may be) shall subscribe such declaration in writing as in that
section is also mentioned then it shall be lawful for such Lieutenant-
Governor to direct from thenceforth the issue from the Colonial Treasury
of a yearly salary for the use of the minister thereof for the time being of
Two hundred Pounds.
XIII. PROVIDED ALWAYS that nothing in the preceding section
shall extend to prevent in any particular case the issue by the Lieutenant-
Governor of any such salary to any minister in the interior (having an
appointment duly confirmed as hereinafter mentioned) although the
number of persons so resident or so subscribing shall be under eighty if
with the previous assent of the Legislative Council testified by a vote of
that body obtained for that purpose but no such salary shall in any
case be permitted where the number of free subscribing adults shall be
less than fifty.
XIV. AND BE IT ENACTED that in estimating the number of
such adults every person above the age of fourteen shall be reckoned
and that three children under that age but above the age of six years
shall be reckoned as equivalent to one adult person and the signature of
either of the parents of such last-mentioned children to any such
declaration as aforesaid may be taken in lieu of their own thereto.
XV. AND BE IT ENACTED that no salary shall in any case be .
issued under the authority of this Act to any minister whose appointment 1
shall not have been made in accordance with the laws and principles of j
the religious denomination to which such minister belongs and have (
been confirmed by Her Majesty or Her Successors or by the Lieutenant-
Governor for the time being—and that no salary shall be continued in any
case to any minister after it shall have been certified to ihe Lieutenant-
Governor by the proper ecclesiastical authority that he has been tried
and found guilty by competent authority according to the laws or usages
of the church to which he belongs of such misconduct or culpable neglect
of duty (specifying in particular the instance or instances of such neglect
or misconduct) as according to the same laws or usages renders the dis-
continuance of such salary proper—nor shall any minister continue
to receive any such salary who shall not (if required) produce to the
Lieutenant-Governor sufficient proof of his having duly officiated during
the period for which such salary is applied for.
XVI. AND BE IT ENACTED AND DECLARED that nothing g
contained in this Act shall be construed to affect in any manner the ri
salaries or allowances which are now enjoyed by the several ministers a
named in the Schedule hereunto annexed or to prejudice the existing
right of any of those ministers to the enjoyment of any glebe anything
in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding—PßOVlDED that every
successor to any such minister shall as to salary and allowances be
subject to the arrangements made .by this Act the successor and
successors to the Venerable the Archdeacon and the successor and
successors to the minister of the Presbyterian church of St. Andrew’s (as
to the extra salary now assigned to such minister) only excepted.
to certain
ministers.
Salary in special
cases.
Mode of estimat-
ing number of
adults.
All salaried
ministers under
this Act to be con-
firmed by the
crown.
Saving of existing
rights in salaries
and glebes.


Trustees may
accept lands.
Definition of term
Lieutenant-
Governor and
church or chapel
wardens.
XVII. AND BE IT ENACTED that it shall be lawful for any
trustees appointed by virtue of this Act to accept or take from persons
willing to give the same any lands or hereditaments adapted for the site
of a church or chapel or of a minister’s dwelling with a garden and
other appurtenances thereunto or any lands or hereditaments adapted
for the puposes of a burial-ground.
XVIII. AND BE IT ENACTED that the term Lieutenant-
Governor used in this Act shall be construed to extend equally to the
Officer for the time being administering the Government and that the
term warden shall for the purposes of this Act be construed to mean such
officer as shall be appointed for managing the temporalities of each
church or chapel according to the usage of each religious communion.
JOHN FRANKLIN.
Passed the Legislative Council this twenty-
seventh day of November, one thousand
eight hundred and thirty-seven,
Adam Turnbull, Clerk of the Councils.
SCHEDULE A.
CHURCH OF ENGLAND:
Hobart Town.
The Venerable the Archdeacon. £5OO 0 0 Salary.
KmtoJfcDSftSEik} 260 0 0 Salary and Glebe.
Launceston.
The Minister of St. John’s Church 250 0 0 Salary and Glebe.
New Norfolk.
The Minister of Church 250 0 0 Salary and Glebe.
50 0 0 Allowance in lieu
of fencing Glebe.
Sorell,
The Minister of St. George’s Church., 250 0 0 Salary and Glebe.
50 0 0 Allowance in lieu
of fencing Glebe.
Norfolk Plains.
The Minister of Church ~.. 250 0■ 0 Salary and Glebe.
50 0 0 Allowance in lieu
of fencing Glebe.
Campbell Town.
The Minister of Church ...» 250 0 0 Salary and Glebe.
Clarence Plains.
The Minister of Church 109 4 0 Salary.
6
1° VICTORIA No. 16.
