

An ad diess
of welcome
to the
American and Australian
guests
of the Sarage club
by will & Thakmar


THREE FLAGS.
DH RE E flags, to-night, are hanging on our walls,
A family gathering of hunting bright;
A Trinity of flags, which augurs well,
A cheering, welcome, and a pleasant sight.
Our dear old mother England’s in the centre floats—
Her daughters’ welfare hers, their joys her own ;
With fond, maternal care she watches both,
Nearer and dearer to each other grown.
Methinks I hear you say, “ You're wrong, old man ;
No fealty to us its people claim;
The Stars and Stripes a nation of their own;
They differ from us, even in their name.”
In name—l grant you that—but not in fact:
Married and settled now —a woman grown ;
But though she’s left our roof, our daughter still ;
In blood, in race, in language, all our own.
It was her mother’s blood which sent her forth
To make a home herself, to carve a name—
Though poor and friendless when she left our door—
’Mongst other nations in the niche of fame.


That banner with the glittering- Stars and Stripes
Shall nestle closely to the Union Jack;
For ever side by side those flags shall float,
Until the sea and land their dead give back.
And thou, Australian flag! youngest of all!
Far from thy mother’s breast thy country lies,
On distant Antipodean shores,
Where beams the Southern Cross, from tropic skies.
Land of the Southern Cross ! Fair land of gold !
Land of the Sun ! Whose gardens ever green !
Whose rivers wander over golden sands !
The fairest land that mortal eyes have seen.
Clear, from cerulean heights the Southern Cross—
A glittering star for every Austral gem—
Shining in peerless majesty sublime—
The five, a cluster in our diadem.
And soon, as worlds spring forth from Nature’s womb,
Shall a new State be added to the band ;
And ‘Northern Queensland join her sister throng,
Another daughter in that far-off land.
No common tie unites us all to-night ;
Shoulder to shoulder have our fathers stood,
Marshalled in battle’s fierce and stern array,
To win our country with their noble blood.
Together they, the rocky heights have stormed,
Together they, in bloody trenches fought;
Together, in one glorious line they died,
Together thus, our liberties they bought.
So, let us pledge anew the triple flags!
And Savage welcome greeting warmly give
To all who come to-night from Austral shores,
Or in the busy Great Republic live.
A ringing welcome we extend to all;
With heart to heartj which e’er your flag may be;
We bid you welcome here, and grasp your hands
In token of our warmest sympathy.
♦Rising Star.
