









An account of Walter Carew's tour of the island of Viti Levu on behalf of the government
1875




SINCE the Cession of the Fiji islands
to Great Britain, mischievous mis-
representations have been circulated
among the natives, to the effect that
their lands were about to be confiscated
and they themselves driven to live upon
certain small reserves. These stories
were to some extent credited, and excited
considerable uneasiness and apprehen-
sion in the minds of the chiefs and
people, to allay which, the Governor,
soon after his arrival, thought it expe-
dient to send a messenger to the interior
Tribes to explain how little te enter-
tained any such intentions.
For this service Mr. Walter Carew, a
gentleman for some years resident in
Fiji, was selected by His Excellency,
and it was my good fortune to be per-
mitted to accompany him on his journey.
Before I go further I cannot but
express my strong feeling of the
fitness of Mr. Carew for the duty
assigned to him by the Governor,
and my earnest conviction that, as a
medium of communication between the
Government and the native popula-
tion of Central Yiti Levu, no one could
have been chosen better qualified
than that gentleman. A perfect Fijian
scholar, he is conversant with the
various idioms made use of in the diffe-
rent dialects ; he thoroughly understands
and appreciates the native character ;
not blind to their faults, and boldly
denouncing their evil practices, he is
at the same time patient and un-
tiring in his endeavours to explain to
them the benefits they may expect by
leading peaceable lives. On the other
hand, the natives place in him implicit
confidence and reliance; he has pene-
trated, alone, with safety, into the inte-
rior of the country, further than any
other white man, and he has lately, un-
aided and on his own responsibility.
1


performed an action which merits the
highest praise, in inducing the chiefs of
hitherto most lawless tribes (up to
that time utterly beyond the reach of
the Government, and even at enmity
among themselves,) to descend from
their mountain homes, and giving up
their former quarrels, with one mind to
submit to the British Government. The
circumstances of this exploit are well
known, though hardly, I think, suffi-
ciently appreciated. It is not, however,
my place to comment upon the manner
in which Mr. Carew’s services in this
matter have been recognised.
Our start for the interior was to be
made from Bau, and to that place we
were kindly given a passage, on the
13th July, by the ex-King Cakobau, in
his yacht the “ Lurline,” in which ho
himself and his suite also sailed.
The wind being unfavourable, after
coasting round the western point of
Ovalau, we put in for the night at Niu
Basaga, a small village on the south
coast of the island of Moturiki. This
island is a favourite resort of Cakohau
who keeps a considerable stock of cattle
upon the excellent pasturage it affords.
These herds, however, are to some extent
a burden upon the villagers, whose vege-
table gardens are occasionally trampled
over and injured by them.
We were somewhat disappointed to
learn the next morning that Cakobau
did not intend leaving for Bau until
the following day. This delay, we
afterwards ascertained, was for the pur-
pose of collecting contributions of yams
and other vegetables, and in some cases,
I believe, pigs, from the inhabitants of
the island. And here, for the first
time, I saw the “ Lala ” system carried
into actual practice. From long'usage.
2


the people have become so used to
this kind of extortion at the hands of
their chiefs, that they scarcely look
upon it in the light of the hardship
which, in some cases, it undoubtedly is.
During the day I walked across the
centre of the island, over a low range of
hills, in some parts well wooded, and
following along the coast on the opposite
side, viz., on that facing Ovalau, returned
to Niu Basaga round its south-eastern
extremity of the island, (a distance of
about 10 miles), passing through seven
small villages, all of them ill-kept and
dirty. This may partly be accounted
for by the state of inaction and depres-
sion existing among the native popula-
tion consequent upon the late epidemic
of measles; and I may here mention
that at Moturiki, and at all the places
we afterwards passed through on the
island of Viti Levu, the people appear to
have suffered terribly, at least a third of
the entire population having died, from
this disease or its consequences, the
latter generally taking the form of acute
dysentery or diarrhoea.
On the following day, as Cakobau
had completed his arrangements, we
started about midday for Bau, where we
arrived after a fast run of two hours.
Everyone who has written anything
about Fiji has given a description of Bau,
its ancient capital, and I need therefore
say no more than that as we neared the
small islet on which the town is built I
was much struck by its picturesqueness.
Encircled by a rough grey stone em-
bankment, it rises from the sea, the
high brown roofs of the houses contrast-
ing well with the green of the trees
among which they appear to be em-
bedded.
Much damage has been done to this


town by the late fire, twenty-seven
houses in the Lasakau quarter hav-
ing been burnt, together with a
large meetinghouse, a building of 140
feet long, and one of Cakobau’s largest
double canoes. Many more houses, if not
the whole town, would have been sacri-
ficed, had it not been for the prompt
energy displayed by Lieutenants Carslake
and Harrison, of H.M.S. “ Pearl,” who
happened to be there, while on leave of
absence, on the night on which the fire
took place. The great service they have
rendered to the people of Bau I was glad
to find was fully appreciated by at least
one of the natives, —Adi Kuila, Cako-
bau’s eldest daughter,—who spoke most
warmly of the aid afforded by these
gentlemen, and graphically described
their exertions in endeavoring, and
happily with success, to restore order
where all was panic and confusion.
This lady deserves far more than a
mere passing comment, and I wish
I were more qualified to describe in
terms which cannot be misunderstood
by those who may hereafter read
these w'ords, the respect and admi-
ration with which she has inspired most
of those who, like myself, have had the
privilege of her acquaintance.
A daughter of the great Chief, Cako-
bau, she inherits from her mother yet
higher rank. The widow of the Chief
of a large district in South-east Yiti
Levu, she has wisely ruled the people,
who, since his death, have regarded her
as their Chief. Learned in native poli-
tics, her opinion has much weight in her
father’s home ; and it is, I believe, uni-
versally admitted among Fijians that,
although according to their laws a woman
has no right to give expression to an
opinion in public, she is as well quali-


fied as any man among them to decide
the course of action to be pursued in
serious and difficult questions affecting
either the Chiefs themselves or the
people.
In her own house she makes a charm-
ing and admirable hostess, and, notwith-
standing the numerous occupations
which engage her attention—now hearing
some complaint,—now issuing an order,
now intent upon reading,—now receiving
and writing letters, —she does not despise
the simpler duties of a good housewife.
She is a staunch adherent of the Wes-
leyan Church, and in the education of
her children pays due regard to their
religious instruction. It is a pleasing
and at the same time touching sight
to see her youngest son, Ratu
Timoci, a little boy of between three
and four years old who bears the some-
what incongruous appellation of Qio Levu
(the great shark!), nightly, before being
laid on bis mat to sleep, taught to
kneel, and with his little head pressed
close betwei n the kind motherly hands,
follow and repeat, in childish lisping
accents, words, caught from his mother’s
lips, of prayer and praise.
The personal appearance of Adi Kuila
is preposessing and dignified, and her
manner both graceful and ladylike.
Both by character and natural attain-
ments she is fitted to take her
part in any society, far better so
indeed than some so-called ladies as
frequently met with in the colonies as
elsewhere, who, in theT self-conceited
ignorance, would consider it a conde-
scension on their part to speak to her,
did they not, indeed, positively refuse to
do so.
I visited the Wesleyan Mission House,
which occupies the summit of the hi'l


round which the (own lies. It is at
present temporarily occupied by Mr.
Webb of the Rewa district, Mr. Lang-
ham, the Superintendant, who usually
lives here, being on a visit to Sydney.
The house is a very good one, according
to the standard of European residences
in Fiji. It was commenced many years
ago by the Wesleyan Missionary, Mr.
Baker, who lost his life in the dis-
trict of Ba, at a place called Na Butau-
tau, where he was treacherously set
upon, clubbed from behind, and his
body eaten, by the Vatu Sila tribe.
Efforts have from time to time been
made to recover his bones, and with
such success, that in one Mission House
alone I have seen no fewer than three of
his skulls!
We also visited the native magistrate
of Bau, Ratu Ilaitia, a fine old man of
prepossessing appearance, much re-
spected both by the Europeans and
natives. It was dusk when we entered
his house, and as I sat down on the
mats I saw, what appeared to me in the
uncertain light to be an European child.
It turned out, however, to be au Albino,
a son of Ratu Ilaitia, and I learnt on
enquiry that this freak of nature is not
at all uncommon among the Fijians.
I myself afterwards came across another
Albino among the mountain tribes : a
boy of about ten years old, a son of the
chief of Na l)rau. The hair of this latter
boy was perfectly white, and his eyes of
a light blue, the whole of his skin, natu-
rally of a pinkish white colour, being
from exposure to the sun, thickly
covered with large freckles.
Next day, before leaving Bau, we
visited the quarter of the town occupied
by Ratu Abel, where we met Ro Vucago,
a young chief from the interior of Viti


Levu, well known to Mr. Carew as the
last to give up cannibalism amongst those
who lately tendered their submission.
He is a tall and well made man with a
wild and restless look. Like most of
the natives of the interior, his skin is of
a darker colour than that of the coast
tribes, and his features flatter and
more of the negro type. This, however,
is by no means an invariable rule, for I
afterwards found in the interior many
individual cases of persons possessing
features of a regular, and in some cases
even aquiline cast. Where, however, the
latter is found, it is by some authorities
supposed to be an indication of a strain
of Tongan blood. Ho Vucago had come
to 13au in search of his younger brother
who had been, when a boy, taken a
prisoner of war by the Bauans : —The
object of his search had been accomp-
lished, and we found the two sitting to-
gether in one house, the elder trying to
persuade the younger, (who is about to
marry a Bau girl,) to return to his own
country, a matter in which he did not
seem likely to bo successful. A year
ago a Mountain Chief would have no
more dared to set foot in Bau, than
would one of his own women have
dared to stand upright in his presence!
Sending our baggage round by water
to Navuso, a village on the Rewa River,
about 15 miles from its mouth, we
ourselves, in a small canoe, ascended for
a distance of about three miles the large
creek which runs inland opposite to the
island of Bau, and then walked across
the intervening country to the left bank
of the Rewa, the road, some seven or
eight miles in length, leading to a point
on the river just opposite to Navuso.
It was fortunate that we did not take
our baggage with us, for on leaving Bau,


and just before entering the creek, our
waterlogged and overweighted canoe
sank, obliging us to swim to a mudbank
and empty her out before proceeding.
The country lying between Bau and
the Eevva is of a low undulating
character, partly covered with forest.
The soil is of a poor quality until
the rich flats which extend along
the banks of the river are reached. We
passed through two native villages, one
of them, (Verata), surrounded by three
deep fighting ditches. In many places
also I noticed the remains of former
earthworks giving evidence of the turbu-
lent times which existed in Fiji only a
few years ago, and at one point on the
road side there still exist about thirty
circular patches, carefully kept clear of
grass and weeds. These patches repre-
sent thirty “ bokolas,” (dead bodies of
people slain in war, and designed to be
eaten,) of men killed by the Namata
people some years back and brought by
them this way. This place is called
“ The Tokatoka men’s heads.”
The village of Navuso is built close to
the river, and on its right bank. It is
surprising that this site should have been
so long retained, for although when the
river, which at this point is about 400
yards wide, is at its usual height, the
banks rise from 20 to 30 feet above the
stream, yet, after heavy rain, it fre-
quently overflows, and the houses, with
one exception, are flooded. That house,
(the finest specimenof Fijian architecture
I have seen), is one belonging to Adi
Kuila, and is raised above the reach of
the floods, upon a high terraced plat-
form of rough stonework.
We stopped at this place during Satur-
day and Sunday, and I had the opportu-
nity of seeing a good specimen of native


roadmaking across a low piece of swampy
land. Two deep ditches are cut parallel
to each other and about twelve feet apart,
the earth from them being thrown up
in between to a height of some five or
six feet, the sides sloped up from the
ditches, and a roadway formed on the top
about five feet wide. The fault of the
work is the absence of a regular fall in
the ditches, holes consequently being
left where water would collect and stag-
nate ; but with all its defects this mode
of crossing swamps is far preferable to
that more generally in use, viz., by
means of a series of upright posts of
unequal height driven into the ground,
and supporting at a height of from
six to eight feet, single trees laid
longitudinally across them in the
form of a rough bridge. The native
Wesleyan Church at Navuso is a fine
large building, over the doorways of
which 1 remarked very good specimens
of sinnet work, most elaborately plaited,
each lintel being bound in a different
pattern ; the roof also is remarkable from
the rafters being composed of a small
kind of palm, in appearance very similar
to the West Indian gree gree.
A native teacher stationed at Na Duta
in the district of Navosa arrived at Na-
vuso during our stay there, stating that
he had been forced to abandon his mis-
sion to the Nuya Koros, on account
of the effect produced npon them by the
terrible ravages of the late epidemic.
Their faith in the new religion had, he
informed us, been so shaken thereby,
that they had again sought the aid of
their former gods, and even endeavoured
to persuade the teacher himself to re-
turn to heathenism. His refusal to do
this, and also the fact of his having,
without permission, taken a lemon from


one of the chief’s trees, (an almost nn-
pardonable offence in the eyes of Fiji-
ans), rendered it unsafe for him to re-
main any longer among them.
It would have been in accordance
with native ideas for us to have
been accompanied by a native mes-
senger of authority, whose duty it would
have been to forward other messengers
from tribe to tribe, to announce our
coming, and a “ mata ” was given us by
Eatu Abel for this purpose. Before we
left Navuso, however, the man, without
giving any warning, returned to Pau,
and Mr Carew foreseeing much delay
had we sent again for him, decided to
dispense altogether with the services of
a messenger, particularly as there was
no doubt of the news of our journey and
its object being quickly spread through
the tribes of the interior, on the return
of Ro Vucago, to whom we had already
delivered the Governor’s message. It
turned out later, however, that Eatu
.Abel's messenger had, after all, per-
formed his share of the task, —the Buli
of Naitasiri alone failing to send a
“ mata ” to the next tribe.
Having made all the necessary pre-
parations, and hired a good large canoe
for the occasion, we left Navuso on the
morning of the 19th July, taking with
us five natives, viz., one police constable,
one teacher, two young men being
trained as teachers, and my boy Nemani.
Our intention was to ascend the Wai ni
Buka, and crossing over the dividing
ranges, strike the headwaters of the
Sigatoka River, follow down one and up
another of the feeders of that river,
and then recrossing the dividing range
to the watershed of the Wai ni Mala, to
return by it to the Wai Levu (Eewa).
Paddling and poleing up stream in a
10


Fijian canoe is a tedious operation, and,
were it not for the beauty of the
scenery, the ascent of the Rewa by these
means would be intolerable.
On our way to Dela-damanu, at which
place we stopped for the first night,
we visited the European plantations
on the banks of the river in the
following order:—Pioneer Sugar Mill,
(left bank) ; Wai ni Vau, small planta-
tion, (left bank) ; Tole, Sagar Planta-
tion, (right bank), Mr. Henry East-
gate ; Melbou. ne Company’s Sugar
Mill, (left bank); Wai ni Sasi, (left
bank), Mr. E. Graham, J.P.; Yiti,
plantation, (right bank), Mr. J. P.
Storck.
The Planters established in this dis-
trict have of late had their hopes much
raised by the establishment and opening
of the Melbourne Company’s Sugar Mill.
Large quantities of sugar cane have been
planted, but up till now they have had
no means of having it crushed, and I
fear much of that which they are now
crushing has been left standing far too
long, while acres and acres of it lie
rotting in the ground.
The climate m this part of Viti Leva
is not, I think, as well adapted for
sugar cultivation as that on the west
and south-west coast, it being impossible
to count upon having a dry season,
although dry weather frequently does last
for seven or eight months together. As,
however, the country gets more cleared
of timber, no doubt the climate will
alter in this respect, and the seasons be-
come more regular. At present rain is
very abundant, causing, as I have before
mentioned, frequent floods ; from which,
however, the canes do not appear to
suffer.
Wide level flats extend on either side
11


of the river for many miles along its
course, and here the soil appears to be
very fertile and of great depth. These
flats, where they are not under cultiva-
tion, are covered with a species of wild
cane, exactly resembling the sugar cane.
On approaching Dela-damanu, the
country becomes more undulating, and
low ranges of hills in some places ap •
proach close to the river side. Wild
ducks and a dark grey blue heron, are
very plentiful on the river, while green
and yellow, and red and blue, parrots fly
from time to time across the stream.
The parrots are considered by the
planters a great pest, on account of
their partiality for Indian corn.
Dela-damanu is a small village on the
left bank of the river. The chiefs house,
at which we slept, is also small. It is a
somewhat dirty, and intensely smoky es-
tablishment, but, like all Fijian houses,
wonderfully picturesque inside. Two
roughly-hewn posts support the ridge-
pole, and the cross-beams, equally rough,
are attached to the posts by a great
knot of twisted creepers. Along the
inside of the low reed walls run a row
of posts supporting the wall plates, from
which the smoke-bronzed bamboo rafters
rise, and are lost in the darkness of the
high pitched roof. The bright light from
without streaming in through the low
door ways strikes along the matted floor,
and through the grey blue haze of
smoke rising from the fireplace,
numerous forms both animate and
inanimate are seen. The fireplace itself
is placed sometimes in the centre,
and sometimes on one side of the
floor, and consists of an oblong
space, separated from the matting by
squared blocks of wood. This space is
large enough for two or three fires, and
12


here, huge black earthen jars, resting
above the fires on large cone-shaped
stones, loom through the smoke, while
from their contents, consisting chiefly of
boiling vegetables, white wreaths of steam
proceed. The whole fireplace is covered
by a canopy of logs, supported by four
upright posts, a man’s height from the
floor. Round the walls hang wooden
bowls of various shapes; earthenware
bottles stand in the corners, with cocoa-
nut-shell drinking cups covering; their
mouths; neatly plaited pandanus leaf
fans lie about the floor, and here and
there, from under the rafters, the head
of a spear peeps out, or the eye is
attracted by the light falling on the
carved handle of a war club. Such is
the interior of a Fijian house, the living
forms of men and women within which
complete a picture, the beauty and
quaintness of which, I fully appreciate,
but am, alas, incompetent to describe.
From a small hill near the village, the
summit of which has been used as a
cemetery, a fine view of the surrounding
country is seen, backed by the mountains
from beyond which the Wai ni-Mala
takes its source.
After passing the night at Dela-
demanu, next day we continued our
voyage upstream as far as Vuni Drala,
which place we reached towards evening.
The town is situated about half a mile
from the river and on its left bank, just
opposite to the junction of the Wai-ni-
Mala and Wai-ni-Buka, and is the
furthest point reached last year by the
steam pinnace of H.M.S. “ i’earl ”.
We passed through some very pretty
scenery with well-wooded hills, and oc-
casional peeps of high distant mountains.
The river winds considerably, but there
13


are some magnificent reaches of about a
mile in length.
At Vunidrala we again met Bo Vucaga
at the chief’s house. He had followed
us from Bau, and had overtaken and
passed us the night before, while we
slept at Dela-demanu.
In the evening Mr. Carew gave the Go-
vernor’s message to a large number of
people who had assembled. General
satisfaction was expressed, and one chief
in reply to Carew’s suggestion that at
the proposed meeting of chiefs the
Governor might possibly distribute
some presents, said, “No presents are
“ needed; our precious riches are the
“ words you have brought us, that our
“ lauds will not be taken from us 1”
The Chief of Vunidrala, (Ho Bati-
ratu), was absent when we arrived; he
appeared, however, next morning, and
accompanied us about three miles up the
river Wai-ni-Mala, to the village of
Nakorovatu, which place we visited, re-
turning for the night to Vunidrala.
The view from Vunidrala looking towards
the river is very beautiful. It is
backed by a long range of distant moun-
tains, with a deeply serrated outline ;
three or four well wooded lower ranges
lead down the right middle distance,
to a wide-spreading cane-covered plain,
with strips of woodland marking the
courses of streams, while the foreground
is occupied by two bends of the river
overhung by a high wooded bluff on the
left.
The next stoppage we made was a t
Dreke ni Wai, also on the left bank of
the Wai-ni-Buka, and about half a mile
from the landing place. It is built upon
a low and narrow ridge midway between
the Wai-ni-Buka and a good sized stream
called Wai Somo, which at this point
14


falls into the Wai-ni-Buka. Here we
arrived on the afternoon of the 22nd,
after a very delightful day, during
which we followed the windings of the
river through a beautiful hilly country,
chiefly wooded, although here and there
the hill sides had been cleared by
the natives for planting yams. We
passed several fine valleys, well shelt-
ered, and apparently well adapted
for the culture of coffee or cocoa.
The soil appears to be very’ rich
along the river sides, and in many places
there are extensive flats covered with a
rich grass and “ Sila ” (Job’s tears)
which would afford excellent pasturage
for cattle. Villages along the river are
pretty numerous ; we passed about 30
in the day’s journey.
At Dreke-ui-Wai we put up at the
teacher’s house, by far the largest and
cleanest in the place. The teacher’s
wife was still suffering from the effects
of the measles, of which disease the
Chief of the village lately died. This
is the first place at which the appear-
ance of the people becomes remarkable
as differing from that of the coast tribes.
Up to this point the Wai-ni-Buka
plantations have, from time to time,
been peaceably occupied by white set-
tlers. About eight years ago, however,
they had all to be abandoned, the natives
being at that time, from various causes,
in a most unsettled state. How 7 far the
settlers had to thank themselves for be-
ing thus turned out, I cannot say.
The following day a shorter voyage
than usual brought us to Dela Vatu
Levu, also on the left bank of the river.
On leaving Dreke ni Wai we did not re-
turn to the place at which we had
lauded the day before, but walking
across the land within a bend of in
15


the river, joined our canoe at a point
about half a mile higher up. It was a
lovely morning, and while waiting for
the canoe I sat down at a very pretty
spot, by the river side, at the top of a
short rapid, running into a deep clear pool
of which a steep rock topped by over-
hanging trees formed the opposite hank.
Some children from the village were play-
ing about, and one bright-eyed little
girl of about eight years old, plaited
for herself in a marvellously short
space of time, the most fairy like
lika of greenest grass, attired in
which, and with a reed in her hand, she
skipped about in the shallow water,
mischievously splashing her playfellows
and being splashed in return, the showers
of drops glistening like gold in the
morning sunshine. I was a good deal
amused also by the antics of a horrid
old cannibal, a very ancient and
shrivelled up specimen of humanity,
who was in the highest spirits and
greatly delighted with one of our
guns, swaggering about and play-
fully pointing it at the children, grinning
and squeaking the whole time in a most
diverting manner. He was much pleased
with an empty match box we gave him,
placing it as an ornament in a slit he
had in the lobe of his ear.
The nature of the country here gradu-
ally begins to change ; the hills for the
most part are nearly bare of trees, and
covered with reeds or a long coarse
grass, but here and there there are still
patches of forest. '1 he native villages
along the river become more numerous,
some of them occupying positions of
considerable elevation, while the number
of vegetable gardens also, proportion-
ately increases.
In the vicinity of Dcla. Valu Levu.
16


the soil, from want of sufficient moisture,
is of a poorer description. This is evident
from the faet that the natives soak their
taro slips, before planting, in order to
ensure their striking, a precaution which
is totally unnecessary on the rich lands
lower down the river, and which, indeed,
is never taken there. Tobacco grows well,
and a good deal is planted by the natives
on the sites of old houses which have
been previously burnt, the ashes forming
an excellent manure. To reach Dela
Vatu Levu we were obliged, on account
of the swiftness of the stream, and the
numerous rapids, to send back our large
canoe and hire a smaller one, better
adapted to the upper waters. Owing to
this change a great misfortune occurred
to us, and one which at the time I thought
bade fair to impede our further pro-
gress. Through the carelessness of one
of our men, Mr. Carew’s boots, with
some other things which we intended to
take with us, were sent back to Yuni
Dr ala in our large canoe, and he was
compelled to perform the rest of the
journey barefoot.
At Dela Vatu Levu I sketched the
head of an old man of the Nailega tribe,
possessing a very striking face wiih a
high Roman nose, and altogether Euro-
pean cast of countenance. He sat
splendidly for at least twenty minutes
without moving a muscle, and seemed
pleased with his portrait when I shewed
it him, but far more so, with a piece of
tobacco and a fishhook, with which I
presented him.
At this village we again took posses-
sion of the teacher’s house, the teacher
himself being absent. This man has
taken much trouble to make his place
look nice, and has planted various
flowering shrubs and trees around his
17


house, setting thereby an excellent ex-
ample to his neighbors, which, however,
they have not as yet attempted to follow.
The native teachers, trained by the
Wesleyan Missionaries, are a most use-
ful body of men. From their numbers
—(one is stationed in almost every
native town) —and their constant com-
munication with one another, and with
their head quarters, an organisation
for providing information, andfor rapidly
circulating orders or advice even to the
merest detail, has been established, that
might prove to be most dangerous were
this power possessed by a body less well
affected towards the Government than
the Wesleyans at present fortunately
are. As it is, these teachers are, with-
out doubt, a great assistance to the
Government, for while inculcating the
precepts of the faith, they at the same
time teach the people to obey the law
and uphold authority. By their habits
they set an example of cleanliness,
orderliness, and industry which in time
must bear fruit.
In the small villages it is always the
teacher’s house that is the best, being
from the greater size of the doors both
lighter and better ventilated than others.
Before quitting the subject of the influ-
ence on the manners of the people of the
Wesleyan Mission I may mention that to
my mind, one of the most striking things
in Fiji is the daily morning and evening
public prayer, that is held by the teacher
in every native house, and attended by
all with the greatest reverence.
Leaving Uela Vatu I evu early on the
morning of the 24th we continued the
ascent of the Wai-ni Buka for another
six or seven miles to a point where the
river divides into two streams of ap-
parently about equal volume, the left
18


hand branch being still called Wai-ni-
Buka, and the right Wai-ko-na-Lawa.
There we landed all our possessions, and,
dismissing the canoe, followed a path
leading along the ridges of the hills
between high coarse grass and
reeds with which the country for
some distance round is chiefly covered.
A short walk brought us to the village
of Na Waciwaci, from which place the
sea, at Viti Levu Bay, on the north
coast, is distinctly visible. Our men got
quite excited at the sight of their darling
“ wai tui and we all made a rush for
an old fortress just above the village to
obtain a better view. After halting here
for a few minutes while a bowl of
yaqona was being prepared, another
hour and a half’s walk brought us to
Bulibuligone, the chief town of the Na
Lawa district. Before reaching this
place, the road makes one deep dip
and somewhat steep ascent, from the
top of which the town is seen, raised
some height above the surrounding
hills, on the summit of a wooded bluff
forming a precipice on the left, but in
front and on the right descending in steep
grassy slopes. From Bulibuligone itself
the view is very striking. Low ranges
of hills run in every direction over a
wide-spreading stretch of country, till
gradually increasing in height they are
at last overtopped by the far distant
peaks of high mountains. The only
break is towards the north, where Viti
Levu Bay is again seen, at a distance of
about 9or 10 miles. From this point
with a small pocket compass we took
the following bearings:—Most western
point of Viti Levu Bay N. f east. Bou-
buco, S.W. a S. ; the latter place is a vil-
lage two days journey from Bulibuligone
through which we afterwards passed.
19


We spent Sunday, the 25th, at Buli-
buligone, at the Taukei na Lawa’s house.
The weather was abominable, —damp and
raw and disagreeably cold, and we re-
mained in doors the whole day. The
old Taukei, having seen my sketchbook,
was most anxious for me to take his
portrait, which I accordingly did, and
presented him with a copy of it, done on
a separate sheet. I took this opportu-
nity of asking permission to sketch his
daughter, Adi Samanumu, a really very
pretty girl. She was a little shy at
lirst but eventually sat still, looking very
grave, a most unusual thing for that
lively young lady. Our teacher went
off to one of the neighbouring villages to
preach.
On Monday morning we made an
early start, accompanied by an escort of
about twenty men of the local police, each
armed with a musket. They were on
their way to Boubuco, to collect taxes,
and we afterwards learnt, that they had
no authority from Katu Isikeli to do so,
the Taukei of Na Lawa having sent them
on his own responsibility. Walking
was very disagreeable on account of the
rain, the path, which led constantly up
and down hill, being exceedingly slip-
pery. We got no distant views, the
rain and mist being too thick, but the
country traversed was of the same
character as that we had passed through
the day before, viz., hills covered with
grass and reeds, with patches of forest
here and there in the valleys. The soil
however became of a richer description,
and the gardens appeared to flourish. I
noticed that near their houses, the natives
generally have a few plants of sugar
cane a little tobacco is also cultivated
and grows to perfection, as I have be-
fore described, on the sites of old houses
20


that have been burnt down. Whether
it would do as well on the hill slopes is
another matter, of which I ayn uncertain,
but the climate and soil are evidently
very favourable to the plant.
We had to cross the Wai ko na Lawa
three times in the course of the day, and
at one of these crossings a little incident
occurred which I think is worth noticing
as shewing that heathenish superstitions
are net wholly eradicated, even from
among the natives who inhabit the
coast provinces.
Having stopped for a few minutes at
the river side to have a bowl of yaqona,
one of cur men, (the constable, Pita,)
was seen carefully collecting all the
chips of the root that had been used
and that were lying about. Carew at
once called my attention to him, and
having told the man not to make a fool
of himself, gave me the following expla-
nation of his proceeding.
A superstition exists among Fijians,
that if any person evilly disposed to-
wards them, finds anything lying about,
left by the person he wishes to injure,
the object so found forms a charm,
with the aid of which, either some
horrible disease or even death itself may
be made to fall upon the unhappy vic-
tim. Therefore, there being with us a
number of men of a strange tribe, Pita,
dreading the possibility of such conse-
quences, would, if left to himself, have
secretly buried every scrap on the ground.
As it was, the poor fellow was much
ashamed at being caught, and had evi-
dently not supposed that Carew was so
well up in Fijian notions. In the interior
of Yiti Levu this superstition is called
“ Noca-ta,” and in the Bau dialect
“ Vakadraunikautaka."
In the afternoon we reached a village
21


of only four or five houses, called Vunl
Koro. Here wc lodged for the night in
the men’s Bure, a building with only-
two low doorways, one of which was
kept closed, and so crowded with men
who, on account of the cold, had lighted
numerous fires, that the atmosphere was
somewhat unpleasant.
We left Yuni Koro the next morning
(27th July) about 9 o’clock, in pouring
rain, which continued the greater part
of the day. Descending into the valley
below and crossing a mountain torrent
called “ Wai na Vatu,” a tributary of
the Wai ko na Lawa, the path leads up
a most precipitous ascent for about 300
feet, after gaining the summit of which,
it passes into forest land, and continu-
ing to ascend, though more gradually,
reaches at length an elevation probably
some 2000 feet. Before, however, gain-
ing the highest point, we passed through
the village of Mataitova (in that district
pronounced Ma’i’ova, the t being left
out). A series of severe ascents and
descents follow, through a country the
whole of which is densely wooded, and
well watered, and before leaving the
Wai-ni-Buka water-shed the path again
crosses another tributary of the Wai
ko na Lawa, called Wai na Sogo.
Then comes the separating range of
hills, having crossed over which
we entered a magnificent valley, down
which flows the river Wai Loa, one of
the heads of the Wai-ni Mala. Follow-
ing the course of this stream for about
half a mile, and crossing it several times,
over the more shallow parts, to avoid
the deep pools at the bends, we left its
right bank, and the path again mounting
to a considerable height, at last brought
us to the village of Boubuco.
Boubuco is situated on the spur of a
22


mountain about 1000 feet above the
valley through which the Wai Loa runs.
It was evident that in fine weather, the
view from this place must be very beau-
tiful, but unfortunately daring our visit
the rain poured down unmercifully, the
mist only occasionally lifting above us,
but never leaving the mountain tops
entirely disclosed. The walking this
day was very severe. Our clothes being
saturated, became very heavy, and the
constant rain made the pathway into a
regular quagmire. The soil, through
this forest land, appears, even upon the
mountain ridges, to be of a rich and fertile
character, and the country perfectly
adapted for the cultivation of coffee.
The Chief of Bonbuco, a young man,
was very shy until the nature of our
visit was explained to him, when he be-
came more at his ease. They have no
native teacher, but the people seemed
anxious to have one, though, from the
evidently recent cutting of many of the
men’s hair, it would appear that before
the announcement of our visit they had
had thoughts of returning to heathenism.
On the 28th July, leaving Boubuco
about nine in the morning, after walking
for seven hours, and passing through the
village of Kuru Yawa, we reached the
town of Wai Dradra. The road leads
through dense forest the whole way
until about a mile from the town, where
the forest ceases and grass country be-
gins again. We had to cross innumer-
able streams and one large river, all
tributaries of the Wai-ni-Mala, and at
one time we had to follow up the course
of a torrent for more than a mile, climb-
ing over huge boulders of rock and fre-
quently having to wade across the
stream. The forest through which we
passed is very beautiful and tropical-
23


looking. This, however, is owing
chiefly to the luxuriance of the under-
growth, and creepers, rather than to
the trees themselves, which, to any one
who has been in the West Indies, appear
small. The largest one I noticed,a Dakua,
(Dammam Vitiensis), was about six
feet in diameter at the base. Tree
ferns are very numerous throughout the
forest, while in many places the whole
of the ground is carpeted with endless
varieties of other ferns, mosses, and
lichens.
Wai Dradra is situated about the
highest point of the Wai-ni-Mala water-
shed, in the centre of a wide grassy
plateau, surrounded by undulating
country on which there are small patches
of forest. The houses are quite unlike
any I had seen before. They are built
square with rounded corners, and pos-
sess only one low doorway. The
roof rises up from each side almost
to a point, the ridge pole (which is only
about three feet long) being supported by
a single upright post in the centre of
the house. The whole, both roof
and walls, is thatched with grass.
They have no teacher at this place,
the one at Na Dran, the capital
of the district, having been forced to
leave during the measles, returning to
bis home at Ba. Consequently the
people, since his departure, have been
again practising heathenish rites, and
drumming with bamboos to appease the
wrath of their former gods; they, how-
ever, were quite willing to allow our
teacher to pray with them in their
houses.
This evening we discussed our further
movements and the possibility of our
passing through a town presided over by
the great chief and noted cannibal Wawa
24


Balavu, (“long belly”), a man deeply con-
cerned in the massacre of the Burns
family on the Ba River, and in other
murders in that district. On asking
Carew if he had ever met the above-
mentioned personage, his reply was
significant—“ Never ; nor has any white
man, I think, except to be killed I”
The house we here lodged in was
crowded with natives, and the smoke
from the numerous fireplaces, each with
its burning logs, rendered the place
almost unbearable. At one moment in
the night I awoke almost suffocated, and
could only obtain momentary relief by
pressing my face against the reeded wall,
and sucking through it a breath of outer
air. To have slept outside would have
been far preferable, notwithstanding the
cold, but would have been considered an
act of discourtesy which might have en-
tailed disagreeable consequences.
The next day we walked over to Na
Drau, a distance of about four miles. The
road leads across the plateau, or
table land, on which Wai Dradra is situ-
ated, passing through one or two nar-
row belts of forest which here, as seen
from the open country, entirely loses all
tropical appearance. This is caused, I
think by the dark grey green colour of
the leaves of the Dakua trees, which are
very , numerous ; whilst the fact of
the grass being covered by a low kind
of brake fern, gives an European
effect to the country generally.
On arriving at the edge of the
plateau, a most unexpected and mag-
nificent sight appears. At ones
feet lies a rugged and precipitous gorge
some 1500 feet in depth and about a
mile in width at the top. As the eye
follows down its course, ravine after
ravine appears opening into it, with but
25


little vegetation on their steep grey sides.
Down these ravines flow the headwaters
of the Sigatoka river, in clear and rush-
ing torrents. Beyond again, are just
visible the edges of one of the gorges
from which the Ba River springs, and in
the back ground range after range of
peaked and rocky mountains fade away
into the distance.
The steep path which descends into
the gorge, passes, from about midway
down to the bottom, through bright green
taro plots, most ingeniously laid out on
the steep slopes, which are terraced,
and irrigated. On a small rocky eleva-
tion, near the bottom, a most picturesque
native village is situated. Here we
stopped for a few minutes, and heard
from the natives that we were expected
at Na Drau, news having reached that
place of our intended visit. The path
here crosses the gorge, and following the
opposite side at a height of some 200
feet above the stream, after passing al mg
taro plot embankments for about a mile,
turns to the right almost at right angles,
and enters a narrow rocky defile with a
clear deep stream rushing between the
stones and boulders along its bottom.
Na Drau is situated about a mile from
the entrance of this defile. The
village is well placed, high up, on
the right bank of the stream, a preci-
pice almost overhanging it. The op-
posite face, though steep, is thickly
clothed with trees and other vegetation.
The high, grass-thatched, yellow, conical
roofs of the houses, (which are raised on
stone platforms, some of them 10 feet
from the ground), peep out between
grassy terraces, lemon, cocoanut, and
other tree 5 , and, with the clear rushing
river below, and the rocky sides of the
defile gradually narrowing behind, form
a most striking and beautiful picture.
26


The old heathen Bure, thatched like
the other houses, but brown and weather
stained with age, is still in existence.
In front, and close to the grey stone
platform on which it is built, stands
a row of tall upright stones in
memory of the chief victims that have
been murdered by the tribe, and eaten
within its walls. A little distance from it
stands the new, but for the present
neglected, Christian Church, the teacher,
as I have before mentioned, having left
during the excitement caused by the
measles. A few paces from the Bure,
the Chief’s house is built, on a platform
at least 10 feet high, with rough steps
leading up to a doorway so low that we
had to go in on our hands and knees.
On first entering one of these houses
the darkness is so great that for a few
moments it is difficult to distinguish
anything.
From hence we sent messengers to
Tavuaicolo, a town at the foot of the
Vatu Sila Mountain, and in a direct
line about five miles from Na Drau, to
ascertain what kind of a reception we
might expect there, as our return
journey would necessarily lead us
through that place. In the meantime
the Chief of Na Drau gave us a very bad
account of the Tavua people, who are a
mixture of various tribes whose villages
were destroyed by the late Government,
in consequence of murders committed
by the mountaineers on the Ba River.
He told us that three weeks before, a
man was clubbed and eaten there, the
murder being sanctioned by the young
Chief Tutivi, a son of the noted Wawa
Balavu, of whose recent death we here
received intelligence. In consequence
of this news much discussion arose
as to whether after all we should
attempt to pass through Tavua,
27


our men being much disturbed at the
thought of so doing, and in favour
of a change in our programme, by
which we might reach the coast in
two days time. The messengers hav-
ing returned from Tavua, reported
that the people were ready to receive us,
and were preparing a feast in our
honour. There would in all probability
have been no danger in going there,
but after the flagrant violation qf
the law that had so lately been com-
mitted there, we could not with pro-
priety give the Governor’s message to
the people, or receive hospitality at their
hands. Instead, theiefore of going
there and returning to the Rewa by the
Wai-ni-Mala, as we had originally con-
templated, we reluctantly decided to
change our course, and endeavour to
reach the north-west coast at Ba.
Messengers, accordingly, were again
sent to Tavua i colo to inform the
people, that having heard of their evil
doings we did not intend to visit them,
and that, for their own sakes, it would
be advisable for them to give up the
murderers to the Government.
Whilst at Na Drau we learnt the facts
of a transaction, of which we had before
gained some knowledge, and in which a
man who had held an important post in
the service of the late Fijian Govern-
ment, counting on the influence of his
former position, had purchased some
men of this district of their chiefs in
order to dispose of them to planters for
labouring purposes.
The following narrative was taken
down by me from the lips of Na Sau ni
Yalu, Chief of Na Drau :
About the beginning of January last
two white men, of whom the above-
mentioned individual was one, came here
28


bringing a small quantity of trade, and
saying that they were anxious to obtain
men. The Chiefs were unwilling to let
their men go, but the native magistrate
of Ba, a Government officer, (since
dead) pushed the bargain by a gift of
Whales teeth, furnished by the labor
hunter, and this present extracted the
promise of ten men. Negociations hav-
ing reached this stage, a letter arrived
frpm the Boko Tui of the district, warn-
ing the Chiefs that it was against the
law to sell men, but it was too late.
The trade, and especially the whales
teeth, had been already accepted, and
after this it would, according to native
ideas, have been a direct insult to draw
back from the bargain. Having gone
so far, and probably being enticed by pro-
mises of more trade, the Chiefs then sent
for, and procured, forty more men from
theYala Tina tribe which is tributary to
Na Drau. For this second batch of men,
money was promised to the chiefs, but
they have never yet received it. The
Chiefs at the time were distinctly given
to ui derstand that the men would only
be required to work for one year, at the
end of which they could return to their
iribes.
Na Sau ni Valu willingly gave this
information, although he himself was in
a great measure to blame in the matter,
and he was most anxious that the men
he had thus sold should be sent back at
once, for, owing to the numbers carried
off by the measles, his people found
themselves much in want of hands for
yam planting.
It is known that the men thus bought
were sold at £4 a head to a planter to
work for a term of two years on his
plantation, where, I have reason to be-
lieve, they still remain.
29


The Chief of Na Drau, Na Sau ni
Valu, is a fine old man, apparently very
well aflected towards the Government.
He professed great indignation with the
Tavua people for their bad behaviour.
This, however, might have been only be-
cause the murdered man happened to
belong to Na Drau I here had an op-
portunity of sketching a man from
Tavua, of the Yuna Gurau tribe, who
still retained his cannibal head of long
hair. It certainly gives a striking ap-
pearance, adding as it does so much to
the height.
Colai Wase, the Chief of a neighbour-
ing town, one of the murderers of Spiers
and Macintosh, who were murdered
about four years ago while residing on
their plantations on the Ba River, was
stopping here in the Chief’s house dur-
ing our visit, and both he and the man
with the cannibal head of hair were one
morning summarily called to order by
a significant gesture of the old Chief,
Na Sau ni Valu, for retaining their
tappa (native cloth) head coverings,
during prayer time; the order to remove
them being instantly obeyed by both, in
the most abject and shamefaced manner.
Leaving Na Drau early on the 31st
we mounted the side of the gorge over
the village, and, after a walk of about
half a mile across the top, reached the
village of Na Kaito, from which a great
stretch of country, broken up by ravines
leading down to the Ba district is visible.
From this point, and with the help of
the natives who pointed out the direc-
tions, we were enabled to take the fol-
lowing bearings by compass :
Nabutautau, S, bv W.
Ba, W. by N.
Tavua, N.\V. by \V.
Vatu Sila, (Tavua i Colo), S.S.E.
Na Drau, N.E. by N.
30


From the village of Na Kaito we de-
scended into a deep ravine, and walking
along the course of abeautifulclear stream
which from the number of its tribu-
taries rapidly becomes a good sized river,
we followed its windings for about seven-
teen miles, when, leaving its right bank,
and bearing in a northerly direction for
about three miles, we arrived at a place
called Sulua Narata, where, at the height
t.f about 200 feet above a considerable
stream, and under a face of cliff, there
exist some caves formed of huge boulders
of rock. These caves are at present inhab-
ited, and here we lodged for the night.
During the evening there was much
talk among our men about the Tavua
affair, and they all professed to believe
that we should most certainly have been
killed and eaten had we gone there.
They had heard at Na Drau, that
after a grand meke that was performed at
Tavua on the recent death of the Chief
Wawa Balavu, the young men of the
town being pleased with the dancing of
the women, had promised them a white
man to eat! It also appeared from their
conversation that not Tutiri, but the
Chief of Yatukoro, Na Mututu by
name, gave his sanction to the murder
which took place atTavua i Colo the other
day. Na Yatukoro is one of the towns in
this district that was burnt by the late
Government in consequence of the mur-
der of a whole family of white settlers
about four years ago, on the Ba River.
This town has lately been rebuilt by
Naraututu, and with Tavua, Nabutautau,
and one or two other places in the neigh-
bourhood of the headwaters of the Siga-
toko and Ba Rivers, is now the resort
of many lawless refugees from the
various tribes that inhabited the villages
destroyed at that time.
31


The last stage of our journey by land
was acomplished on Sunday the Ist
August, when we arrived at the village
of Sagunu, about six miles and a half
from the mouth of the Ba River, after a
walk of at least 25 miles. The road
leads across several ranges of bills before
it reaches the Ba flats. The soil on these
hills is of a very poor quality, large
masses of volcanic rook cropping up
here and there, and the vegetation is
chiefly a coarse kind of grass. From
the mouth of the river a good wide
stretch of flat land extends on each side
some seven miles beyond the village o»
Sagunu. The land on these flats is of
a light but fertile description, easily
ploughed and well adapted for sugar
cane, the climate also being very favour-
able for that cultivation.
The village of Sagunu is on the left
bank of the Ba. Much credit is due to
the native Governor, Roko Tui Ba, for
the cleanly state of this village, and the
encouragement he gives to the people to
plant gardens, &c.
Here we spent a day or two at the
Roko’s house, where his wife, Adi Alisi,
treated us with much hospitality and
kindness.
Although living on the banks of a
large river, and not far from the sea
coast, Adi Alisi, like a true Bau woman,
pines after the sea shore, and makes a
great grievance of her banishment so far
from the centre of Fijian aristocratic
society, to a place where her husband’s
duty necessitates the frequent reception
in her house of the “kaisi” (common
people,) and barbarous mountaineers,
who, as she characteristically but some-
what forcibly expressed it, “ Squash out
their vermin on my mats, as flat as any
turtle!” adding, (I hope with more
32


humor than truth), “ that’s the way we
Ban ladies talk.”
Shortly before our arrival, the intelli-
gence had reached Sagunu of the murder
of three people, two men and a woman,
the last having also been eaten, at a vil-
lage named Yatu Ban, a few miles above
Sagunu, among tho hills near the banks
of the river; and we found the Euro-
pean Magistrate of the District earnestly
discussing with the Roko Tui Ba, the
advisability of issuing warrants for the
arrest of the murderers in this case, as
well as in that which had taken place at
Tavua-i-Colo. Warrants were eventually
issued against the murderers at Tavua-i-
Colo and sent in charge of some native
special constables. The Chief, “Na
Mafutu,” said he was ill at the time of
the murder, and being angry had ordered
the body to be cooked and eaten. He
had the meaning of the warrant properly
explained to him, but refused to give
the people up. After a private consulta-
tion with his friends, to the exclusion
of the Government messengers, he pre-
sented two “tabua” (whales teeth)
saying “A neitou soro ogo, a neitou
hole talega mai,” thus conveying an
apology for what had been done, but
also an intimation that they were ready
to fight if necessary.
I have before mentioned the fact of
Mr. Carew’s boots having been left be-
hind, and the fear that 1 then felt that
our journey would, by this means, be
greatly retarded, to say nothing of the
suffering such a loss would, I thought,
entail upon the unhappy pedestrian.
To my astonishment, however, no less
than to his, the whole of this some-
what arduous journey was successfully
accomplished barefoot, and although
the nature of the ground rendered
33


it impossible for him to proceed ex-
cept at a very gentle pace, yet it
was, fortunately, only during the
last two days that the discomfort of go-
ing bootless amounted to positive suffer-
ing.
There is a Fijian custom in connec-
tion with the drinking of yaqona which,
on account of this incident, was brought
into play. When a person has finished
his bowl, he expresses aloud a wish for
some coveted thing, such as “a club!” “a
turtle!” &c. So whenever the evening
bowl passed round, Mr. Carew invariably
cried out, “ noqui vava ” (my shoes),
thus heaping coals of fire on the heads
of the men through whose carelessness
he was left shoeless.
The men of the different tribes of the
interior that I have passed through, are
far more decent specimens of humanity
as regards physique, than I had been
led to expect. They are occasionally,
but not always, slightly tatooed in small
patterns here and there, either on the
arms or legs ; the only actual disfigure-
ment they practice, being a slit in the
lobe of the ear, generally of one ear only.
Thisslit is often used forcarrying aportion
of some sea shell by way of ornament,
or a short piece of bamboo, carved in
patterns and containing tobacco. The
girls before marriage are not ill-looking,
and some of them very graceful. Their
only dress is a necklace of beads,
and a grass UJeu not more than nine inches
deep. The married women are rendered
perfectly hideous by tattooing round the
month. They are also tattooed all over
the lower part of the stomach and high
up round the thighs. The liku, no
longer than that of the girls, is worn
low down on the hips, and is one of the
most unsightly garments I have ever
34


seen. They are also sometimes tattooed
on the back, arms, and lower part of
the legs.
From the time we left Na Drau and
entered on the watershed of the Ba
River, we found ourselves in a region
the climate of which is of a totally
different nature from that on the eastern
side of the dividing range. Clear, almost
cloudless skies, with hot sun but refresh-
ing breeze prevailed during the day, and
the nights were quite cool, I had almost
said cold.
At Sagunu the weather was perfectly
delicious, and I regretted having to leave,
but my time was up, so I took the first
opportunity that offered, and returned to
Ovalau, round the north coast of Viti
Levu, in the magistrate’s boat, at that
time on its way to Levuka.
G. L. Griffiths, Printer, Levuka, Fiji.
35














