

rf/r-iu
AN ACCOUNT
OF THE
LIFE & MISSIONARY LABOURS
OF THE LATE VENERABLE
IttjjtoEran fll'Cnmr
TOGETHER WITH
HIS LAST ILLNESS, DEATH,
fUIIASi OBSBSIIIIIBIS |
ALSO,
THE FUNERAL ORATION
DELIVERED BY
THE VERY REVEREND DEAN RIGNEY.
Sjrtmej)}
J. a. O’CONNOR, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER, YORK STREET.












AN ACCOUNT
OF THE
pfe & Ulissioimvg Ea&ours
OF THE LATE VENERABLE
ARCHDEACON M’ENCROE
TOGETHER WITH
iis last Site, flMljr, k ,fnml (Msjptfi,
ALSO,
THE FUNERAL ORATION
DELIVERED BY
THE VERY REV. DEAN RIGNEY.
Sydney ;
J. G. O’CONNOR, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER, YORK STREET.




PREFACE.
The very marked and unanimous expression of profound
regret, on the part of this community, which has attended
the sudden, though not altogether unexpected, demise of
the venerable clergyman whose name and worth, and
many virtues, are now the theme of every tongue, haa
induced the publisher to give this brief memoir of the
deceased to the public. It is, however, to be regretted
that time will not at present permit a more detailed
account to be prepared of the truly wonderful labours of
this deeply lamented clergyman, of whom it may indeed
be said, with solemn truth, that he was ever foremost in
advancing, by his advocacy and example, every good
cause—whether religious, social, or political —by which
his fellow men, irrespective of creed, class, or country,
could be benefitted, or by which their condition in life
could be ameliorated and improved. Wise, watchful, and
zealous, he was ever seeking for opportunities of doing
good, and ever finding occupation and happiness in
making the most of those opportunities. His life was
an intensively active one, and the bare record of his
labours in the cause of religion and charity, for more
than half a century, would fill a considerable volume.
All that we can, therefore, here attempt, in connection
therewith, is to give a brief outline of his career, and
merely allude to the striking points of his life and
character.




THE LATE
Yen. Archdeacon John IcEncroe.
The Venerable Archdeacon was born at Tullamane,
near Cashel, Ireland, on St. Stephen’s Day, 1795; he
was, therefore, at the time of his death, in the seventy-
third year of his age. He was from his earliest youth
destined for the priesthood, and, accordingly, at the age
of nineteen, entered the college of St. Patrick, Maynooth,
where he was ordained Priest on the Octave of Pentecost,
in the year 1819, by the late Most Reverend Archbishop
Murray of Dublin. An interesting coincidence which
took place, in connection with the Archdeacon’s ordina-
tion, may be here briefly alluded to. In the very year,
and we believe about the very time of year that this
event occurred, His Grace Archbishop Folding was like-
wise ordained Priest in England. Thus were two noble
youths, of very different nationalities, and in different
countries, strangers to each other, but filled with an
enthusiastic love of God, and devotion to the best
interests of their fellow men—offering themselves as
labourers in the vineyard of our Divine Lord, who was
so soon after to call them to the reaping of the same
harvest of souls in this far Austral land, then an almost
unknown country. Soon after his ordination the Arch-
deacon was thought worthy of an appointment to an
important educational institution, then known as the
“ Diocesan Seminary of Meath,” in the conduct of which


he, for a time, assisted the Very Reverend E. O’Reilly.
His inclination, however, from the earliest time, seems
to have been to labour among his countrymen in distant
lands —knowing well in those evil days how much were
needed the services he, as a minister of religion, could
afford them, scattered abroad as they had been in strange
countries, with few to care for, to console, or to
advise them. Accordingly, in 1822, he went to
labour on the American Mission ; but it appears that,
in consequence of ill health, he was obliged to return to
return to Ireland in 1829. In America he commenced
that life of active and practical usefulness to communities,
as well as to individuals, which ever afterwards distin-
guished him, and which now makes his loss so much
felt and regretted by persons of all shades of opinion in
our colony. The seven years he spent in America always
made him feel a deep interest in the affairs of that great
country; and when the war broke out between the
Northern and Southern States of the Union, no man
more regretted that disastrous strife than he who, in his
prime of life, had lived and laboured as a missionary
priest in that country. Often did he bitterly regret that
fratricidal war ; and often, we'doubt not, did he pray for
its early termination. It was under the illustrious Arch-
bishop England that he laboured in America, and it is
not long since, when speaking of the Southern States,
he alluded to a time (it was, we believe in 1824) when
he was engaged collecting subscriptions for the purpose
of building a church in the city of Charleston —since so
mercilessly destroyed by the dread implements of modern
warfare. On his recovery, he was employed for a time


by the Archbishop of Cashel in raising subscriptions
towards the completion of the provincial college of
Thurles; and was shortly afterwards selected by the pre-
sident of Maynooth, and the Archbishop of Dublin, to
proceed to this mission. He sought anxiously to come
to this colony from the moment he became aware of the
terrible state of spiritual destitution in which the Catho-
lics of this colony were left after the expulsion of the
venerable Archpriest Father O’Flinu, through the arbit-
rary and tyrannical conduct of the governor of that day,
Lachlan Macquarie. Father McEncroe had the good
fortune to meet Father O’Flinn after the latter’s return to
Ireland, and hearing from him the sad tale of his own
persecution, and the deplorable state of spiritual desola-
tion in which be had been compelled to leave the poor
Catholics of the colony, immediately determined to come
hither himself, and at once offered himself for the mis-
sion.
The following statement, having reference to the
expulsion of Father O’Flinn from the colony, may serve to
enlighten the reader as to what were the position and
prospects of Catholics here, a few years previous to the
Archdeacon’s arrival amongst us.
“ Father O’Flinn arrived in this colony on the 9th of
November, 1817. He was a man of meek demeanour,
who speedily won the deep love of his people ; but his
zeal in the cause of religion appears to have brought upon
him the displeasure of Governor Macquarie, who directed
him to produce his permission from the home authorities
(at that time considered necessary, but which he, in his
anxiety to arrive here, had trusted to a friend to send


after liim); being unable to do this, he was seized upon
and lodged in gaol. A petition from four hundred per-
sons was presented in favour of his being allowed to
stay. The Governor became the more incensed at this,
and on the 15th May, 1818, the Archpriest was sent out
of the country. The regret of the colonists at this treat-
ment of the Apostolic missionary was only equalled by
the sensation caused by the intelligence when it reached
the mother country. The case was brought before the
House of Commons, and the Government, in consequence,
found it expedient to apply to the proper authority for
the appointment of two Catholic clergymen, and the
Rev. Messrs. Therry and Conolly were accordingly des-
patched upon the mission.”
There were several other incidents which may be truly
considered providential connected with the venerable
Archdeacon’s first call to this mission. One of these was
that being in an assize town, and seeing a cart containing
a number of prisoners about to be transported, (for some
trifling political offence probably), driven along at great
speed, he threw several prayer books into it. It is only
a few years since that one of these very prayer books was
brought to the Archdeacon by the person to whom it
had been so given, and who came to express his gratitude
for the gift.
On the 10th June, 1832, Father McEncroe arrived in
Sydney. There were then but two priests, besides
himself —the late venerable Archpriest Therry, and
the Reverend C. Y. Dowling —to administer to the
spiritual wants of the Catholics (about 12,000 in number)
scattered throughout the length and breadth of the


colony. Father Therry arrived in the colony many
years previously, (23rd April, 1820), and had during the
intervening twelve years laboured with unexampled
courage and zeal for the spiritual welfare of his fellow
Catholics and countrymen. The Reverend C. V. Dowling
arrived on the 22nd October, 1831, and is, we believe,
still living, at Newcastle, in this colony. Soon after
the arrival of Father McEncroe, the Rev. Dr. Ullathorne
(now Roman Catholic Bishop of Birmingham in England)
arrived in Sydney, after having touched at Van Diemen s
Land. He was then Vicar of the Right Reverend the
Vicar Apostolic of the Mauritius, of whose district these
vast regions at that time formed a part. Dr. Ullathorne,
after his return to England, in a little work which he
published on the “ Catholic Mission in Australia,” thus
describes the nature of the onerous duties which he found
on his landing here devolving on the three priests we
have just named, one of whom is the subject of the pre-
sent memoir. We give Dr. Ullathorne’s own words ;
“ Arrived in New South Wales, the writer found one-
third of the population, spread over this extensive
territory, to be Catholic, with only three clergymen ; the
church at Sydney not yet closed in ; a chapel half raised
at Campbelltown, and the commencement of a second,
in a ruinous state, at Parramatta; a male and a female
free school at Sydney, and two others in the interior
country. Aided by the kind co-operation of his Excel-
lency Major General Sir Richard Bourke, a governor of
a benevolent heart and of the most enlightened mind
whose anxiety was indefatigably directed to the estab-
lishment of a better state of things, by the diffusion of


a sounder morality amongst the people, through the
appliance of religious and other instruction—six addi-
tional free schools were established; preparations were
made for the erection of more churches, and we anxiously
expected an addition to our small number of clergymen,
for which the writer had most earnestly petitioned.
Meanwhile, patient until the time appointed by the
Divine Providence to bring us that aid we so much
needed, every effort was made to supply the place of
numbers by activity. The writer has commenced his
Easter Sunday at Windsor, by celebrating Mass, preach-
ing, and attending the sick; then travelled twenty miles
to Parramatta, again offered the Holy Sacrifice, preached,
and visited the hospital; and, after another distance of
fifteen miles, has concluded the public labours of the day
in Sydney, by a third sermon. The Rev. Mr. Therry
has said his midnight Mass on Christmas Day in Sydney
—his second at Liverpool, twenty miles distant—his
third at Campbelltown, thirteen miles further beyond;
and the other clergymen were not less active. Each re-
mote district of the interior was repeatedly visited. Calls
to visit the dying came to us sometimes from a distance
of Eighty miles, sometimes even further. The writer has
twice sailed a distance of a thousand miles to attend
executions—twice eight hundred miles in another direc-
tion—on the duties of the mission. Wherever we came,
the people, full of faith—whatever I may be compelled
to say of the morals of many, and how, alas! had they
been left to themselves—looking with deep reverence
upon their clergy, gathered round us. A day or two’s
notice would collect together the Catholic population


from the circumference of thirty miles. Any place
covered with a roof served us as a chapel; but our most
common recourse was to a police office, a barrack or hos-
pital-room, or a store. For a considerable period the
chapel at Parramatta was the guard-room, in which there
was not one window; a sermon was even preached
against drunkenness in a public-house, for want of some
other place in which to assemble. Many persons applied
to be instructed in the faith, and w T e received them, re-
penting, into the bosom of our unity. In the course of
four years, twenty six criminals from other creeds called
in the aid of the priest, after receiving sentence of death,
and died with every sign of the most sincere repentance,”
The preceding extract will give to our readers some
idea, though perhaps an imperfect one, of the vast labours
required at the hands of our first missionary priests in
the establishment of the Church in Australia. The
sacred memory of these humble, zealous, and pious
clergymen shall never be forgotten by the Catholics of
Australia. In loving remembrance will the history of
their lives and labours, in the cause of God and their
fellow-men, be- handed down to the remotest posterity ;
they shall be venerated in every succeeding generation
as the earliest apostles and confessors of the faith in
Australia. In 1835, His Grace the Archbishop arrived
in the colony, bringing with him three priests, and four
ecclesiastical students. The importance of this addition
to the sacred ministry can now be hardly realised. Upon
his arrival in Sydney, His Grace assembled his little
flock of six priests, and, retaining one in the capital,
containing about 6000 Catholics, divided the interior


into vast districts, allotting to each of the missionary
priests one. These missionary districts took in each a
range of active duty of some sixty or one hundred miles
extent, a central township being selected for residence,
and the remainder being visited at regulated intervals.
The missionary labours of the late Archdeacon McEncroe
about this time could not be even enumerated in the
limited space at our disposal. It is recorded of him by
Dr. Ullathorne, that within four years he had attended
upwards of seventy-four executions, and a still greater
number capitally convicted also, but committed to Nor-
folk Island, But such was the character of the latter
place about this time that very many declared to Father
McEncroe, on the scaffold, that they preferred suffering
death to being sent there, fearing more the hideous de-
pravity of that place than death itself. That penal
nettlement was, however, next to be the scene of the
unwearying labours of the Archdeacon. Accordingly,
we find him in company with the Rev. Richard Walsh,
and a catechist, named Harding, located on that island,
in the year 1840. No priest, except upon one or two
occasions the Very Rev. Dr. Ullathorne, had, previous
to the Archdeacon, ever visited that penal settlement;
and such was the character which it bore in 1835, that
it was described by the former gentleman as “the modern
representative of those five guilty cities on whom the
Lord rained down His fire and His fury.” The hapless
creatures whose brief and restless lives were doomed to
be passed in this modern inferno of wickedness, and
cruelty incredible, were, in numerous instances, consoled
and reconciled to their God, through the pious zeal and


love of their pastor. After a couple of years spent
among the poor convicts of Norfolk Island, the Arch-
deacon returned to New South Wales, in which, thence-
forth, he laboured uninterruptedly in the capacity of
priest and citizen—taking a prominent part in almost
every great cause, by which the religious, moral, or
material interests of his adopted country were sought to
be advanced, until about nine years since, when he ven-
tured to pay a visit to his native land, after an absence,
therefrom, of more than a quarter of a century, during
which time he was unceasingly employed in matters
relating either to religious or general affairs of consider-
able, and sometimes of the gravest importance. The
occasion of his visit to Ireland was taken advantage of
by the Council of St. John’s College, of which the Arch-
deacon was a Fellow from its formation, to obtain
through the aid of his valuable knowledge and experience
of the old country, the selection of a suitable Rector for
that institution. Accordingly, he was specially deputed
by that body, in conjunction with Cardinal Wiseman
and Cardinal Cullen, to obtain a Rector for the college
—a commission which resulted in securing the valuable
services of the present rector, the Very Rev. Dr. Forrest.
Originally raised by His Grace the Archbishop to the
dignity of Dean of St. Mary’s, the Rev. John McEncroe
was subsequently promoted to be Archdeacon, and, upon
his return from Europe, was appointed to the immediate
pastoral charge of the large parish of St. Patrick’s in
this city, which he retained till the day of his death.
We should have mentioned that, upon returning from
Europe, he was accompanied by several Sisters of Mercy,


who are at present attached to the parish of St. Patrick,
Sydney.
The venerable subject of our brief memoir during the re-
mainder of his eventful life administered, both wisely and
zealously, to the spiritual requirements of his numerous
flock; at the same time seeking, by every means that
lay in his power, the promotion of their social welfare,
and interesting himself, in the spirit of a true Christian
patriot, in all matters tending to the prosperity and
happiness of the public generally, irrespective of creed,
class, or country. His name and virtues will long be
honourably remembered, not only in the religious and
social history of this community, but also in that of the
Australian colonies at large. By his death an important
link between the present generation of colonists and the
earlier days of the colony has been severed. Full of
years and honour, and beloved by all who knew him,
he expired a t the Presbytery of St. Patrick’s, Church-
hill, on Saturday evening, the 22nd August, at half-
past seven o’clock. For some time past it was but too
clear to many that the constitution of the reverend
gentleman, who had already attained to the advanced
age of seventy-three years, was gradually breaking up •
yet, from his mental and physical energy and abstemious
habits, his bodily frame seemed enabled to make a
strong stand against the inevitable inroads of decay
until within a few weeks past, when it became evident
that his death must be near at hand. He was, never-
theless, sufficiently convalescent on Monday, the 17th
August, to be taken out for an airing through the city, in
which he so Jong laboured amongst his own flock, and


for the general wellbeing of the inhabitants. On the
following Friday' afternoon, he received the Blessed
Viaticum, the following prelates of the Church being
present during several hours preceding his dissolution,
and at the last dread moment surrounding his dying
bed:—The Most Rev. John Bede Bolding, the Roman
Catholic Archbishop of Australasia ; Dr. Murphy, the
Bishop of Tasmania ; Dr. James Quinn, the Bishop of
Brisbane ; Dr. Matthew Quinn, the Bishop of Bathurst;
Dr. Murray, the Bishop of Maitland ; and Dr. Lanigan,
the Bishop of Goulburn. All who approached the
death-bed of the venerable priest appear to have been
deeply moved and greatly edified by the calmness, the
simple faith, and Christian resignation which he mani-
fested in his last moments. By his parishioners in the
northern part of this city, he was especially beloved ;
and to them, as to many others, his death, though not
unexpected, was of course a subject of profound distress.
Indeed, many felt the death of their beloved pastor
more poignantly than they would that of a near relative,
and their great grief was unmistakeably indicated
by their sighs and tears. The funeral knell of the
Archdeacon, as it clanged heavily from the great bell of
St. Mary's, awoke a sudden painful thrill in the hearts
of many thousands of our fellow-citizens ; and the
mournful boom was soon heard re-echoing from the
tower of the Sacred Heart Church, and from that of
St. Benedict's. The tenor of St. Mary’s (silent during
the long interval which had elapsed since the removal of
the wooden belfry) was first sounded on this sorrowful
occasion from its new position in the south-western tower.


the only portion of the old edifice which escaped from the
great conflagration of the Cathedral upwards of three
years ago. When the wailing, w r ell-known tones of the
old church bell were again heard in the busy crowded
streets, the Roman Catholics of Sydney, and their friends
of other denominations, knew that all was over.
Shortly after his death the body of the Archdeacon
was removed from the Presbytery to St. Patrick’s
Church, where it lay in state during the whole of the
Sunday and Monday following, and while there was
visited by at least 20,000 persons of all ages and con-
ditions of life, most of whom knew him well in life,
and now came thus, mournfully and affectionately, to
testify their love and veneration for his memory.
On Monday evening the body of the lamented Arch-
deacon was removed from St. Patrick’s Church to the
Cathedral of St. Mary’s, amidst the audibly expressed
sorrow of hundreds who had been waiting around the
church for hours before, to witness the mournful depar-
ture of all that remained on this earth of their beloved
pastor and friend. There the coffin, now finally closed,
was again exposed to the view of sorrowing thousands
who, in succession, continued to pay this tribute of res-
pect to the memory of the dead, and to offer up their
grateful prayers for the eternal repose of his soul, until
the evening had far advanced, when the Brethren of the
Guild of St. Mary and St. Joseph took the sacred remains
under their charge, and, in parties of ten or twelve at a
time, kept watch and ward over them until the morning
had dawned. On Tuesday morning, shortly after nine
o’clock, commenced the final offices for the dead—the


temporary cathedral being crowded in every part during
their performance. ' The coffin, covered by a purple pall,
upon which were placed the sacred vessels used in the
celebration of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, stood in
front of the Sanctuary, and was surrounded by numerous
lighted tapers. His Grace the Archbishop, in full canon-
icals, attended by the Very Rev. Deans Hanley and
O’Connell, likewise robed, sat on a raised throne to the
left of the altar. The five bishops, whom we have before
mentioned, all robed in full canonicals, occupied a posi-
tion opposite, and a large number of priests sat in front
of the altar ; the whole forming a most impressive spec-
tacle. thus, the Office for the Dead and the
Requiem High Mass were solemnly chanted with all
the imposing rites and ceremonies of the church, the
choir occasionaly joining in with much effect. The cele-
brant of the High Mass was the Vicar-General, (the Very
Rev. Dr. Sheehy), the Rev. Pere Garavel acting as Dea-
con, and the Rev. J. Garvey as Sub-Deacon. The
celebration of the Mass was marked by the most impres-
sive solemnity. Those present were moved to tears, and
nothing, save the grave voice of the celebrant and the
chorus of the clergymen present, was heard amid all the
vast assemblage. At certain intervals the choir chanted
the “ Requiem Mrs. Cordner and another lady singing
a portion with wonderful pathos. Mr, Cordner, organist
at St. Mary’s Cathedral, and Mr. Horsley, acting organist
of St. Patrick’s, conducted the musical arrangements—
the former leading the Requiem and the latter playing
with great skill Beethoven’s “Grand Funeral March,”
and Handel’s “ Grand March in Saul.” The Rev. Dr.


Quirk also acted, in conjunction with Mr. Cordner, as
cantor. The spacious building was densely crowded in
all its parts during the whole of the ceremonies which
preceded the departure of the corpse for its last resting-
place. Among those present were not only leading
members of this community who belong to the Roman
Catholic Church, but also a very considerable number
of the principal inhabitants belonging to other denomi-
nations, attending as a mark of respect to the deceased,
and of sympathy with his co-religionists. Upon the
termination of the Mass, the Very Rev. Dean Rigney,
by the wish of His Grace the Archbishop, ascended the
pulpit and delivered the following extempore discourse:
“In those days, I heard a voice from Heaven, saying to me :
blessed are the dead who die in the Lord. From henceforth
now, saith the Spirit, they may rest from their labours; for
their works follow them.”—Apoc. 14, v. 13.
Dearly Beloved Brethren, —Yes, the Venerable,
the good Archdeacon McEncroe is dead ! But, in the
words of my text, “ Blessed are the dead who die in
the Lord.” Archdeacon McEncroe is dead ! He has
at length, been called upon to give up his noble apos-
tolic soul to the Great Creator, and his body, wearied
and worn out by the pressure of seventy-two years, to
the earth from which it was taken. But, “ Amen, saith
the Spirit, from henceforth now he may rest from his
labours.” Archdeacon McEncroe is dead ! His Spirit
has departed from amongst us, leaving its earthly tene-
ment in this coffin, cold and inanimate. But his works


are not dead—his works survive him, “ his works shall
follow him.” Archdeacon McEncroe is dead ! His day
has passed, but, ah! how glorious was its sunset! Last
Saturday evening he breathed his last, full of faith, his
calm countenance beaming with the light of his high
hopes within. His deathbed was affectionately and
assiduously attended by his sorrowing brethren in the
ministry. The great aids and supports to the dying,
which religion supplies in the last sacraments, were duly
administered. The venerated Archbishop watched like
a father at the couch of his dying Archdeacon, and around
his Grace were collected five illustrious Bishops of the
Church. Such, so peaceful, and amid such surroundings,
came the glorious sunset of the good Archdeacon’s life.
Archdeacon McEncroe is dead! That “ great priest who,
in his day, pleased God, and was found just, and in the
time of wrath became an atonement.” Archdeacon
McEncroe is dead! And is it for this that your whole city
is plunged into grief 1 Is it for this that the Church
throughout the land mourns like a disconsolate widow ?
Is it for this that your cathedral is draped in the deepest
mourning? Is it for this that your organ sends forth
those unwonted tones, so plaintive, so pathetic? Is it
for this that the voices of your clergy resound in broken
accents to-day, before the altar, like the wailings of the
winter winds through some old cathedral aisles 1 Answer
me! my brethren, whereto all this grief ? If Archdeacon
McEncroe is dead, has he not died the death of the just ?
and is not the death of the just always precious in the


sight of the Lord I and if precious in the sight of the
Lord, should it not be precious also in the sight of God’s
Church, and God’s children, who you are ? Answer me !
my brethren, wherefore all this grief ? Ah! my friends,
our grief is real, is deep, so deep, so real, that it sadly
unfits us for the task of giving reasoning explanation of
its nature and its intensity. When, formerly, “ a Voice
in Rama was heard, lamentation and great mourning,
Rachel bewailing her children and would not be com-
forted,” who could have expected from the distracted
mothers of Judea a reasoning account of their grief which
filled the air with their lamentation and mourning '? The
dissevered limbs of the Holy Innocents lay lifeless before
them, and their maternal hearts were wrung with un-
utterable anguish. If we must analyze the general grief
of our community to-day, we shall find in truth that we
mourn for the living not for the dead ; we mourn for
ourselves, more than for that great priest who has left
us. He was “ a great priest, who in his day pleased God
and was found just.” The priests of the colony mourn
and reverence his memory. They recognise in his char-
acter of priest “ the annointed Minister of Christ, the
accredited dispenser of the mysteries of God” “ Every
high priest taken from amongst men is appointed by God
to offer sacrifice as well for his own sins as for the sins
of his people .” Behold my brethren, the office and
the duties in which Archdeacon McEncroe has been en-
gaged for the last 50 years nearly—49 years and some
months. Half a century offering sacrifice every day, and


daily offering for the sins of his spiritual children, like
Holy Job, “ lest perhaps, they might sin in their hearts."
He was an Apostle. I need not apprise this distinguished
and enlightened audience, that an Apostle means One
sent to Preach the Gospel and to enlarge the
Boundaries of the Church, He was sent half a
century back to preach and do the work of an Apostle in
his native land, and there he has left the traces of his
missionary zeal, to mark his Apostleship in Europe.
He was sent also to do the work of an Apostle in
America, and in that quarter of the globe also he has
left lasting proof of his missionary zeal. In Asia, too,
in the Holy Land, the land of the great twelve
Apostles, whose humble hut faithful follower he was,
he once paid his apostolic devotions to the footprints of
Our Blessed Lord and the scenes of His saving suffer-
ings. But it is in the wild colonies of Australasia
we are particularly to look for the works and the fruits
of his apostolic life. Here he spent 36 years, just one
half of the life-time allotted him by Heaven —36 apos-
tolic years—in preaching the gospel and planting the
Church. Well may the priests mourn to-day, their
patriarch has been taken away Well may they mourn
the absence of him whose goodness, whose patience,
whose well ordered life was a model for their imitation
and the glory of their order. Well may they mourn
their glory dimmed in the extinction of the Archdeacon’s
life. But there is one whose grief will rise high above
the rest of the Priests—the great chief of our body—


that venerated prelate who has now for three and thirty
years borne the burden and responsibilities of these
Churches. His Grace will mourn the loss of a wise and
learned counsellor —of an experienced and efficient
officer—of an able and indefatigable Archdeacon. Whilst
our revered Chief and Father is thus oppressed with grief
who could expect us, his children, to look on with dry
eyes? Well may the widows and orphans of Sydney
mourn—they have lost a father. Well may the inmates
of the charitable institutions of the city mourn—they
have lost a thoughtful and good friend Well may the
congregation of St. Patrick’s mourn—they have lost a
paternal pastor. Well may the youth of the colony
mourn —they have lost an enlightened and zealous patron
of education. See then, my friends, how true it is that
our grief is for the living, not for the noble dead.
Our duty to the departed and lamented Archdeacon
must not be forgotten. Our prayers, our sacrifices,
our alms-deeds and fasting must be offered to the
Great High Priest of Heaven for the soul that has
just been summoned into His awful presence.
So many years has this good priest been now in
contact with a corrupt and defiled world, and so hard
is it to avoid contracting, more or less, of defilement
from its intercourse, we offer our humble prayers to-day
that any blemishes, any defilements, any shades of
sin, that may be discerned by the the all-penetrating
eye of God in the soul of His servant, may be speedily
washed out in the Blood of the Lamb ; and that the


Lord of the Vineyard may address to His long-tried
faithful servant the glorious sentence of salvation,
“ Well done , good and faithful servant ; because thou
hast been faithful over a few things , I will place thee
over many ; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord
The Funeral.
The burial of the venerable Archdeacon was attended
by such a vast concourse of persons as has seldom, if
ever before, been witnessed in this city. The funeral
itself has been compared to tha f of His Royal Highness
the Prince de Cond6, (who was visited by the deceased
gentleman, as his pastor, during his last moments,) but
it was much more immense in its proportions. From
the lower end of St. Mary’s Road, along King Street
and George Street, right up to the gates of the burial
ground in Devonshire Street, the pavement and every
available spot, from which a view could be obtained,
was crowded with spectators ; nearly all the shops along
the line of route being closed. For at least an hour
before the arrival of the procession, the thi'ong came
pouring into Devonshire Street, and occupying every
available space in its neighbourhood. The yard of the
Railway Station, facing the burial ground, was occupied
by a solid mass of people of both sexes, and of every
condition of life, standing on trucks, boxes, bundles of


hay, palings, or anything else affording a prospect of an
uninterrupted sight of the procession. The following
was the order of procesion :
The Students of St. Mary’s College, Lyndhurst.
The Members of St. Patrick’s Christian Doctrine Society.
The Members of other Parochial Associations of a kindred
character.
The Officers and Members of the Holy Catholic Guild of St. Mary
and St. Joseph,
The Fellows of St. John’s College.
The Clergy of the Diocese, amounting in number to over thirty.
The Very Rev. the Vicar-General (on foot).
Five carriages, containing the bishops of Maitland, Bathurst,
Goulburn, Brisbane, and Hobart, and attendant Chaplains.
His Grace the Archbishop and Chaplain.
The Hearse containing the Body.
Ten Mourning Coaches
(The first of which was occupied by Dean O’Connell and Dean
Hanley of Penrith).
The Congregation of St. Patrick’s
(Four abreast).
The General Public.
About one hundred and fifty Carriages,
Some of which had been sent by the leading residents of the city
and suburbs.
About noon the corpse was raised from the catafalque,
and brought out of the church by the central northern
door, the procession being headed by cross-bearers,
acolytes, and clergymen, all vested in their surplices.
At the end of the mournful train came the Roman
Catholic prelates, now in Sydney ; the Bishops of Goul,
burn, Maitland, Bathurst, Brisbane, and Hobart Town,
—the Most Rev. Dr. Bolding, the Archbishop, walking
last, with Deans O’Connell and Hanley.


At 1 o’clock, the first part of the procession arrived
at the Churchyard, including the juvenile members
of the schools and Christian Doctrine Society. These,
on arrival, filed off past the gate, and were drawn up in
rank, two deep, on the opposite side of the road. Next
came the students and fellows of St. John’s College,
followed by the clergy over thirty in number, amongst
whom was the Very Rev. S. J. A. Sheehy, Vicar-General,
who received the bishops and mourners, as they drove
up. The Bishops of Maitland, Bathurst, Goulburn,
Brisbane, and Hobart were the next to enter the
Churchyard, followed by the venerable Archbishop, who
was much affected, and was assisted into the Church-
yard by his chaplain, (Father Colletti) and the Vicar-
General. Then came the hearse, containing the
covered by a purple pall, and followed by ten mourn-
ing coaches, the first being occupied by Bean O’Connell
and Dean Hanley. These were succeeded by the con-
gregation of St. Patrick’s, walking four abreast, over
four hundred in number, the major part wearing hat-
bands, and all attired in mourning. The general public
followed, a very large number of private carriages bring-
ing up the rear. Immediately the congregation of St.
Patrick’s had entered, the gates of the burial ground
were closed ; and this caused some disappointment to the
immense crowd near the gates, who began to press for-
ward, causing a terrific crush, and rendering it necessary
to lift several children among them over the railings of
the burial ground, to prevent their being hurt. Many
in the crowd were deeply affected, and spoke earnestly
concerning the worth and beneficence of the deceased.


At the Cemetery his Grace the Archbishop, the Very
Rev. the Bishop of Maitland, and the Vicar-General,
assisted by Deans O’Connell and Hanley, and Fathers
Garavel and Garvey, performed the last obsequies.
The Archdeacon is buried in the same vault as the
Venerable Archpriest Therry. On the coffin is the fol-
lowing inscription ;
“ IBLcfaVus, .scrltamtesS
%3H44tme ait it Ku btges&mi &mmira
MDCCCLXVIII.
magnum aVerat (fcptecrrpurum, Clmcarum,
dflKeUutngu*, sJalamcn nunrunti.”
It would require, as we have before stated, much more
space than we have at our disposal to give even a bare
enumeration in detail of the great and varied services
of the venerable Archdeacon to the Church of which he
was so distinguished an ornament; to his fellow-
countrymen, whose welfare was always dear to his heart,
for he loved his country and her children—whether at
home or in other lands—with the deep and unalterable
love of a true Christian patriot; and to Australians gene-
rally, in whose moral, social, and political affairs, he
always displayt d the keenest interest. The Roman
Catholic Church of Australia owes much to his labours,
prolific as they have been of the most valuable results


in regard to her welfare and present status among the
various denominations of Christians. In the matter of
Catholic Primary Schools for the young, he always took
an active interest, and, until lately, had more to do in
connection with them than any other Catholic, lay or
clerical, in the colony.
The building of St. John’s College, of which he was
nominated a fellow, at the first election, and its success-
ful establishment as an educational institution, is due, in
a great measure, to his wise counsels and energetic exer-
tions in its behalf.
The great need of properly trained Priests for the
Australian Mission was a matter he was always very
anxious about, and which he was accustomed to dilate
upon in the most earnest and impressive manner. We
believe he allowed annually, out of his private purse,
a large sum for the education of students in All
Hallow’s College, Dublin, for the Australian Mission.
Lately, he, in a most remarkable manner, displayed his
generosity and devotion to the principle of sound Catho-
lic education being given in our public schools by, some
time previous to his death, making arrangements, which
are now in the course of being carried out, for the intro-
duction of several Marist Fathers into the colony. These
gentlemen, upon their arrival here, are destined for the
purpose of opening a Training School for Roman Catholic
Teachers—the first step towards the establishment of
Catholic primary schools throughout the colony. Through
the assistance solely of the Archdeacon the outfit and
passages of these gentlemen will be provided and their sup-
port for a time after their arrival here secured. In every


matter in connection with his native land, the Arch-
deacon was ever ready with his advice and assistance.
Every movement for the relief of distress in Ireland
found in him a warm and elequent advocate. We need
not more particularly refer to these benevolent and pat-
riotic movements, as there are but few, if indeed anyone,
unacquainted with them. When it was thought that
a former immigration agent had, in one of his reports,
attempted to stigmatise the fair fame of the poor Irish
orphan girls who, after the great famine in that unhappy
land, had been introduced into this colony, the venerable
Archdeacon nobly came forward to rebut the calumny,
and did so to the entire satisfaction of the Legislature,
who had appointed a committee to enquire into the mat-
ter, on the petition uf the Australian Celtic Association
fa literary society of that day). In connection with
political matters, he took an active part with all the
most liberal minded men of the day in moulding the
original draft of the New Constitution into a shape suit-
able to the requirements of a free country; and of the great
Anti-Transportation Association of these colonies he was,
from his position, a prominent and influential member.
With the cause of Total Abstinence the name of the Arch-
deacon has been connected from the earliest days of the
colony. He has been, in truth, the Australian Apostle of
Temperance ; and as powerful in the cause here as Father
Mathew wasin Ireland some years back. Tc tens of thou-
sands he administered the Pledge from time to time ; and
numerous are the persons still living who owe all to him in
this way, even their very existence at the present


moment; for they would now, if he had not so influenced
them for good, be filling a drunkard’s grave.
The Archdeacon was an excellent public speaker, and,
as such, was always very popular with the mass of the
people—Protestant as well as Catholic. His style,
though quiet and homely, was forcible and eloquent;
his speeches were especially characterised by their earnest-
ness and honest feeling. Rarely did he fail to enliven
their more serious passages by some quaint story or
piquant anecdote of former times and personages.
The Archdeacon’s advocacy of any good cause was
not confined to that of the tongue alone; his pen was
likewise ever ready to assist in the carrying out of any
object which he considered worthy of support and en-
couragement. As a writer on any matter of general
interest, his style was remarkably cogent, adhering
strictly to facts, and always reasoning therefrom to their
ultimate results. His memory was very remarkable,
and from the vast repertoire of facts stored therein he
could, at his pleasure, summon up important data upon
which to base the line of argument he chose to pursue.
His language was always fearless, but seldom harsh, and
never unfeeling towards those who d iffered from him in
opinion. His contributions to the Press are numerous,
as might be expected from a man of his active mind
and laborious life. All his writings bore upon their face
the impress of a clear, earnest, and truthful mind, and
they were appreciated accordingly by the public, and
read with avidity.
This connection with the press was not always that
of a mere contributor. When a young priest, on the


American Mission, he conducted, under the authority of
Bishop England, a newspaper in the city of Charleston,
United States, which was named The Miscellany.
Afterwards, in this colony, he was intimately associated
in the conduct of The Australasian Chronicle, then
under the able management of W. A. Duncan, Esq.,
lately Collector of Customs at this port. The Chronicle
was at that time distinguished among all its contempo-
raries by the fearlessness of its tone, and the great literary
ability displayed in its columns. After many years,
during which the Chronicle took a most prominent
and brilliant part in all the great political questions then
agitating the community, it ceased to exist, and the
Catholics, among others, were left to the tender mercies
of a bigoted and hostile press. The Archdeacon, in this
crisis, stepped in, and at his own cost, and upon his own
responsibility, established The Freeman’s Journal,
which, though long in other hands, still exists and
flourishes. Besides being connected so intimately with
the press, he was engaged from time to time in editing
works of a religious and miscellaneous character, among
which we may mention Dunleavy's Irish Catechism, the
revision of which was committed to his care by his
superiors. This task, requiring an intimate acquaintance
with the Irish Language, and a profound knowledge of
moral and dogmatic theology, was excellently executed.
He was the author, also, of several original works of
much merit, mostly upon religious matters. Among
these one entitled “ The Wanderings of the Human
Mind ” is best known, and perhaps the most remarkable.
This was one of the books of a religious character which


had been lent to the late Dr. Bland, some time previous
to his lamented death. To this book—“ The Wanderings
of the Human Mind Dr. Bland ascribed, in a great
measure, that change of feeling which ultimately led to
his conversion to the Roman Catholic Faith.
J. G. O'CONNOR, PRINTER, YORK STREET.


1508
01581724




