

Presbyterian Church of Tasmania,
St. Andrew’s, Hobart.
AN ADDRESS
To the extruded Members of St. Andrew’s Church, Hobart,
numbering Seventy Families, and representing Two
Hundred and Sixty Souls, with some plain Questions
to the Rev. James Scott, who occupies St. Andrew’s
Church and Manse in the face of their solemn and
emphatic Protest.
J-QH IsT GELLIE,
FLDFR OF ST. ANDREW’S CHURCH, HOBART.
A
O. D, N.
1884.


f q fC 3


PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OP TASMANIA,
ST. ANDREW’S, HOBART,
To the extruded Office-bearers and Congregation of the
above Church, numbering fO Families, and repre-.
denting 260 souls.
Brethren,
It is just Three years since our Congregational rights were
taken from us, and a Minister forced into our Church against
whom we protested with strong and united protest. It was pre-
dicted that these years were to he “ Years of prosperity and
plenty,” but the of Balaam, as of old, have been
contrary to Balak’s ardent wishes.
In entering upon a review of these years of usurpation, it will no
doubt be interesting and satisfactory to yourselves and the Church
at large to know that my strictures are justified, not alone from
mere observation, but from Statements published by the people
who now occupy our Church, and who in using our endowments
get cheap ordinances; as some of them say, it is the cheapest
place, in the City, to attend !
The printed statements referred to are contained in a pamphlet
of sixteen pages recently issued by the present occupiers of St.
Andrew’s property and endowments, as a Report and Balance
sheet for the years 1882-3. Upon its title page is the time
honored escutcheon of the glorious Scottish Church, “ Nec Tamen
Consumebatur.” If the motto “Burning and almost consumed”
had been adopted, how much nearer accuracy it would have been !
I find one of its pages devoted to seventeen worthies —the Minister,
fourteen Office-bearers, and two Auditors. One page is devoted
to the Finance, Glebe, and Psalmody Committees ; the next to the
District Visitors; the next two to arrangements for 1883-4 ; the
next four pages to the Report, and the concluding four to the
financial statement and summing up of the total revenue.
You will remember that we published in the daily papers the
last financial statement issued by these people while at St. John’s,
and showing a deficiency of £330: this was said to be sxleojht
07 5 i 55/r fgfi
a. 6-6-77


accidentally picked up, and only intended for Congregational use!
This last issue cannot be called a leaflet ; it was surety intended for
the Archives of the Colony! You will remember too that the
existence of this debt was denied, but at the celebrated libel trial
at the Supreme Court the Bev. James Scott was compelled to admit
its existence, and that the late Editor of the Mercury , Mr. James
Simpson, was responsible for a share of it! !
If you have examined the Beport referred to, you will notice
that the debt incurred since it was taken from us, and at present
existing upon our property, amounts to over £IOOO, and that the
poor attendance at the ordinances of the Sanctuary to which both
old and young are pathetically, and with reiteration invited “to
bring with them an offering,” is bitterly bewailed. .And having
done so, I think you will agree with me that many of its state-
ments are irresistibly amusing, and others, taken in conjunction
with the arguments used for depriving us of our Congregational
rights, discreditable, and shameful in the extreme.
To those of you who have latterly been within the walls of the
old Church it must be apparent that Fourteen Office-bearers to
such a handful of worshippers is very ridiculous ; enough I should
say, if they are men of the right stamp, to leaven half the city.
Let us ascend to the ideal, and suppose each of these holding a
prayer meeting in some neglected district; suppose them banded
together as a social purity society ; suppose them hailing the
drunkard and the outcast, and striving to bring them into virtues
path, what a field of enterprise and Christian usefulness lies before
them!
The Beport says “ The unbroken harmony that in the good
providence of Cod has prevailed has enabled the Managers to per-
form their various duties with comfort to themselves.” The
Almighty’s name has often been invoked, and He has been called
upon to witness many things not in harmony with His attributes.
Dissension is surety not harmony ! Persons leaving a Church be-
cause they disagree with their Minister, or fellow worshippers, is
surety not harmony ! If it is, then, we must acquire a new language,
or alter the meaning of the one now possessed.
The Finances of the Church are said to be “in a position of
greater stability than at any former period.” If £ll2 the total
realised sum for pew rents, collections, and sustentation fund for
the first half of the year 18811 is “ greater stability,” then, How do
they reconcile with this the statement made in the Presbyterian
Magazine, of April 1882, that their income had reached £907, and
“ likely to be maintained and increased ”?—“ Out of thine own
mouth will I judge thee,” are words of divine origin ; and surety
the Minister and Managers of a Christian Church ought, and
should be able, to reconcile statements of their finances, made by
them, and which to the outside pubi c are inexplicable.
Deference is made to the “ liability incurred in lepairing the


property.” One o£ the reasons advanced for denying us Congrega-
tional rights was, That the property required some repairs. Well,
we could have renovated the Church ; could have made a palatial
residence for our Minister ; could have provided a nocturnal lamp
to shine upon his beneficent steps, and leave posterity to pay the
creditor! And in the Summer season we could have permitted
him to rusticate in an obscure village hard by, and let the Manse
to some Victorian Merchant Prince, and thereby allow him to
pocket Nine pounds a week !
The Sunday collections are declared inadequate to the wealth
of the Congregation and “ lower than what is common in similar
Congregations.” Here comes in the grim joke of having Fourteen
Office-bearers. Elijah might say of them as he said of Baal—
Either they are pursuing, or peradventure they sleep !
Employing the language used in stating a rule of three sum —
If it takes a Congregation with fourteen office-bearers to gather
£ll2 in the half year, How many did it require to gather, from
the same number of people, £907 in the twelve months ? We are
dealing with a professedly Christian Church and therefore Elijah’s
derisive words to Baal’s prophets may well be considered “ Perad-
venture he sleepeth and must be awaked.”
The Managers confess remissness in collecting the seat rents
and intend to call the Session to their aid. Thus by the joint aid of
the temporal and spiritual rulers of the Church great things are to
be achieved ! One would think that two active men might, in the
evenings of one week, collect the seat rents of the few who give
the place their occasional attendance. It is suggested to pounce
upon Occasional Attenders and get them to pay for Sittings, and
by that means “ have their interest in the congregation deepened.”
My experience in such matters is, that if people feel any interest
in, and profit by what they get from the pulpit, not only will their
pockets be opened, but their hearts too.
There is to be a large addition to the present Staff of fourteen
officers. The Ladies are to be called in to collect the Sustentation
Fund, “ as the Managers think the necessary enthusiasm and devo-
tion is much more likely to be shown by the lady collectors.” We
give, as we always do, all honor to the Ladies, and feel that if the
Ladies were withdrawn from this “ fragment of a congregation, the
men could be numbered upon the fingers.” Here let us ask, How
often are some of those on this imposing Board of Management
within the walls of the Church ? —Echo answers, How often ?
“ The Managers also think that it is becoming for the congre-
gation of the Parent Presbyterian Church in Tasmania to set a
good example in a work of such vital importance to the best inter-
ests of the whole denomination.” How grand such sentiments!
But without numbers, without means, without that zeal, devotion
and enthusiasm bewailed above, the Parent Church must ta,ke it
rear position, aiid let others lead the van I


The Congregation are recommended to make a strenuous effort
not only to become “independent, but aid giving.” What an
Herculean task ! A congregation gathering £ll2 in the half year
to become Aid giving ! Paul would say of them “ Their deep pov-
erty abounded unto the riches of their liberality —and beyond their
power they were willing of themselves” !
The Kick Session now figures, and reports, that they have
done “ much important work ” —bemoans the lack of Church
Members, to remedy which a Communicants’ class is to be formed.
What have they been doing the many years they possessed St.
John’s, and for the past three years our property and endownments,
when the young of the Congregation have thus been neglected?
Surely the Session composed of Minister and Six Elders have not
been acting up to light and knowledge.
The attendance at the week night Service held in St. John’s
School room, is deplored, and this lack of interest is said to be a
sure sign of declining spirituality—The irregularity and half day
attendance at the Sanctuary is said to be a discouragement to the
Minister and to fellow worshippers and a draw back to the pros-
perity of the Church —And the Apostolic injunction is quoted to
them “ neglect not the assembling of yourselves together as the
manner of some is ” In the Ist place this quotation would lead us
to believe they have the people to assemble ! 2nd, lead us to believe
that the Session is lacking acquaintance with the words in which
the Apostle clothed his injunction. It may, however, be a quota-
tion from the New version, or, as they have let the Old School
house attached to St. Andrew’s to a Komanist for a day school,
they may have unguardedly quoted from the Douay version!
While the Session mourns over the shortcomings of the adherents,
and while they intend to provide a Communicants’ class —Will it
not be well to initiate a Class for themselves, and go in for the
study of Paul’s eptistles.
Under the heading “Psalmody” a mournful dirge is also
uttered. Their facilities are second to none —Instrument, Organist,
and leader of Psalmody, and yet, alas, they confess to “ Ichabod ”
being engraved upon it!
\V ith the Ladies’ Working Society the veil uplifts and a gleam
of sunshine dawns. This Society is declared useful, and as having
“ rendered most important service to the church generally.” Is
this Society thus extolled for the grist it brings to the mill ? Eor I
find that in eighteen months it draws from the church funds £5
and contributes the large sura of £l3. —No doubt gratitude for small
mercies causes this exuberance ! All Ladies connected with the Con-
gregation are urged to join it on account of the Christian fellowship
thus promoted. “ Live and learn ”is a motto applicable to church
as well as ordinary work—but if this Church is dependent upon
the Ladies Working Society for its elevation and the promoting of
( Kristian friendship in the Congregation, then, many have taken
the wrong turning and should retrace their stejps.


The Ncav Hebrides Mission is next touched upon. While
regretting that no Society for the collections of funds has been
formed, it asserts that a large collection of useful articles has been
forwarded. What these useful articles are is a matter of conjec-
ture. They may be “ garments old, or garments new” No doubt
our interest would be deepened did Ave take a trip to the New
Hebrides A\ r hen annexation takes place, and behold the natives
attending the first levee. A gaunt Aboriginal in a coat of some
corpulent elder, another, in the cast off kilts, that have been
worn at many an entertainment here ; the Avomen in dresses that
have frequently offended our taste, or the bonnet, when the church
has been croAvded, that obscured the Minister from our A r iew!! A
congregation Avith their oaati property and ours combined drawing
rents to the amount of £350 a year and not able to contribute
their quota to a Missionary invited from Home and sent forth as
the “ Missionary of the Tasmanian Church,.” Surely this does not
reflect much credit upon the often vaunted “ Parent Presbyterian
Church of Tasmania.”
The Sabbath Schools are embraced in the concluding paragraph.
They number three Schools Avith 18 teachers and 212 scholars.
This portion of the Church Avork cuts a sorry figure in the report.
The attendance not AA r hat it out ought to be—can’t retain the elder
Scholars —Office-bearers having ability and influence AA r on’thelp—it
has been cramped for years for want of hearty co-opera'tion by the
Church —the Schools should be at once supplied with a library,
and at next meeting hope to congratulate “ ourseHes ” that things
have improved.
For very shame the aboA r e should Imre been omitted. The Minis-
ter boasts of being “the oldest Presbyterian Minister in the Colony,”
he occupies the “ Parent Church,” and yet it is here stated, That
the St. John’s School, of which he has been the Minister for 12 or
14 years, does not possess a Library ! To any one connected with
Sunday School work such a confession appears lamentable. Some
years ago the St. John’s School Avas greatly enlarged, and if
such a necessary help for the education of the children was then
wanting, Why not have striven to make the internal machinery,
Avhich is of more A r ital moment, correspond ? This School Avas
enlarged by public Subscription and funds, and in all justice the
rent now got for it, £3O a year, should not go to pay the Minister
his stipend, but for the benefit and education of the Children.
Had I been in the councils of the Church I Avould have
proposed a vital change in the disposition of the property, and
one Avhich I think Avould have been for the lasting interests
of the Church: at least, it Avould have lasted for ninety-nine
years, after Avhich time it Avould not matter much to any of
us Avhether the minister got all the proceeds, or none, or if the
BloAver Avas manager-in-chief, or Avhether he was cashiered. My
plan is this—Sell St. John’s apd St- Andrew’s property % and with


part of the proceeds wipe out all existing debts, instead of fusing
all the Globe land, retain so much as would be necessary for build-
ing a Church, Manse, and School house, &c; make it a condition in
fie leases that one shilling and sixpence per week be paid by the
lessee for the support of the Church; that they and their house-
holds should he bound to attend the Church twice on a Sunday,
and once at a Aveek night sendee : that the Avives and daughters
should he members of the Ladies’ Working Society: that all the
males should be either Elders or Managers. What an imposing
Congregation this Avould be: say GO households of 5 each —300
Subscriptions one shilling and sixpence per week, £231 a year! This
in addition to the ground rent of 50 or 60 allotments, Avhat a princely
income ! and Avhat a charm the assembled three hundred would have
upon the Minister! Hoav it Avould inspire, with Avhat pleasure he
Avould behold his flock, and Avith what unction he would denounce
the sins and the self-imposed sorrows of the money-grubbing city
below ! None Avould bo allowed a lease, save those of good repute :
none Avould ho permitted to dwell there Avho questioned anything
being done, in fact, no opposing element whatever. You may ask
why this scheme was not adopted — I reply, because I was not
consulted.
We now come to the financial statement. I believe that a
Congregational meeting was convened by circular to hear the re-
port and balance sheet read. The report Avas read, but the financial
statement was omitted, through it Avas said, the Treasurer’s
absence from Town. This was very much like the performance
of “ Hamlet ” Avith the Prince of Denmark left out. It may be that
Shakespeare is not read, northeplay of “Hamlet” ever Avitnessedby
either Managers or Elders and I therefore for their benefit use another
simile, viz : like studying Paul’s epistles and omitting that to the
Hebrew’s ! However the financial statement is before us, it has
also been before some experts to Avhom it ajrpears “ rather mixed,”
the Banking business done in the Avay of “Promissory Notes”
staggering them. The rose smells as sweet called by any other
name, so “Promissory Note” can mean something else, and the
difficulty vanishes. 1 propose putting along with this Sheet the
proposed probable estimate of income submitted at that memorable
Synod meeting where Amalgamation Avas consummated, and Avhen
the Rev. James Scott said “that it Avas supported by the back-bone
of Presbyterianism in Hobart.” If £ll2,the total sum collected in the
half-year, represents the back-bone of Presbyterianism,in the name
of humanity, spare us from seeing what makes up the body! He
further said “It was also taken up by the leading members of the
Church.” What do the new arrivals from home say of the “ back-
bone, and the leading members,” when they enter St. Andrew’s.
“ ’Tis a fine Kirk, ’ they say, “ but there’s uae body in tilt!” Hoav
prophetic AA r erethe Rev. Mr. Jenkins’ words, but righteous man, his
salary wa reduced and he had to clear. “He feared Mr, Scott


“ would leave a large number of St. John’s flock behind bun, drive
“ away many of St. Andrew’s before him and that the change w r ould
“ lead to him forfeiting the confidence of those now moving in the
“ matter; of those sitting under him and of those driven from St.
“ Andrew’s, were he in Mr. Scott’s place he would seriously con-
“ sider the matter and the fearful consequences that would follow
“ the amalgamation, and must tell seriously upon the Church, &c.”
(Launceston Examiner, October, 1880.)


Proposed Amalgamation of Congregations of St. John’s and
St. Andrew’s, and the formation of a new charge, viz.—
O’Brien’s Bridge and New Norfolk, with assistance oc-
casionally by the Minister of Sorell.
PROBABLE INCOME FROM ST, ANDREW’S AND ST. JOHN’S.
Rents — £ s. d, £ s. d.
St, John’s Manse (nett) 65 0 0
Schoolroom 80 0 0
„ Hall 25 0 0
St. Andrew’s Glebe 25 0 0
. 145 0 0
Debenture Fund (one Minister) 44 8 0
Sustenation Fund 175 0 0
Sunday Collections 175 0 0
Annual Tea Meeting (nett) 12 10 0
Four Entertainments during the year ... 20 0 0
Seat Rents 100 0 0
526 18 0
Probable Annual Income £671 18 0
Expenditure, £ s. d.
Minister ... ... ... ... ... 400 0 0
Organist ... 40 0 0
Church Officer 20 0 0
Clock ... ... ... 5 0 0
Gas 15 0 0
Organ-blower and Sundries 20 0 0
£soo 0 0
Probable Surplus £l7l 18 0
O’BRIEN’S BRIDGE, NEW NORFOLK, AND SANDY BAY.
Expenditure. £ s. d. £ s. d.
Minister 300 0 0
House 30 0 0
Payment of Supplies and Travelling
Expenses, in consideration of services
to be rendered by Minister of Sorell ... 50 0 0
Travelling Expenses, Ministers O’Brien’s
Bridge, New Norfolk, and Hobart Town 50 0 0
430 0 0
Probable Income. £ s. d.
To be contributed by New Norfolk ... 100 0 0
Ditto O’Brien’s Bridge 100 0 0
Ditto O’Brien’s Bridge 100 0 0
Ditto Sandy Bay 30 0 0
Ditto Debenture Fund. 44 8 0
274 8 0
Estimated Deficiency £155 12 0
But, as it is proposed to work the Amalgamated')
Congregations and the Rural Districts together, > £l7l 18 0
take the probable surplus, as above j
uaivc i/uc ouipiun, auuvc ... ••• J
Deduct Estimated Deficiency above £155 12 0
Leaving estimated probable Surplus £l6 6 0
Note.— lt is proposed that the Ministers of St. Andrew’s, Sorell,
O’Brien’s Bridge, and New Norfolk, shall jointly supply the
pulpits named, on a plan to be hereafter arranged.


Dr. ST ‘ ANDREW ’ S CHUECH ’ Hobart . w account with the TREASURER from 1st January, to 31st December, 1882.
“ — no
±o»z.
Jan. 1.
To balance due Treasurer ... 136 7 10
„ Outstanding promissory note 325 0 0
£ s.
d.
1883.
8 s. d.
401 7
305 16
75 14
25 0
*5 0
10
8
9
0
q
Dec. 31. By Sunday collections
,, Sustenation Fund and Pew Rents
136 3 3
111 14 0
Dec. 31.
„ Minister’s Salary
„ Supply Sandy Bay, etc. .!.
,, Leader of Psalmody
,, Rents (Glebe, etc.).
,, Tea Meeting
,, Collections Sandy Bay
118 19 5
8 11 0
112
,, Organist
,, Promissory note
700 0 0
„ Church officer, £20 ; gratuity, £2 2s
22 2
o
, Communion expenses
0 16
6
,, Young and Walker (law charges)
7 19
8
,, Gas accounts...
17 4
0 10
10
0
,, Hanson’s account (removing organ 1
„ Property Tax : St. John’s, St. Andrew’s
and cottage
11 12
0
,, Rural Police rates (Glebe)...
2 8
9
,, Petty account, 3s. 9d., 4s.. l'6s. 6d
4s. 2d., 12s. Id. ... ’
1 14
0
,, Whitesides and Sons’ account
32 0
5 0
7 n
10
,, Sewing class
0
0
,, Sunday School
„ RentSandyBay schoolroom to 30th June.1882 30 0
0
,, bynod expences
2 4
6
,, Interest account and stamps
79 3
5
” (relinguishing possession of Glebe)
25 0
0
,, Mahers account
256 15
o
,, Mutual Insurance Company
3 7
6
„ St. Andrew’s pulpit supply prior to
October, 1880
5 o
Q
,, Seabrook’s account ...
9. 4
0
,, Collector’s commission on Glebe rents
2 4
o
„ Payment to Treasurer, July, 1883
0 4
5
,, Balance due Treasurer
341 2 1
£1,417 11
8
£1,417 11 8
1883.
Jan. 1.
,, Balance due Treasurer £341 2 10
JAMES THOMAS ROBERTSON,
Examined and found correct,
W. D. HULL )
Treasurer.
20th July, 1883. A. J. TO AN, J
31 was £195 12s. 3d. ; but an error of £59 4s. 5d. wasdis
nt agrees with the Bank balance on 31st December, 1881.
Auditors.
Memo.— 1 he debjt balance brought forward from the accounts of 18
reduced the debit to £13b 7s. 10d., brought forward above. This amou
covered, which


— TREASURER in accost with ST ANDREWS PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, Hobaet Ce
1883,
June 30. To Sustenation Fund and Pew Rent.*
£ s.
d.
1883.
£ s. d.
,, Sunday collections
fil 7 ii
Jan. 1, By Balance due Treasurer
341 2 10
,, Rents as under, viz.—
,, Paid Minister’s Salary
201 13 4
Glebe ... .
. ... £95
9
9
» » Organist
7 10 0
St. John’s Manse
40
0
0
>> ,, Leader of Psalmody
12 10 0
,, Schoolroom
15
0
0
r , „ Church Officer
10 0 0
St. Andrew’s
0
o
,, „ Synod Expenses, etc
4 0 8
Cottage burial ground
6
0
o
,, „ Church Extension Fund
5 17 11
,, ,, Messrs. Davies Brothers’ account
,, Ladies’ Sewing Class
—161 9
9
printing, &c
21 0 Q
,, Paid into Bank in excess
>> » Mr. J. Potter attending clock ...
9 0 0
,, Balance due Treasurer
i> ,, Gas accounts
3 6 6
. OJi
,, ,, Mr. I incham, Tuning Organ
5 5 0
>) » Petty disbursements
2 10 0
„ „ Bank of Australasia Interest
14 8 11
£638 5
2
£638 5 2
E. & O.E.
1883.
July 1. Balance due Treasurer
£351 12 6
A.
RIDDOCH,
We certify that we have this day examined the above statement
Treasurer.
of accounts and compared the same with the vouchers, and found
them correct.
19th July, 1883.
W. D. HULL,
) A
A. J. TOAN,
> Auditors..


It is most apparent tli at fond expectations have not been realised.
Seat rents £lOO. Sustentation fund £175. Sunday Collections £175;
total £l5O. Fiction has vanished, reality presents the naked truth,
less than one half ! The Rev. James Scott said, that this scheme was
propounded hy one of the ablest financiers in the Colony, Mr.
Donald McMillan. Results should bring the blush to the cheek of
both compiler and his extoller. New Norfolk would contribute
£lOO. O’Brien’s Bridge : £lOO. Sandy Bay : £3O. When I ask
for the Church at New Norfolk, I am told that it has been aban-
doned, an epidemic seized the Presbyterians there when funds were
w r antcd, and they have all Amalgamated with other Churches !
No return from O’Brien’s Bridge : and from Sandy Bay the munifi-
cent sum of £1 Is. 2d. Outside of Sandy Bay it may not be known
that it is a fruit growing district, and after Amalgamation the
“ Codlin Moth” attacked the purses of the people, and instead of
£3O; scarcely as many uine-pences ! In the expenditure the
Minister gets his £100; the Organist is reduced to £l5 ; this post
I believe is held by a manager’s daughter. £25 is apportioned for
“ leading of psalmody,” this latter sum going into an Elder’s pocket.
What has the Blow r er done, w r ho was set down at £2O, to be
extinguished ? May be the work is being done gratuitously, or it
is divided among the numerous officers, if not, How can the Organ
be played without a Blower ? or are things in that tranquil state,
and moving with such clock-like regularity, that a little blow is
not now necessary. Personally, I think that the Blower, like
Pharaoh’s butler, should be restored even if some other dignitary
suffers the extreme penalty of the law. I find £2l down for
Printing,&c. Ah! the Blower has become a “ Printer.” Well £2l,
in the half-year, for a little puff is not amiss. Not much like
empty coffers this. Why not have offered the Blower, say, a
collection of “useful articles” and sent £2l to the Hebrides Mission ;
or have formed with it the nucleus of a Library for the Sunday
Schools ?
And now brethren, I would add, finally, that I was recently
in the Old Church and I saw but one solitary soul of the Old
Congregation, and yet, this is called “ Amalgamation.” Deducting
six strangers, there w r ere twenty men and youths present. Two
young ladies stood up in the spacious area set apart for the choir:
there was nothing in the service to indicate either warmth of
feeling or spiritual life.
The state of our Denomination in the City is very lamentable ;
and to those born within its bosom, must be heart-rending : there-
fore we may consider it our duty again to rally and use our utmost
powers to raise the Denomination to its former prestige and once
proud position.
I will now take the liberty of putting a few interrogatories to
the clergyman, the Rev. James Scott, who occupies our Church in
the face of our unanimous protest, and whose Office-bearers have
issued this amusing and startling manifesto,


You, Sir, have been a Minister in the Colony for the past
13 years. You have of late frequently said that you are the
oldest Presbyterian Minister in the Colony, and you boast of
occupying the Parent Church in the Colony, the Cathedral charge,
the Centre of Church extension. I would respectfully ask you—•
1. Do you think it creditable for your Congregation to have
subscribed from all sources only £ll2, for the first half of the
year 1883, taking into account the flourishing statement made by
yourself at the Synod of 1880, when you were in distinct terms
told that you would not be acceptable to the people of St.
Andrew’s ?
2. How can your Church become the Centre of Church
extension when the gross contributions are as above stated for
1883 —a year of prosperity never attained to before by the Colony,
and when the population of Hobart, 22,000, was never greater ?
3. Do you think that your present Congregation have done
their duty to the Hebrides Mission, in sending up to the date of
this balance sheet no money for the support of the Missionary
invited from Home, and to be supported by the united efforts of,
yours, the Established, the “ Parent Church,” and the Free
Church ?
4. Are you aware that the Free Church in Hobart has sent
up to the present time, £5O in money to the support of the
Missionary, Mr. Fraser, and your own Congregation only a collec-
tion of useful articles ?
5. Do you think that you have done your duty while Minister
of St. John’s, for eleven years, in permitting the School to be with-
out a Library up to the present time ?
6. Is it now necessary, considering the large sum acknowledged
by your Managers to be received for rents, to have a sale of
Children’s Clothing about every three months to maintain the
Sunday-schools at St. John’s and St. Andrew’s?
7. Is it consistent with Protestant, apart from Presbyterian
principles, to let the School-house attached to St. Andrew’s to a
Romanist for a day school ?
8. Do you attend this day school and give religious instruction :
if not, why not ?
9. Is it not a fact, that for so letting the School-house, the
Protestant Alliance Friendly Society, of which you were a mem-
ber, struck your name off its books ?
10. Do you think that a Minister’s views, or aspirations, are
likely to be thwarted, when Office-bearers or members of their
families are the paid servants of the Church ?
11. Do you think, the Eev. Mr. Bell, if he could rise and take
part in things terrestrial, would permit, Avithout a protest, his old
Church St. John’s, in the very heart of the City’s population, to
bo closed, his Manse and School-house let, and the proceeds going
to maintain you in your present position?


12. Are you aware of the existing record and consequent founding
of St. Andrew’s Constitution, from which the following is taken?
St. Andrew’s Church, Hobart Town, August 2lst, 1828. The Rev,
A. McArthur,Minister presiding. Members present: Thomas Young,
John Walker, John Thompson, James Corbett, William Guun, John
Thomas, George Jervis, James Jeffry, John Clark, James Thompson,
John Knox, John Makepeace, Isaac Livermore, Peter Pacey, T. E.
Mannington, Janet Young, Elizabeth Scott, Elizabeth Knox,
Mary McArthur, S. Hobberman, S. Macdougall, Janet Anderson.
This meeting called for the purpose of electing Elders for the
Government of the Presbyterian Church instituted in the year
1823, do in the first place direct that the Constitution of the said
Church be recorded; and declare that the Constitution is as
follows:
Ist. The Westminster Confession of Faith, and the other
Standards of the Presbyterian Church in Scotland, shall in all time
coming, be the only standard of appeal in this Church in all matters
whatever relative to doctrine, discipline, and worship.
2nd. The Minister of this Congregation shall be a regularly
ordained Minister of the Presbyterian Church in Scotland.
3rd. In the event of the death or resignation of the Minister
the right of appointing a successor shall be vested in the Members
of the Congregation.
4th. It shall not be in the power of the Minister or Elders or
Members of this Congregation or of any two of these parties, or
of all combined, to add to, alter, or dispense with the jiresent Con-
stitution at any future period, or to substitute another in its
stead : and should such an attempt be made, and a division ensue
in the Session and Congregation, those members of the Session and
of the Congregation who adhere to the present Constitution shall
be held as the Session and as the Congregation, and shall, to the
exclusion of all interference on the part of others, reserve all the
rights, and enjoy all the privileges, which the present Constitution
vests in the Session and Congregation.
(Signed) Alien. McArthur, Minister.
13. You will agree with me that this Constitution is worthy of
those who founded it; and can you say that you occupy St.
Andrew’s in harmony with the design of its founders ?
14. In assuming the Pastorate of St. Andrew’s, without a call,
and without an induction, have you not violated the first principles
of Presbyterianism, and of this Constitution ?
15. While Editing the Presbyterian Magazine you stated in an
issue “ The Original intention of St. Andrew’s being a Cathedral
charge will be carried out; It was on this footing that it was more
largely endowed by the State than any of our Churches.” If St.
Andrew’s was “ more largely endowed ” by the State, do you not
think that the State expected the performance of greater duties bv


its Minister, such as visiting the G-aol, Invalid, and such like
institutions ? Do you ever visit the Invalids in their depot, and
tender to them the counsels, the consolations of Christ’s glorious
gospel: do you ever visit the Captives hard by, and tell them, that
the way of trangressors is hard, pointing them at the same time to
the mighty deliverer ?
16. You stated in the Presbyterian Magazine, while you were
minister of St. John’s, “that you had over 400 persons belonging
to your Congregation.” Now, may I ask, What has become of
those 400 persons ?
17. Is it true that the Presbyterian Magazine , in which these
statements -vCere made, recently collapsed £4OO in debt ?
18. Are you cherishing the fond delusion, that Federation with the
Australasian Church, or representation at the Convention soon to be
held at Belfast, will give a status to the Church in Hobart; relieve
the incubus of debt, and fill its empty pews ?
19. Is it to the credit of the “ Tasmanian Presbyterian Church,”
and consistent with the dignity of the “ Oldest Presbyterian Min-
ister in the Colony,” the occupier of the “ Cathedral Charge, ” to
let during the summer months to visitors from Yictoria, the
furnished. Manse of St. Andrew’s Hobart ?
These, Brethren, are questions which affect not only ourselves,
but the denomination throughout the colony ; in fact the satisfac-
tory solving of the difficulties they present affect the interests and
well being of the whole community.
We know that the Pastor of the “ Parent Presbyterian
Church ” should be a man taking a lively and active interest in the
welfare of his church, and the body politic : in all movements
for social advancement, in all that tends to suppress vice, immor-
ality, and crime : in all that tends to elevate the people he should
be foremost. His conscience may not permit him to “ don the
Blue,” but the Bagged School, the Young Men’s Christian
Association, the Benevolent Society, the Social Purity Society, the
Bible Society, the Minister’s Association, should have in him a
warm advocate, and therefore if remarks made and queries put lead
to a solution of difficulties, and we hereafter find the “ moral tone”
becoming elevated, through the Minister of the “ Parent Presby-
terian Church,” and the Centre of Church extension, taking a
livelier and more active interest in Social, Benevolent, and elevat-
ing movements, my work will not have been in vain.
I am, Brethren,
Very sincerely, yours,
JOHN GrELLIE.
Hobart,
February, 1884,
