

PRICE ONE SHILLING.
AUSTRALIAN
APPEAL
THE EVIL-THE CAUSE—THE REMEDY
INCLUDING
THE MOUNTAIN SANATORIA OF AUSTRALIA
AND
LEGISLATION FOR THE PROTECTION OP INFANT LIFE
PHILIP E
. MUSKE
THK SYDNEY
lath; surgeon to
EDWARDS, D.UNLOP & CO . LIMITED
SYDNEY. BRISBANE & LONDON
Melville, Mullen & Sladr: :
MELBOURNE & LONDON
S S, WIGG & SON: ADELAIDE
Batson & Co., Ltd., Printers, 146 Clarence-street, Sydney,




AUSTRALIAN
APPEAL.


VICTOR HUGO.
“ When the fragile little infant was first dressed, he was
placed within a chair, which would have held a dozen like
him. His brothers were then called to see him. He was
so ugly, and it was his mother who said so, and looked so
little like a human being, that Eugene, who was a big boy
and could hardly speak, called him a little brat !
“ And this puny, contemptible body contained the
germ of the greatest and noblest poetical genius since
Shakespeare. The greatest miracle I can conceive is this :
that a little piece of pink, squalling humanity can contain
the potential powers of a Raphael, a Mozart, a Beethoven,
a Shakespeare, or a Victor Hugo !
“ All other miracles become commonplace when compared
with this one.”
Joseph Forstee,
Some French and Spanish Men of Genius.


AUSTRALIAN
APPEAL
THE EVIL—THE CAUSE-THE REMEDY
PHILIP E. MUSKETT.
LATE SURGEON TO THE SYDNEY HOSPITAL
“ The health of the people should be one of the first considerations of
a statesman." —Benjamin Disraeli,
Earl of Beaconsfield.
Edwards, Dunlop & Co., Limited: Sydney, Brisbane & London
Melville, Mullen & Slade: Melbourne & London.
E. S'. Wigg & Son: Adelaide.
All Rights Reserved.


Professor J. Lewis Smith
NEW YORK,
IN ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF HIS COURTESY IN SUPPLYING
THE FULLEST INFORMATION WITH REGARD TO THE
ADMINISTRATION OF THE
GREAT NEW YORK CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION
DETAILED HEREIN,
AND
AS A TRIBUTE
TO HIS LITERARY ABILITY
DEVOTION TO THE STUDY OF DISEASE IN
CHILDREN
THIS LITTLE WORK
GRATEFULLY DEDICATED
THE AUTHOR.


PREFACE.
For more than two years a knowledge of the alarming
mortality existing amongst the young life of the great
Australian cities has haunted me. On reference to the
table on page 8, facing the opening chapter, it will be seen
that all of the four Australian metropolitan centres are
deplorably stricken in this respect. Moreover, on page 10
it will be found that in Sydney during the last six years
there has been a total of 36,422 deaths, and of these no
less a number than 12,449 have been under the age of
twelve months. In other words, Out of every three
deaths occurring in the metropolis of Sydney one is
of an infant not twelve months old. In Melbourne the
figures and proportion must be even worse ; whilst in
Adelaide and Brisbane, there is every reason to believe,
they are almost as bad as in our own case.
The truth is, the problem of the “ submerged tenth ”
in Darkest England has become that of the buried third
in the principal Australian cities. Is it not a glaring
anomaly, too, that while there is every facility, with
magnificent institutions, for the relief of disease in adults,
there is practically no provision whatever for alleviating
the crying necessities of the most helpless of our population
—indeed, it would appear that they have barely a thought
bestowed on them ?
As I walked up Broadway, in New York, just eleven
years ago, I little thought there was in active existence
there a Charitable Association which was specially organised
M 3 355 jFM 303-7


143 Elizabeth Street,
Hyde Park, Sydney.
March 14th, 1892.
to meet the very difficulty—now confronting Australia.
During the course of last year, however, it came to my
knowledge that such an Organization had been a living
reality since the year 1866. Accordingly, in the month of
May last I wrote to New York, and in August, three
months afterwards, received its Annual Reports for 1889
and 1890, giving the fullest details connected with its
administration. From these it was readily apparent that
the Association has proved a signal success, for up to the
present time it has benefited nearly half-a-million of
sick children and mothers.
It will be found within the following pages that the
New York scheme of relief includes the assistance of a
Sea-Side Hospital in connection with the Floating Hospital.
This I do not propose for Australia, but it will be seen
that the formation of a mountain sanatorium is advocated
as being more in accordance with Australian climatic
requirements.


CONTENTS.
Page.
The Evil ... ... ... .. ... ... 9
The Cause 15
The Remedy ... ... ... ... ... ... 33
INCLUDING
The Mountain Sanatoria of Australia
Legislation for the Protection of Infant Life


Mean annual rates calculated for a period of 10 years ;
Showing the Death-Rates of Children under One
Year in the Australasian Colonies, England and
France.
Colonies.
Deaths of Children
under One Year
per 1000 Births.
New South Wales
119-27
Sydney & Suburbs
166*11
„ „ ~ Country Districts
95-79
Victoria
126-21
Melbourne & Suburbs
171*73
Country Districts
98-21
Queensland
131-40
South Australia
West Australia
Tasmania
122-22
122*5
105-73
New Zealand
88-32
England and Wales
142-00
„ London
Scotland
151*10
117-01
France.
157*00
The Wealth and Progress of New South
Wales, IS9O-91,
T. A. COGHLAN.
Mr. G. H. Ayliffe, Registrar-General of Births, Deaths
and Marriages, Adelaide, informs me that the correspond-
ing death-rate of children under One Year per 1000 births
in Adelaide and Suburbs, for an average of five years, is
129*08.
Mr. Thornhill Weedon, also Compiler of Statistics,
Brisbane—advises me that the similar death-rate of children
under the age of 12 months per 1000 births in Brisbane
and Suburbs, for an average of four years, is 150*13.


ld c &uit.
The appalling table appearing on the opposite page is
unfortunately of tbe most painful Australian interest, and
must come as a distressing shock to those who, having their
attention drawn to it for the first time, realise its significance
as a National calamity. Unquestionably is it a matter for
immediate concern, for no other affair connected with the
State can approach it in importance. But the bitter
solemnity of the figures, the knowledge of the fact that
hundreds of lives are allowed to perish, the feeling of
humiliation attached to Australia’s unenviable position in
the accompanying table—all these cannot but awaken a
desire to bring about a change and rectify such a state of
affairs. For it is quite impossible to conceive of any people
being so utterly apathetic as to be indifferent to a life-loss
occurring in their very midst.
As if to make it appear all the more lamentable, too, the
volume from which it is taken is filled with statistics of an
entirely different character, which prove conclusively the
vast and satisfactory strides made by Australia in other
directions. For instance, in her commerce and shipping, in
her agricultural production, in the increase of her stock and
her wool exportation, in her mining, &c., in these and in
other matters as well, Australia has surpassed all the


expectations that the most optimistic amongst us ever dared
to hope for. But gratified as we may be with these brilliant
evidences of our progress, yet brought as we are face to
face with the dread figures, we cannot but feel that
congratulation is simply out of the question.
Although the state of matters revealed by the preceding
table is heart-rending enough, yet, when we come to
examine other statistics of Coghlan’s, it will be apparent
that similar facts array themselves in a still more convincing
manner. The following figures have been collected together
from his Vital Statistics for six years from 1886 to 1891,
and will, I fear, demonstrate only too clearly what is
going on in our midst: —
Deaths of Infants under 1 year in the Metropolis ( i.e ., Sydney and
Suburbs) in comparison with the total deaths at all ages:—
1890. 1891.
Under 1 year
Under lyear
Underlyear
Under 1 year
Under 1 year Under 1 year
1824 2075
Total all ages
Total all agi
Total all ages Total all ages Total all ages Total all ages
6258 6338 5591 6420
The meaning of the table is plainly this: During the
last six years 36,422 deaths have taken place in the
metropolis of Sydney, and of this number no less than
12,449 have been those of infants under twelve months
old. Looking at the matter in another way we find that
out of every three deaths in the metropolis of Sydney
one is of an infant under the age of twelve months.
In Melbourne and suburbs, although I cannot furnish the
exact figures, I fear the actual numbers and proportion are
even more formidable : while in the metropolitan centres of
Adelaide and Brisbane matters must be nearly as distressing
as in our own case.
It must not be supposed, however, that the alarming
significance of these figures has by any means escaped the
observant eye of Coghlan. On the contrary, there are a


few passages in The Wealth and Progress of New South
Wales, 1890-91, which show that ho is completely aware of
the present excessive death-rate occurring in Sydney
amongst the infantile population. Moreover, these identical
passages constantly appear in the earlier issues of this
yearly volume, so that they must be considered of distinct
importance to call for such periodical reproduction. But
the truth is, attention has never been directed to the
subject, and consequently amongst the mass of other
statistics his words have seemingly escaped notice. After
contrasting the different Australian colonies with the
countries of the old world, he points out that the death-
rate of New South Wales as a whole would be far more
favourable than it is. “ Were it not for the pitiable loss
of infant life, the death-rate of this colony would not
reach more than half the European average.’
Again, a little farther on, in commenting on the mortality
of the metropolis of Sydney, he remarks that the low
death-rate of New South Wales as a whole is due to the health-
iness of the country districts. And then in the following sen-
tence he proceeds to speak in this way of the metropolis :
“As far as Sydney and its suburbs are concerned,
there is no cause for congratulation; on the contrary,
the rate at which children of tender years drop into
the grave forms a pathetic commentary on the
civilization of the colony.”
Farther on again he comments on the identical table—
which has been already shown—that referring to the death-
rates of children under one year in the Australian colonies,
England, and France. It will, however, be desirable to
quote him once more : —“ The general salubrity of the
colony may be taken as well established, and if the deaths
of Sydney and suburbs, especially amongst young
children, were not relatively more numerous than for
the rest of the colony, Now South Wales need not fear
comparison with any country.”


Mean annual
temperature in the
shade.
62-
575
63- 1
6774
There are two prominent conditions obtaining in
Australia which always require to be borne in mind when
considering a matter of this kind, as they undoubtedly
exert no inconsiderable influence over disease. These
features are unique in themselves, and consist of the fact
that in a semi-tropical climate we have already a series of
rapidly populating metropolitan centres. Moreover, in
conjunction with this it must not be forgotten that Australia
is a new country, settled by a white race, who have
displaced the original dark-skinned inhabitants of the soj.l.
All these things consequently combine to bring about a
complexity of circumstances peculiar to Australia and
having no counterpart elsewhere.
The following table has been added, therefore, to bring
prominently before the mind our two distinctive peculiari-
ties—a population of the metropolitan centres increasing
by leaps and bounds, and taking place in a semi-tropical
climate :
Table showing the Australian metropolitan centres, with their mean
annual temperatures in the shade, and population according to the
last census returns (1891)
Australian metropolitan
centres.
Sydney
Melbourne.
Adelaide .
Brisbane
Population according
to the last census
returns, 1891.
387,234
489,185
133,820
102,167
For tho mean annual temperatures of these Capitals lam
indebted to the courtesy of Mr. H. C. Russell, Government
Astronomer of New South Wales; Mr. R. L. J. Ellery,
Government Astronomer of Victoria; Mr. C. Todd,
Government Observer of South Australia; and Mr. Clement
L. Wragge, Government Meteorologist of Queensland, for
the figures, and therefore they are absolutely correct.
With regard to the census returns, also, as they wer©


announced in the daily press in Sydney, as the official
returns were successively forthcoming, there can be no
doubt as to their reliability.
As I have already said, this rapid increase of population
in the chief Australian cities, taking place in a semi-tropical
climate, must bring about an aggregation of conditions
having no parallel elsewhere on the globe.


In cities, among the poor, in the classes and districts
where infant mortality exists on a large scale as a yearly
phenomenon, matters are very formidable. The exigencies
of successful hand-feeding are such that failure is almost
inevitable when poverty, ignorance, carelessness, and,
perhaps, criminal neglect are brought into conjunction with
the additional and probably insurmountable difficulties of
filthy surroundings, due to overcrowding and to defective
ventilation, drainage, and sewerage. Under such conditions
bottle-fed infants rarely survive the summer months.
“Infant Mortality,”
Dr. Thomas B. Curtis.


'(cvftC ©O/UAe
Before proceeding to consider the various causes which
lead up to the extreme frequency and distressing mortality
of the different diseases met with in early life, I should
like to pay a tribute to the memory of a gifted statistician.
And this is due to him, for it must be self-evident that
great results may accrue from well-collated statistics, by
focussing public attention upon any important matter. In
Australia we have every reason to take pride in the
complete character of our statistical returns as are put
forth in Mr. T. A. Coghlan’s Wealth and Progress of New
South Wales and Mr. H. H. Hayter’s Victorian Year Booh.
But valuable as these works are, I venture to say that if
the attention of these statisticians were drawn to one or
two other necessary returns, in the direction of infantile
and early life mortality, that the results would be of
incalculable benefit.
Dr. William Farr, the gifted statistician, to whom I have
referred, was for a long series of years Superintendent of
the Statistical Department of the Registrar-General’s
Office, Somerset House, London. Before obtaining his
diploma he set out for Paris in 1829, where he remained
for two years, and here it was that he was first attracted to
the study of hygiene and medical statistics. After


returning from the Continent he was engaged in practice
for some time, but could not refrain from devoting himself
to his favourite topic. His article on Vital Statistics in
McCulloch’s “ Account of the British Empire,” in 1837,
may be said to have laid the foundation of a new science
to which his whole life was subsequently devoted.
During 1838, in the old country, a great change came
about, and the civil registration of births, deaths, and mar-
riages became law for the first time. It was a remarkable
fact,however —atleast it seems so to usnow—thatthecolumn
stating the cause of death was added to the original
schedule only after considerable hesitation on the part of
Parliament. As a consequence of this important measure,
thus enforcing the registration of births, deaths, and mar-
riages, it became necessary to appoint some one capable of
statistically analysing the mass of material then and after-
wards to be collected throughout England. Through the
influence of Sir James Clarke, and aided by his own grow-
ing reputation, Dr, Farr gave up practice and was appointed
to the newly-created position—an appointment which
proved to be one of the wisest that could be well imagined.
Year by year his series of letters, accompanied by well-
constructed tables, were attached to the Annual Reports of
the Registrar-General, and formed the very foundation of
statistical research in England.
Dr. Farr was endowed with unrivalled powers of statis-
tical analysis, and had a complete mastery over figures
which enabled him to bring his facts to light in an absolutely
convincing manner. A well-merited compliment to his
powers is conveyed in the following : “ From first to last
marked by the same lucid marshalling of the facts, the same
masterly command of all the resources of method and
numerical investigation, the same unaffected and vigorous
English, breaking out every now and again, when stimulated
by a clear view of some generalization, into passages of
great eloquence and pure philosophy.” He remained at his


post until 1879, and passed away a few years afterwards in
1883. It is disappointing in the extreme to know that the
value of his work has been more unreservedly acknowledged
on the Continent and in America than in England itself, in
which country, indeed, his unremitting efforts in the direc-
tion of public health and sanitary progress have but received
scant recognition at the hands of the people and the
Government.
The following perfect account of the different diseases
which prove fatal during the first five years of life, although
it is considered from an English stand-point, is a valuable
contribution to Vital Statistics. Indeed, it may prove a
starting point for us in Australia, and induce us to concen-
trate our attention on the devastating diseases which prove
so deadly in the ranks of early life. It is supposed to
represent the numbers that will succumb to different
diseases in the first five years of life out of a total number
1,000,000 births :
“ The first thing to observe,” says Dr. Farr,“ is that the fatality chil-
dren encounter is primarily due to changes in themselves. Thus,
1,000,000 children just born are alive, but some of them have been born
prematurely ; they are feeble; they are unfinished; the molecules and
fibres of brain, muscle, bone, are loosely strung together; the heart and
blood, on which life depends, have undergone a complete revolution; the
lungs are only just called into play. The baby is helpless; for his food
and all his wants he depends on others. It is not surprising then that a
certain number of infants die; but in England the actual deaths in the
first year of life are 149,493, including premature births, deaths by
debility and atrophy ; diseases of the nervous system, 30,637; and of the
respiratory organs, 21,995. To convulsions, diarrhoea, inflammation of
the lungs, bronchitis, chiefly their deaths are ascribed. The total dying
by miasmatic diseases is 31,263 ; but it is quite possible that several of
the children dying of convulsions die in the early stages of some unre-
vealed zymotic disease, whose symptoms have not had time for develop-
ment Many of the cases of inflammation of the lungs may
also in like manner be whooping-coughs and other latent zymotic
diseases. In the second year of life inflammation of the lungs, bronchitis
and convulsions, are still the prevalent, and most fatal diseases; many also
die then of measles, whooping-cough, scarlatina, and diarrhoea. Scarlet
fever asserts its supremacy in the second, third, fourth, and fifth years of
age. Whooping-cough is at its maximum in the first year, measles in the
second, scarlet-fever in the third and fourth years. Thus these diseases


take up their attacks on life in succession, and follow it onwards. The
deaths from all causes under the age of five years, out of this 1,000,000
births, are 263,182 —thus leaving 736,818 survivors.”
It will now be convenient to consider briefly the main
influences at work in the causation of the excessive mortality
in early life, at present existing in Australia ; and after-
wards some reference to the characteristic features of the
principal diseases which bring about these high death-rates
will lead to a better understanding of the subject before
the reader.
In all large cities the death-rate in early life is very
excessive. There is nothing more certain than the fact
that all large cities are especially inimical to children of
tender years. This can be proved beyond all possibility of
doubt, for unfortunately the confirmatory figures are only
too much in evidence. It will suffice for the purpose of
corroboration to refer to Coghlan’s tables. The average
deduced from twenty-one years’ observations (1871-1891)
brings out distinctly the fact that the death-rate for infants
under one year for the metropolis of Sydney is enormously
in excess of that obtaining in the country districts, while a
similar tale is told for those up to the age of five years.
According to Dr. Farr it is an undeviating law that the
mortality of cities increases in direct proportion to the
density of their population, and he has constructed a series
of tables in support of this statement. But although
overcrowding has such a direct effect in increasing the
whole death-rate, yet the youngest children suffer to a far
greater extent than do the adults. The different forms of
diarrhoea which rage during the hot months are all but
confined to infants, and are most severe in densely
populated communities. This is a subject, however, to
which further reference will be made in considering the
agencies which cause these maladies. But before leaving
this matter of the increased death-rate in crowded cities, it
will be well to direct attention to the following :—ln all
large cities the parts inhabited by the wealthier classes


contain more of an adult population than do the more
crowded portions; firstly, because the birth-rate of the
richer classes is not so high as amongst the poor; and
secondly, because the domestics of the former increase the
adult proportion. On the other hand, in the poorer
neighbourhoods the birth-rate is large, and as no servants
are kept the proportion of young children is necessarily
greater. As the burden of mortality is borne chiefly by the
infantile population, it is clear that the poorer classes suffer
to a greater extent.
In warm climates the death-rate of infants and
young children, in the cities, is always greatest during
the hot months. It has been stated in the previous
proposition that the death-rate of infants and young
children in all large cities is very excessive. This
assertion, indeed, is true, no matter whether these
cities are situated in cold regions or in tropical parts*
But the period of the year in which this mortality
occurs will be different according to the climate. Thus
in Great Britain and Ireland the winter months are
the most deadly, chiefly because of the greater frequency
of affections of the lungs, such as bronchitis, &c. In the
New England States of Northern America, however, in
which hot summers alternate with very cold winters, infants
under the age of 12 months perish in great numbers during
the hot season, while the winter months prove very inimical
to those over that age. On the other hand, in warm climates
like Australia, it is mostly during the hot season that the
infant loss of life is so very severe. Here again Coghlan’s
figures compiled for a period of ISyears, from 1877 to 1891,
show conclusively that the greatest number of deaths occur
during the hot months. The same figures also bear out
another fact to which attention has been called by Professor
J. Lewis Smith, of New York, and it is this : Although the
highest death-rate prevails during the hot months, yet the
mortality is very great for a couple of months or so after


the end of the summer. It is a matter of experience that
some of the serious cases of diarrhoea in infants leave
behind a state of exhaustion, and that death may thus result
even though the diarrhoea has been stopped for some days
previously. In the same way many cases succumb in the
autumn after contracting the malady during the summer.
The disease brings about a condition of general weakness,
the bowels never quite recover themselves, and the little
sufferers linger only to pass away some time after the
original attack.
Affections of the digestive organs are always pre-
valent in infants and young children during the hot
months Of the year. It has just been mentioned that in
the old country the greatest mortality of the year occurs
amongst children during the winter months, and arises
principally from inflammatory diseases of the chest, such
as bronchitis and inflammation of the lungs, caused by cold
and damp weather. In fact the actual proportion of these
affections to all deaths is over 15 per cent,, that is to say of
all the deaths which take place under five years of age, about
one in every seven dies from bronchitis or inflammation of
the lungs. During the summer months, however, diseases
of the chest are not nearly so frequent, and affections of
the digestive organs, diarrhoea, &c., are more numerous.
On the contrary, in a climate like that of the cities in the
New England States of Northern America, where there is
an alternation of hot summers with very cold winters, there
is another state of affairs obtaining. Here inflammatory
diseases of the chest—bronchitis and inflammation of the
lungs —carry off great numbers of young children in the
winter months, but during the hot season the greatest
mortality of the year takes place, and is mostly due to the
infantile diarrhceal maladies, and of these infantile cholera
is by far the most fatal. On the other hand in Australia
where the climate is entirely dissimilar to either of the
preceding, different conditions prevail, as might only be


expected. For although bronchitis and inflammation of
the lungs are still two of the most deadly ailments met
with in young children during the cooler months, yet the
winter is nothing like so severe as in the former places, nor
is the death-roll so great. There is, however, an excessive
mortality from the diarrhoeal diseases and other affections
of the digestive organs during the hot months. Thus the
United Kingdom and the cities of the North American
States resemble each other in that they have an excessive
number of deaths in early life due to bronchitis and
inflammation of the lungs during the winter months. In
the same way Australia and these American cities have this
in common, that they are both characterised by a disastrous
mortality from affections of the digestive organs amongst
those of tender years during the hot months. It is only
during the hot summer that these latter maladies are so
particularly rife amongst the infantile population. During
the cooler parts of the year they are comparatively speaking
infrequent, and when present are mostly the mild forms of
these disorders.
What are the special agencies which prove so inimical
to young children in all large cities during the summer
months ? The answer to this question will be somewhat
facilitated by directing attention to the following striking
fact:—lt is this: Although the same atmospheric heat
prevails in the country as in the cities, indeed it is often
greater, yet the loss of life in the rural districts is very
small indeed in comparison with that which occurs in largo
towns. It is evident, therefore, that a high degree of
temperature in itself is not the cause of this excessive
death-rate, which we are considering; the fatality,
therefore, must be looked for in something quite apart
from the heat. And what this something is, which causes
this great mortality, it will be our effort to determine.
Over every large city there is a well-marked hazy appear-
ance particularly noticeable when viewed from a distance.


On a clear day it may be seen on descending from the Blue
Mountains towards the metropolis, resting over Sydney
like a vast cloud. This hazy appearance overhanging every
large centre of population is always due to the gaseous and
solid impurities with which the atmosphere is laden. The
gaseous impurities constantly existing in the air of any large
city are varied and numerous. They consist of sulphurous
and sulphuric acids, and sulphuretted hydrogen; of gases
of the nitrogen group, as the acetate, sulphide, and
carbonate of ammonium, nitrous and nitric acids ; and also
at times of compounds of phosphorus and chlorine.
There is always carbonic acid due to the decay of vegetable
and other organic matter, besides other sources which are
continually evolving it. In addition to these gaseous
impurities which exist in the atmosphere of all cities there
are also the suspended or solid matters. These latter are
easily discoverable by the aid of a beam of sunlight in a
darkened room; this is a familiar experiment and reveals
the existence of a great number of floating particles.
These suspended bodies are composed in great part of
organic matter, resulting from the various causes which
make up the life of a large town. Thus the air of a great
city is contaminated to a degree which is in striking contrast
to the pure air of the country. Moreover, all these
deleterious agencies are rendered doubly active under the
influence of the high range of temperature existing during
the hot months, and have a more deadly action upon
children of tender years.
Certain conditions unfavourable to the health of
infants and young children must always exist in every
large city. It almost goes without saying that this is a
very counterpart of the first proposition in which it was
stated that the death-rate of infants and young children is
excessive in all crowded centres. But in the present state-
ment there is more to consider at length, as it naturally
leads to an inquiry into the causes which underlie these


unfavourable conditions. In the interrogation imme-
diately preceding this, attention has been called to the fact
that the atmosphere of every large city is always contami-
nated—with various gaseous and organic impurities—to a
degree which forms a striking contrast to the pure air of
the country. And in addition to breathing this impure
atmosphere, which is part and parcel of all towns, there are
certain other circumstances which aggravate matters, and
it will be desirable to briefly consider them. When large
numbers of people are crowded together, and such must
always be the case in populous centres, all the bad effects
which necessarily result from overcrowding must exist. As
we have already seen, the disastrous consequences attached
to this overcrowding are borne almost entirely by those of
tender years. But overcrowding, although it is serious
enough in itself, yet carries in its train a greater host of
evils, and it is to these that attention must be directed. In
densely populated districts the air is manifestly not so pure
as in the more open parts, and to make matters worse the
more packed the dwellings, the narrower the streets,
and the more imperfect the ventilation. People when
crowded together, moreover, do not attach the same impor-
tance to hygienic measures as do the dwellers in less dense
parts. And besides this, too, the garbage and refuse of
the former exercise a vastly more pernicious effect by being
pent up in within a smaller compass. The drains and sinks
add their quota to the already vitiated atmosphere, and the
result is that it is simply surcharged with noisome products.
When the air is thus reeking with these noxious matters it
needs but a slight degree of summer heat to start the pro-
cess of decomposition, with all its resulting unhealthiness.
Now, cow’s milk, which is mostly used as a substitute for
the infant’s natural requirements, is a most absorbent
liquid, and, moreover, all the different forms of micro-
organisms find in it a favourable breeding place. Not only
this, but it is very prone to decomposition, and once any


fermentative or putrefactive changes have begun, it is
almost impossible to check them. It is little to be
wondered at then that the bottle-fed infant in the crowded
districts of any large city has a desperate —indeed a well-
nigh hopeless—struggle for existence during the hot
months of the year.
******
From a consideration of the foregoing it will be manifest
that certain facts having an important hearing on this
question of mortality in early life —have been brought to the
surface. It has been shown that the death-rate of children
in all large cities is excessive in comparison with that met
with in the country districts, and that it is greatest in the
summer. The frequency of disorders of the digestive organs
met with in those of tender years during the hot months has
also been commented upon. Attention has been directed, in
addition, to the impure air which is part and parcel of all
densely populated centres. And lastly, it has been pointed
out that certain conditions detrimental to the health of young
children must always exist in all large cities. It will be
beyond the purpose of the present production to investigate at
length the symptoms and causes of the most fatal diseases
met with in early life. At the same time, however, a brief
reference to these maladies is called for. And it has occurred
to me, moreover, that by specially indicating the peculiar
features of these deadly disorders it might clear the way
for a better understanding of the circumstances required for
their relief.
Infantile Atrophy.— The first of these to consider is
that devastating malady known variously as infantile
atrophy, marasmus, or wasting. It may be best described
as a progressive wasting of the entire system, resulting in
extreme emaciation, the victim being worn literally to skin
and bone. Although it is one of the most common causes
of death in infants under the age of twelve months, yet it
is not always recorded as such, for the reason that some


complication, such as diarrhoea or convulsions, arises—to
which the cause of death is ascribed. The disease begins
because the infant is unable to obtain sufficient nourish-
ment. Either the feeding is unsuitable and disagrees
with the child, or else he is not given sufficient for his
requirements. In the latter case the causes are those
which are known by the uglier name of starvation—but
this only applies to baby farms. Unless such a state of
affairs is rectified the infant continues to waste till at last
he becomes a mere shadow. Most of these cases take
place in infants who are being brought up on the bottle,
and the disease is, comparatively speaking, but seldom seen
in infants at the breast. Now, it is one of the most difficult
things in the world to bring up an infant on the bottle,
without the greatest care is exercised in the selection and
preparation of his food, and unless the surrounding
circumstances are favourable to the baby in every way.
Thus the ravages of this disease fall most heavily upon the
infants of the poor, where there is nearly always over-
crowding, with that disregard of the laws of health and
cleanliness which is so deadly to young life. And besides
these predisposing causes, there is a marked liability to
this malady in infants who are being brought up on the
bottle, during our hot months in Australia, when the
digestive powers are weak and easily deranged.
Infantile Cholera. —lnfantile cholera is best described
as an alarming diarrhoea accompanied by excessive vomiting.
This deadly malady is one of the most serious diseases
which can affect the infant, and, moreover, it is not at all
of infrequent occurrence in Australia. In New York, also,
it is a very fatal disorder, for as many as 1,500 deaths
occur from it every year. Infants of from six to twelve
months old are especially liable to it, although it may take
place at any period up to the age of two years. It is met
with during the hot months, and seems to be in some way
connected with irritating and decomposing food products,


particularly if there be such associated conditions as heat,
damp, foulness, and crowded dwelling-houses. Infants at
the breast do not run nearly the same risk of contracting
the disease as those who are brought up on the bottle. In
the same way, too ; a sudden change in the food, such as
weaning the infant during the hot summer months is always
attended with a good deal of danger; hence, if possible,
weaning in Australia should not be advised from the
beginning of December to the end of February or March,
In the worst cases the disease begins as a sudden and
violent attack of vomiting and purging, which in a few
hours reduces the infant to a state of collapse, with hollow
eyes, pinched features, and a sunken condition of the opening
on the top of the head. There is also an extraordinary
shrinking in size of the whole body ; this is a consequence
of a drain upon the system from the loss of fluids. It is
remarkable, too, that although the surface of the body and
the extremities are deadly cold, yet there is a high state of
fever inside the body, as shown by the thermometer, which
may reach to 104° or 105°. In less severe cases the
onset is more gradual and begins with persistent vomiting
and purging. The contents of the stomach are first
ejected, and then a watery fluid containing more or less bile
is brought up. As the vomiting and purging continue, the
infant soon drifts into the aspect described above and
reaches a dangerous condition by perhaps the third day.
The main features of this disease are so very peculiar that
they cannot be well mistaken. They are the ceaseless
vomiting and purging, which are so appalling ; the raging
thirst which nothing seems to satisfy ; the profuse watery
stools consisting of an almost colourless fluid ; and, lastly,
there is the rapid shrinking of the whole body and the
disposition to a state of collapse.
Inflammatory Diarrhoea.— This is a very serious bowel
complaint to which infants are especially liable during our
hot summer months. It is to be met with particularly in


the densely-populated Australian centres, where there is
much crowding together of the inhabitants. This disorder
is most common between the ages of six and eighteen
months, that being the period in which teething is in such
active progress. It is during this time, moreover, that the
following associated conditions help to derange the bowels;—
There is a sympathetic intestinal disturbance during
teething ; there are progressive changes also going on in
the glands and follicles of the bowels; and lastly, weaning
generally takes place some time within this period. But as
it is most frequently met with in crowded districts during
the hot summer months it is clear that the foregoing only
aggravate matters, but do not actually develop the attack.
Improper food and feeding from bottles which are not
scrupulously clean, or which are offensive to the sense of
smell, are often exciting causes. We may say of it, then,
that it is a disease frequently met with in infants of from
six to eighteen months old, during the hot months,
especially in over-crowded quarters of the cities, where
there are consequently a number of associated insanitary
surroundings. The attack does not begin with the
alarming suddenness of infantile cholera, which has just
been described, but generally commences with some
looseness of the bowels which soon becomes more and more
profuse. As the stomach is often involved there may be
vomiting shortly after food, and the tongue is usually
covered over with a whitish coating. The purging may
vary from six to even twenty or more motions during the
day, but under all circumstances they are horribly offensive.
After this time in unfavourable cases the purging continues
to increase in frequency, violent vomiting sets in, the little
sufferer becomes more and more exhausted, he becomes
shrunken in appearance, the eyes are hollow, and he sinks
into a state of stupor, when death—in many cases preceded
by convulsions —ends the scene. It will follow, therefore,
from the preceding that in weakly children, who are living


under the unfavourable conditions already referred to this,
is a most fatal malady. And, as in the case of infantile
atrophy and infantile cholera, any proposal which will
lessen its frequency and mitigate its severity deserves our
earnest consideration.
Bronchitis and Inflammation of the Lungs.— lt will
be more convenient to consider these two affections as one,
under the name of broncho-pneumonia, for they are almost
invariably associated together in infancy. By the term
broncho-pneumonia, we denote a disease which begins in
the bronchial tubes and runs on to affect the air-cells of the
lungs. Thus the malady represents a combination of
bronchitis and of inflammation of the lungs—these two
diseases blending together to form one disorder. Broncho-
pneumonia, moreover, is a disease which is distinctly
peculiar to infancy. Not only this, but it is extremely
frequent and constitutes one of the most fatal maladies met
with in early life. It has already been stated that broncho-
pneumonia begins in the bronchial tubes and then spreads
into the air-cells of the lung itself. This is a characteristic
of catarrh in children. There is a greater tendency for a
catarrh to spread along the mucous membrane in which it
begins. This is so much the case that in young life a cold
in the head has three or four times the chance of running
O
on to bronchitis as it has in the adult. Diseases in grown-
up persons do not exhibit the same disposition to leave the
original point of attack, consequently a cold in the head
may remain as a cold in the head, a sore throat may keep
as a sore throat, and a bronchial catarrh may begin and
end as a bronchial catarrh. Now, although broncho-
pneumonia is most frequently met with during the cooler
months in Australia, yet it exists to a very great extent all
through the year. It may be the original disease, and it
then constitutes what is termed a primary affection, or it
may develop during the course of another malady when it
forms what is known as a secondary disorder. It is the


latter of which I wish particularly to speak. In many
cases the illness has been preceded by a long continued
diarrhoea, and if the infant be very much reduced secondary
broncho-pneumonia may actually be present without the
symptoms, such as cough, &c., which usually betoken it.
And in other instances, even a slight disorder of the
stomach or bowels, which is so common in infancy, may be
the starting point of a series of events which find their
termination in the disease we are considering. In addition
to the preceding causes, however, there is the evidence of
experience to show that in all cities it is especially common
amongst debilitated and weakly infants, especially those
who dwell in overcrowded dwellings—with which must be
associated the breathing of a foul and vitiated atmosphere,
a disregard of attention to the laws of health on the part
of the parents, and general unhealthiness.
Infantile Convulsions.— These are of alarming frequency
in Australia during the whole period of infancy, that is
till the child is two years old. English statistics show that
they are the cause of death in nearly three-fourths of all
the diseases of the nervous system met with in the first
year of life. This may be taken to represent that a little
over 20 per cent, of all deaths under one year are due to
convulsions—or, in other words, that out of every five
infants who die before reaching the age of twelve months,
one dies from convulsions. Many reasons are assigned for
this excessive proportion, and the following facts require
to be borne in mind ; By the end of the second year the
brain is completely doubled in size, and it has, moreover,
one-fifth of the whole mass of the blood in the body
circulating within it. As might be expected, then, an
organ so rapidly developing and so richly supplied with
blood is easily thrown out of gear. There is, in addition,
an undue tendency to the disease in young children, and
very slight causes, even though acting at a distance from
the brain, may start an attack of convulsions. To a certain


extent it may be said that the state of a child’s health has
very little to do with the disease, and that a strong infant
may be seized with convulsions as well as a weak one. But
there is this difference, that while the former may be
equally attacked, the weak child has much less chance of
recovery. A healthy robust infant may have violent
convulsions arising from some indigestible food or from
teething, &c., in which case treatment is usually successful.
In these cases it may be observed that such a child, after
recovery from a fit, rarely looks ill—though at the same
time it must be remembered that even healthy infants may
succumb to an attack if the convulsions be very violent.
On the other hand, when they appear in a weakly puny
child, who has been reduced to a low state of vitality, the
outlook is far less hopeful. The preceding leads up towards
the point to which I should like to draw attention, and it
is this: Convulsions are of far more serious omen in feeble
debilitated infants, or when they arise during the course of
some exhausting disease. It follows, then, that the fatal
results of convulsions —an exceedingly deadly affection in
weakly puny children—will be best combated by promoting
their general health to the greatest possible extent.




The change in the appearance of these sick children, from
the morning when they go on the barge to the evening
when they leave it, is most remarkable. From cross,
peevish fretfulness and moaning illness, with dull, listless
expressions of pain and exhaustion, one sees them falling
into peaceful, quiet slumber, or, when awake, eagerly
partaking of the excellent milk and food supply so liberally
provided for them ; anon scurrying around the deck,
laughing and joyous, filled with the exhilarating fresh salt
sea air and its ozone.
Deprived of this necessary adjunct, drugs would avail
but a modicum of relief. Many would necessarily succumb
to the consequent exhaustion of prolonged illness, induced
by the vitiated atmosphere of the closely-confined apart-
ments during the oppressive heat of the summer nights,
and our mortality statistics of young children would be
largely increased but for the precious hours of cool salt air
breezes.
The constantly increasing favour with which these sick
poor are receiving these benefits is aptly illustrated by the
eagerness and persistence with which these mothers solicit
your tickets from our inspectors, and the constant daily
applications at our central office by mothers with their sick
children in arms.
Dr. Moreau Morris,
New York Board of Health.


W Svewciij
It would have been extremely unsatisfactory, after
drawing attention to a deplorable state of affairs existing in
the crowded Australian metropolitan centres, to have to
admit that nothing could be suggested for its relief. This
is not the case, however, and it is consoling to know that
there is a remedy. And what is more, it is one that will, I
believe, readily commend itself, and, consequently, the
necessary steps for its early initiation should not be long
delayed.
Through the courtesy of Professor J. Lewis Smith, of
New York, I have been put in possession of the facts
concerning the working of a Charitable Association, and
having for its object a lessening of the loss of life occurring
amongst the infants and children of the American
metropolis. Some years ago an alarming death-rate amongst
its youngest population forced itself upon public attention
in New York, and resulted in the adoption of a scheme of
relief, which has elaborated itself into the perfect
organization in active service there at the present time.
And as my object is to show clearly the working of this
Association, I shall endeavour to do so by bringing its
salient features under notice in the following pages, though
it must be borne in mind that the figures, except when


otherwise stated, apply only to the end of 1890—the
Report for 1891 not having yet reached me.
The beginning of this New York Organization.— As
I have just said, a recognition of the alarming loss of life
amongst the infantile population of New York forced itself
upon public attention some years ago, and resulted in the
formation of a Charitable Association, having for its object
the prevention of such a disastrous state of affairs. It was
organized in October, 1866, and has, therefore, been in
existence for nearly 26 years, up to the date of writing.
For 25 summers this Association has been sending sick
children and mothers on “ free fresh air ” trips, out from
their crowded homes to the untainted air and sea breezes.
It is worth noting that the necessary steps for its initiation
took place at the beginning of the American winter
months, so that it was ready to commence its good work in
the ensuing summer. In the same way, it occurred to me
that by calling attention to the matter at this period of the
year, the preliminary measures for its adoption throughout
Australia might be at once proceeded with, and thus
everything would be in readiness for the approaching hot
months.
The immense numbers who have benefited by it.—
Up to the date of the last Report—December, 1890—it has
been the means of benefiting no less a number than 426,393
sick children and mothers. Nearly half a million have
thus been carried from the crowded tenements of New
York to the invigorating breezes of its bay and harbour.
The number of lives that have been saved by this means
must be reckoned by hundreds and thousands. These
benefits are extended to all, without creed, class, or
sectarian distinction. In the words of its President, Wm.
H. Wiley, Esq., "the physical, moral, and educational
benefits resulting to this vast army of unfortunates can
hardly be over-estimated.”


The style of vessel with which this Organization
began its work, contrasted with that which it now
possesses. —It began its work in hay barges temporarily
hired for the purpose. But the gratifying success attending
these life-saving trips was so immediately apparent, and
financial assistance on the part of the public so freely
forthcoming, that the organization before very long was
enabled to build and equip a magnificent and commodious
Floating Hospital, valued at about £6OOO. This can
embark and carry from one thousand to fourteen hundred
passengers, and is in use four days in the week during the
summer months. And it is now suggested that the Floating
Hospital should go on its life-saving and health-restoring
trips six days in the week instead of the present number.
In fact attention has been specially directed to this matter
by Hr. Moreau Morris, of the New York Board of Health,
and in the course of his letter, which will be found a little
farther on, he urges that “ the demand, almost necessity,
is for daily trips.” During the hot season, when infantile
sickness is prevalent in the crowded tenements, more have
applied for passage than it was prudent to embark. As
many as 1628 sick children and mothers have been carried
at one time. But this crowded the vessel so much that
it was decided to limit the number to fourteen hundred
each trip, and any further applicants were directed to come
the next day.
The maintenance of this New York Organization.—
An intimation of this is to be obtained from the following
passage of the twenty-fourth annual Report (December,
1890) : “We commenced the year with an empty treasury
and some indebtedness, but with an abiding faith
that if our wants and needs were properly set forth, the
benevolent men and women of this great city would
respond to our appeals, made in behalf of the most
helpless of our population. The result has justified our
expectations.”


As the Treasurer’s report is presented in the American
currency, I have thought it advisable to give the figures an
approximate English value, as they will more readily be
understood by Australian readers.
Total Receipts during 1890 ... about £3898
Disbursements „ „ ... „ £3684
Balance in Treasury ... about £214
In fact the Trustees are enabled to say, year by year, in
their annual Reports—“ We have no debts.”
There are a few items in the Treasurer’s report which
will be interesting to refer to. In the first place it must
be understood that the Floating Hospital has no motive
power of its own, and is conveyed on its journey by means
of towing. Consequently there is an item of about £450
under this heading. There were twenty-eight trips made
in the season, so that the towing for each trip costs about
£l7. The Floating Hospital itself is reckoned as an
investment, and is valued at about £6OOO.
The New York scheme of relief, moreover, includes a
Sea-Side Hospital, with ten acres of land, at Cedar Grove,
Staten Island, having a valuation of a little over £6OOO.
But as I shall proceed to point out farther on, 1 do not
advocate this Sea-Side Hospital as part of an Australian
scheme, but would rather suggest the advisability of a
mountain home or hospital.
The Board of Trustees and the Officers of the
Association. —The Board of Trustees, twenty-five in
number, includes merchants and public men, together
with members of the medical and legal professions, who
are all greatly interested in this Charity; though with all
due deference I would venture to suggest that if a fair
proportion were ladies, it would be an improvement and an
advantage. The Officers of the Association are a President
a First Vice-President, a Second Vice-President, a Secre-
tary, and a Treasurer : who are elected from the Board of
Trustees.






The Officials in charge of the Floating Hospital.—
There is a Superintendent—who must possess great
sea-faring experience—and for this responsible post a
captain, or other officer who has been in steam-ship service,
is generally selected. He looks after the discipline of the
crew, the purchase of supplies, and exercises general
supervision. Captain Kelly, formerly with the Old
Dominion line, acted during the 1890 season. It is
courteously recorded that his labours were markedly
successful, and that the Floating Hospital affairs never
received more capable administration.
The Superintendent has the help of an Assistant-
Superintendent, whose duties are to assist him in every way.
The Report, indeed, proceeds to speak of the good nature,
the untiring vigilance, and attention to details shown by
the Assistant Superintendent, so that he is evidently a
valuable officer.
The Police Commissioners, 1 moreover, always lend aid
from their Department, and thus we find it gracefully set
forth that A.cting-Superintendent Byrnes kindly detailed
two careful officers to accompany each trip of the Floating
Hospital.
The Medical Officers and the Nursing Staff on the
Floating Hospital. —The responsible Medical Officer is
the Attending Physician, acting directly under the Board
of Trustees. Of Dr. H. A. B. Macauley, it is said that his
selection was a fortunate one; his industry, zeal, and
dignity combined to give his regime a strong place in the
annals of the Floating Hospital.
With the former is a Volunteer Physician, who always
accompanies the vessel on its trip. It is a voluntary
assistance accorded by the IS ew York physicians. The New
York medical profession have come promptly forward to
assist in the good work of this organization, and,
consequently, the Floating Hospital is never at a loss for a


skilled physician to help the Attending Physician on each
journey.
And, lastly, the New York Board of Health, recognising
the importance of the work taken up by this organization,
sends one of its Medical Inspectors to accompany the
hospital barge on every trip, to aid the Attending
Physician and to help him to guard against the admission
of any contagious disease.
Then, again, there are four nurses on the Floating
Hospital staff during the season, and it is pleasing to notice
that the Misses H. M. McDonald, Kate Van Wie, B. A.
Davis, and D. L. Hughes are accorded proper recognition
for their efforts.
The appointment of Matron, and her important and
salutary influence. —lt must not be supposed that
the organization reached its present stage of perfection
all at once. No ! such is not the history of any human
movement. On the contrary, in the development of this
great New York Charitable Association there has been a
constant endeavour, from its inception, to improve both in
method and practice. Even the carrying of the four
trained nurses on each trip has only been recently
introduced. So, too, with the creation of the important
position of Matron.
On this matter the Report proceeds to remark that “ the
visible success of the touch of intelligent womankind, in
connection with the special work of the Floating Hospital,
which was demonstrated by the presence of trained nurses
for the two preceding seasons, suggested to the Committee
that their preparations for the season of 1890 should
include the creation of the position of Matron, in order that
the dining-room for the patients might be under the
direct supervision of a woman of refinement, tact, and
executive ability ; and, furthermore, that the waitresses
should be young women of a demeanour superior to the
help formerly employed.”


“ Miss Mary J. Pierson was appointed to the position
thus created, and the Committee record with pleasure that
the new departure was a success. Neatness, good manners,
kindness of word and action in serving a wholesome mid-day
meal to many hundreds of women and children, were features
of the service rendered by the Matron and her assistants.”
“ The Committee feel that the Administration of the
Floating* Hospital was, as they designed it to be,
Educational and Uplifting 1 . They consider that the
usefulness of a competent Matron as a member of the
Floating Hospital has passed beyond the point of experi-
ment, and they heartily commend their experience to the
careful attention of their successors.”
The Distribution of Tickets. —According to the Report,
“ the increase in the number of opportunities of obtaining
tickets of admission to the Floating Hospital is a gratifying
response to the efforts of the Committee, that no mother
of a sick child should be without knowledge of its
existence, and our acknowledgments of co-operation are
made to the following channels of distribution, viz. :
The Board op Health.
46 Hospitals and Dispensaries
25 Charitable Societies
187 Physicians.
The Evening World.
54 Trustees and Members of the Guild.”
Assistance from the “King’s Daughters.” The
“ King’s Daughters ” would seem to be another Charitable
Association, as may be gathered from the following extract
which appears in the annual Report: “ Several circles of
the ‘ King’s Daughters ’ showed their sympathy with the
Floating Hospital administration, by contributions to our
treasury during the season; the co-operation was both
timely and helpful, and it is hoped will become widespread
throughout the order. One of the centres of work of the
‘ King’s Daughters ’ in a crowded portion of our city, was


daily in receipt of large quantities of flowers from ‘ circles ’
in the country, and on several occasions large basketsful
were sent for distribution to the women and children on the
Floating Hospital. Could the senders have seen the
happiness, brought to many pinched faces and sad
eyes, by the possession of a little bunch of flowers,
we feel assured that they would gladly see that bountiful
supplies of them are provided for every trip next summer/’
The Custom of “Named Trips.”— This is a pleasing
custom which has sprung up of late years in connection
with this great Charity. By it every donor, who subscribes
a certain amount, has the privilege of giving the trip a
name. Thus the Report records “ Vanderbilt ” trips, the
“ Jewellers’ Trade ” trip, the “ Fruit Trade ” trip, the
“ Hardware Trade ” trip, and the “ Majestic ” trip (given
through the Purser of the s.s. Majestic). All these bear
testimony to the wide-spread interest which is felt in the
organization.
Contributions. —The number of contributions reaches to
several hundreds. An enumerated alphabetical list of the
different contributors takes up, in fact, several pages of the
Report. The donations vary from a small sum, such as two
shillings, to £5O, and in two cases, at least, to £lOO. It
must be remembered, however, that these receipts include
the fund for the Sea-Side Hospital, which has been
previously referred to.
The Plates. —By the aid of the three plates, which have
been reproduced from the last Report of this Charitable
Association, the reader is enabled to witness some of the
daily scenes in connection with the Floating Hospital.
“In Line for Medical Examination ,” shows mothers and
children, about two abreast, kept in place by the crew and
police-officers, nearing the Physician for inspection.
“Embarkation ,” shows the Inspector from the New York
Board of Health scanning the patients as they approach the






gang-plank, on the look-out for improper or contagious
cases. The Attending Physician is carefully examining the
baby to see if its condition corresponds with the diagnosis
of the case, as named on the ticket of admission. The
Superintendent, with some of his crew within a second’s
call, is at his usual post, watching that all rules and
regulations covering the embarkation of this helpless
human freight are strictly carried out.
“ Little Patients ,” shows children in readiness for the
“ fresh-air trip ” from the crowded tenements of New York
to the invigorating breezes of its bay and habour.
The Opinion of Dr. Moreau Morris, of the New York
Board of Health, on this Organization.— ln a letter
addressed to Wm. H. Wiley, Esq., the President of St.
John’s Guild, Dr. Moreau Morris, writes as follows :
“ Sir, —Having again assigned to the charge of the
work of the special corps of physicians of this department,
called the “ Summer Corps,” whose special duty is to look
after and care for the sick poor of the tenement houses
during the months of July and August, I take great
pleasure in testifying to the beneficial results of the
co-operation of the St. John’s Guild.
“ Without its aid in supplying the means and facilities
for giving these poor sick children and mothers the benefits
of a day’s rest and sail upon the salt water, where they can
respire the pure fresh sea air, and be provided with an
abundant meal, or remain for a week or two at your Sea-Side
Hospital, many deaths would, undoubtedly, result to swell
our mortality records of children under five years of age.
In the care of these cases our inspectors have gladly availed
themselves of the opportunity of sending them frequently
on your Hospital Barge, and, in critical cases, to your
Sea-Side Hospital, for the benefit of salt water air and sea
bathing, with the more extended treatment of the Hospital
service.


“ They have reported to me from time to time the most
gratifying results. Many lives have been saved and serious
illness recovered from, through these instrumentalities.
The principal regret we have to offer is the fact that your
barge is available only four days of each week, while the
demand—almost necessity—is for daily trips.
“ These poor mothers cannot always arrange their
household affairs to the days now set apart, consequently
the sick children must suffer from the delay which a
prompt outing in the sea air would avert.
“ So well established in the minds of these poor people
has this great beneficiary become, during past years, that at
the first visits of the inspectors they are importuned with
requests for ‘ tickets for the St. John’s Guild Hospital
Barge.’
“ The Board of Health heartily recognises this co-
operation, and has directed that one of its medical
inspectors, on the Summer Corps, should be detailed to
accompany the Hospital Barge upon each of its trips, to
assist the doctor in charge.
“ It is the universal testimony of these Medical Inspectors,
who have accompanied the barge upon these trips, that
many lives have been saved, and many more have recovered
from serious illness and exhaustion, who must have
succumbed without this assistance.
“ The change in the appearance of these sick children,
from the morning when they go on the barge to the evening
when they leave it, is most remarkable. From cross,
peevish fretfuluess, and moaning illness, with dull, listless
expressions of pain and exhaustion, one sees them falling
into peaceful quiet slumber, or, when awake, eagerly
partaking of the excellent milk and food supply so liberally
provided for them ; anon scurrying around the deck,
laughing and joyous, filled with the exhilarating fresh salt
sea air and its ozone.


“ From personal observation, and the experience of the
past few years of this work of your Guild, I have become
fully impressed with its practical utility and usefulness.
Deprived of this necessary adjunct, drugs would avail but
a modicum of relief. Many would necessarily succumb to
the consequent exhaustion of prolonged illness, induced by
the vitiated atmosphere of the closely confined apartments
during the oppressive heat of the summer nights; and our
mortality statistics of young children would be largely
increased but for the precious hours of cool salt air
breezes.
“ The constantly increasing favour with which these sick
poor are receiving these benefits is aptly illustrated by the
eagerness and persistence with which these mothers solicit
your tickets from our inspectors, and the constant daily
applications at our central office by mothers with their sick
children in arms.
“ I feel it justly your due to mention the fact that your
improved methods of administration in caring for, and
catering to, the necessities of these people, has resulted in
removing entirely the complaints of former years, not one
having been made to us this season. This is unquestion-
ably due to the changes that have been instituted in the
management of the Hospital Barge, and the superior quality
of the attendance that has been provided this season.
The bright dining-room; scrupulously clean tables, dishes,
and other concomitants of the table service; the kind,
cheerful attendance at the table ; the unstinted abundance
of admirably cooked food and milk; and the Christian
sympathy of hearts devoted to His cause, in promoting the
welfare of these unfortunate people, has indeed produced
a revolution in their feelings, and in place of fault-
finding and dissatisfaction we hear the most heart-felt
expressions of gratitude, the only regret expressed being
that they cannot more frequently avail themselves of its
benefits.


ct The distinctive character of this charity from all others )
in that it is purely a hospital service to a class, and in
a manner nowhere else available for so great numbers; that
it is free to all, unsectarian ; in no sense a picnic excursion;
with one, and only one object in view, to serve the Great
Master, in caring for the sick poor, and saving the lives of
the helpless infants and children—must commend itself
to all.
“ For those who have the means and feel charitably
disposed, and are willing to aid in this great object,
no surer, direct, or more economical method has been
devised for so great a number.
“It does not pauperize the poor by continuous charity,
neither does it mortify the sensibilities of the unfortunate,
but extends to all the great boon of pure, fresh air, to
invigorate and restore life and make life worth living. Its
benefits are extended to thousands, where other charities
are limited comparatively to the few.
“ Sincerely and truly yours,
“ Moreau Morris, M.D.,
“ New York Board of Health .”
Lastly, I have considered it advisable to append in full
the Canons of St. John’s Guild, in order to afford those who
are interested, the opportunity of becoming thoroughly
familiar with all the details of its working. This great
Charitable Organization is enabled to proudly say, “ Our
charity is conducted on the broadest basis, and without
class or sectarian distinction.”
CANONS OF ST. JOHN’S GUILD.
CANON I.
NAME AND OBJECT.
Sec. I. —This Association shall be called Sfc. John’s Guild.
Sec. II. —Its object is and shall be to relieve the deserving poor of the
city of New York without regard to creed, colour, or nationality.


w
o
<
w
«
cn
c n
H
Z
W
H
<!




CANON 11.
MEMBERSHIP AND DUES.
Sec. I. —The Guild shall consist of members elected by the vote of a
majority of the trustees present at any meeting, or by a majority of the
members present at any meeting of the Guild.
Sec. ll.—All persons at the time of the adoption of this Canon who
are members of the unincorporated Society of St. John’s Guild shall be
members of this Association.
Sec. 111. — The dues of members shall be three dollars, payable
annually in advance.
Sec. IY. — Patrons in Perpetuity of St. John's Guild. —The contribution
of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more to the funds of St. John’s Guild
at any one time shall entitle the person giving the same to be a Patron of
St. John's Guild. Such a person shall have a Patron’s right in Perpetuity
for each sum of one thousand dollars so contributed, with the privilege of
appointing the successor in each Patron’s right in Perpetirity.
Sec. Y. — Fellotc of St. John's Guild in Perpetuity. —The contribution
of five hundred dollars ($500) at one time shall entitle the person giving the
same to be a Fellotc of St. John's Guild in Perpetuity, who shall have the
right to appoint the successor in such Fellowship in Perpetuity.
Sec. Yl.— Fellotc of St. John's Guild for Life. — The contribution of
two hundred dollars ($200) at one time shall entitle the person giving the
same to be a Fellow of St. John’s Guild for Life, if so designated.
Sec. Yll. — Member in Perpetuity of St. John’s Guild. —The contribu-
tion of one hundred dollars ($100) at one time shall entitle the person
giving the same to be a Member in Perpetuity of St. John's Guild, who
shall have the right to appoint the successor in such membership in
Perpetuity.
Sec. YIII. — Member of St. John's Guild for Life. —The payment of
fifty dollars ($5O), as a membership fee, shall entitle the member giving the
same to be a Member for Life of St. John's Guild.
Sec. IX.—All the privileges named in Sections IV., Y., YI., VII. and
YIII. of this Canon shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees.
CANON 111.
TRUSTEES.
Sec. I. —There shall be a Board of twenty-five Trustees, who shall
control the funds of the Guild, and generally direct its affairs.
Sec. II. —Seven members shall constitute a quorum, except that no
lease, purchase, or sale of real estate shall be made other than by
authority of a meeting of the Board, at which two-thirds of the members
shall be present.
Sec. 111. —The Board shall have power to require at any time reports
from officers or committees, who shall furnish the same immediately.
Sec. IV.—Any trustee who shall fail to attend six consecutive
regular meetings of the Board shall, unless excused by the Board, cease
to be a trustee.


CANON IV.
OFFICERS.
The Officers of the Association shall be a President, First Vice-
President, Second Vice-President, Secretary and a Treasurer of the
Board of Trustees.
CANON V.
STANDING COMMITTEES.
There shall be six Standing Committees of the Guild, viz.:
1. Executive Committee.
2. Committee on Floating Hospital, of nine members, four of whom
shall be physicians.
3. Committee on Sea-Side Hospital for Children, of nine members,
five of whom shall be physicians.
4. Auditing Committee, of three members.
5. Committee on Nominations, of three members.
6. General Relief Committee, of six members.
CANON VI.
ELECTION AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
Sec. 1. —The Trustees of the Guild shall divide themselves into five
classes of five each, who shall hold office for one, two, three, four and
five years respectively, and on the first Monday in December of each
year five Trustees shall be elected by the Guild to serve five years in
place of those whose terms of office shall have expired.
Sec. ll.—The officers of the Board of Trustees shall be elected by
the Board of Trustees at their annual meeting, which shall be held on
the second Monday in December in each year, and they shall hold office
for one year, or until their successors are elected.
Sec. 111. —The Standing Committees of the Guild shall be appointed
annually by the President, subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees, except the Executive Committee, which shall consist of the
officers of the Board and the Chairmen of all Standing Committees, viz. :
“ Floating Hospital,” “ Sea-Side Hospital,” “ General Relief,” “ Audit-
ing,” and “ Nominating ” Committees.
CANON VII.
TENURE OP OFFICE.
A majority of the Board of Trustees shall have power to remove
from his position any officer or member of their own Board, or of any
Committee, after charges have been preferred, and due time has been
allowed, and an opportunity for a hearing has been afforded.
CANON VIII,
FILLING VACANCIES.
In case of a vacancy occurring from any cause in any office, or in the
Board of Trustees, or in any Standing Committee, the same shall be
filled by the Board of Trustees.


CANON IX.
DUTIES OF OFFICERS.
PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENTS.
Sec. I. —The President shall preside at all meetings of the Guild and
of the Board of Trustees, and perform all other duties appertaining to
his office.
The President shall he ex officio a member of all Committees.
Sec. ll.—-The First Vice-President shall, in the absence of the
President, perform his duties.
Sec. lll.—The Second Vice-President shall, in the absence of the
President and First Vice-President, perform their duties.
THE TREASURER.
Sec. IV., Art. I. —The Treasurer shall have charge of the funds of
the Guild, subject to the control of the Board of Trustees, and shall
give such bonds for the performance of his duties as the Board may
require, and shall pay all bills and requisitions approved by the
Auditing Committee.
Sec. IV., Art. ll.—The Treasurer shall make a report of the
amount of cash on hand at every regular meeting and when required by
the Board or its constituted officers.
THE SECRETARY.
Sec. V., Art. I.—The Secretary of the Board of Trustees shall be ex
officio Secretary of the Guild.
Sec. V., Art. ll.—The Secretary shall keep the records of the
Guild, give due notice of the meetings, notify persons of their election,
keep a list of the members of the Guild, its officers and committees,
carry on correspondence on behalf of the Guild, and discharge the
ordinary duties of the secretary of an association.
CANON X.
DUTIES OP STANDING COMMITTEES.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
Sec. 1., Art. I. — The duties of the Executive Committee shall be :
To carry out the instructions of the Board in all matters committed
to them.
To have charge of the collection and disbursement of the Expense
Fund.
To devise plans for obtaining moneys and contributions for the work
of the Guild.
To take special supervision of the interest and practical workings of
the Guild and to report such recommendations as they may deem
advisable for its welfare to any meeting of the Board.
Sec. 1., Art. IT. —The Committee shall have power to terminate the
membership of members who shall fail to pay their dues after demand
has been made for the same, a list of whose names shall be filed with the
Secretary.


FLOATING HOSPITAL COMMITTEE.
Sec. 11., Art. I.—lt shall be the duty of the committee on the
Floating Hospital to supervise the Barge; they shall provide for its care,
repairs, wharfage, &c.; they shall also provide such help and supplies
as may be required for its practical work, and shall cause it to be insured
for two-thirds of its full value, all under the approval of the Board of
Trustees.
Sec. 11., Art. II. —The expense of excursions for destitute sick
children and their’mothers shall be paid out of the “ Floating Hospital
and Sea-Side Hospital Fund,” but in no case shall excursions be given
unless there are sufficient funds on hand to defray expenses.
Sec. 11., Art. lll.—The Committee shall have power to elect an
Advisory Council of physicians, whose duties shall be to give such advice
and procure such medical attendance for the excursions of the Floating
Hospital as they may deem necessary.
COMMITTEE OP THE SEA-SIDE HOSPITAL POE CHILDREN.
Sec. lll.—This Committee shall have general supervision and care
of the Sea-Side Hospital and Grounds, shall see that the Hospital is
opened in season and closed at such time as is deemed proper, and
employ such superintending officers and assistants as may be required,
and provide what may be necessary for the practical work of the
Hospital, subject at all times, however, to the direction of the Board of
Trustees.
AUDITING- COMMITTEE.
Sec. IY.—lt shall be the duty of the Auditing Committee, by one
of its members, to examine and audit all bills and*cash requisitions
before the same are presented to the Treasurer for payment, and to
examine and audit all financial reports of officers and committees.
COMMITTEE ON NOMINATIONS.
Sec. Y. —lt shall be the duty of the Committee on Nominations to
submit nominations for officers and trustees after an examination into
the fitness of the nominees. Nothing in this section shall, however,
prevent the election of any person other than a nominee of this
Committee.
COMMITTEE ON GENERAL RELIEF.
Sec. Vl.—This Committee shall have supervision of General Relief
to be given in certain cases after September Ist, 1889.
CANON XI.
Sec. I.—The funds of the Guild shall be known as the “Relief
Fund,” the “ Floating Hospital and Sea-Side Hospital Fund,” and the
“ Expense Fund.”
Sec. ll.—The “ Relief Fund ” shall consist of moneys received
except membership dues and the donations to the other Funds.
Sec. 111. —The “ Floating Hospital and Sea-Side Hospital Fund”
shall consist of moneys donated for such work.
Sec. IY.—The “ Expense Fund” shall consist of Membership dues,
special donations, and, in case of deficiency, transfers to this Fund.


From this Fund the salaries, the office rent, clerk hire, and other
expenses incidental to the work of the Guild shall be paid.
Sec. V. —Donations not designated for any particular purpose shall
be assigned as the Board may direct.
Sec. VI.— No indebtedness shall be incurred for any purpose in
excess of moneys on hand and one-half of the other property of the
Guild, and when any indebtedness is incurred in excess of moneys on
hand, it shall be authorized only by a majority of the Board.
CANON XII.
SPECIAL CONTRIBUTIONS.
Sec. I.—The contribution of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250) at
one time shall entitle the person to name an excursion to be given on the
Floating Hospital, under the direction of the Board of Trustees.
Sec. ll.—The contribution of one hundred dollars ($100) at one
time shall entitle the person giving the same to name in perpetuity, if
so designated to the Board of Trustees, a “ crib” at the Sea-Side
Hospital for Children.
CANON XIII.
MEETINGS.
Sec. I. —There shall be an annual meeting of the Guild on the first
Monday of December of each year, at which time elections shall be held
and reports presented by all the Officers, Boards, and Committees.
Sec. II. — Twenty-five members shall constitute a quorum.
Sec. lll.— Four days’ notice of all meetings shall be given.
CANON XIV.
EXPULSION.
Sec. I.— The Guild shall have power to expel any member by a vote
of two-thirds of those present at any meeting, provided charges shall
have been made in writing, due time to answer shall have been allow ed,
and an opportunity for a hearing shall have been afforded.
Sec. ll.—Any officer or member of the Board of Trustees, or of any
Committee, shall be removed from his position by the Board of
Trustees before he can be expelled by the Guild.
CANON XV.
AMENDMENT OF CANONS.
These Canons may be amended by the Board of Trustees in the following
manner:—
Notice of the proposed amendment shall be given at a regular meeting
of the Board of Trustees, and be acted upon at the succeeding regular
meeting.
Previous to the next meeting, notice that action will he taken on such
proposed amendment shall be given by the Secretary to each member of the
Board of Trustees.
Such action shall be given four days before the meeting at which action
is to be taken.
The proposed amendment shall be adopted only by a three-fourths vote
of the Trustees present at the meeting.


THE MOUNTAIN SANATORIA OF AUSTRALIA.
“ High-lands are in much request in all hot countries .”
—Dr. Paul Topinard on “ Anthropology.”
There is one interesting fact always to be remembered in
connection with the health resorts of a cold and a hot
climate, respectively. In the former the need for a change
of locality is usually due to the severity of its winter, and
hence those to whom removal is desirable find it necessary
to leave their country altogether. Thus in England and
Northern Europe, on the approach of the cold weather,
many are compelled to make a sojourn in the South of
Prance, &c., in order to escape the rigorous winter at home.
And contrariwise, the inhabitants of a torrid country seek
relief from the heat of the plains in the coolness of elevated
localities. A semi-tropical or hot country, therefore,
fortunate enough to possess mountains or hills within its
own territory has its health resorts almost at its very doors.
So it is that four of the principal Australian colonies —
New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Queens-
land—have within easy access of their metropolitan centres
a salubrious climate, which is entirely different to that met
with in the sweltering cities (lying almost at sea level)
during the hot mouths.
In India, too, the delightful stories of Rudyard Kipling
have made us conversant with Anglo-Indian life at Simla—■
this being one of the few places in which existence is
endurable during the hot Indian season. Moreover, what
has taken place at Simla is so pertinent to our future
Australian conduct that I feel constrained to give some
details. Indeed, they have a very close connection with
the matter under consideration.
Simla —the sanatorium of India and also its Summer
Capital—lies in the north-western part of the country in the
Lieutenant-Governorship of the Punjab. It is situated


amongst the hills of the lower Himalaya mountains, at an
elevation of 7,084 feet above the sea. Throughout all
these hills forests of deodar (the Indian cedar) abound,
while rhododendrons bestrew the slopes—even up to the
limit of the eternal snow. Nor only has it the advantages
which its height alone confers upon it, but it has natural
beauties of itself: its surroundings are charming and
varied : and its salubrious climate renders it particularly
well adapted for Europeans, to recruit their health after
dwelling in the plains.
It was made the Summer Capital in 1864 by Lord
Lawrence, who was Viceroy and Governor-General of India
from 1864 to 1869. Ever since his administration it has
been the abiding place, during the hot months, of the
successive Viceroys, with their Secretaries and head-
quarters establishments. But although it may now seem a
matter of surprise that the propriety of adopting such a
course should have called for any hesitation; yet it will be
interesting to recall the chain of events which led up to this
commendable step.
Lord Lawrence, with his Executive Council, conducted
the affairs of state at Government House in Calcutta.
Finding that he was unable to work there all the year
round—and especially during the hot and unhealthy
season—he requisitioned for permission to pass the
summer months in the Himalayas. This was accorded him,
although the instructions with regard to his Council were
not quite so clear; however, in the end he was allowed to
take his colleagues with him. Accordingly, the Governor-
General, the Executive Council, a part of the Legislative
Council, and the principal Secretaries repaired to Simla
during the hot months, and it thus became the Summer
Capital —and remains so to the present day.
This is somewhat of a digression from the main point at
issue, namely, the mountain sanatoria of Australia, yet I
have somewhat unduly enlarged upon the circumstances to


show that the benefit of elevated regions—in warm climates
—is at any rate officially recognised in India. It would
not require, moreover, a great stretch of imagination to
conceive of our higher legislative bodies in Australia
adopting the same sensible plan during the heat of the
summer months. And, whenever the Federal City of
United Australia is chosen, the idea should not be lost
sight of and the suitability of Cooma in the Monaro district
will render its claims entitled to consideration. Moreover,
it is centrally situated with regard to the four capitals, for
though it will pass the new alternative line of railway to
Victoria, and thus will be linked together —-more indis-
solubly than ever —the four great Australian metropolitan
centres : Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Brisbane.
It will help us considerably in this matter if we look
upon the high-lands of Australia as forming one entire
system. Beginning in Queensland they extend down the
east and along the south of Australia—somewhat in the
form of a boomerang—till they terminate near the South
Australian territory. In New South Wales they constitute
the famous Blue Mountains ; and in Victoria, the Austra-
lian Alps and the Great Dividing Range. The whole chain
varies in height in different parts, from 1,000 to 7,000 feet.
Blackheath in the Blue Mountains is 3,494 feet: Mount
Macedon ( i.e . the township itself) in the Great Dividing
Range of Victoria is nearly 2,000 feet: while Mount
Kosciusko in the Australian Alps reaches to an elevation
of 7,175 feet. These high-lands vary in their distance from
the coast, from twenty miles to one hundred and fifty or
so ; and between the mountains and the sea is the coastal
or littoral region—which includes the most important and
settled part of Australia.
Now mountain air is always distinguished from air in
ordinary by certain characteristics. It is more rarefied—
the atmospheric pressure is less. On ascending to any
great height we pass upward through the atmosphere.


leaving beneath us a certain amount of air; accordingly
the barometer falls. Moreover, it is a well known fact
that the height of mountains can be estimated by means of
the latter instrument.
There is another curious property possessed by mountain
air. It is nearly always dry, for the power of air to retain
moisture depends on the temperature —and diminishes as
the atmosphere becomes colder—so that mountain air being
cold is dry as a rule. This dryness of the mountain air
allows the sun’s rays to pass through without absorbing them,
and consequently a person may receive the full glow of the
sun, although the air surrounding him is absolutely cold. As
a result of this, patients at the mountain health resorts in
Europe may be seen with a sunshade to protect them from
the rays of the sun; and yet they require to be wrapped in
the warmest clothing, and the very breath may be seen to
freeze upon their beards. A similar phenomenon is familiar
to those who have visited our own mountains. It is
intensely hot in the sun during the day—and yet the
temperature at the same time in the shade is downright
cold. The same similar circumstance, also, occurs in
Greenland and other icy regions where the pitch upon
ships may be melted by the sun’s rays, at the very time
that the thermometer in the shade registers many degrees
of frost. It must be remembered, however, that for this
to happen the air must be quite still—for any wind currents
at such an existing temperature would necessarily produce
a chilly feeling.
Another distinguishing feature of mountain air is its
absolute purity. There is a perfect freedom from the
organic impurities and foul emanations common to crowded
cities. This attribute is hardly less important than that of
rarefaction —which is, of course, the peculiar characteristic
of mountain air. In an earlier part of this little work
special reference has been made to the well-known hazy
appearance to be observed resting over every large city,


and to the gaseous and organic impurities with which such
air is loaded. Mountain air is free from any contamination
whatever, and in this purity lies one of our most potent
weapons in the treatment of disease. In addition to this;
mountain air contains a relatively large amount of ozone.
And ozone being one of the most powerful disinfectants
known, it follows that it is a great purifier of the air—and,
moreover, ozonized air is healthy and stimulating.
As might be expected, therefore, from the possession of
these qualities mountain air is of unquestionable value in
the treatment of many diseases. During the summer
months, cases of early consumption are mostly benefited by
it—the rarefaction of the air leads to more vigorous breathing
and the interchange of gases in the lungs is more complete,
The lungs of the Indians on some of the mountain heights
of America and the natives in certain of the hill districts in
India are expanded to a considerable extent to make up for
this altered atmospheric pressure. In the English soldiers,
with affected lungs, who have been sent to the hill stations
in the Himalayas, a rapid increase in the size of the chest'
has been observed. Even in chronic cases of consumption
and inflammation of the lungs great relief is often afforded
by the coolness of the mountain air during the hot months
—for such patients suffer considerably from any excessive
heat. The heat of the summer months, moreover, has an
exceedingly depressing effect upon the nervous system.
Accordingly we find that business, literary, and professional
men who suffer from over-work, with associated worry, are
invigorated by the mountain air, which acts as a tonic and
restorative. Many, also, who have become convalescent
from an acute or exhausting disease recover their strength
more rapidly and thoroughly by a stay amongst the
mountains —the appetite improves, the muscles grow firmer,,
the sleep becomes sounder and more refreshing, and the
whole body gains in weight.


All these preceding observations on the properties and
valuable therapeutic qualities possessed by mountain air,
however, have an immediate bearing on the alarming
mortality at present existing amongst the young life of
our Australian metropolitan centres. It will be observed,
on referring to the Canons of St. John’s Guild, printed
elsewhere, that the New York system of relief includes a
Sea-Side Hospital for sick children, in conjunction with
the Floating Hospital. The adoption of this course would,
I am persuaded, prove of inconsiderable benefit as far as
Sydney is concerned. Here we breathe the warm, moist
air of the Pacific, both night and day, and all along the
adjacent coast a similar atmosphere prevails. Under these
circumstances children would derive benefit only by removal
to a different atmosphere altogether, and to this I propose
to draw attention.
In referring to the treatment of the infantile diarrhoeal
diseases, prevailing in cities, amongst infants during the
hot months, Professor J. Lewis Smith, of New York,
remarks : —“ It is difficult to obtain an atmosphere that is
entirely pure in a large city with its many sources of
insalubrity ; and all physicians of experience agree in the
propriety of sending infants affected with the summer
diarrhoea to localities in the country which are free from
malaria and sparsely inhabited, in order that they may
obtain the benefits of purer air. Many are the instances each
summer in New York city of inf ants removed to the country
with intestinal inflammation, with features haggard and
shrunken, with limbs shrivelled and the skin lying in folds,
too weak to raise (or at least hold) their heads from the
pillow, vomiting nearly all the nutriment taken, with stools
frequent and thin, resulting in great part from molecular
disintegration of the tissues — presenting, indeed, an appear-
ance seldom observed in any other disease except in the last
stages of phthisis—and returning in late Autumn with the
cheerfulness, vigour, and rotundity of health. The localities


usually preferred hy the physicians of this city are the elevated
portions of New Jersey and Northern Pennsylvania, the
Highlands of the Hudson , the central and northern parts of
New York State, and Northern New England. Taken to a
salubrious locality and properly fed, the infant soon begins
to improve if the disease be still recent, unless it be exception-
ally severe. If the disease have continued several weeks at
the time of the removal, little benefit may be observed from
the country residence until two or more weeks have elapsed .”
“An infant weakened and wasted by the summer diarrhoea,
removed to a cool locality in the country, should be warmly
dressed and kept indoor when the heavy night dew is falling-
Patients sometimes become worse from injudicious exposure
of this kind, the intestinal catarrh from which they are
suffering being aggravated by taking cold and perhaps
rendered dysenteric.”
“ Sometimes parents, not noticing the immediate improve-
ment which they have been led to expect, return to the
city without giving the country fair trial, and the life of
the infant is then, as a rule, sacrificed. Returned to the
foul air of the city while the weather is still warm, it sinks
rapidly from an aggravation of the malady. Occasionally
the change from one rural locality to another, like the
change from one wet-nurse to another, has a salutary effect.
The infant, although it has recovered, should not be
brought back while the weather is still warm. One attack
of the disease does not diminish, but increases, the liability
to a second seizure.”
What has been already adduced, therefore, should be
enough to show that the removal of a sickly infant, who is
suffering from these long continued diarrhoeal diseases, from
the foul and impure atmosphere of the large Australian
cities, during the summer months—is a life-saving
And as soon as the benefits immediately resulting from the
Floating Hospital trips became manifestly evident—as they


soon would be—the establishment of a small sanatorium in
the mountains should follow.
In Sydney there should be no difficulty whatever in the
adoption of such a plan for we are within easy reach, by
rail, of all the mountains: indeed, Lawson, Wentworth Falls,
Katoomba, Blackheath, and Mount Victoria in the Blue
Mountains, on the Great Western Railway, are close at
hand, and owing to the exertions of the Railway
Commissioners the journey occupies a shorter and
shorter time, year by year. Not so long ago it took hours
to reach Blackheath, only 73 miles from Sydney, whereas
at the present time the run is accomplished almost within
3 hours. On the Great Southern line, also, there are the
same facilities of access, and Picton Lakes, Mittagong,
Bowral, Moss Yale, and Bundanoon have their wants
attended to in accordance with the increasing favour,
which is shown to these localities as health resorts during
the hot summer months. And we may feel assured,
moreover, that the present rate of travelling will continue
to improve.
At Melbourne, likewise, equal opportunities exist for a
rapid escape from the sweltering heat of the metropolis to
the cool air of the adjacent high-lands. And Healesville
and Mount Macedon, which are only 38 and 43j miles
distance by rail, respectively —although lying in different
directions—may be considered to be almost within driving
distance of the Southern Capital.
In Adelaide, also, Mount Lofty and the surrounding
hills are in such immediate vicinity, that Adelaide may be
said to be far more favourably circumstanced than either
Sydney or Melbourne.
At Brisbane, on the other hand, far-famed Toowoomba
is too many miles away to come within the scope of any
charitable scheme, but if I mistake not there are other
high-lands much nearer the Northern metropolis than the
Darling Downs sanatorium.


LEGISLATION FOR THE PROTECTION OF
INFANT LIFE.
No scheme of relief, haying for its object the diminution
of the excessive mortality at present existing amongst the
infantile population of the Australian metropolitan centres,
would be complete without reference to the subject of
legislation in this particular direction. At the same time,
I do not propose to do more than briefly notice what has
been done in some other Countries ; leaving its practical
application to those within whose province it more naturally
falls. It will be appropriate, moreover, to proceed in this
way, for although the actual knowledge—once it becomes
known —of our present infantile death-rate should be
sufficient to hasten action ; yet an understanding of the
manner in which the problem has been dealt with elsewhere
will prove of material advantage. By this means, and with
the assistance of the facts set forth in these pages, there
should be no difficulty in devising suitable legislative
enactments to meet the exigencies now prevailing in the
large Australian cities.
The most searching inquiry that has ever been made
into the excessive fatality occurring amongst nursing
infants took place in France some years ago. The reasons
which led up to this minute investigation had their origin
in the abuses connected with the business of nursing. And
in no other country have these abuses been of such frequent
occurrence, or so startling in their revelations. In France
it would appear that it is the practice, especially in the
cities, for mothers in the better classes to leave oil suckling
their offspring, and to entrust them to wet-nurses, or else
to send them into the country —there to be brought up on
the bottle. In the former case, the suckled infant usually
fares well, although the unfortunate progeny of the
wet-nurse has to be reared elsewhere, and has scarcely any
chance of living. But under either circumstance, whether


it be the mother’s own offspring, or the wet-nurse’s
supplanted child, which is sent to the country —for such an
infant there is but little prospect of survival. Time and
again attempts have been made by the various Governments
to suppress the abuses connected with the business of
nursing ; the latest enactment being the hi Roussel, for the
protection of infants, adopted by the National Assembly in
1874.
According to Dr. Thomas B. Curtis, the disclosures
relating to baby-farming and its abuses, which came out
some years ago in England, led to the passage of an Act
for the Protection of Infant Life, which came into opera-
tion in 1872. Its leading clause enacts that “from and
after the commencement of this Act it shall not be lawful
for any person to retain or receive for hire or reward in
that behalf more than one infant, and in case of twins more
than two infants, under the age of one year for the purpose
of nursing or maintaining such infants apart from their
parents for a longer period than twenty-four hours, except
in a house which has been registered as hereinafter
provided.” The chief object of this Act was to provide
for the registration and supervision of nurses who receive
infants in their homes.
On the authority of Dr. Willard Parker, speaking in
1871, among the 35,000 annual births in New York, about
3000 children are annually got rid of in any way whereby
the individual can be secure from the penalty of the law.
In 1869, 27*4 per cent., and in 1870, 31 per cent., of all the
deaths were of infants under one year. In the foundling
asylum at Montreal, out of 4059 infants received, 3769 died,
or only 7 per cent, lived one year. On Randall’s Island 10
per cent, of infants only are saved when reared by hand,
but when suckled by nurses. When nursed by the
mother 70 per cent, are reared, while in rural towns 88 per
cent, survive.


An Act similar to the British Act was passed in
Massachusetts in 1876, entitled “An Act for the Better
Protection of Infants,” which runs thus : —Be it enacted , fyc.,
as follows :
Section I.—Whoever engages in the business of taking
nursing infants or infants under three years of age to
board, or of entertaining or boarding more than two such
infants in the same house at the same time, shall within
two days after the reception of each such infant beyond
the first two, give written notice to the board of health of
the city or town where such infant is to be entertained or
boarded, specifying the name and age of the child, and
the name and place of residence of the party so under-
taking its care; and such board of health shall have the
right to enter and inspect said house and premises while
said business is being carried on, and to direct and enforce
such sanitary measures, respecting such children and
premises as it may deem proper.
Section 2.—Any person violating any of the provisions
of this Act, or refusing admission to such board of health,
for the purpose mentioned in the preceding section, shall,
on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less
than fifty, nor more than five hundred dollars.
{Approved April 21, 1876.)
Batson & Co., Ltd., Printers, 146 Clarence Street, Sydney




*
■
'
.
.
