

80.3
o' * AN ACCOUNT
OF THE
PROCEEDINGS OF THE LAITY AND CLERGY
OP THE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND IN SOUTH
AUSTRALIA:
OCCASIONED BI THE PUBLICATION OF CERTAIN
jmttmtes of a#J&*ttoa fjeio to £s»»£
THE
AUSTRALASIAN BISHOPS,
IN OCTOBER, 1850.
PRINTED AT THE OFFICES OF THE DAILY “REGISTER" AND “ OBSERVER''
WEEKLY NEWSPAPER
1851,
s). n




AN ACCOUNT
OF THE
PROCEEDINGS OF THE LAITY AND CLERGY
OF THE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND IN SOUTH
AUSTRALIA:
OCCASIONED BY THE PUBLICATION OF CERTAIN
iWfmites of a Meeting Ijeßi Sulmej}
THE
AUSTRALASIAN BISHOPS,
IN OCTOBER, 1850.
ADELAIDE:
PRINTED AT THE OFFICES OF THE DAILY “ REGISTER” AND “ OBSERVER’
WEEKLY NEWSPAPER.
1851.




AN ACCOUNT
OF THE
PROCEEDINGS OF THE LA ITT AND CLERGY
OP THE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA;
Occasioned by the Publication of certain Minutes of a Meeting held
at Sydney by the Australasian Bishops , in October , 1850.
The following statement, drawn from the public prints, of the
Proceedings of the Laity and Clergy of the Diocese of Adelaide,
relative to the “ Minutes” promulgated by the Australasian
Bishops, at their Meeting at Sydney, in October, 1850, has been
carefully revised by the Committee appointed at the Meeting ot
the Laity, held on the 28th of January, 1851, at the Pulteney-
street School-room, Adelaide, South Australia, and are now re-
published as an authenticated record of those proceedings.
Charles Harvey Bagot,
John Baker.
F, S. Dutton.
J, H. Fisher.
John Hart.
Marshall Macdermott.
William Wyatt.
Adelaide, 28 th April , 1851.




MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
MEETING- OF THE METROPOLITAN AND SUFFRAGAN
BISHOPS OF THE PROVINCE OF AUSTRALASIA,
HELD AT SVSDNEY, FROM OCTOBER Ist TO NOVEMBER Ist,
A.D. 1850.
EE PORT.
The Metropolitan and Bishops of the Province of Australasia
having, by the good Providence of God, been permitted to assemble
themselves together in the Metropolitan City of Sydney, on the
Ist day of October, in the year of our Lord 1850; and having
consulted together on such matters as concern the progress of true
Religion, and the welfare of the Church in the said Province and in


the several Dioceses thereof, did agree to the decisions and opinions
contained in the following Report: —
I. —OBJECTS OF THE CONFERENCE.
We, the undersigned Metropolitan and Bishops of the Province
of Australasia, in consequence of doubts existing how far we are
inhibited by the Queen’s Supremacy from exercising the powers of
an Ecclesiastical Synod, resolve not to exercise such powers on the
present occasion.
But we desire to consult together upon the various difficulties in
which we are at present placed by the doubtful application to the
Church in this Province of the Ecclesiastical laws which are now
in force in England; and to suggest such measures as may seem
to be most suitable for removing our present embarrassments ; to
consider such questions as affect the progress of true religion, and
the preservation of Ecclesiastical order in the several Dioceses of
this Province ; and, finally, in reliance on Divine Providence, to
adopt plans for the propagation of the Gospel among the Heathen
races of Australasia, and the adjacent islands of the Western
Pacific.
We request the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Newcastle
to act as our Secretary, and to embody our Resolutions in a Report,
to be transmitted to the Archbishops and Bishops of the United
Church of England and Ireland.
W. G. Sydney.
G. A. New Zealand,
F. R. Tasmania.
Augustus Adelaide.
C. Melbourne.
W. Newcastle.


11. CANONS OF A.D. 1603-4.
We are of opinion that the Constitutions and Canons agreed upon
with the King’s Majesty’s license, in the Synod at London, A.D.
1603, and published for the due observation of them by his Majesty's
authority, under the Great Seal of England, form part of the estab-
lished constitution of our Church, and are generally binding upon
ourselves and the clergy of our respective Dioceses,
Where they cannot be literally complied with, in consequence of
the altered state of circumstances since the enactment of the Canons,
we are of opinion that they must be, as far as possible, complied
with in substance.
We concur also in thinking that a revisal and fresh adaptations
of the Canons to suit the present condition of the Church is much
to be desired so soon as it can be lawfully undertaken by persons
possessing due authority in that behalf.
111. FUTURE SYNODS AND CONVENTIONS, PROVINCIAL AND DIOCESAN-
We are of opinion that there are many questions of great im-
portance to the well-being of the Church in our Province, which
cannot be settled without duly constituted Provincial and Diocesan
Synods.
Without defining the exact meaning of the word Synod, as used
in the Church of England, whenever the words “ Provincial Synod”
or “ Diocesan Synod” shall be used in the following resolutions,
we understand a body composed of one or more Bishops, with re-
presentatives chosen from among the clergy, meeting at such
times and in such manner as may not be inconsistent with any law
of Church or State.
We understand the Functions of Provincial and Diocesan Synods
to be these:—
1. To consult and agree upon rules of practice and Ecclesiastical
order within the limits of the Province or Diocese.
2. To conduct the processes necessary for carrying such rules
into effect. But not to alter the Thirty-nine Articles, the Book of
Common Prayer, or the Authorized Version of the Holy Scriptures.
2. —Subdivision of Dioceses arid Consecration of Bishops.
1. We are of opinion that it appertains to a Provincial Synod,
with the concurrence of the Diocesan Synod, from time to time to
decide upon plans for such subdivision of Dioceses as may be
necessary for the more efficient discharge of the Episcopal duties,
and to recommend those plans for adoption in accordance with the
laws which shall be in force at the time.
2. We submit that no subdivision of any Colonial Diocese should
be determined on in England without previous communication with
the Bishop of that Diocese, in order that the proposed measures
may be laid before the Diocesan and Provincial Synods before they
be finally adopted.
3. We would further express our opinion, that if the Provincial


Synod should recommend a Colonial Clergyman for appointment
to fill a new or vacant See, the recommendation should be favourably
considered by the authorities in England ; and that the person de-
signated to such See should, in conformity with ancient practice, be
consecrated by the Metropolitan and Bishops of the Province, unless
grave inconvenience be likely to ensue.
3. —Provincial and Diocesan Conventions.
, of opinion that the Laity, acting by the Representa-
tives duly elected, should meet in Diocesan and Provincial Con-
ventions simultaneously with the Diocesan and Provincial Synods,
that the Clergy and Laity may severally consult and decide upon all
questions affecting the temporalities of the Church, and that no act
of either order relating thereto should be valid without the consent
of the other.
2. That any change of Constitution affecting the whole body of
the Church should be first proposed and approved in the Provincial
Synod, but should not be valid without the consent of the Provincial
Convention.
IV. CHURCH MEMBERSHIP.
We acknowledge as Members of the Church of England all per-
sons who, having been duly baptized with water, in the name of the
Father, and Holy Ghost, are conformable to the Doctrine, Go-
vernment, Rites, and Ceremonies, contained in the Book of Common
Prayer ; it being understood that they are entitled to claim at the
hands of its Ministers the Rites and Ceremonies of our Church so
long only as they shall continue conformable to the extent above
required.
By a member of the Church of England in full communion we
understand every one who, being conformable as aforesaid,’is a
partaker of the Holy Communion, as required by the rules of the
Church.
While we would leave the Synods and Conventions which may
hereafter be appointed to fix the qualification of electors, we would
express our decided convictiou that all persons elected to serve as
members of Diocesan and Provincial Conventions should be members
of the Church in full communion.
V. DISCIPLINE.
I. —Bishops and Clergy.
In consequence of statements which have been made in various
places of the arbitrary power possessed by Bishops to suspend or
revoke at their own discretion the licences of clergymen, we dis-
claim all wish to exercise any such power, and we are of opinion
that m aH cases of doctrinal error, or other Ecclesiastical offences,
the Bishops of the Province should be the Court for the trial of a
Bishop, and the Diocesan Synod should be the Court for the trial of
a Presbyter or Deacon, and that the Metropolitan and the Bishop of
the Diocese respectively should be ex officio Presidents of such
Courts, either in person, or by their Commissaries.


Further, it would appear to be necessary that any Bishop or other
Clergymen suspended or deposed by due sentence of the Court,
should be legally incapable of continuing to hold possession of any
Church, Chapel, Stipend, House, Glebe, or other temporalities
which he may have held by virtue of his office.
We are also of opinion that the form of procedure in all cases of
Appeal requires to be defined.
2.— Laity.
Bearing in mind the wish expressed in the Commination Service,
that the Godly discipline of the Primitive Church may be restored,
we are of opinion—
1. That it is the duty of every Church to seek by spiritual ad-
monitions to reclaim those of its members who are living in no-
torious sin.
We therefore hold it to be the duty of every Clergyman having
cure of souls privately to admonish all evil livers among those
committed to his charge, “as need shall require, and occasion
shall be given.” We would also remind the Lay Members of the
Church, that the Clergy are required by the Rubric to repel from
the Holy Communion all persons who are living in sin so open and
notorious as that the congregation is thereby offended, and who
after due admonition shall continue inpenitent, and without amend-
ment of life.
Provided always, that every Minister so repelling any shall give
an account of the same to the Bishop of the Diocese within 14 days
after, at the farthest. And we are of opinion, that it is the duty of
the Bishop earnestly to admonish every person so repelled to qualify
himself by repentance for admission to Holy Communion,
Until the establishment of a form of process by a Provincial
Synod, with the concurrence of a Provincial Convention, we arc of
opinion that in cases where all spiritual admonitions have failed to
reclaim members of the Church who are living in notorious sin, it
may become the duty of the Bishop, with the aid and concurrence
of his Presbyters, to pronounce such persons excommunicate so far
as to release any Clergyman from the obligation to use the burial
service, if they should die without sufficient proof of repentance.
But remembering the solemn charge which we have received at
our consecration, to “ bind up the broken, to bring again the out-
cast, to seek the lost, to be so merciful as not to be too remiss, and
so to minister discipline that we forget not mercy,” we are of opinion
that it is our duty, as in every case, so especially in those which
have been here noticed, to use faithful and affectionate admonition
before we proceed to any strict exercise of the discipline of the
Church.
VI. STATUS or CLERGY.
1. We desire to express our opinion that no Clergyman who shall
have been duly appointed and licensed to any Church or permanent


cure of souls, shall be removable therefrom except by sentence pro-
nounced, after judicial enquiry, before the Diocesan Synod.
2. That this rule should not apply to those Clergymen who have
been appointed and licensed by the Bishop to any charge expressly
understood to be of a temporary nature,
3. At the same time, we consider it to he most desirable in the
present state of the Church of England in our Dioceses, that can-
didates for Holy Orders should devote themselves to the service of
the Church, in that willing spirit which would induce them to place
themselves at the disposal of their Bishop for some definite term of
years, and leave to him the responsibility of appointing and changing
their station during such period.
VII. LITURGY.
I. —Division of Service.
We are of opinion that the Bishop of each Diocese, as Ordinary,
has a discretion to authorize Clergymen, in cases of necessity, to
divide the Morning Service, by using either the Morning Prayer,
the Litany, or the Communion Service separately ; but that each of
the services so used should be read entire.
2. —The Administration of Holy Communion.
In'parishes where the number of communicants is very great,
the Communion Service may be used separately, and the Lord’s
Supper administered at an early hour, besides the usual administra-
tion at the morning service.
In places where there is no morning service, the administration of
the Holy Communion may be in the afternoon if neccessity so require.
When the Holy Communion cannot be administered in a Church,
or other building duly licensed for the celebration of Divine Service,
it may be administered in such places as necessity shall require.
3. —Occasional Services.
We are of opinion that no clergyman has authority at his own
discretion to abridge or alter any of the occasional services of the
Church.
4. —Rules for Service on Saints’ Days falling due on Sundays , < fc.
Should a Saint’s Day fall on Ash Wednesday, Good Friday, or
on Easter Sunday, Ascension Day, Whit Sunday, or Trinity Sunday,
or on Monday or Tuesday in Easter and Whitsun weeks, the Lessons,
Collect, Epistle, and Gospel for those days are to be used.
When a Saint’s Day shall fall on any other Sunday, the Lessons
of the Saint’s Day, unless they be from the Apocrypha, are to he
used, and the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel for the Saint’s Day, with
the Collect for the Sunday.
5. —Of Persons for whom the Prayers of the Congregation are desired.
It is convenient that the names of the persons for whom the
prayers of the congregation arc desired, should be mentioned either
before the Litany or before the Prayer for all conditions of Men, as
the case may be.


The words “especially those for whom our prayers are desired,”
may be inserted in the Litany in their appropriate place.
6. —Thanksgiving Service. ”
It is convenient that the names of the persons who desire to re-
turn thanks should be mentioned before the General Thanksgiving.
The words “ particularly to those who desire now to offer up their
praises and thanksgiving for Thy late mercies vouchsafed unto
them,” may be used for persons who have not been specially
prayed for,
7. — Offertory.
We are of opinion that no clergyman can justly be suspected of
holding opinions at variance with the sound teaching of the Church,
in consequence of his compliance with the Rubric, which directs
“ that upon the Sundays and other Holy Days, if there be no Com-
munion, shall be said all that is appointed at the Communion, until
the end of General Prayer (for the whole state of Christ’s Church
Militant here on earth), together with one or more of the Collects,
concluding with the blessing.”
8. — Sponsors.
Being aware that the clergy have felt the great importance of
having duly qualified sponsors at Holy Baptism, we recommend that
the most earnest endeavours be used by them to convey correct
impressions upon that subject to their several flocks, in the hope that
suitable persons may be in all cases provided to discharge the duties
of that office.
9.— Marriage,
a. Within prohibited Degrees.
Inasmuch as it is directed by the 99 th Canon that no u person
shall marry within the degrees prohibited by the Laws of God, and
expressed in a table set forth by authority in the year of our Lord
God 1563,” we are of opinion that any clergyman of the Province,
who shall solemnize matrimony between persons so related, will be
acting in violation of the law of the Church.
Referring also to the Canons 26 and 109, and to the Rubrics
prefixed to the Communion Service, we are further of opinion that
persons so marrying within the prohibited degrees are liable to be
repelled from the Holy Communion until they have repented and
be reformed.
b. Of Persons neither of whom belong to the Church.
We are of opinion that ministers of the Church of England ought
not to solemnize marriage between persons neither of whom is of
our own communion, except in cases where the marriage cannot
without extreme difficulty be solemnized in any other way.
c. Irregularly Solemnized.
While we recognise the validity of all marriages contracted in
conformity with the laws of the State, provided that they be not
contrary to the laws of the Church, we would earnestly impress


upon all members of the Church of England the duty of having
their marriages solemnized according to the rites of the Church,
and in no outer way.
d. Caution to be used.
1- We desire to draw the attention of the clergy to the necessity
of exercising due caution before they proceed to solemnize marriage.
2. We therefore recommend that the banns be thrice published,
except in case of marriage by licence, one at least in the licensed
place of worship which is nearest to the residence of the parties
desiring to be married.
3. And the Registers of Marriage, Baptism, and Burial be kept,
and copies sent at the times required by law.
10. —Churching of Women.
We are of opinion, from the Rubric at the end of the Service for
the Churching of Women, that that service is not intended to be
used for persons who are living in such a state as would justify the
ministers in repelling them from the Holy Communion,
11. —Ministering to Dissenters.
w e are of opinion that the general principle of Colonial Legis-
lation, by which the equality of all religious denominations is re-
cognised, releases the clergy of the Church of England in these
colonies from the obligation to perform religious services for persons
who are not members of our own Church.
VIII. HOLY BAPTISM.
As Bishops engaged in the charge of extensive Dioceses are
debarred from frequent opportunities of conference, we do not pre-
sume to think that we can inform or guide the judgment of the
Church at large ; but at a time when the minds of pious and thought-
ful men are in perplexity, we cannot remain altogether silent, nor
refrain from stating what we believe to be the just interpretation
of the Creed, Articles, and Liturgy of the Church of England res-
pecting the Regeneration of Infants in Holy Baptism.
We believe Regeneration to be the work of God in the Sa-
crament of Baptism, by which infants baptized by water, in the
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, die unto sin, and rise
again unto righteousness, and are made members of Christ, children
of God, and inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven,
We believe this regeneration to be the particular grace prayed
for and expected, and thankfully acknowledged to have been re-
ceived in the baptismal services.
We believe that it is the doctrine of our Church that all infants
do by baptism receive this grace of regeneration. But remembering
the words of our Lord instituting the Holy Sacrament of Baptism
(Matt, xxviii, 19, 20), which enjoin that they who are baptized
are to be made disciples and to be taught, we are of opinion that,
whensoever an infant is baptized, an assurance ought to be given at
the same time on his behalf, by some one or more baptized persons,
that it will be brought up in the faith of Christ.


Wc do not recognise in the infant itself any unfitness which dis-
qualifies it from receiving in baptism this grace of regeneration ;
for Our Lord Jesus Christ does not deny His grace and mercy unto
such infants, hut most lovingly doth call them unto Him.
We do not believe that unworthiness in ministers, parents, or
sponsors hinders this effect of the love of Christ.
We believe that a wilful neglect of the means of grace does not
prove that the gift of regeneration was never received ; but in those
who so fall away after baptism, we believe that the consequence of
their having been regenerated is to aggravate their guilt.
Finally, we would express, first, our cordial and entire agreement
with the Articles and Formularies of our Church, in their plain and
full meaning, and in their literal and grammatical sense. Secondly,
our willing disposition to accept and use them all in their manner
which is appointed ; and, with especial reference to our present
subject, to carry on the work of Christian education in the firm
belief that infants do receive in baptism the grace of regeneration.
Thirdly, above all, we would express our unfeigned thankfulness
to Almighty Cod for the gift and preservation of these inestimable
blessings.
[Signed by the Bishops of Sydney, New Zealand, Tasmania,
Adelaide, and Newcastle.]
HOLY BAPTISM.
Upon this subject the Bishop of Melbourne preferred to state his
views as follow :
The doctrine of our Church concerning the nature and efficacy
of Holy Baptism may, in my opinion, be stated in the eight
following propositions :
1. Regeneration is that operation of the Spirit of God upon the
heart, which produces a death unto sin, and a new birth unto
righteousness. By regeneration we are made members of Christ,
children of God, and inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.
1. Baptism is the sacrament of regeneration, which is the par-
ticular grace prayed for, expected, and thankfully acknowledged to
have been received in the baptismal service.
3. The work of regeneration is wrought in all, whether they be
adults or infants, who receive baptism rightly (Art. xxvii.), but in
none others (Art. xxv.)
4. The Church, in her office for the baptism of infants, and in
that for the baptism of adults, uses the language of faith and hope,
and is not to be understood as declaring positively a fact which it
cannot certainly know, viz., that every baptized infant or every bap-
tized adult is regenerate.
5. The statement put into the mouth of a Catechumen, that he
was in baptism made a member of Christ, &c., is to be understood
in the same qualified application as the declaration which almost
immediately follows—that by God’s help he will do as his god-


fathers and godmothers had promised for him, and that he heartily
thanks his Heavenly Father that He hath called him, &c.
6. Repentance and faith are required of those who come to be
baptized, hut the Church is silent as to the fitness or unfitness of
an infant, who is incapable of repentance and faith, for receiving
regeneration in baptism.
7. The unworthiness of a minister does not take away the
effect of baptism, either in the case of infants or adults.—(Art.
xxvi.)
8. Parents are nowhere mentioned in the Articles, or in the
baptismal service ; but infants are baptized because they promise
repentance and faith by their sureties. These sureties or sponsors
are to be duly qualified persons, and no one is to be admitted god-
father or godmother before the said person so understanding has
received the Holy Communion (Canon 29). The Church, how-
ever, has not positively affirmed that the unworthiness of sponsors
disqualifies an infant for receiving the grace of baptism.
The truth of the following four additional propositions may also,
I think, be gathered from the Scriptures, and is perfectly con-
sistent with the general tenor of the Articles and Formularies of
our Church, viz.—
9. Sponsors, who themselves repent and believe, may and ought
to expect most confidently the grace of regeneration for the children
whom they bring to be baptized.
10. While the Church may and ought to use the language of
faith and hope respecting all infants brought to be baptized, im-
penitent and unbelieving sponsors are not entitled to expect any
from an ordinance which they only profane.
11. Children who have been baptized are to be taught to regard
God as their Father, and to love and trust in Him as having re-
deemed them by His Son, and sanctified them by His Spirit—to
pray that, being regenerate, and made the children of God by
adoption and grace, they may daily be renewed by the Holy Ghost
(Collect for Christmas Hay), to consider the guilt of any sins which
they may commit against God as aggravated by their having been
baptized and brought up in the faith of the Gospel.
12. Our personal repentance and faith are the only sure evidence
of our being spiritually the children of God.
Having thus stated my views of the doctrine of our Church con-
cerning Holy Baptism, I would unite with my Right Reverend
Brethren in expressing—
1. My cordial and entire agreement with all the Articles and
Formularies of our Church in their plain and full meaning, and in
their literal and grammatical sense.
2. My willing disposition to accept and use them in the manner
which is appointed; and, with especial reference to our present
subject, to carry on the work of Christian education, in the firm
belief that infants do receive in baptism the grace of regeneration.


3. Above all, my unfeigned thankfulness to Almighty God for the
gift and preservation of these inestimable blessings.
IX. EDUCATION.
I.— Schools.
We cannot incur the responsibility of seeming to countenance
any system of erroneous, defective, or indefinite religious instruc-
tion by incorporating ourselves with the Boards, either general or
local, which have the regulation and superintendence of schools so
conducted.
But wherever a Church of England School cannot be established,
the clergy, after communication with the Bishop, should consider
it their duty to remedy, as far as possible, the evils or defects of any
schools to which Church children may be sent by their parents.
2.— University.
We are of opinion that the establishment of the University of
Sydney may promote the growth of sound learning, and may in
many ways assist the Collegiate Institutions of the Church of Eng-
land in our respective Dioceses.
But while we are not unwilling that the Students in our Diocesan
Colleges and Schools should compete with all other classes of
Students in such public University examinations, on general litera-
ture and science, as may be established by a Senate, appointed
under Ordinance of the Legislature, we should decidedly object to
any University system which might have the effect of withdrawing
from our Collegiate rule the Students educated in our separate
Diocesan Institutions.
10. —Australian Board of Missions.
The objects of the Australian Board of Missions arc twofold—
Domestic and Foreign.
1. Domestic —The conversion and civilization of the Australian
Blacks.
2. Foreign —The conversion and civilization of the heathen races
in all the Islands of the Western Pacific.
The difficulties to be expected in this work, perhaps to a greater
extent than other Missions, are—
1. The low state of barbarianism in which these races now are.
2. In the Australian blacks the unsettled habits of the race.
3. The multiplicity of languages and dialects throughout the
whole field of operations.
4. The unhealthiness of many of the Australasian islands in
certain seasons of the year, especially from January to April.
These peculiar difficulties must be met by a plan of Missionary
action deviating in many respects from the practice of other Mis-
sions.
1. The low state of barbarianism in which these races are seems
to require that a select number should be brought under the most
careful training at a distance from their own tribes.


2, The unsettled habits of the Australian blacks require the
same corrective, and further suggest the necessity of providing
religious instruction for them rather by means of visiting Mission-
aries than by fixed Mission stations.
3, The multiplicity of languages makes it necessary to conduct
instruction in some one language common to all, which must be
English.
4, The unhealthiness of many of the islands makes it advisable
that Missionary action should be carried on rather by long visits of
the English Missionaries during the healthy season, than by the
occupation of permanent Mission stations.
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN CHURCH SOCIETY.
The annual meeting of this Society took place on Wednesday,
the Bth January, according to advertisement, in the Trinity School-
room. There was a large attendance of the clergymen of the
Established Church, including the Lord Bishop of Adelaide and
the incumbents of the most distant parishes of the Diocese. There
was also a large number of highly respectable laymen present, and
a still larger attendance of ladies. Shortly after 12 o’clock, His
Excellency, the Patron of the Society, and Lady Young ax-rived,
and were received with max-ked respect,
His Excellency called on the Rev W. J. Woodcock, one of the
Secretaries, to preface the business with prayer ; after which
His Excellency took the chair, and addressed the meeting as
follows :—My Lord Bishop, Ladies, and Gentlemen : It gives mo
great pleasure to attend this meeting, to receive the report of the
progress of the Church during the last year. It would be hardly
necessary, even were I able, to advert to the different topics des-
canted upon in the report. That I cannot do, for the best of all
reasons—l had no opportunity of perusing it previously ; but that
was of the less consequence, inasmuch as the several subjects would
be done justice to by the various speakers during the meeting. His
Excellency continued—There was one remark which he could not
avoid making with reference to the extension of the Church in this
colony. The principal instruments, under Providence, in that work,
were the Clergy; and although his residence had not been long
here, it was quite long enough to enable him to bear testimony to


the ability, piety, zeal, and economy with which that body was
characterized. That Avas what he could say, as a disinterested
layman, although he Avell knew that he would be accused of being
influenced by different motiA’es. (Hear, hear.) He would, how-
ever, say that here the titles of Bishop, Archdeacon, Dean, and so
forth, carried with them only the distinction of supcreminent toil,
responsibility, and anxiety. (Hear, hear.) He did not mean to
underrate the good-will and liberality of the laymen of the colony ;
and trusted that, by a combination of the two classes, the extension
of the Church would be increased greatly beyond Avhat had been
done for the last tAvo years. His late excursion into the interior had
enabled him to see that there Avere many parts of the country where
the people, yet struggling for independence, needed all the aid the
Society could afford them ; and he felt convinced the means of the
Society Avould be the only limit to the aid extended. (Applause.)
After these few general remarks, he Avould call upon the Secretary
to read the report.
The Rev. W. J. Woodcock then read the report.
On the motion of the Right Rev. the Lord Bishop or Adelaide,
seconded by C. B. Newenham, Esq,, and resolved unanimously—
1. “ That the Report now read be adopted and printed.”
On the motion of Frederic Wick steed, Esq., seconded by the
Rev. S. P. R. Allom, and resolved unanimous!}" —
2. “ That the Society recognises the duty of exerting itself tc
secure for the youth of the Colony a sound comprehensive education,
based upon religious principles.”
On the motion of the Venerable Archdeacon Hale, seconded by
the Rev. James Pollitt, and resolved unanimously—
3. “ That this meeting, impressed with the Christian obligation
of seeking the conversion and civilization of the Aborigines of
Australia and the Islands of the Pacific, hails with thankfulness the
establishment of the Native Mission at Port Lincoln.”
On the motion of William Bartley, Esq., seconded by the Rev.
J. C. Bagshaav, and resolved unanimously —
4. “ That this Society regards the measure of success already by
the Divine blessing vouchsafed, as a call to more vigorous efforts
to help to provide the ministrations of the Church for the increasing
population of the Colony.”
Marshall MacDermott, Esq., then rose and 'delivered the fol-
loAving speech : —Your Excellency, and Ladies and Gentlemen—lt
is foreign alike to my habits and inclinations to put myself forward
on public occasions ; but where questions arise which deeply affect
the interests of our religion and the purity of our faith, silence
Avould betray a want of moral courage Avhich, 1 trust, upon fitting
occasions, may not be laid to my charge. I will at once advert to
a document, emanating from a high quarter, which has just found
its way into print: I mean the Minutes of a Convention of Aus-
tralian Bishops recently held at Sydney, which, to rny mind, appears


fraught with danger, and may well excite feelings of suspicion and
alarm. The dogmas put forth in those Minutes would narrow the
terms of communion with, and admission into, the ministry of our
Church, and, in my humble judgment, appear to have been gratuitous,
unnecessary, and calculated to disturb that peace and harmony which
have hitherto happily prevailed in the province. Since the days of
the Reformation, the greatest ornaments of our Church have held
different views on the subject of baptismal regeneration ; but 1 lament
to say that those views have now become the test of party, and on
that account are much to be deplored. As this vexed question,
however, has at length been raised in this province, I think the time
has arrived when the laity are called upon to express their senti-
ments on the, subject, in a manner so unmistakeable as to show that
such tests will not be tolerated here. When we reflect on the progress
of the Tractarian doctrines—their almost imperceptible beginnings
—their fearful results—how many persons, eminent for learning and
piety, have miserably fallen from their Protestant faith and swelled
the ranks of Popery —we must deeply lament a delusion which has
overwhelmed such numbers. It would almost appear that the battle
of the Reformation is again to be fought in the nineteenth century,
to save us from lapsing into ignorance and superstition. Almighty
Cod has endowed us with reason—a talent for which we shall be
held accountable. He has also, in mercy, revealed to us His will
in the Holy Scriptures ; and we are not bound to believe anything
as doctrine which may not be proved therein. But it is our clear
right and duty to exercise, to the best of our abilities, that reason
with which we have been endowed. Experience unhappily shows
that, in seasons of prosperity, the Church has fallen off in spirituality;
and it may be in the providence of Cod, that the dangers and cala-
mities with which we are now threatened have been permitted as a
trial of our faith. I trust that you will this day exhibit that firmness
and determination in resisting the approaches of error upon which
you can reflect with satisfaction when these passing scenes are about
to close. I shall now read the resolution which 1 have to propose
for your adoption :
“ That this Society has heard with regret and alarm that the
Australian Bishops, at their recent Convention held at Sydney,
have attempted to narrow the terms of communion with, and ad-
mission into, the ministry of our Church, by their formal, gra-
tuitous, and unnecessary dogmatical declaration on the subject
of Baptismal Regeneration, thereby disturbing the peace and
harmony which have hitherto prevailed among its members in this
diocese."
His Excellency wished to make a few observations before putting
the resolution to the meeting. He certainly did not think it was
any part of the business of that day to discuss the very important
subject broached in the speech with which the resolution was in-
troduced, and he never would put himself in a position to be called


ou suddenly to give an opinion on a subject so serious, lie felt he
had cause to complain of a want of candour in not giving him notice
of the intention to bring forward the matter. (Hear, and ap-
plause.) lie held in his hand a paper purporting to he the resolu-
tions to he submitted to that meeting, and there was not in it the
most distant reference to the resolution now proposed. He was of
opinion that it was competent to any person to give notice of the
subject, and propose a special meeting for its consideration. He did
not feel called on to give any opinion on the subject, or even to
state whether he would attend such a meeting if it assembled, and
he hoped he would be allowed to retire before the resolution was
seconded. (Great applause.)
Mr. Stocks declared that His Excellency was led to think the
paper in his hand contained a copy of all the resolutions. He (Mr.
Stocks) was also of that opinion, and he hoped his friend would
withdraw his motion, which could more properly, and perhaps more
satisfactorily, be discussed another time.
Mr, MacDermott : Please Your Excellency—ln explanation of
what has taken place, if you will refer to the object of tins Society,
you will find that the resolution I have proposed is perfectly in
order. There may be a difference of opinion as to its merits ;
but lam convinced it is quite in order. Nevertheless, if a majority
of the meeting is against me on that point, I shall withdraw it.
His Excellency —lf it was a substantive question embodied in
the resolution that was to be discussed, it might be entertained,
and each might give an opinion upon it.
The Lord Bishop —lf anybody had cause to complain, he thought
it must be him, as he was not made acquainted with the charge
contained in the resolution, which involved a fact that he solemnly
denied, lie denied most solemnly that it was either the wish or
the desire of the Bishops to narrow the terms of communion, but to
abide by the law as laid down by the highest functionaries in the
realm. He agreed the present was not the time to discuss the
question just introduced. He was fully prepared to concede to all
the liberty which he claimed to himself; and so long as he was a
member of the ministry, so long would he exercise that liberty. He
denied the fact asserted in the resolution ,* it contained a mis-
statement.
His Excellency —The discussion is quite Irregular. As yet, the
resolution has not been seconded. If
Mr. Gregory Seale Walters —Please Your Excellency, I am
prepared to second the resolution, and beg to do so.*
* Mr. Gf. S. Walters afterwards published the following speech, which it
was his intention to have delivered in seconding Mr. MacDermott’s motion :
“ May it please Your Excellency: My Lord, Ladies, and Gentlemen—l
rise with feelings of pain to second the motion of my excellent friend. I
would most willingly have shrunk from this duty; hut truth demands it at my
hand, however incompetent and utterly unworthy to undertake it. Ou such


lira Excellency (excited) —Then I shall leave the chair (re-
tiring),
Mr. Farrell—Will your Excellency please to stop for a moment?
Ladies and gentlemen—l propose a vote of thanks to His Excellency
for his conduct in the chair.
Mr. Stocks seconded the motion, and the Bishop put it to the
meeting.
On its being carried,
IBs Excellency said, with peculiar emphasis, bowing towards
Mr. MacDerinott —“ Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for a vote
which, under the circumstances , is peculiarly gratifying.
His Excellency then retired.
The Rev. Mr. Woodcock said the business was not done. He
also was of opinion that it was fully competent to any layman to
propose the resolution submitted by Mr. MacDermott, and he was,
with all respect, further of opinion that His Excellency was out of
order in not putting the question. He would suggest that another
chairman be appointed, and the sense of the meeting' taken as to
whether it would entertain the motion or not-. It merely expressed
regret that a source of discord had been introduced, and he, as a
clergyman, declared he participated most sincerely in that feeling of
regret. (Applause.)
Mr. Farrell thought Mr. Macdermott, as a Member of the
Committee, ought to have given notice of any resolution he had in-
tended to bring forward.
Mr. Woodcock regretted that a bone of contention had thus
been cast into the diocese by his Lordship. Yes ; he sincerely re-
gretted the circumstance ; but that was not the time to fly, when the
occasions as this, individuals, however reluctant must speak out plainly,
firmly, and respectfully. Concurring fully in the remarks that have preceded)
I can oply add my surprise and disappointment in perusing the printed docu-
ment referred to. To mo it seems most extraordinary that the Bishops of these
colonies should have issued such a manifesto on such subjects, while the
highest authorities of our Church in England have hitherto carefully and
modestly refrained from doing so. Apart from the observations already made,
my attention, among other matters, has been called to the clauses respecting
marriages and ministering to Dissenters, as well as the incipient desire evinced
to withdraw from the authority of the present heads of the Anglican Church.
These clauses appear to me so objectionable, not to say obnoxious, as they
stand, that they throw distrust and discredit over the whole document, which
happily, however, is destitute of all validity, or any,real authority iuthe Church
itself. lam convinced that our laity are not prepared to give their assent to
strange doctrines nor priestly miracles. lam quite mistaken if they do not
utterly discard, and heartily condemn, the Bishop of Exeter and all his fol-
lowers. I believe that, now, no settlement here of the kind proposed by the
Sydney Meeting will be satisfactory to our laity, or obtain their confidence and
support, until such settlement shall have been first considered here by the
Church at large, and then referred for examination and approval to the'good
Prelate who is, by God’s blessing, placed at the head of our Church in
England. If I have spoken unadvisedly or too strongly on the occasion, let
me craye your pardon.”


proposition was brought before the meeting in a perfectly regular
manner.
Mr. Bartley said the proposition, was perfectly irregular. The
question required the utmost deliberation, and they ought to have
had proper notice.
Mr. W oodcock, with due deference to Mr. Bartley as a lawyer,
would repeat that the proposition was quite regular.
Mr. Newenham proposed, and Mr. Stock* seconded, u That the:
meeting be now adjourned.” (Confusion.)
Mr. Coombes moved as an amendment, seconded by Hr.
Bagshaw —“ That the Lord Bishop do take the Chair.”
It was hardly possible to ascertain which got the larger share of
support, the proposition or the amendment; but the latter was
understood to be carried, and the Bishop took his seat as Chairman.
Mr. Woodcock asked the Chairman to put it to the meeting—
Whether it was or was not competent in them to entertain- the pro-
position ?
Mr. Bartley said it was not competent in a Member of the
Committee to propose such a resolution without due notice.
Mr. Woodcock, said that the Committee was now defunct, after
the Report was adopted. The meeting now formed the Committee,
and he would willingly abide by their decision.
The Bishop said he had understood himself to have been placed
in the Chair merely to conclude the business left unfinished by His
Excellency. Instead of that, however, a resolution was put into
his hand directly impugning his own motives and conduct. Was it
fair ? Was it courteous ? Was it generous to urge him to act as
Chairman for such a purpose ? If the meeting thought so, he-should
go on with any business they brought before him.
Mr. Wicksteed said that Mr. Macdermott was out of order, by
proposing his resolution before the other business of the meeting
was disposed of,
Mr. Macdermott said that'- he had understood all' the- other
business to have been gone through. He meant no discourtesy to
the other members of the Committee, as >the Minutes of which he
complained w r ere only published within, a few days, so that a long
notice could not have been given. As it appeared, however, that
the sense of the meeting was against: the pressing' of his
he was ready to withdraw it. (Applause.)
A resolution, thanking the past Committee, and appointing the
Committee for the current yeari, was put to the meeting, on the
motion of Captain Hart, seconded by Mr. Fulfomj.
Carried:
The Bishop then said it was customary to close such meetings,
with prayer, and he would wish to do so now if Iris friend Mh
MacDermott (for still he would call him friend), and : those who
throught with him in this- unhappy misunderstandings concurred.
(Slight applause.)


Bishop Short then repeated the usual benediction, and declared
the meeting dissolved.
The latter part of the meeting was characterized by great irre-
gularity and confusion. All present, except the newspaper re-
porters, were upstanding; and even some of the ladies, although
silent, evinced the most intense interest in the issue of the contention.
The various speakers were repeatedly interrupted, and half-a-dozen
persons occasionally spoke at the same time; whilst the murmurings
of some, and gestures of others, pourtrayed anything but general
satisfaction at the conclusion.
MEETING OE THE LAY MEMBERS OF THE
CHURCH OE ENGLAND.
On Tuesday, January 28th, the lay members of the Church
Committee, and of that communion generally, met, pursuant to ad-
vertisement, consequent on the Lord Bishop’s notice to the Secretary
to convene a meeting on that day, in the School-room, Pulteney-
street.
The exciting causes that led to the meeting being convened had
the effect of inducing a large attendance, including a considerable
number of our leading colonists. Among those present were—His
Honor Judge Cooper; the Hon John Morphett, Hon Capt. Bagot,
Hon. Capt. Sturt, Hon, Major O’Halloran ; Captain Butler, J.P. ;
Henry Watts, Esq., J.P.; Marshall MacDcrmott, Esq., J.P. ;
R. F. Newland, Esq., J.P.; Francis Dutton, Esq., J.P. ; G, A.
Anstey, Esq., J.P. ; T. Gilbert, Esq., J.P. ; John Baker, Esq.,
J.P.; John Grainger, Esq., J.P. ; John Ellis, Esq., J.P.; J. H.
Fisher, Esq., J.P.; Captain Hart; Captain Duff; Major N.Campbell;
Captain Berkeley; Drs. Duncan, Davies, Wyatt, and Taylor ;
R. R. Torrens, W. Bartley, A. Scott, F. C. Singleton, Henry
Ayers, Gilles, Williams, Hare, Kingston, Flaxman, Charles Mann,
Younghusband, Burr, J. Adams, Esquires. Of the Clergy were
present —The Very Rev. Dean Farrell; Revs. Canon Woodcock,
Bagshaw, Coombs, Watson, Bayfield, Miller, and Platt.
On the motion of Captain Bagot,
The Hon. John Morphett was called to the Chair. He said the
question they had met to consider was one of such paramount im-
portance to their spiritual welfare, that he had no doubt the meeting
would agree with him that its business should be opened with
prayer. He would therefore call upon the Very Reverend the
Dean to Implore the Divine blessing on their proceedings. (Ap-
plause.)


The Very Reverend Dean Farrell then read the following ap-
propriate prayer: —
“ 0 God ! the Protector of all that trust in Thee; without whom
nothing is strong, nothing is holy ; increase and multiply Thy
mercy upon us. Re Thou our Ruler and Guide ; enable us so to pass
through things temporal, that we finally lose not the things eternal.
Re with us, 0 Lord I at this time with thine Especial Presence;
prevent us with thine Especial Presence—prevent us with Thy most
gracious favour; and further us with Thy continual help, |hat in the
work in which we are about to engage (as in all our works) we
may glorify thy Holy name. 0 God ! may we remember that we
are in thy presence —thine eye upon us—thine ear open to us ; and
so guide us in all we do and say, that we may seek thy glory, the
good of thy Church, and the eternal well-being of thy people. Give
to those who are about to speak a spirit of wisdom and of sound
mind, that they may so speak as thou canst approve. Let all bitter-
ness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil speaking, be put
away from us, with all malice. Let charity, love, truth, and sin-
cerity be ours. Grant, 0 Lord ! these our prayers, for His sake, who,
ere He died to save, taught us thus to pray : —Our Father,” &c.
The Chairman said the meeting was convened by the Lord
Rishop of Adelaide, on the following requisition of certain members
of the Church Committee, who were laymen :
“ To the Secretaries of the South Australian Church Society.
“ January 13, 1851.
“ Gentlemen —We, the undersigned, respectfully request you
w-ill take the necessary steps to convene, through the Committee, a
general meeting of the Members of the South Australian Church
Society, to consider the resolutions proposed at the last annual
meeting of the Society by Mr, Macdermott, seconded by Mr. Walters,
and withdrawn with a view to future discussion ; and such other
matters as may be brought forward bearing upon the ‘ Minutes of
Proceedings at a Meeting of the Rishops, held at Sydney in October
last,’ as published in the Gazette of January 4th instant.
“ M. MacDermott. “John Hart.
W. Wyatt. Wm. Gray.
John Adams, Abr. Scott.”
That requisition was, by a resolution of the Committee, referred
to the President, who replied with the following
“ Minute. —The Lord Rishop of Adelaide having received a
notification from the Committee of the South Australian Church
Society, to request that he would call a meeting of its members, has
much pleasure in complying with the spirit of the requisition, by
convening a meeting of the lay members of the Church of England
in South Australia, on Tuesday the 28th instant, at 1 o’clock, in
Pulteney-street School-room.
“ Samuel Stocks, Hon. Sec.
“ Chapter-house, January, 1850.”


They would observe that the Bishop had differed from the terms
of the requisition ; and it was believed his object in doing so was
to give wider scope and latitude to their operations. (Hear, hear.)
It would be his (the Chairman’s) duty to see that the discussion
was conducted in an orderly manner ; to secure a fair hearing to
each speaker; and to take the sense of the meeting on each resolu-
tion. He trusted their proceedings would have the effect of inducing
the Lord Bishop to satisfy the minds of the community on the sub-
ject whicfy had caused such general excitement.
Mr. Bartley (Registrar of the Diocese) here came forward with a
letter in his hand, and addressed some words to the Chairman. He was
quite inaudible, and the meeting resounded with cries of “ .Speak up !
Speak up I”
The Chairman said it was a letter from the Lord Bishop, which
he understood Avas written in a most conciliatory spirit, and Avas
well calculated to throw oil on the troubled waters of lay dissatis-
faction at the late proceedings of the Sydney Synod. He would
put it to the meeting whether the letter should be read or not.
Loud cries of “ Read, read.”)
Mr. Bartley would endeavour to elevate his A r oice so as to be
heard in every part of the meeting. He then proceeded to read as
follows: —
“ Claremont, 21st January, 1851.
“ My dear Mr. Bartley—To you, as a layman, I wish to address
a feAV words of explanation respecting the Minutes of Conference
at Sydney, which appear to me, from remarks I have both heard
and read, to haA r e been much misunderstood. It AV’as my desire and
intention to have circulated copies of those Minutes among the
laity, and for this purpose I had left instructions at Sydney to for-
Avard to me 250 copies immediately they were printed. They have
not, however, yet arrived.
u "Within ten days of my return, I read those Minutes on the
30th November to all the Clergy who could conveniently be
assembled (10 out of 16), and on leaving the Church I placed my
manuscript in the hands of the Dean, stating that any Clergyman
might have access to it; nor did I take it back again until Christ-
mas, when it became necessary for me to advert to some of the
topics in Avriting my charge. As no observation had been made to
me from any of the Clergy, it Avas certainly Avith some surprise
that I listened to the resolution proposed by Mr. MacDermott at
the Church Meeting. It is usual, I believe, when a resolution
censuring the conduct of any person or persons at a public meeting
is to be proposed, to give the persons so arraigned notice of the in-
tention, and a copy of the resolution, that they may at least have
time to consider Avhether they ‘ shall answer when they are re-
proved.’ No such courtesy, however, was shown to me,”
Mr. John Baker rose to order. If it Avas Mr. Bartley’s in ten-


tion to move sin amendment to the resolution which it was known
would he submitted to the meeting, he should wait for the proper
time; if it merely was his wish to make certain observations by
letter, he should have done so before. Any opposition to the reso-
lution from the Bishop or his friends should be expressed openly in
the meeting. (Great applause.)
Mr. R. L. Milne thought, in common courtesy, they ought to hear
the Bishop’s letter. (Applause.)
Captain Ellis thought the reading of the Bishop’s letter was
quite in order. (Great applause.)
The Chairman said that, feeling it was irregular to allow Mr.
Bartley to proceed in the first instance, he had put the question to the
meeting ; and as it was determined to hear the letter read, he must
request Mr. Bartley to proceed.
Mr. Bartley continued —But to the subject of the Minutes
themselves—
“ When I left Port Adelaide for Sydney, I w r as perfectly igno-
rant of the topics I should be called on to consider. I was sum-
moned by the Metropolitan Bishop to meet my brethren, and I
obeyed the summons. The proposed meeting was known to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and it was called for by the Legislation
touching the Colonial Church in the Imperial Parliament. On this
head, the leading principles w r hich guided our deliberations were—
-Ist—Unity w ith the United Church Church of England and Ireland
in doctrine, worship, and the Canon of Scripture ; 2nd—The lawful
supremacy of the Queen ; 3rd—The due representation of the
Clergy in Synod ; 4th—The representation of the Laity in Conven-
tions, and their co-operation in making ecclesiastical regulations
concerning the temporal matters of the Church. And if in the last
particular we were guided by the existing constitution of the Church
of England rather than that of the American Episcopal Church, I
express my own opinion, and that of some, at least, of my brethren,
when I say that we shall willingly see the Clergy and Laity re-
presented in Diocesan and Provincial Conventions, as is now done
in the latter Church. It is from want of Conventions so framed
that the isolated action of the Episcopalian portion of the Church of
this province is now, perhaps, without conference, discussion, or
mutual explanation, to be impeded by the lay portion of it. This
is badly contrived in comparison with the American system ; but
as the canons and decisions of the Clergy of England in their con-
vocation are not binding on the laitg without their consent, given
by the Queen's Majesty and by Parliament, so the voice of the
laity must be listened to with becoming respect in the Colonial
Churches.
“ It has been said that I have in my charge contradicted my own
assertions and the doctrine of the Minutes. 1 have fortunately
preserved notes of the Conferences taken at the time us they pro-


ceeded, and I am able boldly to deny, on my own part and that of
the other Bishops, any such unworthy prevarication as has been
charged upon me.
“ It has been said that the introduction of the topic on baptism
was unnecessary and gratuitous. lam guiltless of this introduction,
beyond being able to give a reason for the faith that is in me when
asked. I have never entertained the thought of narrowing the
communion of the Church, nor am I aware of any such desire or
intention on the part of my right reverend brethren. My rule is
that of Gamaliel— ‘ If this counsel or this work be of men, it will
come to nought; and if it be of God, he cannot overthrow it.’ So
long as any Clergyman subscribes and keeps the three Articles of
the 3Gth Canon, I shall not study to force upon him that construc-
tion (on a point which, though important, is not, I suppose, essential
to salvation), which I deem to be the plain, literal, and grammatical
sense of the Liturgy ; but I am ready to allow that same freedom
of judgment which I claim for myself.
“ I observe offence has been taken with regard to the Minutes
concerning marriage and burial, as if they were offensively aimed
at Dissenters. The one was Intended to guard against clandestine
marriages and bigamy, which, in the vast interior of New South
Wales, are likely to take place if the Clergy were to marry indiscrimi-
nately persons of whom they know nothing. In regard to the
funeral service, the Minute was adopted in consequence of the letter
of a pious Clergyman, certainly not of Tractarian views, whose
conscience w r as sorely burdened by having been compelled (as he
thought) to read the beautiful language of our service over the
remains of ‘ notorious ill-livers,’ dying ‘ hardened in sin.’ The
Bishops resolved to claim for the Clergy the same liberty as is
enjoyed by the Ministers of every denomination. We asserted,
therefore, the absence of any legal obligation [Mr. Walters—
They never said so. Hear, hear.] (which exists in England),
compelling every parish minister to bury the dead of that parish.
1 am persuaded that every religious Dissenter will own that the
laxity of discipline exhibited by our Church in the indiscriminate
use of that office has been one of their main objections to the
establishment in England. (Hear, hear.)
“ I have nothing more to add, but trust that both I and my Right
Reverend Brethren will strive always to have consciences void of
offence both towards God and towards men ; resting assured that
He, in His own good Providence, will take care of His own truth
and His own Church.
“ I remain, yours faithfully,
“ Augustus Adelaide,”
Marshall Macdermott, Esq., rose and spoke as follows :
It is due to you and to myself to offer some explanation touching
the “ Resolution” 1 proposed at the recent meeting of the Church


Society. For the manner in which that resolution was brought
forward, I alone am responsible ; and I should have expressed my
deep regret at the time for the apparent discourtesy of omitting to
give notice of my intention, had I not thought tne terms in which I
was censured too severe. The simple fact is, that being absorbed
in my subject, the point of etiquette never once occuired to my
mind.'' I disclaim the intention, however, of offering the slightest
disrespect to any one on that occasion; but in presence of this
meeting I must again assert and maintain the right of every
member of the Church Society, at their annual meetings, intro-
duce for discussion any subject affecting the interests of our Church.
That Resolution I am now permitted to offer for the consideration
of the laity of the Church of England here assembled; and from
the large attendance, and the deep interest expressed upon the
subject, I am led to hope that a chord has been touched which has
vibrated in the breasts of thousands. (Applause.) We must not
forget, however, the solemnity of this day’s proceedings, which
may influence, for good or evil, generations yet unborn. I would
entreat you, therefore, while asserting your principles, most innexib \
to maintain that spirit of moderation, candour, mid courtesy which
will entitle your decisions to respect; remembering that our warfare
is against principles, not men 5 and that the best Christian is also
the truest gentleman. (Hear, hear.) _ Before entering on my sub-
ject, I must heartily congratulate tliis meeting that the laity are
now called upon, for the first time in this province, to express an
opinion on matters affecting the interests of our Church; and it
would probably be better governed were they consulted more
frequently. (Hear.) Holding, as you do, the purse-strings, your
voice, restrained within limits of prudence and moderation, would
be most powerful; and in all cases I think you should hold the
temporalities of the Church. (Cheers.) At present a large, amount
of property —I mean the “ Leigh” and other funds —are vested in
the Gospel Propagation Society, for the benefit of the Church in this
province, and administered apparently by irresponsible hands, as we
never see any published accounts of expenditure. It might be
applied to support views contrary to the interests of the Church, and
it ought, in my opinion, to be administered on some fixed principles
by alboard composed of laymen. The laity, now-a-days, are ac-
customed to hear much about the so-called decisions of the Church;
but what is the Church ? A congregation of faithful men (lay and
clerical) holding pure doctrines, the clergy being simply its ministers.
(Cheers.) Having carefully considered the Sydney Minutes pro-
ponnded to the Australian Church as decisions and opinions, with a
view to discover their real character and object, I confess I have
encountered some difficulty. Ido not see the great doctrine of the
Atonement, or indeed any of the fundamental doctrines of our
Church insisted on. But Ido see a dogma put forth in a most


formal and gratuitous manner on the subject of Baptismal Regene-
ration, apparently because it is the great symbol of Tractarianism,
and therefore doubly offensive to a large majority of our Church.
(Cheers.) By the promulgation of this manifesto, the Australian
Bishops have set authority at defiance, virtually spurning the
Queen’s supremacy, and condemning the decision of the Privy
Council, in the case of Gorham against Exeter (in which our
Primate, the Archbishop of Canterbury, concurred) —(hear, hear) —
who have left this question, as our Reformers did, an open one.
And I am forced to the conclusion that the Minutes were less in-
tended to edify and promote the spiritual interests of the Australian
I Church than to serve the purposes of the Tractarian party in Eng-
i\\ and with a view of procuring imperial legislation in eccle-
siastical matters prejudicial to freedom of conscience in these colo-
nies. (Hear.) By those “ Minutes” the Australian prelates have,
to a great extent, identified themselves with the Bishop of Exeter,
who would indeed narrow the terms of communion with the Church
within infinitely small limits, having already subjected the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury to a kind of excommunication, by branding
His Grace as a heritic and schismatic, on account of his sanctioning
the judgment of the Privy Council. (Cheers.) He has refused to
receive testimonials in his Diocese because they were countersigned
hy His Grace, and has also refused to license clergymen, amongst
whom was the Rev. Mr. Simpson, because thev held Mr. Gorham's
views on Baptismal Regeneration. One of‘his followers in the
island of Madeira, the Rev. R. F. Lowe, has had the audacity to
repel from the communion-table on the same grounds Dr. Carr, the
Bishop of Bombay. And the Dioceses of Exeter, Toronto, New-
foundland, and Sydney are now weeded of almost every clergyman
who would not subscribe to the Bishop of Exeter's views. So
much for narrowing the terms of communion with our Church, f
extract the following passage from a sermon of the Rev. Dr. McNeill,
referring to the opinions on the same subject held by the Reformers
of our Church :
As a matter of fact, men of widely-differing opinions did ap-
prove of it (the Article); some making the Baptismal Service the
standard, and thereby interpreting the Article, the standard, and
thereby interpreting the Service; and both claiming to be consis-
tent and orthodox Churchmen,
‘‘So matters stood for centuries, and considering that the Church
of Christ has not yet attained to her perfection, but still sees, as
through a glass, darkly, many were content that so matters should
continue.”
But the following testimony of the Rev. Mr. Dodsworth (a
follower of the Bishop of Exeter, reported to have since joined the
hurch o. Rome), taken from one of his recent sermons, is beyond


suspicion, showing that the question was left open by our Re-
formers :
“ I think it only fair to state, that having had the advantage of
hearing the arguments in the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council in the late case, my opinion of what was really intended to
be the force of the Article 27 has undergone considerable modifi-
cation. I cannot now feel certain that the Reformers did not intend
to leave Baptismal Regeneration an open question. In the vrey
able argument of the counsel for the appellant (Mr, Turner), it was
urged with great effect, that upon a comparison of the Articles of
1536 with those of 1552, it might be fairly inferred, that the
latter were intended to open the question which was closed by the
former.”
Mr. Dodsworth further states—
“ One cannot say that it is other than a probable conclusion, that
they so worded the Article of 1552, as to include the subscription
of those who would have refused to subscribe the definite language
of the previous Article. I cannot but think that great weight was
given this consideration in the very able judgment which was
delivered.”
It thus appears that Baptismal Regeneration was left by our Re-
formers an open question, it being monstrous to suppose they would
construct services in relation to that subject, whose effect (interpreted
in accordance with the views of the Bishop of Exeter) would be to
exclude themselves from the Church, according to their avowed and
published sentiments. The decisions and opinions on this subject,
therefore, contained in the Sydney “ Minutes,” are dogmatical,
gratuitous, and unnecessary, and that they have disturbed the
peace and harmony of the Diocese, ye are witnesses ; seeing they
have torn and rent the Church for a season, and driven peace from
its bosom. No country was more free from the heartburnings occa-
sioned by the bitter controversies which have long prevailed in
England, and it was the earnest desire of the clergy generally and
of the laity to avoid them. But the “Minutes ” have applied the
torch, and it is hard to say where the conflagration may end. Upon
the authors of those Minutes a heavy responsibility must rest. We
are not schismatics —we are the supporters of order and legitimate
authority. It appears to be contemplated by the Minutes “ that
candidates for Holy Orders should devote themselves to the service
of the Church in that willing spirit which would induce them to
place themselves at the disposal of their Bishop for some definite
term of years, and leave to him the responsibility of appointing and
changing their station during that period.” And also, that a
portion of the clergy should be licensed by the Bishop to temporary
charges, who would of course be also for a term of years at the
disposal, and under the entire control, of their Lordships. Now,
the systematic training of a number of young men under strict


rules of discipline and obedience for a period of years, as Novices
and Deacons,| who would ultimately absorb all the offices of the
Ministry, and whose prospects in life shall be wholly dependant on
their Bishop, appears well calculated to destroy the independence of
the Clergy, and to inflict deep wounds upon the Church. Those
men must obviously adopt the views of their chief (be he a Gorham
or an Exeter), or abandon their prospects in the Church ; and the
system seems open to some of the strongest objections urged against
the Order of the Jesuits. Gentlemen, I view with much alarm
the attempt to r introduce Tractarianism into this province, from which
we have hitherto been comparatively free ; at this time, therefore,
it may not be out of place to attempt a definition of the term. I
believe it to be a system of theology, having for its object to unpro-
testantize the Church of England—to introduce Popish ceremonies
—to exalt the Priesthood—to substitute the Prayer Book and
traditions for the Bible—to introduce the Popish doctrines of tran-
substantiation, purgatory, confession, penance, absolution, &c., &c.
The following is an extract from a letter addressed by the Rev.
Mr. Dodsworth to Dr. Pusey, dated May, 1850, and is very cha-
racteristic :
<{ You have been of the foremost to lead us on to a higher appre-
ciation of that Church system of which Sacramental Grace is the
very life and soul. Both by precept and example you have been
the most eaimest to maintain Catholic principles. By your constant
and common practice of administering the Sacrament of Penance ;
by encouraging everywhere, if not enjoining auricular confession,
and giving special priestly absolution ; by teaching the Propitiatory
Sacrifice of the Holy Eucharist as applicatory to the sacrifice on
the Cross, and adoration of Christ, e.g., to his five wounds by
adopting language most powerfully expressive of our Incorporation
into Christ, e.g ., our being inebriated by the blood of Our Lord ;by
advocating counsels of perfection, and seeking to restore with more
or less fulness the Conventual or Monastic life. I say, by the
teaching and practice of which this enumeration is a sufficient type
and indication, you have done much to revive amongst us the system,
which may be pre-eminently called Sacramental.”—Letter, pp. 16
and 17.
God forbid that I should lay such heavy charges against a large
body of men, who regard with favour portions only of this system ;
amongst Tractarians there are many shades of opinion. But
numbers having once entered on this downward course, after
wandering for a time in the devious paths of tradition, and finding
no rest for the soles of their feet, are finally driven to seek shelter
in the Church of Rome. To counteract this movement, you must
be vigilant —you must organize the laity. If unsound doctrine is
preached in your Churches, stop the supplies, If erroneous prin-
ciples are taught in your schools, stop the supplies. (Cheers.) If


you build Churches —know the doctrines to be preached in them,
and keep the patronage in your own hands. The Australian Bishops
can when we follow the example of disobedience
they have set before us, by solemnly rejecting and repudiating in toto
their unauthorized “ Minutes ” as null and of no effect. I need
hardly remind you of the rivers of blood which were shed for the
achievement of the great Protestant Reformation, which enfranchised
the human mind from bigotry, ignorance, and superstition ; nor that
the scope and tendency of the Tractarian movement is to restore
the blackness of darkness and thraldom from which we have been
emancipated. 11 Let us hold fast the profession ot our faith without
wavering.” May God ot Mis infinite mercy avert those calamities
from our land! But my brethren of the laity, a heavy load of
responsibility now rests upon you | I believe that under Providence
the laity of England have been mainly instrumental in preserving
their Church. May yours be the same holy mission ! 1 shall now
read the resolution I have to propose:—
“ That this Meeting has heard with regret and alarm that the
Australian Bishops, at their recent Conference held at Sydney,
have attempted to narrow the terms of communion w ith, and ad-
mission into, the Ministry of our Church, by their formal, gratuitous,
and unnecessary dogmatical declaration on the subject of Baptismal
Regeneration ; thereby disturbing the peace and harmony which
have hitherto prevailed among its members in this Diocese.”
(Cheers.) _ .
G. S. Walters, Esq., seconded the resolution in the following
terms: —Brethren —L rise, for the second time, to support the
motion now before you. 1 am deeply thankful to my honoured
friend for the most interesting statement he has given ; the tacts so
luminously unfolded cannot tail to make an impression on j oui
minds. Together we have sounded the trumpet of alarm; and
together we rejoice to see that the hearts of our brethren in this
province have responded to the sound. I would willingly have
excused myself from appearing before you in a position so new to
me ; but it seems to be my duty, I hope, therefore, you will treat
me with kind indulgence, while I repeat, as as I possibly
can, a few of the many reasons that induce me to give my hearty
concurrence to this motion. Ihis is not the place for entering into
any theological discussions : nor is it, I believe, our intention to do
so. This meeting, I believe, is of a declaratory character : that is
to say, there are certain points so well understood by all, and so ap-
parent to each of us, that we have only to declare our solemn con-
victions with regard to them, and proceed at once to record our
verdict. This being done, it is to be hoped that no further vain
attempts will be made to relax our firm faith in the Word of God ;
aye—in the Word of God alone. In the language of our Church
Articles, we shall eschew all doctrine that may not be proved by


this unerring testimony. My respected friend has said with truth,
that these Minutes of the Bishops, at Sydney, will tend “ to narrow
the terms of communion with, and admission into the ministry of,
our Church.” In spite of the emphatic denial of our Bishop at the
late meeting of the Church Society, it is evident that it must he so,
where disputed doctrines are made the test for candidates for holv
orders ; the Bishops themselves having the pow er to examine and
reject those who do not agree with them. Experience determines
the fact that it is as Mr MacDermott says. Witness the diocese of
Sydney itself, where none but Tractarians are ordained for the
Ministry, to the exclusion of those w’ho hold the truth. Witness
the diocese of Toronto, in Upper Canada; witness all other dioceses
where Tractarian Bishops preside. Hear the cry raised, in the
Church Record , published in London, against the tyranny of the
colonial Bishops , hear it in the mouths of the sober-minded, and
reflecting in every place. Again, as to narrowing the Communion
with the Church, I will roundly state, that if the Sydney Minutes
were really the law of the Church, which they are not, nine-tenths
of our laity would secede. I do not believe that the Church of
Rome will ever regain power among the enlightened laity of the
present day, who can distinguish the means from the end, mid w r ill
not grasp at the shadow, and lose the everlasting substance. Ido
not pretend to go seriatim through the whole of these minutes, but
that there are some items that stand forth in bold, but obnoxious,
relief, is, as I have elsewhere stated; if the tree be known by its
fruits, what shall we say to such fruits as appear in the clauses,
respecting the solemnization of Marriages of Dissenters and the
ministering to Dissenters ? Some one in real authority once said
that, of the fruits of the Spirit, the greatest of all was charity.
But in reply to this, it may be objected, I suppose that these are
fellow-Christians, these our brethren, who, with ourselves, as I
would humbly hope, are winding their way to Heaven, and have re-
ceived no baptismal Grace. Again, what think you of the attempt
to bind the laity in matters of faith and doctrine, when we ourselves
are under orders to search the Scriptures, and to see for ourselves
if things are so ? Are we to go to these Scriptures to ascertain the
plain grand truths of Christianity ; or are we to go and consult the
traditions of men of the dark ages, and of six Bishops at Sydney,
all uninspired sinners, like ourselves? Are these persons the
fountains of living waters ? Our Church sends us to the Scriptures,
and to the Scriptures we will go. To the law and to the testimony
say we; and if Bishop, Priest, or Deacon speak contrary to these,
it is because there is no light in them. Then the attempt to tyran-
nise over the inferior order of clergy, and to quash their independence,
are we to suffer that ? Shall we not rather protect, uphold, and
maintain in worldly and spiritual honour and independence, those
ministers of the everlasting Gospel, that do their duty towards us?


1 hope what I have yet to say may not offend any one, as I intend
it not. The Tractarian tendency of these unauthorised and illegal
Minutes I have once before excepted against, 1 ask you, will you
consent to believe that in these days a priest can perform a miracle ?
If he can perform one miracle he can perform a hundred, and we
should gradually retrograde to winking Madonnas, holy Mackintoshes,
rushlights on our Communion Tables, spurious relics of holy sin-
ners, Cardinals, Councils, and infallible Popes. Our Bishops at
Sydney have, I believe, stolen a march upon us. I hear that they
have already sent home to their friends these Minutes, with the view
of obtaining an Imperial Act to pass them into law in these colo-
lonies ; and this Act, thus done, without the consent of their clergy
and laity, renders all subsequent attempts at explanation on their
parts perfectly nugatory. They have treated with contempt the
decision of Her Majesty’s Privy Council, and they have dared to do
that which the heads of the Church in England have not ventured upon.
If ever the remark of Festus was applicable, it seem so in this case :
too much learning has made these six persons mad. However you
will, in this one respect, imitate Galileo —care for none of these
things. The power to avert the evil resides in you, so therefore
does the great responsibility. Only be firm and united, and try
the apostolic injunction, prove all things and hold fast that which
is good—to that wdiich will avail you in the hour of death and in
the day of judgment. What will avail you then, that you require
now ; and let me ask, will the inventions of man be among those
requirements ? Do any of our brethren hesitate as to their course ?
To them I would recall the language of the prophet—How long
halt ye between two opinions ? Choose ye this day whom ye wall
serve. If the Lord be God, follow Him ; but if Baal (and his
images), then follow' him. (Loud and continued approbation,)
The Chairman announced that His Honor Judge Cooper wished
to propose an amendment to the resolution.
His Honor begged to state that, if he ventured to submit an
amendment to the resolution which had been proposed for their
adoption, and nobly supported by the proposer and seconder, it was
out of no feeling of disrespect for those gentlemen. He felt, in
fact, the greater difficulty, because the sentiments of the meeting
went with those gentlemen, and, indeed, so were his ow r n to a cer-
tain extent. It w r as with the form in which the resolution was put,,
rather than with the principle it contained, that he disagreed. He
felt that he must appear under peculiar disadvantages on this
occasion, because he was not in the habit of attending and taking
part in meetings where there w r as a probability of party feeling
arising ; he abstained, from a feeling that it might be injurious to
his character for impartiality, and diminish his usefulness in his
judicial capacity. (Cheers.) The resolution, he confessed, had
given him great pain. He had come to the meeting entirely on his


own opinion, without consulting auy one. He had simply mentioned
the subject to one friend, who had concurred in the propriety of his
attending the meeting, and had promised to he there to support his
motion, as a seconder was necessary. At that time he and his
friend were quite unaware what resolutions would be pi'oposed.
He found that unavoidable engagements would prevent the attend-
ance of that friend. He then proceeded to read the following
amendment to the resolution, stating that, as to the wording of it,
or the mode of carrying it into effect, he placed himself entirely in
the hands of the meeting :
“ Resolved—That this meeting has heard with alarm that, at a
meeting of the Metropolitan and Suffragan Bishops of the Province
of Australia, recently held at Sydney, a plan has been devised for
the government of the Church of England in Australasia, wherein
no provision is made for appeal from the decisions of the Provincial
Synod to Her Majesty in Privy Council. That a petition be pre-
pared for presentation to Her Majesty the Queen, respectfully
praying Her Majesty that she will be graciously pleased not to as-
sent to any measure for establishing a general system of Church
Government in the provinces of Australia, in accordance with the
Right Reverend Bishops thereof, until Her Majesty’s faithful sub-
jects, members of the Church of England in South Australia, have
had an opportunity of considering the same. That a committee be
appointed for preparing such petition.”
His Honor, having read the amendment, was proceeding to comment
on it, when the Rev. Mr, Woodcock declared that it was not an
amendment upon, but an addition to, Mr, MacDermott’s resolution.
Of that His Honor thought the objector might allow him to be the
best judge. (Applause.) He thought that it certainly was an
amendment, inasmuch as the resolution was of a condemnatory
character, confining itself to a censure on the proceedings of the
Synod, without substituting any plan by which the evils complained,
of might be remedied; whilst his amendment did not convey any
censure, and did propose a remedial plan. (Hcai*, hear.) How-
ever much many in that meeting, however much he himself might
regret recent proceedings in England and elsewhere, they should not
be too hasty to censure
Mr, Rorert Lyon Milne stood up and addressed the Chairman,
lie was called to order, and immediately sat down.
His Honor went on to call attention to the declaration of the six
Bishops —five of whom, it appeared, were with the Bishop of Exeter,
and one, the Bishop of Melbourne, was what he might term of the
evangelical party. (Applause.) In calling attention to the Sydney
Minutes, it was not his intention to criticise them. On doctrinal or
dogmatical points it would be impertinent in him to do so ; but lie
thought others should have the same freedom of opinion as the
Bishops claimed for themselves. Before going further into the


subject, be must confess that the letter which had been read to the
meeting from their respected Bishop bad given him great pleasure,
containing, as it did, a disclaimer on the part of his Lordship of
any intention to narrow the terms of communion with the Estab-
lished Church, or to place any unwonted yoke upon the necks of
his spiritual children, lay or clerical; and he thought this simple
declaration of the Bishop must give pleasure to every person of
right mind in that meeting, however they might wish certain
questions carried. (Hear, hear.) Taking up a paper on a Saturday
morning, his eye fell upon the Minutes of the six Bishops, and he
confessed the perusal of them was a source of great anxiety, as he
could not avoid thinking the authors of that document concurred
in the views of the Bishop of Exeter, and were endeavouring to
exclude from their communion all who differed from them on those
points. (Great applause.) But after having heard the Bishop’s
letter and seen in the papers his charge, he confessed he did not
see why they should not give him credit. What had Ins conduct
been since Ids arrival in the colony? How zealous had he not
been in the cause of religion ? He had performed cheerfully, in
addition to his peculiar duties, those of a simple clergyman. He
had erected churches, had founded schools, and promoted in every
way the advancement of religion in the colony. Again, all knew
that although His Lordship entertained what were called High
Church views, those amongst his clergymen who entertained different
opinions had not been slighted or passed over when an opportunity
of preferment occurred. (Exclamations of “ No, No,” met by
counter cries of “ Yes, Yes.”) Though he did enjoy the
honour of an intimate acquaintance with His Lordship, he had
learned from those who knew him well that such was the case, and
thought he could call on Dean Farrell and Mr. Woodcock in proof
of what he had stated; for those gentlemen were well known to
entertain strictly evangelical views. (Cheers.) This conduct, he
confessed, weighed much with him in giving credit to the explana-
tions in His Lordship’s letter and charge. When a man’s conduct
squared with his declaration, he was always inclined to give him
credit, (Hear, hear.) But though they might give him credit it
would by no means render caution unnecessary. (Cheers.) He
did not condemn the precautionary steps about to be taken, but
differed from his friends as to the mode of carrying them out. He
did think a censure should not be passed, when all that was sought
for could be effected without it, and when its presence could only
serve to gratify a feeling of spleen, though he did not wish by that
expression to" reflect on the conduct of any individual in that
meeting. His Honor then (taking up the Book of Common Prayer)
said he should proceed to state the reasons why they should take
every possible precaution on the present occasion, and in doing so,
he had no intention of obtruding opinions on them on point of


doctrine, although he had opened that book at the Articles. He
proposed in his amendment the presentation of a petition to Her
Majesty, but any other equally effective mode of obtaining their
object which might please the meeting would please him. It
appeared that certain proceedings had taken place in a Synod at
Sydney, and had found their way to England, by whom, or to w hom
sent, he did not pretend to know r , nor for what purpose. It however
behoved them to be prepared to oppose anything sinister or injurious.
He would as briefly as possible state the reasons why, but he found
that he should be somewdiat long, since it was difficult in a mixed
meeting, particularly when not possessed of eloquence, to make such
subjects clear. It appeared from the minutes before referred to
that a plan of Church government was proposed, i.e., if a Bishop
should commit a fault that would subject him to trial, all the Bishops
of the province must be present —that if a clergyman should be put
on his trial, the constitution of the Court would be local, and all
this was without any provision for, or any motive of, appeal—now
this was in his view a serious omission, the real point of danger in
the whole case. For what would be the condition of a society, in
which such a state of things existed ? Suppose five of the Bishops
entertained high Church views—or suppose the present Bishops
gone and others to have succeeded them, what new doctrines might
not they invent—what arbitrary decisions might they not come to
—against those who, in their eyes, were offenders ? (Hear, hear.)
Then, according to the view of that document, all future Bishops
should be appointed on the recommendation of the then Bishops—
they would be enabled to keep up a corporation—(hear, hear) — to
have a perpetual succession in the Church. This was the great
danger, this was the danger we should endeavour to prevent. His
Honor then proceeded to show that the Queen’s supremacy had been
attacked, not that the attack appeared in the Minutes themselves,
but could be gleaned from English newspapers and published cor-
respondence. He must say that when he was first made acquainted
with this fact his mind involuntarily reverted to years gone by,
and the vision of long tables, at which sat the rich country squire
and substantial yeomen of England, and where the loyal toast of
Church and State was applauded to the echo, rose before him ; he
felt like Rip Van Winkle, when he awoke in Sleepy Hollow after
his nap of a hundred years, and who would fain have drunk with his
waking draught the health of good King George, but who feared
that things had sadly changed during his slumbers, and that no
American could be found who would speak to King George, but
through an Ambassador. His Honor might say that it did not
diminish his astonishment to find that this attack on the rights of
Her Most Gracious Majesty had been made, not by the rude hands
of laymen, but by clergymen who had received their appointment
from Her Majesty or Her Royal Predecessor. The following pas-


sage occurred in His Lordship’s charge to the jury—(shouts of
laughter)—he begged pardon in His Lordship’s charge to the
clergy. The laughter continuing for some time, His Honor said it
was some satisfaction to know that he secured more applause than
any preceding speaker 1 The subject, however, was a serious one,
and as such he hoped they would treat it. The following was the
passage to which he referred :
“ I hardly suppose that any one would so wish to extend the
* Queen’s supremacy in all causes and over all persons,’ as to think
the Crown enjoyed by Divine right, the authority to define the
doctrine of the Church in the last_resort. What our Reformers
demed fcT T caiTEardly suppose they intended
to yield to the Sovereign !” The value of having such a Court of
Appeal as the Privy Council was proved by the protection it had
thrown over Mr. Gorham, a man of excellent character and
acknowledged talent, who had been presented by Lord Lyndhurst
to the living of Bamford Speke; which living, unfortunately for Mr.
Gorham, was in the Diocese of the Bishop of Exeter, from whom
lie was obliged to undergo a long and unusual examination as to
his theological tenets ; having, in consequence of his differing from
the Bishop on the doctrine of baptism, been refused institution to
his cure. He appealed to the Ecclesiastical Court, but without
success. He then appealed to the Privy Council, and was successful.
The Privy Council did not pretend to decide doctrinal points, but
the legal "bearing of the question as affecting the Bishop’s refusing
to institute Mr. Gorham into his living. And yet some Bishops and
clergymen were not content with this decision, because it went
against their own opinions. What position would Mr. Gorham
have been in if there were no appeal from the decision of the Eccle-
siastical Court ? (Hear, hear.) That Court did consist of Arch-
bishops and Bishops, but of shrewd men of the law.
Captain Bagot—By whom appointed ?
His Honor —Sometimes by Her Majesty ; sometimes by the
Bishops ; but that did not affect the question. (Question, question.)
The question is the advantage of an appeal to Her Majesty in Privy
Council. It saved Mr, Gorham, and may save many more in this
colony, (Hear, hear.) That appeal was not so monstrous as was
supposed, but would seem to have been contemplated when the
Church Articles were framed, as would appear from the following
passage from His Majesty’s declaration prefixed to the Articles in
the Book of Common Prayer :
“ The Bishops and Clergy, from time to time, in convocation,
upon their humble desire, shall have licence under our Broad Seal
to deliberate of and to do all such things as being made plain by
them and assented to by us,” &c.
And again—
“ Even in those curious points in which the present differences
— 4 t* {St / 'C. f r'


lie, men of all sorts take the Articles of the Church of England to
be for them ; which is an argument again that none of them intend
any desertion of the Articles established.”
These Articles (His Honor continued) though framed by Bishops,
were only authoritatively put forward by the King, after having
received the assent and approbation of His Majesty’s Privy Council,
consisting, be it remembered, not of clergymen, but of lawyers,
keen and experienced men of the world. He felt convinced, from
this passage, that for the sake of peace men did at that time assent
to them in general, though they might have objections to particular
points contained in them. And this, he thought, was only reason-
able ; for make what law you please, on whatever subject it might
be, and exert all ingenuity to make it clear, men would never be
found to agree in it. His Honor, in conclusion, insisted on the incon-
sistency which must ensue respecting decisions on temporalities if
the Privy Council was prohibited from touching in any way on
doctrinal points. His Honor having again read his amendment,
hoped it would be adopted, because it conveyed no censure on any
one, and w r as, he thought, most likely to promote the views of ail
true friends of the Church, by preserving peace and goodwill
amongst its members.
Mr. Newxand seconded His Honor’s amendment.
Captain Bagot submitted that the proposition of His Honor
Judge Cooper would have better come as an amendment, or rather
as an addition to the 7th resolution ; but he (Captain B.) objected to
the latter part of it. The lay members of the Church of England
in this province require no time to consider whether they will have
ecclesiastical law, founded on the Canons of 1603, legalized here.
They want no hierarchical domination ; they want no ecclesiastical
courts. The common law of the land is sufficient for all the tem-
poral purposes of the Church, and they will never submit to legalized
tyranny in spiritual matters. Ecclesiastical law r , administered by
Judges and officers appointed by the Bishops, adjudicating without
the intervention of that palladium of British freedom—a jury of
compeers is utterly distasteful to Britons. That such laws have
been used for ages in Britain is no argument to warrant their intro-
duction here. The people of England could well dispense with
them, and would willingly do so if they could ; but supported as
they are by a powerful hierarchy, it would not be an easy matter
to get rid of them. South Australia is yet free from their baneful
influence, and will resist every attempt that may be made to intro-
duce them. His Honor, in reference to the Gorham case, pointed
out the protection against the tyranny of ecclesiastical law afforded
by the right of appeal to the Queen and Privy Council. True, there
is that appeal for those who can pay for it. Report states the cost
of appeal in that case at £BO,OOO. Is it not mockery, then, to
name this as a protection. In this province, public worship is pro-


vlded for by the voluntary exertions of the people. The Churches
and the Clergy virtually belong to the people, who require no
ecclesiastical law to enforce upon them, and upon their Ministers,
points of doctrine; and as long as the latter teach Gospel truths,
they will be revered and respected. The Wesleyans and the other
numerous bodies of Churchmen differing from the Church of England
have no ecclesiastical laws to control or perplex them; yet where
can there be found Ministers more respected, or people more
attached, or Church discipline more strictly attended to ?
A voice—They have their Conference ?
Captain Bagot —That is a purely temporal body.
A Clergyman—On the contrary, it has recently removed and
degraded ministers on purely doctrinal grounds.
Mr. George Stevenson reminded the rev. gentleman that
Clergymen were only there by sufferance, and should not interrupt
the speakers.
Captain Bagot continued—llis Honor has feelingly stated to
the meeting that the Lord Bishop of Adelaide in his recent charge
to the Clergy, and in the letter this day read, has shown that he
does not altogether hold to the doctrines set forth in the Sydney
documents. If His Lordship has recanted, his change of opinion
should be more clearly shown than can be gathered from either
of those papers before it can be depended upon. When his Lord-
ship’s Registrar read that letter, he spoke of its being calculated
to throw oil on the troubled waters of public opinion—troubled by
that remarkable Sydney document. In his (Captain Bagot’s)
opinion, its tendency is far otherwise. li offers no satisfactory
explanations, and not one word tending to allay the fear and distrust
produced by their Lordships’ proceedings at Sydney.
Mr. John Baker would not follow the preceding speakers, but
would content himself with opposing the amendment. There had
been a certain resolution moved at a former meeting, and he thought
it was an act of high moral courage, although a different opinion
had been expressed. (Hear, hear.) If, therefore, that meeting
adopted the resolution proposed by His Honor the Judge, it would
be actually passing a vote of censure on these gentlemen who had
come forward at the former meeting, in a manner that deserved,
instead of censure, the thanks of the community. (Cheers.) The
amendment was an attempt to get rid of the original resolution by
a side wind —(hear, hear) —and they wanted no ecclesiastical law
here. The Members of the Church of England could manage their
affairs without such Papal machinery. (Hear, hear.) He had
recently read in one of the papers of a poor Mr. Horner —not him
who was stuck “ up in a corner eating his Christmas pie”—(a laugh)
—but a poor sinner who was by ecclesiastical law stuck up in a
Church porch to do penance—(a laugh)—a bite which might await
many here if the Bishop’s Courts were introduced. (Hear, hear.)


The Judge’s resolution implied that they would at some future time
consider the propriety of introducing those Courts, lie (Mr. Baker)
was for emphatically rejecting them altogether. (Cheers.) The
present was a time when every man should throw the weight of his
influence into the scale ; they all knew how easy it was to prevent
an evil, but perhaps all did not know the difficulty of remedying
one. His Honor had told them how bitterly he felt when he read
the Sydney Minutes, but he did not explain clearly how he got over
his feelings of bitterness, and proposed a resolution which was vir-
tually one of censure on gentlemen who deserved so highly of the
community—a resolution which he (Mr. Baker) hoped the meeting
would not entertain. (Cheers.)
Mr. Torrens rose to reply to some of the remarks made on the
speech of the Judge. His Honor was accused of getting up to
make a fine speech -while the attention of the meeting was alive. He
believed no such thing ; but if inclined to retort, he would say the same
of the gentleman who replied to His Honor, but really could not
call his a fine speech. (Disapprobation.) He considered the lan-
guage of the resolution was scarcely warranted by facts. He found
nothing to support the charge of attempting to narrow Church com-
munion, and he thought such language inappropriate. He argued
at considerable length and with great ability that the resolution
invited the clergy to an unreasonable proceeding.
Mr Robert Lyon Milne advanced to the platform.
The Rev. Mr. Woodcock asked if he were not a clergyman ?
Mr. Milne was the first to beg for the formation of an episcopate on
this side of the line, and for additional clergymen for these colonies,
and he rejoiced to find that so many and such exemplary clergymen
had arrived. He begged permission to say that, sooner then see
His Honor’s amendment supersede the resolution, lie would consent
to the obliteration from the page of history of the record of Luther’s
burning the Pope’s bull, (A laugh.) He begged pardon for
having interrupted the Judge, and informed the meeting that ho
had faced the enemies of his country, and fired a well-directed shot
in her defence.
Judge Cooper disclaimed having imputed inconsistency to the
Bishop, or that his amendment involved a censure of Mr. MacDermott
or Mr Walters, for both of whom he entertained feelings of the
greatest respect. He was content to expunge the last paragraph of
his amendment to secure the support of Captain Bagot, and the
approbation of the meeting.
Captain Bagot explained, he did not intend to support the
amendment even if denuded of the last paragraph ; but thought the
question of the petition it proposed might be entertained
Mr. James Allen asked if Dissenters might be allowed to vote ?
• —-they were interested in the matters under discussion.
Judge Cooper —This is a meeting of the laity of the Church
of England.


The Chairman decided Dissenters could not be allowed to vote ;
and, on putting the amendment, declared it was negatived by a
large majority. —The original resolution was then put and carried.
Mr. Fisher moved the second resolution as follows :
“ That as Members of the Protestant Church of England in
South Australia, and desirous to pay proper deference and respect to
the Lord Bishop of the Diocese, we totally and absolutely v,
repudiate any assumption of ecclesiastical authority by the Church s I
in this province, and solemnly protest against any attempt on their
part to exercise the same.” *
He had now been fourteen years in the colony, and had the satis-
faction never to have witnessed religious discord in the com-
munity until the late promulgation of the unhappy Minutes of
the Sydney Conference. Those Minutes were concocted, not only
by the Bishop of this Diocese, but also by those of other Dioceses,
who had no power whhatsoever to frame rules for the temporal or
spiritual guidance of the Church in this colony. (Hear, hear.) He
denied the existence of any Diocesan but that of this Province ; and
whence then the power that the Diocesans of the neighbouring
colonies have over the Church in South Australia ? (Cheers.) In
the Act that established this colony, it was explicitly provided that
the legislation of other places should not interfere with its legislative
proceedings, for the colony was expressly exempted from the
operation of all other laws save those immediately for its own ex-
clusive government, and the colonists could accordingly object to
any enactment of even the Imperial Parliament that tended to affect
their interests injuriously. (Hear, hear.) He altogether denied
the legality of the proceedings to which His Honor’s amendment
referred. Was the signature to the Sydney Minutes consistent with
the letter of recantation —for he must term it so—of his Lordship
that had just been read? He hoped that letter was merely a
preliminary to a full and unmistakable recantation on the part of
his Lordship. (Applause.) He would have been glad had that
letter come spontaneously from his Lordship, and had not been the
result of compulsion as it appeared to he. Let the Bishop with-
draw his name, like an honourable man, from the obnoxious
Minutes of the Sydney Conference, and all might go on smoothly.
A Voice—That is morally impossible,
Mr Fisher did not think so, and such a proceeding on the Bishop’s
part would yet put all to rights. Here the speaker read some
extracts from the Minutes, and remarked that the whole proceedings
were illegal, unjustifiable, and unwarrantable, and stated that he
would not object to the severest penalty of the law being inflicted
upon them for such conduct. (Laughter and applause.) If the
Minutes were bad enough to justify the Bishop’s recantation, how
much more were they unfit for promulgation ? (Cheers.) Yet they
had gone home and elsewhere, and it might take a vast deal of time


and labour to undo the mischief that they had already effected,
especially in uncultivated minds. With these remarks he would
now conclude by merely moving the resolution, and adding, in the
beautiful and emphatic language of the Book of Common Prayer,
“ From all false doctrines, heresy, and schism, good Lord deliver
us.” (Loud and continued applause.)
Dr. Wyatt, in seconding the resolution, would only occupy a few
minutes. He pronounced a high eulogium on the Lord Bishop, of
whose zeal, activity, and piety he was a humble but willing witness.
It was a mistake to suppose, as some of the speakers did, that a
Church could exist without some form of government, but their
object was to oppose Church tyranny. (Hear, hear.) Just as civil
government was essential to the stability of a state and the pros-
perity of its inhabitants, so was ecclesiastical government essential
to the existence and well-being of a Church. (Applause.) He
had intended to refer to some other matters, but the lateness of the
hour, and the time already occupied, warned him to be content with
simply seconding the resolution. (Applause.)
Dr. Duncan rose to submit an amendment, as he did not think
the resolution met the difficulties and dangers of the case. He
went on to explain the system of the National Church of Scotland.
He was interrupted by a person who asked if he belonged to the
Church of England—(a laugh followed the query, which the
doctor answered in the affirmative.)
Mr, Fisher wished to know if Dr. Duncan intended to move an
amendment ?
Dr. Duncan read the following amendment: —
“ That in the opinion of this meeting it is desirable that lay members
of our Church, duly chosen by their several congregations, should
have an equal voice with their clergy in convocations, or assemblies
meeting for the purpose of deciding upon points of Ecclesiastical
doctrine and discipline.”
The Chairman decided against putting it.
Judge Cooper remarked that Mr. Fisher was mistaken in his
Ecclesiastical law.
Mr. Fisher would be happy to receive instructions from His
Honor. (A laugh.)
The Chairman put the resolution, which was carried bv a larve
majority,
F. S. Dutton, Esq., in proposing the third resolution, said—
Sir, when I look round this room and see the numbers which have
been collected together, it must forcibly strike the mind of every
one present that a subject of overpowering interest to all actuates
us. If this meeting is unprecedented, so also are the circumstances
which call it into being; nor to the members of the Church of
England has the importance of the subject to be discussed been
exceeded by anything that has occurred here since this country


was reclaimed from the wilderness. I see myself surrounded on
all sides, not by a band of turbulent agitators, but of retiring and
peaceful men, who, with me, grieve that the hitherto uninterrupted
peace of the Church should have been disturbed, and who, I trust,
are as anxious as I am that the firm and uncompromising expression
of opinion which will be heard this day may have the effect of pre-
venting the. like occurrence again. (Cheers.) None of us could
have imagined, when we welcomed our Diocesan on his return from
Sydney, that discord and disunion was to have been the result of
his visit to that place, and that we should so soon have been obliged
to meet to assert our freedom of thought on doubtful points of doc-
trine ; our disapproval of intolerance ; and our firm determination
to recognise no domination in spiritual matters, no more than we
would permit it in secular matters. (Loud cheers.) We are brought
together by no hasty or unreasoning clamour ; we have had ample
time calmly to consider the full bearing and meaning of the docu-
ment which has emanated from the unauthorised and illegal meeting
of the Bishops in Sydney ; and as we cannot accept the very small
amount of good it contains, in the face of the vast amount of evil
that may arise from it, we have no other course left but to entirely
repudiate it. We do not mean to say that the six Australian
Bishops had no right to meet together ; we do not say that they
shall not have the same liberty of thought which we claim ; but we
do most emphatically deny their right to meet in Sydney with all
the solemnity and assumed authority of a Synod or Convention,
•which the constitutional law does not allow; and we deny in the
same emphatic manner their right to promulgate any document like
the Sydney Minutes, which, although put forth under the modest
garb of mere opinions, bears evidence enough within it what effect
it is intended to produce. (Hear, hear.) The speakers who have
preceded me, and those who are to follow, have, with myself, the
duty imposed upon them to demonstrate to this meeting the injurious
effects of these Minutes ; and I will now read to you the resolution
to which I have more particularly to call your consideration :
“ That one of the evident objects of the unauthorised Conference
of the Bishops at Sydney, being to obtain an extension of power
dangerous to the peace of the community, this Meeting deems it
necessary to express its opinion that it is highly inexpedient that
any extension of ecclesiastical power should be permitted, or that
authority should be given to establish Courts with any secular
jurisdiction for so-called spiritual purposes.”
Before proceeding with my remarks, I may be allowed to glance
at the occurrences in another hemisphere, which bear a close relation
with the matter under our notice. When the Australian Colonies
Bill was under the consideration of Parliament, in May last year,
Mr. Gladstone moved the adoption of a clause to be inserted in the
Bill, by which power should be given to the Bishops, in conj unction


with the clergy anti laity, to meet and make all such regulations as
may be necessary for the better conduct of the ecclesiastical affairs
of this part of the world. I beg of you particularly to remark
that, even in England, it was never contemplated that any steps
should be taken without the privity and consent of the clergy and
laity. This proposition met with the most decided opposition in the
Commons. It was shown that the revival of Ecclesiastical Synods,
which such meetings really are, would, so far from peace, produce
most untoward circumstances —(hear, hear) —it would, in fact, be
virtually setting up an independent body sitting side by side with
our Colonial Legislature, having power to make laws without their
sanction. (Hear, hear.) The measure was defeated by a large
majority. Contemporaneously with this proposition, another
measure was introduced into the House of Lords, by the Bishop of
London, aiming a direct blow at the Queen’s supremacy, by seeking
powers to set up a Court of Ecclesiastical Appeal. This measure
met a similar fate, being opposed by the greatest legal talent, by
some of the most eminent statesmen, and also by some of the Bishops.
Now, when you take these two measures in connection one with the
other, it clearly proves what kind of a spirit of innovation is
abroad ; and, by an easy transition, you arrive at the leading
motives which induced the Australian Bishops to venture on the
perilous experiment of initiating a similar process of action here,
without consulting either clergy or laity although in England, even,
such a course would never have been dreamt of. Now, how can we
shut our eyes to the possibility there exists, that this meeting in
Sydney, and the document emanating therefrom, is intended to
strengthen the hands of those parties in England entertaining
similar views, who may be induced to renewed action during the
present Session? And does it not deserve the most severe censure
at our hands that the Bishops should have forwarded such a docu-
ment to England, without having ever thought whether the clergy
and laity of their respective Dioceses approved of it? (Cheers.) I
repeat, it shows the spirit of innovation which is abroad. But this
unwarrantable assumption of power will avail them nothing. They
have tried to insert the sharp end of the wedge ; but, like some of
our Australian forest trees, the material is too tough for the wedge
to penetrate, and the harder you hit it, the harder does the blow
recoil. (Cheers.) That their object was to obtain extension of
power is easily gathered from the Minutes themselves. The Bishops
seek to have the younger clergy placed at their disposal for a term
of years. Can you not perceive the power this would give them ?
Can you not perceive the blow that is hereby aimed at the inde-
pendence of those who are to be the teachers and guides of our
children in spiritual matters ? All their prospects in life depending
on the degree of favour they would enjoy with the Bishop, the
younger clergy would be under constant temptation to adopt views


in which they might not sincerely concur, and their ministration
rendered thereby less efficient. The servile obedience which the
Bishop might, under such circumstances, exact, being repugnant to
the spirit of progress of this enlightened age, w r ould assuredly bring
them into collision with their congregations. The Bishops seek to
dictate to the clergy with respect to their administering the rites of
marriage, baptism, churching, burials, &c., to say nothing of the
intolerant spirit the Minutes breathe towards Dissenters, Then, as
to the establishment of Courts—they seek powers to cite offenders,
or alleged offenders and witnesses, to administer oaths, to award
punishments, and what not else. All this is an attempt, without/
precedent in the history of the colonial Church, to extend
power. No other body of religionists has such power, or seems to
need it. But these powers become in the highest degree dangerous,
when you further consider that the Minutes expressly set forth a
distinct decision on the subject of baptism. An eminent statesman,
the Marquis of Lansdown, in alluding to the impolicy of giving
any opinion at all on such a subject, has remarked :—“ To make
points of doctrine depend on the decision of any six Bishops, would,
so far from allaying the ferment in the public mind, merely make it
resolve itself into the form of agitated speculation as to the time
when other Bishops should come with different opinions. Looking
to the declaration of our ancestors, the statements of eminent
divines, the Articles of the Church, and the best writers on them,
you will find that it w r as the wise intention of the founders of the
Church to leave a certain latitude of judgment.” In the face of
such evidence, and the wise example set by the Bishops in England,
who, as a body, refused to give an opinion on the subject, it is
astounding that six Australian Bishops, so recently raised to this
high dignity, should authoritatively express not only an opinion on
this doctrine, but in the same Minutes proceed to declare that it is
desirable the younger clergy should for years be placed under their
guidance, to be, of course, brought up exactly in their way of
thinking. (Hear, hear.) It is my duty—painful though it be for
me to be placed in a position of so decided antagonism to the Lord
Bishop of Adelaide, for whom I entertain a sincere respect, and
whose powers, in a spirit of usefulness, I w r ould rather see increased
than curtailed —most solemnly to call upon this meeting, as they
value the future peace of the Church, to do all in their power to
crush these innovations in the bud. (Loud cheers.) I cannot
understand that the Church of England, as at present circumstanced,
can be under any disadvantage not removable by the Colonial i
Legislature. (Hear, hear.) It certainly appears from the existing
state of the ecclesiastical law r , that the Bishops possess arbitrary, I
may say despotic powders, to suspend or revoke at pleasure the
licences of clergymen ; but had the Bishops not better take counsel
how they can best arrange the regulation of the Church in the


Colonies, by falling into colonial requirements? (Hear, hear.)
Would it not be well for them to consider, that by an apparent
j sacrifice of arbitrary power—(hear, hear) —which we all know
L would never dare to be put in force in this Colony, they would only
I gain increased influence and promote the genuine discipline of the
Church? (Cheers.) The Statute Book of the British Empire is
still disgraced by too many enactments, dating from the dark age of
bigotry and intolerance; the present generation should join heart
and hand to expunge them—not to perpetuate them by fresh enact-
ments —(hear, hear) —let our Bishop consider this if he wishes to
carry with him the cordial sympathies of the laity, and secure to
the Church her real authority and sacred rights. The warning
Lord Brougham threw out as to the schisms likely to arise from
such a course as the Australian Bishops had actually pursued, has
received a memorable confirmation. If the disturbance is great
when we have nothing but harmless “ opinions ” to deal with, what
would be the result were those opinions changed into the dictum of
a legally constituted Synod, such as the Bishops desire. (Loud
cheers.) Having trespassed so long on the attention of the meeting,
I will merely add a short quotation from another eminent statesmen
of the present day, the Earl of Carlisle, which tells with great
force on the present subject, by only applying it to the colony in-
stead of to England : —“ If the Bishops will but allow the Church
of England to remain in the position she inherits—betray no
symptom of aggression—no grasping at new powers—her condition
will be one of increasing influence : ‘ in quietness and in confidence
shall be her strength forever;’ but if, on the contrary, she give rise
to well-founded suspicions of an intention to encroach on the
functions and attributes of the other constituted powers of the pro-
vince, if she continue to seek for pecuniary resources from the public
fund, or assume privileges and preferences not clearly her own, those
privileges will become her impotence, and that power will be her
failure. (Cheers.) I estimate the unity of the Church at its full
value ; but, Sir, that unity would be purchased at too high a figure,
which in the present enlightened century would admit domination
and intolerance into her bosom ; or which would expose us to the
danger of eventually seeing revived the councils of the early ages,
■or the advent of another Gregory, to found a new theocratic des-
potism.” (Loud cheers.)
Mr. Burr said he was called on to second the resolution in the
absence of the person that duty was first entrusted to. He was
consequently not well prepared to do justice to it. He considered
the Church of England only differed politically from the Church of
Rome, in having the Sovereign instead of the Pope at its head.
(Laughter, hisses, and cheers.) Well, then, he seconded the resolu-
tion. (Cheers and laughter.)
The resolution was carried unanimously.


J. Baker, Esq., in proposing the fourth resolution, said—Mr#
Chairman and Gentlemen : The subject of the Minutes has been so
fully dealt with by those who have already addressed you, that it
appears unnecessary for me to say much. It is necessary, however,
that I should say something ; and if I should appear to touch on
points already disposed of, I would crave your indulgence. The
nature of the resolution placed in my hands is fortunately one that
will not require much argument on my part to recommend it to
your adoption. Although I may regret, and do, with many others,
most sincerely regret, that any necessity for this meeting should
have arisen, I trust that I shall not be found to turn aside from the
path of duty. A bold and high-handed attempt is being made by
the Bishops, not only for ecclesiastical authority, but for secular
power ; and I think it behoves every man, to whatever denomination
of Christians he may belong, to throw his whole weight into the
scale —to nip their aspirations now, whilst they are in the bud. We,
as Members of the Church of England, object to any power being
conferred on the Bishops and Clergy of that Church, except such as
may be necessary for the due management of their own affairs ;
and that power, we think, they already possess. All denominations
of Christians are on an equal footing in this province ; and, by the
blessing of God, I hope they will be so maintained- The publi-
cation of the Sydney Minutes has created considerable suspicion
and excitement; and men —reflecting men —have become somewhat
uneasy and alarmed. This alarm induces some to close their eyes,
as if an enemy were less dangerous when unseen; whilst others,
out of deference to authority, refuse to take any part in our pro-
ceedings, and keep themselves in the background, although they
are fully sensible of the necessity for action. All must agree that
the Bishops are grasping at power ; and in order to prevent their
obtaining it, we must make a resolute stand. As I said before, I
grieve that there should be any necessity for this meeting; but
seeing that a necessity has arisen, it affords me great happiness to
be associated in a just cause with those who have spoken to the pre-
vious resolution; for they must be regarded as men whose minds
are intelligent, whose purposes are firm, and who have—throwing
aside all personal consideration—taken a step for conscience sake in
the right direction. I hope that they will persevere until their end
is accomplished, and that they will ever be found foremost in the
ranks to protect the true interests of the Church of Christ; to
guard against dangerous innovations ; and to maintain, in the
broadest acceptation of the terms, our civil and our religious
liberties ; and I trust, Gentlemen, that we shall be enabled to
hand down those inestimable blessings, unimpaired, to our children.
The gentlemen who have spoken before me have confined themselves
almost entirely to the political bearing of the matter under discussion,
■and I am desirous, so far as I possibly can, to follow their


example. At the same time, there is another subject which I
cannot bring myself altogether to overlook ; and which, in connec-
tion with the resolution entrusted to me, I would venture to touch
upon. lam not one of those who look upon Bishops as possessed
of supernatural grace : I view them as mere fallible men like our-
selves. I believe that man is destined to progress in wisdom and
intelligence ; that his religious views will gradually become more
clear and philosophical: I think the time has now come when the
principles of the Reformation may, in a colony free from the abuses
of a State Establishment, be freely, fairly, and fully dis-
cussed ; and there would almost seem to be a necessity for such a
course. A general suspicion of unsoundness of opinion prevails.
Some are said to be flying away with all haste, via Exeter to Rome !
Others are accused of having taken the road to Geneva ! And
some persons do not hesitate to say that the Citadel is assailed even
by its appointed defenders ! The Bishops have put on the armour
of controversy ; but, after all, perhaps if those who meddle in the
matter carry on their discussion in a Christian Spirit, determining
to bear and forbear—not to mix bitterness with their discussion—
good may result. Let it be hoped, indeed it cannot be doubted, that
those whose consideration of the subject I am about to solicit will
keep cautiously in sight that character which belongs to their sacred
office. Disputes on religious subjects, between well-intending persons
—like the dispute about the partycoloured shield —are sometimes
the effect of looking at the same object from opposite points of view 1
Can it possibly be so with regard to Baptismal Regeneration ?
There are in my estimation points to be considered in the Sydney
Minutes of a more objectionable character even than that to which I
have just alluded. If persons would look more to the objects of
Christianity, they would think less of differences of opinion. The
time has happily arrived when men can search the Scriptures for
themselves ; and when they feel called upon to receive such doctrine
only as with a reference to them approves itself to their own con-
science. What other course, indeed, is there open for us ? If men do
not use their own understanding, upon whose can they rely ? In
the Churches, both of Rome and of England, those who pharisaically
assume to an intimate acquaintance with the Divine Will, disagree
among themselves, and are, therefore, unworthy of credit. What,
then, can we do but make use of the reasoning powers with which
God has endowed us ? After all, Gentlemen, we must go back to
the principles contained in the protests from whence we derived our
name. The chief point at issue between the rival Churches is that
which Luther raised —inward or outward authority—my own mind
or another’s mind—myself or the Pope —this is the question which
Luther originally put, however it may afterwards have been
darkened and confused ; and this it is after all which underlies all
the minor topics on which the Christian world is divided. We want


to know, then, what our clergy will do under existing circuni- / '
stances. Will they allow their reason to be put in chains ? or will
they declare for liberty of conscience ? Whilst some arc running
back to Rome, we want to know who will declare for mental inde- ' *•
pendence. We wish to know the opinions of the men under whose
ministry we sit. AVc want to know r the opinions that will be in-
stilled into our children, and something of the school in which they
are to be brought up. We want to know if the clergy in this
province will quietly submit to such dictation unscriptural, un-
christian, and uncharitable, as I believe it to be as is contained in
the Sydney Minutes. With these remarks I will read to you
the resolution I have to propose:— .
“ That the Clergy of the Church of England in this 1 royince
be respectfully invited to meet and publicly, their opinion
on the ecclesiastical character and authority of the Minutes and
Proceedings of the Bishops of Sydney. ’
I may, in my remarks, have been led, perhaps, to go further than
necessary for the introduction of the resolution I have read, and i
must apologize for trespassing on so much of your time. 1 will
now merely go through the Minutes with a view to direct attention
to those parts I consider most objectionable, and which have not
been touched upon. We find that their Lordships agreed to the
decisions and opinions contained in the Minutes ; but it is not clearly
set forth which are decisions or which are opinions. It is evident
to me, that if their Lordships had been in possession of the power
they seek to obtain, the whole would have been decisions they are
merely put forward as opinions, for the present occasion , m conse-
quence of doubts existing how far they were inhibited by the
Queen’s supremacy ; the whole must therefore be treated as decisions.
Their Lordships then show their object “ to suggest such measure as
may seem to be suitable for removing their doubts and embarrassment;
to suggest, indeed, and to endeavour to obtain the ecclesiastical law
of England in this province—but by the blessing of God they
never shall have it. We are then informed by their Lordships that
they u are of opinion” (that is not a decision mind you) t-* ®
constitutions and canons agreed to in London in 1603, and published
under the Great Seal of England, are binding upon them (! M) but
they do not think that the power to be given to Provincial and
Diocesan Synods should extend to an alteration of the Thirty-nine
Articles, the Book of Common Prayer, or the authorized version of
the Holy Scriptures.” Church membership is then _ defined. The
next point I think it necessary to call your attention to is, that
regarding the mentioning the name of any person wishing the
prayers of the congregation. This I look upon as necessary. lam
of opinion that many a poor sufferer on the bed of sickness might
be induced to seek the prayers of the congregation, and might find
consolation in doing so, who may be kept from doing so by the


knowledge that Ills name is to he brought forward. We then come
to the subject of marriage : —“ Their Lordships determine that no
person shall marry within the prohibited degrees set forth by
authority in 1563.” 1 regret under these circumstances that their
Lordships should have come to any decision on this subject. They
are said to be against the law of the Church ; but are they against
the law r of God ? I think not. But in the next sentence we are
informed that persons “ so marrying” are to be “ expelled from the
Holy Communion until they repent and be reformed” What kind
of repentance does the Church require from a man who, on the
death of his wife, marries the person of all others whom he may
consider the best friend and guardian of his little ones—his late
wife’s sister ? 1 say, what kind of “ repentance” is required ?Is
he to put her aw'ay, to kick her out of doors, and take another to
wife ? Or, are they both to regret the step they have taken, to
repent, and still live on together ? I must confess it is not exactly
clear to me how the repentance and reformation necessary for ad-
mission to the Holy Table is to be brought about. Then, again,
as to the solemnization of marriage between those who are not of
Church communion. Can it be, Gentlemen, that the Church of
England—the recipients of Government aid—shall throw obstacles
in the way of marriage, and refuse to perform the rite because the
persons are not of her communion ? You will observe that there is
a distinction drawn between persons who are “ Members of the
Church,” and persons w'ho are “of her Communion.” Why, how
natural it is when two young persons take a fancy to each other, that
they should go to be churched. I believe that any obstacles thrown
in their way of their entering upon that holy state must be injurious.
Is it intended to exalt the marriage service into a sacrament ?
Something was said, 1 think by His Honor the Judge, about
bigamy; and I believe there was a case tried in Sydney some time
ago, where the man got off the penalty due to his crime because he
had not been married according to the “ rites of the Church.” I
think it extremely inexpedient to throw difficulties in the way of
persons who desire to avail themselves of marriage according to the
“rites of the Church of England.” We now come to what I look
upon as a very seriously objectionable part, namely, the ministering
to Dissenters. The language and spirit of this decision might be
understood if viewed as coming from men who met only to acquire
power ; but if looked on as coming from the heads of the Church,
of Apostolic succession, as the language of Christians—if compared
with the character of a Christian as delineated by the pen of Saint
Paul, and so beautifully illustrated in his life, it is difficult to com-
prehend. A better Christian spirit would have been discovered if
it had been set forth that as there was no Church bylaw established ,
and consequently no denomination of Christian Ministers who could
legally be called upon, it behoved the Ministers of the Church to be


over zealous and foremost in the performance of acts of charity and
love, and especially with regard to those persons whose previous life
had not identified them with any particular class of Christians. In
connection with this subject, when we find the Bishops nten of
high intellect and learning—seriously discussing as to whether a
poor little baby is saved from everlasting wrath by the sprinkling
with water by a priest | and when we find too that they decide the
question in the affirmative, what are we to think of their with-
holding the rite from a child because its parents are not members of
their Church ? Look at the converse. If baptismal regeneration
is necessary to salvation, and the infant is benefited by the cercmonv,
what becomes of those who die unbaptlzed ? and what could u e
think of those who, believing in the virtues of baptism, would refuse
to save a soul from everlasting punishment ? I will now go to
education. Their Lordships say they cannot incur the responsibility
of seeming to countenance erroneous, defective, or indefinite re-
ligious instruction. The object here again appears to be to set
themselves against the Boards which have the regulation and supei -
intendence of Schools. I would strongly oppose the granting of.
one farthing of public money, drawn from the pockets ot all classes
and creeds, to support what is called religious education. 1 would
wish to see our public schools such that any man, whatever his
particular belief, might send his children to them. Let religion be
taught at home, and on the Sabbath. Indeed, I have his Lord-,
ship’s authority, in his charge, for saying that a Sunday School is
the best possible place for religious instruction. At our schools I,
would have the intellect developed to the utmost extent, and
morality inculcated ; but I would not have them made hot-beds for
sowing "the seeds of tractarianism or sectarianism either. I object
to their being made instrumental to raise up followers of any par-
ticular church or sect. We must remember that, since the days of
Cranmer, great modifications of opinion have been undergone; and
persons who cling to the old definitions and the old views regarding
inspiration, miracles, &c., might do well to consider, lest m he
advancing tide of human thought they be found in the rear of that
Church which has the repute of hating and avoiding the light.
There are, no doubt, great differences of opinion amongst those now
assembled ; and we can scarcely expect but that there will be dif-
ferences of opinion amongst the Clergy upon points of aoctnne , I do
not wish to touch. It is sufficient to say that, as 1 would receive
no doctrine whatever upon any man’s word, but such only as
approves itself to my own conscience, so I presume we all wisu to
secure the same end ; and we must all adopt those means which, to
us, with the aid of the Scriptures—our only sure and certain guide
—seem the appointed way to accomplish it; and I trust that the
rights of conscience—the exercise of private judgment in all matters
pertaining to the soul’s welfare —will ever be respected in


Australia, and that in tins land of liberty no power will ever dare
to interfere between a man’s judgment and his God. I have much
pleasure in moving the fourth resolution.
Mr. Adams briefly seconded the resolution.
Mr. Goodwin was not a theologian of Mr. Baker’s school, and
had been induced during that gentleman’s speech to protest against
the introduction of matters which should not influence that meeting
in its decisions on the questions before it. They had heard much
about doctrine, although gentlemen protested they did not wish to
introduce doctrinal points. They also heard that clergymen were
there only by sufferance, while one of their resolutions invited
clergymen to express an opinion on the ecclesiastical character and
authority of the Sydney Minutes. (Cries of “ Not now, not now.”)
He (Mr. Goodwin) had the happiness to have been brought up under
the dignitary to whom the writing of the Minutes was attributed
—he meant the Bishop of New Zealand. (Hear.) He had been
a teacher in his Sunday School, and had access to his library.
(Hear, and a laugh, followed by cries of “Question, question.”)
The Chairman reserved a motion submitted by Mr. Goodwin,
and, on putting the original resolution, he declared it carried.
Captain Bagot said, in proposing the fifth resolution, that some
persons might expect him to enter into a detail and exposure of the
Tractarian doctrines, but they had been well dealt with by speakers
who had preceded him, and he would content himself with again urging
the duty of opposing the introduction of Ecclesiastical laws. He would
also remind them that they soon would be called on to exercise the
right of selecting members to represent them, when that matter
should not be overlooked. It Avas not correct to say that Dissenters
had such laws, for there were no laws not recognised by Act of
Parliament, although he had been somewhat uncourteously told so
that day. He begged to propose the following resolution :
“ That apprehensive that the recognised standards of the Church
might be perilled by their unauthorised construction, and by the
innovations of the Tractarian and Anti-Protestant part of the
Church, it is necessary that measures be taken to guard against
the spread of dangerous error in the doctrines of the Protestant
Church in this province, and to maintain those doctrines in their
purity.”^
Captain Hart, in seconding the resolution, would, as the mover
said nothing of Tractarianism, make a few remarks on the subject.
He referred to it with pain, as a young relation of his own was,
through its pernicious agency, if not quite perverted to Romish
superstition, deeply imbued with the sentiments that generallv
ended in 11 1 at result. The peculiar character of the Tractarian pub-
lications was insidious ability; they led the reader on by almost
imperceptible degrees to the eventual reception of opinions that, if
presented to them undisguisedly at first, would shock them effectually.


That would be seen by a perusal of the Oxford tracts. There was
little or nothing in the first to incur censure ; but England rung
with alarm and warning on the appearance of “ Tract Ninety."
With those warnings he was of opinion that none but weak-minded
people could be deluded by the tinsel of style or the sophistical
reasonings of the Tractarians. He felt convinced Hr, Pusey him-
self must be surprised at the results of his teaching, but it was
worthy of remark that it was only the young and imaginative of
his pupils that ran riot into the arms of the Romish priesthood.
(Cheers.) He begged to second the resolution.
Mr. Hewitt, of Willunga, thought the resolution deserved a
few words of remark. It had been said that the time \\ as come to
take measures to prevent the spread of dangerous errors. He was
aware that attempts were being made to spread such errors, but
trusted that none but the most ignorant would be endangered.
There were unfortunately many who professed to teach Protestantism,
who were in fact Roman Catholics in disguise. (Cheers.) They
wanted no teacher on the mere introduction of a Bishop ; they
would expect him to come forward and state his opinions openly
and unreservedly, and they would decide as to his fitness. (Hear,
hear.) He had himself heard a minister preach disguised Popery,
and after maintaining a half hour's argument with him at its close,
left the Church, not to enter it again for twelve months ; so great
was his abhorence of Tractarianism. (Cheers.) He knew the Rev.
Mr. Shore, who was persecuted by the Bishop of Exeter, and a
more amiable, learned, and pious and devoted clergyman he ne\ er
met with —(cheers) —while the conduct of the Bishop of Exeter
was in its intolerance and persecuting spirit, the very opposite to
what a Christian’s should be. (Cheers.) Then he (Mr. Hewitt)
would wish to ask, how was it that their Bishop could sign one
thing at Sydney, and write to them that he did not mean it? (A
laugh ) If he was not sincere when at Sydney, how could they be
certain he was so now? (Hear, hear.) He (Mr. Hewitt) had
lately met with the Bishop, who claimed him as a countryman ; but
he would disown the Bishop if he did not repent and reform.
(Laughter and great applause.) The tree was known by its fruit,
and what was the fruit of Puseyism ? Why, its miserable mis-
guided votaries dropped oft day after day into the more decided
errors of Popery. (Cheers.) *lt was absurd to suppose that a
priest was better than a layman except by his greater piety. The
imposition of a Bishop’s hand without the inspiration of the Holy
Spirit was of little avail; and it behoved them to set at naught the
teachings of such disguised Roman Catholics, and come, forward and
battle for the pure Protestantism in which alone they could safely
trust. (Cheers.)
The resolution was then put and carried. _
Captain Henry Watts proposed the sixth resolution, as follows


“ That the following gentlemen he a standing Committee to re-
present the Laity, and watch over their interests generally, and to
call meetings of the Laity when and as often as they may deeem
necessary, and to replace their number when reduced "to five :
Mr. MacDermott.
Captain Hart.
Dr, Wyatt.
Mr. J. H. Fisher.
Captain Bagot.
Mr. F. S. Dutton.
Mr. Baker.”
Mr. Abraham Scott was ashamed of the Protestants of South
Australia, who suffered the duty of seconding the resolution to
devolve on him. (Applause.) There was a great movement abroad,
and the emissaries of Tractarianism were busy, not only in England,
but in the Colonies also. It was no time for Churchmen, lay or
cleric, to sleep in fancied security; they should be up and active in
defence of their threatened Protestantism. (Cheers.) They could
not, unfortunately, consider their Bishops infallible instructors ;
and still more unfortunately they, as laymen, were called on to
defend and protect the truth. Their duty was to watch against the
introduction of error, and call the attention of the Church to
threatened danger ; and, above all, to look unceasingly to God and
His Word for illumination and guidance. (Cheers.)
The resolution was carried.
Mr. G. S. Kingston moved, and Captain Duff seconded the
seventh resolution—
“ That a copy of the foregoing resolutions be forwarded by the
Chairman to the Lord Bishop of Adelaide, and to His Grace the
Archbishop of Canterbury, our Primate, with an earnest supplica-
that His Grace will use his authority to protect the Church in
South Australia from any Episcopal interference with its doctrines
and discipline, which has not previously received the direct sanction
of His Grace, and of Her Majesty, as the Supreme Head of the
Church.”
Carried.
Mr. Francis Dutton said—Gentlemen, one dutv now only
remains to us ; a duty which you will all consider of a very pleasing
character. We have had many public meetings in Adelaide, which
have been presided over by various chairmen, but we have never
had a chairman who hao conducted the business of the day with
more firmness, discretion, and impartiality than Mr. Morphett has
done to-day. I beg to propose that the cordial thanks of this
meeting be given to Mr John Morphett, for his able conduct in the
chair this day
Carried with loud cheers, and the meeting broke up.


THE LORD BISHOP’S LETTER TO MR. MORPHETT
ACKNOWLEDGING RECEIPT OF RESOLUTIONS.
Adelaide, January 31, 1851.
Dear Mr. Morphett —l beg to acknowledge the receipt of the
Resolutions passed at a meeting held on the 28th, in Pulteney-
street School-room, which reached me this day ; and I take this
opportunity of making a few observations, which I request you to
make public, and to transmit, together with the Resolutions, to His
Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury :
1. The attempt “ to narrow the terms of communion and ad-
mission into the Ministry alleged against the Bishops in the hist
Resolution, is negatived by the language of the Minute itself on
Holy Baptism ; which states that they “ do not presume to think
that they can inform or guide the judgment of the whole Church”
in this matter; and, secondly, by incorporating in the same Minute
the statement of the Bishop'of Melbourne, which appears to favour
another construction of the baptismal services ;• thereby indicating
liberty of judgment on this subject. _
2. The institution of duly elected conventions of the Laity,
suggested in the Minutes, sitting simultaneously with Synods of the
Clergy, under authority of the Queen as Supreme Head of the
Church, negatives the attempt on the part of the Bishops to
a assume ecclesiastical authority, and obtain an extension of power,”
alleged in the 2nd and 3rd Resolutions. With such conventions
and & synods sitting, either simultaneously or conjointly, it would be
morally impossible. . . . . .
3 Any disloval wish to repudiate or restrict the lawful supre-
macy of the Queen is negatived by Minute 2, affirming the Canons
of A.D. 1603 to be binding on the Bishops and Clergy of the
Australasian dioceses. Jhe first article of tlm 36th Canon ex-
pressly affirms the Queen’s supremacy ; and it is further secured
by subscription to the Thirty-nine Articles, in the declaration pre-
fixed to which it is set forth.
Lastly—With respect to Tractarian and Anti-Protestant views.
Having witnessed the beginning, rise, progress, and eventual ten-
dency of that party in the Church, I have no hesitation in saying
that with their doctrinal statements on sin after baptism; the
mystical presence in the sacramental elements, and propitiatory
efficacy of the Lord’s Supper as a sacrifice; the virtue of penance;
meritoriousness of works ; the exaltation of the Virgin Mary; the
invocation of Saints set forth in one of the Tracts for the Times ;
reserve in preaching the doctrine of the Crgss ; the assumption of
the priesthood and apostolical succession being necessary to give
validity to the sacraments as means of grace ; Romanizing books of


devotion and lives of the English Saints ; the setting up of outward
forms and disused ceremonials; insubordination to the civil power
as supreme “in all causes and over all persons;” the putting a non-
natural sense upon the Articles and Liturgy ; the disingenuousness
and want of moral honesty in many of the disciples; —with all these
things, and possibly many more if brought to my recollection, I
neither have nor have had any sympathy whatever. I recorded
my vote in convocation at Oxford against Mr. Ward and his book,
entitled the “ Ideal of a Church and lam fully prepared, with
God’s grace, to stand by the Scriptural principles of our Reformed
Protestant Church, both as to discipline and doctrine, in their plain,
ordinary, moderate and general acceptation, as understood before
the late Romanizing movement; and in which, for twenty years of
parochial ministration, I ever held them, previous to my consecration
as Bishop of Adelaide. I rejoice to witness a godly jealousy
among the laity for the purity of the faith won for us at the Refor-
mation ; and would conclude with the prayer that we all —Bishops,
Clergy, and Laity—may be guided unto all Truth, and kept from
any zeal which is not after knowledge.
I remain, dear Mr. Morphett,
Yours faithfully,
Augustus Adelaide.
Hon. J. Morphett.
North-terrace, Ist February, 1851.
Gentlemen —I have the honour to inform you that, in pursuance
of a resolution (the seventh), passed at a meeting of the Laity of
the Church of England in this province, convened by the Lord
Bishop of the Diocese, and held on the 28th ult., I had the honour
on the following day of transmitting to the Lord Bishop a copy of
the resolutions passed at that meeting ; and this day I have done
myself the honour of sending a copy of the resolutions to His Grace
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
I beg to state that I have sent them in original and duplicate ;
the former per Raleigh and overland, the duplicate per Ascendant
and overland.
I have the honour to be, Gentlemen,
Your very obedient servant,
John Morphett.
To M. MacDcrmott, Esq., G. S. Walters, Esq.,
and the Laymen of the Church of England in
South Australia.


REPORT OF THE OPINIONS OF THE CLERGY OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA ON THE “ MINUTES OF PRO-
CEEDINGS AT A MEETING OF THE AUSTRALASIAN
BISHOPS,” HELD AT SYDNEY, IN OCTOBER, 1850.
To the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Adelaide.
Chapter House, Adelaide, February sth, 1851.
My Lord —We, the Clergy of the Diocese of Adelaide, having
deliberated, at your Lordship’s suggestion, upon the “ Minutes of
Proceedings at a Meeting of the Metropolitan and Suffragan Bishops
of Australasia, held at Sydney in October last,” have now the
honour of submitting, for your Lordship’s consideration, our
views and opinions thereon, as embodied in the following propositions.
Though unfortunately under the necessity of differing from your
Lordship on many points, we trust our manner of doing so will bo
deemed unexceptionable. We are persuaded that we only do
justice to the Chief Pastors of the Australasian Churches by giving
them credit for a sincere and earnest desire to advance the interests
of true religion in their respective Dioceses. As Presbyters and
Deacons of the Church of England, we must claim to be considered
no less desirous of securing the attainment of the great ends of the
Church’s institution.
It was not thought necessary to remark upon those matters con-
tained in the “ Minutes” which are determined by the Rubrics ;
referred to the decision of the Ordinary ; or judging from the ge-
neral usages in the mother-country, left to the discretion of each
individual clergymen.
Any attempt to enforce a rigid uniformity on minor or trivial
matters would, it is to be feared, not only fail in its object, but
would tend to engender strife and evil surmisings.
The Church needs rests. May its Chief Pastors be endued with
the spirit of wisdom, power, love, and of a sound mind ; and may
we a ll—Clergy and Laity —be divinely enabled to maintain the
faith “ in unitv of spirit, in the bond of peace, and in righteousness
of life.”
Propositions above referred to.
1. That our proceedings may be made public.
2. That we proceed to the consideration of the “ Minutes”
seriatim; omitting, however, all discussion upon the question of
baptismal regeneration, except to affirm on the propriety or other-
wise of its introduction into the “ Minutes.”
3. That we regard the meeting of the Bishops respectively of
Sydney, Tasmania, New Zealand, Adelaide, Newcastle, and Mel-
bourne, simply as a voluntary assembling of the Chief Pastors of
the Australasian Dioceses, to confer upon matters affecting the
interests of the Church.


4, That while we approve mainly of* the objects on which the
Bishops proposed to consult—as specified in Section I.—we cannot
refrain from expressing regret that, as they had not conferred with
their respective Clergy before their meeting, they should have
forwarded their “ Minutes” to England, with a view, it is presumed,
to Imperial Legislation, without previously submitting them to the
Clergy and Laity of their respective Dioceses.
Future Synods and Conventions.
5. That adverting to chap, iii., “On Future Synods and Con-
ventions, ’ we are of opinion that it would be preferable for the
Clergy and Laity to meet in one Assembly or Convention, con-
sisting of every licensed Presbyter having ciu'e of souls, and one
or more Laymen, chosen by and out of the members of each con-
gregation, in full communion, and presided over by the Bishop of
the Diocese.
Subdivision of Dioceses and Nomination of Bishops.
b That the right and power of Her Most Gracious Majesty to
subdivide the Australasian Dioceses and to nominate Bishops
thereto has hitherto been wisely aud beneficially exercised, and
ought for the present to be retained intact; and that, should a
period arrive when it should be deemed expedient that Her Majesty
should relinquish the right of nominating to Colonial Sees, we are
of opinion that, according to ancient usage, such right of nomination
should be vested in the Clergy of the Diocese over which the Bishop
is to preside.
Church Membership.
Minute.— On a discussion of the phrase “ duly baptized,” it was
understood that the word “ duly ” was intended to be
explained by the words following, viz.—“ with water, in
the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,” and not
to refer to the person baptizing.
DISCIPLINE.
Clergy.
7. That, as the Australasian Bishops “ disclaim” the right,
power, or wish “ to suspend or revoke, at their own discretion, the
licences of Clergymen,' 7 we are of opinion that the licences to in-
cumbencies should, as far as possible, be in the same form of words
as those issued in England, and not revocable at “ pleasure.”
. 8’ That it is desirable there should be a power of depriving
Clergy, convicted of immorality or heresy, of their incumbencies.
Status of Clergy.
9. lhat we view with some degree of fear and disapprobation the
desire of the Australasian Bishops to license Clergymen to charges
of a “ temporary nature,” and the wish expressed by them “ that
candidates for Holy Orders” “should place themselves” entirely
at the disposal of their Bishop for some definite term of years,
and leave to him the responsibility of appointing and changing


tlielr station during such period —as we believe such a policy, if
general, would, under present circumstances, be injurious to the
maintenance of mental independence, doctrinal purity, and pastoral
fidelity among the junior Clergy, and would be inimical to their
domestic comfort and general usefulness.
10. That it is of the utmost importance to the respectability, in-
fluence, and efficiency of the clerical body in this Diocese to keep
up, as far as possible, the standard of secular and theological
learning for candidates for Holy Orders which is required by the
Bishops at home. # . .
11. That, under present circumstances, it is not desirable to
admit to the Diaconate, for the service of the Church in this Diocese,
persons whose previous position in the colony would materially im-
pair their influence. _ . .
12. That, for the due preservation of order and harmony, it is
desirable that no Deacon or Catechist should be introduced into any
district already under the care of a Presbyter, but on the nomination
of such Presbyter to whom the said Deacon or Catechist should
be subordinate.
LITURGY.
Marriage of persons neither of whom belong to the Church.
13, That whereas up to a recent period no marriages of Dissenters
in England were legal unless celebrated according to the rites and
ceremonies of the Established Church, and whereas at the present
time the majority of Dissenting marriages are so celebrated in the
mother-country, we are of opinion that no Australasian Clergy-
man ought to refuse to marry any parties who may apply to him,
though they be not members of our communion.
Ministering to Dissenters.
14. That, while we are relieved from any legal “ obligation ’ “ to
perform religious services for persons who are not members of our
Church,” yet, to guard against any misconception, we desire to
express our readiness to afford our ministerial offices, as far as in
us lies, to any who may need or desire them.
Minute. —We deem it inexpedient to express an opinion on some
points touched upon in chap, vii., as we believe these
points must be left, to a certain extent, to the discretion
of the Officiating Minister. We feel bound, however, to
remark that in section ix., letter d, no mention is made of
mamages to be solemnized on certificate from the
Registrar’s Office ; but we cannot suppose that it is in-
tended by such omission to condemn the solemnization of
such marriages by Ministers of our Church.
We desire also'to express the difficulty we are under of
understanding what is meant by the advice of the Bishops
to repel from the Holy Communion persons who have
married within the prohibited degrees “ until they have
repented and be reformed.”


Hull/ Baptism.
15. That the introduction by the Australasian Bishops of the
question of Holy Baptism into their “ Minutes ” was uncalled for
and injudicious ; that the construction put by them upon the
“ Creed, Articles, and Liturgy,” with respect to this subject,
would, if imposed, be tantamount to a new article of faith; and
that the dogmatical determination of a question which has ever
been practically considered an open one , virtually narrows the terms
of communion with our Church.
Education.
16. That, whilst desirous of seeing a school established in con-
nection with every Church in this colony, we shall be prepared to
regard favourably any system of education in which the Bible shall
be the basis of the instruction given.
Missions.
17. That we hall with great satisfaction the establishment of
the Australasian Board of Missions, in connection with our Church,
with a view to the conversion of the aboriginal Inhabitants of Aus-
tralasia and the Isles of the Western Pacific ; and we earnestly
hope and pray that such measures may be adopted and carried out
by its members as may be crowned with the Divine blessing.
JAMES FARRELL, Dean of Adelaide, and
Incumbent of Trinity.
WILLIAM JOHN WOODCOCK, Canon of Ade-
laide, and Incumbent of Christchurch.
THEODORE PERCIVAL WILSON, Canon of
Adelaide, and Incumbent of St. John’s.
JAMES POLLITT, Curate of Kooringa, and
Chaplain to the Patent Copper Com-
pany, Burra Burra.
W. H. COOMBS, Incumbent of St. George’s, Gawler.
JOHN CHARLES BAGSHAW, Incumbent of
St. Mark’s, Penwortham.
ARTHUR B. BURNETT, Presbyter, Incumbent
of St. Stephen’s, Wiliunga.
JOHN WATSON, Incumbent of St. Matthew’s,
Kensington.
JOHN W. SCHOALES, A. 8., T.C.D., Officiating
Minister, Mackgill,
JOHN FULFORD, Deacon, Incumbent of St.
Mary’s, Sturt, and Christchurch,
O’Halloran Hill.
E. K. MILLER, Deacon, Head Master of Pulteney-
street School, and Assistant Minister
of Christchurch, North Adelaide.
SAME. PERCY RICHD. ALLOM, Second Master
St. Peter’s Collegiate School.


THE LORD BISHOP’S ANSWER.
Claremont, February 6, 1851,
My dear Mr. Farrell — I return for publication the resolutions
and opinions arrived at by the Clergy on the Minutes of the Con-
ference at Sydney, which, on my return, I submitted for their con-
sideration. They appear to me to be characterized by a calm and
serious spirit, which, under the circumstances of excitement lately
prevailing, is peculiarly gratifying. Should Her Gracious Majesty,
as Supreme Head„of the Church of England, authorize the Clergy
and Laity of the Australasian Dioceses to frame their own ecclesias-
tical polity, subject to her approval, and should it be deemed ad-
visable to depart on any point from the existing constitution of the
English Church, I trust that the pattern of other reformed Protestant
and Episcopal Churches will be followed, and the relations of the
Bishops, Clergy, and Laity, as set forth in the Scriptures, carefully
preserved.
I remain, yours very truly,
Augustus Adelaide.
The Very Rev, Dean Farrell.




APPENDIX
It is thought duo to the parties immediately concerned to add the
following particulars:—
Owing to the proceedings relative to the Sydney Minutes, at the
Chvrch Society’s Annual Meeting, His Excellency felt it his duty
to resign the office of Patron of the Institution. In his letter ten-
dering his resignation, he somewhat strongly reflected on the
Hierarchy Clerical Secretary and Marshall MacDcrmott, Esq., for
the part they took on the occasion. Every effort was made by the
Committee, consistent with their duty, to induce His Excellency
to withdraw his letter; but, we regret to say, without effect.
At a Meeting of Committee of the Church Society, held in the
Chapter-house, January 10th, 1851 The Venerable the
Archdeacon in the Chair :
Resolved unanimously—
« 1. That this Committee, feeling that the character of their
Secretary (the Rev. W. J. Woodcock) has been reflected upon in
the letter of His Excellency, beg to express their unshaken con-
fidence in the integrity, honour, and straightforwardness of the
Clergyman who fills that office.
“ 2. That this Committee desire to express their confidence in
the honesty, candour, and Christian conduct of Marshall MacDcrmott,
Esq., as a Member of the Committee.”


At a Meeting of Committee of the Society, held in the Chapter-
house, January 14th, 1851, the following letter was read :
“ To the Committee of the South Australian Church Society.
“ Christchurch Parsonage, North Adelaide,
“ January 14, 1851.
‘ Gentlemen —Circumstances have recently occurred in connexion
with, and consequent upon, certain proceedings at the meeting of
Australasian Bishops lately held at Sydney, which indicate the
desirableness of the immediate termination of my official connexion
with your Society.
In the course which I may feel it incumbent upon me to adopt
m the present exigencies of the Church in this Diocese, with a view
to uphold and disseminate the great principles of our Protestant
Reformed Church , I feel that I might, by retaining office, compro-
mise the Society.
“ I therefore most respectfully tender to the Committee the re-
signation of my office as Secretary.
“ To the Society, I need hardly say I am strongly attached ; not
merely from my having had the honour to assist in its formation,
or from the share I have taken with many of you in the adminis-
tration of its affairs—but because I believe it has been owned and
blessed of God to the ends for which it was founded, and is still
capable of being, under proper management, and with the Divine
blessing, an instrument of vast and increasing good to the Church
in this Diocese.
Sincerely thanking the Committee for the courtesy generally
shown me, and earnestly praying that the Great Head of the
Church would vouchsafe to you ‘ the spirit of power, of love, and of
a sound mind,’ and enable you earnestly to contend for, and widely
to disseminate, the pure Protestant Faith of our beloved Church,
“ I have the honour to be, Gentlemen,
“ Faithfully ycurs,
“ W. J, Woodcock.”


At a Meeting of Committee of the Church Society, held in the
Chapter-house, March 4th, 1851—
A letter was read from the Rev. W. J. Woodcock, stating that
having, at the kind suggestion of the Committee, reconsidered the
subject of his resignation of the office of Secretary, he still felt
it desirable, for the reasons before assigned, that his official con-
nexion with the Society should cease :
It was resolved unanimously —
“ That the Committee beg to tender their best thanks to the Rev,
W. J. Woodcock for his zealous discharge of the duties of Secretary
to the Society during the time he has held that office,”
rSISXBD AT THE REGISTER” AND “ OBSERVER” OFFICE






I tv v « -> u
j faulty*. /2.2/^.W^^
hvn~ %*U-'-/*^-' },u rr--
Z///(44c i^ j n< /X- ?n
lit. //u.t~ (- L x tit^.?~7*'*r~7x
6 1 < t A/' -2-* — oj J -
ff* - £< x /i . /tsCv-* _ 30
AutuU. * 3it
* I i ( JILC J & S -2 f
-Ct (si** **( ft* s / fusty* * *
.Ji~/n*vf —■
