

An Anzac’S
Open Letter
Being trenchant comments on current
events in Queensland, written from
the view-point of a returned
soldier.
Republished, from the Brirbane “Sunday Sun.”
Price 6d.




INDEX
To the Right Hon. William Morris Hughes, P.C., K.C., Prime i
Minister of Australia —On His Return.
To the Hon. Thomas Joseph Ryan, ex-M.L.A. for Barcoo, on his 2
leaving State Poitics.
To the Hon. Edward Granville Theodore, M.L.A., on his appoint- 3
ment as Premier of Queensland.
To the Hon Edward H. Macartney, Esq., M.L.A., on consolidating 4
the Nationalist Forces.
To Lieut. General Sir C. B. White, on his return to Queensland 5
To Major General Sir Thomas William Glasgow, on his return to 6
Queensland —A request to enter Politics.
To Lieut. Colonel Donald Cameron and the sth Regiment, giving 7
a Welcome Home.
To the Hon. H. F. Hardacre, on his appointment to the Land Court 8
To H. S. Cribb, President N. D. C., being some good advice. 9
To Claude Henderson, Esq., on Repatriation. 10
To the Right Rev. St. Clair George Alfred Donaldson, D.D., 11
Archbishop df Brisbane, on Organisation.
To the Most Rev. James Duhig, D.D., Archbishop of Brisbane, on 12
many things.
To Edward Gaffney, Esq., Chairman W. S. C., on Thrift. 13
To Mrs. Bale, of the Red Cross Kitchen.—An Appreciation. 14
To the Members of the King and Empire Alliance, on Loyalty. 15
To the Hon. John Fihelly, Minister for Railways, on giving Value 16
for Money Expended.
To Denison Miller, Esq., Governor of the Commonwealth Bank, 17
on his success in the Banking World.
To Messrs. E. T. Garbutt, A. Gibson, and H. G. Bradley, of the 18
Northern National Union, on their achievement in uniting
their supporters.
To J. H. Thomas, Esq., General Secretary of the National Union of 19
Railway Men in England, on the recent strike.
To T. J. Rothwell, Esq., Chairman Automobile Club Transport 20
Corps, on conveying Returned Soldiers from Central Station.
To the Persons who were responsible for the sinking of .the 21
Llewellyn.
To the Hon. Randolph Bedford, M.L.C., on his views of the British 22
Empire.


EVERY day hundreds ol men are buying 41 THTSTLE
BRAND Tourist Shirts. Their superior fit and finish
ccrrn . .1 r~» 7 means satisfaction in
1 rustle Brand com/orl - servlce and ap ~
pea ranee.
Shirts Yoa can be siire °f
luurioi kj/ufLo pood Shirts when vou
buy “ THISTLE ” BRAND TOURIST SHIRTS. Right in
every detail —they are the shirts you should buy.
Sold in all up-to-date Shirt Depts.
Made in Australia
By ALEXANDER STEWART & SONS, LTD.
Brisbane
A.S. 1
£
o
X
8*
Mar^
'dp
1/




TO
THE RIGHT HON. WILLIAM MORRIS HUGHES, P.C, K.C.
PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA.
1
DEAR MR. HUGHES,—
It is many years since I had the pleasure of meeting you daily for a
few weeks, and I have had much time since then for reflection and for
thought. I did not realise to the full what greatness was contained in
that small body of yours. Later I thought you had failed when the
Referenda were not passed by the people of Australia, to give a means of
obtaining reinforcements by other than voluntary methods.
I believe now that these failures were not your fault; that it was im-
possible for you to make Conscription law, by any means at your disposal.
Many of your great successes have been achieved abroad; it was your in-
fluence that was responsible in a great measure for England’s decision that
the personal freedom of the mdividual must be subordinate to the needs
of the State when grave danger of defeat was imminent. It was your brain
that conceived and carried out the acquisition of the Commonwealth line
of steamers which have so abundantly justified their existence.
On the mission to England from which you have just returned, you
have succeeded in upholding for Australia that place at the Peace Con-
ference to which the efforts of my comrades on sea and land have entitled
her —you spoke out, and Australians stand behind you. You exposed the
danger of German trading within the heart of the Empire, and vanquished
Mertons. You sold our wheat, and have used your wonderful business
capacity to place our commerce on a solid base for the post-war com-
petition.
Returning to Australia you have received the reception that shows,
however inadequately, the opinion we have of your efforts on our behalf,
and Mr. Hughes, you have received a royal welcome from the returned
soldiers because they believe you have stood by them through thick and
thin, and in acknowledging the receptions you have promised to remain
our friend. We require you, for despite the generous provisions of
the Repatriation Regulations, there are many matters in which we are
not obtaining our just dues. Stick to the soldiers, Mr. Hughes, and
they will stick to you. You are a very wonderful man. Not long ago
you were cooking on a little boat on the Queensland coast, were mending
umbrellas for a living, and you have risen to be Prime Minister of Aus-
tralia, a Privy Councillor and a King’s Counsel. More than that, you
have stood for the right, you have been prepared to leave the party that
had lost its ideals, and, risKing everything, to throw yourself on the
mercy of the electors.
If you can carry out your policy and steer a straight course, refusing
toleration to profiteer and Bolshevik alike, then our future is assured.
You know the menace that either side is to a full-grown and healthy
nation. There are innumerable difficulties in your path. Profiteering
is very hard to prevent, and the extremist, especially when he is en-
couraged by people who should know better, is like a Moreton Bay flg,
his roots spread, and he is hard to pull out.
We are expecting great things from you in the near future, and we
are sure you will not disappoint us, if your health holds out. Wishing
that you may live long to enjoy the honours you have received, and the
appreciation of the people of Australia.—l am,
Yours truly,
AN ANZAC,
Brisbane, September 16, 1919,


2
TO
THE HON. THOMAS JOSEPH RYAN,
PREMIER AND ATTORNEY-GENERAL OF QUEENSLAND.
(Ex-M.L.A. FOR BARCOO.)
SIR
I should prefer, in addressing this letter to you, to be taking the
opportunity of congratulating you upon some signal qualities of mind or
body, which have been devoted by you to the public good. I regret and
say it with the utmost sincerity that I cannot offer you those congratu-
lations. You have, sir, certain qualities that applied whole-heartedly to
the advancement of this, your State of Australia, your native land, and
of the Empire, of which you are a servant under His Gracious Majesty the
King, would have been of inestimable value, especially during the years
of war.
It is an unfortunate circumstance that you have neglected “to rise
on stepping-stones of your dead selves to better things,” but instead,
having lowered yourself to meekly obey a section of the community, you
have lost your individuality, and become merely a. slave, whose only
apparent object is to “smoodge” and cringe to the masters, while leaving
no stone unturned, nor neglecting any opportunity to belittle the work of
those men who are endeavuring to advance the interests of their country,
regardless of the praise or condemnation of any one section, however
numerous or easily led by posturing or tricks of speech that section may
be. That you are skilled in debate and a doughty opponent, is a matter of
common knowledge; your successes as a barrister are admitted.
Your good points, Mr. Ryan, only stand out as showing to what an
extent you have become subservient during your slavery. Your career is
well known to the people of this State, although there are many who did
not realise fully to what heights you might have ascended, or to vwhat
depths you have now been thrust. When war was forced upon this Empire
your party was in opposition, but it was not long before you became
Premier, your party being returned with a majority.
Following the popular feeling, you threw your energies into the Offen-
sive against our enemies. r You used your voice and your personal
influence to persuade the eligible men that their duty was to enlist and
fight for those privileges they enjoyed by the valour and self-sacrifice of
their forefathers. Then came the conscription campaign. I refrain
from commenting on your attitude. I will even, admit you were sincere,
when you declared that we were a free people and that a man should be
prepared to fight of his own free will against those who would deprive
him of his country, his women, and his honour. You may even have
been sincere when you repeated your assurance of adherence to voluntar-
ism on the taking of the second referendum. As the result of a general
election you then resumed office for a further period. Again you
promised your support, even to the extent of allowing men to be enlisted
as the “Ryan Thousand.”
What did you do then. M.\ Ryan? Did you appeal to your supporters
to come forward and, under ycur name, assist to stem the onrushing
hordes who were driving back our forces on the Western Front? You did
not. You. with your favored Ministers., attended the Labour Conference at
Perth. What transpired in Its entirety, we do not know, but we know
that a resolution was passed, drafted by you, that peace be made on a
basis of “no annexations and no penal indemnities,. You, with your
legal astuteness may argue that the resolution was not calculated to
assist the enemy, nor to give him the impression that he had powerful
and able friends within Australia who were prepared to negotiate and to
grasp the hand then dripping from the blood of innocent sacrifices.
It is easy to follow the trend of your mind, and to know the desires
of your task-masters. The stage was set, and on it would appear a
Mr Ryan who had never advocated beating the workers of another
country to their knees, a Mr. Ryan who was a Socialist a benefactor of
the human race.


But your attempt to woo the blind goddess failed. Despite your
resolutions, despite the attitude of the Industrial Council, despite any-
thing and everything her detractors could do, the Empire and her Allies
did force their foes to sue for peace.
And this great and glorious victory was won by the self-sacrifice
of men and women who know their duty, and who, uninfluenced either
by place nor power, by love of ease, or by fear of death, assured for you
that freedom, and secured against aggression those constitutional liberties,
which are an integral part of citizenship of the British Empire. To
detail the acts by which you have offended against the feelings of right
thinking persons would be too tedious. Your most recent, that of the
publication of a partisan speech by one of your supporters in the House,
broadcast, under privilege, is not the least of them.
And now, Mr. Ryan, you have decided, “in the interests of Australia,'*
to desert your party, having allowed this State to fall into industrial and
financial difficulties, that will take a far better man than you to untangle.
“In the interests of Australia”—truly, this is the crowning jest from a
man who has become so lost to every feeling of fairness, that he character-
ises every criticism of himself and his Government as “political spleen,”'
refusing to admit, even though he knows them well, the honesty and
fair-mindedness of many of those who, even though they do not agree
with the policy of his supporters, are entitled to voice their opinions.
That you did not choose the clear path when the chance was given you,
must be the bed of thorns on which you toss unceasingly, to know the
poor esteem in which you are held by men who are far inferior to you in
brain power; to know you have qualities that should make you acceptable
in any and every circle of society, that you are a “good fellow,” and a
very pleasant companion, must be gall and wormwood to you whenever
you think, as you must do often, of what might have been.
“QUO VADIS.”
Brisbane, October 15, 1919.
P S. —Rumour has it that your departure from State politics was not
altogether of your own free will, and that your entry into the Federal
arena is not looked upon with favour by the Labour leaders. Remember
that the seat on either stool is small, but that the space to fall between is,
of immeasurable vastness.—Q.V.


3
TO
HON. EDWARD GRANVILLE THEODORE, M.L.A.,
VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL, PREMIER, CHIEF
SECRETARY AND TREASURER OF QUEENSLAND.
MOTTO FOR GOOD LABOURITES: ONE MAN ONE JOB.
DEAR MR. THEODORE, —
I can imagine the glow of satisfaction that is enveloping you just
now, because, through the withdrawal of Mr. Ryan, you become
Premier of this State, a great and glorious opportunity for a man who is
possessed of the'necessary strength of mind and purpose to make good,
and to leave behind him an imperishable record of advancement.
In your new Cabinet you have also been chosen by the Caucus to
retain the office of Treasurer, which you have held for some time.
There are among those who you no doubt choose to regard as your
-enemies, because they differ from you in politics, many who have a
•certain regard for you. Your style in the House is open and gives the
impression of honesty. You gave a warning to the extremists among
your supporters recently; in fact your advice was to “boot out the
1.W.W.,” but there does not sejm to have been any noticeable action taken
on your advice.
Mr. Theodore, permit me to say that I admire an optimist in his
proper sphere, at the war shall we say, or on the race track, but your
optimism in regard to the State’s finance is rather overdone. I suggest
you have a heart to heart talk with the Auditor-General ,and that instead
of referring too much to the profiteer and the legislation you are intro-
ducing for his extermiantion, you take a look at the State Railways, in
consultation with Mr. Fihelly, who, having cost the taxpayers no less
than £lBOO for a tour to Europe and the United States, must have at
least one idea that might make for efficiency.
This Mr. Fihelly is to be your deputy, and also to retain the Railways
Portfolio, while spending his spare time as Minister for Justice. He has
done some good work for the “workers” as Minister for Railways, his fear-
less refusal to raise the price of beer at the Central Station during the
recent beer strikes endeared him to the hearts of many, and showd how
true a democrat he is.
I know little of Mr. Larcombe, who is your Minister for Pdblic
Works; no doubt he has the necessary qualifications for this very re-
sponsible position and will take care that no buildings are erected for
the State by ‘.‘day labour” at a higher cost than “contract.” Mr. Mullan,
your Assistant Minister of Justice, doubtless received his reward for
the mare’s nest he uncovered with such glee when he accused the
employers of a plot against Labour, while all they were doing was to
adopt one or two of the least objectionable principles of the Trades Hall.
One thing you should remember, and the failure to recognise this
fact is the reason for the unpopularity of the Labour Government. You
must not legislate for one class only; remember you are endeavuring to
govern because you are elected by a majority, but that does not mean
that the minority, and it comprises a large number of citizens,
forfeited their rights to consideration. My advice. Mr. Theodore, “play
the game” like a Britisher and an Australian, if your team will let you,
and your supporters allow you to remain on the field.—Good health, from
yours truly, . „
AN ANZAC.
Brisbane, October 22, 1919.
p.S.—Don’t you think you are on the wrong side? The great man
is never afraid to admit when his outlook has so widened, that he realises
the folly of his old views. I suppose you will be making a trip abroad;
if you want an excuse, investigate irrigation and main roads. — A.A.


TO
EDWARD H. MACARTNEY, ESQ., M.L.A.,
LEADER OF THE NATIONALIST PARTY IN THE LEGISLATIVE
ASSEMBLY OF QUEENSLAND.
4
"DEAR MR. MACARTNEY, —
It has been my intention for some time to write and tell you of my
admiration for the manner in which you and your colleagues have always
upheld any National or Patriotic movements during the war. When I
:say upheld, I do not mean simply giving your patronage, or your moral
but giving of your very best, always without thought of either
personal gain or popularity.
I am glad to see that the forces that are behind you are, one by one,
falling into line, and recognising that the motto, “United we stand, but
divided we are no one at all,” is just as true of political forces as of armies
in the field. I notice that one large section, and a hitherto divided section
•of your supporters, has decided to take the field as one concrete division,
under your leadership. It must be a source of gratification to see the
organisation which you started amidst so much hostile criticism, forging
rapidly ahead. Your position is a difficult one. As Leader of the Oppo-
sition, you are like the commander of an army, but unlike him your dis-
cipline does not depend on others.. But like him you must rely on the
of every man and woman in the ranks. You stand in the front
line, at the apex of the triangle. Behind you are your supports, the
members of your party; then the reserves formed by the executives of the
various organisations and their affiliated bodies, like the National Demo-
cratic Council, the Queensland Women’s Electoral League, and the Primary
t Producers’ Union, etc. The base of the triangle is formed by the members
of these associations, and by the other electors who, although not members,
are your supporters.
In times of stress the army becomes alert; every man realises that
should the enemy suceed he will be to blame. Do your supporters realisj
their responsibilities? Or do they spend their time and energy in useless
criticism and squabbling, and grudge their money to help their own
•cause?
Organisation, advertising and personal loyalty will move mountains,
and the present Government is not nearly so solid as that. So be of
good cheer, but remember, that a battle is not won on the field solely
by the personal bravery of the opposing forces, but by the preliminary
dispositions of the commanders and by the supply of ammunition, rations,
and other munitions of war. With best wishes. —I am, yours truly,
AN ANZAC.
Brisbane, August 28, 1919.
P.S. —What about calling a Round Table Conference between General
Cribb of the N.D.C., General Petersen, of the P.P.U., and General
-Anderson, of the Q.W.E.L.? —A.A.


TO
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL SIR C. B. B. WHITE,
K.C.M.G., C. 8., D. 5.0., M.C., BELGIAN CROIX DE GUERRE, A.D.C. TO*
THE KING, GOLD MEDAL FOR MERIT (MONTENEGRO),
QUEENSLANDER.
5
SIR, —
I take the liberty of addressing you, as last week I did your illustrious;
comrade, Major-General Sir T. W. Glasgow. On behalf of my fellow re-
turned soldiers, and of the citizens of Queensland, I welcome you home..
I heartily congratulate you on the many honours you have won, and on
the display of those qualities of mind and body that have made them so
richly merited. Your achievements have added to the glroy of the A.1.F.,.
your work at the Gallipoli Evacuation will go down to history, and will
rank worthy alongside the deeds for which the great men of our Empire-
are ever honoured and revered. Now we hope the work of destruction is
ended and that the time for construction has arrived, to you who have
been specially honoured by His Majesty our King, is, we learn, to'be given
the duty of advising the Commonwealth Government on our future military
organisation. That a Defence Force is necessary in our island continent
is admitted by all who grasp the world problems of to-day. In addition
to providing a weapon against attack, the army inculcates discipline into*
the minds of the young, and improves their physical conditions—very
necessary factors in the training of the future generation of Australians.
There will be many ways in which you can help the returned men in the
future. Many attempts have been made to obtain the redress of grievances
that have caused discontent and unrest among our ranks. The Defence-
Department has not always ‘ played the game,” and requests for the *
removal of civilians have often been met by Ministerial camouflage. The-
Commonwealth Military Forces include many men who did not go to the-
war; possibly they are unfit; possibly they have had good reasons to stay
at home. The point is that they still hold their rank. Can you expect the
returned men to come back to the C.M.F. their junior? Or even to associate
with many of them in a military organisation? The solution of this problem
may result in the Australian Army Reserve being so organised that it be-
comes universally popular. All we ask, General, is a ‘‘square deal.” We-
have fought for our country abroad, and we realise that reforms are neces-
sary at home, even though we have become civilians again. As civilians
and citizens, one last word: We are resolved that the sacrifices that have-
been made to achieve victory shall not be wasted by the Bolshevik and
revolutionary element in our midst. Perhaps you can help us there, too,
even though you are a permanent soldier in contrast to General Glasgow.
Wishing Lady White and yourself a long and happy life in enjoyment of
the honours you have won.—l am, Sir Cyril,
Your very humble Comrade in Arms,
AN ANZAC.


10
TO
CLAUDE HENDERSON, ESQ.,
DEPUTY CONTROLLER OF REPATRIATION (QUEENSLAND).
DEAR MR. HENDERSON, -vJTJ HJJiiIN SLAIN Uiiii,
SIR,— - ”'" lr shoulders rests a heaw
On behalf of your comrades who fought under you, I congratulate
you on your safe return. I congratulate you on the honours bestowed
on you—honours so well deserved.
You have won the admiration of your fellow Queenslanders, shown
by your great welcome home. But you have done more. By your
constant thoughtfulness for all ranks under your command you have
won the respect of the “Diggers ” In your generous praise of the troops
whom you have commanded, you have made us all feel our pride in you
and in ourselves.
You belong' to us—to the returned sailors and soldiers—you have
been our leader in war, and we require your leadership in peace.
I know you are no “militarist”; you cannot be accused of bolstering
up the “officer class”; you would be happiest if you could retire to the
life you led before the war.
But you mustn’t do it, Geneial; your country needs big men, and your
service must be given to her.
To be known as a politician has become no great honour in this
State, but surely that should not prevent the best men from entering the
political arena and elevating the work of guiding the destinies of the State
to its proper level.
Only men who know us can realise our needs; only men who know
us can understand the strength of our demands for a “square deal.” We
want to see a great nation as a result of our efforts, a decent nation, a fair-
minded nation, whose watchword shall be the ideals for which we fought.
And I appeal to you to give your services in a cause almost as great
as that for which the’Allies fought and won.
I am, Sir Thomas,
Your very humble Comrade in Arms,
Brisbane, June 26, 1919. AN ANZAC.
7
TO
LIEUT.-COLONEL DONALD CAMERON,
AND THE OFFICERS, NON-COMMISSIONED OFFICERS, AND MEN OF
THE FIFTH LIGHT HORSE.
GENTLEMEN, —
I wish to express to you (however feeble and however inadequate those
expressions may be) the welcome that Queensland gives you. Home
once more, back to that sunny State you left in December, 1914, back
after years of hardship, years of fighting, back with the knowledge of
duty done, and victory accomplished. With what high hopes you left
on the Persic; and with what fears that the war would be over.
Many* scenes and many faces will flash across your memory as
you come home —Chatham’s Post, and Harris Ridge, a lasting memorial
to your original commander who died in action, mourned equally by
officers and men alike; of Lock Wilson, now Brigadier; of “Tibby”
Brundritt, whose untimely death lost to you a most promising and
popular soldier; of the Evacuation; of Egypt and of Palestine; of the
great game of war; and of men who have proved themselves true com-
rades, in life and in death.
The Vth Regiment has been a great Regiment in War; it now
remains for its members to become great in Peace, to accept the welcome
of their fellow-citizens, and to return to their civilian occupations,
always remembering the burden that is laid on all true men —the
burden to stand for Australia and for the British Empire in time of
trouble, and consistently advocate those principles for which you fought,
that are summed up in “A square deal.”
Gentlemen! May you live long in happiness and prosperity to up-
hold the honour of the great Australian Regiment to which you be-
longed.—Your admirer, AN ANZAC.
Brisbane, July 30, 1919.


I desire to offer you - -„ F uiuiment to the
Land Court Judgeship. What a relief it must be to you, after all these-
years paddling your canoe on the troubled waters of party politics, tO'
reach a smooth backwater at last!
I think your appointment will be quite popular., because most people
think you “quite a decent chap.” They realise that your heart (although
it is reputed to beat feebly, at times) is in the right place; that you are a
decent, loyal Britisher who has more than once incurred the displeasure
of the Caucus for your work during the war, especially on the recruiting
platform, and for the assistance you gave to various patriotic objects
through the schools.
Now, Mr. Hardacre, you need not care if the Industrial Council
decide that “drums shall not beat and bugles shall blow no more in the
State schools,” you need not worry if the extremists of the Labour Party
are really cross because you have given the utmost assistance to the
Peace Loan that the Department of Public Instruction could afford.
I am glad to see you are getting right on the job and have already
assumed the correct air. The nice little photograph that accompanied
the announcement of your appointment in the city press showed you look-
ing quite as wise as Solomon, holding a legal-looking volume. Perhaps
it was the advance proof of the new “History for Schools,” specially pre-
pared, by order, with all reference to war carefully cut out, while you
lean your head on your hand, at the same time showing a really large
amount of presumably white cuff, because, Mr. Hardacre, it is understood
that white cuffs and collars are a mark of the bourgeoisie, and act like a
red rag to a bull on the feelings of extremists of the Bolshevik type.
They tell me you were once a hard-up butcher’s assistant, but you
may be a good Land Court Judge. We hope for the best at any rate, and
giving credit where it is due, your work in the Education Department
has been good to the best of your ability—you have not failed from lack
of trying. Wishing you many good days to draw your £lOOO a year.—
I am, yours truly,
Brisbane, September 4, 1919. AN ANZAC.
9
TO
H. S. CRIBB, ESQ.,
PRESIDENT THE NATIONAL DEMOCRATIC COUNCIL.
DEAR MR. CRIBB, —
I have read the reports of your recent National Democratic Con-
ference, and the new platform of the N.D.C., with much interest. It is
a good platform, and the preference to returned soldiers clauses are'
particularly prominent. We as a class are rather doubtful of poli-
ticians, but we keep hoping for what we call “a square deal.”
There seems at last to be a strong semblance of unity in the
Nationalist ranks. May Ibe allowed to say that if your party want to
make certain of winning the next election, there will have to be more
unity, still more self-sacrifice, and much more publicity.
The Labour party are always organised to win. I sometimes have
thought in the past that the Nationalists did not want to win. They
were split into so many sections that organisation became impossible.
Your publicity department seems a bit weak to me. It seems quite
content apparently to allow outside organisations to publish literature
that helps its cause, but is not ready to take a leaf out of their book,
or their pamphlet, and get busy.
Mr. Cribb and Gentlemen of the N.D.C.: There are a lot of decent,
loyal people in this State, whose votes will be cast for people they can
trust, and follow, at the next election. It is your business to find the
right type of men to represent those people in the House, and to find
them soon. Then utilise the whole power of your association to teach
the theory of decent citizenship. I wish you the best of luck. —Yours
truly,
Brisbane, August 20, 1919. AN ANZAC.


10
TO
CLAUDE HENDERSON, ESQ.,
DEPUTY CONTROLLER OF REPATRIATION (QUEENSLAND).
DEAR MR. HENDERSON, —
On your shoulders rests a heavy responsibility—a responsibility not
of business or commercial enterprise, but of being mainly responsible-
for the administration of that multiplicity of reuglations which are
formulated with the object of replacing your comrades in the civil life
of the community that they abandoned temporarily to join the ranks of
Australia’s citizen army.
Your task is one of national importance. On the success of
Repatriation rests the immediate future of the State and the Common-
wealth.
Discontented and dissatisfied soldiers will be seized upon by those
gentry who are busy stirring up strife, and may be induced to throw
in their lot with them.
I know that your department has been hampered in the past by the
centralisation of control in Melbourne; now with widely extended
powers given to local committees we hope for great things in the future.
You will never be popular; you can’t please everyone; but as long
as the man who wants work, gets it, the man who is entitled to be
trained is trained, loans made available to those who will use them well,
while land settlement is encouraged among the right class, then you
will have no cause to be troubled by hostile criticism; in fact, you should
welcome it because it gives you the chance to get what you want—
publicity.
As long as the good work is not properly known, and only the
mistakes that are bound to occur are made prominent, then you and
your department must suffer. I suggest that you take every opportunity
of getting into the limelight. You have many duties to perform, but
let everyone know what they are.
I wish you every success in the future, and hope that Queensland
may stand in the forefront of the States, even of the world. —Yours truly,
AN ANZAC.
11
TO
THE ARCHBISHOP OF BRISBANE,
THE RIGHT REV. ST. CLAIR GEORGE ALFRED DONALDSON, D.D.
YOUR GRACE, —
I write to you as the head of a great Church which we all admire-
and respect, a Chuch whose apostles have fought and lived with us as
comrades, and in conjunction with the representatives of other Churches
and Denominations, have carried on their noble work wherever the-
Armies were engaged' in their efforts on behalf of civilisation, the success
of which we celebrated last week.
Surely now, if ever in history, those whose duty it is to help mankind
to better and saner ideals, to show the reality of the spiritual life that
uplifts our poor human clay, should get busy.
If we wanted recruits, subscribers to War Loans, or donors to
Patriotic Funds, we went out after them, we advertised, we used every
trick of the adevrtiser’s art, in an endeavour to create the necessary
atmosphere. We did not sit still, expecting the mountain to come to
us, but, like Mahomet, we went to the mountain.
I snbmit, your Grace, and I do so with greatest humility, that the
salvation of the world depends on the re-awakening of the moral sense
of its inhabitants. If people have come to regard vice as virtue, to
applaud the successful thief, and to acclaim the agitator and fomenter
of strife as a hero, then civilisation is as surely doomed, as if the hordes
of the Hun hald over-run the globe.
Perhaps it may appear undignified, perhaps no precedent exists for
the clergy to go forth as of old to preach the word of God in the “high-
ways and byways,” but, your Grace, precedent has gone by the board.
The clergy did their work on the field of battle. And that they may carry
the banner of the Church militant as ably in the battle that confronts us
to-day, is the sincere wish of yours respectfully,
Brisbane, July 23, 1919. AN ANZAC.


TO
THE ARCHBISHOP OF BRISBANE,
THE MOST REVEREND JAMES DUHIG, D.D.
12
YOUR GRACE,—
I take the liberty of congratulating you on the many sound opinions
you expressed when speaking at the opening of the Gladstone-road Church
School (St. Ita’s) last Sunday.
You consider the industrial unrest which is menacing our national
prosperity, as engendered by the lack of discipline and sound moral train-
ing in the households of Australia, where children aer allowed to dictate
to their parents.
You have struck the root of the trouble, and again when you condemn
the advanced Socialist and Revolutionary, who recognise neither the
authority of God nor man, your Grace voices the opinion of hundreds of
thousands of sane, loyal, people in this State.
Another expression of opinion which you gave some time ago, I think
at Helidon, when you suggested that all candidates for Parliament should
pass an examination in matters appertaining to their electorates, was
worthy of the highest commendation. But it has not been adopted, and
if you look round the faces of the gentlemen who are responsible for
the Government of our State, the reason is plain.
Recently your Grace criticised the Peace terms which the Allies had
enforced on the Central Powers. You regard them as harsh; you think,
as is most fitting, that justice should be tempered with mercy. Do you
think that Cardinal Mercier regards the terms as merciful? Had the
Parish Priests been shot, the Nuns insulted, the Altars and Churches de-
filed and desecrated in Queensland, would you then have thought the
penalty demanded from the criminal perpetrators too severe?
If a man steals, he must be punished; if a nation commits unspeak-
able crimes, that nation must be punished, and show true repentence be-
fore the rest of the world can acknowledge it.
In conclusion, I trust that every member of your Church will practise
in their homes what you preach; that they will become apostles, teaching
the value of moral training, the need of discipline in this life, the foolish-
ness of “direct action” when arbitration is available, and the necessity
for working together in unity if Australia is to be a great nation.
I should like to take the opportunity of expressing my thanks and
gratitude to the many fine Chaplains of your Faith who served abroad
with the Australian Imperial Force, with many of whom I had the honour
of associating.
Hoping that your good words have not fallen on stony ground,—
I am, yours truly,
AN ANZAC.
Brisbane, August 7, 1919.


13
TO
EDWARD GAFFNEY, ESQ.,
CHAIRMAN, WAR SAVINGS COMMITTEE.
«
DEAR MR. GAFFNEY, —
The work on which your committee are engaged is closely connected
with that of the Repatriation Department. Without money, the pledge
to the soldier cannot be redeemed.
You have, in addition, a splendid business proposition that should
appeal to the men with money; £6OO becomes £lOOO in 10 years, and
money back, if required, at any time, and with interest, after twelve
months.
Also you are endeavouring to encourage one of the greatest of national
virtues —Thrift. The small investor has the same opportunity as the
Capitalist; 15/6 becomes £1 in five years, 12/- becomes £1 in 10 years,
and so on; always with the right of withdrawal whenever it is required,
and with interest added after a year.
Your .stamps of the value of sixpence and two-and-sixpence place
this method of investing within reach of every man, woman, and child,
offering the start in saving that will culminate in a decent competency
early in life.
Unfortunately this wonderful opportunity does not appear to be re-
ceiving the attention it should. Good things are often neglected. You
remember the man who failed to sell sovereigns for shillings on London
Bridge; but how the people who refused to take a profit of 19/- must
have cursed themselves —when it was too late.
It’s an uphill fight yours; people would sooner spend their money
wastefully than save, and your duty with those associated with you is
to educate, to produce such an atmosphere in the community that saving
shall become the virtue, which it is entitled to be. Wishing you the best
of luck, —I am, yours truly,
AN
ANZAC.
Brisbane, July 19, 1919.
P.S. —I
like to see money
grow like this: —
In 5 Years.
In
10 Years.
15
6 makes £1
12/-
makes £1
£3 17
6 makes £5
£3
makes £5
£7 15
0 makes £10
£6
makes £10
£77 10
0 makes £100
£60
makes £100
£775 0
0 makes £1000
£600
makes £1000


TO
MRS. BALE,
CONVENER OF THE RED CROSS KITCHEN
DEAR MRS. BALE, —
14
The spontaneous outburst of enthusiastic cheering that greeted yon
and the ladies of the Red Cross as you marched past the saluting base in
the Peace Procession, on the never-to-be-forgotten Saturday, of July 19.
when we celebrated the victorious consummation of our effort on behalf
of civilisation, reminded me anew of the part you and the ladies of the
Red Cross Kitchen had played in the achievement of the glorious result.
Our work is done, we are demobilised, civilians who for a little while
as soldiers tried to do our bit for our country and our Empire; your work
will go on until the last man is home, and as long as the hospitals require
the delicacies you prepare for the patients. Many a heart grows lighter
coming home, but without the meal always provided by you and your
assistants at the hospital, to soldiers on their return, we should have
been considerably heavier in mind, though lighter in body. What your
efforts have meant to the patients in hospital is beyond my power to
express; day after day the “kitchen car” has conveyed to the Military
Hospitals those products of your skill that have been so large a factor
in restoring the victims of war to health and strength. I know how hard
you have all worked in that “kitchen,” long hours, hours that would cause
the male worker to faint with horror, every day, including Sundays, for
four years, and sometimes when troop trains were late —as they often
are—your duties did not end till long after the witching hour. You have
our gratitude, Mrs. Bale, you and all your fellow workers, women of
Queensland, who played your part as nobly and as unselfishly as the men
who fought. Your reward is our appreciation, that and the knowledge
of the success of your work will ensure you all the happiness in the years
to come, —I am, your deep admirer,
AN ANZAC.
Brisbane, August 1, 1919.


TO
THE MEMBERS OF THE KING AND EMPIRE ALLIANCE.
15
LADIES ANDLnd'tha'fin writing to you I am addressing an organisation
composed* ivy SSUTof n—s societms
ot whom send delegates to your council, whose only onjeci .s p are
loyalty, and oomtat «» in.Wo«. nlsm to the Imperial
splrit, S and to Mver d those bonds which unite us to our kith and kin in the
M ° th , e am sure that you have ‘“■'eady
people to realise the direction in comments I have heard and
spread circulation of your literat i . that the members of the
read on it. Sometimes lam inclined tfcoAlliance means to
various affiliated organisations do n understand how much depends
them and to the country TheytherJ/re ew some who wear
SSSri»rA“r! ss
another orgy of blood and misery, failings and a better understand-
civilisation, of a greater tolerance for the a ne Labour
lug ol the good point.l that exwt In .**££**<££ § r h e “ nix _ llke (ro m the
iMttt w", -n-o^ought,
Amanrto e up n ho,d V ?n your daily life the principies
to which you are pledged.
I have heard you called “a is aTastdlto-
fMK the merits or de-
merl j S war^ad 0 to'see
men er f a rom Sl ou? r s?a e t n e e who, /for gallant service in the field, have been
Qwnrdpd the highest of decorations —the V.o.
what^hav^^een 1 ! arn
Tn the sSon of our most difficult „
In closing, I sincerely hope that you "!" Qaee s n °Xnders the necessity
the Alliance may become the moans of teaching Que ns n loyal
of Imperial Federation, but at the same «me stlmuiiai ng ducer
your success,-I am.
yours truly, AN ANZAC.
Brisbane, September 24, 1919.
P S. —How about a meeting of members of affiliated societies, to put:
some “ginger” into it? —A.A.


TO
THE HON. JOHN FIHELLY,
MINISTER FOR RAILWAYS.
16
DEAR MR. FIHELLY, —
I wrote you a few weeks ago, but I cannot allow your speech at the
Mock Banquet tendered to you at the Trades Hall to pass unnoticed.
Was it a “Mock” speech to harmonise with the banquet? You are such
a refreshing person, Mr. Fihelly. You bring back to me memories of
my school days, when boys with unformed minds, but boundless assur-
ance, used to write essays on, and give their opinions of great men, and
the problems that confronted them.
So Lenin is the greatest man in the world, although I expect you
made a mental reservation in favour of one John Fihelly. In the history
of this little thing we call the World, we have all sorts of great men
“Jack the Ripper” was a great murderer; Charles Peace was a great
burglar; Robespierre was a great killer off of so-called aristocrats.
Lenin is admitted to be a combination of all these—at least his
Government has committed all these crimes. So he may be called great
in his own line of business. Is this what you meant, Mr. Fihelly?
Clemenceau, “The Grand Man of France,” is a “Cave Man.” That ex-
pression shows how you have absorbed the American atmosphere.
Neither you nor anyone else can give an accurate definition of the ex-
pression. Anyway, the French Mission, which recently visited us, would
have told us what they thought of M. Clemenceau, and we would have
agreed with them.
Mr. Gompers and our own Lloyd George are “Tories.” Now, do
these two men know your opinion of them? Because I am sure they would
feel inexpressibly hurt to know that you thought them “Tories.”
Gompers, who appears to be still holding, unshaken, the confidence of
American Labour; and Lloyd George—who does not know his work, and
what Great Britain, under his leadership, has done during the years of
war, and the coming years of peace? Mr. Fihelly, did you ever see a little
boy put his fingers to his nose behind the teacher’s back?
Another of your remarks interested me deeply, when you said: “That
if young men had a chance of deciding the matter, there would be no
wars, and old generals would nor be behind the lines directing how young
men should be killed.” We know how you decided, and had the young
men of Australia—and many old ones, too—followed your lead, you and
they might together be working for taskmasters far more exacting than
the Caucus. When you talk of generals, you speak without accurate
knowledge. Had you been there, Mr. Fihelly, you would have seen our
generals taking the risks of death, with the men they led, and you would
have known how rare it was to find an old man o'f high rank. Good-bye,
and please make another speech soon. They are so amusing.—Yours
truly,
AN ANZAC.
P.S. —Did you go to America and England to study Railways?


17
TO
DENISON MILLER, ESQ.,
GOVERNOR OF THE COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA.
DEAR MR. MILLER, —
I have the honour to exteud to you a very hearty welcome to Queens-
land, on this your first visit, after your recent mission to Europe. I wish,
as a member of the A.1.F., to thank you and your staff for the excellent
arrangements made at all times for the convenience of the soldiers, and
for the kindness and courtesy which we invariably received in all our
dealing with the Bank.
In saying that, to my mind, the Commonwealth Bank is one of
Australia’s greatest institutions. I know I shall not incur ihe displeasure
of any of our great private banks, because the bankers are almost as
close a corporation as the medical fraternity. Owing to the respect that
your competitors had for your banking experience and skill, the pathway
was made smooth for you by them in the early days of your Bank’s history.
We remember, too, that you offered to come to the assistance of one of
our banks at a time when a public panic threatened. Fortunately, that
help was not needed but it shoved the happy unoerstanding which exists
between all our Australian Banks. The Commonwealth Bank is now a
powerful factor, not only in Australia, but in world finance. On your
organisation devolved the duty of handling the country’s finances during
the war, including all matters connected with the A.1.F., excepting the
actual work of the Military Paymaster. The v>/-ious War Loans alone
involved a task which would tax the organising resources of any financial
institution, however old, or however great.
One very pleasing feature I notice is the cordial relationship existing
between yourself and all the members of your huge staff. The
of your management is of particular interest to the people of Queensland,
standing as it does in such bold contrast to the methods adopted in con-
nection with the management of our State enterprises. With a full know-
ledge of your experience and ability, the Commonwealth Government gave
you unlimited discretion. From what we know of you, we do not think
you would have undertaken the work under any other conditions. If a
subordinate gives you satisfaction, you reward him. If he fails, you are
strongly enough entrenched in your position to deal with him as he de-
serves. In most Government-controlled institutions, with their labyrinth
of political interference, it is as hard for the man at the wheel to remove
an unsatisfactory employee as it was for the camel of Biblical history
to pass through the eye of a needle. There is one thing I know, and that
is the best thing the Labour Government ever did in Queensland was to
follow the example of the Commonwealth Government by making the Com-
missioner of their Savings Bank just as secure in his independence as
you are.
Now that the problems of war have passed we are faced with the
equally difficult problems of peace, and I hope that your visit here, and
the talks you have had with our business men, will have impressed them
with the vital necessity of subscribing freely and quickly to the Peace Loan.
Of course, the commercial men of our community were bound to listen to
you, and they did so very attentively, but I trust also that you have been
able, through the press, to reach the hearts and the pockets of that large
class of people here in Queensland who can so easily afford at least a £lO
Bond each, but who, for some unknown reason, refrain from making even
this small investment in the Peace Loan.
Queensland’s record in all Patriotic matters is a brilliant one, and it
would be a sad calamity if we besmirched that record by failing to sub-
scibe to the Peace Loan after our sailors, soldiers and sisters have gone
through so many hardships to achieve the great name which Australia has
won in the eyes of the world.
Again, may Ibe allowed to say how glad we are to see you. We hope
to prove it by taking heed of what you have said, for, truly, actions speak
louder than words. —I am, yours truly,
September 11, 1919. ' AN AN2AC.
P.S. —By the way, might I suggest that you have a yarn with the
President of the Returned Sailors and Soldiers Imperial League while
you are in Brisbane. There are one or two matters he might like to
chat over with you regarding the employment of crippled soldiers in
minor positions.—A.A.


. TO
MESSRS. E. T. GARBUTT, A. GIBSON, AND H. G. BRADLEY,
' delegates from the northern national union.
18
GENTLEMEN, —
I have much pleasure in welcoming you to Brisbane, on what I
understand, is an official visit. It is pleasing to me, although in many
ways outside the political arena, to congratulate the men who have
been responsible for welding together in the North those interests that
stand for moderation as against extremism —for a Government that will
be prepared to enforcp its laws without fear or favour, as opposed to a
so-called Government that is controlled by one section of the com-
munity, and is prepared to legislate for that section, without giving
consideration to the interests of any other citizens. Those interests
that stand for a Government that will take its instructions neither from
the Employers’ Federation nor the Trades Hall.
Your energy and quickness to appreciate the situation caused you
to commence your work immediately the result of the last election was
declared. You saw how the disunited forces of Nationalism were scattered
by the solid phalanx of their opponets, and before anyone could advocate
the policy of “wait and see,” you grasped your opportunities with both
hands.
As a result of your work, fifteen electorates now recognise your
authority, because each of these electorates have been consulted in the
amalagamation, and the governing body is the elect of the rank and file
of Northern Nationalsm.
Day by day the various bodies whose identical interests demand the
Teturn of a National Government, draw closer together throughout the
State, and the Federation will ultimately be the salvation of Queensland,
achieved by the people whose ambition is to benefit the community as a
whole, exercising their power at the ballot box in perfect harmony.
I know you will work day and night until December 13, or whenever
the date may be, to perfect your organisation, so that you can support Mr.
Hughes and whoever you choose to follow him as your representatives.
But do not let your efforts slacken. If success is to be won in the State
elections, you must keep at concert pitch.
I am glad you are following Mr. Hughes, for in him the returned men
have a friend, and moue even than that, he stands out as Australia’s
statesman —the man who believes in the great destiny of his country, and
is prepared to steer the Ship.c? State in a straight line for port, however
rough the passage may be, and however difficult and dangerous may be
the steersman’s duty.
I am pleased to note that your platform contains many sound, sen-
sible and moderate planks, also that you propose several measures for
the benefit of returned sailors, soldiers and sisters. You have, I under-
stand, given a proof of your sincerety by appointing, the other day, as
your organisers, men who were entitled to wear the returned soldiers’
badge. Sincerely hoping that your efforts will be crowned with the
success they deserve, —I am, yours truly,
AN ANZAC.
Brisbane, October 8, 1919.
P.S. —Did you notice the finding of the Police Magistrate who was
appointed to enquire into the recent shooting by the police in Townsville?
They tell me that Mr. Ryan could say something if he would, and that
Messrs. Huxham, Coyne, and Bertram, his colleagues and supporters,
have also to feel the weight of the Caucus’s displeasure for certain inci-
dents that occurred during that period.—A.A.


19
TO
J. H. THOMAS, ESQ., M.P. (ENG.).
GENERAL SECRETARY OF THE NATIONAL UNION OF
RAILWAY MEN.
SIR
Despite your previous wise counsel and careful tactful handling of
many difficult problems for many years past, especially during the war,
the Railway Unions of Great Britain have struck.
Whether you have been carried away by irresistible pressure, or
whether you have been able to delude yourself into believing the strike,
a justifiable act, I, like many other persons in this country, am unable
to decide.
It seems a crime of the greatest magnitude to endeavour to hamper
the transport of Great Britain at this critical period when every nation,
including our Germanic foes, are straining every nerve to increase their
production, to supply the markets that await their goods now that peace
has come to the world.
The Railwaymen are striking against something that may happen in
six months’ time, and not against an evil that oppresses them to-day.
Surely the offer of the Government is fair —that a man who reecived
18/- per week before the war shall receive a minimum of 40/-, with
an additional bojius of 11/- until the end of this year, and then only to
he reduced gradually as the cost of living becomes lower; thus guaran-
teeing the war time wage of 51/-, while your members ask for a per-
manent 60/- per week. Surely if 51/- was sufficient during the war, what
justification is there in their request for an increase of 9/- per week now?
Do your remember Germany’s threat, that if the Central Powers
were not victorious, they would so embarass their conquerors and dislocate
their trade, that they would secure an economic triumph which would
ultimately give them almost all the fruits of a victory by force of arms?
These unwarranted upheavals have a strange likeness. We know the
wonderful cunning of our enemies, and I do not hesitate to say that
German cunning is responsible in some measure for this strike.
Look at the position from the viewpoint of Thomas Atkins who has
been fighting on a small wage, while large numbers of railway men and
other skilled workers who were necessary to the country’s trade, and in
munition factories, were classed as “indispensable,” and remained at
home earning more than they had ever hoped for in their wildest dreams.
How will the strike look to the returned soldier who awaits repatriation
and a chance of employment? Will he feel kindly towards the railwaymen?
The ball has started rolling down the hill, and it is hard to prophesy
what will happen before it finally comes to rest. If the Transport
Workers, the Miners, the Electricians, and other large bodies of organised
labour join you, the strike will become more bitter, and even without their
intervention, many things may happen which no one would deplore more
deeply than yourself. It is recorded in thq cables that you shed tears
when the strike was called on. Remember, Mr. Thomas, that there are
many thousands of men in Britain to-day who have fought in battle, and
that life is held cheaper than five years ago. Remember, I say, and
beware!
The wonderful war time organisation of the Government is now show-
ing that your union is not absolutely indispensable, and that it may not
he impossible for the country to carry on. But meanwhile, your members
are losing wages, and your country and your Empire are losing trade.
That it may be possible to bring this most unwise and unwarrantable
strike to an early conclusion, is the wish of, —Yours truly,
AN ANZAC.
Brisbane, October 2, 1919.
p.S.—A word to the wise: The success of a strike depends on popular
sympathy; even had your cause been just, the sudden “downing of tools”
and the consequent needless inconvenience caused to the public, was bad
generalship, and lost you lots of moral support.—A.A.


TO
T. J. ROTH WELL, ESQ.,
CHAIRMAN AUTOMOBILE TRANSPORT CORPS.
20
DEAR MR. DOTHWELL, —
For a long time I have admired the work of the Transport Corps that
has so generously and efficiently arranged for the conveyance of soldiers
from the Central Station to Kangaroo Point Hospital. The task under-
taken by your committee has been no light one, and you have not only
had the organisation in hand, but have attended at the Central Station.
Your honorary secretary, Miss D. M’Cook, has been untiring in her efforts
to make sure that cars were always available, despite short notice of the
arrival of troops, and the refusal of the trains to run according to the
advertised time.
You have been well to the fore in many other Patriotic and Nationals
movements during the war—especially as hon. secretary of the Queens-
land Patriotic Fund, which raised over £650,000 for patriotic purposes—
also the War Loan, while I notice with pleasure that you are again giving
your services as a member of the Peace Loan Committee. I feel sure that
your fellow-committeemen and yourself will be able to congratulate your-
selves on the success of this Loan at the end of September. You wijl
then have played a large part, rot only in transporting the soldiers, but in
assisting their Repatriation.—Wishing you the best of luck, I am, yours
truly,
AN ANZAC.
Brisbane, August 19, 1919.
S
P S. —Some of the motor car owners haven’t done their bit in helping
the Transport Corps, and some of the people in this State haven’t done
their bit in lending money to the Commonwealth. If you asked the motor-
ists and they turned you down, ‘'Finish.” But if the Peace Loan is turned
down, it will be “Commence”—compulsion.—A.A.


21
TO
THE PERSONS WHO WERE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE LOSS OF
THE LLEWELLYN. !
SIRS,—
I do not know quite whom I am addressing, but I know that some
persons will carry to their graves—-and perhaps beyond—the burden of
guilt. This little boat, not considered fit to undertake the pilot work
in the bay, was sent to the north. The seamen’s strike was responsible
in the first place; and who is responsible for the refusal of these men
to comply with the law, and approach the Arbitration Court? Does the
guilt lie there?
The tiny craft went north to carry food for a starving population,
“a spoon to fill a well.” She went down, and as she sailed down the
Brisbane River she passed the Aramac and the Arawatta, the Bingera,
and the Cooma, the Tinana, the Palmer, and the Tay lying idle at the
wharves. Was there no ship among these that could have been sent?
Surely the Government that governs could have overcome the difficulties
before them, 'and defied for once the powers behind them. Even the
Allinga might have gone, but for the dissatisfaction of the crew with
the conduct of the steward. Eut for the tragedy, this would be some-
what humorous.
Now, sirs, let me tell you a little story: A soldier returned the other
day. He had lost one leg fighting, so that men might govern in peace
here in Queensland, and strike in comfort, untroubled by a vision of the
iron discipline of the Hun. This man had been away for some four
years, and he was asked: ‘‘Won’t you be glad to see your people again
after that long spell?” He replied: ‘‘l should have liked to see my father,
but he was on the Llewellyn.” I believe this is a true story, and the
answer of that man should ring in the ears of those who, through their
cowardice, and their fear of hurting someone’s feelings, allowed a little
unseaworthy boat to attempt a very dangerous trip. Many of us have
known the fear of an enemy torpedo in mid-ocean; many of us have
thought of our wives and families in case of the unforseen happening;
but we have known that those responsible for our being on that boat knew
their job, and that our presence in the danger zone was unavoidable. Did
those on the Llewellyn have that assurance? —I remain, yours truly,
AN ANZAC.


22
TO
THE HON. RANDOLPH BEDFORD, M.L.C.
DEAR RANDOLPH, —
Forgive my familiarity, but I notice from your recent speech in
supporting the Address in Reply, that you object to titles, even cheap and
nasty ones. You are entitled to an honourable prefix. May I suggest
that the worth of the title depends on the man, and that ultimately every-
one gets his just reward. The man who sweeps the gutter is more valu-
able to Australia in your eyes than a king, because he has a vote. Why
not the man who sells tombstones? I know how industriously your
associates endeavour to catch votes, but to estimate the value of a man
by a power that is conferred on him to exercise the franchise is very much
below your usual standard of proportion. Really, Randolph, you seem to
have made an awful ass of yourself. You know quite well that the
British Empire is responsible for the introduction of the majority of those
reforms that are tending towards better social conditions. Why, even the
ancient Britons erected tombstones. What a commission someone must
have got on Stonehenge! I admire you for your ability. I consider some
of your stories excellent. I know of you as a genial, kindly man, a most
charming travelling ocmpanion, but you are on the wrong track. We are
looking for, working for, and some of us, including your own son, have
fought for, a better, cleaner, happier world. You say the old order is
changing. It is changing, and it may be changing rather differently to
your expectations. Suppose, when the change is over, you find a Govern-
ment that will govern, that is determined on a square deal, and that
Government supported by people who, recognising their right, insist on
working for the prosperity of their country, where would you come in then?
Anyway, Randolph, take a hint. Forget Socialism at work, and try to
remember that Australia is bound to Britain by ties of blood and gratitude
that you and all who preach your doctrines, will never sever. Cheero O.
AN ANZAC.
Brisbane, August 6, 1919.




THE
KING AND EMPIRE
ALLIANCE
NON-PARTY POLITICAL
AND NON-SECTARIAN
OBJECTS:
TO MAINTAIN AND PROMOTE ROYALTY TO THE KING AND
BRITISH EMPIRE.
TO SECURE UNITED AND ORGANISED ACTION BY ALL SOCIETIES
WHICH HAVE AS ONE OF THEIR OBJECTS THE MAINTEN-
ANCE AND PROMOTION OF SUCH LOYALTY.
TO DO ALL THINGS NECESSARY TO FURTHER THE WELFARE OF
THOSE WHO HAVE FOUGHT FOR AND UPHELD OUR
EMPIRE, AND TO CULTIVATE PATRIOTISM.
TO AVOID SECTARIAN AND POLITICAL ISSUES, EXCEPTING IN SO
FAR AS IT MAY BECOME NECESSARY TO CENSURE OR
EXPOSE ANY SECTARIAN OR POLITICAL MOVEMENT
WHICH, IN THE OPINION OF THE KING AND EMPIRE
ALLIANCE, IS DETRIMENTAL TO THE INTERESTS OF THE
EMPIRE AND LOYALTY.
BADGES AND ALL INFORMATION CAN BE OBTAINED AT
ALLIANCE OFFICES,
368 QUEEN STREET, - - - BRISBANE


<►
o
<►
o
o
o
<►
<►
<►
<►
<►
<►
o
o
<►
o
$
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
4
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
the Car that boosts itself
JUST READ THIS TETTER.
Simpson’s Garagre,
Brisbane, September 18, 1919.
G. W. WHATMORE,
Manager, Queensland Motor Agency Utd., CITY,
Dear Sir, —I would like to draw your attention to the results of
the Reliability Run conducted by the Queensland Automobile Club
on the 6th September.
The petrol consumption of my “Ford” Car was 2 galls. 3 qts.,
which works out to nearly 31 miles to the gallon, 1 quart less!
than the next best consumption, which I might mention was a?
10-h.p. car and used 3 gallons.
This should surely be a record for this distance, and taking
into consideration that this car is a 1911 Model, should prove con-
clusively that the “Ford” is easily the most economical on petrol.
I might state there was practically a gale blowing the whole
way up, not forgetting the ascent up the range, which necessitated
the use of the low gear for about 6 or 7 minutes.
Yours faithfully,
Simpson’s Garage,
(Sgd.) per H. S. SIMPSON.
BUT SAY
)\V ABOUT POPPING IN AND HAVING
TOOK AT THE NEW MODELS?
£255
BUYS A
FORD
£255
Queensland Motor Agency Ltd.
(OPP. NORMAL SCHOOL),
ADELAIDE STREET, BRISBANE
O
o
o
o
o
<0
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
<0
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
<>
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
I
t
<0
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by T. J. Bermingliam,
Printer and Publisher, 45 Adelaide Street, Brisbane, and published
by G. M. Dash, Adelaide Street, Brisbane.
