

national library
AN AUSTRALIAN ~
TAMMANY RING
(Reprinted from “The Daily
Telegraph.
(To the Editob.)
Sir, — In this age of gigantic trusts and com-
bines, which exert such disastrous and far-
reaching an influence alike upon the industrial,
commercial, and political life of many countries,
it is simply wonderful that Australia, which pre-
sents (or did present up to recent times) an
absolutely virgin field for exploitation, should
have been so apparently neglected by the Napo-
leons of finance.
It has been quite customary for Australian
politicians to enter the Legislative arena in fairly
comfortable circumstances and leave it almost
penniless, while in the United States exactly the
contrary is almost the universal rule, especially
in regard to the Senate, which clearly shows a
lamentable want of business acumen on the part
of our Australian statesmen.
If a man with the business training of even a
New York alderman had succeeded in recent
years in obtaining a political foothold in Aus-
tralia, and could have surrounded himself with
a compact and obedient body of trained sup-
porters, he would have occupied the enviable
position of a veritable “ Yankee at the Court of
King Arthur,” with like satisfactory results as
far as he was concerned.
With a view of showing what marvellous
opportunities for skilful engineering are being
apparently totally neglected at the present time,
I desire to unfold in your columns the details of
a comprehensive scheme of exploitation
For Which the Groundwork Has Been
Already Laid
in quite a provincial manner, as the highly-
respected Mr. Rockefeller would remark.
About the time when the J übilee preparations
were in full sw ngin the mother country, aud all
the leading Australian politicians and commercial
magnates were expected to ga her in London,
several things happened—quite casually, of
course. The first was a gigantic land grab in
New Guinea, which project has unfortunately
gone somewhat astray, although backed up by
powerful Imperial sanction. Then a project
materialized for obtaining a concession from the
South Australian Government for the purpose of
allowing a syndicate to construct enormous
harbor works at an estimated cost of about three
millions sterling.
A succession of applications were received at
the Adelaide Land Office for a number of con-
cessions, mineral and pastoral leases, etc., cover-
ing all country of any prospective value for
several hundred miles directly southward of Pert
Darwin.
Taken separately, there was apparently a large
amount of individual foolishness in the projects.
An isolated land grab in New Guinea had little
prospective value for market purposes. The pre-
sent scanty shipping trade of South Australia
could scarcely justify so vast an expenditure as
three millions on harbor works, and the prospect
of obtaining capital to develop any one of the
separate concessions in the Northern Territory
was visionary in the extreme. But if one master
mind had planned the whole, or had effected a
combine covering all these projects, then it
would be at once apparent to a financial genius
like the late J. Gould or Mr. Rockefeller that
there were
Millions in Australian Politics
if rightly handled, and they would have been
handled accordingly.
The first step would have been to establish an
Australian Tammany-hall, which would include
within its silent and secret ring a compact body
of prominent and influential Australians, and
when this was done the word would have been
passed round for “the ring” to devote them-
selves to the task of bringing about the union of
the Australian colonies at an early date with
much zeal and a good deal of discretion. From
all quarters of the continent would have arisen
a mysterious blast of Federal enthusiasm which
would have swept unsteady politicians and un-
thinking voters before it.
Federal Leagues would have been established
everywhere, and ample funds would have been
forthcoming for such noble and patriotic work.
Of course, these funds would be mostly con-
tributed by the local patriots in each centre, but
still in each great association there would always
be at least one member of the inner ring who
knew exactly where to get subscriptions of
£25, £5O, or £5OO if Required
for any special purpose.
The broad humanitarian spirit of the repre-
sentatives of the various Churches would have
been appealed to to throw in their weight with
the great movement which was destined to bring
about the brotherhood of all Australians, and
such an appeal would have been productive of
great results in that direction.
The vanity of our ambitious politicians would
have been tickled with the idea that their names
would be handed down to posterity as the
founders of a great new nation under the
Southern Cross, and the politicians would have
fallen into line behind the Federal banner, and
marched to the music of union. With much
cheering the people, with the exception of certain
obstinate ai d hard-headed persons (who would
have been promptly denounced as Geebungs, aud
accused of base and personal motives), would
have followed the politicians, the free inhabitants
of Australia would have been skilfully driven by
unseen hands into the Federal city, aud the
Gates Locked for Ever.
A Federal Parliament would have been elected,
with a strong Senate, composed of prominent
men, and then it would have casually occurred
to somebody that there existed in the Federal
Constitution a clause which enabled the Federal
Government to construct railways in any State
with the consent of the State, and to float a
Federal loan, pawning the credit of all Australia
for that purpose.
A Bill would have been introduced in the
Federal Parliament for the purpose of raising a
loan of, say, twelve or fifteen millions, for the
purpose of constructing a trans-continental line
connecting Adelaide with Port Darwin, and
neatly bisecting in its course each and every one
of the long chain of concessions in the Northern
Territory obtained from the South Australian
Government prior to the act of union.
South Australia would be radiant with joy,
Victoria would recognize the fact that there was
not only a direct gain to her, in that she would
have first chance after South Australia in fur-
nishing the supplies necessary to carry out so
vast a work, but that the whole thing meant a
violent wrench southward of the commercial
centre of Australia, to the enormous loss of
Sydney and corresponding gain of Melbourne.
Little Tasmania would have followed Victoria,
and if West Australia were included in the
Federation the dominant party there would have
seen that the project went through for obvious
reasons.
The harbor scheme would boom, the various
Wild-Cat Leases and Concessions
along the transcontinental route would blossom
forth as great corporations, with their head
offices in London and influential Australian
directorates.
The development of the Northern Territory by
colored labor, so long hinted at by the Imperial
authorities, would become an accomplished fact,
and the black-labor party of Queensland would
have a new and powerful ally in Northern Aus-
tralia. The passage of a Federal Undesirable
Aliens Act would then be impossible, in the face
of a strong Senate entrenched by Imperial
backing. An enormous military expenditure
would at once become necessary alike for the
defence of Port Darwin (the back door of Aus-
tralia) and to control the
Yast Hordes of Colored Aliens
who would be poured in by the promoters of this
magnificent undertaking for the purpose of
developing their concessions, aud the value of
lands acquired for a mere song in the right quar-
ters by the far-seeing members of the inner ring
would increase a thousand-fold. Meantime New
South Wales’ share of the project would be to
look on, curse her mad folly, and pay a liberal
share of the interest on the Federal loan. For
of course, no one would expect a railway built
for the purpose of developing new territory to
pay for many years, if ever. If, in sheer despera-
tion, the people of New South Wales, rendered
desperate by the widespread ruin and distress
wrought by excessive taxation, and the dis-
ruption of trade and commerce, madly sought to
break their chains by secession, they would be
faced with the fact that the Federal army could
be used at any time
To Quell Internal Disorder,
and, if necessary, a few regiments of Indian
troops could be landed at Port Darwin by fast
steamers at very short notice.
The whole project could be carefully planned
out beforehand, as shown above, in every de-
tail, and the only thing that could prevent its
successful consummation would be that at the
eleventh hour, when the unseen leaders of the
movement were confident of success, and the
ambitious politicians were pulling themselves to-
gether for the last lap, one of the ring, through
sheer excess of joy, should expose his hand, and
a Geebung get possession of the whole plot and
make it public, and with one tremendous NO
at the referendum the electors of New South
Wales should smash the whole carefully planned
scheme, to the infinite dismay of the Napoleon of
Finance without, and the prospective Asters and
Vanderbilts within, the Australasian camp
Yours, etc.,
A NATIVE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Co-operative Print, 227 Castlereagh st., Sydney.
