

AN APPEAL
TO THE
AMERICAN OFFICERS & MEN
OF THE
AMERICAN FLEET
BY
E. N. KITCHEN & S. A. DOYLE.
TWO AMERICAN CITIZENS
AT PRESENT RESIDING IN VICTORIA
FOR THEIR PROTECTION
UNDER THE RIGHTS OF THE
AMERICAN FLAG
THEIR LIVES AND LIBERTY
BEING IN
IMMINENT DANGER
IN CONSEQUENCE OF THEIR HAVING REQUESTED THE
AMERICAN GOVERNMENT
TO DEMAND RESTITUTION
OF
KITCHEN’S PROPERTY
FELONIOUSLY TAKEN BY THE
BANK OF AUSTRALASIA
ASSISTED BY THE
VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT.
J. INGLESON, PRINT, 178 QUEEN STREET, MELB.


An Urgent Appeal.
Fellow citizens of America, knowing
that the protection of the American flag
has been always extended to her citizens
seeking justice in a legitimate manner
in a foreign land it would be gross laxity
on our part if we did not claim it.
The perilous position our lives and
liberties are now in and being feloniously
deprived of the means to get away from
the usurpers and persecutors compels us
to avail ourselves of your presence here
to make this urgent appeal.
The story of how- we have been robbed
and persecuted under the guise of British
justice would be an almost incredible
had we not stated our case on oath which
makes us amenable to the penalties of
the Criminal Law if our statements were
untrue.
Now that we have shown a determin-
ation to obtain justice at all hazards,
your immediate interference is the only
thing to save us from some horrible death
or the prison dungeon.
This can be no exaggeration or imag-
ination considering the Premier’s intim-
ate friend, who corruptly steers the
Government it is alleged, keeps a band
of hired assassins. The Government
also sanction the damnable practice of
some fictitious informant to make an un-
founded charge against persons who
resend, their persecution and support
those charges by jury squaring, perjury-,
and subornation of witnesses.
You will not be suprised to hear of
such a lawless state of affairs when we
tell you that this country- is governed hy-
men who are in the hands of the worst
criminals and who have themselves com-
mitted almost every crime under the
canopy of Heaven.
Let it not be taken that we are prompt-
ed by any prejudice against English law
or British rule, as we are perfectly satis-
fied to abide by the law as it is written
if honestly administered ; but we shall
be never satisfied until the same law is
strictly enforced against those who have
offended against us in contravention to
their own laws.
The following shows that Americans
seem to be fair game for plunderers in
Victoria. “Comments,” 28 5,08 says,—
We desire to ask why- the Federal Par-
liament or the Post Master General
should waste any time over what appears
on the facts to have been merely an
attempt to blackmail. If the “Age”
had only- been honest, and if the “Argus”
had made some sort of an effort to live
up to its text, the public would long ago
have made its voice heard and the whole
affair would have been settled in the
Criminal Court. If it had known that a
Detective concocted a scheme to black-
mail Freeman & Wallace (an American
firm), and that the precious O’Callaghan
along with Deakin and Mauger, winked
at the fact, it would have expressed itself
in a way that would probably have en-
tailed the heaving of our remarkable
Commissioner of Police out of his expen-
sive job. But the big Dailies take care
to tell the public as little as possible
about the real facts.
The Federal Parliament which thanked
Sir John Quick for his report in which
he accused American Congress of being
corrupt, refused an inquiry into this com-
plaint of an attempt at blackmailing
American citizens by public officials.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Deakin, is a
‘man whom we believe would do right if
he could without incriminating others in
high positions. This is why he has re-
frained from assisting us and also re-
tained men in gaol whom he knew to be
innocent.
The best we can tell you of the Premier
of Victoria and other administrators of
the Government is that if they- were not
above the law they would not be at lib-
erty to welcome you to Melbourne with
a greeting of the Judas character.
Another part of this pamphlet shows
the hy-pocracy of the pretended friendly-
welcome where a whole House of Aus-
tralian Legislators silently- listen to Sir
John Quick’s tirade on the Americans.
Men of the Grand Republic of America
where rivers of blood have been shed for
the abolition of slavery the opportunity
is now afforded you to show your con-
tempt for corrupt administrators for
such is the character of those with whom
you are invited to officially fraternise.
The graduates of Fagan’s School are but
poor scholars compared with some of the
scoundrels w-ho will greet y-ou in
Melbourne.
Edward Nicholson Kitchen
Stephen Angus Doyle.
Ist. August, 1908.
J. Ingleson. Printer, 178 Queen-ft., Melbourne#


Parliamentary Debates, No. 27,
Dec 12th, 1884.
Mr. McColl moved—
“ That a select Committee of this
House be appointed to inquire into and
report upon all the circumstances con-
nected with and relating to the issue of
a Crown Title under the Lands Transfer
Statute to the assign of the Bank of
Australasia, Mathew McDonald, over
allotments 17 and 31, Section 6, parish
of Guilford, county of Talbot, by which
the owners have been dispossesed of
their estate, which they never sold,
alienated, or conveyed,- and for which
thev have received no consideration of
anv kind. Also to inquire into and re-
port upon all the circumstances connected
with the prosecution and imprisonment
as a lunatic of one of the Trustees of the
aforesaid estate, Mr. George Bishop.
The said Committee to consist of Mr.
Reid, Mr. M. H. Davies, Mr. Hall, Mr.
Billson, Mr. Mirams, Mr. Russell, and
the mover, three to form a quorum, with
power to send for persons, papers,
records and documents, and to sit on
days on which the House does not meet.”
Mr. McColl stated that he did. not in-
tend, at the present l ate period of the
session, to do more with this motion than
just lay it before the House. The case
to which it referred had already- been
partially investigated by a select Com-
mittee, but when the full facts came
before the world, they would show that
£30,000 worth of property had been con-
veyed by means of forged signatures, and
that the guilty parties were at the present
moment in the Government service.
On the resumption the following year,
Mr. McColl moved for the Select Com-
mittee and had in the meantime been
fully investigating all papers and doc-
uments in the posession of the Govern-
ment with Mr. Alfred Deakin, then acting
Solicitor General, from whom he obtained
everv assistance, but was bitterly-opposed
bv Mr. B, C. Harriman, Secretary of the
Law Department, and was with me,
E. N. Kitchen, continually- shadowed
about the streets and Government offices.
I became alarmed for his safety and
begged of him to give it up and let me fight
it out as I said they- would murder him ;
he laughed and said they dared not. I
said they would by- some sinister means,
but he scorned the idea, and was anxious
for the fight ; unfortunately for. Mr.
McColl my- predictions were fulfilled ; on
going home from the House one night he
was murderously- assaulted, from which
he never recovered, but nothing was
done in the matter and the man who
attacked him could be seen daily after-
wards hanging about the precints of the
Bank of Australasia.
The “Telegraph,” April 4th, 1885,
which was the organ of that Bank, con-
tained the following announcement :
“Mr. Hugh McColl, M.L.A., died at his
residence, Park Street, St. Kilda, on
Thursday- morning. About twelve
months ago Mr. McColl received an
injury- from the effects of which he never
recovered, as was predicted by his med-
ical advisors.
EDWD. NICHOLSON KITCHEN.
PARLIAMENT HOUSE.
Dear Mr. Kitchen —
I had a long interview with Mr.
Deakiu and came over to the House and
found you had gone.
He is going to ask Mr. Service for the
loan of the resume and pricis prepared
for the Governor, which I am to see ; I
need not say but before it leaves un-
hands I will get it copied in full.
Mr. Harriman told Mr, Deakin that he
would find in that document, his (Mr.
Harriinan’s) opinion of the whole case.
I find he is taking much interest in the
case. He will take every- care of your
letters from Le Patoural and thinks that
that letter must refer to another doc-
ument which the Home Colonial Secrelaty
of State sent for. a
However, I shall get ithem all, and
when the House meets' if not near a
settlement, I can move for the papers
with the evidence of Committee, to be
laid on the table of the House.
Yours faithfully,
HUGH McCOLL,
April 30th, 1884.


IX THE MATTER OP EDWARD X.
KITCHEN AND OTHERS
V.
THE RANK OP AUSTRALASIA AND
THE GOVERNMENT OP VICTORIA.
I, Stephen Angus Dovle, 430 Bourke-
street, Melbourne, Manager of Doyle's
Detective Service Co. of America, do
solemnly and sincerely declare: —
1. That I formerly filled the position
of Captain of Police, Dulhith, Minne-
sota. America.
2. That I am a citizen of the United
States, and have not forfeited my
American citizenship. It being my in-
tention to return to America i made
no attempt to become a naturalised
British subject.
3. That on the 14)o)06 1 opened a
branch of Doyle's Private Detective
Service Co. here when I was engaged
by Edward Nicholson Kitchen, also a
citizen of the United States of
America, to investigate his legal claim
to a 2oth interest in the freehold es-
tate and gold mine known as the “ El-
dorado,” Guildford, Victoria, which ho
alleged was fraudulently taken from
him and his partners by the Bank of
Australasia, assisted by the Government
of Victoria and their officials.
4. That on the 14)3/07 1 forwarded
to Messrs. Casey and Casey, Attorncys-
at-Law, 220 James-street, Seattle,
Washington, America, a report of the
result of my inquiries, together with a
copy of Mr. Kitchen’s (Claimant) affi-
davit as follows, which I found and
verily believe to be substantially true
and correct in every particular:—
AFFIDAVIT OF EDWARD NICHOL-
SON KITCHEN TO ACCOMPANY
PETITION TO SIR HENRY
BROUGHAM LOCH. GOVERNOR
OP VICTORIA.
1, EuwAiin Nicholson Kitchen, a
citizen of the United States of
America, now residing at number 46
Moor Street, South Yarra, in the
British colony of Victoria, make oath
and say ;
1. That I did, on the thirty-first day
of May, one thousand eight hundred
and sixtv-tivc. purchase an undivided
twenty-filth (2oth) share In a freehold
estate', used by the owners for gold
mining purposes. from Thomas
McGrath, Doctor of Medicine, the said
estate being allotments 17 and 31, sec-
tion six, parish of Guildford, County
of Talbot, in the colony of Victoria,
containing one hundred and three
acres, one rood and sixteen perches.
2. That I have never sold, alienated
or conveyed, or authorised any person
to sell, alienate or convey my right,
title and interest in and to the said
©state.
3. That I have been defrauded and
dispossessed of the said estate by offi-
cials of the Bank of Australasia
through forged and fraudulent deeds
and documents upon which they ob-
tained a certificate of title in the name
of the Crown.
4. That the deeds of the estate were
lodged by the owners in the Union
Bank, and were feloniously taken from
the custody of the said Bank.
5. That all deeds, conveyances and
mortgages subsequent to the thirty-first
day of May, one thousand eight hun-
dred and sixty-live, together with all
erasures and alterations which have
been or purport to have been effected
upon deeds executed ou the thirty-first
day of May, one thousand eight hun-
dred and sixty-five are forgeries.
6. That the Certificate of Title in the
name of the Crown issued over the said
estate to the assign of the Bank of Aus-
tralasia, Matthew McDonald, on the
eleventh day of September, one thou-
sand eight hundred and seventy-four,
was obtained by fraud and collusion on
the part of the said Bank with the
officials of the Crown Law and Titles
Office, m conjunction with the owner's
solicitor, James Cooper Stewart, of
twenty-four Queen Street, in the city
of Melbourne.
7. That I did with George Bishop
and Alfred Rowbotham (two of tile
original purchasers of the estate) ou
the second day of September, one thou-
sand eight hundred and seventy-three,
employ the firm of Malleson, England
and Stewart, of twenty-four Queen
Street. Melbourne, to lodge a caveat
against the application of Matthew
McDonald for a certificate of title under
Lands Transfer Statute: the said
caveat being drawn up and signed in
our presence by their clerk, Mr. W. G.
Robertson, instructed by Mr. James
Cooper Stewart.
8. That recent researches in the
office of the Registrar-General show
that no caveat has ever been filed.
9. That an action in tile Supreme
Court, Melbourne, before Judge Barry,
the second day of October, one thou-
sand eight hundred and seventy-three
—Bishop v. McDonald —and an action
in the Supreme Court. Castiemaine, be-
fore Judge Fellows, the twentieth day
of July, one thousand eight hundred
and seventy-four, Bishop v. McDonald,


withdrawn, settled out of court, were
brought by the Janies Cooper Stewart
aforesaid without the knowledge of my-
self. Bishop, or Rowbotham, and were
frauds to cover the issue of the title to
the Bank of Australasia.
10. That the existence of the forged
deeds was first discovered by Mr.
George Smyth, Barrister-at-law,'in the
year one thousand eight hundred and
seventy, and I at once placed a sworn
information in the hands of the Minis-
ter of Justice against the parties utter-
ing the deeds, which information has
never been permitted to be heard in
court._ And I make this solemn de-
claration. conscientiously believing the
is a me, to be true,, and by virtue of the
provisions of an Act of the Parliament
of A ictoria rendering parties making a
false declaration punishable for wilful
and corrupt perjury.
Sworn before me this twenty-second
day of November, one thousand eight
hundred and eighty-six.
James M. Mohoan,
United States Consul-General.
Witness, J. R. Bush.
(Seal U.S.)
EDWARD NICHOLSON KITCHEN.
5. That in receipt of my communica-
tion Messrs. Casey and Casey forward-
ed me a copy of the letter sent by
them to the Premier of Victoria with
instructions for me to receive his reply
and cable same to them.
Casey and Casey,
Lawyers,
220 James Street.
Seattle Wash, June 4, 1907.
Mr. Thomas Bent,
Melbourne, Victoria.
Dear Sir, —
A matter has, been placed in my
hands by the Detective Agency
of your city lor adjustment, or for
action between two Governments. You
have unquestionably heard of the mat-
ter before as it has been more or less a
public matter there tor nearly forty
years. I refer to what one might well
term, the robbery of Mr. Edward N.
Kitchen, an American citizen, of his
estate. It seems unbelievable that in a
supposedly civilised community any
person could receive the treatment
which has been dealt to this man, and
Ihat_ so many rascals could be found,
bolding responsible positions in the
Government service there, for so many
years who have helped to consummate
tile stealing of this man’s fortune, and
subject him to so many hardships and
indignities, and throw so many ob-
stacles in bis way, that his efforts to
save his property from the greed of a
gang of freebooters and murderers
would be baffled, and still these facts,
which appear unbelievable, are admit-
tedly true according to the statements
made on numerous occasions by many
of your own officials, executive and
judicial, as well as legislative.
Now this is a matter of inquiry be-
tween two Governments under the cir-
cumstances, for if your Government is
either unable or unwilling to protect
an American citizen residing there in
his personal and property rights, and
restore to him that which he has been
robbed of, partly at least, through the
assistance and connivance of Govern-
ment officials, others must bo called in.
In other words, if he cannot obtain re-
dress there, he has the right to ask it
from his own Government, which he
will.
I expect to take this matter up with
the State Department of our Govern-
ment which is now’ dominated by the
Roosevelt determination fop a “ square
deal ” everywhere, and the matter will
be taken up and pushed with a vigour
that will preclude the possibility of fur-
ther whitewashing rascals in high
places.
When men who disregard the laws of
God and man come to grief, and are
caught red-handed with the goods on
them, and they see prison garbs star-
ing them in the face, their despair is
pitiful but real. I am also writing to
London in regard to this matter, but
it is up to you for the present in a
Government capacity for appropriate
action that reparation may be made to
this man, so grievously and persistently
wronged, largely through the neglect,
cowardice and connivance of your Go-
vernment officials there.
We wish to know at an early date as
possible whether or not satisfactory ex-
planation and reparation can and will
be made in the matter. Awaiting your
answer, we are.
Yours respectfully,
(Signed) JOHN T. CASEY,
220 James Street', Seattle,. Washing-
ton. U.S. A,
G. That I wrote to the Premier
25/7/0". informing him of my instruc-
tions and requesting a reply which
W’as ignored.
7. That I called at the Premier’s
office 5/8/07 and saw the Attorney-
General, Mr. J. M. Davies, who was
then acting-Premier in Mr. Bent’s ab


sence. Mr. Davies said: “ Those
American Attorneys had made serious
charges in their letter/’ which he held
in his hand. I said, “Yes! they were
serious but true, and that I furnished
the information in which the charges
were based.” When I told him I was
instructed to ask for his reply to their
letter Mr. Davies said he could not give
any.
8. That I forwarded that answer to
Messrs. Casey and Casey, and received
the further communication that the
matter was passed on to the Depart-
ment of State, and no doubt the rascals
would soon be likely to pay the penalty
the law enacts.
9. That after the return of Premier
Bent from England I read in the Mel-
bourne “Argus” that he had a con-
sultation with Attorney-General Davies
regarding Messrs. Casey and Casey’s
letter, and that they had decided to
treat it with contempt.
10. That on the 10/1/08 a man called
at my office and introduced himself as
Mr. Solomon, Solicitor for Messrs.
Alexander and Coppel, financiers, Mel-
bourne (with whom 1 had private finan-
cial business).
11. That Mr. Solomon offered me on
behalf of Messrs. Alexander and Coppel
certain financial and other benefits if
I would use my influence to break down
Mr. Kitchen’s claim against the Bank
of Australasia. When I rejected Mr.
Solomon’s offer he .said that Messrs.
Alexander and Coppell would use every
effort to break up my business, and
put me on the street for not complying
with their request.
12. That Messrs. Alexander and Cop-
pel broke their private agreement with
me, and by illegal law procedure as-
sited by the police, they seized my
office furniture and broke up my busi-
ness.
13. That I went to complain to the
Governor of Victoria, Sir Reginald
Talbot, of the illegal action of the
police. When I told his private secre-
tary my name, he said. “Then you are
the person mentioned in the despatch
we received from the Secretary of
State?” He expressed .surprise on
bearing my complaint, and advised me
to go at once and state the facts to
the Premier and tell him he had sent
me.
14. That I made several fruitless at-
tempts to see the Premier, and on one
occasion, when I knew he was in his
office, I asked his secretary to inform
him that the Governor had sent me;
but that gentleman rudely replied that
the Governor does not run this office,
and that I would have to take my
chance of seeing the Premier.
15. That on failing to obtain an in-
terview with Sir Thomas Bent at his
office, I wrote 14/5/08, asking him to
make an appointment for me to call
on him at his convenience, but up to
the present have got no reply.
16. That I forwarded to the American
Government particulars of the unjust
treatment I received at the hands of
the Victorian Government through ad-
vocating in a constitutional manner
the just claims of a fellow-American
citizen, Mr. Edward N. Kitchen.
I make this solemn declaration con-
scientiously believing the same to be
true and by virtue of the provisions of
an Act of the Parliament of Victoria,
whereby persons making false declara-
tions are punishable for wilful and cor-
rupt perjury.
Declared before me the 16th day of
July, 1908, at Melbourne.
STEPHEN ANGUS DOYLE.
(Signed) JOHN MUNDAY, J.P.
AFFIDAVITS WHICH HAVE BEEN
PLACED IN THE HANDS OF
GOVERNMENT.
I. George Bishop, a resident of Guild-
ford, in the colony of Victoria, mane
oath and say as follows: —
That 1 purchased all that Freehold
Estate, Guildford, being Allotments 17
and 31, Section 6, Parish of Guildford,
County of Talbot, in the Colony of Vic-
toria, containing 103 acres on the 14th
day of September, 1861, that the said
property was disposed of in shares, and
used for mining purposes, and that
the number of shares was twenty-five
(25), that I became one of the Trustees
in whom the Estate was vested (on ac-
count of several shareholders being
aliens), viz., George Bishop, John Mer-
riflrkl and Thomas McGrath, that I
and the beneficial owners have been
defrauded and dispossessed of the said
Estate by a series of forgeries on the
part of the employees of the Bank of
Australasia, aided and assisted by cer-
tain Crown officials. That my name
and signature is forged to a “ consent”
on the 13th day of May, 1865, also to
a deed of conveyance of the Estate to
a public company on the 7th June,
1865. That as a Trustee I could not
convey the said Estate without the
knowledge or consent of the beneficial


owners. That I have exhausted all my
means in endeavouring to bring the
persons who have been guilty to jus-
tice, but owing to the unscrupulous
use of the money powers of the Bank
have been unable to do so. That the
statements contained in the petition to
the Assembly are true in every par-
ticular. That the issue of a Title in
the name of the Crown by the Attorney-
General, Mr. G. B. Kerford, was a
deliberate felony against myself and
the beneficial owners by which we have
been entirely dispossessed of the Estate
which I and the majority of the bene-
ficial owners never alienated, sold or
conveyed, and for which we never re-
ceived any consideration of any kind.
That the Estate could not he conveyed
or mortgaged legally without my sanc-
tion or the consent of the beneficial
owners which was never given. That
the said Mr. G. B. Kerford, Attorney-
General, did suppress the Parliamen-
tary Committee, who investigated the
case, by using forms of the House, and
refused to allow - the Report to be
brought before the House, as the evi-
dence criminated him. That copies of
the evidence have been refused to me
and the Petitioner, notwithstanding the
most strenuous exertions on my behalf
being made by members of the Com-
mittee.
GEORGE BISHOP.
Sworn at Mel-
bourne, in the
Colony of Vic-
tor ia, this
seventh day of
January, one
thousand eight
hundred and
seventy-six, be-
fore me. —N. J.
Casey.
A Commissioner of the Supreme
Court, of the Colony of Victoria, for
taking affidavits.
k
I, Gottardo a Swiss
citizen, now a resident in Strangways,
County of Talbot, miner, do solemnly
declare —
Ist. That I did in the year one thou-
sand eight hundred and sixty-three pur-
chase from Paulo Mettoni, one un-
divided Twenty-fifth Share in the Free-
hold Estate, being Allotments 17 and
31, Section 6, Parish of Guildford,
County of Talbot, and in January,
1864, purchased an undivided twenty-
fifth share from Anotonio Simoni in the
same Estate, and the said Estate being
held in trust.
2nd. That I have never sold, alien-
ated or convey my interest in the said
Estate.
3rd. That all deeds, conveyances,
mortgages subsequent to the 31st day
of May, 1865, over the said Estate
are frauds against me.
4th. That I have been defrauded and
dispossessed of the said Estate by the.
Bank of Australasia, aided and assisted
by officials of the Government of Vic-
toria, and I make this solemn declara-
tion conscientiously believing it to be
true and by virtue, etc.,
GOTTARDO GIOVANETTI.
Before me at Guildford, the 22nd
June, 1880.
C. A. BIAGGI, J.P.
I, Grovanni Calegari, a subject of
the King of Italy, now residing in
Drummond-street, Carlton, Melbourne,
in the British Colony of Victoria, make
oath and say as follows: —
Ist. That I did, on the 16th day of
September, 1861, with George Bishop
and others purchase from Alex. Laing,
official assignee in the Estate of John
Flaxmann, the Freehold Estate being
Allotments 31 and 17, Section 6, Parish
of Guildford, County of Talbot, for the
sum of £2OOO sterling, the said Estate
being subsequently held in trust.
2nd. That I have never sold, alien-
ated or conveyed or authorised any per-
son to sell, alienate or convey my in-
terest in the said Estate being one un-
divided Twenty-fifth share.
3rd. That all deeds, conveyances and
mortgages subsequent to the 31st day
of May, 1860, over the said Estate are
frauds against me.
4th. That I have been defrauded and
dispossessed of the said Estate by cer-
tain officials of the Bank of Australasia
and -others, aided and assisted by offi-
cials of the Government of Victoria by
the issue of a Title in the name of the
Crown to the Banks Assign.
And I make this solemn declaration
conscientiously believing it to be true
and by virtue of an Act of the Parlia-
ment of Victoria, rendering parties
making a false declaration punishable
for wilful and corrupt perjury.
GIOVANNI CALEGARI.
Dated this oth day of February, 1880.
Sworn before me,
LEWIS SANDERS, J.P.


LEGAL OPINIONS.
When the Bank first pretended to
sell the Estate the Owners obtained the
opinion of the Hon. Wilberforce
Stephens, which was: “The Bank of
Australasia had neither a , legal nor
equitable claim upon the Estate, and
therefore could not sell.” But a sham
sale was effected by forged deeds ; the
Estate still being in their (the bank’s)
hands, held by a dummy, a Crown
Title was issued to them by the Minis-
ters of the Crown, Kerford and Mad-
den, in defiance of the protest of the
Registrar-General, Air. Richard Gibbs,
and the Owners. The opinion of the
Hon. George Higinbotham was obtain-
ed, through the Owners’ solicitor, the
Hon. James McKean, the opinion being
“ Thar there was no deed or document
to show that the land had ever passed
from the Owners to the so-called El-
dorado G.M.C. Reg. That the title is-
sued in the name of the Crown was
utterly worthless, and ought never bo
have been issued. That the conduct of
the Crown Law officers was inexplic-
able to him. That the Owners had no
remedy in common law or equity, the
case being one of crime upon crime,
etc.” The opinion of the Hon. James
McKean: “ That the issue of the Crown
title to the bank was the result of a
conspiracy between the bank and Crown
Law' officials for the purpose of shifting
the liability of the bank on to the
Public Funds of the colony; and that
theii* crime was ‘ treason-felony ’
against the Crown of Great Britain;
the punishment was death, but there
■was no tribunal in the colony to bring
them before, and could only be done
by the British Government.”
The follow'ing is a copy of letter re-
ceived from the Honourable J. B.
Ronald re the usurped property: —
Mr. S. A. Doyle.
Dear Sir, —
I have read carefully the ease of
Mr. Edward Kitchen, Bishop and
others versus the Bank of Australasia,
and I am candidly of the opinion that
a prima facie case is made out for the
appointment of a Judicial Commission
to enquire into the very serious allega-
tions. No country can afford to have
such serious charges brought against
men in high places without giving
every facility to prove them, and the
accused an opportunity of rebutting
these charges. There seems to me only
one thing to do, and that is to appeal
to the Federal Government, and es-
pecially the Minister of External
Affairs, who is the custodian of our
national honour and in our relations to
citizens of other lands must see justice
done.
Undoubtedly a prima facie case is
made out, and an impartial neutral,
unbiassed tribunal such as the Depart-
ment of External Affairs should now
deal with the matter. The good name
of Australia has been too long dragged
in the mud by this case, and it re-
minds us that the people who are really
responsible for the stain on the fair
fame of Australia are those Financial
Institutions which have made Aus-
tralia’s credit stink in the nostrils of
the investing public. Over and over
e.g., the Bank Reconstruction Scheme.
These things have done more, and are
well fitted to do more for the destruc-
tion of Australian credit than a cycle
of Socialism. Australian democracy
will never acquiesce in shielding villainy
such as this.
Yours, etc.,
(Signed) J. B. RONALD,
18/8/07.
Mr. Ronald seems to forget that Aus-
tralian democracy is chloroformed by
thieves and gamblers.
39 Longmore Street,
Middle Park,
November 13, 1907.
To The Hon. The Minister for External
Affairs, Commonwealth of Australia.
Honourable Sir, —
I desire to bring under your
notice an important matter affecting
an American citizen and an Australian
Institution. The citizen’s name is Mr.
Edward Nicholson Kitchen, and the In-
stitution is the Bank of Australasia.
The subject matter of the dispute
is about the Eldorado Gold Mining
Company, and the date of the first
transaction in this affair is 1865, the
sun involved was £30,000, and in con-
nection with this there were a number
of very serious charges on oath against
the officials of the Bank of Australasia.
The matter was discussed in the State
Parliament of Victoria in 1874, and a
Committee of Parliament investigated
the matter, and stood in the Notice
Paper for fourteen years, and no
finality was ever reached. The whole
thing is made to apnear as a piece of
gross corruption, and is fitted to dam-
age the good name of Australia, unless
an investigation he made and the


COMMONWEALTH OF AUS- •
TRALIA.
DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL
AFFAIRS.
22ud November, 1907.
Sir, —
In acknowledging the receipt of your
letter of the 13th instant, forwarding
pamphlet respecting certain charges
made against the officials of the Bank
of Australasia and others, I have the
honour, by direction, to inform you
that it is not what action you
desire taken in the matter.
Should, however, any communication
on the subject be received from the
Government of the United Kingdom
or from the United States of America,
it will receive consideration.
I have the honour to be. Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ATLEE HUNT,
Secretary.
The Hon. J. B. Ronald,
29 Longmore Street,
Middle Park.
Melbourne, December 3rd, 1907.
Alec. Hunt, Esq.,
Secretary to the Minister of External
Affairs.
Dear Sir, —
In answer to yours of the 22nd ult.,
I beg to say that in my former com-
munication to you I meant to suggest
that a Royal Commission or a Com-
mittee should be appointed to investi-
gate those charges, because it is quite
clear that if the statements made in
the pamphlet I forwarded to' you are
false, they should be answered for the
sake of the good name of Australia. If
they are true then it is equally clear
that some individuals have suffered
wrongs which should be righted. But
investigation is clearly required, and
it seems to me that it is the duty of
the Department of External Affairs to
do this.
I am, yours faithfully,
(Signed) J. B. RONALD.
Air. Ronald stated verbally that the
reply he received to above was that the
Minister of External Affairs sympathis-
ed with claimants, but as the State
Government refused to go into the
matter his Government dare not.
AN ATTACK ON AMERICAN CON-
GRESS.
The Sydney “Bulletin,” 16th
January, 1908, wrote: —
“ A curious list drifts round Parlia-
ment House. It purports to show the
names of two members, both Tories,
who got £2OOO apiece for changing
their view's about the necessity for tax-
ing the Standard Oil Trust Kerosene,
of a third Tory who ivas bought by
being put into a nice corpulent spec.,
and of a fourth Tory who# took the price
of the betrayal of his country in a dif-
ferent form but took it all the same.”
On the 12th March, 1908, Air. Lid-
dell reas the allegation to the House,
and wished to know if the Prime Minis-
ter were going to allow' a reflection of
that sort to rest on every member of
the House. The Prime Alinister said:
“There w r as no indication of any kind
as to the individuals as to whom the
statement related.”
The writer, who is himself well
known, indicated so clearly the four
parties prosecuted for perjury for
bringing the most serious charges
against men in high places.
It is very bad policy indeed from
merely a patriotic point of view to
allow these charges, which are all made
on oath, to be circulated in England,
America and Australia.
The case is now in the hands of the
United States Government, and it be-
hoves you to be acquainted with the
facts of the case before it comes to you
officially. This is the reason of my
writing to you.
No man can read the evidence of this
case without seeing that a prima facie
case has been made out for inquiry.
1 cannot undertake to give even an epi-
tome of the evidence, but I have much
pleasure in enclosing a copy. I would
especially call your attention to a copy
of the Petition to the Parliament of
Victoria in November, 1874, which con-
tains the graveness of the charge. But
it will be necessary to have a com-
mittee of experts to investigate and
test the value of the evidence given in
support of the most serious charges
that can be brought against any public
men.
Awaiting your reply,
I am, yours respectfully.
J. B. RONALD.


(whom he said suspicion now stinks to
heaven) that Mr. Deakin must be the
only one in Melbourne who did not
know who they were.
Melbourne “ Punch,” 19th March,
1908, said: “Having given fit utter-
ance to his indignation Mr. Deakin an
hour or two later gave proof of his
earnestness in the matter by dining
with the Arch Offender, the Sub-Editor
of the ‘ Bulletin.’ ”
However, Mr. Deakin told the House
that he would take an early oppor-
tunity of appointing a commission to
consider methods of procedure by which
offenders could be effectively dealt with.
The Commission was appointed with Sir
John Quick as Chairman, who, in pre-
senting his report to the House, made
an unwarrantable attack on American
Congress, causing me to write as fol-
lows :
Doyle’s Detective Service Co. of
America.
Australian Office, 430 Bourke Street,
Melbourne, 5/6/08.
The Honourable The Prime Minister.
Sir, —
In the “ Age ” of this morning
Sir John Quick is reported to have
said in presenting an alleged Bribery
Report to Parliament that the United
States Congress had now got so low
in public estimation that it is the
commonest thing for charges of bribery
and corruption to be raised against
members without Congress answering
or resenting them.
Being a citizen of the United States
I desire to know from you if Sir John
Quick is correct!} 7 reported ?
Yours truly,
(Signed) S. A. DOYLE.
Not having received a reply to the
above I wrote again 18/6/08 as follows :
“ Referring, to my letter of the sth
inst., 1 desire to know if it is possible
for it to be mislaid as it is hard for
me to believe that you would not reply.
This is a deliberate vile slander on the
U.S.A. Congress by a representative
of your House, Sir John Quick. To say
the least of it, Mr. Prime Minister,
you can only be acting in inviting the
American Fleet here to receive them
with a theatrical display while you
silently listen to a member of your
House malign your visitors’ representa-
tives. As a citizen of the United States
I again request your reply before bring-
ing it under the notice of my people in
America.
(Signed) S. A. DOYLE.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
Prime Minister’s Office,
Melbourne, 25/6/08.
Sir, —
I am instructed by Mr. Deakin to
acknowledge the receipt of your letters
sth and 18th June respectively respect-
ing certain statements alleged to have
been made by Sir John Quick, and to
say that they have been sent on to that
gentleman for any remarks he may-
wish to make. You will be further in-
formed in due course.
Yours very truly,
(Signed) M. S, SHEPHERD,
Secretary to Prime Minister.
Mr. S. A. Doyle,
430 Bourke Street,
Melbourne.
Second reply:—
With reference to your letters of oth
and 18th insts., I have now the honour
to inform you that beyond stating that
he is correctly reported in “ Hansard."
Sir John Quick does not wish to make
any further statement.
As. you may not have seen the “ Han-
sard ” report, a copy is forwarded here-
with with Mr. Deakin's compliments.
(Signed) M. S. SHEPHERD.
TIRADE ON AMERICAN CON-
GRESS.
The following are the verbatim re-
marks reported in “ Hansard ” as made
by Sir John Quick on the occasion re-
ferred to: —
“ I believe that the Congress of the
United States of America has either,
because of want of power or because of
carelessness, not sufficiently resented
attacks and insults on its honour, with
the result that now the public opinion
of it is very low. Any idle scribbler or
irresponsible person seems at liberty to
attack it without fear of being brought
to book. The time has come when in
the estimation, of the great public of
the United States of America it is not
much honour to be a member of Con-
gress. If Congress has the power it has
not discreetly asserted it, and it has
consequently fallen very low- in public
estimation. It is quite common for
charges of bribery and corruption to be


hurled against members without Con-
gress raising its voice in protest. I
hope that this Parliament will show a
determination to maintain its honour
and to be very jealous of charges of
that kind so that those outside will
know that there is a strong arm able
and ready to intervene if necessary for
the protection of either House.”
CHAMPION LAW BREAKER.
POWER BEHIND GOVERNMENT.
To show how much honest meaning
there is in Sir John Quick’s final re-
marks I cull the following from
“ Liberty and Progress” (The Victorian
Employers’ Federation Journal), 26th
May, 1907:
“It is not generally known, but it is
nevertheless a fact, that when the
short-lived Labour-Socialistic Govern-
ment was formed, John Wren was of
much more importance to Cabinet
Councils than the Prime Minister.”
“ After all the golden eloquence that
had been expended on Federation Aus-
tralia had come to this that the cham-
pion law-breaker of the Commonwealth
was the power behind the throne of its
Government.”
This did not come from an irrespon-
sible scribbler, as the paper represents
the moneyed classes of Victoria. Sir
John Quick was a member of the House
of which this was said a little over a
year ago, but failed to let that strong
arm he refers to to intervene.
Sir John’s report to the House ex-
presses regret that the existing law
prevents effective inquiries and recom-
mends new legislation to meet such
charges as made by the “ Bulletin,”
but is careful to recommend that the
new law should not be retrospective.
Further, that it would not be wise to
enter into the case, as there is no law
compelling witnesses to be sworn, and
to answer questions.
BRIBING THE PREMIER OF
VICTORIA,
I have a report of a Royal Commis-
sion before me dated 10)5)04 made by
a Supreme Court Judge who enquired
into a charge of a foreign insurance agent
bribing the Premier of Victoria. In
this case the reverse of Sir John
Quick’s contention of difficulties with
witnesses is shown. The person who
made the charge was threatened with
contempt of court for attempting to
substantiate it. Ons witness was or-
dered out of the box when he tried to
tell the motive there was for bribing
the Premier. Another in saying that
other politicians received bribes was
told by the Judge not to mention
names.
After the closing of this farcical in-
quiry the Judge reported that the in-
surance agent gave £SO to the Premier
of Victoria for the purpose of corruptly
influencing him in the performance of
his public duties, but that the Premier
did not receive the bribe with any im-
proper intent.
This incomprehensible report was
never dealt with by Parliament, so that
no verdict as to penalty has yet been
arrived at. This leaves one to wonder
if Parliament considers political bribery
an offence at all, and it appears not as
the Premier referred to is now a mem-
ber of the present Government.
This clearly shows that even the
leaders of Parliament in Australia are
amenable to bribery, and how wilfully
wrong Sir John Quick was in evading
an allegation of four members of his
House accepting bribes by vilely charg-
ing American Congress with being ir-
retrievably corrupt.
It is characteristic of the public men
here to lull the people into false
security by telling them that they are
blessed with their representatives being
not corrupt like those fellows in
America. Like the Pharisee of old
they thank God they are not as bad as
the Yankee publican.
MISAPPROPRIATION OF PUBLIC
MONEY,
As instancing the corruption that
prevails in Victoria, the Premier and
Treasurer, Sir Thomas Bent, has used
State moneys in paying an intimate as-
sociate of his (a convicted felon) £75,
£OO, £45, and £3O. Also' £ll2 passage
money to London for Mrs. Bleasby, a
free pass to Mrs. Jowett to Sydney,
and £l7 10s. for a theatre party.
If such criminal misappropriation of
public money occurred in America Sir
John Quick’s excuse that they are worse
somewhere else would not prevail. A
grand jury would be applied for, and
the criminal given a chance to defend
his conduct in open court.
“The Age,”_ 9)7)08, says; “The
whole country is tired of Sir Thomas
Bent, weary almost to death of his


squandering of tjie taxpayers’ money.
But with Mr. Prendergast (who has
just emerged from being co-respondent
in the Divorce Court) as the only per-
ceptible alternative, the country re-
signedly shrugs its shoulders and mut-
ters discontentedly, ‘ Better put up
with the devil we got.”
Want of stability in the Labour
Party was shown recently when the
leader, Mr. Prendergast, and the secre-
tary of the Political Labour Council,
Mr. P. Hcagney, led a deputation of
500 unemployed to ask Premier Bent
for work that they might earn sufficient
to keep themselves and their families
from starving. Sir Thomas told
Heagney he would not listen to him
because he was ignorant and loafed on
the unemployed.
Fellow-citizens of America, just im-
agine, if you can, the pitiable spec-
tacle of this counterfeit leader desert-
ing 500 hungry men and, quietly sub-
mitting to the Premier’s despotic order
of “ Out you'go, you ignorant loafer.”
“ Liberty and Progress ” also tells
you (and no attempt has been made to
refute it) that when the Federal Labour
Party were in power they were under
the thumb of an outside corrupter, so
that no reform, in the way of honest
and just administration need be ex-
pected from such a polluted source.
I attach a pamphlet published by a
British subject which speaks for itself.
The publisher, Mr. Crowe, who, it will
be seen, has opposed corrupt ad-
ministration for years, is now engaged
by some of the claimants to the usurped
Eldorado Gold Mine to enforce their
claims. I heartily welcome his assis-
tance in this business.
S. A. DOYLE.
J. Ingleson, Print, 178 Queer-st., Melbourne.
