

|\uio|5I?QKAPnY


/


AN
/KIT OBIOQKfIFMT
OF A
LfIUQMINQ JflCKflss
MABEL F. BOOTHBY
Published by
P. T. LAW & CO,
MELBOURNE




Hn Hutobiograpb^
of a
Xaugbmg Jacfcass
A Land, they said, of golden air, where scents
of sweetest flowers float, and where the grapes
in honeyed clusters droop, a paradise of glowing
blue and tranquil loveliness
—HALLAM TENNYSON.
Kookaburra is my name. I
was hatched in a snug little nest
in a hollow trunk of an old gum
tree at the top of Mount Lubra. Ido not
remember the exact date of my hatch-day,
but I think I must have come out of my shell
on a Friday, as I was such an unlucky bird,


and I will just tell you why. I was caught.
So, feathered friends, never be hatched on
a Friday if you can avoid it.
I was barely fledged when it all happened.
It was on a very hot midsummer day. The
gigantic eucalyptus trees were in their glory,
and the whole atmosphere was scented with
the sweet fragrance of their red and white
blossom. Here the bees were busy at their
work. But, alas, there had been very little
rain. The creeks and many of the water
holes were dry, and as I belong to the King-
fisher family I always enjoy my bath, and
whether it was the scarcity of water that up-
set me, or whether I had eaten a tough little
worm that was not quite nice, I cannot say,
but as I was flying about 1 felt giddy and fell


TWO OF THE FAMILY


c


to the ground, in fact landed in the middle
of a dusty road and went round and round
on my back. I was just recovering when
I was caught, and I heard a little boy say,
“’E is yours, lidy, take im,’’ and then to
my disgust I was wrapped in a dust mg
and whirled along in a little yellow cart
for some miles to a quaint old farmhouse
tucked away in a beautiful gully.
At once I was put into a cage. A
horrible large wire cage with just a tiny
door, which, of course, I could not open,
but I was too ill to care, and so hungry
and thirsty. After a little time I was taken
up in the cage to a wide verandah cover-
ed with wisteria, honeysuckle and climbing
crimson roses. Here I was given some


nice raw meat and cold water and shut
up for the night. What a night I had.
I dreamt I saw oceans of water all run-
ning away and I tried to reach it, but the
faster I went the faster it flowed. I could
not fly, my wing was cut. It was a bad
dream.
The next morning I was up early. By
the way, I am sometimes called the Bush-
man's Clock because it is my good habit to
go to bed early and early to rise.
1 was just out of my bath and was
preening my feathers when the whole
houseparty, eighteen of them, came out to
see the new arrival. 1 heard them say,
“Oh! It’s a Laughing Jackass.” I was
cross, too cross to laugh, as I am not an


ass by any means. 1 have not long ears,
but I have a long strong beak, and would
have bitten their fingers if I could have
caught them when they poked them through
the wires of my cage and tried to make
me laugh.
But who can laugh in a cage ? Not I!
I can laugh a real hearty laugh, a mirth-
ful laugh when I like; in fact I am a
feathered comedian. My laugh is infec-
tious, and when there are a number of us
together we have a jolly time, and can
be heard some miles away.
After many days 1 was taken out of
the prison, but, alas! only to have my
wing cut, just below my pretty little blue
feathers, of which I am so proud, as all


my other feathers are of sombre grey, red-
dish and brown.
One morning I was having breakfast
of spiders and lizards, when I found the
little wire door of my cage open, so out I
hopped. What joy to be out again ! By
flying little by little I got down to a winding
path, bordered on either side with hollyhocks
and rosemary, to. a shady corner under
some large willow trees. How I did enjoy
poking my old beak into everything! I
found some delicious little frogs, centipedes
and a tender young snake, twice as big as
myself. I broke the back of the snake by
hitting it against a log for an hour or so.
How I chuckled over it! If I had not had
my wing cut I should have flown away up


into a high tree and dropped my prize to
the ground and killed it in that way, it is
far easier. After beating and pounding it
to a pulp, I swallowed half of it, taking
the head first, but keeping the tail end
in my bill until the next day. Early next
morning 1 gave one big gulp and it was
gone
To my great joy I was allowed after this
to remain in the garden, as I am a very
useful bird about the place, and as a pet
lam quite nice. I do not eat the fruit
or destroy the flowers, or worry the cat,
but eat the rat, the mouse and all those
delicious little things which the farmers call
pests and vermin. Some people have
queer tastes.


But I was not to be happy long in this
beautiful garden, as one fine day I was
put into a basket, not a very big one, as al-
though my Latin name is “ Dacclo Gigas” (a
Giant Kingfisher), I only measure from the
tip of my bill to the tip of my tail, seven-
teen-and-a-half inches. I was then taken
to the City. I was good. 1 did not laugh
once in the train, but when let out in my
new home on to a pretty green lawn I gave
one big laugh, a real good one. Every one
laughed again and again, and I knew I
should be quite happy here, and so I was.
I had a good splash in a large white bowl, not
deep enough to drown myself in, as so
many of my family have done when in
captivity. Then I had a mouse for dinner,


and some little frogs, all alive, were put
into my bath and I had good fun catching
them and eating them too. I never knew
a bird improve in looks as I did. The
fatter I got the better my disposition grew.
I always answer to my name, “ Jack,”
by night or by day, and give a hearty
laugh to any one who comes to see me.
I overheard one day that I was looking
so pretty and fluffy and that I was to have
my portrait painted. So when everything
was being arranged for this important
event I thought I would just have a bath
and I did. It was a dreadful mistake on
my part, and ! looked like a drowned
rat. I was then taken into the kitchen
and wiped down before the fire, and I


was put into a good position once more,
but, alas! the paint brushes had been for-
gotten, so now was my chance for another
cooling dip, which I took, as I was feeling
very hot and nearly roasted. Oh! What
a scolding I got. I shall never forget it.
I was gently reminded that I had been
chosen for one of the “Australian Eleven,”
a picture of eleven Kookaburras, and if I
was not good I should not be one of them.
I was good. lam one of them.


— jg* «*■ \ . - gjgy ’JH|
Copyright
AN AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN
lam one of them. Here we are, eleven of us,
altogether on an old branch of a gum tree, cracking
many a joke, and having many a laugh of the old
days that have passed, and of the good time to come in
the new year. Now, one more chirp for our Aus-
tralian Eleven who are doing their duty so nobly at
the front. Whoo-ah ! Who-o-ah-a-a-a !


,
<4


S-2
87^5
00364201


ATLAS PRESS PTY. LTD
Melbourne
