



r )%\ o






No. 5
AN APPEAL
from the
PREJUDICES, to the JUDGEMENTS,
of the
Inhabitants of Melbourne ;
on the
Capital Punishment Question:
by
B. S. RTayler.
Delivered, in St. George’s Hall, 12 December, 1866.
PEICE, ONE SHILLING.
Mr. Chairman !
Ladies and Gentlemen!
Cicero informs us, that he never stood up to plead
the cause of a Client, without fear and trembling—imagine then, what
my sensations must be, on standing up before an unknown auditory, to
plead the cause of Humanity!
lam aware, Mr. Chairman, that it is customary with Lecturers, on
occasions like the present, to assume a considerable degree of modesty;
to pretend feeling an unspeakable amount of diffidence, in addressing a
public assemblage; and then, humbly soliciting patient attention to a few
scattered remarks, from one who is so ill-qualified to appear before a
discerning public—and I know not what hypocritical gallimaufry besides:
but, Sir, I stand not here to crave the indulgence of my Hearers, while
expatiating on that relic of barbarism, Death-punishment; on the con-
trary, I most respectfully dare the judgement of every individual who
hears my voice ! adding, in the words of Brutus—Censure me in
your wisdom, and awake your senses, that you may the better judge ! ”
Upwards of 200 years ago, Pascal maintained— Public Opinion is
the Queen of the World —and though Public Opinion is incessantly
changing, on a variety of social, moral, political, and theological subjects,
still, Mr. C. still it retains its sovereignty over the masses of every
community. There are, indeed, but few who have moral courage suffi-
cient to espouse, and still fewer who venture publicly to propagate Truth,
when it runs, either directly or indirectly, in opposition to popular Error.
It requires an indomitable spirit to feel with Daniel de Foe—
He that opposes his own judgement against the ( consent of the
times, ought to be backed with unanswerable Truths; and he that
hath truth on his side, is a fool as well as a coward , if he is afraid to
own it, because of the currency or multitude of other men’s Opinions.”
Everyone who thinks at all, thinks his own Opinion right —he cannot
possibly think it wrong , for then, it would have ceased to be his opinion;
but, Sir, thinking is the least exerted privilege of even cultivated
humanity! and is solely attributable to that defective Education which


teaches young folks what to think, instead of teaching them how to
think ; making them mere Copies, instead of developing them into
Originals; forming them into Fractions of a mass, instead ot constitut-
ing them Units in society
“ Tis Education forms the human mind;
Just as the Twig is bent, the Tree’s inclined.”
When I look back, Mr. C. on the days of my Youth, and remember
how men, women, and children, were legally suspended from the Gallows,
by dozens, scores, and hundreds ; and when I call to mind the pains our
Schoolmasters took, to impress upon our minds, that Hanging was then
rapidly going out of fashion ; I cannot but rejoice in having lived untill
Capital Punishment has become a Capital Enormity in the opinion of the
most advanced minds, in all the most civilized countries on the lace ot
Britain has been gradually progressing for ages; but Mr.C
we have not yet receded so far from Barbarism, as we are still distant
from Civilisation; for, calling a selfish people, a civilized people ; denom-
inating a fighting nation, a civilized nation , is sheer absurdity—pure
ignorance of the right meaning of words. , *
Man, to be perfectly civilized, must be wholely rescued from t
tyranny of selfishness, lust, hatred, revenge, terror, cruelty, and super-
stition ; doing unto Others, as He would have others do unto bim-and
untill this shall be folly accomplished, Society will not have reached t at
mild, benevolent, pacific, moral goal, towards which it has been steadily
approaching ever since the discovery of the Art of Printing. Man,
Mr C. wilf then first be thoroughly civilized, when all the powers of his
animal, intellectual, moral, religious nature, shall be> foUy-tojeUoge d in
subordination- to his ultimate, his eternal destiny; and Society will then
first be completely civilized, when all its Members, in then respec iv
spheres fully receive and reciprocate all the humane fee mgs and expres-
sfons of benevolence, brotherly-kindness, and chanty, dictated by refined
sensibility and governed by elevated judgement. ni i
Perhaps, Mr. C. it may not be amiss, just to glance at “ Merry Old
England ” m the time of “our glorious Queen Bess who (pious soul)
not”only Executed 168 persons for being Priests, iov harboring P«s s,
or for l being Converts, but (very devoutly) burned 2 Dutchmen, in
Smithfield-market, for the heinous crime of being Anabaptists. I e
Majesty's righteous indignation against tall men, was unmistaka i y
mamfested’in the gratification She enjoyed in making so many of them a
head’shorter; whilf no fewer than 63.000 of Her “ welhbeloved sub cte (
were by Her parental orders, graciously swung from the trail
Worthy D“ughter of the first “defender of the _ Faith” (Henry VIIIO
who, m addition to the multitude of S ‘ ate -™|“ s 0 “S
monks, friars, heretics) Hung upon the gallows 73,000 I of
iects ' every one of whom, we must in charity believe, to have Deen .
much better than Himself. “ The Roman-catholic bloody Queen Maiy,
as she^is styled Tn schoolbooks, sinks into perfect insignificance, when
Her sacrifices of human life are contrasted with those ot her pyo
SsttS ZyMngarian Father; for, during the 5 years re.gn of Mary,


only 277 perished at the stake: consequently, we Protestants may fairly
boast, that as a Royal deadly-sacrificer of human beings, Elizabeth bears
away the palm—for, Mary despatched but hundreds, while Elizabeth put
thousands and tens of thousands to a premature, violent death !
Floggings, fetters, and dungeons; halters, axes, and carbines, have
sunk the morality of England; have stained the names of many great
Statesmen; while the experience of age after age has proved, that all of
them have failed to prevent outrages against either Person or Property.
The universal History of Penal Legislation shows, that the views
of every nation regarding the infliction of Capital Punishment, have
undergone many and great changes ; that the Laws relating to the im-
position of Death, and which constitute by far the most important part
of the Penal Code, sprung from the history, and are based upon
the moral and religious sentiments, together with the political constitu-
tion, of a People. As a country recedes from barbarism, its Criminal
Code undergoes alterations; and records prove, that with the advances
towards Civilisation, the Penal Laws have been mitigated; while the
Crimes by which the lives of men are forfeited, have become more
clearly defined, and considerably reduced in number.
On the present occasion, Mr. C. it is not necessary even to attempt
giving an historical survey of Penal Legislation in general, nor yet
of Capital Punishment in particular —were I ever so capable of doing-
justice to either the one or the other: I shall have abundant matter
"for a single Lecture, if I confine my observations to matters be-
longing to Great Britain alone —to what I have heard, and what I
have seen; what I can communicate as facts, more startling far than
fictions; when the unchristianized Rulers of England strung up in rows,
living men and living lads, living women and living girls, quite as un-
concernedly, as Butchers hang up dead oxen, dead sheep, and dead pigs
—and that, Sir, in the present century! for, our Criminal Laws, even
after I arrived at manhood, were sanguinary in the extreme; so sanguin-
ary, Mr. C. that after the able Solicitor-general, Sir Samuel Romilly,
had devoted much time to the examination of the Penal Statutes of other
countries, He declared, that the English Code was the most draconic of
any nation under heaven !
Some writers have attributed the long continuance of our inhuman
and unchristian Laws, to the inhuman and unchristian conduct and
influence of our professed Ministers of the Gospel of Peace and
Goodwill to men —and not without grounds, Mr. C. for, while we read
in the history of St. Bernard, how fervently and assiduously foreign
Clergy exerted themselves to pnt down Capital Punishment in the
Middle-ages, on the plea of its being pointedly antagonistic to the spirit
and precepts of Christianity; our Oxford and Cambridge taught Clergy,
together with hundreds and thousands of our other Pulpit admirers of
the barbarous Levitical laws, have, as assiduously and ardently, thwarted
the oft-repeated attempts of lovers of God and Man, to get rid of
Death-punishment altogether.
It is high time, Mr. C. that the Platform should boldly support the
Newspaper-press, in calling upon every grade of Melbourne citizens, to


do their Duty—not overlooking the avowed Ministers of the Gospel f
As public monitors, as able guides, as faithful teachers, as true friends to
the people, the leading Newspapers in Victoria have taken precedence of
the Pulpits—and the Pulpits, in many instances, lag behind the intelli-
gence of the Pews ! “ ’Tis true,” Mr. C. “ ’tis true," Mis pity; and pity
’tis, ’tis true!”
Where were the Ministers of Religion at 8 o’clock on Monday
evening, the 26th of November, when the Mechanics Institution over-
flowed with intelligent men, assembled together, at a short notice, to
deliberate on the most expedient means for suing the Executive Govern-
ment of Victoria, to raise itself in the appreciation of a vast majoi’ity of
the Inhabitants, by performing an act of Mercy? I expected, Sir,
to have seen the Platform crowded with Ministers of various denomi-
nations—but, not a single Minister was there ! nor could I distinguish
a Minister in that close-packed assemblage of the friends of suffering
Humanity—not One ! “ Shame, burn their cheeks to cinder !”
In public, they often make a shift to “ Pray for Mercy ;
And that same Prayer doth teach us all , to render
The deeds of Mercy !”
Let not anyone among my respected Hearers fancy for a moment,
that I wish to extenuate Burke’s crime, or in anywise condemn or
censure the conduct of our Executive Government—nothing’ of the kind ;
He transgressed the law, was amenable to the law, and the law has had
its course. If the case did not admit of commutation, nor yet reprieve,
the Executive did their Duty in carrying out the Sentence, notwithstand-
ing the apparently mitigating circumstances which have taken such firm
hold on public sympathy.
Allow me, Mr. C. to read an extract from one of Lord Erskine’s
Speeches —as clear as it is important—
If a Law be bad, it is one thing- to oppose the practice of it, but it
is quite a different thing to expose its errors, to reason on its defects,
and to show cause why it should be repealed, or, why another ought
to be substituted in its place. I have always held it an opinion
(making it also my practice) that it is better to obey a bad law,
making use at the same time of every arguement to show its errors,
and procure its repeal, than forcibly to violate it; because, the
precedent of breaking a bad law, might weaken the force and lead to
a discretionary violation of those which are good. The case is the
same with principles and forms of government, or what are called
constitutions, and the parts of which they are composed. It is
for the good of nations, and not for the emolument or aggrandize-
ment of particular individuals, that Government ought to be
established, and that mankind are at the expense of supporting it.
The defects of every government and constitution, both as to
principle and form, must, on a parity of reasoning, be as open to
discussion as the defects of a law; and it is a Duty which every
man owes to Society, to point them out. When those defects, and
the means of remedying them, are generally seen by a nation, that
nation will Reform its government or its constitution in the one
case, as the government repealed or reformed the law in the other.”


The sciences of jurisprudence and legislation, combined with experience,
tend to the total abolition of Death-punishment ; and if Christ-
ianity be not a cunningly devised Fable, and Religion itself not altogether
a rhapsody ; then, Mr. C. then is the continuance of Capital Punishment
a Capital blunder with Ministers of State, and a damnable doctrine to
be inculcated by Ministers of the Christian Religion.
It is not my intention, Mr. C. to examine the merits or demerits of
the Case of poor, pitiable Burke; that I leave in abler hands ; He was
a lawless, reckless, dangerous man ; and richly deserved severe punish-
ment : yet, I cannot but regret, Sir, that the Executive could not
be fully satisfied with anything short of his Life; that our Ministers of
Justice did not embrace so favorable an opportunity of putting a feather
into our Governor’s cap, by strongly recommending him, as our gracious
Queen’s representative, to snatch a fellow creature out of the very jaws
of Death! I would fain hope, Sir, that not one among them despises
that quality which “is an attribute to God himself though they seem
not to be aware to a convincing extent, that
“ Earthly power doth then show likest God’s,
When Mercy seasons Justice.”
Retributive justice is a thing much talked of, in churches and
chapels; but “ Oh, this work
Of retribution in a Human hand—
’Tis havoc , and not Justice /”
Like that wonderfully great man, the semi-civilized Moses, our State and
our Church Ministers demand an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a
Tooth —and even Life for Life; while the more humane and christian-
ized Shakespeare asks,
How shalt thou hope for Mercy, rendering none ?”
They teach and preach “ the necessity of a rigorous scrupulosity in
dealing with Evil-doersbut, Sir, they too frequently lose sight of
the frailties of Humannature. They protest with rhetorical eloquence
against our lack of moral severity, against our not adequately punishing
the perpetraters of moral enormities ; yet, in the language of our great
and compassionate Moral-teacher, we may ask these advocates of extreme
punishment If, when you make your Prayers,
God should be so obdurate as yourselves,
How would it fare with your departed souls ?”
And again t How would You be,
If He who is the top of judgement, should
But judge You as ye are ? 0, think on that ;
And Mercy, then, will breathe within your lips,
Like men new made.”
I am not preaching, Mr. C. I am only scattering a few Nuts for
our Ministers to crack. We all know, that our Ministers of State
possess sufficient talent to “ make the worse appear the better reason
and we all know, that our Ministers of Religion, if clever textuarists, can
quote passages upon passages of Scripture, out of the Old testament, in
excuse of their unmercifulness and lack of brotherly-kindness; for, as
Shakespeare has remarked


In Religion,
Wliat damned error, but some sober brow
Will bless it, and approve it with a Text,
Hiding the grossness with fair ornament ?”
—but, Sir, Christ’s sermon on the Mount of Olives most emphatically
condemns every species of hardheartedness, cruelty, and revenge, in
Governments as well as Individuals.
350 years ago, Sir Thomas More, who was then Lord High Chan-
celor, published his admirable Utopia; a work, Mr. C. the excelence of
which was not discovered untill the present century; and in Utopia,
More expressed the decided opinion, that even the greatest Criminals
ought to be punished with Imprisonment for Life ; and that those only
of persevering, obstinate, rebellious, and indomitable ferocity, should be
Strangled like Brutes —untamable by Prisons and Chains. Though More
was singularly great and good, his Royal Master, one of the most
notorious of human Butchers, had him beheaded, on 6 July, 1553 !
when he met his cruel fate, not only with intrepidity, but even with
cheerfulness.
The present century, Mr. C. commenced with such political disorder,
moral depravity, and mental distraction, as had never been witnessed
since the Roman Empire fell to pieces—but, Sir, I must u stick to my
Text.”
I shall take it for granted, Mr. C. that the present auditory need not
to be informed of the low state of philanthropy , nor yet of the savageness
of the English laws, when I first began to creep about on this nether world ;
for, during my pilgrimage of Three score years and Ten, I have heard
and seen such things and such sights, as Englishmen shall never see again
—a few of which I shall endeavour to recount.
Many English practical lawyers have strongly advocated the abolition
of Death-punishment, in toto—as may be seen in the valuable Vacation
Thoughts, by Phillips—the menace of Imprisonment for Life, having in
their opinion, much greater power of repression, and certainly much more
to be relied on.
In 1808, that eminent lawyer and philanthropist, Sir Samuel
Romilly, succeeded in carrying a Bill to abolish the Punishment of
Death “ tor stealing from the person to the value of Five shillings”; and
in 1810, He introduced three Bills in favor of suffering Humanity—
but, without success ! At that period, stealing from a shop to the value
of ss. from a house or ship to the value of 40s. were Capital offenses !
The great Founder of Christianity’s Sermon on the Mount was not
then familiar, perhaps, not apprehended by our Legislaters, who seem
to have progressed in Bible-reading only as far as the Pentateuch —at
least, I draw this inference from their being- so well-read in the barbarous
laws of Moses, and their apparent ignorance of the gospel of Jesus, who,
to all intents and purposes, abrogated the horrible Levitical laws. To
do away with such frightful barbarities, Sir Samuel’s three Bills were
framed. The first was carried in the Commons, but, lost in the Lords,
who long continued to set less value on the lives of their Countrymen,
than on the lives of the Brute-creation. The second and third Bills
were rejected by the Commons, on their introduction.


Lords Eldon, Ellenborough, and Sidmouth (3 stubborn antagonists to
Improvement) were then the jealous conservative guardians of the sanctity
of the Criminal Code; while the members of the House of Commons,
many of them Soldiers, Sailors, and Foxhunters, had still to be educated,
still to be imbued with humane feelings and philanthropic sentiments.
Nor did the draconic severity of our Penal Legislation yield to the efforts
of one, but required the patient and arduous perseverance of several genera-
tions of Reformers.
In 1813, the new House of Commons carried the Bill relating to
shoplifting, but, it was thrown out by the Lords, who thought ss. a very
fair price for an Englishman’s life ! Of those who robbed the Country
of thousands and tens and hundreds of thousands, but little notice was
taken; it was not genteel, perhaps not expedient, to meddle with whole-
sale plunderers ; though petty thieves were Hanged unceremoniously,
as a mere matter of course. Romilly then desisted from introducing
Bills, which had for their object the abolition of inhuman laws; seeing
that both Lords and Commons were too ignorant —not sufficiently
enlightened, to prefer justice and mercy to injustice and revenge ! They
were the slaves of Prejudice, and too dull of apprehension to appreciate
the pith of those humanizing Lessons, taught by him who spake as
never man before spake.
It was not untill after the release of the national energies from the
absorption of brutalizing War, that successful attempts were made to
amend our draconic laws, to ameliorate the social condition of the People
of England!
On the establishment of Peace, Sir Samuel again exerted his talents
and influence on behalf of his cruelly ill-used Countrymen, who were
groaning underneath oppressive laws, enforced by uncivilized, unchris-
tianized Rulers; for, in those days, we “ freeborn Englishmen” were liable
to be “ hanged by the neck” for upwards of 200 (two hundred) Capital
offenses! In 1816, Romilly renewed his attempts to get rid of the
barbarous law which punished shoplifting with Death—that law, which
Sir Samuel regarded as the worst of the sanguinary Code. He combated
the plea of “ necessary severity,” so often and so successfully urged
against his hnmane measures, with the fact, that Juries refused to Convict j
and, consequently, the Crime increased, especially among Children—
calling the attention of the House to a Boy, not ten years of age, then
lying in Newgate under sentence of Death, for the very offense! His
arguements prevailed with the Commons; but, the Lords (swayed by
the unfeeling Lord Chancelor and the inhuman Lord Chief Justice—
two hot-headed and stiff-necked Retarders of Progress) thought Hanging
far too good a thing to deprive Englishmen of its benefits: so, hanging
for petty offenses, continued the order of the day. Such was the
unhappy influence of the Sidmouths, the Eldons, the Ellenboroughs, of
that period, who, by their fallacious logic and adherence to Mosaic mon-
strosities, ruled the conduct of the then inconsiderate House of Lords.
Now, do you, my hearers, clearly apprehend what I have communi-
cated ? Are you now aware, that scores and hundreds of Englishmen


have suffered Death, during- my life time, for such Offenses as are now
committed daily throughout Great Britain and her over-grown Colonies,
of which scarcely any notice is taken ? What would you think, my
hearers, of Hanging a Man till he was “ dead, dead, dead,” for cutting
down a Shrub ? or, for stealing a Coat, or even a Sheep, an Ox, or
a Horse ? Yet Romilly, a man of great personal and political influence,
a man at the very head of his profession, celebrated alike for eloquence
and legal skill; even this same influential Romilly spent his best years
(1808 to 1818) in trying to persuade our then insensible Legislature,
to exempt petty thieves from the gallows ? and only succeeded, in all
his strenuous efforts, in getting “ pocket-watches ” and “ bleaching-
linnen,” struck off from the frightfully long list of articles, to purloin
which, was Death !
Strange things, these, Mr. C, to recount before the Junior portion
of this assembly; yet, no stranger than true. In 1820, Sir James
Macintosh (another of our great men) in prosecution of the philanthropic
task, which he had courageously taken upon himself, after the much
lamented demise of Romilly (who fell a sacrifice to his overstrained powers
on behalf of his Countrymen) gained an encouraging modicum of success,
pleading the cause of Humanity. By the passing of three out of six
Bills, Shoplifting to the value of Five Shillings, was, struck off from
the long list of Capital offenses !
So long as Englishmen were executed for Robbing to the amount
of Thirteenpence-halfpenny , many Juries brought in Larceny under
Twelvepence, when really of much greater value. And when men, women,
and children, were Hung in our day for 40s. there were 585 cases, within
15 years, in which Juries declared the value not to exceed 89s. Juries
would not Convict, despite the pleadings of Lawyers, and the dictum of
Judges ; and this frequent manifestation of humanity in Juries,
eventually got rid of the barbarous Law,
In 1828, the Society for the Abolition of Capital Punishment was
founded, under the patronage of the Duke of Sussex, by Messieurs
J. Sydney Taylor, W. Allen, Peter Bedford, J. Thomas Barry, Sir Fowell
Buxton, and the Right Hon. Dr. Lushington: and among the members of
the Committee, were Richard Cobden, John Bright, Wm. Ewart,
Charles Gilpin, Henry Pease, Edmund Beales, Professor Christmas,
Rev. J. Hildyard, Professor Leone Levi, Edward Webster, Thomas Beggs,
&c. with Samuel Gurney for its Treasurer—3 of them, Mr, C. my intimate
and honored friends. Through their instrumentality, several Petitions
have been presented to both Houses of Parliament. On 24 May, 1880,
a Petition, signed by upwards of 1,000 Bankers of Edinburgh, Dublin,
Liverpool, and 230 other towns, was presented to the House of Commons,
by that stanch friend of the people, Henry Brougham—which petition
contained the following remarkable statement:
“ That your Petitioners find, by experience, that the infliction of
Death, or even the possibility of the infliction of Death, prevents the pro-
secution, conviction, and punishment of the Criminal, and thus endangers
the property which it is intended to protect.”


Two years later, a great step was made in the melioration of our
Criminal Code, through a Bill, introduced in 1830, by that Convert to
Circumstances , Sir Robert Peel, for abolishing the punishment of Death
for forgery —except in certain cases.
So slowly, Mr. C. so tardily, do truth and justice make their way
through ignorance and prejudice !
In 1837 —not yet 30 years ago—Lord John Russell introduced
, i/ cj
a series of Bills for the further amelioration of our abominable Criminal
Code, reducing the enormous number of Crimes punishable by Death , to
Seven ; and relieving the Sheriffs from the obligation to execute Murderers
within three days of condemnation.
This brings to my rememberance, Mr. C. the last Official act of
William IY— the Reprieve of a Criminal condemned to Death —
certainly, not the least appropriate deed a King might have done, before
entering into the immediate presence of the King of Kings.
According to Earl Russell’s new edition of “ The English Government
and Constitution,” published last year, “ In 1837, upon the Queen’s
accession, the offenses subjected to Capital punishment were virtually
reduced to the following—
“ Murder, and attempts to murder; burglary with violence to person ;
robbery with cutting or wounding; arson of dwelling-houses, persons
being therein ; rape ; with some few offenses of rare occurance.
“In 1841, Capital punishment was further abolished, for rape,
embezzlement, and riot.
“In 1861, for all offenses except murder and high treason. The
practical effect of these changes has been the following diminution in the
number of persons sentenced to Death, and of those actually Executed—•
Sentenced to Death. Executed.
1833 968 54
1824 1066 49
1825 1036 50
1833 931 33
1834 480 .., 84
1835 523 84
1837 438 8
1838 116 6
1839 56 11
1843 97 18
1844 57 16
1845 49 12
1853 55 2
1854 49 5
1855 56 7
1860 48 12
1861 ... 50 15
1862 29 15
“ In taking the average of decennial periods, we find—
-1823 to 1832 1279.5 56.8
1833 to 1842 325.2 17.1


1848 to 1852
61.6
... 10.7
1852 to 1862
50.9
... 11.1
“ Taking the proportions to the population, the diminution is Still
more striking—
Sentenced, One in Executed, One in
1823 to 1832
... 10.123
229.177
1883 to 1842
... 45.834
881.185
1843 to 1852
... 274.692
1,581.390
1853 to 1862
... 373.223
1,711.434
“ The first sett of numbers in these tables, shows the great Changes
which have taken place in the Law; the number of Capital sentences has
diminished from 1279 to 51, or from 1 in 10, 123 in the population to 1
in 1,711,000. The great diminution in the number of Executions
evidently took place at the Accession of the present Queen.
“ But, if these changes show the increased Humanity of our people,
under our very imperfect system of Secondary punishment, it may well
bear a question whether Murder is prevented by retaining the punishment
of Death for eight, ten, or fifteen persons in a year.”
“In Scotland, there were, in the year 1823, 16 persons Executed of
the 32 Condemned ; in 1826, of 26 Condemned persons, only 8 were
Executed ; in 1829, there were 9 Condemned, and 6 Executed; in 1837,
there were 3 Condemned, and 2 Executed. From 1851, the number
of Executions falls so, that, in most years, only 1 Execution took place,
excepting 1852, 1857, when there were 3 in each year. In 1858 and
1859 no Capital sentence was passed;'in 1860, 4 persons were sentenced
to Death, but, all of them were Pardoned.
“In Ireland, the ratio which Death sentences bears to Executions,
is most surprising. In 1823, of 241 Death sentences, 61 were carried
into Execution; in 1829, of 295, 60; in 1828, of 211, 21; in the year
1850, of 17 Condemned, only 8 were Executed; untill, in the year 1855,
the annual number of Executions falls to 4.”
The statistics relating to Scotland and Ireland, I have copied from the
most masterly and reliable work ever published on the subject; and as it
is not yet in the hands of Melbourne Booksellers, I shall give the Title,
that those who are interested in the Question, may obtain it from
London —
Capital Punishment; based on Mittermaier’s Todesstrafe: edited by
John Macrae Moir. Published by Smith, Elder, and Co. 1865.
This able work, the result of many years careful inquiry, and in the
compilation of which the Professor traveled into many Countries, and
examined into the whys and wherefores of many different Penal Codes,
confutes all the arguements ever produced in favor of Death-punishment
for any and every known Crime— murder, of course, included.*
Earl Russell, one of the most experienced as well as one of the
cleverest Statesmen of our age volunteers (on p. 249) his matured
*lf nothing unforseen prevent, I shall shortly publish, for the benefit of the
Victorian public, the very interesting Biographical Sketch of Professor Mittermaier
(now the youthful old man of four score years) penned by Dr, Schaible, in
November, 1864.


opinion on the long-vexed question, Capital Punishment; expressed in
the following words- —
For my own part, I do not doubt for a moment either the right of a
Community to inflict the punishment of Death, or, the expediency
of exercizing that right in certain states of society. But, when I turn
from that abstract right, and that abstract expediency, to our own state of
society—when I consider how difficult it is for any Judge to separate the
case which requires inflexible justice, from that which admits the force of
mitigating circumstances —how invidious the task of the Secretary of
State, in dispensing the Mercy of the Crown—how critical the comments
made by the Public—how soon the object of general horror becomes the
theme of sympathy and pity—how harrow and how limited the example
given by this condign and aweful punishment—how brutal the scene of the
Execution — I come to the conclusion , that nothing mould he lost to
Justice , nothing lost in the preservation of innocent life, if the Punish-
ment of Death mere altogether abolished .”
When Lord John Russell’s Bill to reduce the number of Capital offenses
was under consideration in Committee, 12 May, 1837, Mr. Ewart moved
an amendment, confining the penalty of Death to the single case of
deliberate murder. The Ministry resisted Mr. Ewart’s motion, and carried
the original Bill, by a majority of One vote. When taken to the Upper
House, Lord Brougham remarked, that nothing but pressure of time
prevented his endeavouring to amend the measure, by extending the
remission of the Death-penalty to all crimes except murder; and his
Lordship did not know that he should venture to except that—so convinced
was he that Capital Punishment tended to the increase of Crime and to the
impairing of Justice.
Enough has been communicated, Mr. C. to convince my hearers
how much the times are changed tor the better, since the commencement
of the present century, when neither our property nor our liberty —nay,
when not even life was secure ! and, instead of the young “ Go-a-heads”
elbowing the “ Old Coves ” out of their way (whether they meet us in
Bourke Street, the Botanical Gardens, or, on the Beach) they ought
rather to smoothe our descent into the grave ; acknowledging themselves
our Debtors, for having, prior to their existence, protested against acts
of oppression, set right against might, contended for political liberty and
religious freedom, and wrestled with ignorance, fanaticism, and
authority, on behalf of ourselves and our children’s children.
Public Opinion has undergone a thorough Change on the Capital
Punishment Question since I was a Boy ; for, it is now, looked upon as
a Capital Enormity by nearly all, except our Pulpit-teachers, who
mostly adhere to the barbarous laws of Moses, and strangely refuse to
adopt the humane inculcations of their so-called Lord and Master ! The
Change, however, has been gradual, not sudden. If we take the
6 decennial periods from 1800 to 1860, we shall see our Progress very
distinctly; for, the numbers of Executions stand thus recorded: 802,
897, 686, 250, 107, 100.
It appears, that the greatest number of Executions in any one year
within this period, was in 1801, when, suddenly doubling the average of


the preceding- years, the Executions rose to 210. What was the cause ?
It is not difficult of discovery; statistics prove, that whenever Bread
cheapens, Crime decreases ; and increases with the rise of Bread—yet,
strange to say, persons may still be found in 18G6, who curse the Repeal
of the Corn-laws, and heartily wish Free-trade at the Devil!
Of the 49 persons sentenced to Death in 1850, 6 only were Executed,
and they were for murder. Of the 48 sentenced to Death in 1860, 12
were Executed for murder. What a change Mr, C. from my younger
days, when our Rulers used to Hang men, women, and children, as a sort
of passtime !
The last execution for a simple offense of Theft, was in 1841; when
a Convict, poor fellow, was executed for stealing to the value of £5 in a
dwelling-house—not 5s as a few years previously. The last execution for
any description of Theft, was in 1836, when 5 persons were executed for
robbery and burglary. Since 1886, with the exception of 3 executions for
“ attempts to murder,” the last of which was in 1841, murder has been
the only offense for which the punishment of Death has been inflicted in
England —and when more of Great Britain’s Lcgislaters shall have
progressed nearer to the standard of Christian morality, then, the
inhuman, the horrible, the monsterous punishment of Death, will be, at
once and forever, erased from the Statutes !
“ Man, proud Man,
Dressed in a little brief authority,
Plays such fantastic tricks before high Heaven,
As make the Angels weep!”
Some of my respected auditors may well be excused not believing, on
the bare statement of an unknown Lecturer, that Sir Robert Peel was once
so benighted, so prejudiced as to wish, or that he ever was so poreblind
and unfeeling as to argue, in the face of the nation, that a man, woman,
and even a child, ought to be Hanged by the neck, as “ a just punishment”
for simply Stealing to the paltry amount of 40s.
Perhaps, Mr. C. here may be a Lesson for some of us ; let us not
pass it heedlessly by.
Sir Robert’s youthful mind was instructed , not educated; crammed
not develloped; he was carefully taught what to think; but, not untill he
arrived at mature manhood, had Sir Robert discovered hom to think !
Though capable of reasoning, he long acted, unpremeditatedly, from the
influence of Prejudice ; he committed many blunders, and was often found
in company with Retarders of Progress: but, when once convicted of
error, he was man enough to acknowledge his error, and thenceforth
renounce it ; He was not ashamed of confessing before Parliament, before
the world, that he had Changed his opinion ; that he was wiser today
than he was yesterday. Sir Robert was the Creature of Circumstances ;
and some writers, who have not examined the motives of his conduct, have,
as unceremoniously as unjustly, nicknamed him — Turncoat, Weather-
cock, Renegade —whereas, he conscientiously did his Duty, according to
the light he had ; for, Sir Robert was, emphatically, a child of Prejudice,
and grew up among physical prejudices, moral prejudices, religious pre-
judices, and prejudices of the senses ; all of which belong to what a French


writer calls une opinion sans jugement [an opinion without judgement] as
if the parties had eyes inaccessible to light, and ears inaccessible to sound.
Well might Bucke say —To encounter a long-established and deep-rooted
Prejudice requires, sometimes, more courage than it does to face an army
of 40,000 men. For, some Prejudices may be compared with the snows
of the north ; all markings are lost: and he who travels during athaw, if
once he makes a stop, is swallowed. A soul of divine perspicuity is
demanded ; and a perseverence and courage worthy the best and most
fortunate of men. [Happily illustrated in Sir Robert Peel] If we raise
trophies to heroes, we should erect monuments as high as the pyramids to
those who encounter and conquer Prejudices —destructive to the welfare of
human society.”
But, let no one hastily “jump to conclusions;” for, as Erskine
(another of our great and admirable men) remarks, in his Speech for the
Council of Madras —Some of the darkest and most dangerous Prejudices,
arise from the most honorable principle of the human mind. When
prejudices are caught up from bad passions, the w r orst of men feel intervals
of remorse, to soften and dispense them; but, when they arise from a
generous, though mistaken, source, they are hugged closer to the bosom;
and the kindest and most compassionate natures feel a pleasure in foster-
ing a blind and unjust resentment.”
I would have my Juniors ponder on the sad but true observation of
Bugald Stewart —A great part of the life of a philosopher is devoted, not
so much to the acquisition of new knowledge, as to unlearn the errors to
which he had been taught to give an implicit assent, before the dawn of
reason and reflection.”
That will be a Golden age, Mr. C, when political, social, moral, reli-
gious, and philosophic truths, shall be taught in our Schools ; that the
poor and the rich may walk, hand in hand, down the avenues of intelli-
gence, and sit, side by side, under the bowers of wisdom !
That Sir Robert entered Parliament while still grossly ignorant of
men and things, need not surprise those who make good use of their eyes
and understandings ; for, they have seen, and may, perhaps, again see, the
veriest “ Stocks and Stones” voted into Legislators, who might have made
creditable Squatters, or first rate Plowmen—just as some Plowmen and
Squatters, whose heads are properly screwed on, would make admirable
Legislators, had the Voters but discrimination enough to place them in
such a befitting position. Neither affluence nor learning, even though
allied to family greatness, can constitute an efficient Statesman; while
some of the ablest Lawgivers and men of State-business, have arisen from
that class called plebeian.
But, Sir, I have strayed away from the Lesson taught us by the
Changes of Opinion exhibited in Sir Robert Peel. It would be out oi
place 'here, to enter into details of the variety of Changes which marked
Sir Robert’s progress in Statesmanship; though I may briefly allude to
a few prominent traits.
In 1809, he attained his majority, and entered Parliament, as “ a
rank Tory” and “uncompromizing Conservative.” In 1817, he was
chosen one of the Representatives of the University of Oxford. At the


end of 2 years, to the utter astonishment of many, He was sitting as
Chairman on the celebrated Committee which resulted in the return to Cash
payments. When Canning became Prime Minister (in 1827) Peel retired
from Office, being still of opinion that the demands of the Roman Catholics
ought strenuously to be resisted : yet, but two years later, He not only saw
his error, but, he actually moved the Relief Bill himself; which, as all the
world knows, after a long and arduous struggle, was Carried, in 1829,
We next find him opposing to his utmost, Lord John Russell’s well-known
Bill for Parliamentary Reform. We then behold him at the head of affairs,
First Lord of the Treasury—the Duke of Wellington accepting a seat in
the Cabinet, without office, but taking the Leadership in the House of
Lords. Sir Robert’s Ministry was formed on what politicians call “the
strictest Protectionist principlesnevertheless, the Guide and Director of
that great and powerful party, contrived to effect considerably more public
good, than the Whigs would have ventured barely to attempt, though
looked upon as the more liberal and progressive party. Sir Robert, during
his notable tenure of Office (1841 —1846) manfully aided the Repeal of
the Corn-laws—the relaxation of the whole Commercial code —the Bank-
charter Act —and the establishment of the general Financial policy of the
country on a firmer basis than it ever was before! For these important
changes and invaluable services, brought about by a fundamental Change
of the policy to which, in his blindness, he had conscientiously pledged
himself, Sir Robert incurred the odium of his party; but, he won the
admiration, secured the affection, and received the thanks of the nation at
large! and, despite his long-protracted narrowness and exclusiveness, as
his vision enlarged and his mind expanded, he not only saw his errors, but,
he had the courage, generosity, and manliness, to renounce them ! and
while he is known as one of the most Changeable of Statesmen, he has
the undying honor of being ranked among the greatest Benefactors to his
Country, during the Age we live in.
Instead of heaping reproach on Sir Robert Peel, for his
changeableness, he merits the praise of all right-thinking minds ; for, as
conviction after conviction of Error, flashed upon his understanding, he
mastered his Prejudices, and acted the part of a conscientious and
exemplary Statesman —even at the risk of forfeiting place and friends,
and in direct opposition to his former deep-rooted Opinions.
Guizot, in his “ Life and Acts of Sir Robert Peel,” after an able
characterisation of his political genius, tells us —Sir Robert was a great
and honest servant of the State; proud with a sort of humility, and
desiring to shine with no brilliancy extrinsic to his natural sphere ;
devoted to his country without any craving for reward : severing himsell
from the past without synical indifference, braving the future without
adventurous boldness ; solely swayed by the desire to meet the necessities
of the present, and to do himself honor by delivering his Country from
peril or embarrassment. Thus, he was, in turn, a Conservative and a
Reformer, a Tory or Whig, and almost a Radical; popular and
unpopular ; using his strength with equal ardor, sometimes in making
an obstinate resistance, sometimes in yielding concessions which were,
perhaps, excessive ; more wise than provident, more courageous than


firm, but, always sincere, patriotic, and marvelously adapted, in a period
of transition like ours, to conduct the Government of modern society, as
it has become and is becoming 1 more and more in England, and
elsewhere, under the influence of the Democratic principles and feelings
which have been fermenting in Europe for 15 centuries.”
Lord John Russell writes—lf the Protectionists counted on Sir Robert
Peel to confirm the reign of Monopoly [on his being placed at the head of
the Government] they were woefully deceived. It is true, that, with
characteristic prudence, he left for a time unassailed the Corn of the landed
gentry and the Sugar of the West Indian Colonies. But, he struck down
all the minor Monopolies, and advancing, like a great general, left the
fortresses of Corn and Sugar held by mere garrisons in a conquered
country.”
On great occasions—such as the passing of the Roman Catholic
Relief Bill, such as the Repeal of the Corn-laws, Sir Robert had the
magnanimity to laud the conduct of his most determined Opponents, and
to give them the full credit due to their foresight and energy in bringing
forward measures for the Public good, however much he resisted them on
their introduction. Accept, as an example, the following tribute paid to
the indomitable Cobden, on the passing of the Repeal of the Corn-laws—
I said before, and I said truely, that in proposing our measures of
Commercial policy, I had no wish to rob others of the credit justly due to
them. I must say, with reference to honorable gentlemen opposite, as I
say with reference to ourselves, that neither of us is the Party which
is justly entitled to the credit of them. There has been a combination of
Parties generally opposed to each other, and that combination and the
influence of Government have led to their ultimate success; but, the
Name which ought to be associated with the success of these measures, is
not the name of the noble Lord, the organ of the Party of which he is the
Leader, nor is it mine! The Name which ought to he, and will he
associated with the success of those measures, is the name of one, who,
acting, I believe, from disinterested motives, has, with untiring energy,
made appeals to our reason, and has enforced those appeals with an
eloquence the more to be admired, because it was unaffected and unadorned-
—the Name which ought to be chiefly associated with the success of these
measures, is the name of Richard Cobden !”
But, lest I should be accused of “ spinning too long a yarn,” I must
hastily direct the attention of my Juniors to the grand Lesson to be learned
from the life and conduct of Sir Robert Peel; it is this— His openness to
Conviction and his moral courage in Changing and Uttering his
opinions. From being one of the sturdiest of Protectionists, he became,
through the influence and force of Circumstances, the grand and honored
instrument in carrying out the prosperous principles of Free-trade. Yet,
the Change was not the work of a day ; he did not instantaneously
discover, that protection was synonymous with ruination; his mental
telescope of observation was drawn out by degrees, requiring years to find
the right focus; his progress was the steady advance of principle, the
onward movement of conscientious conviction ; the result of a gradual
acquirement of true political foresight and manly courage.


Let laughers laugh, Mr. C. like gibers gibe, but let us never forget,
that Men of Sense often Change their Opinions —Blockheads never !
for, “though thou shouldest bray a Fool in a mortar, among wheat, with
a pestle, yet, will not his foolishness depart from him!”
It surely ought to influence the minds of those who have not yet
examined into the propriety or impropriety of inflicting Death-punishment
on a human being for mere robbery, or, for indisputable murder —nay, it
ought to make even the most strenuous advocates for the Levitical
law, taking “ Life for Life,” to question the justness of their own views,
when they learn that the most talented and best informed men of our day,
though once the abetters of Capital Punishment, and who formerly insisted
on its absolute necessity, have, on riper consideration, deliberately and
totally Changed their Opinions.
The philosophy in Penal Legislation has not in any country been more
carefully investigated than in Italy. In 1764, Cesare Bonesano de Beccaria
(born 1788—died 1794) published the first edition of his celebrated
and soul-stirring work, Dei Delitti e delle Dene, anonymously ; a work
which rendered him famous throughout Europe, and which up to the pre-
sent time continues to be considered one of the most important treatises
on Criminal Laws. It has passed through 30 Italian editions, and been
translated into most of the European languages.
I read, but a couple of months back, that an Italian delegation has
presented a Petition to President signed by Garabaldi and 362
other Italians of distinction, earnestly praying him to abolish Capital
Punishment in the United States.
Even the Zurich Commission, which was appointed last year for the
purpose of Drawing up a New penal Code, decided, by 9 votes to 2, against
the retention of Death-punishment.
The celebrated Jeremy Bentham sagely observed, that the Punishment
of Death is not remissible ; that Error is possble in all Judgements ; and
that in all other cases of judicial error, compensation can be made to the
injured person —but, that Death admits of no Compensation.
Better, Mr, C. 1,000 times better would it be, to let 1,000 villains
escape Punishment altogether, than Hang One Innocent person —and yet
Sir, I have a list of 50 individuals, with their Names and the dates of their
Executions, who suffered the extreme penalty of the law in what is called
civilized and Christian England, during the first half of the present
century, the unquestionable innocence of every one of which, was
discovered, and officially acknowledged, after they had been robbed of their
existence! And taking away Innocent lives still continues to disgrace our
Mother-country—and will continue to sully its glories, untill Death-
punishment be wholely abolished.
“ Life, it must be remembered, is the Gift of God , and the
necessary condition of the devellopment and moral culture of Man.
The duration of man’s Life, is determined by the Almighty; whatever
punishment interferes with his Will, by curtailing man’s existence, is
Unjust. It is only the notion of a wrathful Deity that must be re-
conciled —a notion diametrically opposed to the idea of Christianity—
which could lead to the belief in a right of inflicting a Punishment
that deprives a man of his life. Mittermaieb. p. 98.


“ Life is the Gift of God, of which no man has a right to deprive
his fellow. No man is entitled to inflict a penalty, by which another
man is prevented from morally reforming himself, and from mani-
festing the fruits of sincere repentance, p.IBB.
“ A right understanding of the spirit of Christianity teaches, that
no Criminal—so far as the possibility of his reformation is concerned
—must be despaired of; and that the gravity of the Crime does not
justify the inference that the Culprit is incorrigible. There may
remain a sound moral sentiment in the perpetrator of a heinous crime,
which, when appealed to in the right manner, will lead to reformation.”
A whole volume could be filled, Mr. C. with very interesting and most
reliable accounts of the perfect reformation of desperate and hardened
Convicts, many of whom have afterwards led exemplary lives.
Wise and dispassionate Legislators—and many such shall arise in
Australia—will not condemn to Death the man that has done, or, may do,
more service than injury to Society. Statesmen shall arise, who, discard-
ing a vulgar policy, will discover the true interest of our communities;
will discover, Sir, that life is immeasurably more valuable than property ;
will discover that taking Life for Life is as barbarous and unchristian, as
it is cruel and unjust; as mischievous and impolitic, as it is unwise and
wicked! Ever since 1830, the number of advocates for the abolition of
Capital Punishment, has been steadily on the increase; and within the
last few years only, tens of thousands of thinking men and powerful
writers, despite all their strong educational prejudices, have become decided
Opponents to Death-punishment for any crime whatever !
Statistics show, Mr. C. that when and where the number of Execu-
tions have been most numerous, Capital crimes have invariably increased ;
and, on the other hand, Capital crimes have ever decreased at those periods
and in those places in which but few Sentences of Death have been carried
out. As a natural consequence, Mr. C. the Execution of Burke will be
followed by deliberately-desperate Murders !
Causes of Crime is a subject of thrilling interest and vital import-
ance, but, much too extensive to be discussed on the present occasion.
Professor Austin declares (in his work on Jurisprudence) It is only in
the Ignorance of the People, and in their consequent imbecility, that
Governments or Demagogues can find the means of mischief”—while
Bulwer exclaims, Survey our faults, our errors, our vices (fearful and
fertile field) trace them to their causes; all those causes resolve themselves
into One— ignorance ! for, as from this source flow the abuses of religion,
so also from this source flow the abuses of all other blessings, of talents,
of riches, of power ; for, we abuse things, either because we know not their
real use, or because, with an equal blindness, we imagine the abuse more
adapted to our happiness. As Ignorance, then, is the sole spring of evil, it
necessarily follows, that were we consummate in Knowledge, we should be
perfect in good. He, therefore, who retards the progress of Intellect,
countenances crime—nay, to a State, is the greatest of Criminals.”
But, Mr. C. what is Ignorance ? Ignorance, Sir, is a something much
easier conceived, than described; once dispelled, it is impossible to
re-establish it; men cannot be made ignorant; but when ignorant they may


e kept so: and were I called upon for an illustration, I should say, that
the Mind, in discovering Truths, may be likened to the Eye, in discovering
Objects—when once the Object has been seen, it is impossible to put the
mind back into the same condition in which it was before —convince but
the mind of Error, and that error will be expelled for ever.
Shakespeare tells us Ignorance is the curse of God ;
Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven !”
Knowledge, Mr. C. cannot possibly have any enemies, except the
Ignorant; for, it not only cherishes youth, and delights old-age, but is an
ornament in prosperity and a solace in adversity. Yet, whoever wishes to
make thorough progress in knowledge, must dedicate his age as well his
youth, the later growth as well as the first fruits, at the altar of Truth —
“ And Truth alone, where’er my lot be cast,
In scenes of plenty, or, the pining waste,
Shall be my end and aim, my glory to the last!”
It cannot but be evident to You, Mr. C. that there now exists a
Spirit of Inquiry among the nations of the earth, which not anything
human can stop; which not anything human can essentially controll.
Reproach, obliquy, persecution, cannot any longer prevent Human Pro-
gress; they may embitter opposition, they may engender violence, but,
they cannot now abate the keenness of research; they cannot now arrest
the silent march of thought! The English, as a people, have, at length,
seen and felt the heinousness of Death-punishment; and they will now
insist upon its total abolition.
It is urged by some Colonists, with as little good taste as judgement,
that very few of the Aristocratic Statesmen of England have declared in
favor of putting a total stop to the infliction of Death-punishment; but,
Mr. C. many of England’s noblest and greatest Statesmen, had their
origin among the Working and the Poverty-struck classes. As a score
only, from among hundreds, accept the following examples
Oliver Cromwell, the Lord Protector of England, was the Son of a
Brewer. Sir Edmund Saunders, Lord Chief Justice of the King’s
Bench, was, at his outset, the Errand-lad of the Lawyers ; yet, he became
so skilful in the legal profession, that Justice Wilks declared “ Saunders
is so learned in the law, that no authorities are necessary to be mentioned
after him.” Philip Yorke, afterwards Lord Hardwicke, a man whom
Campbell (in his Lives of the Lord Chancelors) describes as having been
“universally and deservedly considered the most consummate Judge
that ever sat in the Court of Chancery, used frequently to be sent on
family errands, and to fetch in little necessaries from Covent Garden and
other markets which his Mistress considered quite in keeping with the
Duties of “ a poor gratis Clerk” to an Attorney. Lord Chancelor King,
was the Son of a Gtocer. Thomas Parker, Lord Chief Justice of
England, Lord High Chancelor of Great Britain, and Earl of Maccles-
field, was the Son of an obscure Village lawyer. The great Erskine,
whom Campbell has registered among the Lord Chancelors as “ the
brightest ornament of which the English Bar can boast,’’ was born “in
a small and ill-furnished room, in an upper flat of a very lofty house, m
the Old town of Edinburgh.” That illustrious lawyer and judge, Sir


William Blackstone, whose Commentaries on the Laws of England have
secured him a lasting reputation, was the Son of a Silkman. Lord
Chancelor Thurlow “ had a just contempt for the vanity of new men pre-
tending- that they are of ancient bloodand Campbell has recorded, that
on some one’s attempting to flatter Thurlow, “ by trying to make out
that He was descended from Thurloe (Cromwell’s secretary) he stopped
him with—Sir, there were 2 Thurlows in that part of the country, who
flourished about the same time ; Thurloe the secretary , and Thurlow the
carrier: Sir, I am a descendant of the Carrier!” Lord Eldon, who
occupied the Woolsack so many years within my rememberance (obstin-
ately retarding the Progress of the nation) first swept out the Offices
in a lawyer’s chambers at Newcastle on Tyne, where he was taught
Singing in the Orphanhouse. The great philanthropist and able Solicitor-
general, Sir Samuel Romilly, was a Watchmaker’s Son. The well-known
Charles Abbot, afterwards Lord Tenterden, eminent both as a lawyer
and a judge, was the Son of a Barber; and was often heard to speak
instructively of his low origin. Lord Chief Justice Denman (the
co-advocate of Brougham in the disgraceful trial of Queen Caroline)
sprang from an humble Man-midwile. Sir John Strange, Lord Roden,
Lord Kenyon, and a long list of others known to fame, raised themselves
from obscurity into commendable notoriety —from being humble Servers
of Writs, and Engrossers of Deeds, to clever Lawyers, learned Judges,
and Lord High Chancelors. Canning, when Prime Minister, tenderly
and publicly evinced his great affection towards his Mother, making no
secret of her having been an Actress; while Sir Robert Peel, with
honest pride, exhibited to his aristocratic friends, the Clogs in which his
Grandfather had worked, for 12s. a week ! That most indefatigable of
all financial Reformers (military, naval, ecclesiastical, fiscal, etc.) my
obliging acquaintance Joseph Hume, was the Son of a poor Widow who
kept an Apple-stall, and a petty Huxter’s shop, in Montrose; and, by his
good management and truthfulness, not only acquired affluence, hut w'on
the unqualified respect of all the Members, of every shade of politics,
in the House. And, though last of the score, not least, comes my
esteemed friend Richard Cobden, the Son of a petty Farmer ; who has
done more for the peace and prosperity of his Country, for Europe, for
the World, than a whole catalogue of Aristocrats and Courtiers put
together!
As it might seem somewhat invidious, were I to instance a score of
living Statesmen (such as Bright, Gilpin, and Mill, in the House of Com-
mons —Poll ok, St. Leonards, and Brougham, in the House of Lords) all
the architects of their individual renown, without instancing everyone
who merits a public tribute of praise from his Country ; I shall pass
them by, for the present —observing only, though Potentates can make
men great, Great men make themselves !
“ Honor and Shame from no Condition rise;
Act well your part —there all the Honor lies.”
Most of my auditors are probably aware of the narrow escape Great
Britain had last year, from adding to former monstrosities, by Hanging the
innocent Polizzioni, who was condemned to Death by, Judge Martin.


As the case may not be known to all present, I shall briefly recount it.
In the beginning of 1865, a Jury declared that Serafino Polizzioni
murdered Michael Harrington; and on that declaration, the presiding
Judge (Baron Martin) passed the Sentence of Death on his fellow-man !
It makes the blood tingle in the veins, Mr. C. to think how, almost
accidentily, poor Polizzioni escaped from being legally murdered —it made
me shudder, when I read of the hair-breadth ’scape of the Innocent culprit
from an ignominious Death on the Gallows ! It grieves one to the soul,
Mr. C. to know, that in our pseudo-enlightened England, the possibility
still exists, of Innocent persons being offered up as sacrifices to ill-founded
verdicts ! It is enough to call down the Curses of every humane individual,
on the supporters and abetters of the horrible Law which our Mosaic-
pulpits so devoutly reverence and so energetically maintain !
Had the Pulpit done its duty, Mr. C. the monsterous, the unchristian,
the inhuman Law of human sacrifice, would have been erased from our
Statutebooks ages ago ! But, Sir, our pulpits uphold the monstrosity. I
heard my esteemed friend, Charles Gilpin, M.P.—who had traversed the
kingdom, Lecturing on the Capital Punishment question—l heard him
declare on the 10th of December, 1853, in the Hall of Commerce, before
a crowded London auditory—
Out of every 20 Clergymen and Dissenting Ministers throughout
the length and breadth of the land, I have found 19 decidedly Opposed
to the abolition of Capital Punishment!”
For ages past, Mr. C, the professed Ministers of the Gospel of Peace,
have been the most influential abetters of -War and Bloodshed, as well as
the chief supporters of our draconic Laws; and, Sir, I challenge the
Episcopalians (Romanists and Protestants) the Presbyterians, the Baptists,
the Independents, the Wesleyans, and others, to falsify my assertion !
But, to the point in hand —What else than the Sentence of Death
could Baron Martin, as administer of the sanguinary English law, pro-
nounce ? The Jury brought in the verdict that Polizzioni was the murderer
of Harrington—and Hanging was the necessary consequence. The Judge
himself, indeed, declared from the Bench, that the evidence was the most
direct and conclusive he had ever heard in the whole course of his experience;
that there was nothing in the circumstances of the Killing, to reduce the
crime to Manslaughter —adding, “ I am as satisfied as I can be of any-
thing, that Gregorio did not inflict the wound, and that You are the person
who did!"
And yet, my respected hearers, notwithstanding all the singularities
of the certainty of Polizzioni’s having stabbed Harrington, and of the
apparently unquestionable legal justice of the Sentence of Death for the
deed, a month afterwards, it was clearly proved that Polizzioni had been
mistakingly Condemned, and that He was perfectly Innocent of the Murder
for which he had been publicly sentenced to be Hanged, and for which he
had been immured in the Condemned-cell in Newgate !
Another Jury found, a month afterwards, that Gregorio Mogni (the
man alluded to by Judge Martin) struck the fatal blow —the grand jury,
moreover, having previously decided that the act amounted to manslaughter
only, and not to murder!


Though many have been Hancked in England for the perpetration of
Crimes they never committed, and whose Innocence became known after
they had been deprived of Life, still, Juries have gone on, year after year,
furnishing the accursed Gallows with fresh subjects who were not guilty of
the deeds laid to their charge, but, for which they were condemned—their
Innocence having first been made manifest when the Death-penalty had
been paid ! And yet, Sir, we wish to be looked upon as a civilized people !
Why, then, does not the righteous indignation of Public Opinion destroy
the Gallows at once, and for ever, despite all the Lawyers, and despite all
the Pulpit-ministers, in the land ? A single Week’s delay in Mogni’s
confession, and Polizzioni would have been Hanged —hanged by the neck,
untill “ Dead, Dead, Dead” ! though perfectly Innocent!
Were there no other plea for the total abolition of Death-punishment,
than the scores of legal murders which have taken place in England
during the present century, that alone, Mr. C. ought to outweigh all the
arguements that can possibly be brought forward in favor of its con-
tinuance.
The XI Ch. of Mittermaier’s convincing book is headed — Executions
and the condemnation of Innocent persons" ; and is considered under two
heads:
I. To what extent are the expectations of the Legislater, in pro-
ducing a salutary effect for the Prevention of crime, realized by
inflicting the severest penalty ?
11. How far has experience shown, that Capital Punishment has
been inflicted on Innocent persons ? p. 145.
For such of you, my hearers, as have not perused the very interesting
and instructive volume, I have extracted 4 short paragraphs to read from
this Platform—
Experiences are, alas, daily on the increase, proving that Execu-
tions have not the alledged Deterring effect: this appears from the
following observations—
I. That immediately after the Execution of a Murderer, in the same
neighbourhood aggravated crimes of Homicide have been committed.
11. From the observations of Prison Chaplains, it appears, that the
greater number of those Condemned for grave crimes, had been
present at Executions.
TIT. In England and France, there are frequent instances of Families,
in which the Granclfather, Father, Brothers, of a Murderer, have
been executed for heinous crimes—a Fact which in itself affords
proof, of no Deterring effect having been produced by the formidable
example.
As one authority from among many, I shall mention the trust-worthy
Rev, Mr. Roberts, of Bristol, who testifies, that—
Of 167 persons who were consoled by Him before their Execution,
161 declared that they had been present at Executions.
And you may rely upon it, my hearers, that every Public execution, is a
Public abomination, where robberies and murders are bred, and thence
brought into being. Irrefutable facts prove it.


Weak-minded and ill-read Pulpit ministers tell their congregations,
that the sacrifice of human life is a Scripture doctrine, and ought not,
cannot, be abolished by any God-fearing people; they quote and misquote
text upon text, to countenance their really unscriptural and clearly un-
christian representations. Tis true, Mr. C. as you are aware, that we
read in Exodus (xxi. 28, 24, 25) Thou shalt give life for life, eye for eye,
tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound
for wound, stripe for stripe.” In xxiv Ch. of Leviticus we read (16,
17 v.) He that blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, he shall surely be
put to Death; all the congregation shall stone him—as well the stranger
as he that is bom in the land, when he blasphemeth the Name of the Lord,
shall be put to Death; and he that killeth any Man, shall surely be put to
Deathand in Deuteronomy (xix. 21) Thy eye shall not pity; but, life shall
go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot” —and no
one, Mr. C. no one acquainted with primitive Laws can pretend to
ignore the fact, that Capital Punishment was carried to a fearful extent in
the earlier ages of the world—and among various infant nations, besides
that of the barbarous Israelites. But, what, in the name of Commonsense,
what have we, in 1866, to do with Laws which shock every precept of
Morality, every feeling of Humanity, every sentiment of Christianity ! Sir,
it is an insult to our judgements for any professed Christian Pulpit-teacher,
under any pretext whatever, to ask of us, the oldest generation the world
has yet seen, to be governed by the crude and inhuman Laws of antiquity !
Age taking lessons of infancy! Preposterous !
Twenty times, Mr. C. within the last few days, have I had that
passage wrung in my ears —Whoso sheddeth Man’s blood, by Man shall his
blood be shed” (Gen. ix. 6) and as often as it was repeated, so often I
pitied whoever quoted it as an authority for our taking away Human life
—as it bears no such meaning—and even if it did, what then ? What
then, Mr. C ? Did not the Founder of Christianity abrogate the Mosaic
Laws, in his humanizing and fraternizing Sermon on the Mount ? But
that, Sir, is a Sermon which has yet to be studied by our lovers of worn-out
Orthodoxies, and our ardent admirers of the wisdom of their Ancestors.
That one text, Thou shalt not suffer a Witch to live (Exodus xxii. 18)
was made the subject not of hundreds but thousands of Sermons ; and
upwards of 30,000 Innocent human beings were put to Death in England
alone, at the instigation of our fanatical Pulpits, for the alledged crime of
Witchcraft! “0, Shame, where is thy Blush !”
No one in this assembly, Mr. C. has a more reverent regard for the
Bible as a whole, or, pays higher respect to the Ministers of the Gospel of
Jesus, than I do ; yet, Sir, I do not, can not, will not, accept for the
Commandments of God, the most horrible and demonstrably unchristian
Doctrines of Men !
To conclude—There are 6 points, my respected hearers, to which I
solicit yet a moment’s attention—
I. The histories of nations teach us, that the more barbarous any
People is, the more Death-punishments abound; gradually decreasing,
in number and severity, as approaches are made towards civilisation.
11. Proportionally with the severity of Penal-enactments, Crime
increases ; but, decreases on the introduction of mildness—as proved
by the experience of ages, in differently constituted nations.


111. Death-punishment is not a general Deterrent to Evil-doers —on the
contrary, it has ever been the natural parent of many Crimes.
IY. Reformation, not Destruction, ought to be the object of every
Government; because, the most desperate villains are human still,
and, with judicious treatment, susceptible of Reformation.
Y. All human Judgements are fallible; and the mistakingly putting
Innocent persons to Death, is an indelible blot on every community
that is guilty of such irreparable enormities.
VI. Mis-government cannot cease, untill Philosophers become Legislators,
or, Legislators become Philosophers.
In 1866, notwithstanding Life is the gift of God, and for Deafh compen-
sation is utterly impossible ; still, Mr. C. still we have a Law in Victoria,
by which Human beings are Condemned ignominiously to perish on the
Gallows ; this, Sir, is an undeniable fact: but, can this intelligent auditory
approve of the longer continuance of such a brutal, savage, inhuman Law ?
If not, then, let the intellectually-minded and humanely-disposed men and
women of this Colony, who abhor Death-punishment, let them agitate the
Question, untill both'Pulpit-ministers and ministers of State acquire nobler
conceptions of the true Dignity of Man, more exalted notions of Justice,
as well as of Mercy. Let the Colonists petition the Government to do
away with the iniquity in Victoria, and thereby raise this newly-rising
country in the estimation and admiration of the wise and the good among
mankind, both here and elsewhere! Commonsense tells us, Mr. C. it can
be done; Policy tells us, it ought to be done; and Humanity tells us, it
must be done!
“ What might be done, if men were wise !
What glorious deeds, my suffering brother,
Would they unite, in love and right,
And cease their scorn of one another ?
Oppression’s heart might be imbued
With kindling drops of loving-kindness;
And knowledge pour, from shore to shore,
Light on the eyes of mental blindness.
All slavery, warfare, lies, and wrongs,
All vice and crime might die together;
And wine and corn, to each man horn,
Be free as warmth in summer weather.
The meanest wretch that ever trod,
The deepest sunk in guilt and sorrow,
Might stand erect, in Self-respect,
And share the teeming world tomorrow.
What might be Done ? This might be done,
And more than this, my suffering brother —
More than the tongue e’er said or sung,
If men were wise, and loved each other ! Mackay.


Mr. Chairman !
Ladies and Gentlemen!
No. 2.
PENNY READI NGS;
What they Unfortunately now Are,
Melbourne and its Vicinity,
What they Ougrht to Be:
namely,
No. 3.
A NEW-CHUM'S ADVICE
In tlie Senate, at tlie Bar, in the Pulpit,
or, on the Platform;
and
Hot to he despised in Eamily-circles,
where
Elegrance is preferred to Vulg*arity:
containing an
Outline of Elocution.
No. 4.
THE AGE WE LIVE IN;
SEPTTJAGEN AEI AN.
Robert Bell, Machine Printer, 97 B, Little Collins Street, East, Melbourne,
tl&l-jo
fl 3 (OZ
I have spoken as to persons of understanding,
Judge ye what I have said!
Institutions for Elevating* tlie Uneducated-masses.
to
Public Speakers and Public Readers;
whether «
To be had of any Bookseller. The Trade supplied with these Pamphlets, by
Mr. George Robertson, Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.


1508
01846430


