

STEAM CLIPPER,
. ■ . r -i|l
' <’ 5
OCTOBER 26th, ‘ 1859.
.. -¥ r :. 'A /..A
• - !<■ '...wl
BY A. &J.K. • r:&
- -- , ■ - i* -&*
DUBLIN:—M‘GL A SHAN & GILL, ’
50, UPPER SACKV1LLK STREET; W®
JOSEPH HOLLAED, 9, HAME-STKEET.
ON HER PASSAGE FROM AUSTRALIA TO LIVERPOOL 3


Xo Australian Gold
In Old Welsh Wreck
LONDON, Dec. 21 (A.A.P.). —A 100-year-old sunken
treasure of an estimated £500,000 worth of Australian gold
should no longer lure treasure hunters, * group of amateur
frogmen decided yesterday.
The frogmen spent twoitelling tales about the during a long dive, says
daas investigating the sunken treasure. “The Times.”
wreck of 'the Royalj They told of relatives Visibility was only about
Charier, shys “The; who had dived over the two feet, the diver said,
limes” jwreck in low spring tide He reported that all that
. , and had seen chests full ofifemained were two lines of
Bound lor I.ivcipool fiom,„ 0 | den sover eigns, and ofVon ribs which appeared to
lie Australian goldfields*. (armcrs . wjves who attached to Ihe keel
lie Kowii Charter sank off| cha[Ked t 0 wa lk along th e!buried in the sand,
the rocks at yiocl.re. Nor hj beach near the wreck and j '.lnspection of the wreck
Wales, on Dctobci J 7. 1859,j had returned h ome withjd'spelled any hopes of quick
wilh the loss ol more than| lhe j r aprons bulging with r 'riies. Divers were not able
dO n locs. L 0 id coins. lo dig into the sand,
andi Inspection of the wreck
wjdvdispelled any hopes of quick
with riches. Divers were not able
to dig into the sand,
People living aroundd .... , , . All
i.Moellrc stood shivering J Ihe most experienced of Derby
raincoats and ruhher boots :*hc divers found the re- Associ
watching Ihc divers and re-lmains of the ship yesterday Clubs.
All are members of Ihc
Derby branch of the British
Association of Sub-Aqua


Wff J'ERGUSON CoLLECTlOfCA*?
|| Xationa!. Library" |S


. /'. - '''' jdy|||g^k
. 3
......„-t-;-r- -■- • VSHT .
+ -
"<X.
■ |n~‘-
”■ ••■ -*-..«_■. , : ■ -‘•jL. .
-iMU ** j-j •_
’**<«•
JLft» '
t- _ ,.;..' ;,t * , * !^4 a g; ■
*«*f
\
J DOllARD LITH DUBLIN
THE
«REC
K AT LOW WATER
m


AN AUTHENTIC ACCOUNT
WRECK
‘ROYAL CHARTER” STEAM CLIPPER,
OK HER PASSAGE FROM AUSTRALIA TO LIVERPOOL,
OCTOBER 26th, 1859;
WITH AN INTERESTING ADDITION OF SUBSEQUENT
EVENTS AND INCIDENTS,
WRITTEN DURING A RESIDENCE AT MOELFKA, THE SCENE Of
THE CATASTROPHE.
WITH ENGRAVINGS.
A. & J. K.
DUBLIN;
M'GLASHAN & GILL,
50, UPPER SACKVILLE STREET;
JOSEPH HOLLAED,
S, DAME STREET.


PRINTED };!' JOSEPH BOLLARD, 9, DAME STREET, BERLIN.


(z - 7 DEC- 1993
Chapxee I. —T' r c Wreck at Mofi.fr a.
ll.—lntelligence of the Wreck at Livehi-001.
111. —Coroner's Inquest at Llanali.g-o.
IV. —Official Inquiry at Liverpool.
V.—Captain Taylor.
VI. —Pakticclap.s of Unclaimed Bodies from hie Regis-
ters of cue Ret. S. I!. Hughes of Llanallco. and
the Putt. H. Hughes, of Penbhos Lr-i&ws.
Vll.—Particulars of Remains Identified and Claimed.
VIII. —Mr. Bradbury’s
Careiv Tailor’s Account
of the Wreck.
IX. —Visitors to Sloelfra in Search of their Friends’
Remains.
X.—The Divers.
XT. —News of the Wreck at Ai strati \


PREFACE.
The following pages are designed to present, in a truth-
ful form, the most striking incidents connected with the
wreck of the Eoyal Charter; and, we think, we have
not performed a task unacceptable to that portion of
the public who were bereaved of friends and relatives
by that deplorable catastrophe, in thus having detailed
many events of interest which a six weeks’ sojourn in
the vicinity of Moelfra, immediately after the wreck,
gave us an opportunity of witnessing. We have also
collected and inserted all the authentic accounts which
appeared, at different periods, through the medium of
the public journals; and though the press, in announcing
the disaster of the wreck, deplored it as a national
calamity, and one of the saddest that for years had been
their painful province to chronicle, still, we think, an-
other record of that tragedy is due to the memory of
those who perished—one apart from worldly claims—-
and prompted by this desire, we have ventured to narrate
“ their travels history ” in a page to which, we trust,
undivided attention may be accorded, as a last tribute


of respect to the memory which survives the earthiv
dissolution of those, whose fate, must ever awaken emo-
tions of the tenderest sympathy and regret, and whose
remains, we grieve to add, now lie entombed beneath
the treacherous seas of their native country.
“ Thou can’st not name one tender tie,
But there, dissolved, its relics lie."
April 21st, 1860.


XAEKA'iTYE OF THE WRECK.
CHAPTER 1.
“But no mortal power shall now
That crew and vessel save :
They are shrouded as they go
in a hurricane of snow.
And the track beneath her prow
Is their grave.”
On-the 26th of August, 1859, the “Royal Charter”
steamship, registered 2,719 tons burthen, furnished with
auxiliary engines of 200 horse-power, steamed out of
Hobson's Bay, Victoria, bound for Liverpool. She
was equipped with her full complement of officers and
crew, commanded by Captain Taylor, who had gained
for her golden opinions, by his previous rapid and suc-
cessful voyage, having accomplished the passage from
Liverpool to Melbourne in fifty-nine, days; and who
now, in charge of 400 passengers, and a consignment of
gold valued at half-a-million sterling, proudly looked
forward to completing his triumph by lauding his pre-
cious freight of life and property in Liverpool, within
the same period which had been occupied in his transit
from that port to Melbourne.
Several families, comprising some of the most wealthy'
in the colony, gladly availed themselves of the oppor-
tunity this noble vessel offered to return to their native
laud; and we do not hear, up to the hour of her arrival


off Queenstown, that any one on board had reason to
regret the predilection they had made in her favour. It
is true, an iceberg is reported to have approached the
ship rather close, when rounding Cape Horn, but the
passengers were only made acquainted with this danger
when it no longer menaced them; and a stronger proof
of the satisfaction existing on board could scarcely be
advanced, than the fact of a testimonial having been
presented by the passengers to Captain Taylor on the
24th of October, when the Eoyal Charter lay at anchor
about twenty miles off the Cove of Cork.
While in sight of the Irish coast, many of the elated
passengers wrote to their friends, announcing their' safe
arrival. Their letters were dispatched by the Petrel
pilot-boat, and several telegrams also communicating
the same glad tidings to different parts of the United
Kingdom.
Thirteen of those who had shared the pleasures and
perils of the journey across the great deep, availed them-
selves, likewise, of this means of landing, though, owing
to the calm that pervaded both sea and land, the pilot-
boat did not succeed in reaching Queenstown until the
following day, the 25th of October.
We need scarcely observe that all on board the Eoyal
Charter were animated by the hope of arriving safe at
Liverpool, from the circumstance of not a breath dis-
turbing the waters when she steamed off the shores of
Ireland. “ The coming event cast no shadow before it!”
Off Bardsey, the master of the United Kingdom steam-
tug, solicited Captain Taylor, to give eleven riggers a free
passage to Liverpool, as they wanted to get home; Captain


Taylor assented, and these unfortunate men participated
in the dreadful disaster that ensued. Holyhead was next
passed and distinguished in the distance, without claim-
ing any particular attention from those on board, and.
yet, this was the last view that 500 souls were permit-
ted to behold of “ the promised land,” after their hope-
ful wanderings through the great wilderness of the deep!
Night approached—an Egyptian darkness reigned. The
wind, which had been freshening in the earlier part of
the day, now burst with uncontrollable fury over the
devoted ship. The captain signalled for a pilot off the
Skerries, and also when off Point Lynas, but was forced
to proceed without one; for no pilot-boat dare venture
amid the breakers in the darkness of that terrible night.
It was now eleven o’clock, p.rn., and the vessel was
becoming unmanagable. The captain made an attempt
to stay the ship, by bracing the yards the other way
and squaring them, but she resisted all efforts. The
port anchor was then let go, and one hundred fathoms
of chain cable paid out. Shortly after, the starboard
anchor was let go, and seventy fathoms of chain; these
succeeded in checking the vessel until 1-30, a.m., -when
the port chain parted. Orders were then given to get
up the stream anchor; but while this was doing the
starboard cable also parted, and immediately after the
vessel grounded.
The storm had now lashed the sea into mountainous bil-
lows, which threatened every moment to overwhelm the
labouring ship. The officers and crew resorted to every
means which the skill of an experienced commander
could devise, for the preservation of life and property.


The lofty masts were at last cut down and swept away, and
owing to the falling debris, several lives were sacrificed,
which obliged all but the officers and crew to keep
below. Guns of distress were fired, and blue lights sent
up; but the voice of the booming tempest was louder
than their signals for aid; and the fire of the rockets was
extinguished by the waves that with ungovernable rage
broke over the decks, and even penetrated into the
saloon beneath.
The hurricane increased in violence, and the waters
in strife. The helpless vessel struggled in the grasp of
those two mighty combatants; but her last fight was
soon fought. A tremendous sea, sweeping past, forced
her from where she grounded, and, in a few seconds
after, the vanquishing elements laid her prostrate on the
rocks.
The concussion, when she struck the shelving stone,
was the first fearful intimation the passengers had of
their immediate danger, though they all had been up
and dressed for at least two hours previously. The
assurances of the captain that he would land them all
in safety betrayed them into a sense of false security.
But, now, a scene of indescribable consternation
ensued. Children, screaming, clung to their agonized
mothers; husbands, who could no longer affect com-
posure, took a last embrace of despairing wives. The
Rev. Mr. Hodge, who had acted as their chaplain on
the voyage, begged them all to join in fervent prayer,
and employ their last moments in preparing for another
world; but the pious man’s appeal to heaven was inter-
rupted, by the force of the winds and the waves; the


latter deluging the saloon where they were congregated.
At this crisis the captain again appeared, and by hi?
self-possession and fearless bearing succeeded in esta-
blishing order, confidently declaring that the receding
tide was favouring his intentions of landing them all,
when daylight gave him an opportunity of doing so,
with safety.
Who may now determine whether hope was en-
couraged or despair succumbed to by that terror-struck
group, during the intervening hours of darkness ? The
accounts of the survivors do not harmonize. Some
declare that, up to the fatal moment when the vessel
parted, the passengers were sanguine as to their safety;
while others maintain that, from the period she first
struck against the rocks, indescribable alarm ensued.
We are justified in assuming the latter to be the correct
report, from the distressing scene with which the name
of the Rev. Mr. Hodge is so touchingly associated.
The morning of the 26th of October, 1859, slowly broke
over the coast of Anglesea, revealing a scene of wild
and terrible interest —about a mile from the life-boat
house of Moelfra, and five of Point Lynas, on a ledge
of limestone rock, the Royal Charter was wrecking.
Some of the Welsh labourers, early in pursuit of -work,
passing the cliffs near Dulas Bay, were the first to
witness the work of destruction, and, hastening to the
village for assistance, spread the alarm, and soon the
rocks were crowded with peasants all eager, but unable
to render assistance. No boat could live in such a
tumultuous sea; the stupendous waves lashed the dis-
masted ship, and the gale raged with such unnatural


strength, that pieces of rock, some fourteen tons in
weight, were forced from the sands, and hurled upon
the shores of Moclfra.
Every moment the horrified spectators expected to
see the waves burying in their depths the wrecking ves-
sel, and more intense became their terror and excitement,
when they beheld a man let himself down from the decks
by a rope into the midst of the breakers.
This was the heroic Joseph Eogers, who volunteered
to swim with a hawser to shore, and who, though three
times driven back by the hissing floods, nobly persevered
in his mission of mercy, and succeeded in making fast
the rope to the rock—now the only means that re-
mained of landing those on board the Eoyal Chatter.
Sixteen of the crew, with the assistance of the villagers,
effected their escape by this frail bridge, and remained
to work it, having received instructions from Captain
Taylor to do so. Every arrangement was completed for
the women and children’s transit to shore ; daylight was
fully developed, it being now seven o’clock, a.m., and
the command was given for the ladies to come on deck,
but as speedily negatived; they were ordered to remain
in the saloon for ten or fifteen minutes longer, and this
time, so precious, was employed by the chief officer, Mr.
Stevens, in urging a woman, a third class passenger, to
go on shore, by what is nautically termed the boatswain’s
chair. Most probably this noble-hearted man thought,
that, unless the ladies had an example to inspire courage,
they would never avail themselves of this perilous pas-
sage, but, failing in his humane exertions, the command
was repeated for the ladies to come on deck; but just as


they passed down the saloon, obedient to the order, the
vessel was propelled by the storm with such terrific force
against the rocks, that she parted in two; and as the
death-dirging billows swept through her, many a despair-
ing cry was heard mingling with the voice of the tempest,
and many a gentle form was seen shrouded with the
white surge of the waves, before the dark volume of
water, rolling past, buried it in the abysses of the deep
for ever.
The survivors of that awful moment, with almost
supernatural energy, clung to the floating spars and every
piece of available timber; but the ruthless breakers
dashed them with murderous force against the projecting
rocks k where they must have perished also, had not the
villagers extended their hands indifferent to the exist-
ing danger, and assisted the poor exhausted victims in
their last struggle to reach land. Yet, alas ! how few
were the conquerors in that battle for life—4Bo souls had
been suddenly launched into eternity! and the stately
vessel, that had thirty-six hours before glided in majestic
beauty over the silvery waters of the Irish coast, now
lay a helpless ruin on the shores of Anglesea—her frag-
ments the sport of the devastating winds, and her precious
freight of life, “ unooffined and unknelled,” committed to
the friendless mausoleums of the deep.


CHAPTER 11.
While tills appalling scene was witnessed from the
cliffs of Moelfra, another ,of painful interest occurred at
Liverpool. On the landing stage, where the Royal
Charter was hourly expected, relatives had assembled to
welcome their long absent friends; fathers had come
from distant parts of England to meet their children;
husbands were seen anxiously watching to catch the
Erst glimpse of faithful wives; brothers impatient to
embrace the companions of their early days —all un-
conscious of the dreadful truth. The violence of the
gale the preceding day had damaged the telegraphic
wires, and intelligence of the awful catastrophe was not
communicated to the public until the following morning,
the 27th of October, 1859.
The news of this lamentable tragedy produced an
overwhelming gloom throughout the United Kingdom;
like a death knell the fatal tidings rung through every
town and village, and the bereaved in numbers hastened
to Moelfra to seek for the remains of those whose pre-
sence, but the day previous, they had hoped to enjoy
amid the bright throng of the living.
The sea had given up thirty-six of its dead, and, side
by side, they were laid in the little church of Llanallgo,
which is situated about two miles from the scene of the
tragedy. Stalwart seamen, models of manly strength
and vigour, lay like felled forest trees on the floor of


that friendly sanctuary; women and children, too, were
sleeping their last sleep under the same protecting roof.
All was silent within, hut without there was the sound
of busy hands already at work. The fresh green turf
of the churchyard was displaced, and narrow beds were
forming low in the earth for those who had been claimed.
The sea continued, though reluctantly, to cast up its
victims, and every day brought from distant towns and
provinces sorrowing friends in search of their lost re-
latives.
The Rev, Mr. Hughes, the rector of Llanallgo, had a
trying task to perform, not only that of consigning “dust
to dust, ” but also, of ministering to the living, comfort-
ing the fatherless children and widows, and sheltering
the desolate and oppressed. His amiable wife and sisters-
in-law, the Miss Mosdales, imposed on themselves the
painful task of examining the dead, ornaments, clothing,
and even the type of the mutilated face was faithfully
noted and preserved, thus relieving many a heart-broken
pilgrim to that scene of woe, from a further and severer
trial of their fortitude.
Had not the practised and accomplished hand of Mr.
Dickens already familiarised the public with the self-
devotion of the rector of Llanallgo, and his household,
we might have endeavoured, though we know how im-
perfectly, to record their merits in these pages; but
cannot conclude our brief notice of a family so eminent
for their Christian virtues, without expressing our grati-
fication at the opportunity afforded us by Mr. Dickens
of selecting such passages from his popular periodical
as relates to the rector of Llanallgo, where our readers


shall not see darkly through the glass the distant view
of a priest and king, but find themselves transferred to
holy ground, close to the “ little church where so many
were so strangely brought together,” and face to face
with the man of God.
Mr. Dickens, after describing his visit to the wreck,
thus refers to Mr. Hughes :
“ I had heard of that clergyman as having buried many scores
of the ship-wrecked people ; of his having opened his house and
ins heart to their agonized friends; of his having used a most
sweet and patient diligence for weeks and weeks in the perform-
ance of the forlomest offices that man can render to his kind ;
of Ids having most tenderly and thoroughly devoted himself to
the dead, and to those sorrowing for the dead. I had said to
myself, ‘ In the Christmas season of the year, I should like to see
that man,’ and he had swung the gate of his little garden in
coming out to meet me not half-an-hour ago
He had the church keys in his hand, and opened the churchyard
gate, and opened the church door, and we went in.
‘‘lt is a little church of great antiquity; there is reason to
believe that some church has occupied the spot these thousand
years or more. The pulpit was gone, and other things usually
belonging to the church were gone, owing to its living congre-
gation having deserted it for the neighbouring schoolroom, and
yielded it up to the dead
“Forty-four shipwrecked men and women lay here at one
time awaiting burial. Here, with weeping and wailing in every
room of his house, my companion worked alone for hours,
solemnly surrounded by eyes that could not see him, and by lips
that could not speak to him, patiently examining the tattered
clothing, cutting off buttons, hair, marks from linen, anything
that might lead to subsequent identification, studying faces,
looking for a sear, a bent finger, a crooked toe, comparing
letters sent to him with the ruin about him.
“ The ladies of the clergyman’s family (his wife and two


sisters-in-law) came in among the bodies often—it grew to be
the business of their lives to do so. Any new arrival of a
bereaved woman would stimulate their pity to compare the
description brought with the dread realities. Sometimes they
would go back able to say, ‘ I have found him,’ or, 4 1 think she
lies thereperhaps the mourner, unable to bear the sight of
all that lay in the church, would be led in blindfold. Conducted
to the spot with many compassionate words, and encouraged to
look, she would say with a piercing cry, ‘ This is my boy,’ and
drop insensible on the insensible figure. From the church we
passed out into the churchyard. Here there lay, at that time,
one hundred and forty-five bodies that had come ashore from
the wreck. He had buried them, when not identified, in graves
containing four each. He had numbered each body in a register,
describing it, and had placed a corresponding number on each
coffin and over each grave. Identified bodies he had buried
singly in private graves, in another part of the churchyard.
“ The cheerful earnestness of this good Christian minister was
as consolatory as the circumstances out of which it shone were
sad. I never have seen anything more delightfully genuine than
the calm dismissal, by himself and his household, of all they
bad undergone, as a simple duty that was quietly done and
ended. In speaking of it, they spoke of it with great compas-
sion for the bereaved, but laid no stress upon their own hard
share in those weary weeks, except as it had attached many
people to them as friends, and elicited many touching expres-
sions of gratitude. This clergyman’s brother—himself the
clergyman of two adjoining parishes, who had buried thirty-
four of the bodies in his own churchyard, and who had done to
them all that his brother, as to the larger number—must be un-
derstood as included in the family. He was there with his neatly-
arranged papers, and made no more account of his trouble than
anybody else did. Down to yesterday’s post, outward, my clergy-
man, alone, had written 1,075 letters to relatives and friends of
the lost people. In the absence of. all self-assertion, it was only
through my now and then delicately putting a question as the


occasion arose, that I became informed of these things. It was
only when I had remarked again and again in the church on the
awful nature of the scene of death he had been required so
closely to familiarise himself with for the soothing of the living,
that he had casually said, without the least abatement of his
cheerfulness—indeed, it had rendered him unable for a time to
eat or drink more than a little coffee, now and then, and a piece
of bread. ‘ Had I lost the friend of my life in the wreck of the
Eoyal Charter; had I lost my betrothed —the more than friend
of my life, —had I lost my maiden daughter—had I lost my hope-
ful boy —had I lost my little child—l would kiss the hand that
worked so busily and gently in the church, and say, ‘ None better
could have touched the form, though it had lain at homel
could be sure of it; I could be thankful for it; I could be content
to leave the grave near the house the good family pass in and
out of every day, undisturbed in the little churchyard, where so
many are so strangely brought together.”
We feel happy in being able to announce that the
friends of the rev. gentleman, whom Mr. Dickens has
made such honourable mention of, are at present re-
ceiving subscriptions, with the pleasing object of pre-
senting him, and his brother and fellow-labourer, the
Eev. Hugh Hughes, with a testimonial, expressive of
their gratitude for their united care of, and attention to,
the remains of the passengers who perished in the wreck
of the Eoyal Charter; and also as an acknowledgment
of the hospitable and kind-hearted reception accorded
to the friends of the lost, by the inmates of Llauallgo
Eectory.


CHAPTER 111.
Oh the 2nd of November, 1859, the little sohoolhouse
of Llanallgo parish presented a scene of unusual ex-
citement. Mr. H. Jones, the Coroner of Anglesea, se-
veral of the district magistrates, and a respectable jury,
assembled within its primitive walls, to institute an in-
quiry into the cause of the wreck of the Royal Charter,
and the consequent death of the crew and passengers.
Mr. Tyndall Bright, in coming forward, said he had
collected all the witnesses whom he thought could give
any valuable information on the subject of the present
painful inquiry. First and second-class passengers were
ready to give their evidence, also several of the crew.
Mr. Mellar was in attendance for Messrs. Gibbs and
Bright, the owfters. Mr. Henry Morse, saloon passen-
ger, was the first examined. He said—“ I was a pas-
senger on board the Royal Charter; she sailed from
Melbourne the 26th of August; there were about sixty-
four saloon passengers and about three hundred second
and third-class ; at no time was the vessel slow in sailing,
or any other respect, up to the time of the wreck; we
saw the Irish coast on Monday morning; we put thirteen
passengers on shore by the pilot-boat, when we were oil
Cork; no passengers were landed at Holyhead; the
wind was blowing fresh, and, I think, against us, while
passing that port; we passed two or three lighthouses ;
the storm continued to increase until it blew a perfect
b 2


hurricane ; the ship was drifting, when the anchors were
let go, in sight of Point Lynas, at twelve; I had no
conversation with the captain, hut I saw him; I heard
no one making any remonstrance with him about turn-
ing back to go into harbour; I saw him giving directions
up to five o’clock; after that I was not after on deck ;
there was nothing wrong with the machinery or screw
after the anchors were let go, that I was aware of; guns
were fired and rockets sent up, until daybreak ; Wed-
nesday morning she struck on the rooks, about three
o’clock; the first shock was a slight one; she broke up
about seven o’clock ; one of the seamen took a hawser
on shore; I saved myself by swfimming; the captain
came into the saloon and told the ladies there was no
danger—they "would be able to walk on shore.”
The Coroner—“ Was Captain Taylor sober then?”
Witness —“ Perfectly sober.”
Coroner—“ Had you seen him intoxicated before ?”
Witness—“ Never, during the whole Voyage, nor any
of his ship’s officers. Captain Withers and Captain
Taylor had a consultation about the ship ; the former
told the ladies they were on a sandy beach; Captain
Taylor was cool and collected; he did not dine with ns
on that Tuesday.”
Mr. Carew Taylor, examined. He said—“ I concur
in the evidence given by Mr. Morse. Up to the time of
onr arriving off Cork, some of the passengers were sent
on shore by a pilot-boat; while at dessert, on Tuesday,
one of the stewards came and asked me, ‘ Should I like
to see the Great Eastern’—this tvas about five o’clock; —
the vveather was foggy, and it was blowing almost a


gale. I do not recollect seeing Captain Taylor on deck ;
I saw him in the saloon after the vessel struck; he was
assuring the ladies they would get on shore, and I saw
him on deck when I jumped over hoard; he had a rope;
round his waist and a log tied to it. I said, ‘ Oh!
Captain, what a fearful state of things this is!’ Be
made no reply. When I was in the sea, I caught hold
of a log of wood, on which there was a mainyard; three
times I was washed off it; I clung to weeds on the rocks;
twice I was washed away from them with the weeds in
my hands; the third time I was caught by the points
of my fingers by three men and saved; but my little
daughter and nurse were lost. Captain Taylor was
perfectly sober; I never saw him intoxicated; 1 have
frequently invited him to drink something, but he
always declined; if I thought he was not sober, it is un-
likely I should have gone to bed, leaving all my pro-
perty unprotected; I never heard such an imputation
•cast on his character until after the accident; I went to
bed at eleven o’clock; I was roused by some one saying
‘ I will take your child;’ there was some answer to this,
when Captain Withers said, c No, there is no time to be
lost.’ I got up and felt the vessel as if rubbing along
the ground, and then there were several violent con-
cussions ; this was about half-past two o’clock; I dres-
sed myself, and went into the upper saloon, and found
the passengers in the greatest state of consternation.
Wr. Hodge, the clergyman, was there, and they were all
at prayer together; I heard the captain telling the ladies
•they would get on shore; I went to look for my child
■and nurse, and, after much difficulty, eventually found


them; I saw Captain Taylor knocked down three or
four times on deck; everyone was knocked down in the
same manner by the force of the wind; I never heard
anyone suggest to the captain that we should turn back
to Holyhead harbour; it struck me we were going very
slowly all the day. I never heard that there w r as a
difficulty in steaming the ship; I saw two rockets let off
between seven and eight in the evening—these, I under-
stood, were signals for pilots. Before the accident, we
were ordered down into the lower saloons, while the
masts were cutting down.”
Mr. Thomas Grundy, examined —“ I have heard the
evidence of the two previous witnesses, and agree in
what they have said. The Eoyal Charter arrived off
Queenstown about half-past twelve at noon, on Monday;
we arrived at Holyhead between four and five on
Tuesday evening; a gun was fired about 10; we did not
apprehend danger until the anchor was let go; I saw
Captain Taylor on deck at 10 o’clock, he was giving
orders and attending to his duties; I never saw him the
least intoxicated; I can only account for the accident
from the violence of the hurricane ; I believe the screw
was in perfect working order; I cannot say how far the
ship was from the shore when the anchors were let go;
Point Lynas Light was just over the stem ; she parted
from her first anchor about two o’clock, and, I think,
struck about three; she began to break up at seven;
the captain was on deck from ten a.m., Tuesday night,
until half-past one on Wednesday morning, when he
came down to order coffee; he was then called up by the
mate, and came down again at four; he tried to soothe


the ladies, and said, ‘ When daylight came, all would be
well; ’ I swam to shore about ten minutes after she
broke in two; Ido not think any more could have been
done to have saved the ship than was done ; I heard a
remark made that if her masts had been cut away before
her anchors were put down, it would have been better,
but I am convinced from what I saw of Captain Taylor,
that he was quite sober and capable of managing the
vessel in the emergency; it was pitch dark when the
ship struck; I believe if it had been daylight, all the
passengers and crew would have been saved, as opera-
tions could have commenced sooner with the hawser or
other means.”
The next witness was Mr. J. Russell, but as his testi-
mony corresponded with the former witness, it is un-
necessary recording it.
Mr. Gapper, examined—-in addition to the evidence
adduced, stated—“ That several of the passengers wished
to see the Great Eastern, but, that the captain’s reply
was, ‘You may site her, but I must not stand away for
it, as I want to get home.’ ”
The next witness examined was George Suaicar, a
Maltese; he was boatswain’s mate on board the Royal
Charter; after describing her course from Queenstown
to Point Lynas, and her getting aground, he said'—-“We
could see nothing where she grounded; two hours after-
wards she went on the rocks, and about two hours from
that she broke in two. During the time she was on the
rocks there was no possibility of sending a rope on
shore—this was owing to the darkness; as soon as we
could see, Rogers succeeded in bringing the rope to


shore, at the same time 1 was trying to swim on shore
with a smaller line; I did not succeed, and was hauled
on board again; the villagers made the hawser fast to
the rocks, and sixteen were saved by it; I think it took
an hour to send those on shore ; everything was done
to save life ; I saw Captain Taylor all the night giving
directions; he was perfectly sober; I received orders
from him myself during the night; in my hearing none
of the passengers asked him to turn back after the storm
increased; I did not apprehend danger of life until she
parted her cables; I have been twenty-two years at sea ;
I heard orders giving by the captain to stay her, in
order to put her about: we first of all tried her under
s-team by bracing the afteryards on the starboard tack,
she came up so far to the wind, that the wind drove her
head off again; we made a second attempt, we braced
the afteryards the way they were before, and squared
up the headyard to keep her up to the wind, but the
force of the storm sent her head off again; we tried her
with the lower maintopsail; a ship under a heavy gale
of wind, can never stay; Ido not know the course
between Holyhead and Liverpool; the first signal off
P oint Lynas, w r as for a pilot-boat; the wind after that
got to the east, and was veering them to the north and
north-east; the lead was cast before we came to Point
Lynas; the anchors were let go in ten fathoms; the
captain was on the forecastle-deck when the first anchor
was let go; we tried to lire again when off the rooks,
but the gun was full of water; the captain sent me to
the chief engineer to tell him to give her as much steam
as he could, as he was going to try to make the ship


stay; the sailors were sent on shore to work the hawser;
I never heard any one ask the masts to be cut away
before they were. [Here an altercation arose between
Mr. Mellor and witness, the former stating that Suaicar
had positively asserted to him that several had begged
the masts to be cut down, and had urged the captain
himself to do so.] This Suaicar denied, but admitted
having asked the second officer, in the captain’s presence,
if the rigging should be cut away, when the captain said,
‘ No, my lad, not yet; ’ Suaicar also denied ever having
said the captain was drunk, and insisted on Mr. Mellor,
being under a mistake in pointing him out as one who
fabricated falsehood; I saw the captain standing bv
the steam-telegraph, and I met the chief officer, Mr.
Stevens, with a lead line in his hand ; he said— £ Suaicar,
if I could swim, I would take this line on shore; will you
swim with it ?’ I said ‘ I would do anything to save life
three of the villagers came down from the rocks as close
to the sea as they could to try and catch the line which
,Mr. Stevens threw, but it failed to reach them; it was
washed out of his hand, and we were nearly washed
overboard with it.”
The next witness was William Foster.—“ I was car-
penter on board the Eoyal Charter; nothing w r rong
occurred to the ship from the time we left Melbourne
until we reached Point Lynas; on this coast the wind
was right ahead ;as we came from Holyhead.we were
obliged to put out signals at Point Lynas for a pilot,
and then signals of distress ; an attempt was made to
take the vessel out to sea, by bracing the afteryards ;


some time after I saw them trying to put her about,
and bracing the foreyards; I lent a hand to set the
lower maintopsail; the port anchor was let go about
eleven o’clock; she would not hold on, but was dragging
all this time ; the vessel was steaming, and the captain
was on deck giving directions; she parted the first chain
between three and four on Wednesday morning; she
did not ground until she parted both chains; we cut
away the mainmast before she gave way ; she broke
right off at the main hatch; previous to this a line had
been got ashore, and sixteen were saved; those were a
portion of the crew; more could have been saved by
it, only for delay incurred by a female on the forecastle,
who hesitated about going on the hawser; I went my-
self ; a great many were on the forecastle, but a heavy
sea broke over the starboard bow, and swept about
seventy away; during the whole time we were trying to
wear and stay the ship; the captain was on board, and
was perfectly sober; I have been several voyages at sea;
considering the gale that night, I do not think the
captain could have done more to have saved the ship;
we took soundings; the lead was going all the night—
both hand and deep sea leads; —lt was my duty to see
the vessel made no water—she made none after she just
grounded—not until she steered round on the rocks;
we fired guns, and had torches made of oakum, and
dipped in turpentine; I assisted to cut away the masts;
we first cut away all the rigging; an attempt was made
to get another hawser on shore, but we did not succeed;
it was just then she parted across the main-hatch; every-


thing had been prepared to get the passengers on shore ;
it was for that purpose tire crew were first sent on the
hawser to work it.”
Thomas Griffith —“I was one of the crew of the Royal
Charter; nothing occured to the ship until we passed
Point Lyuas; it blew very fresh from six o’clock on
Tuesday morning ;■ the vessel was then outside the Sker-
ries ; we made signals for a pilot; I don’t understand
navigation, but from my knowledge of the course, I
should say the ship was on her right course; we lost
sight of Point Lynas before we let go the first anchor,
and that was about eleven p.m.; she first struck about
three; the captain tried to stay the vessel several times,
but could not—she was too light, and the wind -was
blowing too hard. She had ballast enough when she left
Melbourne, but she lightened as we used the coal; she
did not steam all the way; I cannot say whether there
was anything wrong on the part of the captain.”
The coroner, in addressing the jury, observed that if
they were satisfied as to the sobriety of the captain, it
would not be necessary to examine the steward on that
point. The jury said they were perfectly satisfied Cap-
tain Taylor was sober, and in their verdict expressed
their opinion that he had done all in his power to save
the ship and the lives of the passengers.
While the coroner’s inquest was proceeding at Llan-
allgo, the philantrophic were making an appeal to the
British public in behalf of the widows and orphans left
destitute by the disastrous wreck of the Royal Charter,
and from the libe’ral subscriptions which we have since


seen acknowledged, wo feel justified in expressing our
confidence as to its ultimate success.
An appeal so well worthy the attention of the benevo-
lent and humane, is sure to claim their sympathy and
assistance: “ Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of
the least of these, ye have done it unto me.”


CHAPTEE IV.
The next inquiry which was instituted respecting the
circumstances attending the loss of the Koyal Charter,
was an official one directed by the Board of Trade, and
commenced November Ist, 1859, in St. George’s Hall,
Liverpool, before Captain Harris, the nautical assessor,
and Mr. Mansfield, magistrate, of Liverpool.
As we give the full official report on the evidence
adduced during the investigation, we think it unneces-
sary to give the examination of the witnesses in detail.
The following extract we make from Mr. O’Dowd’s
eloquent address to the court: —
“It has been my painful task to have acted in a similar
capacity upon very many other occasions during the last four
years ; but never in the course of my experience, and, I venture
to say, in the memory of man, has an event occurred so dis-
tressing in its character, or so lamentable for the extent of its
sacrifices and losses, as the event which we are now about to
investigate.”
In speaking of Captain Taylor, Mr. O’Dowd thus ex-
presses himself:—
“ It is with extreme reluctance that I would throw out the
slightest imputation upon his memory, or that I would ask this
court to review, in a spirit of cold censorship, his conduct as a
mariner upon the occasion. The tomb is the silence of blame;
but the interests of that community, whom I feebly represent
upon this occasion, demand that the conduct of Captain Taylor
should be investigated; and mutilated and buried though he
may now lie in his watery grave, I apprehend that it is the duty
and province of this court to scrutinize his acts, as far as any


light can he thrown upon them, with the same stem regard for
truth and for justice, and with the same anxiety for the public
interests, that it would do if Captain Taylor, instinct with life
and wdth professional pride, were here in court seeking to pro-
tect that commission which authorises him to pursue his high
profession.”
EXAMINATION OF OWEN WILLIAMS.
Owen Williams said—“ I -was a quartermaster on
board the Royal Charter; Ido not remember when she
came abreast at Holyhead. In the forenoon of Tuesday,
it was my watch from eight to twelve, and I was at the
wheel from ten until half-past twelve; I then went be-
low, and came on deck again at four o’clock, remaining
there until six; David Strong was at the wheel during
this time, and I was making up signals to hoist for
Holyhead, and performing other duties; I took the
wheel at eight o’clock, when I again came on deck, and
the course given me was east by south; there were only
the fore and aft sails on when I took the -wheel; 1 saw
the maintopmast staysail and spanker; I don’t know
what they had forward, as my duties confined me aft; I
remained at the wheel until twenty-five minutes to twelve
o’clock, but, before I left, the lower maintopsail was set.
We tried to stay the ship at this time by bracing the yards
the other way and squaring them, but we could not
stay her; the helm was put hard to starboard; indeed,
all the time I was at the wheel wc carried a starboard
helm; no attempt w r as made to stay the ship before
eleven o’clock, when the port anchor was let go, and, a
little afterwards, the starboard anchor was also let go—
about a quarter of an hour after the other anchor. The


ship was at anchor then, and I was still at the helm,
steering the same course, with the helm hard to star-
board; she came up when the anchors were let go, E.
N., and fell off E.S.E., and S.E. and by E.; the wind
was about N.N.E.; the anchors steadied the ship, and
she did not appear to me to be driving; the screw was
kept going, and she continued in that state until the
parting of her anchor; the lower maintopsail was furled
after the anchors were let go; the spanker was brailed
up some time afterwards; from six to eight the main-
topipast staysail was reefed, and then set again; I did
not see it done, but some of the men told me it had been
done; at about a quarter-past two in the morning the
port cable gave way, and about twenty minutes past
three the ship struck upon the sand; the engines were
working all this time—up to the time of striking on the
sand. I should say it was about five o’clock when she
struck on the rocks; it was dark; I was in the forecastle
at the time; in about three-quarters of an hour after
striding on the rocks she went to pieces; some parts of
the bulwarks were washed away, and some of the spars
fell over, but she was broken up altogether in three-
quarters of an hour; I was one of those who got on
shore by means of the hawser and the boatswain’s chair;
I saw Captain Taylor, for the last time, about four
o’clock; he was then on the forepart of the poop, at-
tending to his duties; I cannot tell whether it would
have contributed to the safety of the vessel if the masts
had been cut away when the anchors were let go; there
were parties on board who knew better than me what
should be done.”


By Mr. Aspinall —“ Mr. Stevens, first mate, was for-
ward when the hawser was got on shore; he was on the
forecastle, and giving orders about the hawser; I re-
member Stevens ordering me, when the hawser was
hauled taut, to go aft and get the lady passengers, in
order that they might be sent first on shore; I -went aft
to obey the order, and the ship broke up in the middle ;
I went back to Mr. Stevens; he had charge of the haw'-
ser, and would not let anyone go; I told him the ship
had broken up, and then he left the hawser and -went
aft towards where the ladies were, and I never saw him
afterwards; he would only allow two or three men to
go on shore to haul the boatswain’s chair backward and
forward; Ido not know of any order being given to get
out a second hawser from the stem; Mr. Stevens was
most anxious to save the ladies, or he could have got
on shore by the hawser; the third officer was at the
hawser; he let the men go, and tried to get a woman
on the forecastle to get into the chair, in order that she
might get on shore, but he did not go himself; both
Mr. Stevens and Mr. Bean attended well to their duty,
and never thought of saving themselves.”
By Captain Harris—“l joined the ship on the 9th of
May; we had a fine passage out, but strong westerly
winds in coming home, all the way from Melbourne to
this side of the Cape; about fourteen days before we
saw land we experienced head winds, but I never saw
an attempt made to stay the ship at all; I believe we
had about 300 tons of coal on board when we came
into the channel; I was told we had 700 tons on leav-
ing Melbourne, but we did not use our steam until we


were on this side of Cape Horn; on Monday, after leav-
ing Queenstown, it was dead calm, and the sea as smooth
as a mill-pond; I was at the wheel when we passed
Tuskar Light, and it was about three o’clock on Tuesday
morning when we passed it: it sprang up a little breeze
then —just a little ripple on the water, with the wind
ahead ; in the afternoon, about five o’clock, it freshened
up ; when I came on deck, about six o’clock, I think
we had passed the Skerries, but there was not much
wind; if it had been fair we could have carried our
skysails; it was not a topsail wind ; it began to blow
pretty fresh about half-past nine ; I was at the wheel at
eight o’clock, steering east by south, and she was carry-
ing lee helm ; I don’t know why she was carrying slack
helm ; at eight o’clock it was a topgallant breeze, but
she did not steer well, and had to carry the lee helm ;
the wind came on like a squall at nine o’clock ; 1 can’t
tell how fast she was going after rounding the Skerries,
and between Holyhead and the Skerries ; we hove the
log, and found she was then going about six knots an
hour; all the squaiesails were bent, and all the fore and
aft sails, when we were crossing from Queenstown to
Holyhead ; there was the mainskysail-yard aloft; we
usually carried it, but had it down off Cape Horn; I
don’t think any of these sails were unbent; the ship had
only staysails, and these were all aloft, and not unbent
that afternoon ; lam quite sure of that; I came to the
wheel at eight o’clock, and remained till near twelve
o’clock; I did not leave the wheel, because the aftermen
were in the chains, and I thought I might be as well at
the wheel as at the chains; when I was at the wheel,


and after we passed the Skerries, 1 carried the helm
three parts to starboard; she came up to east once, and
I then eased the helm; the ship always steered very
well; when I went forward, about twelve o’clock, the
men were all very busy, and I could not see what sails
were set, but the head-sails were all down; I was at the
■wheel when they let go the anchor; I was in the fore-
castle when the port cable parted; it parted outside the
liawse-hole; when it parted I went aft to the poop; the
hands were all on deck; I don’t know whether any at-
tempt was made to veer on the starboard cable; I don’t
know about the starboard cable parting; there was a
barometer on board—it was fixed in the captain’s cabin;
I have never been in the captain’s cabin, but I know
the officers used to go down to look at the barometer;
I heard no remark made on the barometer that afternoon,
but there was one on board; the hawser we got ashore
was our best hawser; it was a ten-inch hawser, and
it was ready piled on the house, with the bend already
on it, to throw it on the steam-tug; a man named
Eogers took the line ashore, and fastened it under a
loose stone; the people on shore gave every assistance,
as far as I could see, but I did not see any lifeboats
about.”
John Shepherd was the next witness called. He said
—“ lam master of No. 4 pilot-boat; there are twelve
pilot-boats on the Liverpool establishment; my boat is
seventy-four tons builders’ measurement, and fifty-three
tons register; we have a mast-head light, and use the
flash every quarter of an hour; there are twelve pilot-
boats belonging to Liverpool—six being always on duty,


mul six in port. I remember Tuesday, the 2oth Octo-
ber ; I was out on that day; we were close in between
the Middle House and Puffin Island the whole of that
day and night; the weather, at 7 pan., was commencing
to blow very strong, and it increased in violence till
after eight, with rain and lightning ; at eleven p.m. the
weather was more stormy than it had been all the day
or night—it was dreadful, and at a distance of eight
feet we could not hear one another speak ; the wind was
N.E. and by E. Our lights were put out by the vio-
lence of the wind; vessels from the westward, bound
for Liverpool, seldom come up without getting a pilot ;
our lights were lit again, but they were blown out con-
tinually during the night; during the night we did not
know our position; just before daylight we sounded
twenty-five fathoms, but it was so hazy we could not
see the length of the boat; after we sounded we sighted
land, but lost it again ; at eleven a.m., the wind having
abated, we sighted Point Lynas; during the night we
lost some of our sails, and the boat, in consequence,
drifted about eight miles.”
By Mr. Aspinall —“ I have had thirty-nine years’ ex-
perience on the coast —twenty-nine as master—and dur-
ing the whole of that time never knew of such a hurricane,
the wind blowing from that point of the compass; it is
more usual for an easterly wind to back to the south
than to the north ; I never saw a heavier sea in my life-
time, and there could not be a worse place for breaking
a vessel up than where the Royal Charter grounded.”
By Captain Harris—“At five o’clock p.m., on Tuesday,
I telegraphed at Point Lynas to know if any ships were


visible, but received no answer; after eight o’clock we
lost sight of Point Lynas light, and it was so dark and
hazy that we could not see anything; with Point Lynas
lighthouse bearing about W., and for the distance of
about a mile, the anchorage ground is good holding
ground, under ordinary circumstances, but no ground
would hold on such a night as that. Our boat was
reported to have been lost.”
Eichard Parry, on being sworn, said—“ lam master
of pilot-boat No. 11, and was out on the evening of
the twenty-fifth of October last; I was at Holyhead at
three p.m.; the wind was then E.S.E.; about seven
p.m. I saw what I thought was a blue light on the lee-
quarter from a vessel four or five miles off Point Lynas;
it was reported to me at half-past six o’clock p.m. that
a rocket was seen below the Skerries ; at seven o’clock
the wind was blowing hard, and we had all the reefs
set in ; the wind commenced to blow from E. and by S.,
backing to the N. and E. by E.; the wind increased
every minute ; we lost sight of Point Lynas about eight
o’clock p.m., and saw nothing more until eleven o’clock
next day. Our boat was on her beam ends all night;
I agree with the previous witness as to the extra-
ordinary violence of the hurricane, and nobody but
those who were out in it can form any idea of its fury;
a worse place for breaking up a ship could scarcely be
found than the spot where the Eoyal Charter went
ashore.”
By Captain Harris —“ When we left Holyhead at
three p.m., on the twenty-fifth, the weather was fine ;
it was no part of my duty to leave my station and go


to the westward in the direction where the blue light
was seen; I did not expect a ship to be standing on
the tack towards the land with the wind blowing from
the point it did ; we could not have boarded a ship on
such a night; about six o’clock p.m. the barometer fell
to twenty-nine; between midnight and four o’clock on
the morning of twenty-sixth, the barometer reached
28'70 ; I did not notice at that time the state of ther-
mometer.”
Mr. William Patterson, shipbuilder of Bristol, was
next called. He said—“ I have been engaged in build-
ing both iron and wooden vessels. The Eoyal Charter
was built in April, 1855; the ship was contracted to be
built by Mr. George Cram, of Chester, for Messrs.
Charles Moore and Co., of Liverpool. After Mr. Cram
failed, and Messrs. Gibbs, Bright & Co., had purchased
her, I went down to superintend the building of her at
Sandyoroft; at the time Mr. Cram failed, the greatest
portion of the iron was on the premises; prior to that I
brought my own foreman from Bristol to look particularly
to the iron and rivetting. As the ship progressed, we
were very particular in looking to see that the iron and
rivets were particularly good. Lloyd’s rules for iron
ships were not at this time drawn up. The keel-plates
were one inch thick; the following plates were \ and
|-inch up to the turn of the bilge; the two ends, and
a length of about thirty feet, were l-16th less; the
plates opposite each tier of beams were extend-
ing 250 feet of the length of the vessel; the size of the
keel was twelve inches deep by four inches thick; the
rivets, I think, were but I am not clear on that


point; the rivets in the turn of the bilge were an
inch in diameter ; all the plates and butts were double
rivetted; the frames were eighteen inches from centre
to centre; the frames were 5-inch by S|-inch thick.
The vessel had five kelsons—one was a centre, and two
were sisfer kelsons on each side ;—the upper beam had
an angle-iron rivetted on, 3-ineh by 3by -|-mch; the
second tier of beams were 9-inoh by 5-inch, with angle-
iron rivetted on the upper edges; the upper tier of
beams were 8-inch by 9-16th, the angle-iron being the
same as the second tier, and they had two plates ex-
tended fore and aft as a stringer; the lower tier of
beams were 10-inch by There were shelves
rivetted on the ends of the beams; both middle and
upper beams were secured by these shelves and vertical
iron, and the middle tier were further secured by dia-
gonal plates rivetted; strong teak water-way pieces,
about fourteen or fifteen inches thick, were bolted down
to the beams and to the shelf-pieces. There were six
standing bulkheads—five of them water-tight, about
half-an-inch in thickness. The bulkhead at the after
part of the engines had a passage leading into the screw
tunnel; there was no door, but to meet that the tunnel
shaft was made water-tight; there was another water-
bulkhead immediately on the foreside of the sternpost;
the stuff-box was immediately before that bulkhead.
These bulkheads were put into the ship before she was
launched, and after she was designed for a screw-ship ;
they were rivetted to the angle-irons of the floor, round
the sides of the ship, to the middle deck-beam, and sup-
ported by vertical angle-irons, each two feet nine inches


apart ; the stringers passed through the angle-iron ; this
applied to the whole of the water-tight bulkheads in
the ship ; the whole of the fastenings were made of the
very best iron; I examined the iron when I undertook
to complete the vessel, and it was good ; any portion
that was defective was put aside; the stanchions were
rivetted to the kelson and to the beams. The ship was
lengthened before I took to her; she was not out in two
and lengthened; she was lengthened at her extremities;
the midship part of her and the keel were never touched ;
in point of fact, the vessel was not made one whit
weaker by being lengthened; the plates, I believe,
were ordered to be made thicker in consequence of
being lengthened ; the plates, to the best of my recol-
lection, were six feet in length, and one streak between
each set of butts; all the iron was of the very best
quality, and, in order that the rivetting might be done
well, higher wages was paid than I had ever known
to be given before. I have seen the Eoyal Charter in
dock after each voyage, with the exception of the last,
and I have never known a loose rivet in her. I can say
the same of the Great Britain, which I also built. I
am the surveyor of the Great Eastern, having been
appointed as such between the owners and the builders.
I think where there is a want of attention to keep the
rivet heads clean, they may be affected in the bilge-
water, but of late a cement has been made to prevent
decay ; I believe there is nothing better for this pur-
pose than Portland cement. The floor-plates of the
Royal Charter were twenty-six inches deep at the cen-
tre, tapering up to the size of the angle iron above the


bilge ; the engines were horizontal. At the launching
of the vessel she grounded on the sands; the highest
spring tide on the Dee is fifteen or sixteen feet; we
dug the sand from under her, and at high tide we
towed her out; she afterwards broke her main kelson
in being towed down the river Dee. She was surveyed
at Liverpool, and thoroughly overhauled, and put to
rights in the graving dock. After the accident, I ob-
served that none of her plates had parted.”
Mr. Aspinall here read a report by the surveyors of
the Eoyal Charter, relative to the injuries she had sus-
tained at the launching.
Witness—“ As the builder, I consider that the vessel,
after the accident, was quite capable of being efficiently
repaired; I have no doubt that the violence of the
weather, with the weight she carried, had the effect of
almost dividing her when she was dashed against the
rocks ; the sea would strike her on the two angles,
broadside against the rocks, and would break her just
like a stick across one’s knee; I believe the Eoyal
Charter was as strong as any ship of the date at which
she was built; the proper proportion of length to breadth
is eight times the beam, having regard to strength.”
Captain Harris remarked that the Eoyal Charter
would not come up to Lloyd’s regulations now.
Witness—“ Those regulations were not in existence
when she was built, but she would nearly come up to
them.”
Mr. Mansfield—“ In what would she fall short ?”
Witness—“ In some parts the iron would be too light,
but not much.”


By Mr. Aspinall —” When I took charge of the build-
ing of the ship, after Mr. Cram failed, I had no restriction
as to the cost, and no expense was spared in her con-
struction ; after the repairs she was as good a ship as
she was before the accident.”
Mr. Mansfield —“ Supposing the ship had been built
stronger, she would have been heavier; therefore, she
would not have existed longer on the rock ?”
Witness— “No.”
Captain Harris said—“ That if she had been built
like the floating-batteries, with plates, her very
weight itself would have broken her on the rocks.”
At half-past five o’clock the inquiry was adjourned.
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER TWENTY-FOURTH.
Mr. William Patterson, the builder of the Royal
Charter, was again put under' examination by Mr.
O’Dowd. He said—“ I did not say yesterday that the
vessel could not have been classed A. 1 at Lloyds ;
I believe she could have been classed A. 1 at the time
she was built, if the owners had so pleased; the foreman
I brought from Bristol to superintend her construction
was a competent judge of the quality of iron; both of
us examined the iron; the whole of the angle-iron
frame, floor-plates, and beam-iron were on the premises
when I took possession ; 1 cannot now form an idea of
the proportion of the iron that was rejected, but that
portion of it which would not submit to a sudden bend
was rejected; the diameter was 1| inches, which 1
consider to be sufficiently large for a ship of the magni-
tude of the Koyai Charter; I don’t think that more


beams than the number 1 mentioned yesterday wen-
required for the vessel; I also think the kelsons were
sufficiently large.”
By Mr. Aspinall—“The iron used in the construction
of the Royal Charter was boiler-plate ; before she was
purchased by Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co., I looked
her over; very little of her was then put together >
Messrs. John Penn and Co., of Greenwich, supplied the
engines, the price being £55 per horse-power, which
was a very high figure.”
The evidence was then proceeded with.
James Barry said—“l am Mr. Patterson’s foreman;
the thickness of the iron used in the bulkheads of the
Iloyal Charter was five-eighths of an inch; I heard Mr.
Patterson’s evidence yesterday, and I agree with him in
all his statements; I superintended the work under Mr.
Patterson, and was constantly on the premises; the ship
was lengthened and in frame when I joined her at Sandy-
eroft; the greatest possible pains were taken to make
her a strong ship; there were three foremen, and it
was impossible for anything defective in the iron to
escape them; she was inspected by many parties, and
I never heard any objection made to her strength; I
think the keel rivets were lg or lj-inch ; there were
strings in the wings, and diagonal plates under every
deck; indeed, it was wonderful to see the plates that
were used; there are various qualities of plate iron,
but I do not know the number.”
Mr. O’Dowd—“Now, I am not a shipbuilder, and
yet I know the number—there are six.”
Witness—“ There are various sorts of iron; we re-


jected some of the iron found on the premises, but not
much; I was in the Eoyal Charter when she grounded
at Flint; we got her to Liverpool, where she was
docked and surveyed; she had broken thirty-three or
thirty-five of her floor angle-irons; she had also bent
her keel amidships '2\ inches to a distance of about
twelve feet; the midship kelson was broken, and torn
down the two sides; some of the garboard streak butts
were strained, but not broken; the bent plates were
taken out and put into the furnace and re-set; Ido not
think any of the side-plates were taken out, as they were
not injured; the bilge kelsons, one on each side, were
put in after the accident, to strengthen her; she was
originally built with three kelsons only; four or five of
the stancheons or uprights in the midships were bent;
some of the rivets were started, but that was not general;
many of the rivets in the neighbourhood of the accident
were ‘ shaky,’ and had to be replaced; they were all
made good, and angle-irons were introduced into her
floors; Stronger plates were also put in the main kelson
for the space of thirty or forty feet; the vessel altogether
was strongly and effectually repaired; I did not see the
Eoyal Charter before she started on her last voyage; after
these repairs, and on her first voyage, she put back into
Plymouth; I superintended her repairs on that occasion;
there was then nothing the matter with the hull of the
vessel, but she leaked in her water-ways; she was not
put into the graving-dock; she was afloat; the water-
ways were caulked, and additional bolts were put in
under the direction of the surveyors.”
Mr. Aspinall here remarked, that on this occasion


the ship, in going down channel, experienced a tremen-
dous gale, and, on putting into Plymouth, it was found
that she had too much ballast, and 300 tons were taken
out by the direction of the surveyors. Mr. Aspinall
then handed to the commissioners the survey of the
damage and of the repairs.
Mr. O’Dowd—“ It was clear this ship was made all
right, otherwise she would not have received a renewal
of her certificate from the Board of Trade as a passenger
vessel.”
Captain Harrison said that his attention had been
called by a very high authority to the fact of the vessel
having put back to Plymouth on her first voyage.
Mr. Aspinall stated that on the subsequent voyages,
the defects were found to have been remedied.
Witness—“ The vessel was originally built with three
kelsons, but afterwards two were added to make her
stronger.”
Mr. Aspinall—“ Mr. Patterson is still under the im-
pression that there were five kelsons originally.”
Mr. O’Dowd —“ I believe the surveyor for the. Board
of Trade found five kelsons in 1855.”
The original specifications of the construction of the
vessel were handed in by Mr. Aspinall, from which it
appeared that the vessel was to have five kelsons.
Mr. John Vernon, of the firm of Messrs. Thomas
Vernon and Son, shipbuilders of Liverpool, said—“We
put a fore-and-aft stringer into the Koyal Charter in
October, 1856. I was requested by Messrs. Gibbs,
Bright & Co. to suggest a form of stringer to strengthen
the ship after she had performed her first voyage; the


stringer was introduced half-way up between the mid-
dle and the upper decks ; its dimensions were as large
as the space would permit, and it was as strong as it
possibly could be; I never saw such a stringer in my
life up to that time; there was no restriction by the
owners as to cost in its construction. We also intro-
duced some breast hooks or ‘ crutches ’ in the forepart
of the ship to give additional strength. In examining
the vessel, I found the materials of good quality, and
bore the strength remarkably well. I was requested
by Messrs. Gibbs, Bright & Co., to examine the ship,
and I suggested this stringer as additional strength. At
this time she showed slight symptoms of weakness in
her upper works, but I did not perceive that the vessel
had departed from her original lines ; I attributed this
weakness to her great length and fine ends. I con-
sidered at that time that she was remarkably well built
foe the purposes for which she was intended. I may
observe that Lloyd’s rules up to this time do not re-
require a stringer as long as the one which was put into
the Eoyal Charter; those rules had no existence until
a few months after this vessel was built. As an
iron shipbuilder, I believe a ship may be built any
length having regard to strength in her construction
amidships. In October, 1857, by collision, a hole was
stove into the bow of the Royal Charter, about two
feet square ; the plate and iron angle had been then sub-
jected to very great torture ; the materials appeared to
have been of very good quality. When she struck on
the w r ays at her launching (Sandycroft) I visited the
vessel, and she appeared to be all right.”


By Mr. Aspinall—“ Several screw steamers have
since adopted a stringer, but not so strong —similar to
that introduced into the Royal Charter. The Royal
Charter was a ship of very great strength, but was,
perhaps, liable to more strain than other vessels, be-
cause of her great length and fine ends. The materials
and rivetting were good. With the stringer in, I con-
sidered her a very strong ship.”
By Mr. O’Dowd—“ I consider Lloyd’s rules capable
of very great improvement. The strength of a vessel
ought to be very much in proportion to her length, the
same as in a bridge.”
Mr. John Jordan, shipbuilder and engineer, said—
“He was surveyor to the Liverpool Underwriters’ Asso-
ciation, and had been in that capacity four years. He
examined the Royal Charter after each voyage, for the
purpose of furnishing information to the underwriters'
and he found her, with regard to strength, to be an
average specimen of large screw steamers. [The witness
then entered into details as regarded the construction
of the ship, his evidence being nearly similar to that
given by Mr. Patterson.] After the first voyage, he
found the Royal Charter had sprung amidships, which
was the same in all the long ships that had not been
‘stiffened.’ The straining upon the ship showed itself
in the butts ; in her fore-part he found symptoms of
‘ blowing ’ —that is, the rivets were slackened in the
frame; a stringer was then introduced, as described
by Mr. Vernon. He saw her on her second and third
voyages, but the appearances he had referred to were
not more than in other ships; the plates were fully


thick if anything. He believed that a thicker plate
than 11-16ths would have a tendency to weaken the
work of an iron ship. He did not believe in the whole
of the strength of a ship being centred in the shell.”
Mr. Aspinall —“ Similar paint-cracks in the butts, 1
believe, have already taken place in the Great Eastern.”
Mr. George Barber said—“ He was one of the ship-
wright surveyors for the Board of Trade, and had con-
siderable experience in that department. He had ex-
amined the Royal Charter on four separate occasions,
but had only guaranteed her a passenger declaration
once, which was in May, 1857, when he felt that she
was quite sufficient for the purpose intended. In May,
1859, he examined her bottom only, when he was
struck with her excellent appearance. He observed
two butts which appeared to be slack, but on examina-
tion one only was found to be slack, the rust having got
round their heads.”
By Mr. Aspinall—“ After a very careful examination,
both in May, 1857 and 1859, he was satisfied that the
ship was well qualified to carry passengers. If a ship
was painted over, and he was satisfied in other respects,
he was bound to grant a declaration. It was not the
duty of the surveyor to examine the quality of the iron.
Witness had a nephew on board, and having been to
the scene of the wreck, he was of opinion that a wooden
vessel of the same dimensions would have gone to pieces
as readily as the Royal Charter. He felt more interest
in the ship in consequence of his nephew being on
board.”
Mr. James Martyn, one of the surveyors for ths


Liverpool Underwriters’ Association, said—“ He sur-
veyed the Royal Charter, in conjunction with the pre-
vious witness, with whose evidence, as to the strength
and soundness of the ship, he entirely concurred. He
gave a declaration for the ship on the 11th May of this
FRIDAY, NOVEMBER TWENTY-FIFTH
Foster, the carpenter, was recalled. He said—“ That
in about ten minutes after the vessel struck the sand-
banks, the pumps were sounded, when six inches of
water were found in her ; the pumps generally sucked
at six or seven inches; after that he went into the
engine-room, and the engineer told him the vessel was
all right; witness did not sound the pumps when she
was on the rocks.”
In reply to Captain Harris—
Mr. Bright said—“ The owners had not yet received
duplicates of the ship’s papers; they really did not know
the exact cargo that was on board, but he knew the
quantity of copper, which amounted to forty-live tons;
it was a very light cargo.”
Captain William Martin stat ed—“ That he was marine
surveyor for Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co., as well as
for the Australian Steam Navigation Company ;In
that capacity it had been his duty to inspect the Royal
Charter on every occasion she was in port; he had
constant opportunities of viewing her whilst in course
of construction, as well as subsequently in Liverpool,
where he superintended her masting and fitting up ;
he corroborated all that had been stated by Mr. Patterson,
the builder, as to her great strength; there was no


limit as to the cost of her construction, and the owners
evinced the greatest anxiety to make her a. fine ship ;
she had three of Trotman’s best bower anchors, and 300
fathoms of 2£-inoh bower chain, the latter being supplied
by Mr. Henry Wood, of Liverpool; the cables were
proved at Chester to seventy-two tons each; the custom
of the merchant service was to take the maker’s certifi-
cate as to the strength of the cables ; the vessel had
Trotman’s stream anchor, which was 15 cwt. 1 qr. 10
lb§. ; the price of the three bower anchors, as well as
the spare bower one, was 455. per cwt.; the stream
anchor, and the small anchors were the same price; the
bower cable was 13s. 6d. per cwt.; the sheet anchor
was kept in .the fore-hatchway, with the chain up, that
being the most convenient place for getting it according
to the arrangments of the ship; there would be some
difficulty in keeping the sheet anchor in the gunwale
in a port like Liverpool, in consequence of going in
and coming out of dock; the anchors and chains were
of the full size for a ship of the class of the Eoyal
Charter; he had gone through the log-books frequently,
and found that she both stayed and wore beautifully ;
looking at her great length and narrow beam, the vessel
had greater stability than might have been expected ;
never saw her wear, but from the log-book he found
that she had done so, both with and without steam-
power; she was the largest auxiliary clipper-ship he
had seen at the time she was built; the stability of a
vessel like the Royal Charter would depend very much
on her loading; on her first voyage after her repair at
Plymouth, she sailed remarkably well, experience having


proved that, in the first instance, she had too much bal-
last on board ; the vessel was not strained at all when she
put into Plymouth; she had 210 scuttles, and a great
quantity of water went through them; all the heavy
sails were Nos. 1 and 2 canvas; there were no staysails
on board, it having been found by experience that large
ships did better with lower topsails, and without foresails;
after the vessel rounded the Skerries, it was impossible,
in his opinion, that she was put hard a starboard, as
deposed to by two witnesses, who must be mistaken;
on one occasion witness had been as far as the Skerries
in the Eoyal Charter; she then never made loss than
knots an hour; she answered her helm, and steamed
well; on all occasions that he had been with her at sea
she was perfectly manageable ; he had also seen her
put round on the occasion he referred to ; the masts
were very nicely proportioned—not to gain space, but to
make the vessel efficient; she was so nicely balanced,
that she would steer herself under sail for half-an-hour
without the helm being moved; the reason she did not
wear on the first voyage, as stated by Dr. Scoresby, was
in consequence of being too deeply loaded, and not
being in proper trim; witness had been nineteen years
at sea, and had had much experience ; he had heard
the evidence as to the letting go of the anchors.”
Captain Harris —“ The vessel appears to have rode
out four hours; now, do you not think, as a man of
experience, that Captain Taylor ought to have cut away
the masts earlier ? ”
Captain Martin replied —“ That it was a very difficult
thing to say ; what he thought guided Captain Taylor


■was the fear of having his engines crippled by the masts
when they were cut away.”
Captain Harris said that he could have understood
that if the vessel had a three-bladed screw, but, hav-
ing a two-bladed screw, it might have been feathered.
He did not ask the question particularly with reference
to Captain Taylor, but to the public at large. His own
humble opinion was that, if the masts had been cut away
in the first instance, all the lives would have been saved.
The vessel rode gallantly for four hours before she parted
her anchors; therefore, he again asked Captain Martin,
as a man of experience, whether, if the masts had been
cut away, the vessel, in all human probability, would not
have been saved ?
Captain Martin said it was a very dangerous pro-
cess to cut away large masts and yards in such a storm;
a commander, under such circumstances, had much to
think about, and by cutting away the masts and yards he
might defeat his object; for if a large yard or piece of
iron struck the vessel the chances were fifty to one that
one of the plates would be knocked in.
Captain Harris—The masts clearly could not have
been of any use, and, so far as the screw becoming-
fouled, it might have been feathered when they were
cut away ; he again asked Captain Martin whether he
considered it would have been prudent to cut away the
masts under the circumstances ?
Captain Martin thought that, under the circum-
stances, a ship-master would have thought a great deal
before he cut away the masts if he was dependent on
the screw; and, in this case, the evidence of the witness


showed that the screw was assisting the vessel to keep
to her anchors, for it appeared that the engineers had
received orders to go a little slower ahead ; it was quite
clear that Captain Taylor was depending upon both
the anchors and the screw ; if a vessel was independent
of a screw, witness would by all means out away the
masts.
Mr. Aspinall remarked that they had only the most
imperfect statement of those who were saved, whilst
Captain Taylor, who was assisted by his officers and
three other captains, had the actual facts or state of
things before him.
Captain Harris was unwilling to throw even the
shadow of blame upon poor Captain Taylor, but he
thought that he was within legitimate bounds when he
called attention to these points.
Captain Martin then stated that the price of the
Royal Charter was £34 per ton, ready for sea. He next
described the state of the wreck, and said that it was
evident that the bilge must have been knocked in on
the rocks before she parted.
Captain Francis Boyce said—“ He was on board one
voyage with Mr. Gilmour, and there was no truth in
the statement made by that gentleman as to the rattling
of the rivets; she made no -water; he commanded the
Royal Charter on her first two voyages, and she wore
and stayed like any other vessel, both in strong and
fine weather, without the aid of steam. After leaving
Plymouth, she was as handy as any other vessel; she
was splendidly rigged, and he did not consider her a
weak ship; when he was in command, no ship could
have been tighter than the Royal Charter.”


Mr. R. T. Steel, insurance broker, said—“ That the
Royal Charter was insured at 70s. per cent, for the
voyage out and home, which was considered a low rate.
He had such a good opinion of the ship that he did not
think it necessary to see the surveyor’s certificate for
the last voyage. As a broker, he made no distinction,
for insurance purposes, between an iron and a wooden
ship, except that a steamer was taken at a lower rate.”
Mr. William Macdonald, superintendent of the Liver-
pool corporation testing machine, had tested six pieces
of iron plate furnished him by Mr. Smith, receiver of
wrecks at Beaumaris, in the presence of some gentlemen ;
he did not test them by hydraulic pressure ; five of these
pieces had been fairly tested: the first plate was 5-inch
by |, and it broke in the bolt-eye, at a pressure of 41
tons ; the next was 3-inch by |, and it broke at 45 tons
10 cwt. ; the next was a piece of the same dimensions,
(3-inch by |) and it broke at 42 tons; the next was
3-inch by 13-lGths, and it broke at 45,tons ; the next
was 2-inch by 11-16ths, and it broke at 32 tons; the
next was 2-inch by 11-16ths, and it broke at 28 tons.”
Mr. O’Dowd—We have made an average of the five
fairly-tested plates, and tire result is 20 tons 55 cwt.
to the square inch, which, I am informed, is a higher
quality than good Staffordshire plates; Mr. Fairbairu’s
average is 19 tons 5 cwt., so that this iron is Itons
over Mr. Fairbaim’s average.
Mr. William Clay said—“He was the superintendent
and manager of the Mersey Iron Works: he was present
at most of the experiments made by Mr. Macdonald;
he was of opinion that tensility is not the only test of


strength ; the strain borne by the iron produced was
very extraordinary, and it was above the average
strength used in the construction of iron vessels; in the
construction of steam-rams, the government required
iron to bear a strain of 22 tons to the square inch, but
builders found great difficulty in getting iron of that
strength.”
Mr. O’Dowd —That is all the evidence I propose to
Mr. Aspinall said that, although he was not in a
position to give the price of the iron used in the con-
struction of the Eoyal Charter, he might state that it
cost £l2 10s. per ton, which was a high price, as iron
was ranging at that time.
After a brief consultation by the commissioners, Mr.
Aspinall proceeded to make some observations to the
court, commenting upon the necessity of the inquiry
upon public grounds, as well as to show that the reports
circulated about the vessel and her commander were
not founded on fact, but illusory from first to last. The
evidence went to show that Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and
Co., were anxious from the first moment they became
possessed of her, to turn out one of the most magnifi-
cent ships that ever sailed; and, for this purpose, all
that science, energy, and mechanical skill could do, was
brought to bear in her construction. They had not
only the evidence of Mr. Patterson, the builder, and his
foreman, but they had the statements of the official
surveyors, whose interests were rather adverse to the
owners, all of whom had come to the same conclusion,
and spoke in the strongest terms as to the merits of the


vessel. Therefore, with the mass of evidence before
them, he (Mr. Aspinall) thought it was impossible that
even the greatest grumbler could hereafter find fault
with her construction. Various reports had been cir-
culated, and they had had a lamentable exhibition on
the previous day. The person to whom he referred had
written a letter in the newspapers, and he was brought
down by Mr. O’Dowd, but he utterly failed to sub-
stantiate his statements, not only as regarded the ship,
but as respected one person wdiom he had maligned;
indeed, he only made a discreditable and disgraceful
exhibition of himself. Mr. Aspinall then read several
extracts from Dr. Scoresby’s journal of his voyage in
the Royal Charter, to show that she was a magnificent
vessel in every respect. There was another part of the
inquiry which could not be referred to without feeling
deep anxiety lest they should trench in any shape or
way memory of those who were gone. It would
be for the court to report on the cause of this lament-
able accident, and those whom he represented were
most anxious that the conclusion come to should in no
degree be adverse to the memory of those brave men
who were no more. Captain Taylor and his officers—as
they have been even described by the writer referred to—
were, from first to last, a “ band of brothers,” and, from
the feelings of affection which actuated them, the dis-
cipline on board the ship was more likely to be kept up.
On that unhappy afternoon, Captain Taylor entertained
no apprehension of danger; the ship was getting into
pilot ground, and there was no reason to suppose that
the weather was going to break, as the barometer did


not indicate any change. Then came this most unac-
countable hurricane —one of the most awful hurricanes
known on the coast for a quarter of a century. The
wind changed almost in an instant from the quarter
from which it had been blowing to another point of the
compass, and drove the ship upon a lee shore. He sub-
mitted that Captain Taylor was, under the circum-
stances, not only justified in pursuing the course, but
was absolutely right in doing so; and, in coming to a
judgment on his conduct, they must remember that he
was a sailor of equal experience with Captain Harris,
who sat in judgment upon him. Therefore he would
ask the court to remember that Captain Taylor was
actuated by all the facts which were before him, whilst
we could only see darkly through a cloud, and any
odium as to the course he pursued, or his conduct and
judgment upon the question of cutting away the masts,
could only be formed on mere theory. They had it in
evidei ice that Captain Taylor did all in his power to
save the ship and the passengers; and they also had it
in evidence that he consulted the opinion of those who
were most competent to judge of the course necessary
to be pursued. He had with him three captains, and
he took the opinion of those gentlemen and of his offi-
cers, over and over again, as to the best course to be
taken. Mr. Aspinall then, at some length, urged that,
after the vessel had struck upon the rocks, everything
was done that could be done to save the lives of the
passengers; and, in conclusion, he passed a high eulo-
gium upon the heroism, bravery, and disinterestedness
exhibited by Captain Taylor, his officers and crew, pre-


f’erring, as they did, to use every effort to save the pas-
sengers, than to leave the ship and save their own
lives. Having also complimented the passengers for
their fortitude and heroism, he expressed the thanks of
the owners to the court, to Mr. O’Dowd, and to all con-
cerned, for the manner in which the inquiry had been
conducted.
Mr. Mansfield said that he and his brother commis-
sioner fully concurred wdth the remarks made by Mr.
Aspinall in reference to the heroism and gallantry ex-
hibited not only by the captain, the officers, and crew,
but by the passengers, at the last moment. Every person
seemed to be doing his duty with intrepidity and un-
flinchingly up to the last moment, although there w r as
almost certain death before him. Perhaps a nobler spec-
tacle was never witnessed, except in the one memorable
case of the “Birkenhead;” and was never, perhaps, more
remarkable in a case of ordinary passengers of the middle
and lower ranks of life. Notwithstanding what had taken
place in that court during a very long inquiry, he under-
stood that some persons still persevered in casting
malignant reflections with reference to Captain Taylor’s
sobriety. It w r as well known that the Board of Trade
w r as most anxious to receive any communications what-
ever which bore on the subject. Indeed, the post-office
had been like the “ Lion’s Mouth ” at Venice, from the
number of communications which had been dropped into
Nothing of that sort, however, had been brought
forward. On the contrary, some names had been given
for that most malignant imputation, but the parties, on


being referred to, denied it. It seemed, therefore, so
groundless, that Mr. O’Dowd, in his opening, declined
going into it. The whole story was utterly baseless,
and he should not oven mention it in his report to the
Board of Trade. There could be no doubt that Captain
Taylor w r as a gallant and brave seaman, and it could
only be from the vilest malignity or some other motive
that an attempt w T as made to leave a stain upon his
character.
The inquiry having lasted six days, then closed, Mr.
Mansfield remarking that he and Captain Harris would
make their report to the Board of Trade.
OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE LOSS OF THE ROYAL CHARTER.
The following is the Eeport to the Lords Committee
of Privy Council for Trade of Mr. Mansfield, the ma-
gistrate, of Liverpool, and Captain Harris, nautical
assessor, who held the recent inquiry at Liverpool into
the loss of the Eoyal Charter screw steamer: —
“My Lords, —In accordance with the instructions
which I received from the Board of Trade, I have, with
the assistance of Captain Harris, nautical assessor, held
an inquiry into the circumstances attending the loss of
the auxiliary steam clipper ship, Eoyal Charter. The
ship was, originally, ordered to be built by the Messrs.
Moore, of this town. The builder was Mr. Cram, of
Chester, and the keel was laid at Sandycroft, on the
Eiver Dee. Before any considerable progress had been
made in her construction, the firm of Messrs. Gibbs,
Bright, & Co., who are managers for, and now repre-
sent, the Australian Steam Navigation Company—the


registered owners of the Eoyal Charter—took her off
the hands of Messrs. Moore. At or about this time Mr.
Cram failed, and the further progress of the ship-building
was conducted by Messrs. Gibbs, Bright, & Co. on their
own account. Some changes were made to fit the ves-
sel for the purpose, which were ultimately attained; an
addition was made to her length at either end, and the
original specification was departed from in other respects.
It is not material to dwell upon this part of her history
at any great length, as, at the time of her transfer to
Messrs. Gibbs, Bright, & Co., her keel only was laid,
and a portion of the frame set up. Nearly all the ma-
terial had been provided by Mr. Cram, and was on the
premises; this, after an examination by the builders
employed by Messrs. Gibbs, Bright, & Co., was used in
the construction of the vessel. A portion of this iron,
recovered with great difficulty from the wreck, has been
produced before and tested by the Liverpool Corporation
mechanist. It is decidedly above the average strength
of iron plating used for shipbuilding, and the average
strength assigned by Mr. Fairbairn for good Staffordshire
plate. When the ship was completed, it was necessary
to launch her diagonally, owing to the shallowness of
the water at Sandycroft. During this operation she
stuck fast on her ways, and great efforts were necessary
to get her afloat. It does not, however, appear that she
received any injury at this time. In proceeding down
the Dee she took the ground off Flint, and here her keel
and the adjoining portions amidships received serious
injuries, so as to necessitate extensive repairs in the
Graving-dock at Liverpool. There is some discrepancy


in the evidence; but it is probable that, on this occasion,
she was strengthened by the addition of two bilge kel-
sons, having been originally constructed with a kelson
and two sister kelsons. Of her rigging it is sufficient to
say, that her masts and spars seem to have been amply
sufficient, and, though very large, not out of proportion
to the size of the vessel. Her tackle seems to have
boon generally good, and her heavy sails were of No.
‘l’ and No. ‘2’ canvas —the quality of storm-sails in
ordinary ships. The ground tackle seems likewise to
have been free from objection. She carried two bower
anchors and a sheet anchor of requisite size, and all
of Trotman’s model. She was provided with 300
fathoms of chain cable of'full 2g- inches in diameter,
tested by the maker, Mr. Woods, Chester, to seventy-
two tons. From the performance of this cable, im-
mediately previous to the loss of the ship, it is rea-
sonable to suppose that the material and workmanship
were good. Her engines, which worked a two-fan
screw, were of nominal 200 horse-power, and were able
to propel the vessel in dead water at the rate of about
eight knots an hour. Upon proceeding upon her first
voyage, she was very heavily ballasted, as her builders
apprehended she would be crank, owing to her narrow
beam. In the Bay of Biscay, however, she encountered
very rough weather, and put back to Plymouth. Here
she was examined by the emigration officers and sur-
veyors, who recommended some trifling repairs to ob-
viate her making water, as it was supposed, through her
deck. These, however, had nothing to do with the sea-
worthiness of the ship. In accordance, also, with their


recommendation, slie was lightened of 400 tons of ballast,
the result of which was that her sailing properties im-
proved, and she was enabled to stay and wear with
facility. lam assured by the witnesses who have sub-
sequently made voyages in her, that she was far from
being defective in this respect—regard being had to the
greater time necessarily requisite to bring a long vessel
round. Upon returning from her first voyage, it was
observed by the surveyor of the Liverpool Underwriters’
Association that some of the paint had cracked at the
joining of the butts, outside amidships, and that in those
places there were streaks of rust. This, he stated, was
invariably the case with long iron vessels on their return
from a voyage. It does not, however, appear that
wooden ships, after encountering heavy weather, are free
from an analogous indication of a strain in their butts;
some suspicion, however, seems to have acted upon the
minds of the owners; and, with a view of giving her
additional longitudinal strengthening, a massive stringer,
the greater part of the length of the ship, was introduced
on either side, between decks ; after this, nothing further
of any importance as regards the strengthening of the
ship, seems to have been done. It may be proper at
this point to state that, from the evidence, I have arrived
at the conclusion that the Royal Charter was at the
least fully equal in strength to the average of ships of
her class, built at the same date (1855.) Whether this
be sufficient is a question which-in reality does not arise
in the present inquiry; even if it did, I should hesitate
to generalise from an isolated instance on very imperfect
evidence, and where so much is left to conjecture, a


much wider induction is necessarily applied to the sub-
ject by the underwriters, in the ordinary course of their
business and to those of the public ; who may be ignorant
of the fact, it may be of interest to learn that there is
no difference in the premium paid for insuring wooden
or iron vessels of the same class. Upon her last voyage,
the Eoyal Charter, after an unusually quick passage
from Melbourne, arrived off Queenstown on the 24th of
October. She proceeded up channel, and passed the
Tuscan light about 4 a.m. on the 25th October; about
4.30 or 5 p.m. she was abreast of Holyhead; up to
that time the weather had been fine, with a light breeze
ahead. A change then took place, and it became hazy
over the land. The vessel proceeded on her course,
rounding the Skerries at six or half-past six p.m. Point
Lynas light was in sight at a quarter to seven p.m., at
a distance of six or seven miles on the starboard bow.
At eight p.m. the wind was from N.E. to E.N.E., veer-
ing and blowing very hard, and had been increasing in
strength from the time the ship passed Holyhead. She
was heading, at this time, about E. by S. At a quarter
to nine Captain Taylor gave orders to starboard the
helm, to which the quartermaster at the wheel replied,
“ The helm is a-starboard already.” At a quarter to
nine, orders were given to take a cast of the lead.
In about a quarter of an hour they first succeeded
in getting soundings with the hand-lead in eighteen
fathoms. The screw-propeller was at work, but the
ship, notwithstanding, was drifting rapidly to leeward, as
denoted by the lead. Shortly after this, soundings
were again taken in fifteen fathoms, and about half-past


tea p.m., an attempt was made to stay the ship. This
appears to have failed, for shortly afterwards. the port
anchor was let go, and 100 fathoms of chain cable
paid out. At 11.15 p.m., the starboard anchor was let
go, with seventy fathoms of chain. The two anchors
brought the ship up. At 1.30 a.m. of the 26th inst., the
the port chain parted outside the hawse-hole. Orders
were then given to get up the stream anchor, which
weighed only 15 cwt., and was stowed in the after,
the sheet anchor of 50 cwt. was stowed in the fore
hatchway; it took about one hour to get up the stream
anchor, and when this was done, about 2.30 a.m., the
starboard cable parted. About 3or 3.30 a.m. the ship
took the ground; her keel seems to have struck first,
and her head cantered round to the westward, broad-
side on to the wind and sea. It appears that the screw
stopped when the ship struck. The mainmast was then
cut away; it fell abeam, and not in the direction of the
screw. The foremast was then cut away, but did not
fall till the ship was washed upon the rocks about
5 a.m., or two hours after she first struck. About 7.30
to 8 a.m. the vessel parted amidships, and a melancholy
loss of life ensued. Such is the narrative afforded by
the few survivors of the loss of the Eoyal Charter. In
reviewing the evidence before me, it is my painful duty
to notice the apparent want of preparation to encounter
stormy weather shown by the Eoyal Charter in her
course up channel. She came up channel with her
skysail masts on end, and yard across. It is true that
the weather was fine in the morning, and there might
have been no indications of the coming hurricane; but


it is certain that in such a dangerous sea, and at a time
of year when storms may be expected, the stanchest
merchant ship would be only prudent in making all
snug aloft; and the best equipped man-of-war would
infallibly do so. I have no evidence before me to show
whether the barometer gave any indication of the ap-
proaching gale. There were two, if not three, of these
instruments on board. If they had been noticed, they
would, in all probability, have suggested caution. At
5 p.m., there were two courses open—the Eoyal Charter
was close to Holyhead, and might have run in there for
refuge; or she might have put her head to the westward,
and kept the Irish channel open. At 6 p.m,, the
Skerries were rounded, and the wind increased to a
gale. At 9 p.m., the wind and sea had increased so
much that, though under full steam, the ship refused to
answer her helm. It was then found that the ship was
drifting bodily to leeward, and no course remained but
to let go the anchors. To the anchors, it will have been
observed, that the ship held four hours; and it is to be
lamented that the resolution was not immediately taken
to cut away the masts. Had she been so relieved, her
only chance of safety, viz.—holding on to her anchors—
might possibly have been secured. It is evident, that
with the top hamper alopt, the steam power was inade-
quate to keep the ship under command. Had the masts
been sacrificed at first, as they were ultimately, the
steam-power might have availed the ship more effec-
tually. It is very likely that the captain of the Eoyal
Charter was deterred from this course by the apprehen-
sion that the falling rigging and spars might foul her


screw —thus repeating the catastrophe undergone by the
4 Prince,’ in 1854, off Balaklava; but it should be re-
membered that the 4 Prince ’ was supplied with a three-
bladed fan, while the Eoyal Charter had a two-bladed
one only, which could be hoisted up in a short time, and
with little labour. I am well aware that, in making
these animadversions on the measures taken by the
Eoyal Charter, I may encounter some difference of
opinion ; but, having the advantage of judging from the
event, I cannot help concluding that a fair chance of
safety was sacrificed by the course pursued. I may here
also advert to what appears a dangerous practice, viz.—
to steam ahead to the anchors in a gale of wind,
and, in a sea-way, a gale of wind, as is well known,
is not uniform in strength, but there are moments
of comparative lull; during these, the steam power,
not being readily controlled, is apt to shoot the ship
ahead. After this, when a violent gust of wind occurs,
the ship drops astern, bringing up, with a sudden
and a severe jerk on her cables, a kind of strain most
likely to make them part. It is not impossible that
such may, be the true explanation of the parting of the
cables of the Eoyal Charter; all the evidence concurs
in showing that the force of the gale was terrific, and
unexampled on that coast. Nothing conclusive can be
arrived at towards solving the question, whether a
wooden ship would have held together longer, or so
long as the Eoyal Charter ? As far as I have had in-
formation on the subject, I have no ground to impute
blame to the life-boat people. The coast-guard were
early on the spot though stationed ten miles off. The


two pilot-boats, according to the regulations of the port,
were in their proper cruising-ground, off Point Lynas;
one of them saw a blue light, probably from the Eoyal
Charter, and kept a sharp look out accordingly; but,
immediately afterwards, the darkness was so great, and
the rain so thick as to make it impossible to see from
one end of the pilot-boat to the other. The wind also
became so high as to put out her lights repeatedly; and,
eyen had she neared the Royal Charter, there was such
a sea running as to make it impossible to put a pilot
on board. The officers and crew to the last were in-
different to the preservation of their own lives, and
solely intent on their duty. Taking into account the
unexampled fury of the gale, which entirely neutralised
the powerful action of the screw-propeller, so that the
ship was no longer under command—a circumstance
which Captain Taylor could not have anticipated; and
considering also the apprehension he may have sustained
while at anchor, that the masts would foul the screw if
they were cut away, and, possibly, that the action of the
screw to ease the cables could not be safely intermitted.
I do not think that this is a case in which I could report
that the ship was lost by the default of the master.
“J. S. Mansfield,
“Stipendary Magistrate, Liverpool.
“ Liverpool , November 28th, 1859.
“ I concur in the above report.
“ Henry Harris, Nautical Assessor.”


CHAPTER Y.
The two investigations connected with the loss of the
.Royal Charter, concluded hy acquitting Captain Taylor
in being any way accessory to, or responsible for, her loss.
A base attempt had been made to urge intemperance
on his part as a cause of the sad catastrophe, but this
was disproved to the satisfaction of a just and impartial
The saloon passengers, who were examined, and who
had daily opportunities while on board the Royal Charter
of observing his habits, were unanimous in their testi-
mony to his uniform sobriety; and those of the crew
who were examined and acquainted with nautical opera-
tions, were unanimous, also, in declaring that he had
done all that an experienced officer could, in the emer-
gency, to save the ship.
It has been asserted by those practised in channel
navigation, that had Captain Taylor kept his ship more
to sea, the result would not have been attended with
such disaster. But when we reflect on the observations
made by some of the witnesses, we are inclined to believe
that the screw of the ship was strained, and occasioned
her weakness and final loss in the hour of trial; as it
has been admitted, when it blew a hurricane, she became
unmanageable—“ The screw propeller was at work, but
the ship notwithstanding was drifting rapidly to leeward.”
One of the witnesses examined, stated they were all day
in the vicinity of Holyhead; he could not account for it,
f 2


but it struck him and several of the passengers that the
ship was making no way, and this testimony was partially
substantiated by one of the crew examined, wdio ac-
knowledged that they were four hours there.' We copy
the following extract from an article which the recent
rapid voyage of the “ Great Britain,” from Liverpool
to Australia, elicited from the Times Correspondent at
Melbourne :
“ The ‘Great Britain’ made her passage out in fifty-five days
and sixteen hours. I believe the ‘ Simla ’ made her first voyage
out to join the Red Sea line in fifty-five days and fifteen hours ;
but there is a dispute between the respective owners and agents
of these vessels about an hour or two. In the meantime, the
unhappy fate of the Royal Charter and of her living freight has
raised the objection by many that the intense greed of the
owners of rival lines to accomplish ‘ the shortest passage on
record ’ must greatly increase the risk of life. Of this there can
be no doubt. It is really awful to put the proposition broadly—•
that the wholesale sacrifice of life in the Royal Charter was
part of the price the world pays for enormous speed.”
Though it be far from our intention to insinuate that
Captain Taylor was instrumental in producing the de-
struction of life that resulted from the wreck of the
Royal Charter, still it must ever continue a source of
domestic regret that he did not, when the gale increased
to a hurricane, avail himself of his contiguity to Holy-
head, and put back to that port for shelter. From a
calm retrospect of all the circumstances connected with
this deplorable calamity, we must infer that Captain
Taylor was not prepared to meet, in a narrow sea, a
tornado peculiar to the great oceans of the equator;
but, finding himself betrayed into the fatal cyclone, he
exerted every means that his nautical proficiency en-


abled him, to save his valuable freight of life, and pro-
tect his vessel from the fate that menaced it. Three
times we hearof his having been prostrated on the deck by
the force of the prevailing waves, and, yet, from amidst
this scene of darkness and danger, he proceeded to the
saloon, calm and collected, to tranquillize the terrified
passengers ; but he lived to see their worst fears realised,
and his own hopes broken up like the ship he com-
manded, for he went down to his watery grave with the
fragments of her ruins in his hands, and the death wail
of the perishing passengers in his ears ; and if the
agony of these moments could have been rendered more
intense, it must have arisen from memories of fair and
favorite forms—household treasures, that might never
more make glad the heart or home of the lost mariner!
Bear Admiral Fitzroy explains the nature of the
storm which wrecked the Eoyal Charter. Combining
the various reports, he has ascertained it to have been
a complete horizontal cyclone, travelling bodily north-
ward; the area of its sweep was scarcely 300 miles in
diameter, while the central portion was advancing north-
ward, not uniformly, but at an average rate of about
twenty miles an hour, the actual velocity of the wind,
circling (as against watch hands) around a small “ lull,”
was from fifty to a hundred miles an hour. At places
westward of its centre, the wind appeared to “ back ” or
“ retrogade,” shifting from east through north-east, and
north to north-west; while at places eastward of its
central passage, the apparent change or veering of the
wind, was from east through south-east, south, south-
west, and, west to north-west. Our channel squadron,


not far from the Eddystone, had a rapid—indeed,
almost a sudden—shift from south-east to north-west,
being in or near the central lull; while at Guernsey, the
wind veered round regularly. The sudden shift off the
Eddystone occcured about three, or soon after, and about
half-past five it took place near Eeigate, from eastern
parts of England; the central portion of the storm
moved northward and eastward, places on the east and
north coasts of Scotland having strong easterly and
northerly gales a day later than the middle of England.
When the Eoyal Charter was wrecked, Elgin and
Banffshire were not disturbed by wind ; when it blew
hard from east to north on that exposed coast the storm
had abated, or almost ceased in the channel and on the
south coast of Ireland.
We copy from the Liverpool Albion of March 26th,
1860, the following paragraph :
“ It appears from the annual report of Captain Robertson to
the Board of Trade, that the ships and lives lost on the British
coasts, during last year, were greatly in excess of the numbers
recorded as lost in any previous year. As compared with 1858,
there were 1,416 casualties against 1,170, and 1,645 lives lost
against 340. This increase is chiefly attributable to the violent
gales of October 25th and 26th, and of October 31st and
November Ist and 2nd. In the former gale there were 133
total wrecks and 90 casualties, resulting in serious damage, and
'798 lives were lost; this number includes the loss of 480 lives
in the Eoyal Charter. In the latter gale, there were 27 total
wrecks and as many casualties, with a loss of 51 lives. It is
computed that the loss of property caused by wrecks and
casualties during the year was, in cargoes, 893,000, and in
ships, 870,000, making a total loss of nearly two millions.”
The following interesting letter is from Mr. W.


Gilmour, of Aylesbury —for two years surgeon super-
intendent of the Eoyal Charter:—
“ Having been surgeon of the unfortunate vessel during four
voyages from Liverpool to Australia and back, I feel myself
called upon to give a few reminiscences of the ill-fated ship, and
her late officers who are now no more. Almost every one of
the late officers was most intimately known to me, as we were
more a 1 band of brothers ’ than anything else; but, poor fellows!
they are gone, and they deserved a better fate. To begin with
Captain Taylor—a better commander and seaman never had
charge of a ship. He was a strict disciplinarian with his officers
and crew—almost too much so. He was very fond of carrying
all the sail he could possibly have spread out; he took every
advantage of' the wind, but it was thought by some that he
sometimes carried too much sail, which strained the ship
more or less ; but of this, from my own knowledge of nautical
affairs, I cannot give an opinion; but I can safely say that,
when at sea, I never, on any occasion, felt the least nervous or
uneasy at the quantity of canvass he had on her—l mean as long
as we had plenty of sea-room. But I felt rather nervous the
voyage before last; I think it w*as that I was in her coming up
channel. We were steaming, and there were a great many
vessels passing us, and one ran right across our bow —so close
that I could have almost stepped on board of her—but this was
no fault of Captain Taylor. What I used to say of him was,
that he was a ‘ rough diamond ’ —as almost everyone is who has
risen from the ranks of the forecastle. He never had been a
gold-laced, kid-gloved middy, with more money than brains,
but had got up to what he was by his own perseverance and
proficiency. He has left a widow, and, I think he told me,
he had nine children.
“ The chief officer was W. B. Stephens—a more gentlemanly,
better educated, cool-tempered chief-officer there did not exist.
He was one who had always a pleasant word for everybody, and
who did everything in his power to make all on board happy
and comfortable. He was the life of all the deck during his


watch aloft, as very many of the passengers who sailed in her
will remember. He had been twice shipwrecked before, and was
in the steamship ‘Cleopatra’ as chief-officer all the time she
was employed in the transport service during the Crimean war.
Poor fellow! if he had been spared he would have been an orna-
ment to the mercantile marine service ; but it was willed other-
wise. Many—very many—hours have I spent in his company,
and, I can safely say, a better young man I never knew. He
was a good Christian, a good seaman, a fond and tender husband,
an honorable and true son of the ocean. He has left a widow
and two children, who are residing in Bootle. He was a native
of Scotland.
“ The second officer, Andrew Cowie, was also a very pro-
mising young man, a good seaman, well educated, and fearless
of danger. He was once shipwrecked on the coast of South
Australia. He came home with Captain Taylor in the old
‘ William Murncy,* which showed that he was fearless of danger
in trusting himself in such a craft. He was also a Scotchman,
and married; his wife resides at Govan, near Glasgow.
“ The third officer, Mr. Bean, I did not know much of. He
was of a more reserved and quiet disposition, but always plea-
sant and agreeable to the passengers; and he always did his
duty on all occasions as a true British seaman. I cannot say
if he was married or not.
“ The fourth officer, John Croome, had been a cadet, or
middy, on board ever since she first started from Liverpool. He
was appointed as fourth officer the voyage previous to the last.
At the time of the appointment he had not served out his time,
but he was a very clever, gentlemanly young man, a good
scholar, and clever draughtsman, which talent he inherited
from his father, who is a mechanical draughtsman to the firm
of Penn & Son, the celebrated marine engine-boilermakers, of
London. He was a mere youth in years, but a man possessed
of sterling nautical qualities.
“The purser, Mr. John Lewis, commenced his sea life on
board the steamship ‘ Great Western.’ In her he made several


trips across the Atlantic. He afterwards entered on board the
■ City of Pittsburgh’ steamer, belonging to an American com-
pany ; she was burnt to the waters edge, and he lost his all,
and suffered much privation, both bodily and mentally. He
afterwards entered on board the steamship ‘ Great Britain,’ and
in her was promoted to the post of chief steward, which he
tilled without complaint all the time he was in her, more
especially while she was in the transport service, when he came
more especially under my notice. On her being paid off by the
government, he was transferred to the Royal Charter as purser,
which situation he has well and truly filled to the satisfaction
of all—owners, passengers and crew. He was allowed to he
the best purser that ever sailed on the sea; he well knew how
to make the most of everything on board. He was most gentle-
manly in his manner ; he was very engaging and most pleasant
in his conversation, and many—very many—passengers will re-
member the pleasant hours spent in his cabin, after the business
of the day was over. He belonged to Bristol, and has left a widow
and two children.
“ I come now to a person whose talents and education were
of a different kind—poor John Rogers, the chief engineer. He
was the second engineer on the ‘ Great Britain ’ while in the
transport service, and for some time previous, I believe. He
had made altogether six trips to Australia, and this unfortunate
one was the seventh. On the Royal Charter being ready for
sea he was promoted as chief in her, which situation he has
filled ever since. He was a good practical engineer, and one
who was complete master of every part of his trade. He was
very fond of his violin, and, when not steaming, many a pleasant
hour have I spent in listening to the beautiful Scottish airs he
used to play; but his little engines were his chief delight; he
used to call them his children, and often, in the midst of our
amusement, would he say— ‘ Come and see how my children
look.’ He was a Scotchman, born in Edinburgh, but for many
years his family have been residing in Liverpool. He has left a
widow and six children to mourn their loss.


“ The second engineer’s name I cannot recollect, but his
Christian name was ‘Trank.’
“The third engineer was named Hoskins, son of the Captain
Hoskins, who was in command of the ‘ Great Britain’ when she
was wrecked in Dundrum Bay. He played very well on the
cornopean, and, when the ship was lying in Port Phillip Bay,
used to enliven the tedium with the strains of his music. He
was a very gentlemanly young man, and attentive to his duty.
“ The fourth, a boilermaker, whose name was Wilson, I did
not know much of, only that he was a Scotchman, and could
‘ spin a good yarn.’
“The principal storekeeper, Robert Clucas, will long be
remembered by the many passengers and others who were
acquainted with him. He always gave satisfaction to every
person, and when the toils of the day were over, the many
invitations he had to the passengers’ concerts, parties, told how
he was beloved. He could sing a good song, and tell a good
story. He belonged to the Isle of Man, and had a brother living
in Liverpool.
“ The barkeeper was Edward Lewis, brother to the purser.
He had been at sea many years. I think he told me that he had
been shipwrecked on the coast of South America. His situation
was a difficult one to fill, more especially on board a passenger
vessel, and to give satisfaction to all was a most difficult task ;
but, yet, he managed to please every one, and to carry out the
regulations to the best of his ability. He was also married, and
had a son in Australia, and a wife and several children in
Bristol.
“ And now for one solitary middy on board, whose name was
Frederick Foster, an orphan. He was fonder of his bunk than
the deck. He never would have made a good sailor, but now all
his troubles are over.
“ The chief steward, Mr. Emery, I did not know much of.
He was of a reserved disposition, but always paid particular
attention to his duties, as the excellent table that used to be
spread in the Charter could testify. He belonged to Liverpool,
and was married.


“ The chief steward of the second-class saloon was Mr. Alien:
he had been first steward to the officers' mess-room. On being
promoted to the saloon the officers presented him with a purse,
in remembrance of his kindness and attention to them. He was
afterwards promoted to the situation of chief of the second-class,
which situation he ably filled during several voyages. He was
one of the smartest stewards that ever were on board a ship,
and the many presents he received fully testified as to how he
did his duty. He has left a widow and family, who reside on the
Cheshire side of the Mersey.
“The stewardess was Miss "Wareing, whose father has been
in Mr. Bright’s employ very many years. She was a very good
modest young woman. She had made two trips in the ship, and
was universally liked by all the lady passengers in the saloon;
but her services and attention were very often given to the
second-class as well; and often have I seen her in the very.bows
of the ship visiting some poor third-class passenger who was
sick—indeed, even to the common sailors—when any of them
were ill; well do I remember her attention and kindness to one
poor fellow, a sailor, who one night fell from the mainyard on
to the deck, and had one of his arms taken off. She tried to take
him the nicest part of her meals, and nursed him like a sister
till he was able to go about again.
“ And now for Joe Rogers, the Maltese, who swam ashore
with the rope to which the hawser was attached that was the
means of saving several lives. He was a hero, indeed, to over-
come the death-dealing waves. This feat will be ever remembered
by every true British seaman. But many a time have I seen
him go out on a yardarm when it was blowing great guns,’
when no other sailor would venture. He has often told me that
he never knew what fear was, and I bless God that such a brave
fellow has been spared to perform more deeds of daring.
“ I will now close with a few words of Piping Judd; though
but a sweeper between decks, he often delighted the passengers
on board the Charter with his tin whistle. He was able to play
some of the most delightful pieces from celebrated operas.”


The fearless bravery which Mr. Gilmour was accus-
tomed to see evidenced by Joe Rogers has now obtained
for him a lasting notoriety. In November he was pre-
sented by the committee of the National Life-boat Insti-
tution with a valuable gold medal, £5, and a suitable
vote of thanks engraved on vellum. The presentation
was made at Liverpool, and Mr. Graves, the chairman
of the Local Marine Board, in addressing Rogers,
dwelt eloquently on the heroic conduct of this distin-
guished seamen. Rogers, in a brief reply, said he should
be glad to perform the same duty again under similar
circumstances.
George Suaicar, a Maltese seaman, also, whom it may
be remembered, was the first that made the attempt to
swim to shore with a line, but failed, has been presented
with a silver medal, at the Liverpool Sailors’ Home, in
presence of the boarders of that establishment. Suaicar
was boatswain’s mate of the Royal Charter at the time
of her unfortunate wreck, and rendered great assistance
in saving the lives of those who escaped by means of
the hawser.


Mft '-
,., m
--
>%j: : 7
M- - }~ 7~';T
fjJPP |l ' 2 * 1 *'*
K _
~* 11 ' *" y -—
.Vtlln*,. >_
■'■■ . - 1
. •.. - -
.. A*-*-- .^£S3S
KOVWV-.
•-■ 4«a
,: -^-y;.
M it'
HMHBBBHHnHMm'
HUlai' »*>«■» /»■»>. ,_ / Jj
HpHRMUb^^^
**•*“ -****■'•
l —' ' ' T ' r *V' s^';
* JJW, ™ JI
J .DOLLARD Li ! H DUBLIN
LLANALLC 0 CHU
RCH AND RECTORY.
1. EDWIN FOWLER
1 S. JAMES WALTON
1 107 RICHARD EVANS.
j S3. IT* M« CLO to.
i.i3»«r uoHT " ) i nmmmk
I «a WtLMAM AMCATON
/ if ifi
/ 133. _ CHAIR.
j 'OS MCMOTV EHtMr


CHAPTER YI.
Considerable anxiety was experienced by those who
had friends in Australia, until the arrival of the Novem-
ber overland mail. It was expected that a later and
more correct list of the passengers who had embarked
by the Royal Charter would be forwarded to England
by that route. We copy from the Times of the 7th of
November, the following catalogue of names which was
published at that date ; but from subsequent lists which
appeared in the Australian papers, we have reason to
conclude that numbers perished whose names were not
forwarded in the catalogue sent to England by this
mail.
The names which have an asterisk prefixed denote the persons whose
remains were recovered.
FIRST CLASS PASSENGERS.
* Mr. Edwin Fowler
Mrs. Fowler
* Two Miss Fowlers and
* Servant, Emma Calf
Hugh Bethune
Mr. and Mrs. Bruce, infant,
and servant
W. Beamer, Jun.
* Mr. and * Mrs. Davis, * two
daughters and two sons
*Mrs.Fenwick and four children
* Mrs. Foster
Mr. and Mrs. Grove
Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, (Mr.
Gardiner landed at Cork)
Walter Nugent Lefargue
* Mr. and * Mrs. Murray, and
* Miss Murray, and * Master
Murray
J. M‘Evoy (landed at Cork)
Mr. Mellar
Mr. Molineaux
W. H. Morse (saved)
R. F. Mac George
Mrs. Nahmer and child (landed
at Cork)
* Mr. and * Mrs. Pitcher, two
children, and servant
* Mr. Eufford
Mrs. Tweedale


Mr. Grundy (saved)
* F. T. Hutton
Eev. Charles Hodge
* Dr. Hatch
* J. S. Henry
Mr. and Mrs. Jenkins and five
SECOND
Mr. Allen and two children
(landed at Cork)
Captain Adams
Mr. Barret and * child (son)
Charles Callis
Mr. and Mrs. Dodd, and two
children
* Miss F. Davis
* Mr. Eddewes
* Mr. Reed
Edward Gates
T. E. Gapper (saved)
Mrs. Glover
John Griffiths
William Harlsden
Mr. Henderson
John Loone (saved)
Mr. Lethlanie
L. E. Mention (saved)
* John Maule
Mr. M‘Nabb
STEERAGE AND
J. Bradbury (saved)
C. R. Ross
W. S. Fenis (saved)
J. M'Coppin (saved)
* J. Potts
Mr. Lyons and family (wife
and three children—two sons
aged ten and twelve)
J. Trusteman and family (two
children)
H. Bums and child
Nathaniel Nathan
Alice Newton
J. Churton
John and Catherine Drygan
John Judge (saved)
Maurice Boyle
* Mr. Henry Carew Taylor,
(saved) child and servant
Mr. Walsh
* Captain Withers
Mrs. Woodruff and child
Mr. G. Watson
T. Macready
Mr. Nicholas
* Mrs. Norman and two chil-
dren
Mr. Partnay
* Mr. Perry
Edmund Pearce
Mrs. R. Rose
Mr. and Mrs. Russell, and two
children
Mr. Russel (saved)
* Mr. and Mrs. Smith, and
three children
* Solomon Samuel
Mr. Lausan
Julius Striko (landed at Cork)
Miss Elizabeth Ward
Miss Mary E. Wrigley
Edward Watson
John Wilks
* Mr. Watson
THIRD CLASS.
Bates and Robeshy
* James David Woodside
* J. C. Ellison
Capt. James Johnson
James Pardy
James Spyaglio
George Chesney
Thomas Byrne
* John Grice
* Matthew Scott
Houghton and Thomson
T. Wood
Thomson and * Milliken
Noah Lyons
William Green
* Robert Tuck
Joseph Gibson


James Dean (saved)
Wright Lockwood
J. Moss
Mr. Faulkner and child
Robert Jeffery
* P. De la Landra
David Thompson
Mrs. Kennedy and family (two
children)
Thomas Willis
.1. Wickett and party
C. Jackcman
Messrs. Jones and Eice
C. Kisterman
Messrs. Cnlina, Sturt, and Lyon
Charles Conway
Mr. Kirkhride and two sons
Mr. Kennedy and family (wife
and three children)
William Banks
David Thomas
T. Taylor
* Robert Hogarth
Henry Enghaus
* Edward Lauson
* Mr. and Mrs. Davy
W. and J. Row
Messrs. Tripit and Laws
William Makepeace
Thomas Fawcett
W. Bawden (saved)
James King
Denis Callins
W. and T. Murray
John Buchannan
Col. M'Phuil (saved)
James Robinson
Alex. Pottinger
R. Oliver and party
* Mr. and Mrs. P. Hogarth and
* child
William Ford
C. Shanahan
* David Bell
William Wilson
* George Smyth
Michael Frawley
Messrs. Derase and Kenny
John Farnby
R. Laystaff
John Wotherspoon
John Lynch
Charles Anderson
P. Thomson
E. Fowler
H. Ivey
L. Pornt
Michael Kavanagh
Antonio Ahhergath
Drifflon and Rolla
Marrelli and Cavagna
John and P. Martin
George Leitu
Henry Lawton
George Taylor
Samuel Grenfell (saved)
E. Allen
John Anderson
S. Dalton
William Storey
W. Crowley
* Mrs. Boss and two children
D. Travers
Mr. and Mrs. Marks and two
children
* Captain James Morris
T. Wyatt
James Sullivan
James Turner
Mr. Cartny and three children
B. Bladier
Mr. Padaritle
* William Bishop
Mrs. Willis and family (two
children)
John Gillespie
Thomas Kelly
Mr. Mitchell and wife
William Fleming
John Scott
John Michlmann
Charles Parkinson
John Parkinson (or Ranson)
James Pamplin
* J. Lewis
Miss Davidson
Henry Sims
John Manion
Samuel M. Wade
Nicoli Le Page


Prank Webher
George Watson
Mr. Holland and family (three
children)
Isaac Stephenson
Mrs. Athy and child
T. Newton
Agett Richards
J. Staunard (saved)
Edminster and Ellis
Mr. Terril
Jessie Thomden
Baptiste Phillipine
The Eev. Mr. Hughes, of L
parish graveyards 140 bodies
body in a register, describing i
Mr. M'Leod and family (two
children
W. Tany
John Inglis
Richard Davis
Joseph Potts
* Prank Hogland
E. Willray
Miss S. Marton
John Mason
T. Bakewell
James Black
Biratti Yingenge
Llanallgo, interred in his
?,s; he had numbered each
it, and had placed a cor-
responding number on each coffin, and over each grave.
When relatives came in search of their dead, the register
was produced, and, on several occasions, was the means
of communicating a sad consolation to the bereaved.
The faithful portrait of the lost would appear, and, then,
this uncomplaining clergyman would discharge the
double duty of first having the claimed exhumed,
then consigned to a separate grave, reading the burial
service a second time. The Eev. Hugh Hughes, of
Penrhos Lligwy, interred in his parish graveyards forty
bodies. Mr. Dickins, in alluding to this rev. gentleman,
says—“ He had done to them all his brother had done
to the larger number.” While at Llanallgo, we have
seen ourselves the kind assistance he rendered his brother
when the sea first gave up its dead on the shores of
Moelfra. The following interesting list we publish from
his registry :
FROM THE REGISTRY OF THE REV. HUGH HUGHES, INCUMBENT
OF PENRHOS LLIGWY.
No. I.—A man about 5 feet 10 inches ; features gone;


had on a vest and browsers of dark tweed, woollen-woven
drawers and singlet; had a shirt on; two printed ballads
entitled “William and Mary,” and “ The Green Lament’
in his pockets; also a small card with perforated edges,’
with a few printed lines, headed “ A Blessing; ” age 40
to 50.
No. 2.—The body of a male child, or youth, from 13
to 14 ; without extremities (i. e.) the legs gone, having
only head and trunk; had on a jacket of fine black
cloth, without pockets; the jacket was buttoned; no
other clothing under the jacket; the buttons of a con-
vex shape, covered with flowers embossed on raised
silk; very large and perfect teeth in the upper jaw,
lower jaw gone ; nails well trimmed; must have been
a youth of respectable connexions.
No. 3.—A man about 6 feet, age about 50; had
on a dark brown cloth vest, shepherd plaid browsers,
purple woollen shirt, striped with white, cotton-woven
drawers and singlet, (slight) a pair of fine and well
made elastic boots; the general appearance that of a
gentleman.
No. s—The body of a sailor, age from 30 to 35;
slight made ; features gone ; black hair; height about
5 feet 8 inches ; had on white duck browsers, strong
cotton shirt, marked “I. M.,” a dark grey woollen
Guernsey, one dark woollen stocking, marked also “ I
M.,” a pair of buttoned boots ; 3 keys, and a copper
coin attached.
No. 7.—An old man, age about 60; had on a Guern-
sey frock and shirt; vest of claret-coloured cloth, striped
lengthways; a pair of browsers of blue striped cloth ;


one long Wellington boot on, with brass nails ; large
features, and fat; in his pocket, a common key, a piece
of paper, on which were the words “ Band, concert,
many people, generally;” the date, October 21st, 1859,
was all that could be deciphered.
No. 11 A man: had on a pair of fustian trowsers,
and woollen-woven drawers ; had a white linen shirt
on, black silk neckkerchief, a pair of socks marked
W. B.” in red thread letters.
No. 14.—A man about 5 feet 7 inches ; had on
Bradford cord trowsers, woollen drawers, Blucher boots,
a blue spotted cotton neckkerchief; a glazed leather
belt, on which was an anchor, and the letters “ G. B.
and Co., Liverpool.”
No. 19 A sailor, 5 feet 9 inches ; two blue woollen
Jerseys; devices on the arms—right arm, a represent-
ation of our Lord on the cross, the vesture stained red;
on the lower part of the arm, man and woman; on one
side of the crucifix, the appearance of a half-moon, with
a face on the other side; an appearance of the sun ; on
the top of the cross the letters “I. H. S.; ” on the left
arm, a man and woman dancing, under which the letters
“M. E. L. ; ” on the Guernsey, “L. and A. N. Co.”
No. 32.—The body of a man about 5 feet 6 or 7
inches ; apparently a gentleman, from the character of
his clothing ; had on a woollen-woven singlet, a pair of
drawers of a purple colour, and a flannel or merino
travelling shirt of fine material and make ; stockings on
which there is the remains of a name ; I immediately
had the body disinterred, in order to see if we could be
more successful, but, I regret to say, it proved a failure.


No. 10.—A man ; body much mutilated; had on a
blue flannel shirt and oilskin browsers, and a broad
leather strap around the waist—a common sailor, to all
appearances.
No. 28.—A man about 6 feet 1 or 2 inches; very
stout, and powerful, not corpulent; had on a light
brown or dun-coloured thick cloth jacket (a short jacket)
with large pearl white buttons, well lined with a plaid
material; plaid trowsers, Guernsey frock, shoes cut
in front, and stockings; had a deep belt round the middle
—a kind of stays, of black material.
No. 29. —A man, 5 feet 9 inches ; sail-cloth trowsers,
good boots, and blue woollen drawers of fine material;
black cloth double-breasted waistcoat, plain leather
strap around the waist; white linen shirt; age about 35 ;
large full face, not mutilated.
No. 30.—A man about 5 feet 10 inches; age about
40; had on a blue striped cotton shirt, very strong
flannel drawers and singlet; flowered silk necktie tied
round the waist; on one leg a fragment of fustian trow-
sers, a Blucher boot, and stocking ; dark hair, dark
brown beard and whiskers; features perfect, excepting
the loss of one eye.
No. 31.—A man about 6feet, robust and powerful;
very large head; the form of the skull and features
resembling those of a Negro; had on a part of Jersey
frock, and a good pair of trowsers.
FROM THE REGISTER OF THE REV. HUGH HUGHES, OF BODIES
IDENTIFIED AT PENRHOS LLIGWY.
Young Hogarth—The remains of his parents were


conveyed also to Penrhos Lligwy, and they all now
occupy graves close to each other.
Mr. Pitcher’s son—This child was found the day the
lamentable disaster occurred on the shores of Moelfra,
and was subsequently removed, with the remains of his
parents, to Brompton cemetery.
Mr. Samuel Soloman—His remains were removed to
Liverpool for interment by his friends.
Mr. J. Watson, brother of Mr. Robert Watson, Glas-
Mr. Anthony Belt, son of Mr. Belt of Great Market,
N ewcastle-on-Tyne.
Mr. Edmond Smith, from Worcester.
Mr. Philip de la Landa, of St. Helinas, Jersey.
A sailor, with the following devices on his arms:—A
sailor and woman, the man holding the union jack, with
a streamer, the folds of which waved over her head, and
the end held by her hand; on the upper part of the arm,
a representation of our Lord on the Cross, with stars
surrounding the head; one large star on the side; on
the left arm, in Indian ink, a flag, a true lover’s knot,
a face, and, underneath all, the initials “H. S.” He
was identified as Henry Smith, of Bethnell Green,
London.
Fifteen bodies were interred by the Rev. Mr. Wil-
liams, of Tyddyn, in the churchyard of Llanfair, and at
Almwch eleven bodies were buried by the Rev. Mr.
Richards; amongst them one of a lady, between thirty
and forty years of age, of low stature, and very stout;
had on a black silk body with crape on the sleeves,
patent elastic stays, and two rings—the one a wedding,


and the other an emerald set round with diamonds.
The Rev. Mr. Drew, of the adjoining parish, also con-
signed the remains of three to their last resting-place.
At Pentreth, the Rev. Morris Hughes, incumbent of
that parish, interred several of the bodies that were
washed on shore in the vicinity of Red Wharf Bay. It is
impossible to give an accurate list of the remains of the
poor passengers recovered and interred—some having
been cast on the Irish coast, others near the Isle of
Man, and several on the Carnarvon shores. Of those
identified, belonging to the staff of the Royal Charter,
the following list will be found_ correct: —
Mr. Ceoom, Fourth Officer
John Emery, First Steward
James Walton, Steward
Jacob Rogers, Fireman
James Edwards, Rigger
Henry Aspinall, Rigger
Fairclough, Sailraaker
John Rees, Seaman
Lambert, Seaman
Russell, Seaman
Tate, First Cook
Wilson, Boilermaker
The Australia papers state that at least one hundred
diggers, from Back Creek, alone, perished in the wreck
of the Royal Charter.
Some of them by industry, self-denial and economy,
had, it appears, secured a competency, and were return-
ing with the hope of spending many years in their native
country. The Amherst and Bach Creek Advertiser pub-
lishes the following particulars :—“ Several miners, who
had large sums of money, embarked by the Royal Charter
with the intention of settling in England. Considering
the number of ‘ pile ’ claims obtained at Scandinavian
Lead, we may conjecture that a large number of the
miners from this lead have perished, with the fruits of


their hard-earned toil, in the angry waves which en-
gulfed the Eoyal Charter.”
FROM THE REGISTER OF THE REV. STEPHEN ROOSE HUGHES,
RECTOR OF LLANALLGO, OF BODIES NOT IDENTIFIED.
No. 3.—A male: deformed foot; “S.D. F. G.” on
right arm.
No. 4.—A male: diggers’arms; ring on; red whiskers;
tall and slender.
No. 6.—Supposed Jewess; about 65 years of age;
grey hair; large robust frame; commonly dressed; had
on a pair of blue stockings.
No. 7. —Irishwoman: short; about 80 years of age;
commonly dressed.
No. 22.—Male: large frame, and tall; about 40
years ; sandy hair, with only one large tooth remaining.
No. 24.—Male : “A. H. P.” on shirt.
No. 28.—Male : well dressed; black moustache and
beard ; sharp nose; age about 45.
No. 31 Male: height 5 feet 10 inches; dark brown
hair and whiskers meeting under the chin ; band on
wrist made of leather.
No. 38.—Male : short nose; dark hair; no beard.
No. 39 Male; sailor-like; the shape of a heart
marked on the right arm, with the name “ Mary.”
No. 40.—Exact likeness of number 38.
No. 42.—Male : light complexion ; from 35 to 40;
heavy frame and arm; extraordinary width across the
chest.
No. 45.—A lady having three rings.
No. 55—Male : known by some of the survivors as
“S. Perry,” being a false name; real name unknown.


No. 58—Male, adult; black curley hair ; large brown
whiskers around the chin.
No. 63 Male: black whiskers, and hair under chin;
height about 5 feet 10 inches.
No. 64.—Female, enciente : age about 32 ; had on a
black silk jacket, and black worsted stockings.
No. 66.—Young man, with red bushy whiskers close
to the ears.
No. 71.—Male passenger: stoutly built; from 30 to
35; dark sandy hair : uncommon large round face.
No. 95.—Male ; supposed Roman Catholic, having a
cross hung round his neck.
No. 100.—An elderly lady, with money in belt, and
spectacles in pocket, (supposed once to be Mrs. Anne
Short.)
No. 113.—Male, having an anchor on his arm, (sup-
posed to be David Kaye, seaman.)
No. 128.—A lady: “F. R. Munroe” on her stockings,
aged about 35 years; middle statute; face broad; inside
clothes very superior; night dress trimmed with em-
broidery; wove white woollen socks under her stockings;
had two rings on —one a wedding ring, the other a
diamond half-hoop; as the name of “ Munroe ” did not
appear in the list of passengers, it was assumed that
was the lady’s maiden name; though it may not be
improbable that, in the confusion which ensued the
morning of the wreck, this unfortunate lady may have
put on stockings belonging to her servant.
No. 130 Male body: strap and tuck on; large toe
peculiarly bent in.
No. 132.—Male: lost third finger on left hand.


No. 133.—Male; about 24 or 25; height 5 feet 7
inches; round face ; red tuft under chin.
No. 134.—Male ; large made, and tall, with the letter
“M” on woollen stocking.
We are prepared to give a lengthened account of
the bodies identified in the parish of Llanallgo, but,
previous to doing so, it will be essential for our readers
to learn the exact geographical position of Moelfra.


CHAPTER VII.
The village of Moelfra is situated on a rocky eminence,
north east of the Island of Angiesea, about thirteen
miles from Beaumaris, its chief town, and the same
distance from Bangor, from which latter place it is
separated by the straits of Menai.
The inhabitants of Moelfra principally consist of fish-
ermen and their families, who are remarkable for their
kindness of heart, and simplicity of character. Welsh
is the language spoken, but we met, occasionally, with
some who could converse freely in English.
What rather surprised us on first seeing the fatal shore,
was the small indications of wreck, from the destruction
of a vessel of nearly 3,000 tons, as we had often seen
more debris from the breaking up of an ordinary craft;
but this was easily accounted for—the Royal Charter
having been built of iron, scarcely a fragment of whiclx
had been washed on the beach. Proceeding a little further
however, we had abundant proofs of wreck on a more
gigantic scale, for a portion of the mainmast of the noble
ship was lying “high and dry” on the shore; its diameter
being, as near as we could determine, no less than four
feet, and attracted the attention of many who gazed
upon it in silence, significant of the awe with which it
inspired them.
The next object of interest which we approached, was
the ledge of rock on which Joseph Rogers effected a


landing. The detached piece round which he threw the
line, was a slab about ten feet long, by seven feet broad,
and one foot in depth, and, singular to say, was the only
thing to which a rope could possibly have been attached.
Had complete success attended this brave fellow’s efforts,
and this fragment of rock proved instrumental in the
preservation of the life sacrificed, what veneration might
it not have claimed from the pilgrims to those shores
through future years ? and what a goodly acknowledge-
ment might not the heroic Maltese have been awarded
by those proud to associate their names with his, and
distinguish him through life by evidence of their lasting
gratitude.
Close to the ledge of rock just alluded to, lie the
remains of the Koyal Charter. None but those who
beheld them could realize the fearful wreck which the
hurricane of the ill-omened 26th of October had reduced
it to. Nothing was visible but a blackened mass of ruins;
those who viewed her but the day previous—an impo-
sing specimen of marine architecture, apparently strong
enough to combat with, and conquer the fiercest gale—
might well stand appalled at the sudden and awful
transition.
The cliffs by which Moelfra is fronted, are low, and
formed in square blocks, some of which have been de-
tached by the force of the sea. From their summits
you have a commanding view of Great Ormshead, which
projects eastward of the island, and looks in the distance
strikingly sublime. Puffin Island is also observable in
the same direction, but would claim little notice from
its insignificancy, were it relieved from the painful no-


toriety which the wreck of the ‘Eothsay Castle,’ in
1832, attached to it, when 126 lives were sacrificed.
Dulas Bay and Point Lynas are situated to the west
of Moelfra; close to the former lies the wreck of the
ill-fated Eoyal Charter, and close to the latter may be
observed a small tower, erected in consequence of a ves-
sel being lost there, the unhappy crew having perished
for want of shelter.
Further on may be discerned, though indistinctly,
from intervening hills, the shores of Amlwch—a small
village, though greatly superior to Moelfra, owing to
the commerce carried on in copper and other valuable
ores. Eed Wharf Bay is also on the coast of Anglesea;
it is a plain of white sand extending about five miles,
and is situated between Beaumaris and Llanallgo.
Tyddyn, the residence of the Eev. Mr, Williams, is the
only place deserving of notice in this barren locality.
Circumstances obliged us to stop one night at Eed
Wharf Bay, and the first object -which attracted our at-
tention the following morning was a boat to which was
attached by a rope the body of one of the poor passen-
gers. It was most distressing to witness the face of the
dead, every undulation of the sea rendering it painfully
visible. The coastguard who conveyed it to shore car-
ried it to the cottage of Mrs. Eoberts, where we stopped,
and which is situated so close to the beach, that the
waves, the morning of the 26th of October, broke over
a>
and completely deluged it.
The delicate care which this kind-hearted woman
bestowed upon the poor remains was most gratifying to
observe. She told us she had lost a favorite brother by
h 2


the same treacherous element, and showed a small
souvenir which she preserved as sacred to his memory—
this was a shilling, pierced to admit the string through,
by which she attached it to her nock—the piece of sil-
ver, so religiously guarded, was all that was found on
her lost brother, and the tenderness she regarded it
with struck us as a beautiful trait of sisterly affection.
The body found on examination proved to be that of
Mr, John Grice. He was a tinsmith, and having suc-
ceeded in business, was proceeding to England for the
purpose of bringing his wife back with him to Australia-
On his person was discovered a bill of exchange for
£l4O, some Australian sovereigns, and twm or three
rupees.
It will be observed that Moelfra, Amlwch, and Red
Wharf Bay are all contiguous to each other, and parties
seeking for the remains of relatives visited those places
daily: for we should not omit to record the humane
assistance granted by Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co.
in having boats provided and sent out early and late
from those three places, under the superintendance of
the coastguard, to rescue any of the bodies which
might be found out at sea.
Miserable as the accommodation was which Moelfra
afforded, numbers gladly availed themselves of it, as the
distance from Beaumaris and Bangor, and the difficulty
of procuring a conveyance from either place, owing to
the great demand, made them, as a residence, most in-
convenient.
Thus, when intelligence would reach Moelfra of the
coastguard boats having conveyed to shore the remains


of any of the passengers, those interested immediately
proceeded to the place, and the most mutilated object
was not regarded as too appalling for inspection, so
great was the desire of the living to pay the last tri-
bute which affection could to the memory of the dead.
Of those oast on shore the morning of the 26th of
October, immediately after the wreck, three were iden-
tified. Mr. Russell, who had such a marvellous escape
himself, found the remains of his eldest child, aged
eight; and it was a heartrending sight to witness that
bereaved father carrying in his arms his dead offspring
rrp the rocky heights to Moelfra. We saw the little
innocent in one of the cottages, carefully wrapped in a
white sheet; it looked as if peacefully sleeping. Mr.
Russell remained some time at Moelfra, but did not
succeed in finding any other member of his family,
though a very singular circumstance attended his
anxious pursuit.
While on the shore one day conversing with the
Misses Moulsdale, of the rectory, something attracted
his notice floating on the surface of the sea; after seve-
ral efforts he succeeded in picking it up ; it proved to be
Iris own little deeds to some property he had purchased
in Australia. Those ladies who saw the deeds, informed
us that the writing on them was in a perfect state of
preservation.
The second body discovered was by an afflicted parent
also; this was Lewis, one of the inhabitants of
the village. He had been expecting his son from Mel-
bourne, but, when endeavouring the morning of the fatal
26th of October to assist the wretched shipwrecked, he


was ignorant where the vessel was from, or bound for,
that was breaking up; but his face was soon recognised
on the cliffs by his despairing son, who cried in accents
of anguish from the deck of the Eoyal Charter, “ Father,
father, I have come home to die!” The remorseless
waves which refused to aid his struggles to reach the
beach of his childhood, restored his poor remains to his
heart-broken parents.
Lewis was not the only sufferer from those “ death-
dealing waves.” Two smal Ivessels belonging to Wales
were also wrecked on the coast of Anglesea, and amongst
the crew who perished with them, were one or two of
the natives of this place. But the destruction of life
that resulted from the loss of the Royal Charter was so
great that the smaller wrecks, in the same vicinity, were
scarcely named.
The third identified on that memorable morning was
Jane, the daughter of Mr. Edwin Fowler. She was in
her seventeenth year, and her sad fate elicited the
deepest sympathy, as did her remains, the admiration
of the moved spectators. Her lips had preserved their
natural crimson hue, and her cheeks a bloom that
seemed a mockery of death; the deep fringe of her eye-
lids cast a peaceful shadow over her youthful face, and,
but for the weeds of the ocean which were mingled
with her dark hair, it would have proved, indeed, an
effort of faith to believe she had been the prey of the
devastating waves. As we gazed upon her, the de-
scriptive lines of the poet suggested themselves, where
he exclaims—
“ Oh, she was fair, but nought could save
Her beauties from the tomb!”


This girl, of so much promise, was lost shortly before
the vessel broke up. With the impetuosity natural to
youth, she rushed from the saloon to the deck of the
Royal Charter, accompanied by her favorite companion,
Miss S. Davis. Mr. Carew Taylor just at that moment
saw a terrible sea sweep them both away, and he could
discover no trace of either afterwards. Miss Fowler
was interred in Llanallgo churchyard. The Rev. Mr.
Hughes, whose benevolence and charity have been
celebrated by Mr. Dickens, consigned her to her last
resting-place. Relatives were present who had come
from afar to honour the remains of her, who, from child-
hood, had attached herself to them by her endearing
manners, and unsophisticated disposition.
While standing in the same churchyard, in about a
month after witnessing the scene we have just described,
we saw a new grave making, close to the one in which
Miss Fowler’s remains had been deposited. The sexton
told us it was for Mr. Fowler, and, while we spoke, the
funeral approached. The same devoted minister, came
forward with his white surplice on, and his sacred volume
in his hand, accompanied by all the inmates of the
Rectory. It was evident this amiable family wished to
eollect all they could to form an assemblage. This
delicate compliment was designed, lest a sense of the
existing desolation should add to the affliction of those
who had congregated to witness the last solemn ob-
sequies performed over the remains of their beloved and
lamented relative.
Mr. Fowler’s remains were found two miles out at
sea, by one of the boats cruising about Red Wharf Bay.


His clothes were on, with the exception of his coat, and
on his person were found a watch and chain, two seals,
thirty-five sovereigns, and some memorandums; the
watch had stopped at half-past seven. Captain Withers’
body was washed on shore at Bull Bay, Almwch; on him
were found a gold watch and chain, thirty-six sovereigns
in money, and a silver snuff-box, on which was inscribed
—“Presented by the passengers of the ship ‘ Gloucester,’
to Captain Withers, November 7th, 1838.” The watch
had stopped at half-past seven.
The body of Dr. Hatch was recovered at Moelfra; on
his person were found £l5O in gold, a silver snuff-box,
with his name engraved upon it, and his watch, which
had*also stopped at half-past seven, thus affording a
melancholy and corresponding proof of the time when
the unhappy passengers “ completed life’s journey.”
One who particularly claimed our respect for his
unwearying exertions to recover the remains of his wife,
was Mr. Foster, of Manchester. He stopped at Moelfra
for six weeks, during which period he visited every
morning at daylight, those places along the coast where
any of the poor bodies were washed on shore. The
reason he assigned to us for thus early devoting himself
to this sad task, was the doubt of recognizing his wife,
unless he saw her immediately after coming out of the
water. But the hope deferred made his heart sick at
last, and, in December, he reluctantly complied with his
friends’ requests, and prepared to leave Moelfra. Every-
thing was arranged for his departure the ensuing morning,
and he had just laid his head on his pillow for the night,-
when a messenger arrived with a telegram from Bangor,


announcing that Mrs. Foster’s remains were found at
Portaferry, on the east coast of Ireland, near • Belfast.
Mr. Foster immediately proceeded to Bangor, just in
time to meet the last train for Holyhead, and the follow-
ing evening, reached Portaferry, where he heard his wife
had been interred with every respect. But this devoted
husband, so true to the love after death, was not content
to let her remains lie in a land (to him) of strangers; he
had them exhumed, and conveyed to England, and they
now lie in his family vault at Chester.
While we are recording the indefatigable exertions
resorted to by Mr. Foster to recover his lost wife, we
must not omit to name the no less persevering labours
of Mr. Pitcher, whose brother perished in the wreck,
with his wife and two children. Mr. Pitcher’s nephew,
Mr. Arthur Eich, stopped at Bangor for seven weeks,
prosecuting his search every day along the coast of
Anglesea. This gentleman’s name must be familiar
to the public, as many were indebted to him for infor-
mation respecting the remains of their lost relatives, he
kindly communicating to the leading journals particulars
of those found along the coast.
Mr. Pitcher’s eldest child was one of those recovered
the day of the fatal disaster on the shores of Moelfra,
in the parish of Penrhos Lligwy. Mr. Pitcher’s re-
mains were found at Almwch, where he was deprived
of his clothing, and thus the only hope of his identity
might have been destroyed, had not the searching in-
quiries instituted by Mr. Eich elicited such information
as led him to request the exhuming of the body, which
had been interred in Almwch churchyard. When Mr.


Pitcher at once recognized in the dead, his lost bro-
ther, and Mr. Rich, his uncle, the remains were con-
veyed to Llanallgo. Two or three weeks elapsed before
the sad addition of Mrs. Pitcher was made to this
family; her remains were discovered at Moelfra, but not
until December. We saw the melancholy procession as
it passed from Llanallgo to Bangor; from thence the
three coffins were conveyed to London, under the super-
intendence of Mr, Davis, of Bangor, and finally deposited
in Mr, Pitcher’s family vault. The Rev. Mr. Hughes,
of Llanallgo, performed the last solemn rites, and the
journals which recorded the interment, added that a
more impressive scene had never been witnessed in the
new cemetery at Brompton.
Mr. Pitcher had, for some years, carried on large com-
mercial operations in China, and for the last two or
three, in Geelong, Australia, where his health declined,
and having amassed a fortune, he made arrangements to
return to his native country. The Royal Charter being
a favorite vessel, he secured a passage for himself and
family, the unhappy result of which is already so widely
known, and so universally deplored.
The great majority of those in search of the remains
of their friends, not succeeding in recovering them,
naturally inferred that they were in and under the
debris of the wreck. The result of this conclusion was,
an application to Sir Richard Bulkeley, praying him to
exercise his influence with the proper authorities, to
oblige them to raise the wreck, that the poor bodies,
might be disengaged from the machinery, which it was.
unanimously agreed they were entangled in. This
happened the latter end of November.


Sir Richard Bulkeley, with that kindliness of feeling
for which he is distinguished, immediately communi-
cated with the Board of Trade, and the relatives of the
lost had the satisfaction of seeing their, wishes partially
carried out.
A steam-tug was sent to Moelfra, and after disturb-
ing a portion of the iron of the wreck, it was confidently
affirmed that no bodies were in or under it. These
operations were carried on under the superintendence of
Captain Fell and Captain Martin. Several bodies were
washed on shore the same week; but whether this re-
sulted from the efforts resorted to by the steam-tug, or
the wind proving favourable to such an issue at that time
we cannot now presume to determine.
At this period, the remains of Mrs. Fenwick were
recovered who perished with her four children. Mr.
Fenwick was spared hearing of the lamentable loss of
his family: he died at Melbourne a week after the
wreck of the vessel he had placed such confidence in.
Mrs. Davis was also found—she was sister to Mrs:
Fenwick; her husband and four children were lost.
The remains of Mr. Davis and his two daughters were
not discovered for some weeks after; but those of Mrs.
Murray were the week we refer to, and interred in
Almwch churchyard; the body was not identified. From
a description preserved of her appearance, &c., it was
assumed by a Mrs. Kennedy that the remains were
those of her sister, Mrs. Edwin Fowler, and at her re-
quest they were exhumed, under the superintendence
of Dr. Griffith, who, having known Mrs. Fowler, kindly
interested himself to accomplish everything essential to


prove an identity, but a subsequent interview which
Mrs. Kennedy had with Mrs. Nahmer, the lady who
fortunately left the ship at Queenstown, undeceived her
in this conjecture. The remains interred at Almwdi
were those of Mrs. Murray.
Several were found in a state of perfect preservation,
after having been exposed to the decomposing influence
of the water for several weeks. Mr. Hutton was at
once recognised by his mother, though his remains
were not discovered for at least a mouth after he had
perished. This young gentleman was a great favorite
on board the Eoyal Charter. Amongst other accom-
plishments he had cultivated a taste for painting, and
executed, while on his passage, an admirable likeness
of Captain Taylor, also one of Mr. Pitcher’s eldest
child. In writing to his mother previous to his de-
parture from Australia, he affectionately declared that,
to embrace her once again, he would willingly forfeit
ten years of his life. Alas! poor fellow! when just
about to achieve a wish so near his heart, the sudden
termination of his hopes seem doubly distressing.
Another body which presented no signs of decompo-
sition was that of Mr. Croome. He was fourth officer
on board the Eoyal Charter. We saw him lying in
Llanallgo church, dressed in his uniform. His body was
found at Moelfra some weeks after the dreadful catas-
trophe ; his friends arrived while we were there to claim
him; but we are not able to state correctly where his,
remains were interred.
Mr. Eufford was another gentlemen who was for-
tunate in recovering his brother’s remains; he had them
conveyed to his family vault in Warwickshire.


Those members of the Jewish faith who had friends
on board the Royal Charter were also successful in their
exertions to recover them. In a letter addressed by
those gentlemen to the Rev. Mr. Hughes, and published
by Mr. Dickens, they pleasingly acknowledge the kind-
ness they experienced while at the Rectory, and grate-
fully allude to the facility which Mr. Hughes afforded
them in having the remains of their friends disinterred
and conveyed to their own place of burial.
In February, at the particular wish of their relatives,
the remains of Mrs. Hogarth from Llanbedrgoch church-
yard, and of Mr. P. Hogarth from the churchyard of
Llanfairmathafarncithaf, were conveyed in double coffins
to Penrhos Lligwy, where they were interred with their
little boy, Robert, who was buried there the first week
of the wreck. The Rev. Mr. Hugh Hughes, Rector of
that parish, kindly superintended their interment.
At Pentreth, near Red Wharf Bay, the remains of Ida,
Mr. Edwin Fowler’s youngest daughter, aged five-and-
a-half years, and also those of her nurse, Emma Calf,
were found. When discovered, they were lying close
to each other on the sands, presenting a melancholy
proof of the maid’s fidelity, for evidently, in death, she
had not relinquished the charge confided to her. The
cruel waves that separated many loving souls, cast those
two victims of their destructive power on the shores
together. We saw them by torch-light in Pentreth
Church, where they 7 w T ere permitted to lie until identified,
and a sadder scene we have seldom witnessed ; no longer
might the cheerful voice of the shipwrecked girl make
glad the heart of the shipwrecked child; the same de-


routing element engulfed both —the child, most likely,
while sleeping its last sleep, unconscious of the horrors
of that eventful night, or the unseen glories that awaited
the dawn of its heavenly morrow.


CHAPTER YIII.
Messrs. Gibbs and Bright, the owners of the Royal
Charter, with great consideration for the friends of those
who perished, induced Mr. Gapper, one of the survivors,
to stop at the village of Moelfra; he being a young man
of intelligence, they wisely concluded that he would,
from his knowledge of the passengers, be able to identify
many of the lost; and the information he was able to
give, was eagerly sought after by the crowds who made
their way to the scene of the withering calamity.
Mr. Bradbury was also daily besieged by despairing
relatives, and was most desirous of affording all the
knowledge he possessed of the dress, appearance, &c., of
those on board. This young man, it may be remembered,
had an extraordinary escape from the WTeck, having
broken his leg, and injured his spine in his struggle to
swim to shore; the former accident obliged him to con-
tinue in the cabin, where he was carried the morning of
the 26th of October, until the middle of December.
When we visited him, he gave us the following account
of some of the last scenes he witnessed on board the
Royal Charter; —
mb. beadbuet’s account of the wreck.
“About three o’clock, a.m., the morning of the 26th
October, the vessel struck as if she had come in contact
with a rock. The alarm was general, and confidence
was never again restored. I accompanied a great many
i 2


of the second-class passengers to the saloon, where we
found all the ladies and gentlemen up and dressed, but
in great consternation. The deck had been injured when
the masts were cut down, and the result was, that the
water came into the saloon, creating the appearance
of a wreck. I being a good swimmer, was most anxious
to got upon deck, but heard such an attempt would be
attended with great danger, as one of the ship’s officers
had already been killed, owing to the falling spars, &o.
We were assured by Captain Taylor, that when day-
light dawned, he would have no difficulty in getting us
all on shore, but those few hours of darkness seemed
to me longer than all the years of my previous life; at
last morning came and relieved some of our fears, and
when I heard the order given for the ladies to go on
deck, I thought all would be well with us; just as the
ladies passed down the saloon, the order was counter-
manded, and they were desired to remain in the saloon
for ten or twenty minutes longer; I was at a loss to ac-
count for this delay. In about a quarter of an hour
the order was repeated, and just at that moment the
ship commenced striking violently against the rooks.
The saloon doors were opened, but before any of them
had passed out, the ship broke in two. I rushed on
deck and let myself down into the sea, and whilst
struggling there, a boat fell from the vessel and crushed
me underneath it. lam unable to account for reaching
shore, as my leg was broken, and my back and breast
very much injured. I was carried to this cabin, and
owing to the kindness of Mr. Tyndall Bright, who pro-
vided for all my wants, and left nothing undone to con-


tribute towards my restoration, I am now, thank God,
wonderfully well.”
This account of the wreck, though more abridged,
corresponded with Mr. Carew Taylor’s, which was as
follows:
“ On Tuesday night, wdren the gale became so strong,
opposite the Skerries, the ladies and many of the pas-
sengers became exceedingly nervous ; for my part, how-
ever, I had such confidence in the captain, officers, and
ship, that I went to bod at ten o’clock. I could only
doze, and w T as aroused in an hour or two by the fearful
storm. I heard a voice in the cabin cryipg out—
“ Come directly, or we are all lost ; I wfill take your
child. Come along directly.’ The voice < was that of
Captain Withers, a passenger, wdio had lost his own
vessel in the South Pacific. I jumped out of bed and
opened his cabin door, but all were gone from there.
Hastily putting on a few articles, I ran upon deck;
the ship bumped heavily two or three times against the
ground. On going into the general saloon, I found it
crowded with ladies and gentlemen in the utmost state
of tremor. Families were all clinging to each other ; the
young children w T ere crying out piteously, whilst parents
■were endeavouring to soothe them with cheering hopes.
The Eev. Mr. Hodge, a church of England clergyman,
belonging to East Betford, instituted a prayer meeting,
and a great number of passengers fervently participated
in the service. The ship struck, however, so fearfully,
and the huge waves came down upon her with such
tremendous force, rushing into the cabins, through the
skylights, broken by the falling rigging and hatches,


that all became absorbed in the idea of personal danger.
All tried to soothe the ladies and children. Captain
Withers came into the cabin, remarking —‘ Now, ladies,
you need not be at all afraid; we are on a sandy beach,
and imbedded in the sand; we are not ten paces from
the 'shore, and the tide will leave us dry; and in ten
minutes you will all be safe.’ ”
Dr. Hatch, a government medical officer, also cheered
the passengers. Captain Taylor came down afterwards
to give encouragement, and he made a similar repre-
sentation which had the effect of greatly allaying the
excitement. Great order w r as, consequently, kept on
board. At half-past five o’clock the bumping went on
worse than ever, until, at last, the water came rushing
in. When daylight began to peep, I was knocked by
the force of the waves with great violence against the
side of the saloon, and the screams were now dreadful.
It was impossible to know what to do. I went on deck,
but with the greatest difficulty maintained my equili-
brium. At this time, a great sea came against the
broadside, and divided the ship into two, just at the
engine-house, as one would smash a pipe stump, and
the sea washed quite through her. The two parts
“ slewed ” round, and became total wrecks. Parties
were carried down "with the debris, and as many must
have been killed as drowned. Having made up my
mind that I had best jump overboard on the lee side,
I attempted to descend by a rope, but fell deep into the
water, which was so thickly strewn with portions of the
wreck that I had to open up a passage with my head.
I was repeatedly thrown ashore, and as often washed


back, until some people on shoie managed to rescue me.
By this time I was almost worn out and insensible.”
During one of our interviews with Mr. Bradbury,
a widow lady, named Bakewell, expressed a wish to see
him. Her son had gone a year previous to Australia,
and in the last letter she had from him there ivas no
intimation of his returning to England; but, in three
weeks after the wreck, she saw in the list of the lost
the name of Bakewell, and started at once for Moelfra,
hoping some of the survivors would be able to give her
a description of the young man bearing that name.
She was correct in her conjecture ; Mr. Bradbury, whom
she then addressed, had shared the same cabin with her
son, whom the young man proved to be, and told her
his reason for not acquainting her -with his projected
return originated in his wish to give her a joyful sur-
prise. What added to the tribulation of this bereaved
widow was the improbability which she thought ther
existed of finding her son’s remains. She stopped somt
time near the village, but, despairing of success in hej
sad labours, returned to Manchester with kind assuran-
ces from the family at the rectory that in the event o:
her son’s body being found, she should at once be com-
municated with.
Another distressing incident occurred while we were
in the vicinity of Moelfra. An humble couple, after
journeying some hundreds of miles, reached those tragic
shores, though the name of their son whom they sought
did not appear in the fatal list of the lost; but from a
letter recently received from him, they feared he was
one of the victims of the week. In this letter he wrote
—“ Before this arrives in England, I will be more than


half-way home.” He was a sailor, and every particular
relating to him was graphically described to Mr. Smith,
the receiver of wreck, who assured the unhappy couple
that no body had been found resembling their son, and
kindly endeavoured to persuade them that their sus-
picions were altogether groundless. While thus en-
gaged talking to the man, the poor woman made her
way to the beach where the debris of the wreck was
strewed around, and, in a very few minutes after, a
startling shriek was heard—the distracted mother had
discovered the lid of her son’s chest with his name,
which he had peculiarly marked upon it himself pre-
vious to his leaving home, and in her agony she sprung
up in the air with the fragment in her hands, which had
so convincingly developed the fatal truth. Mr. Smith
shouted to the coastguard to hasten to her assistance,
but before any one reached her she had fallen to the
earth in a swoon. How strange and sad this circum-
stance appears, accident abruptly revealing a fact of
such terrible extent to those two mourners. Their
lamentation over the well-known relic was touching in
the extreme. It was all they ever found belonging to
the son so dear to them. They stopped at Moelfra
some time seeking his remains, as they dwelt on the
solemn consolation they should derive in laying them
under the turf of his country; but, poor people! this
last desire they were not permitted to see fulfilled.
“ No flowers bloom in beauty, no stone tells his story,
No dirge save the wind and the wave;
No tablet of fame, and no emblem of glory
Are found near the sailor boy’s grave.
Yet, his head rests in peace on his coral rock pillow,
’Neath his childhood’s first dream—his first love—
And the sun, and the sea bird, and foam-crested billow
All sparkle in splendour above.”


CHAPTER IX.
IV e could enumerate a variety of similar painful in-
cidents, as many parents who had children in Australia,
legislating on conjecture, repaired to Moelfra, where,
on instituting inquiries, they discovered that their un-
happy offspring were among the lost. In having refer-
red to Mr. Smith in our last chapter, we should observe
that he was collector of customs at Beaumaris, and
■was obliged to stop at the scene of the wreck. He was
a gentleman of extraordinary energy, and in the dis-
charge of his duties, which were arduous and responsi-
ble, manifested a humane anxiety to obtain every infor-
mation that he thought could in any way soothe or
satisfy the inquiring multitude. Should this imperfect
acknowledgment of his kindness ever meet his eyes,
may it assure him of the gratitude of at least two, who,
while at Moelfra, were witnesses of his philanthropy,
and at Beaumaris, the recipients of his hospitality.
Amongst those whom we met, and whom, we regret
to add, were unsuccessful in their labours to recover
their friends, were Doctor LaFargue and his sister, Mrs.
Weston; they were in search of their lost brother’s re-
mains, Mr. Walter Nugent LaFargue—a gentleman, who
had endeared himself by his noble nature to a large
circle of friends, both in this country and in Australia.
In the last letters his friends in Geelong received from
him, he names the pleasure he anticipated on his voyage


from the agreeable companionship of Mr. J. Rufford, who
shared his cabin; ho also gave a most pleasing account
of all the arrangements of the ship.
In a communication addressed to Mrs. Weston, his
sister, by one of his Australian friends, who deeply de-
plored his loss, the following interesting paragraph
occurs:—
“On the morning we left here, when about a hundred yards
from the premises, he pulled up, and turning round said—‘Well,
I must have another look at the old place; who knows hut it
may be the last ?’ Mr. ,an old colonist with whom he was
intimate, on hearing the Royal Charter was lost, came twenty
miles to hear if we had an account of his escape. When I told
him he was amongst the lost, he was very deeply effected, and
exclaimed —‘ Surely he must he in heaven, he was so upright,
honest, and good-hearted.’ ”
This spontaneous panegyric pronounced on the un-
conscious dead, must be regarded by the living members
of his family as a happy assurance that change of cli-
mate had not produced in him change of disposition;
and that the same purity of principle which charac-
terized him in his native country, distinguished him,
also, in his adopted one.
The last time he was seen alive by one of the sur-
vivors, he was boldly struggling with the waves to reach
shore, and, being an expert swimmer, it is assumed that
some of the falling must have crashed him, and
thus put a period to his valued existence.
Mr. LaFargue, in his last letters, also mentions Mr.
Stevens, whose gentlemanly bearing had greatly pre-
possessed him in his favour. Mr. Stevens was chief-
officer on board the Royal Charter; he was an ornament


to his profession, and an honour to his country; for never
was there, in the annals of calamity, a more signal instance
given of the sacrifice of all that was selfish to an heroic
sense of duty, when, with ease, he could have effected
his transit to shore by availing himself of the hawser;
he employed himself more nobly, for, from the moment
daylight made visible the perilous position of the ship,
his object was to save the female passengers, and all his
efforts were devoted to this humane end, even at the
most fatal crisis—when the vessel parted in two—and
when many were frantic in their endeavours to get on
deck to save themselves, this brave officer, faithful to
his purpose, and fearless to himself, made one last and
desperate attempt to save the perishing; he sprang down
the foaming chasm into the saloon; but either the fall-
ing decks or the merciless breakers put a period to his
noble project; for he instantly disappeared from mortal
sight and for ever. But his memory shall long sur-
vive, not only in his own country, but in distant lands,
and his name be preserved in the hearts of those who
shall ever remember with gratitude his noble exertions
to save their friends and relatives.
On the morning of the 27th of October, Miss Stevens
was married at Liverpool, and the presence of this very
dear brother was hourly expected to complete the joy
this event occasioned; but the wedding breakfast had
only commenced when the fearful news of the wreck
prostrated with grief the whole assemblage, and the
bridegroom hastened from the festive scene to witness
the desolating one which the shores of Moelfra pre-


seated; but the remains lie sought, we regret to add,
were not recovered.
The fearless exertions also made by Mr. Cowie, second
officer on board the Eoyal Charter, to save the women,
deserves to be recorded. He was the last seen at the
hawser after the ship parted in two, but made no effort
to avail himself of it. Still expecting some of the lost
might have escaped when the decks fell in and that he
could have aided in their rescue. This gentleman was
once shipwrecked on the coast of Adelaide, South
Australia, but survived only to become the victim of a
wreck that not only proved fatal to himself but to all
his brother officers.
The remains of the Jenkins family were not re-
covered. Mr. Jenkins, M.L.C., of Bombala, near
Marulan, left Australia, accompanied by his wife,
daughter of Captain Plunkett, P.M., Goldboum, and
five sons, with the intention of remaining in Europe two
or three years. His daughter, who was completing her
education in Paris, was to join them on their arrival in
London. But the fatal morning of the 26th of October
put a period to all their previous arrangements; and Miss
Jenkins, who was promising herself such pleasure at
the prospect of meeting her dear relatives, was plunged
into the deepest affliction at the sudden and unexpected
intelligence of her loss.
Mr. Jenkins was a native of New South Wales; and
this voyage, which terminated so disastrously, was his
first to Europe. Another family, who were on a pleasure
tour tq Europe, and who participated in the same fear-
ful disaster, was that of Mr. Bruce, of the firm of Neil


and Bruce, Oxford-street. This gentleman, though aged
but twenty-eight, was possessed of great commercial
knowledge, and having devoted himself closely to busi-
ness for six years, was proceeding to Scotland with his
wife and child, hoping to enjoy once more the beautiful
scenery of his native land. Their remains were not re-
covered while we were in the vicinity of Moelfra. We
deeply regret that the patience and diligence of one lady
whom we met should not have been rewarded with the
success it merited. This was Mrs. Henderson, a widow
lady, who three times visited Moelfra in search of her
son’s remains. She carried with her his picture, hoping
it might prove of use in his identification. Alas! poor
lady! on examination of some of the bodies, how pain-
fully convinced she must have become of the little value
that precious memorial of her child possessed, as an assis-
tant to her in her distressing, though self-imposed duty.
Perhaps the most singular circumstance connected
with the loss of the Eoyal Charter, was the sacrifice of
the lives of five masters of vessels; four captains were
passengers on board—Captain Withers, Captain Adams,
Captain Johnston, Captain Morris, and Captain Taylor,
the commander of the ill-fated ship. Not one of those
experienced seamen escaped the dreadful wreck, which
was an evidence of the fury of the storm, as some of
those men were good swimmers, but unable to combat
with a sea described by the natives of Moelfra, as un-
paralleled on that coast. The oldest seafaring man
not remembering, during his generation, anything ap-
proaching the madness of the ocean, or the violence of
the gale.


The remains of the Marks family were not recovered.
Mr., Mrs. Marks, and two children, were returning to
England, to reside permanently. The declining health
of Mr. Marks’ father necessitated the transfer of his
business to his son; and it was with the view of carrying
out this arrangement he left Australia.
Mr. E. Gardiner, who got out at Cork, arrived at
Moelfra immediately after the wreck, in search of his
■wife’s remains. This gentleman’s grief approached mad-
ness ; he accused himself of leaving the object of his
dearest affection to perish, and, several times in his
agony, exclaimed, “Would to God I had stopped to die
with her !”
The remains of Mrs. Edwin Fowler were not re-
covered by her anxious friends. This lamented lady,
when writing home to her sister, previous to leaving
Melbourne, thus expressed herself:—
“ If anything should happen to me on my voyage, you know
my last wishes respecting Ida and Jane Although
I have written this, I trust, by God’s mercy, I shall he spared
to see your dearly-loved face again. Pray that, indeed, it may
be so ; if not, look forward with resignation to our meeting in
that blissful world where parting is unknown.”
This submission to the divine will "was practically
evidenced by a spotless life and conversation, and by
the exercise of all those charities and amenities which
make that life lovely; and this tribute to the memory
of the lost we offer, as no eulogium upon the spirit that
resteth from its troubles.
But a personal knowledge of Mrs. Fowler’s character
only claims from us, in recording her loss, this brief


notice of the virtues which so eminently adorned her.
In writing to her sister, also, from Queenstown, after,
acquainting her with the safe arrival of the Royal Charter
there, she begs of her to proceed to Liverpool to meet
her, adding ; “I am so anxious and excited at the
thoughts of seeing you all so soon.”
While Mrs IL, whom she addressed thus, was pre-
paring to cross over from Ireland to meet her, the tele-
graphic wires conveyed the awful news of the wreck;
but, still, hope was not abandoned by this devoted sis-
ter —twenty-seven were saved; those so dear to her
might be amongst the number. Vain surmise! An-
other day saw her encountering the fatal seas—not to
embrace the companion of her youth, or fondly welcome
her back to the homes of her kindred, but on a pil-
grimage to the shores of death, in search of all that
then remained of her, who but the day previous she
had received the glad tidings from, of her safe arrival at
Cork, and who anticipated such joy, seeing once more
those relatives by whom she knew she was so dearly
beloved.
The remains of the Rev. Mr. Hodge were not re-
covered. The respect which the lamented gentleman’s
character inspired the passengers with, while on board
the Royal Charter, was testified by their presenting him
with a purse of thirty-five sovereigns, in acknow-
ledging which he stated his intention of applying the
amount to the purchase of a private communion service.
We are happy to see the friends of the Rev. gentlemen
have subscribed for the benevolent purpose of present-
ing his afflicted family with a testimonial, as a proof of
k 2


their appreciation of his Christian character, and sym-
pathy for his lamentable fate.
A Mr. Watson, from Scotland, had also made his
way to Moelfra. He was in search of the remains of a
son, who had perished in the wreck of the Eoyal Charter.
The meek resignation which characterized this old gen-
tlemen inspired us with great respect. We have often
accompanied him along the shores, while seeking some
relic of the lost. Books, in a delapidated state, were
sometimes picked up, with the owner’s name remaining
to tell their sad fate; pocket-handkerchiefs, also, with
the names marked, and different trifles that death in-
vested with a strange interest. But from the quantities
of clothing which the action of the sea had piled upon
the beach, it was almost impossible to procure the
smallest memento, a complete fence was formed of such
a strange assemblage of articles, that very few had the
strength or desire to disturb them.
Out of some of the debris, a rude tent had been
erected to shelter the coastguard who were protecting
property washed on shore, night and day; and who
were particular in allowing only those who had lost
friends or relatives to walk in the immediate vicinity of
the wreck.


CHAPTER X.
When the weather permitted, the divers employed in
recovering the sunken treasure proceeded with their
operations, and finally succeeded in collecting gold to
the amount of nearly half-a-million sterling, which the
underwriters took possession of, having effected an in-
surance upon it. One piece of iron found was exhibi-
ted as a curiosity; nuggets of gold and sovereigns were
so completely forced into it as to defy the exertions of
the divers to extract them. Articles of plate and jew-
lery were also found. On some of the former, the
letter “F ” was engraved; the latter consisted of breast-
pins, earrings, broaches, rings broken watches, chains,
&c.
As many of our readers may never have had an op-
portunity of witnessing the process of diving, it may not
be uninteresting here to give a description of that use-
ful and scientific invention. The diver is first clad in
a suit of thick woollen clothing, over which is placed a
dress of Indianrubber, very pliant, fitting the body easily,
and well secured at the wrists and ancles. No cover-
ing impedes the action of the hands, but the feet are
protected by very strong boots, having attached to each
sole about twenty pounds weight of lead. When these
matters are properly fixed, the diver stands up in the
boat, and makes fast the life line round his waist, and
the signal line to his wrist. Then a large copper hel-


met resembling those soon amongst ancient armour, is
placed over his head, and is secured round the neck,
to his dress by screws.
There is a valve in the helmet for the purpose of
emitting foul air, and from the back of it descends the
long Indianrubber tube which supplies the enterprising
explorer with fresh air, from an air-pump fixed in the
centre of the boat—this presents the appearance of a
square box, with handles at each end.
The next arrangement is the filling up of the sockets
of the helmet with large dises of glass; and, from that
moment, the pump commences operations, as the insert-
ing of the dises excludes all air, and the diver is depend-
ing on the pump for life. Two or three men in the boat
now commence turning the handles of this ingenious ap-
paratus, slowly and regularly, and the last requirements
are quickly adjusted—that of fitting two large slabs
of lead weighing about two stone each on the back and
breast of the diver, who immediately steps on the gun-
wale of the boat, falls heavily over the side, and dis-
appears in the sea.
The tube and life-line are now carefully paid out until
the diver reaches the wreck, and the man in charge of
them is all attention, watching with the greatest care
the slightest signal—which the first time we witnessed
particularly excited our interest, but occasioned no other
movement in the boat than attaching to the signal-line
an iron instrument, which was hauled down into the sea.
When the diver wishes to come up, or meets with any
accident, he touches the life-line, which gives an alarm
by striking a bell, and he is at once assisted to the sur-.


face. In this way a communication is carried on, much
resembling telegraphing in system. Buckets were sent
down in which gold, bolts of copper, and small articles
were put; ropes and chains to bring up the heather
articles, and so on. The average time the men remain
down is about two hours, but we saw one down three
hours, which is really extraordinary, and can scarcely
be believed without witnessing; this, however, can only
be accomplished when the sea is a perfect calm.
We have often solemnly meditated on the tragic
scene before us—on one side the divers in search of
the “ barbaric gold,” while on the other, our eyes have
anxiously followed the boats out seeking for human re-
mains. In a roofless hut, near the beach, coffins were
piled together; it was easily known when they were
required, as the bodies, when found, w r ere secured by
ropes to the boats, and could be discerned far out
at sea. When landed, they w T ere placed at once in
coffins, and cars conveyed them to the parish churches;
we have frequently met two and three coffins on each car,
proceeding to Llanallgo church, where the Eev. Mr.
Hughes allowed them to remain as long as he possibly
could, to give an opportunity to the friends of identifi-
cation, and interring them. About a month after the
wreck, this respected clergyman pointed out one place
near the fatal rook, where he supposed, from his know-
ledge of the coast, many bodies w r ere lying entangled
in the seaweed, and with the consent of Mr. Bright, a
diver went down, but found great difficulty in prevent-
ing the life-line from becoming fast in the weeds. During
this process, great excitement prevailed, many encourag-


ing the hope that it would prove successful, but the
diver, on coming up, declared his search a failure, though
immediately after, a body floated on the surface of the
spot just disturbed. It was claimed as that of Mr.
Frederick Hutton, a gentlemen, very dear to his family.
A tombstone recording his melancholy fate, has been
erected in Llanallgo churchyard, not far distant from
the shores where he perished.
In March, Moelfra was visited by as large a concourse
of people as had assembled the first week of the unhappy
disaster. A report, just at that period, obtained circu-
lation that Messrs. Gibbs and Bright purposed taking
advantage of the low tides, predicted to raise the wreck,
and many hoped, even then, to rescue the remains of
relatives, which they were of opinion the debris of the
iron kept under water; but great disappointment ensued
when they found the operations carried on merely
routine. The machinery necessary to remove the mass
of ruin did not arrive, and Captain Martin, the superin-
tendent of the works, informed those interested in the
result, that he did not expect, for at least three months,
to accomplish the undertaking.
That bodies are still close to the wreck can scarcely
be doubted from the circumstance of two appearing in
its immediate vicinity at that period, both males, and
dressed respectably. They were conveyed to Penrhos
Lligwy for interment. Particulars relating to them
will be found in the registry of the Rev. Hugh Hughes,
rector of that parish.


CHAPTER XI.
When intelligence reached Australia of the loss of the
Royal Charter, few could realize the appalling truth.
The dreadful announcement came upon the friends of
those who perished by surprise, which was succeeded
by a gloom that spread throughout the colonies. Per-
haps the best means of putting our readers in posses-
sion of the sensation the news of the calamity excited
is to give the following extracts from letters that arrived
in England by the March overland mail. One gentle-
man who lost several relatives, writes: —
“The catastrophe was of such a dreadful nature, so unex-
pected and overwhelming in its results to us and to numbers,
that I cannot even yet realize a loss so terrible and final to all
of those who, a few months ago, left us in such high and joyous
hopes ■
That you may understand how unprepared we were for this
desolating news, I mnst explain that a late telegram from Eng-
land to Aden announced the arrival of the Eoyal Charter at
Liverpool, after a passage of sixty-two days, and the overland
mail conveyed this report to Melbourne. I, amongst many
others, wrote letters of congratulation to those so dear to me,
on having arrived in safety, and despatched them by the mail
outward hound for England
“ On hearing that thirteen had got out at Cork, a gleam of
hope sprung up. I thought, perhaps, a remnant might have
been spared;—this was on Saturday. The following Sunday
night, at eleven o’clock, the guns of the mail ship announced
her arrival for Hobson’s Bay, and I and Mr. immediately


started, and, on going on board, need I say, all our fears were
confirmed. We returned home to those anxiously awaiting
our arrival to tell them we must all prepare to meet our ter-
rible and apalling loss.”
Another gentleman who had lost a family of near
relatives, thus expressed himself:—
“ A week has since passed away, yet I am continually asking
myself, ‘ Is this all a dream?’ and, then, the frightful reality
rushes upon me, and closes the gates of hope for ever.”
A lady writes who lost father, mother, and sisters:—
“ The news this mail has brought so completely overwhelms
me, lam almost unable to write. You who know the magni-
tude of my loss may imagine the anguish the terrific intelligence
has caused me.”
' Then the last sad hope is expressed—that the re-
mains of those so dear might be recovered, and their
graves visited by the bereaved, if spared, in future
years.
The 24th of August was the day announced for the
sailing of the Royal Charter from Melbourne; but,
though all the passengers had embarked, she did not
steam out of Hobson’s Bay until the 26th—two days
later—and in two months, as near as might be, after
encountering the perils of the great Pacific, and sight-
ing the “ happy homes of England,” the ill-omened ship
went to pieces, and her unhappy passengers passed from
hence to be no more seen. Six months have now
elapsed since the awful tragedy of the wreck on the
rocks of Moelfra; yet Time—that great rectifyer —
has not reconciled the bereaved to the loss they sus-
tained, though humbly submitting to the decrees of an
allwise Providence, still must they ever continue to


lament a disaster tliat hurried into eternity four hun-
dred and eighty souls in sight of their native, shores.
The graveyards of Anglesea have now become pain-
fully associated with that catastrophe, for within their
remote and secluded walls, repose the mortal remains
of many of the loved and lost. We derive, ourselves,
a mournful gratification from the knowledge that those
of our dear relatives recovered from the wastes of the
deep, now quietly rest in Llanallgo churchyard, “by
strangers honoured,” for already violet flovvers are
blossoming around their lowly beds; gentle hands
transplanted them from the Eectory garden as a grace-
ful tribute to the remains of departed worth. Many will
bless those faithful guardians of the household graves,
and pilgrims who, in sorrow and vexation of spirit,
may visit that peaceful sanctuary, will feel a pleasing
consolation in leaving the ashes of their kindred where
such mindful care is bestowed, and rejoice to think that
“ Still shall their graves with rising flowers be dressed,
And the green turf lie lightly o'er their breast'*


; In five, months offer Mr. Fowler's interment, a ring, which he was aeons-
; unied to wear in memory of a departed sister, whose name was inscribed
Npon it, was washed on shore, and found by one of the peasants living in the
\ieiuityof the wreck. Owing to the kind and Timely interference of the
Kev. Hugh Hughes, it was recovered and restored by him to Mr. Corn
J'uwler, of Dublin, father to the gentlemen whoso sac fate we have re
curded, and wc copy the following lines, as they were composed by a niece
cf the lamented deceased immediately on seeing the interesting, thoudi
mournful relic.]
/Jne.s on a Ring cast on shore five months after the \tv eric >■)
the Royal Charter .
JANE FOWLER JOKES.
Five moons the raging sea retained.
Within its secret hold,
This ring, the sad and sacred type
Of mourning manifold.
This ring, that to a brother’s love,
A sister’s death declar’d,
lieturneth, crying from the deep—
“ Wop! woe I He hath not spared !”
Oh ring of mourning! ring of Fate I
In what nnfathom’d scene
Of horror unexplor’d and dark
Hast thou mute witness been ?
Thou hast been where the hidden dead
Repose beneath the sea,
Nought fearful, or soul-harrowing
Is there unknown to thee.
Oh sea! we hade thee not restore
Our jewels, or our gold ;
We ask’d of thee a greater debt—
The lives within thy hold.
In vain, in vain, oh ruthless sea I
In vain our arms we spread,
And prayed thee for our lov’d ones
Thou gavest us our dead.
Yet not in vain, from thee, sad sea,
This precious gift is riven,
Imparting hope—to us who weep—
That we may meet in heaven.


KKATUM.
1 n Gl. line 2a, rend tor “ 20 tons oa cwt..*’ “20 tons 15 cwt.”
GB. lines I*l and 32, read £ before numbers 803,000
' and 870.000.
] IG, line H, for “ discs.'’ road “ discs.'
117, line 23. for “identification ’’ read •• identifying.'
110, last line, tbe word “ for” -hoidd be “ in.”


STEAM CLIPPER,
. ■ . r -i|l
' <’ 5
OCTOBER 26th, ‘ 1859.
.. -¥ r :. 'A /..A
• - !<■ '...wl
BY A. &J.K. • r:&
- -- , ■ - i* -&*
DUBLIN:—M‘GL A SHAN & GILL, ’
50, UPPER SACKV1LLK STREET; W®
JOSEPH HOLLAED, 9, HAME-STKEET.
ON HER PASSAGE FROM AUSTRALIA TO LIVERPOOL 3
