

AN ACCOUNT
OF THE
State of Agriculture & Grasing
IN
NEW SOUTH WALES;
INCLUDING
OBSERVATIONS ON THE SOILS AND GENERAL APPEARANCE
OF THE COUNTRY,
AND SOME OF ITS MOST USEFUL NATURAL PRODUCTIONS;
WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE
VARIOUS METHODS OF CLEARING AND IMPROVING LANDS,
Breeding and Grasing Libe Stock,
ERECTING BUILDINGS,
THE
System of employing Convits, and the [?]se of Labour generally
THE
MODE OF APPLYING FOR GRANTS OF LAND;
WITH OTHER INFORMATION
Important to those who are about to emigrate to that Country:
THE RESULT OF SEVERAL YEARS’ RESIDENCE AND PRACTICAL EXPERIENCE
IN THOSE MATTERS IN THE COLONY.
BY
JAMES ATKINSON, ESQ.
OF OLDBURY, AHGVLE COUNTY, NEW SOUTH WALES,
AND FORMERLY PRINCIPAL CLERK IN THE OFFICE OF THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
AT SYDNEY.
London:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY J CROSS, 18, HOLBORN,
OPPOSITE FURNIVAL'S INN.
1826.
Price Seven Shilling, or, deluding a large Map and View of
Sydney, Fourteen Shillings.










VIEW OF POET JACKSON AND PART OF THE TOWN OF SYNEY, FROM A DRAWING IN THE POSSESSION OF BARRON FIELD, ESQR.


AN ACCOUNT
OF THE
State of Agriculture & Grasing
IN
NEW SOUTH WALES;
INCLUDING
OBSERVATIONS ON THE SOILS AND GENERAL APPEARANCE
OF THE COUNTRY,
AND SOME OF ITS MOST USEFUL NATURAL PRODUCTIONS ;
WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE
VARIOUS METHODS OF CLEARING AND IMPROVING LANDS,
Breeding and Grasing Libe Stock,
ERECTING BUILDINGS,
THE
System of employ ing Convicts, and the expense of Labour generally ;
THE
MODE OF APPLYING FOR, GRANTS OF LAND;
WITH OTHER INFORMATION
Important to those who are about to emigrate to that Country:
THE RESULT OF SEVERAL YEARS’ RESIDENCE AND PRACTICAL EXPERIENCE
IN THOSE MATTERS IN THE COLONY.
BY
JAMES ATKINSON, ESQ.
OF OLDBURY, ARGYLE COUNTY, NEW SOUTH WALES,
AND FORMERLY PRINCIPAL CLERK IN THE OFFICE OF THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
AT SYDNEY.
London:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY J. CROSS, 18, HOLBORN,
OPPOSITE FURNIVAL’S INN,
1826.




ERRATA.
At Page 36, line 24, for “ back” read “ buck.”
36, line 26, for “ a large load be carried” read “ a large load
carried.”
36, line 28, for “ drags” read “ drays”
76, line 16, for “weaned” read “yeaned.”
100, line 5, (from the bottom,) for “ brands” read “ boards.”
129, line 14, for “council” read “counsel.”




PREFACE.
Affairs of importance having imposed upon me the
necessity of visiting England a few months since, I
found myself, on my arrival, assailed from all quar-
ters, and in every company in which I happened to
be present, with innumerable questions and enquiries
respecting the present state of New South Wales,
and especially of its Agriculture and Grazing. For
a while I was enabled to answer these interrogatories
with tolerable patience ; at length, the continual
repetition of the same queries began to grow weari-
some; and I was induced to think of some more
comprehensive method of satisfying curiosity. At
the same time, several of my friends represented to
me, that notwithstanding the many large volumes
that have been published on the subject ol this
Colony, its rural and domestic economy were still
comparatively unknown ; and that my experience,
and somewhat successful practice, as a Settler, would
most probably enable me, in some measure, to


supply the deficiency. In compliance with their
request, I have produced the following humble work,
in the anxious hope of serving such of my countrymen
as may feel disposed to emigate to that rising and
interesting Colony. I trust a candid Public will
overlook its many imperfections, and give me credit
for the sincerity of my intentions; I have experienced
and surmounted the privations and difficulties of a
Settler, and in this volume have had no object in
view, but only to smooth the way for others that
may follow me in the same path. I have studied
no ornament, but endeavoured to give the details
and information I had to communicate in the plainest
and most familiar manner; and I am not without
hopes, that my present attempt may be the means of
stimulating some person, better qualified than mysell,
to favour the public with a more enlarged history of
Australian agriculture. My limits would not allow
me to go into any topographical history of the
Colony; I have merely confined myself to those sub-
jects on which the most frequent questions were put
to me, and on which I perceived information to be
most wanting.
JAS. ATKINSON.
Merewortji, Kent,
14 th April, 1826.


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
Page.
General description of the Country—Scrubs—Brushes—Forest Lands—
Plains—Alluvial Lands—Rivers and Water 1
CHAPTER 11.
Natural Productions—Trees—Shrubs—Grasses—Fossils and Minerals—
Quadrupeds—Fish—Birds—Reptiles—lnsects 12
CHAPTER 111.
State of Agriculture—Systems pursued by the different Classes of Settlers
—Working Cattle and Implements—Crops cultivated—Remarks on
various Impediments to the progress of Improvement, and on the
frequent fluctuations in the price of Produce—Horticulture .... 28
CHAPTER IV.
Breeding and Management of Live Stock—Horses—Horned Cattle-
Sheep—Swine—Fairs and Markets 60
CHAPTER V.
Various Methods of Clearing Lands—Clearing Gangs—Draining—Paring
and Burning—Fencing and Enclosing—Buildings . . . T”. .83
CHAPTER VI.
Remuneration of Labour—Free Labourers—Various Remarks on Do-
mestic Manufactures, and other Matters connected with the economical
management of a Farm—Assignment, Maintenance, and Management
of Convict Servants—Female Servants—Regulations respecting Grants
of Land—lnformation to Persons about to emigrate respecting their
Passage, &c 103
SUPPLEMENTARY CHAPTER.
Trade and Manufactures—Circulating Medium—Roads—Travelling—
Climate—Revenue—Police—Military Force—Church and School Es-
tablishments—Civil Government and Administration of Justice—
Black Natives 13Q




AN ACCOUNT
OF THE
STATE OF AGRICULTURE AND GRAZING
IN
New South Wales.
CHAPTER I.
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTRY—SCRUBS— BRUSHES
—FOREST LANDS—PLAINS—ALLUVIAL LANDS—RIVERS AND
WATER.
The various descriptions of country in New South Wales
may be classed under the following heads ; viz. barren scrubs,
brushes, forest lands, plains and alluvial lands ; in describing
which it will be necessary, in some cases, to make a further
subdivision.
The barren scrubs almost every where border the sea coast,
and extend to various distances inland ; in some places two or
three miles ; in others, lands of a better description approach
close to the water’s edge. The soil in these scrubs is either
sandstone rock or sterile sand or gravel, covered, however,
with a profusion of beautiful shrubs and bushes, producing the
most elegant flowers, and affording a constant succession
A


throughout the whole year, but most abundant in winter and
spring; the shrubs and plants growing in these places furnish
the Colonists with materials for brooms, but produce little else
that can be converted to any useful purpose.—The grass tree,
with its lofty flower stalk, is a conspicuous object in these
wastes; of the hard and woody but light stalk of this plant
the natives make the shaft of their spears, and shooting or
fish gigs. Very few trees grow in these places, except a few
stinted gum trees, in situations sheltered from the sea winds.
Much honey might probably be collected from these scrubs,
were bees plentiful in the Colony, and some small profit maj/
possibly be thus made of them hereafter; but with this ex-
ception, they scarcely seem susceptible ot any improvement.
Scrubs of this description are also found in places on the sum-
mits of the Blue Mountains, and other high and exposed situ-
ations in the interior, producing the same shrubs and plants
as on the sea coast.
Brushes may principally be divided into coppice, vine, wil-
low, and indigo brushes. The first kind I have called coppice
brushes, as they approach nearer to the nature of coppices in
England than any other kind of woods in the Colony. They
are not, however, known by that name in the Colony, but are
distinguished into iron bark brush, stringy bark brush, &c.
according to the kind of trees that predominates in them. —
These brushes are found principally in the tract of country
included between the sea and the mountains which separate
the waters falling into the sea on the Eastern coast, from the
interior rivers; and also about the sides and upon the summits
of those mountains. They are generally thickest and most
extensive towards the sea: there are, however, some large
tracts of brush at some distance in the interior, such as Bargo
Brush, in the county of Camden, and Wombat Brush, in the
county of Argyle. Brushes of this description are principally
composed of lofty stringy bark andiron bark trees, thickly set
beneath with underwood, composed of several varieties of mi


mosa, young trees ot the kinds already mentioned, and many
others. The soil, in places, is very good, consisting of a
light vegetable mould upon a clay or loam; it is very light
tillage when once properly cleared, and is well calculated for
the production of potatoes and grain crops ; but the expence
of clearing is so great, that unless in the immediate vicinity of
a market, or upon a leading road, or thoroughfare, the return
to be expected will not warrant the outlay. The principal
part, however, of the lands of this description, are very in-
different, and in many places wretchedly poor, consisting of
a sterile clay or gravel, and wholly unimprovable.
Vine brushes are mostly found on the sides and summits of
steep mountains near the sea. It is here we may see the ve-
getable kingdom in its most magnificent form, lofty cedar and
turpentine trees of the grandest dimensions, with large vines
or parasitical plants of various kinds, thick as a man’s leg,
twining up to their very tops, catching hold of other trees in
all directions, until an immense net-work is formed, impervious
to the sun’s rays. Here are found the elegant sassafras or
kalang ; the bark of this tree has a spicy aromatic taste, and
is much esteemed in the Colony as a stomachic and purifier of
the blood; and the whitewood or boula tree, with its dark
green foliage and smooth bark, resembling the beech of
Europe. The cabbage tree, with its slender stem, rising to
60 or 70 feet high, and circular head, is a conspicuous object
in these shades, and is generally found growing wherever any
rills of water run down the sides of the mountains; of the
centre leaves of this tree the Colonists make very durable hats,
split and plaited like chip or straw. Here is also found the
fern tree, a very beautiful vegetable production: its stem is
about eight feet high and two feet in circumference; the leaves
are about three or four feet long, branching out from the top
of the stem in a very elegant manner. There are many other
beautiful plants and trees produced by the perpetual moisture
of these brushes, and the complete shelter formed by their
A 2


impenetrable covering. In some places these kind of brushes
extend into the low lands, and accompany the mountain streams
to the nearest river, or to the sea ; to their other productions
are then generally added the bangally, much resembling the
cabbage tree in appearance, but having some long and wide
leaves of a thick and tenacious texture; these the natives tie up
at each end in the form of a boat, and use them for carrying
water and other purposes. In these lower situations is found the
nettle tree, a very singular plant, about 20 or 30 leet high;
the bark is nearly white, the leaves are heart shaped and
large, of a pale green, and jagged at the edges ; these leaves,
if unwarily handled, inflict a sting infinitely more painful than
the nettle of Europe.
The soil in many of these brushes is extremely rich, but the
labour of clearing is immense; and very little land ot this
description has been hitherto brought into cultivation ; it seems,
however, well adapted for the production of vines and other
fruits, being generally of a light friable texture, and lying in
peculiarly warm sheltered situations.
In willow brushes the ground is more or less covered with
the white or woolly gum trees, and underneath thickly covered
with what is termed in the Colony willow brush, growing to
the height of 2or 3 feet; many of these brushes are very good
land, being a light sandy loam, and very fertile, with proper
management, well adapted for the growth of barley. This
kind of country affords good grazing ; the grass growing very
freely among the brush, which protects it from the frosts, and
these places therefore afford the best winter keep for stock.
This shrub is frequently eaten by cattle, especially horses ; it
affords a very pleasant bitter, and might perhaps be advan-
tageously employed in brewing, as a substitute for hops.
Indigo brushes are not very common; the timber in these is
generally white or blackbutted gum; the ground beneath is
covered with the native indigo, a very beautiful plant, with a
light purple flower. Horned stock are extremely fond of this


plant, and in winter, when the grass in the more open situa-
tions is withered by the frost, delight to feed in these brushes,
which afford at once both food and warm shelter; the soil in
these places is mostly a light free loam, very fertile, and well
fitted for agricultural purposes.
Forest lands are variously designated according to the qua-
lity of the soil, or the nature and number of the trees growing
thereon, such as good, poor, open, or thick forest. It is,
however, always to be understood, that forest means land
more or less furnished with timber trees, and invariably cover-
ed with grass underneath, and destitute of underwood. Under
the head of forest lands are included some of the best and
most improvable soils in the Colony; they are generally either
clay or loam, of various degrees of tenacity, with a layer of
vegetable earth on the top, extremely well calculated for the
growth of grain. In the county of Cumberland, one im-
mense tract of forest land extends, with little interruption, from
below Windsor, on the Hawkesbury, to Appin, a distance
of 50 miles ; large portions of this are cleared and under cul-
tivation, and of the remainder that is still in a state of nature,
a great part is capable of much improvement. The whole of
this tract, and indeed all the forest in this county, was thick
forest land, covered with very heavy timber, chiefly iron and
stringy bark, box, blue and other gums, and mahogany. The
quality of forest land, and indeed of most others will be found
to be governed by the nature of the rocks and stones that form
the basis of the soils ; thus, in this tract of forest, in the county
of Cumberland, the rocks are either common or calcarious
sandstone, ironstone, and in some few places whinstone ; these
form soils of various degrees of goodness, the whinstone
generally the best. In some places small iron stone, not larger
than peas, may be found, scattered over the surface; this,
wherever it occurs, is a sure sign of a poor hungry soil. In
the country westward of the Blue Mountains, and also in the
counties of Argyle and Antrim, are large tracts of open forest.


where the basis of the soil is granite ; this country is thinly
covered with trees, of the white and blue gum kinds, and large
blocks of granite, of a coarse texture, and grey colour, are
seen lying about upon the surface. This country, though
pleasing to the eye, having a beautiful park-like appearance,
is poor and seldom adapted for cultivation; but the soil is
light, dry, and extremely well suited for sheep grazing, the
surface being covered with a thin but very nutritive herbage.
In the county of Argyle are some small tracts, where whin-
stone predominates; this is the finest description of forest land
m the country, equally well adapted for grazing or for culti-
vation ; the soil is firm and rich, and the herbage of the most
nutritive description.
Extensive plains are a distinguishing feature in the interior
of New South Wales. These tracts, although termed plains
in the Colony, are very seldom level, but generally a gently
undulating surface, destitute of timber, and covered with
grass ; they extend, with many interruptions, but still forming
one great chain, from Liverpool plain, in the county of Cam-
bridge, to Maniroon Plains, to the southward of Lake George,
approaching nearer to the sea coast as they extend to the
southward; many large portions of this immense tract are
occupied in grazing by persons holding tickets of occupation,
for which purpose, especially for sheep grazing, it is extremely
well adapted, being covered with fine grass and herbage, and
generally well watered; very little of this immense tract of
open country has as yet been granted, or in the Colonial phrase
located, to individuals; and a very considerable portion is
yet wholly unoccupied in any way. The silence and solitude
that reign in these wide spreading, untenanted wastes, are
indescribable, and must have been witnessed to enable any one
to form a proper conception of them ; no traces of the works
or even the existence of man are here to be met with, except
perhaps the ashes of a fire on the banks of some river. r l he
plain affording little or nothing for the subsistence of fhe


savage, is wholly abandoned or but seldom crossed by him;
the Kangaroos even shun the place, preferring the shade and
shelter furnished by the forests ; and nothing meets the eye of the
traveller, with the exception of a few solitary Emus, to enliven
the monotony of the dreary expanse. From the contemplation
of this vacancy and solitude the mind recoils with weariness,
and naturally turns with pleasure to anticipate some future
and not distant period, when these vast and in many places
fertile plains, shall be covered by productive flocks and herds,
and enlivened by the presence and industry of civilized men.
The soil in these plains is of various qualities, according to the
nature of the rock which forms the basis ; in some places lime-
stone prevails, and occasionally forms a good soil; in others
whinstone, which is much better; in others granite, with
fragments of white quartz strewed upon the surface, in these
places the soil is weak and hungry, but dry and well adapted
for sheep grazing, being covered with a sweet though thin
herbage.
The alluvial lands in New South Wales are not surpassed
in fertility by any in the world; the principal tracts are found
along the banks of the Hawkesbury, Nepean, and the various
branches of Hunter’s River; they consist of vegetable mould
more or less mixed with sand of many feet in depth. In some
places, the soil, by continual augmentation, has risen above
the level of the floods, which has been further aided by the
rivers having deepened their own channels, so that many spots
formerly flooded are now exempt from that visitation : the
greater part of the alluvial lands, however, still remain sub-
ject to inundation, and all the liability to loss of crops and
other calamities consequent thereon. These floods are much
augmented, and the rapid rise of the waters accelerated, by
large quantities of timber and still living trees, that have either
fallen in accidently, by the banks whereon they stood being
gradually undermined by the water, or have been thrown in
designedly by the indolent Settlers in clearing the land, rather


than take the trouble of burning them ; whenever a tree falls
or is thrown into the bed of a river in this manner, a sandbank
is immediately formed, and thus the channel becomes choaked
up, and the free passage of the water prevented. It is believed
by many intelligent persons, that were each Proprietor com-
pelled to clear his own frontage, or some other means adopted
to remove these obstructions, so that the water, during the
time of its rising, when floods occur, might pass olf with ease
and rapidity, very few floods would rise so high as to overflow
the banks. It is probable, that were these fallen trees re-
moved, some small parts of the present banks might fall in, as
the rivers would naturally work their channels both wider and
deeper ; but any trifling loss to individuals of this kind would
be amply repaid by the advantage that would arise from such
a quantity of fertile lands being exempted, in a great measure,
from such destructive visitations as these inundations.
The greater part of the alluvial lands upon the Hawkesbury
and Nepean have been cleared, and are under cultivation ; and
in the hands of any others than their present ignorant, indolent,
and improvident possessors, would produce the most plentiful
and valuable crops, as is sufficiently exemplified on the farms
of a few individuals where a better system is practised. The
soil and climate are admirably fitted for the growth of tobacco,
and many other valuable productions. The land is easily
wrought, little or no manure is necessary, and the whole atten-
tion of the farmer may be directed to cropping his land in a
proper manner, and keeping it free from weeds. The alluvial
land upon Hunter’s River is, generally speaking, in the hands
of a better sort of people, by whom it will be managed with
somewhat more intelligence and industry. On Shoal Haven
River there are a few spots of land unlocated, but the quantity
is small, and the quality not very good. Most of the alluvial
lands were originally forest; the timber was large, principally
blue and flooded gum, with an abundance of the tree known in
the Colony by the appellation of the apple tree, which is of




AN EXPLORING PARTY IN NEW SOUTH WALES.


very little value. There are many flat pieces of land in the
neighbourhood of the Rivers, that are covered with what is
termed hack water in time of floods ; there is no current over
these places, and the mud and vegetable matters contained in
the water are deposited here in great quantities. This land is
very rich and fertile, well calculated for agricultural purposes,
but containing little sand, is a very stiff strong soil, and heavy
tillage. The whole of the alluvial lands would make most
excellent permanent pastures, if laid down with proper grasses;
and as fatting pastures would yield a greater profit than in
cultivation, as the crops would be less liable to be carried away
or damaged by the inundations. They have been found by ex-
perience to be sound healthy pasture for cattle and sheep.
The following remarks on the cultivation of alluvial lands,
and the ■effects of the floods, are by a Gentleman in the Colony,
of long experience, and accurate observation :
“ Notwithstanding the fertility of the soil upon the Banks of the
Hawkesbury and Nepean, the farmers there run much greater risks
in cropping their lands than in any other part of the Colony. If the
season proves wet, the wheat, in consequence of the richness of the
soil, grows so rank in the straw, that it is liable to be laid by the
winds and rain, and to rot upon the ground ; and where it is not laid
it is very light in the ear. —In very hot seasons the soil in some parts
binds so hard, that the roots of the wheat cannot tiller and spread,
and in other places, where there is much sand, it is burnt up : but
when the season proves favorable, the crops are immense.
“ The Farmers upon these banks also run very great risks from
the floods, which do not return at any stated periods, and therefore
the crops are liable to be destroyed by inundation in every stage of
their growth. If the land is overflowed when the wheat or other
grain is just sown, it generally swells and bursts, or rots ,• and in all
the low grounds it is totally destroyed, as the water is some time be-
fore it runs off, or is absorbed by the earth. If there should be no
flood till the plant has begun to spindle, or is in blossom, or nearly
ripe, and the waters should then overflow the banks, and rise above
the upper joint of the straw 7 , a mortification will immediately tak<


place at the bottom of the pipe or stem that supports the ear, close
to the joint. The end of the stem when drawn out of the sheath
will appear white for two or three inches, with a small point like a
needle, and smell very offensive. A field of green wheat in full ear
after the blossom has gone off, will appear, when the flood subsides,
as if it had sustained no injury from the water 5 the car for a time
will continue green and full, and flatter the unfortunate farmer with
the hope of a crop, but, upon minute examination, all communication
will be found to be cut off at the upper joint between the stem and
the root, the grain in the ear can receive no further nourishment; so,
whether the crop is in spindle, in blossom, or in full ear, it is totally
destroyed.
« The inundation which happened in March, 1806, carried away
grain and live stock to the amount of The waters on the
Nepean rose ninety-two feet above the common level of the river,
threatening to carry every thing aw r ay before it. At the Hawkesbury,
houses, barns, stacks of corn, together with some thousands of hogs
and other live stock, were swept away, leaving nothing but desolation
and ruin behind.”
In the early days of the settlement, the Colony was almost
wholly dependent upon these flooded lands for its supply of
grain; the inundations were then followed by a scarcity that
sometimes almost amounted to a famine ; cultivation, however,
within the last 14 or 15 years, has principally extended on the
forest lands, and these inundations, though still disastrous to
the immediate occupiers of the Banks, are of less importance
to the general prosperity of the Colony. It is however to be
hoped, that the greater part of these lands will, before long, be
converted into fatting pastures, for which, as before observed,
they are admirably adapted.
The great defect of New South Wales is the want of navi-
gable rivers ; none have been yet discovered that are navigable
any considerable distance, and the large tracts of fertile plain
in the interior are in consequence inaccessible to water car-
riage ; this circumstance will occasion the Colony for a long


period to be more a pastoral than an agricultural country; and
cultivation and colonization will extend most upon the sea
coast, and in the neighbourhood of the few rivers that are na-
vigable ; there are, however, plenty of fertile lands in these
situations for all the Settlers that will arrive for many years to
come. In the lower parts of the Colony, between the moun-
tains and the sea, the country in many places is very scantily
supplied with water, and what there is to be found is frequently
of a very bad quality. The higher parts, and to the westward
of the mountains, are abundantly supplied with excellent water.
Running streams, small lakes, and ponds, are every where to
be met with.


CHAPTER II.
NATURAL PRODUCTIONS—TREES—SHRUBS-GRASSES-FOS-
SILS AND MINERALS—QUADRUPEDS—FISH—BIRDS— REPTILES
—INSECTS.
To describe the natural productions of this vast Continent in
a complete and satisfactory manner, would be utterly impossi-
ble in a work of the limited nature of the present; and besides
would require a degree of botanical and other scientific know-
ledge, to which the Author makes not the smallest pretension.
The brief sketch here presented, therefore, will be principally
confined to those objects which either are or may be capable
of being converted to useful purposes.
The timber of every uncultivated country forms a very im-
portant part of its spontaneous produce, and is generally the
first article that can be made available to the domestic wants
or foreign commerce of the early settlers. Yet so difficult is it
to prevail on ship-builders to make use of any new species of
wood; and so great is the force of prejudice in men of this
description, in favour of English oak and other kinds that have
been in use for many ages ; that for several years succeeding
the settlement of the Colony, the timber of New Holland was
believed to be of a very inferior description, and wholly unfit
for ship-building. Many specimens were at different times
sent home, and uniformly rejected, and pronounced worthless
by our builders. It is true many of these specimens were very
ill selected, there being few persons in the Colony competent,
to form any correct opinion on the subject. Experience has


now, however, fully demonstrated that there are several kinds
very useful and durable, the best proof of which is, that they
have lately become a considerable and increasing article of ex-
port, and several cargoes have been sold in London, at prices
that have fully remunerated the Merchants for their expenses
in importing them. None has as yet, however, found its way
into our naval yards, sharing in this respect the fate of teek,
and other woods, confessedly superior to English oak.
I shall here endeavour to give a list of the most common
woods of the Colony, and the uses to which they are applied,
as far as the extent of my observation and humble abilities
will allow'.
Rose Wood. —Found principally at Port Macquarie, and
Hunter’s River. The trees are large, and generally sound quite
to the heart; the grain is close and fine, and the texture and
appearance when worked extremely beautiful, resembling the
best mahogany. This wood is much used by Cabinet-makers,
and makes very excellent furniture ; it also makes very good
shells for blocks, not being liable to split.
Cedar. —Found principally at Port Macquarie, Hunter’s
River, and the distract of Illawarra. Its grain is not so com-
pact as rose-wood, but still makes good furniture; Hunter’s
River cedar is most esteemed, the texture being very fine and
beautiful; in colour it resembles Honduras mahogany. It
works readily when fresh cut, shrinks greatly, hardens by ex-
posure, and when dry is very light. It is much used for doors,
window frames, and wainscoting in houses; and also makes
good board for boat-building, and useful pannels, frames, &c.
for gigs or other light vehicles.
Coal River Pine. —Found at Hunter’s River ; is not much
used, but seems more of the nature of ash than any other Eu-
ropean tree.
Moreton Bay Pine. —Found in great abundance at More-
ton Bay; but its recent discovery has not allowed sufficient
time to make any trial of its qualities.


Blue Gum. —This is perhaps the most generally useful of
all the Australian woods. The grain is close and compact, the
timber heavy, and of a red colour. It is found almost evei y
where, but of the largest dimensions, and most abundant, near
the sea coast. Large quantities of it have been exported to
England in the shape of plank, and its merits have been duly
appreciated in the London market. It is extensively used in
the Colony in ship and boat-building, and has been found veiy
lasting and durable. The smaller sticks make good lower
masts, yards, and booms, being extremely tough. It is used
in house-building for beams and flooring boards, and also by
turners in common articles of furniture. It makes good posts
for fences, resisting the alternations of wet and dry better than
any other wood. It splits well, and saws easily when green,
but gets extremely hard when seasoned. It is bent into hoops
for the tilts of waggons and carts. In the county of Argjle
this tree grows smaller, and seldom splits well, but is veiy
sound, and useful for sawing.
Black-butted Gum —grows mostly in low lands near the
sea cost.; is a very large tree, and probably next to the blue
gum in usefulness ; the grain is not so compact, and the wood
is of a brown colour.
Flooded or Wafer Gum— is found in low situations, like
the last variety, which it much resembles in quality ; both
kinds are much used in house-building.
Spotted Gum. —Found in abundance about Shoal Haven
and Jervis’s Bay. Is remarkable for its lofty straight stems,
with a grey bark, spotted with white ; it has not been much
used, and is probably an inferior variety.
White Gum— is found in the county of Argyle, and other
places westward of the Blue Mountains. It is a tough wood,
very fit for wheelwright’s work, but the grain is not compact,
and it is probably not very durable; when free of gum veins,
to which it is very liable, it makes good flooring and weather
boards, being of a good white colour.


Red Gum —grows principally about the sea coast, is very
lull of gum veins, and when tapped yields an immense quantity
of a dark extractive matter, highly astringent; it is esteemed
an inferior variety.
Woolly Gum. —Found in the county of Argyle, and country
to the southward. Has a low trunk with wide spreading
branches, and more foliage than the generality of Australian
trees. The wood is very inferior, of a coarse texture, and
not durable.
Box. —This is a very useful wood, of a firm compact texture,
tough and durable. The trees are handsome and well grown,
the bark is strong and close, possessing much of the tanning
principle, and is very useful in constructing huts and temporary
buildings; this tree abounds in all the forest lands in the county
of Cumberland and cow pasture district; and is much used for
boards and joists in house-building, and also in wheelwright’s
work.
Iron Bark —is a tall straight tree, with a small top, and
scanty foliage ; the bark is extremely rough, of a dark colour,
and very hard, from whence it derives its name. The wood
of this tree is of a dark red colour, very hard and heavy ; it
splits readily, and makes excellent shingles for the roofs of
buildings and capital rails for fences. It would make treenails
for ship-building ; would be useful in millwork, or any other
purpose where strength and durability are required. This
tree abounds in the county of Cumberland and many other
parts of the Colony.
Stringy Bark. —This tree is perhaps the most useful to
the Colonists of any in the country. The wood is of a good
quality, of a brown colour, splits and saws well, not much
subject to gum veins; is very much used in building and
wheelwright’s work, and in fencing and paling. Is found dif-
fused in almost all parts of the Colony; the bark is much used
to construct huts and temporary buildings, being of a fibrous,


tenacious texture, and parts readily from the wood; the inner
bark is frequently twisted into ropes for many temporary uses.
Turpentine —is very conspicuous from its peculiar dark
green foliage; is found almost everywhere near the sea coast,
but not in great plenty. The wood is of a brown colour, and
good tough quality. Is frequently used in building; and
makes good oars and handspikes.
Mahogany, —A tree resembling the stringy bark, but not
so rough coated. The wood is of a dark red colour, hard and
heavy—much used in building, and also by turners, for bed
posts and other articles of common household furnitui e.
Sassafras or Kalang. —This is a beautiful tree found in
vine brushes near the coast. The bark, as already mentioned,
is aromatic, and used medicinally in the shape of a decoction.
The wood is white and very light, but lam not aware that it
has been applied to any useful purpose.
Whitewood or Boula. —Found in the same situation as the
last. The wood is white, but heavier than sassafras, but like
it, I believe, its qualities have not been tried.
Forest Oak.— This tree in outward appearance much
resembles the scotch fir. The wood is well known in England
by the names of Botany Bay wood, or beef wood. The
grain is very peculiar, but the wood is thought very little of in
the Colony; it makes good shingles, splits in the Colonial
phrase from heart to bark, but these shingles are not near so
durable as iron bark, but possess the advantage that they
may be nailed on without boreing with a gimblet.—ls found
almost every where.
Swamp Oak. —Much resembles the last; grows in wet
places and along the sides and in the beds of rivers and streams.
Is also used for shingles.
Red Honeysuckle. —A low tree, found about the sea coast.
The wood of this tree is of a close short texture ; and much
used for timbers of small vessels; and makes excellent naves for


wheels. The ashes yield a considerable quantity of pot ash
for the soap-boilers.
White Honeysuckle. —Found in various parts of the inte-
rior. It much resembles the red. The wood makes good
shoemaker's lasts.
Myrtle. —This is a shrub growing about the rocky banks
of creeks and rivers in various places ; it reaches the height
of 20 or 30 feet, but does not assume the form of a tree, grow-
ing clustered together in the nature of underwood. The wood
is very compact, tough, and heavy ; bends readily when green,
but gets very hard when seasoned : makes excellent swingels
for thrashing flails, and is used by the natives for their clubs
or waddies.
Light Wood. —A small tree found in the county of Argyle
and other places; makes good axe helves, being tough and
light.
Black and Green Wattle —are very common every where.
The bark of the black wattle contains a large proportion ol
tannin, and is much used by the tanners of the Colony. In the
shape of solid coagulated extract, obtained by boiling the bark,
it has been sent to England, and used with success. The young
saplings of these trees, cut and seasoned, make excellent han-
dles for pitch forks and rakes ; the old wood, when of curly
growth, makes good heads for mauls.
Currajong —is found in many parts, but not very plentiful ;
the inner bark of this tree, beat and twisted, forms ropes nearly
equal in strength to Manilla coir.
The above are the principal Australian trees ; there are some
others distinguished by the Colonists by the names of bastard
iron barks, bastard box, bastard stringy barks, gum box, &c.
but they differ but little from the kinds from whence they de-
rive their names.
Much care is requisite in seasoning wood in the Colony,
especially in spring and autumn; any long continued exposure
to the sun at those seasons, when they contain most sap, causes
B


such a rapid evaporation of the juices, and such a quick con-
traction of the vascular system of the timber, that the wood is
very apt to cone and cast extremely. I have found the best
way to cause the timber to be sawn, for the purpose intended,
as soon as felled, and then to immerse the board, &c. in water
for at least six months ; the juices are thus gradually drawn off,
and the vessels contracted; it may then be taken out and dried,
but should not be too suddenly exposed to the full influence ot
the sun and air.
The greater part of the full-grown trees are uniformly de-
cayed at the heart; and the best timber is found to be, it not
exactly the sap, at least the newly formed spine. The first
specimens sent home were squared logs ; the hearts of these
being decayed, caused them to be rejected by the ship-builders.
The late exportations have all been made in sawn plank, of
various thicknesses; none but the prime wood has thus been
sent to market, and the prices obtained have shewn the plan to
be judicious.
No very certain inference of the quality of the soil can
be drawn from the species of timber found growing upon
it.—The iron bark, stringy bark, and spotted gum, generally
grow in poor gravelly land. The box, blue and white gums,
grow in good clay or loam; swamp oak abounds where the
land is wet, cold, and generally poor. W ith the exception of
alluvial land, good timber is very seldom found upon good
land. The fertile plains in the interior are wholly destitute of
it. The best whinstone forest lands in the county of Argyle
are very thin of timber, and the trees are small, stinted, and
useless, except for firewood. In the county of Cumberland,
the best forest lands are invariably thinest of trees; and in
general it will be found the best lands are least encumbered
with timber ; this, however, does not hold good of granitic
soils, which are generally open and free of timber, and sandy
weak land.
Very few of the shrubs have as yet been converted to any


beneficial purpose ; many of them might probably afford useful
materials in the arts, and also in medicine. The excellent and
indefatigable King's Botanist, Mr. Cunningham, has, I believe,
pointed out many to medical gentlemen, which he imagined
might be possessed of particular properties ; but no person
has yet been found possessed of sufficient science or inclina-
tion to make any experiments on them. A species of sallow,
growing about the sides of rivers, furnishes good materials
for basket-making, though not equal to osiers. The wood of
the wmrrataw or native tulip, the most magnificent flower of
New Holland, has also been applied to the same purpose. At
certain seasons of the year, the dwarf honeysuckle, which is
very abundant in barren scrubs and brushes, yields an immense
quantity of beautiful transparent honey ; it is found standing in
large drops among the filaments of the flower cone, and might
be easily collected by simply pressing the cones in a jelly bag.
There are no indigenous fruits worth mentioning : the native
cherry, five corners, jibbong, and others, are mere tasteless
berries. The native currant is a fine pleasant acid, resembling
the cranberry; it makes a very agreeable preserve with plenty of
sugar. The burwan is a plant with leaves very much like the
cocoa nut, growing out from a stem about a foot high; at
certain seasons it produces a flower, which is succeeded by a
cluster of nuts, enclosed in a hard woody shell; this nut in its
raw state is a poison ; the natives, however, convert it into a
very pleasant and nutritive article of food. They first roast
the nuts in the ashes of their tire for a short time ; then crack
them between two stones, separating the kernels and breaking
them also; they then roll up a piece of bark in the form of a
tube, and placing some grass or other substance to prevent
their escape, immerse them in a running stream for twelve
hours ; they are then good and wholesome food, tasting much
like roasted chesnuts. The burwan is found in great plenty
in the scrubs and poor forest lands near the sea coast.
b 2


The grasses and wild herbage form a most important part ol
the spontaneous productions of New South Wales ; and, in
this respect, the Colony justly claims precedence over many
uncultivated countries ; since by their aid alone, grazing and
breeding live stock have been carried to an extent that is really
astonishing.
The principal grasses are, the oat grass, kangaroo grass,
two sorts of rye grass, a variety of the fiorin, timothy, &c.
Of these the oat grass is the most generally diffused ;it affords
good pasturage, and is eaten by all kinds of stock, but does
not stand the winter. The kangaroo grass is found in low and
warm places near the coast; it grows with an upright stalk
to the height of eighteen inches or two feet, has a few blades
at the top, of a fine green, but is destitute of leaves at the
bottom; it is relished by horned cattle, but does not feed
horses or sheep well, being probably too succulent, and those
animals delighting most in a short close bite. The other de-
scriptions of grass above mentioned, are not found anywhere
in very great plenty; the rye grass seems most to affect
whinstone lands, and the timothy is found in sands and granitic
soils. There are tw o or three varieties of rib grass ; also
chichory, trefoil, burnet, and some other herbs, which stand
the winter, and in that season afford good food for sheep.
In the swamps and wet places in the county of Argyle, a
coarse sedgy grass abounds; it is not eaten by cattle unless
when young. In that part of the Colony, there are many low
places between hills, where the fall is not sufficient to enable the
water to work itself a channel; and the surface being also cover-
ed with coarse grass, encreases the difficulty; the water, there-
fore, in rainy seasons, spreads about upon the surface, until it
becomes completely saturated with moisture : these places are
termed swamps in the Colony; but they certainly do not deserve
the name, since it is always possible to ride over them in the
wetest season. By simply cutting a small ditch to convey the


water from the hills into the nearest stream, I have converted
these places into sound and productive meadows : and have
made from them a good quantity of hay, much relished by
cattle in the winter season, and have obtained besides a good
after-grass, of great service to my working oxen in the au-
tumn.—ln the unoccupied districts in the interior, and also in
those tracts that are only used for the purposes of grazing,
the grass in winter becomes withered by the frosts, and as-
sumes the appearance of bad coloured hay ; in this state it is
refused by the cattle ; and as it impedes the growth of young
grass, the common practice is to set fire to it. The Natives
also pursue the same system, setting fire to the thick brushes
and old grass every summer ; the young herbage that springs
up in these places, is sure to attract the kangaroos and other
game ; and the horned cattle are also very fond of feeding upon
this burnt ground, as it is termed in the Colony ; they should,
however, be kept from it as much as possible till it has ac-
quired sufficient growth to form a good bite, as they pick about
upon it before it is in a fit state to yield them any nourishment,
and thus injure their own thriving materially. In dry seasons
these periodical burnings sometimes assume a truly awful
appearance ; the country seems on fire in all directions, and
if the weather is calm, is enveloped in dense smoke. It is no
doubt the means of destroying a great quantity of useful feed,
but in the interior districts the practice is unavoidable ; in the
more settled and cultivated parts of the country it is frequently
dangerous, and always injurious, and should be put a stop to
by every possible means.
No person, to my knowledge, has yet tried any experiments
to ascertain how far any of the native grasses might be im-
proved, or made more useful by cultivation, or in what propor-
tion they are nutritive, when compared with European grasses.
It is true, very few of them will preserve their verdure through
the winter, even of that mild climate, and some of them are also
said to be annuals: certain it is, that keeping them close fed.


so as to prevent them from perfecting tlieir seeds, will soon
totally destroy them. In many parts of the country, formerly
most abundant in grass, there is now scarce a blade to be seen.
I am of opinion, however, that some of them might, upon trial,
be found worthy of cultivation. In alluvial lands, a kind called
blady grass is found; this is a very coarse variety, the ribband
being half an inch wide, and it is probably not very nutritive ;
cows, however, fed upon it, yield a good quantity of milk.
In all low and warm situations near the sea coast, the grass
grows high, and generally preserves its verdure throughout
the winter; but is probably not so nutritive as in the higher
lands, where it is withered by the frosts, but produces a shorter
and sweeter bite in summer, and a more close and comjjact sod.
The useful fossil or mineral substances hitherto discovered
are very few. Freestone, of a good qualify, is found at Syd-
ney and Parramatta; it hardens by exposure, is much used in
building, and also makes very good grindstones, especially that
of the latter place. This kind of stone is also found in great
plenty in various other parts of the Colony. Whinstone and
granite, where they abound, furnish excellent road materials.
Limestone, of a good quality, is not found any where to the
eastward of the Blue Mountains. To The westward of those
mountains, very fine limestone has been discovered, especially
in the neighbourhood of Bathurst, and in the country to the
southward of Lake George : at this latter place very fine sta-
tuary marble, and other varieties, were found by Mr. Trosby.
Very fine limestone is also found at Barrarnarragoa and Mur-
roowallin, in the county of Argyle. Slate and ironstone, of
good quality, have been observed, but no attempts have yet
been made to convert them to any useful purpose. Coal is
found very abundant at Newcastle; the mines at this place
have been worked for several years ; large quantities are con-
sumed in Sydney, and a considerable quantity exported to the
Isle of France', Batavia, and other places.
The Colony is extremely favored, in being totally exempt


from the ravages of ferocious beasts ; none being found in any
part which may endanger the personal safety of the Settlers.
The native dog is a small species of wolf, not much exceeding
the English fox in size, but stands higher, and is stronger
made, but not so swift: it is of a black or red colour, though
sometimes dirty white. It forms no burrows in the earth, but
inhabits rocks, hollow trees, or thick brushes. The female pro-
duces about six or seven at a litter. This animal, unless the flocks
are carefully attended, will commit serious depredations among
sheep : it sometimes also will steal a fowl from the roost; but
the extent of its ravages, where common care is taken, is sel-
dom very important. It is not very swift of foot, and easily
taken with good dogs. The kangaroo dog, a large variety of
greyhound, is usually employed for this purpose. The Agri-
cultural Society has very patriotically offered a reward of half
a dollar for every brush brought to any of its members ; and
an annual reward besides for those who kill the greatest num-
ber. The effect of this measure has greatly reduced their num-
bers in many of the grazing districts in the interior, where they
were before very abundant.
The native cat is a carnivorous animal resembling the weasel;
it is of a dark brown or black colour, spotted with white ; this
animal is a serious annoyance in the poultry yard, frequently
carrying away young chickens. It inhabits holes in decayed
trees; and the best way to get rid of this and many other
kinds of vermin is to cut down and burn all the decayed trees
in the neighbourhood of the farm yard.—The above are the
only two animals in the country strictly carnivorous.
The rat, or native rabbit, has all the habits of the domestic
rat of Europe ; the form of the head is rounder, and the ears
longer, more resembling the rabbit; its tail is long and bushy.
It is not very numerous any where.
The kangaroos are of four kinds, viz. the burroo, or forest
kangaroo ; the wallabee, or brush kangaroo ; the padgy mel-
lan, or brown kangaroo ; and the wayrang, or rock kangaroo.


There is also found far in the interior another variety, called
wallaroos ; they are ranch larger than any of the others.—
The different varieties of this animal furnish the principal and
indeed only objects of chase in the Colony worth mentioning.
The form of the kangaroo being well known, it is unnecessary
to describe it here. The forester is the largest of the common
kinds, frequently weighing 1501bs. It is seldom found in an
open country, delighting in forests that have occasional thickets
of brush. In unoccupied tracts it is sometimes seen in Hocks
of 50 or 69 ; but its destruction is soon effected when the
country becomes inhabited, as the female brings but one at a
birth. This animal is exceedingly swift when first started, go-
ing off at a great rate, by leaping on its hind legs, covering 12
or 14 feet at each bound ; it, however, soon gets tired, and is
easily taken by good dogs : when hard pressed it turns upon
its pursuers, standing erect, and fighting the dogs most reso-
lutely. It has three toes on its hind feet, the middle one of
which is long and pointed; supported by its tail, it strikes
forward with this dangerous weapon, and inflicts severe wounds
on the dogs. It requires five or six good dogs to master a large
animal, its tail does not seem of much use to it in running,
unless to preserve its balance, as it never touches the ground.
The animals of this kind that are not quite full grown are
termed flyers ; they are exceedingly swift, and can seldom be
taken unless the ground is soft.
The wallabee and padgy mellan seldom exceed 30 or 401bs.
weight; they inhabit brushes, and afford good sport in the
chase.
The wayrang is about the size of the two last kinds; it in-
habits among rocks and places difficult of access. It differs
from the other species in having a long bushy tail.
The flesh of all the species of kangaroo is wholesome and
nutritive ; it has no fat, except a small quantity round the
root of the tail ; this part of the kangaroo makes excellent
soup, highly esteemed in the Colony. The skins make good


feather, and also form an article of export ; they are worth in
the Colony from l.y. to 3 s. each, according to their size.
The wombat is an animal that forms burrows in the earth,
and lives upon roots and herbs ; its flesh is good eating being
very fat. It weighs sometimes 80 or lOOlbs.
The coolor or maingee is of the sloth kind; it inhabits the
hollows of trees, and lives upon their leaves ; its weight is
about 121bs. The Natives are extremely fond of its flesh,
which appears to be a delicate meat.
Four species of the flying squirrel and two kinds of opussum
inhabit the trees, and form a principal part of the animal food
of the Natives; the fur of these creatures might probably afford
good materials for hats.
The kangaroo rat is a small animal about the size of a
rabbit; it runs very swiftly ; the flesh is of little value and they
are not very numerous.
The bandicoot is about the size of the common rat; it bur-
rows in the earth, and feeds upon roots; its flesh is highly
esteemed by the Natives.
The porcupine of New South W ales is a small kind, in nothing
differing from the same animal in other places ; its flesh is
very flue eating.
The above are I believe all the principal quadrupeds hitherto
discovered on the continent of New Holland.
The coasts of New South Wales abound with fish; the black
Natives are the principal fishermen, and from them the town of
Sydney derives its supply of that article. The best kinds are
snappers, king fish, rock cod, bream, mullet, whiting, and
mackarel. Rock and bed oysters, lobsters, crayfish, and
prawns, are also found in many places. The rivers falling
into the sea on the eastern coast have plenty of perch and eels.
The Lachlan, Macquarie, and other rivers in the interior
abound with fish of a large size and fine flavour: they have
not, I believe, been properly described as yet, but resemble the
rock cod and mullet of the sea cost. It is a very singular cir-


cumstance, that no eels have yet been found in any of these
rivers.
The feathered tribes in New Holland are extremely numerous,
and many of them remarkable for their singular character and
beautiful plumage. The emu, when standing erect, is some-
times five or six feet high; it has no wings, but runs very swift;
it is covered with feathers of a very singular kind, and imme-
diately under the skin is found a large quantity of fat, which
yields a fine oil, very useful for oiling shoes and other leather
articles. The emu is taken by hunting it with the greyhound,
and affords good sport ; it is principally found in open coun-
tries, and feeds upon herbs, flowers, and seeds of trees. That
singular bird, the black swan, is found upon the lakes and rivers
of the interior, but is very shy, and disappears as soon as the
country becomes inhabited. Wild ducks are very abundant
every where in the interior : they are of four kinds, afford good
sport, and are excellent eating. Pigeons of several species
abound throughout the Colony; they are easily shot, and are
fine eating. Snipes, plovers, and quails are also found, but not
very numerous. The finest bird, however, of the game kind,
is the wild turkey or bustard ; it is nearly as large as an Eng-
lish goose, and excellent eating, but they are not very common.
My limits will not allow r me to enumerate the many other birds
with which this country abounds, and I shall therefore merely
mention a few of the most remarkable. There are several
species of the parrot and cockatoo kind, with most beautiful
plumage ; they are frequently very troublesome in corn fields,
and also destroy the buds of fruit trees. The common crow
and three species of magpye abound every where. There are
several kinds of hawks, that will sometimes steal young
chickens, but are not otherwise mischievous. The native
pheasant is remarkable for its beautiful tail, but is not fit to
eat. There are no birds in the Colony deserving the character
of singing birds.
The reptile tribe is rather numerous, and some of them


highly dangerous : of these, the most fatal is the brown snake;
its general length is about five feet, the body is brown above,
and yellow beneath ; the head is large and flat, and the mouth
wide ; its poison is exceedingly active and virulent, and unless
an immediate remedy is applied, inevitably proves mortal; the
Natives, when bitten by them, tie a ligature above the place,
and then scarify and suck the wound, spitting out the blood.
This is perhaps the only safe and effectual remedy that can be
applied.—The diamond snake sometimes attains the length of
13 or 14 feet, and as thick as a man’s leg, but its bite is not
dangerous ; the flesh is highly esteemed by the Natives. Scor-
pions, centipedes, and tarantulas are also found, but their poi-
son is not very dangerous, and they are not numerous.
The insect tribes in New Holland afford a wide and enter-
taining field for the naturalist, many of them being extremely
curious and beautiful; but it is unnecessary to enumerate
them here. The most formidable to the farmer is a small dark
caterpillar, that sometimes appears in vast numbers, commit-
ting great ravages upon the grass and growing crops of corn.
Locusts are plentiful in the summer, but have never been
known to do any injury. Flies are very numerous and trou-
blesome in summer, and great care is requisite to protect meat
and other articles from their ravages. Mosquitoes, except in
low situations near water, and where there are thick woods in
the neighbourhood, are not very numerous, and seldom of any
serious inconvenience. The town of Sydney, in the summer
of 1824, was visited by immense swarms of these insects, a
circumstance never experienced there before ; and what was
very remarkable, the large blow flies, that had formerly been
very troublesome, disappeared immediately the mosquitoes
made their appearance.


CHAPTER III.
STATE OF AGRICULTURE-SYSTEMS PURSUED BY THE DIF-
FERENT CLASSES OF SETTLERS—WORKING CATTLE AND
IMPLEMENTS—CROPS CULTIVATED—REMARKS ON VARIOUS
IMPEDIMENTS TO THE PROGRESS OF IMPROVEMENT, AND
ON THE FREQUENT FLUCTUATIONS IN THE PRICES OF PRO-
DUCE-HORTICULTURE.
1F a foreigner who had travelled through England, were
afterwards to visit New South Wales, he would scarcely he
able to persuade himself that the inhabitants where derived
from the same stock ; lie could hardly believe that the people,
who, in the mother country, cultivate their lands with such
persevering industry and intelligence, should here become so
extremely slothful and negligent; yet such is the case—the
state of agriculture being ruds and miserable in the extreme.
The first Settlers in the Colony were obtained from among
the military and convicts ; very few of these men had any
knowledge of agriculture, being mostly derived from inhabi-
tants of great towns, or from the very low r est orders of the
people; thoughtless and negligent, as might naturally be
expected from their early habits and subsequent life, with
very little regard for the comforts and conveniences of civilized
society, their whole desires were confined to the obtaining
sufficient food: clothing, except what decency absolutely re-
quired, they had little regard for; and to bring up their
famine s with respectability, and make a comfortable appear-
ance in the world, never once entered their minds. Their
absolute wants being satisfied, the whole surplus produce of


their labour was expended in intoxication and debauchery.
Men of this description were but little calculated to improve
and beautify the face of the country, and develope its agricul-
tural capabilities ; accordingly, their farms exhibit to this day
nothing but 'a scene of confusion, filth, and poverty. Their first
necessarily rude habitations of bark, are still unreplaced with
more comfortable dwellings of brick or timber ; and their fami-
lies have been suffered to grow up without education, useful
knowledge, or religious principles. I beg here to be under-
stood as only alluding to the early Settlers, and the lower or-
der of the present—what are technically termed in the Colony
Dungaree Settlers, from a coarse cotton manufacture of India
which forms their usual clothing: a more improvident, worth-
less race of people, cannot well be imagined. It unfortunately
happens that the greater part of these people have been located
on the banks of the Hawkesbury and Nepean, and in the district
of Airds, the best lands in the Colony. I shall first describe
their method of cultivation, and then proceed to that of farmers
of a better description.
The first step in commencing a farm of this kind, is to cut
down a few trees, and erect a bark hut; this is effected by
setting up corner posts of saplings, surmounted by plates,
and the frame of a roof of small poles. Some large sheets of
the bark of the box or stringy-bark are then procured; some
are set up on their ends to form the sides, and others laid up
and down on the top to form the roof, with one or two long
pieces lengthways to form the ridge, securing the whole by
tying it with strips of the inner bark of the stringy bark; a
space is left for a door, and a square hole cut for a window,
and pieces provided to close these apertures at night; some
long pieces are then built into the form of a chimney at one
end, and sods placed inside to prevent their catching fire.
Care is taken to give the different sheets sufficient overlap to
allow for their shrinking, and also to give the eaves sufficient
projection to carry the rain water from the walls ; a trench is


dug* round to carry oft the wet; and thus a habitation is built
in the space of a few hours, that will resist the utmost in-
clemencies of the weather; and many of the early settlers have
lived in no better for more than 20 years. The interior is then
furnished with platforms of bark for bedsteads, and a sheet
of the same material for a table; some blocks of wood supply
the place of chairs; and these, with an iron pot, frying pan,
bucket, tea kettle, tin dish, and a few tin pots and pannikins
for drinking out of, complete the whole essentials of the es-
tablishment. Blankets and flock mattresses form the bedding;
a few bags contain clothes, flour, tea, sugar, &c. and perhaps
the Settler is sufficiently rich or has credit to procure a small
steel mill and wire sieve for grinding and dressing his wheat
into flour. Many of these people possess nothing more than
what is here detailed, with the exception of a few of the most
necessary tools.
The hut being erected, they proceed to fell more trees ; this
is done with an axe, the edge of which is about two and a halt
inches, with a large eye, and weighing about Gibs.; the trees
are cut through with this at about three feet from the ground.
Having felled as many as they think will clear sufficient ground
for their first crop, they next lop off the branches and pile
them round the middle of the trunk so as to burn it in two
pieces, these are afterwards rolled round so as to form one
fire. The smaller trees are also cut up and rolled to the large
ones; thus the ground is cleared, leaving the stumps in the
land. The next step is to break up the soil with a large hoe,
II inches long by 7 inches wide, the handle is usually rather
short; this the labourer raises over his head, and brings down
with all his might. It would surprise an English farmer very
much to see how effectually this implement will break up land
when it is not too hard. If the ground has much grass upon
it, they suffer it to lay a short time to wither, and then go
over it again with a hoe before it is sown ; but if there is not
much grass, and the land crumbles in breaking up, it may be


sown immediately. Wheat is sown broadcast, and chipped in
with a hoe to cover it. But the most usual first crop is maize;
this is planted in the month of October; while it is growing
the Settler is occupied in putting some kind of fence round
his crop, frequently nothing but boughs and brushwood of the
rudest description, in earthing or hilling his maize, or in fell-
ing and burning olf more land against the season for sowing
wheat. The maize, if put in early, will be ready for pulling in
March or April; the cobs are then gathered in, and put away
in a loft, formed with some sheets of bark in the roof of the
hut, and the stalks pulled up and burnt. The ground, without
further preparation, is now sown with wheat, and the seed
chipped in with a hoe. The wheat will be ripe in November;
as soon as it is reaped, stubble co7'n or maize is planted, per-
haps even before the wheat sheaves are carried olf; after the
corn is above ground, the spaces between the holes are
chipped over with a hoe. This maize will be ripe in May ;
but before that time arrives, the wheat seed time has come
round again ; wheat is therefore broadcast among the standing
crop of maize, and chipped in as usual: thus two most ex-
hausting crops are raised from the same land in a year. Some-
times, however, from the backwardness of the seasons, or
other causes, it is impossible to do this ; the crop then becomes
alternate, wheat one year and maize the next; and this is the
only rotation the land ever obtains ; many even neglect this
most important point in good farming, but sow wheat on the
same land, year after year, for a succession of seasons.
The consequence of this miserable system is, that the land in
a few years gets exhausted, and having very little tillage, is
entirely covered with weeds. Even on the banks of the
Hawkesbury and Nepean, where its great fertility would seem
to defy the exhausting effects of this double cropping, the land
becomes covered and choaked up with wild vetches, and other
rubbish, so that no crop can come to perfection; the plan
then adopted is to let this lie fallow, as it is termed, that is.


to suffer it to lie unto tidied for several years, to be overgrown
with mimosas, and to become a nursery for rank and noxious
weeds of every description ; in the mean time, the Settler
clears another piece of fresh land, and with this proceeds as
before.
The Settlers of this class have seldom any live stock, except
perhaps a few pigs and poultry ; no manure is therefore made
upon the farm, and it is a common practice to barn the straw
and corn stalks; this, I am sorry to say, I have frequently
seen done upon farms where better things might be expected.
The wheat sheaves at harvest time are carried to a clear place,
and built into a stack; some slight covering is put over it,
but as it is common to thrash it out immediately, this is not
always done. The grain is thrashed out upon the ground by the
side of the stack, and cleaned by the wind. I have seen a man
set up a ladder to the limb of a tree, spread out a blanket un-
derneath, and then ascending with a bag on his shoulder con-
taining wheat in the chaff, suffer it to run gently down ; the
wind carries away the chaff, and leaves the grain at the
bottom completely cleaned.
The system above described, such as it is, was the only
husbandry known in the Colony for some years after its first
establishment; many of the finest tracts were thus ruined and
exhausted; and though this class of people are fast giving
place to others possessed of more industry and skill, yet the
mischiefs that arose from the plan of giving grants of land to
men of this description, who -were possessed neither of capital
nor rural knowdedge, are many of them irremediable. These
people were generally indebted to the full amount of their crop
to the shopkeepers and publicans, and when, from unfavorable
seasons, or other untoward circumstances, they w r ere unable
to pay their debts, the mortgage of their farms was the inevit-
able consequence. These sharks, their creditors, never failed
to take advantage of the first opportunity to foreclose the
mortgage, and thus become possessed, for a mere song, of the


fruits of the improvident Settlers toil. Large portions of the
most fertile parts of the country have thus passed into the
hands of a set of men, the majority of whom came to the Co-
lony as convicts, without a shilling of property, and who,
though possessed of abundant cunning and duplicity, would
never, but from the peculiar circumstances of the country in
which they were placed, have emerged from that obscurity for
which their breeding seemed to have destined them; many of
these people, however, are now large landed proprietors and
opulent men.
It was formerly the custom to give grants of from 30 to 60
acres to all convicts who had served their term without being
convicted of any misdemeanour; or at least to such as could
make interest to get their petitions signed by the Magistrates
oi their district; without making any inquiry as to the ability
or means of the parties to make a proper use of the indulgence :
the consequence was, that perhaps three-fourths of them*never
made any attempts to cultivate their lands at all, but sold the
order for their grants as soon as they had received it. Others
did make the attempt, but not having sufficient capital to
carry them round till their farms began to afford them a sub-
sistence, they were necessitated to obtain credit from some of
the shopkeepers, who were generally publicans also ; credit
was usually given readily, the Settler giving his note of hand
to discharge the debt in grain at harvest time; if the season
was favorable, the claim was perhaps paid; and the surplus
produce of the year being spent in drunkenness and riot, a new
debt, to enable the Settler to go on for the next year, is con-
tracted. Now, however, a new security is required, and a
mortgage, or more frequently a warrant of attorney to enter
up judgment is produced; the ignorant victim of art and du-
plicity, little aware of the nature of the instrument, readily
affixes his signature, and then upon the first unfavorable sea-
son, his lands and property are taken by a writ of fieri facias,
and sold by the Provost Marshal for probably half their value;
c


the creditor becomes the purchaser of the laud, and the poor
Settler is constrained to become his tenant, at a rent perhaps
equal to half the amount of the purchase.
I shall now proceed to describe the system pursued by the
better sort of Settlers—men who have either come from Eng-
land with sufficient capital for their establishment, or have ac-
quired it by patient industry and economy within the Colony:
many of these were formerly convicts, and now torm very
respectable and industrious members of society; —reserving
my observations on the various modes of improving land for a
separate chapter.
Even among the Settlers of this description, a most lamen-
table deficiency of agricultural knowledge and rural experience
is observable: many have been tradesmen in great towns,
others have been officers in the navy or army, and Ido not be-
lieve it is possible, at the present moment, to name ten indivi-
duals in the whole Colony who can properly be called farmers.
Their former habits and prejudices are utterly at variance with
their present pursuits, independent of their want of practical
knowledge; and very few can be found who will lay aside the
manners of the city, the camp, or the quarter deck, and betake
themselves to those habits of diligence, activity, frugality, and
attention to minutiae, that are requisite to form the complete
farmer.
The working cattle most usually employed are oxen. The
breed of horses common in the colony is not well adapted for
draught; a pair of the best horses of that kind cannot be had
under ,£IOO, and, unless well kept and allowed corn, they will
not be able to perform more labour than a pair of oxen. The
common interest of money is £lO per cent,; a pair of horses
will not be fit for active work above ten or twelve years, and
will then be worth very little, so that a sum of at least £7 per
annum must be laid by or provided to replace the horses when
incapable of further labour, making a sum of £l7 per annum
for the interest of money, and to replace the capital; the ex


pense of shoes will be near £1 a year for each horse. A pair
oi well-broken oxen, 4 years old, and fit for immediate work,
will cost at the most £3O ; they will work till they are eight
years old, with nothing but the grass provided for them by
nature, and if allowed twelve months’ run after that period,
upon good grass, they will, as beef, nearly replace their first
cost. I never use any other draught cattle than oxen ; they
plough in pairs, guided by the ploughman with reins, without
a driver ; they are harnessed with collars, bridles, and bits in
their mouths, precisely the same as horses ; I allow three oxen
to each plough, changing one every day, so that each beast
works two days and rests one, or four days out of seven.
Their usual day’s work is three quarters of an acre, except
when breaking up new land, then four are used to each plough,
and they perform half an acre a day. They never get any
other food than the natural grass, though it would certainly be
desirable to assist them with a little hay or turnips in the win-
ter. I usually break in my young bullocks at three years old,
and the first year work them in yokes at light work, such as
harrowing, &c. in teams of four or six together : the next year
they are put into the plough teams, and worked in collars with
reins. The expense of ploughing in this manner I estimate at
about 4s. per acre. Many reasons besides those here men-
tioned might be adduced, why the preference should be given
to oxen as working cattle, in the present state of the Colony.
Six oxen will not cost more than two horses ; the latter will be
unable to break up new land which four of the former can
effect, leaving two for a change. Should any accident happen
to a horse so as to render him unfit for labour, a very heavy
loss will be experienced, while an ox may be fatted and will
then nearly replace his first cost. In travelling the roads in
the more distant and recently settled parts of the Colony, it is
necessary to carry corn for horses, or they will be little able
to bear the fatigues of a long journey, while oxen will be con-
tent with the grass that is generally to be found every where.
c 2


They are also best in swampy and wet places, being not so
easily alarmed, and never plunging when they find themselves
sinking. In breaking up new land, where roots or stones
abound, oxen are infinitely superior to horses, being a more
steady and temperate draught; the latter, when the plough
meets with an impediment of this kind, will snatch and plunge,
and most probably break some of the tctckliyig, but oxen im-
mediately stop until told to go on again.
The wheel carriages in most general use in husbandry are
light carts ; they are built in the Colony of a good construc-
tion and materials, complete, for about twelve or fourteen
pounds ; unless, however, they are very light, they should al-
ways be built to shoot, in the manner of dung carts or tumbrils,
to render them useful upon the farm, as well as upon the road.
Proper carts for carrying manure, stones, &c. are very rarely
to be met with, owing to the little attention paid to manuring
by the majority of farmers. Waggons are not much used, and
those that are possessed by a few persons, are generally built
on very defective principles. On farms, however, where there
is much wool or grain to carry to market, a vehicle of this
description is extremely useful; carrying a much larger load,
and descending hills and steep places with greater facility;
they are also very useful in drawing in split stuff for fencing
and building, if so constructed that the back or body will take
off upon occasions; temporary rough bolsters, with short
stumps, may be placed on the carriage, and a large load
carried with ease and facility, which it would not be possible to
lay on a cart. Some few persons use
kinds of commodities very well, and are easily loaded and un-
loaded ; they are strong vehicles, not liable to upset, and carry
fencing stuff better than any other two-wheeled carriage, but
they do not descend hills so well as waggons, and afford the
load no protection against thefts. The harrows in use are
of a simple and frequently rude construction, and only used for
covering seed. Large pulverising harrows, grubbers, seal-


riliers, drills, or other more complicated agricultural machinery,
are seldom seen.
The plough in general use is the swing plough; a great
many iron Scotch ploughs have been imported, and answer
very well; ploughs with wooden mould-boards are made in the
Colony at about £3 or 10s. each, but they are seldom
made on correct principles, and do their work badly. Perhaps
the kind of plough best adapted for general purposes is that
with an iron foot and mould-board, and wooden beam and han-
dles ; they are not so expensive, and are more easily repaired
in case of accident. A wrought-iron share is best for breaking
up new land, but after the ground has been completely cleared
of roots and large stones, cast-iron shares may be used with
advantage.
No system of agriculture can be said to have been as yet
established in New South Wales ; even on the best cultivated
farms, very little has been done towards introducing a proper
rotation of crops; the same destructive recurrence of wheat
year after year is too generally practised, without the inter-
vention of green crops, and with little aid from manure to re-
cruit the fertility of the soil.
The first crop is generally wheat or maize. I have found it
best to break up new land in spring, before the ground gets hard;
to let it lie until the month of February or March, and then to
cross-plough it, and work it well to pieces with a strong har-
row ; then to plough it once more, and sow it with wheat upon
the furrow ; in this way, the turf has sufficient time to rot be-
fore it is again disturbed; and the new land experiences the
full benefit of exposure to the air and summer sun.
Maize, or Indian corn, on low and flooded lands, is much
planted as a first crop ; and where the soil is rank and contains
much vegetable matter, its effect is very beneficial; the hand
labour required in its cultivation, pulverising and exposing
the soil, and fitting it for the reception of wheat as the suc-
ceeding crop. Potatoes, in the upland districts where maize


does not come to perfection, are a good first crop, and make
an excellent season for wheat. For the information ot new
Settlers, I shall here shortly describe a plan I have practised
with success in planting this root as a first crop ; the method
is very rough husbandry, but a new Settler must endeavour
to draw some return from his labour as early as possible, and
to him the hint may be useful, if adopted to a limited extent.
The best season, as above mentioned, to break up new land
to be sown with wheat the succeeding autumn, are the months
of September and October ; this is also the season for planting
potatoes as a field crop. As soon as the plough had gone two
or three bouts, and a good open furrow was obtained, the
plough was taken up, and a thin flag pared oil as fleet as pos-
sible, and turned down into the open furrow ; upon this the
sets were placed ; the plough was then let out, and biought
round again in the same place, taking up the mould from the
bottom, and turning it over the sets ; in this manner the ope-
ration was continued, placing a row of potatoes in every fourth
furrow ; the surface immediately over the seed was afterwards
broken with a hoe to cover it more effectually, and when the
plants were at a proper height, they were earthed up in the
same maimer. If the seed is prepared before-hand, two per-
sons may attend one plough, and will plant half an acre per
day. The quantity of seed per acre is about seven cwt.; and the
return with me has generally been about eight for one. This
plan cannot be adopted where there are many large roots or
stones in the ground, but, where it can be practised, will well
repay the expense of seed and labour, though the leturn will
be small compared to what it might be were the lands properly
broken and pulverised.
I am of opinion, that when a proper system of agriculture
is introduced, maize will be very little cultivated, except as a
first crop, or in peculiar situations on alluvial lands ; it will
indeed be always useful as a saving crop on lands that from
any accident have not been sown, as the season for planting is


after every other grain. The best rotation I think, on all up-
land situations where the soil is tolerably light, will be wheat,
turnips, barley or oats, grasses, and peas. It is to be obseved,
that the wheat harvest comes sufficiently early to admit of the
ground being ploughed and turnips sown the same summer ;
these may be fed off with sheep in time to sow the barley
early the ensuing spring. The grasses must be sown with the
barley or oats; the grain will be ripe in December or January:
and the grasses may be fed off with sheep through the remaining
part of the summer and autumn ; and the next year it may be
cut for hay : this may be done in November, and the rouen
may be pastured and folded over with sheep until the next
August, which is the best season for sowing peas. In stating
my conviction that this will be found the most convenient and
profitable rotation for the upland and colder districts of the
Colony, I must candidly confess, that the period I have been
settled has not allowed me sufficient time to introduce the
system fully upon my own farm ; but I have adopted it as far
as possible; and in one or two years more, shall have suffi-
cient land in cultivation, to carry every part of the plan into
effect: my experience, however, as far as it goes, has hitherto
confirmed my opinion on the subject. The rotation of five crops
here alluded to, will occupy a period of four years. Some
persons will, perhaps, think it better to omit the crop of peas,
and sow wheat at once upon the clover lay ; but in the upland
districts, where maize does not come to perfection, peas are
one of the most valuable crops that can be raised, pork being
an article in great demand, both for sale and domestic con-
sumption ; and unless a crop of peas is introduced, or some-
thing equivalent, the barley produced in the course here re-
commended will not be sufficient to fatten a proper quantity
of pork ; and I have found by experience, that peas make a
most excellent season for wheat. The making of hams and
bacon has hitherto been little attended to ; indeed many per-
sons thought the climate too hot for the purpose, but I have


ascertained that hams, of a quality equal to the best English,
may be made for four or five months in the winter season;
they sell readily at good prices in the Colony at present, and
when they become plentiful and cheap, a market may be found
in the East Indies for any quantity.
The principal impediment to the introduction of a proper
rotation has been the want of a demand for barley, or, in fact,
for any other grain than wheat or maize; but breweries and
distilleries are now becoming numerous, and good malting
samples of barley will always sell readily. Green crops were
also formerly of very little value, the natural grasses being
competent, even in the county of Cumberland, to fatten a
sufficient supply of meat for the Sydney markets; but now by
the exhaustion of the natural grass, and the great increase
in the numbers of live stock, the principal flocks and herds
are removed to such an immense distance in the interior, that
it will be impossible to bring down fat stock, particularly in
the winter season, without a very considerable loss of flesh ; and
every year increases the difficulty. It will therefore become
necessary to fatten stock, bred in the interior, upon artificial
food raised nearer the markets ; and thus it will become, and
I am satisfied is now, possible to grow green crops at a very
considerable profit, independently of the improvement that
would be thereby effected in the land, and the consequent in-
creased amount of the grain crops. Wheat and other grains
are generally sown broadcast on the furrow, and harrowed in.
Very little drill husbandry has hitherto been practised, although
in many instances its introduction would be highly beneficial.
Wheat is sometimes ploughed in, and the plan has been at-
tended with good success, particularly in dry seasons ; I tried
it myself to some extent, in the dry season of 1824, with much
advantage. The roller is very little used; I do not believe
there are six at this time to be found in the whole Colony j its
use would, however, be attended with many benefits, especi-
ally in rolling grain crops in winter, for the purpose of closing


PAM TIT PREPARING TO BIVOUAC.




the ground round the roots of the plant, to protect it from the
C 6Cts ° f the drou^hts of spring, and to prevent it from be-
coming root-fallen; I have much used the roller this way, and
found it highly beneficial.
r i he stumps of the trees, which are suffered to remain in the
ground, are a very serious impediment to good husbandry;
they are perpetually in the way in every operation; it is im-
possible to drill crops among them; and though people do
manage to plough and harrow, yet it is attended with much
inconvenience, and is continually the means of breaking the
implements. The immediate neighbourhood of the stumps, not
being tilled, becomes the nursery for noxious weeds, and their
entire removal would be attended with the most substantial
benefit; at present, however, probably three-fourths, or at
any rate one half, of the cultivated lands in the Colony have
the stumps remaining in them.
The quantity of land that can be managed by one plough
will depend upon a variety of circumstances; but where the
land is properly cleared and brought into cultivation, and a
suitable rotation of crops adopted, so as to distribute the la-
bour equally throughout the year, a plough with three good
oxen will pi obably be able to do all the work requisite upon
80 acres. It will be recollected, that the farmer is never set
fast by deep snows or long frosts; and though the drought
will sometimes render land in a state of nature too hard to
break up, yet the seasons will very seldom prevent him from
prosecuting his operations regularly throughout the year.
Road work, however, is more tedious than in England, the
markets being more distant, and the journeys consequently
longer.
All kinds of grain are usually reaped with the sickle, the
scythe being very little in use for this purpose. Moderate
sized stacks, set upon steddles, clear of the ground, and barns
that admit a free circulation of air, are best suited to the cli-
mate, as grain in the straw is very subject to weevil and fly


moth, if collected in large quantities, especially if the straw,
or the situation in which it is placed, be damp. It is a com-
mon fault with the Settlers to let the grain stand till dead ripe,
whereby much loss from its shedding is frequently incurred.
Some few farms are furnished with threshing and cleaning
machines : but in general they are not of good construction,
and the most usual way is, to thresh out the grain by hand,
and to winnow it with sweeps or fanners, or in a current of
air ; —very few use wheat screens, and to this imperfect man-
ner of cleaning the corn, and negligence in preparing the
seed, may be attributed the prevalence of drake, which is a
great pest to the farmer, and materially injures the crop.
Granaries of a good construction are very rare ; many people
are of opinion that under-ground granaries similar to those
used in the South of Europe, would suit the climate best; but
I believe they have not yet been tried.
The varieties of wheat in most general cultivation are the
common red lammas, and the creeping wheat; there is also a
variety called the Macquarie wheat, having been introduced
by Governor Macquarie, and which is a native either of Syria
or Egypt. The red may be sown late and ripens early; it
does not tiller much upon the ground, and is subject to smut:
the grain is large and heavy, and produces good flour; the
quantity of seed per acre may be stated at two bushels. The
creeping wheat should be sown early ; it ripens after the red ;
it tillers very much, and does not shoot up into spindle till the
summer begins to advance, when it runs up and comes into
ear quicker than any other sort: the grain is plump but small,
and is very little subject to smut; it makes excellent flour;
the quantity of seed per acre is one bushel and a half.
The Macquarie wheat is a very hardy bearded kind; the
grain is coarse and flinty. There is a kind also called the
dumpey or dumpty wheat; it grows, with a short and thick
ear and short straw; the grain is white and not much subject
to smut, but very difficult to thresh out. I can give the


average produce of the whole Colony from mere conjecture,
hut it does not probably exceed fifteen bushels per acre ; and
when the miserable system followed in cultivation is duly taken
into consideration, its dmount will not appear surprising;
on farms properly managed, the produce is about the same as
upon lands of the same description in England, The smut in
wheat so prevalent in the colony seems intirely owing to bad
husbandry. The same land is sown with wheat year after year
without any change of seed, and without the smallest pains
bestowed in preparing the seed. I have never, but with one
very small exception, sown wheat on the same land two years
successively, and have always steeped my seed wheat in strong
brine, and afterwards mixed a small quantity of lime with it,
and I have never had any smutty wheat. Rust sometimes ap-
pears but is not very common ; and wheat is sometimes blight-
ed by the hot winds or other causes in the month of November,
more especially upon alluvial lands, and other low and confined
situations, where there is not sufficient circulation of air.
If the winter be open and moist, with little frost, the wheat
grows very rank, and comes forward too fast; it has even
been known to be injured when in bloom by the late frosts of
spring ; the best prevention is to keep it fed down with sheep
until the end of August, especially the red wheat; the treading
of the animals is highly beneficial to the crop, and prevents it
becoming root-fallen in spring, while eating off the plant
causes it to stool or tiller.
The maize cultivated in the Colony is of various kinds, white,
yellow, and purple. It is a fine and productive grain, of a
most luxuriant appearance in a growing state ; in proper situ-
ations it yields an abundant return, but is a very exhausting
crop, and returns very little to the ground in shape of immure,
the stalks being very hard and slow of decay. The grain is
an excellent and very forcing food for horses, swine, and
poultry; it is also converted into a wholesome bread for
man ; and when malted makes good beer, but possesses less


saccharine matter than barley. It is planted in holes formed
with a hoe, about three feet apart each way ; at a proper stage
of its growth it is hilled up with a considerable quantity of
earth. The cob or cone of grain is enveloped with a thick
coating of leaves, called its husk; the grains are disposed
round a core in a very compact form. When ripe, the cobs
are gathered in, each stalk producing one or two, and spread
upon a floor to dry, and, as opportunities offer, the outward
husk is stripped of; it is then spread about eighteen inches
thick upon a floor; if spread too thick it is apt to heat and
get mouldy; when quite dry, the grain is detached from
the core by thrashing the cobs with a flail, or rubbing them
with the hands ; this is termed shelling corn. —The average
produce I am hardly able to state, but on forest lands it is per-
haps about 40, and on flooded lands about 80, bushels the
acre. I have already given my opinion of this grain as an ob-
ject of cultivation in a regular course of husbandry. It re-
quires a great deal of hand labour, and is a most scourging
crop to the soil. The other kinds of European grain are
cultivated in the Colony in such small quantities at present,
that very little can be said respecting them. Two kinds of
barley, the English and the Cape, or skinless, are common;
the latter is frequently sown for green food in winter. Oats
of a very coarse kind, and also the Spanish oat, are sometimes
grown, and I have found these answer better as green food
than barley. Rye is sown, and its cultivation seems extend-
ing. Peas of different kinds are also raised, but not in any
great quantities.—There seems no reason why all these grains
may not be brought to perfection on suitable soils. Beans do
not seem to suit the climate; the plant grows luxuriantly, but
keeps continually flowering and dropping off, and it is seldom
that any of the pods will stand and ripen. I have not been
able as yet to give this crop a fair trial, but suspect that if
sown early, and the tops taken otf as soon as the flowers begin
to appear, it might succeed very well as a field crop. In the


county of Argyle, and country westward of the Blue Moun-
tains, the maize will not come to perfection, and it is probable
that the bean, and other European grains and pulse, may attain
to greater perfection there than in the lower and hotter parts
of the Colony.
It is extremely difficult to obtain a true sample of seed of
any description. The system of husbandry has been so slo-
venly, and corn crops have been grown in succession, without
any intervening green crop to clean the land, that all the dif-
ferent varieties are jumbled together in the strangest manner.
The consequence is exceedingly prejudicial to the crop, as
where two or three kinds of wheat are grown in the same field,
one sort will probably ripen a week or more before the others,
and consequently will be shed and wasted, and become the
prey of quails and parrots. The Agricultural Society have
lately imported some samples of wheat, barley, Poland and
potatoe oats, tares, and buck-wheat, and it may be fairly anti-
cipated, that from them some prime sorts will be obtained.
The most important point in good husbandry, change of seed,
has been greatly neglected, and to this omission may be rea-
sonably attributed the present inferior quality of the barley
grown in the Colony ; no other grain requiring such frequent
and careful changes of seed as this, to prevent it from degene-
rating. It is true, the greater part of the county of Cumber-
land is unsuitable for the growth of barley, the soil being a stiff
clay. But still there are many tracts in that county of fine
barley land ; and in the more elevated districts, the soil is well
calculated to produce that grain.
No attempts have yet been made towards feeding or fatten-
ing live stock upon artificial food, except very partially with
i egard to sheep ; nor has any system of farm-yard manage-
ment, with a view to the production and preservation of
manures, been adopted. The stable, pig-sties, and calf-pens,
are the only places about the farm-yard where manure is col-
lected ; and as these are seldom half littered, the quantity


made is very small; indeed the whole obtained upon many
large farms is frequently expended upon the gardens, which
in general are much too large, and only rob the rest of the
farm. No value seems to be set upon straw ;itis a very com-
mon practice to burn it, and when this is not done, very little
care is taken to use it with economy and benefit. In the
winter of 1824 I kept my milch cows shut up in the yard at
night, and fed them upon hay, mixed with oat barley and pea
straw; they throve much better than they would have done
upon the withered natural grass in that severe season, and the
yard being kept well littered with wheat straw, a large quan-
tity of dung was obtained; the calves also had wheat straw
given them in racks in their pen, and they consumed a large
truss every night.
The green crops hitherto raised have been chiefly devoted
to feeding swine, except some small portion that has been
appropriated to milch cows ; green barley and oats are also
used as winter food for horses. Every variety of turnips is
known in the Colony, and, where properly cultivated, on suit-
able soil, they have been found to thrive very well. I have tried
them to some extent, and obtained good ones. In 1824 they
failed through the extreme drought of the season ; it is proba-
ble they w ould have succeeded better had they been drilled ;
but I was not in possession of proper machinery, and could
not obtain it in the Colony. Rape has been cultivated as food
for sheep with success. Tares, I believe, have never been
tried, although as spring food they would be extremely valua-
ble. Potatoes are grow r n to some extent, but are principally
intended for market; in the lower districts the soil is too stiff
for this root, and the quality is inferior, except in a few places
on brush lands, and on light sandy tracts, near the banks of
creeks or rivers ; but in the more elevated parts, the quality
is good, and the return abundant. They are a good first crop
upon new land, but will be inconvenient in any regular rota-
tion, and are attended with much manual labour It is proba-


ble the cultivation of potatoes will never be much attended to
as a field crop. Cabbages, I believe, have never been attempted
except in gardens, though the clay lands of the Colony are well
adapted for their production.
Tobacco may now be said to be fairly introduced as an ob-
ject of cultivation, and it may be reasonably anticipated, that
in a few years the export of this article will be an object of
importance. Very few persons are, however, as yet, in pos-
session of proper sheds and conveniences for drying and cur-
ing it. The produce, when well managed, has been of excel-
lent quality. As the culture of this plant is likely to extend
very considerably throughout the Colony, I shall here insert
Mr. Bradley’s method, as communicated by him to the
Agricultural Society, and for which he was voted a piece of
plate by that body.
“ In the cultivation of tobacco, raising the plants is not the least
difficult operation to persons unacquainted with it. Having marked
the ground where I mean to raise my plants, it is covered with small
brushwood, and this is burnt to kill any seeds or roots that may be
in it, and it also helps the growth of the plants when the ground is
cold. It must be raked very fine, and the seed then sown, but not
covered with the rake : it may be pressed a little with the back of
the spade. A hurdle, or something of that kind, must be laid over
it, but so as not to touch the ground, and this is to be covered thinly
with straw, only enough to prevent the rays of the sun from pene-
trating. It may be watered through the straw, which must be done
once a day, and in very dry weather twice ; as the surface should
never be dry from the time the seed is sown until it is well up ; then
in wet or dull weather the hurdle and straw may be taken away, but
the plants still nourished with water in dry weather.
“ The seed may be sown in August ; it will be up in three weeks,
and some of the plants may be transplanted in the latter end of Oc-
tober, and the transplanting may continue, when the weather permits,
until the middle of January. Forest land, to receive the plants
should be well manured and worked fine. The plants should be four
feet between the lines ; but, if the land is not very rich, they may


be planted much nearer. The planting should be done in wet wea-
ther, or while the ground is moist ; even if it should rain, no time
should be lost. If a shower falls in the night and the morning looks
like a dry day, plants may be put out, but they must be covered with
a chip or a piece of bark, nor must they be uncovered for five or six
days, unless it rains. Some seasons I have been obliged to cover
nearly all my plants, and other seasons I have not covered any.
“ After planting, the first enemy is a black grub, which will de-
stroy many plants. It lies in the ground, and there is no finding it
until the mischief is done, when it will be found at the root of the
plants; it must be looked for and killed to prevent the loss of more
plants : they are perceptible at first, but in two or three days they
grow to a large size, and will do much damage. These must be
diligently looked for and destroyed; they are the worst in the be-
ginning of the season, when the plants have not a strong root.
If the season has been wet, the ground w ill be hard and baked
in dry weather; the soil therefore should be loosened, and the plants
will be much stronger. The employment now is to keep clear of
insects and weeds until the plants are lopt. In doing this, I let the
plants grow until the form of the blossom is just to be seen; I then
take off from the bottom the decayed leaves, and such as have been
injured by the insects. I then take off the top, leaving what the
stalk will bear, generally from 12 to 16 leaves. The work will now
be to keep down the suckers until it is ripe, which state may be
known by the curly and yellow mottled appearance of the leaves.
It is then to be cut in dry weather and left on the ground, but only
until it is softened, which is to prevent its breaking in removing to
the shed. If it lies too long in the sun it will have a bad colour.
Two men with a hand-barrow will carry it in the safest manner to
the shed. It is then hung up, every stalk separate and clear of the
other. Sheds for drying tobacco should be as airy as possible, and
in wet weather assisted with fire ; perhaps charcoal would be the
best. I used w r ood, and found no inconvenience from it as to the
quality of the tobacco. In this state it hangs till it is perfectly dry.
It should be taken down in wet or moist weather, and the leaves
stripped from the stalk, and if the tobacco is not good then, I think
it never w ill be so.


“ The greatest danger of spoiling tobacco arises from the want of
proper sheds to dry it in. If it gets mouldy, lam of opinion that
it can never be made good ; but as for sweating, I think the higher
it is in that state, the nearer rotten. I take great pains when I have
a heap of leaf tobacco by me to keep it as cool as possible, by very
frequently turning it, until it can be manufactured into negro-head.
This is best done in wet weather ; but, if the leaves are dry, they
are to be sprinkled with water, and laid in a heap, until it has the
dampness desired, which is just such that it can be worked without
breaking the leaves. The stem of the leaf is then taken out, and the
leaves twisted up in the size and form desired. It is then placed in
a cask put under the press ; it is in the press the tobacco gains its
fine colour and smell.
“ My press is as simple as any part of the process, being only a
strong post placed in the ground with two mortices cut in it : one to
admit the lever, the other to admit a strong piece of timber level
with the ground for the cask to stand, so that one works against the
other, and keeps the post steady : two men with block tackling can
work it with ease.
“ One acre of tobacco will require the constant labour of one man,
until it is fit to cut.”
Flax has been cultivated with success ; the produce is of
good quality, and the crop abundant. It would probably be
a profitable crop for the purpose of exportation, especially on
the alluvial lands, where its exhausting nature would do little
injury. Its production is at present limited to the demand for
the Factory at Parramatta, and other domestic purposes. The
New Zealand flax has been introduced and thrives well, but
has never been tried as a crop.
Hops are grown by the colonial brewers, and seem to an-
swer well; but the demand being limited, the cultivation is
not likely to extend.
Nearly all the English grasses, clovers, &c. have been in-
troduced, and some of the principal Settlers have sown consi-
derable quantities ; but in general the process of laying down
the land to grass has been very ill executed. Lands that had
D


been exhausted by a repetition of corn crops, and were full of
seed weeds, have been sown with grasses, without being pro-
perly cleansed, and the consequence has been, that the grasses
have soon been overpowered and destroyed by the weeds. In
many cases, the species sown were not adapted for permanent
pastures, such as red clover and cow grass, and of course
decayed in two or three years. No idea of introducing grasses,
as part of a rotation of crops, seems to have been entertained
by any one; the sole object was to obtain permanent pasture ;
but no suitable selection of kinds, adapted to the soil and situ-
ation, was thought of, people generally sowing the seeds of
such as they could obtain, without reference to their individual
qualities, or endeavouring to obtain a due proportion of each
kind. Enough, however, has been done to ascertain that
the whole of the European grasses will thrive in the Colony,
and stand the winter. White clover is spreading every where
through the country, but it withers and almost disappears with
the summer’s drought. The other kinds resist the heat very
well. Lucerne has been tried with great success ; red clover
flourishes amazingly, but is said not to perfect its seed. The
principal use that has been made of artificial grasses has been
as pasture for sheep, and to supply the town of Sydney and
the shipping with hay. This article is now sold, delivered in
Sydney, at about .£9 or <£lo per ton.
Much difficulty is experienced in this, as in every other de-
partment of agriculture, in procuring good seed; and every
person who intends laying down any considerable quantity of
land to grass, will find it necessary to cultivate the different
sorts in beds, or patches, and to collect the seeds as they
ripen.
From what has been stated, it will be seen that the agricul-
ture of the Colony is in a very rude and infant state, and will
require many years, and much fostering aid from the Local
Government, to bring it to any degree of perfection. Many
circumstances have hitherto contributed to retard its progress


towards improvement ; the principal of which has been the
want of capital and skill in the majority of the Settlers; this
defect nothing but time, and due encouragement held out to
induce respectable men of capital to emigrate, can remedy.
The difficulty of obtaining good farming servants, and especi-
ally good ploughmen, has always been a serious impediment,
and still continues so ; but were the masters generally pos-
sessed of more practical knowledge, it. w r ould be of less impor-
tance, since many well-disposed men may be found among the
convicts who might be taught to plough, and perform other
operations, had the masters sufficient skill for the purpose. —
The w r ant of mechanics is an evil not so easily remedied as the
last; the Government formerly retained the whole of the con-
vict-mechanics that arrived, for the purpose of constructing
magnificent public works, while the majority of the Settlers
were destitute of decent habitations, and convenient buildings
for their business; and none but very particular favourites
could ever obtain the assignment of a mechanic. A somewhat
more liberal distribution is now practised, but a charge of
3s. 6d. per week is imposed for each mechanic assigned : this
is certainly a very great hardship, since a man that maintains
15 or 20 convicts in constant labour, free of every expence to
the crown, ought at least to be allowed the services of a me-
chanic, free of any charge of this kind. Among the convicts
in every ship that arrives, there are always a considerable
number of lads, who have served part of an apprenticeship to
various trades ; by completing these in their respective trades
in the Government service, a very considerable number of
useful mechanics might be obtained; this plan might also be
extended to the instruction of a number of the young London
thieves and pickpockets, and other convict boys, in useful
arts; they are utterly useless upon a farm in their present
state, but many of them might be rendered useful members of
society, if instructed in this manner. This plan is indeed
acted upon by the Government to a certain extent, but seems
D 2


capable of being rendered much more beneficial. Sawyers are
a description of people very much wanted in the Colony; there
are in every ship a considerable number of able-bodied men,
that have been soldiers, sailors, &C.; these are of no use to a
farmer, but if instructed in the very simple art of sawing, and
subsequently assigned to individuals, would be highly useful.
The want of buildings and proper conveniences is the greatest
impediment in the way of the cultivation of tobacco, and many
other articles.
The irregularity and uncertainty of the markets have hitherto
much retarded the improvement of agriculture. The price of
every article of produce fluctuates extremely; and although
this may sometimes be an advantage to the few possessed of
means of hoarding in time of plenty, against the return of
scarcity, yet it is an evil to the greater part of the community,
h ormerly, when a plentiful season occurred, the markets were
completely glutted ; and no vent being found for the surplus
produce, the price generally sunk very low ; the natural result
was, that a much less quantity of grain was sown, and this
produced a short supply, and consequent high prices, and cul-
tivation again extended. Thus alternate plenty and scarcity
have existed from the first settlement of the Colony. The
colonial distilleries, breweries, and exportation to the Isle of
h ranee, and other places, now provide a market for some part
of the surplus produce, and these sources of demand are con-
tinually increasing. In former times, the demands of the Local
Government, for the supply of the military and convicts, was
the only market open to the Settlers; and Government still con-
tinues the principal purchaser. The measures and operations of
the Government have therefore a very great influence upon
the markets ; a very remarkable instance of this has occurred
within the last year, and as it has given rise to events of a very
extraordinary nature, I shall here insert a few remarks on the
causes that have led to the late fluctuations in the price of
wheat in the Colony.


Previous to November, 1822, the plan adopted in receiving
wheat from the Settlers was as folloAVS : The Commissary, by
advertisement, required each person to tender the quantity he
was able to supply ; when all the tenders were delivered in, a
certain proportion was appointed to be received from each,
never exceeding 100 bushels. This quantity was invariably
paid for at KL. per bushel, without any reference to the ex-
isting market price.
The harvest of 1822 was a full average crop, and the mar-
ket price having declined below the fixed Government price,
the Local Government thought a fit opportunity had arrived
to abolish the system of receiving wheat at a fixed price, and
determined for the future to receive wheat by tender, at the
lowest price that might be offered; this determination was
announced on the 27th November, 1822.
From this time until the harvest of 1823 the price of wheat
continued gradually to decline ; the harvest of that year was
very abundant, and in the month of February, 1824, the mar-
ket average had fallen as low as 4s. o \d. per bushel; the Go-
vernment might now have been supplied with a full year’s
consumption; but by going into the market and purchasing
thus largely, the price must have been considerably enhanced;
they therefore determined to receive no more than their pre-
sent wants required, vainly imagining that by such means they
could keep down the price of wheat for the whole year. No
doubt, however, can be entertained, but that by purchasing
with due discretion, at proper intervals, the whole year’s sup-
ply might have been obtained under 7s. per bushel.
Three-fourths (perhaps even a greater proportion) of the
people who raise wheat for sale in New South Wales, are in-
dividuals who have been either soldiers or convicts ; men of
thoughtless, improvident habits, and consequently in indigent
circumstances ; these men have no barns or granaries for hous-
ing and preserving grain ; their crop, when obtained, must
immediately be thrashed out and carried to market, or very


great loss and damage will unavoidably ensue ; moreover, the
greater part of them are commonly indebted to the shopkeepers
and merchants of Sydney, and the other towns, and look to
the sale of their wheat as their principal future means of pay-
ment. On the present occasion, finding the Government stores,
to which they had hitherto been accustomed to look for their
principal market, shut against them, through the backwardness
of the Local Government to purchase, they were compelled to
part with their crops to the persons with whom they stood in-
debted, at very low prices ; the main bulk of the year’s crop
thus got into the hands of a few individuals, a circumstance
which could not fail greatly to enhance the price, as will be
seen in the sequel.
In seasons when wheat sells at good prices, the greater
part of the poorer class of Settlers, especially the Irish, with
their servants, consume very little, but subsist upon maize
and potatoes. The year in question, (1824,) these people,
finding no sale for their wheat, used it themselves ; many
thousand bushels were also consumed in feeding swine, to
which I was an eye witness, and, indeed, I used a considerable
quantity that way myself. All these circumstances acting
together, which could not, or at least ought not to have been
unknown to the Local Government, contributed to expend the
crop of wheat in a very wasteful and improvident manner;
which was further aided by the crop of maize being very short
in consequence of a dry summer, and thereby occasioning still
greater calls upon the stock of wheat, so that by the middle of
July, the supply had considerably diminished, and the market
average had consequently advanced to 7s. 11 Id. per bushel;
many discerning persons, who were possessed of good informa-
tion, now began to see that a scarcity must take place before
the next harvest, and therefore immediately commenced pur-
chasing ; but, as already observed, the bulk of the crop had
got into the hands of a few merchants and shopkeepers; and
the price consequently advanced so rapidly, that in the month


of September, the market average had reached 135. 6|ch per
bushel.
Strange as it may seem, it is nevertheless true, that the
Local Government never discovered their error until the alarm
of a scarcity had spread; and I am credibly informed, de-
layed making any purchase till there was at one period only
six days’ rations of flour in the magazines; in this emergency,
they were compelled to purchase at extravagant prices, and
dearly paid for their ill-judged parsimony and want of liberality
in the beginning of the season. It was now resolved, just at
the approach of harvest, to send to Batavia for flour, and the
ship Almorah was accordingly engaged for that purpose; she
sailed on 10th September. New wheat was sold in Sydney
market on November 18th; and the harvest became general
in that month throughout all the principal corn districts. The
importing this cargo could not therefore relieve the existing
scarcity, and could only serve to introduce a quantity of fo-
reign produce into the Colony, to the prejudice of the home-
grower. The ship on her retnrn to Sydney, was, however,
seized by His Majesty’s ship Slaney, for a breach of the East
India Company’s Charter, and sent to Calcutta to be tried:
her cargo, consisting of rice and wheat, procured at high
prices, and attended with very heavy expences, was thus acci-
dentally prevented from coming into consumption in the
Colony. The consequences of the wretched policy of the
Local Government at the commencement of the year 1824, did
not end here; the long continuance of very low prices pro-
duced a belief, which was very prevalent among the poor and
ignorant Settlers, that wheat would never again be worth 55.
per bushel; this persuasion was at that time industriously
encouraged by the crafty dealers and shopkeepers, for the
purpose of inducing the Settlers the more readily to part with
their grain then on hand at low prices. The lower order of
Settlers are, however, the principal suppliers of the markets


with grain, the wealthy grqziers very seldom growing sufficient
for their own consumption; and the consequence of this
opinion, so firmly believed by the greater part, was, that at the
wheat seed time in the months of April and May, 1824, pro-
bably not above two-thirds of the land intended for wheat was
sown. The harvest, from the drought of the season, also
proved a very bad one, and the average price of wheat, which
at the time of the arrival of the Almorah, immediately after
the harvest of 1824, was at 7s. 1 \d. per bushel, again rapidly
advanced, and when the last accounts left the Colony in July,
1825, was at 13s. Id. per bushel; these high prices will cause
the cultivation of wheat to be again extended ; and two years
more, with average seasons, will again bring about a plentiful
supply, and a recurrence of low 7 prices.
The system of receiving wheat at a fixed price, which in
the early days of the Colony might have been a measure of
good policy, had no doubt become injurious to the interests of
the Settlers themselves, and its abolition was therefore a wise
measure. The Colonists, habituated to expect IDs. per bushel
for their wheat, never gave themselves the trouble to attempt
the production of many articles suitable to their soil and cli-
mate, and this maximum price may be assigned as a principal
reason why the Colony has yet produced so few articles for
exportation. But the manner of carrying the measure into
execution, and the subsequent measures pursued, were injudi-
cious, and produced the evils above described.
The horticulture of the colony has, by a few intelligent gentle-
men, been carried to a much greater degree of perfection than its
agriculture ; but on this head, ray personal experience will
not allow me to say much: and perhaps in a work of the limited
nature of the present, it is unnecessary to go into a detailed
account. My observations on this point will therefore be as
condensed as possible, in hopes that some gentleman better
qualified for the task, of whom there are several in the Colony,


will favour the public with the results of his experience in
Australian horticulture ; a work of that description would
confer a great benefit on the Colony.
The esculent and culinary vegetables and roots of Europe
are all grown in great perfection, together with many others that
cannot be raised in England without the aid of artificial heat.
Fruits are in great abundance and variety, and many of ex-
cellent quality; the principal are oranges, lemons, citrons,
peaches, nectarines, apricots, figs, grapes, olives, loquats,
grenadillas, pears, apples, plums, cherries, quinces, mulber-
ries, raspberries, strawberries, and pomegranates, the whole
of which arrive at great perfection, especially such of them
as are natives of the south of Europe ; the trees are invariably
grown as standards. Peaches are more abundant than any
other fruit; considerable quantities of cider are made from
the juice ; and swine are fed with them by many people, for
three or four months in the summer and autumn. The banana
and guava are grown, but the climate is not sufficiently hot to
bring them to perfection. Pine apples require the protection
of a frame. The climate seems too hot for currants and goose-
berries ; but the Cape gooseberry is a good substitute for the
latter. Melons grow every where and arrive at perfection
in the open air. Of the nut kind, are the almond, walnut,
chesnut, and filbert; all which do extremely well. The plant-
ing of almonds is now much attended to ; and it may be ex-
pected a considerable quantity will be furnished for exportation
in a few years. Several gentlemen have lately turned their
attention to the vine and olive with much success ; some good
wine and excellent raisins have been made ; and these valuable
productions at length bid fair to be of essential service to the
Colony. The cultivation of these articles, however, is attended
with much expence, and can only be undertaken by persons
who have been settled some time, and have a considerable
command of labour.
New Settlers will find it to their advantage to confine their


operations in gardening to the production of a few of the most
useful vegetables, and the propagation of fruit trees ; after two
or three years, when their farm begins to be fully productive
and support itself, the labour of three men will be of less im-
portance, and their maintenance of less expense, than one
would be in the first commencement; they may then appropriate
one man to the management of the garden, and raise a variety
of articles which will contribute greatly to their comfort and
convenience ; no garden can be properly attended to, unless
at least one man is kept constantly employed in it; there are
always a number of little jobs and trifling operations to per-
form, which, however, are important to the raising the differ-
ent productions in a proper manner; and to execute these it
will never answer to take off the farming labourers from their
other and more important work ; any premature attempts
therefore at elegance or perfection in gardening, will either
prove abortive, or entail on the Settler an useless and ruinous
expense. The whole strength upon every new farm should be
directed to the most useful objects, such as the clearing and
enclosing land for grain crops, and erecting the most necessary
buildings ; ornament and elegance must for a time at least be
kept out of sight ; the obtaining plenty of provisions must be
the grand and only object; upon the early accomplishment of
this important point, the Settler must rest his hopes of success ;
when that object is once attained, everything will go on
smoothly ; the labourer w ill feed the shepherd and mechanic—
the shepherd will clothe the mechanic and labourer—and the
mechanic will house the labourer and shepherd.
The propagation and planting of fruit trees must not, how-
ever, be neglected, especially of the more useful kinds, such as
apples and peaches ; this very important point in rural eco-
nomy, is not sufficiently attended to by the majority of Settlers.
The want of some kind of cheap and common beverage is much
felt. Private brewing is very little practised; and apple or
peach cider would be most important and useful articles in
harvest and other busy seasons.


The horticulture of the Colony has been much improved by
the establishment of the Government Botanical Garden at
Sydney, under the superintendence of Mr. Charles Fraser,
the Colonial Botanist; whose indefatigable exertions in intro-
ducing and propagating new fruits and other productions, and
liberality in distributing them among those persons likely to
take care of them, are deserving of the highest praise.


CHAPTER IV.
BREEDING AND MANAGEMENT OF LIVE STOCK—HORSES—
HORNED CATTLE—SHEEP—SWINE—FAIRS AND MARKETS.
JTHE facilities afforded by the goodness and abundance of the
natural grasses, and the steady, though gradually declining,
price of meat, have contributed to advance the grazing and
breeding of live stock in the Colony, especially in the hands
of a few intelligent individuals, to a much greater degree of
improvement than its agriculture; the system pursued by
many of the stock-owners is still, however, very rude and im-
perfect.
The bulk of the horses are derived from animals imported
from the Cape ol Good Hope, and from India; they are of a
very mixed description, having, for the most part, been bred
without care, the high price naturally tempting the owners to
put every mare to the horse, however deficient in the requisite
qualities for a good brood mare; and the high sum demanded
for the service of the best horses obliging the poorer breeders
to content themselves with such horses as they could send their
mares to at a cheap rate. There is, properly speaking, no
breed of good draught horses in the Colony ; a great many, it
is true, are used for drawing carts, and also in ploughing,
but they are deficient in bone, weight, and strength, and sel-
dom of good bottom. The majority of the horses may be de-
scribed ot the nag kind ; they are of various colours, and not
very sightly in appearance, being narrow and sharp-backed.


fall off much from the rump to the tail, low-necked, and large-
headed. They are very apt to shy at objects upon the road,
and are not very sure-footed, which, perhaps, may be owing
to the unskilful way in which they are generally broke in ;
they are, however, subject to few diseases, and capable of
enduring great fatigue, and will perform long journeys on in-
different keep much better than any horses in England. There
is a breed of small galloways, derived from crosses with the
Acheen breed of ponies ; they are very hardy and serviceable,
and some of them handsome. Within the last few years
some very good thorough-bred blood horses have been intro-
duced from India and England; one of the best of these was
Mr. Browne’s Arabian horse. Model, from Calcutta: the best
cross-bred horses, now in the Colony, are derived from this
very fine specimen of the Oriental breed. A cross-bred
horse of his getting has been sold for 200 guineas, for
exportation to India. This horse covers at twenty dol-
lars each mare: ten guineas are demanded for the ser-
vice of the thorough-bred blood horses lately imported
from England—and it is said the horses are sufficiently em-
ployed even at that high price; there are horses, however,
that cover as low as ten and eight dollars each mare. Some
stallions and mares of the English and Flemish cart breeds
have been lately introduced; the thorough-bred horses of this
description are certainly too heavy for the climate, but it is
probable that, by judicious crossing with the lighter kinds, a
breed may be obtained with sufficient bone and strength, but
yet not too heavy for the purposes of draught in this climate.
I have already given my opinion as to the superiority of oxen
as working cattle in the present state of the Colony ; but it is
probable that, as the country becomes more extensively culti-
vated, and the roads are improved, horses will come more into
use, from their greater activity and superior fitness for road-
work.


The prices of horses are extremely various, but upon the
whole very high; three-year old colts will fetch, accord-
ing to their qualities, all prices, from 20 to 200/.; the price,
however, of good horses for the saddle, or to run in harness,
may be stated from 40 to 60/.; the best draft horses are nearly
as dear : fillies and mares may be stated at 15 or 20 per cent,
above colts and horses of the same quality, being much sought
after for the purpose of breeding.
Breeding horses is a very profitable occupation of capital,
but cannot be attempted by any new Settler with a prospect
of full success, until he has a sufficient number of enclosures
formed to class and divide his stock in a proper manner ; the
breeding mares, entire colts, geldings, and fillies should all be
kept separate, in secure enclosures, otherwise the fillies will
take the horse, and the colts will cover, at too early an age,
which wall greatly check and impede their growth. The colts
also drive the geldings about, and frequently do them serious
injury. It is the practice with many breeders to allow the
horse to run with the mares in the covering season, which is
certainly attended with many advantages, as the mares then
never take the horse unless when nature prompts them, and it
is very rare they miss breeding. Others keep their horses
stabled, and bring the mares to them at regular intervals of
nine days, until they refuse the horse ; but in this way they
very often miss breeding. Every person who breeds horses
to any extent, should endeavour to keep an entire horse of his
own, otherwise the expense of hiring the service of a horse will
run away with a good part of his profits. Those, however,
who have any very valuable mares, will do well to send them
to the best horse they can, without regarding the expense.
The climate seems peculiarly congenial to the breeding and
improvement of horses; they are subject to few diseases, and
the mares, if w ell kept, breed very regularly to an advanced
age. Horses kept in towns are principally fed upon maize
and bran; they are seldom allowed hay, wffiich is dear, and


not always to be obtained; but in lieu thereof the coarse
grass, produced in the neighbouring woods, which is brought
into Sydney by people who make a living by procuring it;
this is, however, a very poor food, and a wretched substitute
for hay, especially in the winter. In the interior, horses are
generally kept in enclosures, and fed upon the natural grass;
those, however, that do much work, are allowed corn, either
maize or oats, and are also frequently supplied with green oats
or barley in the winter ; but this is a poor washy food, and a
bad substitute for good hay, for horses that work hard.
The horned cattle of the Colony are derived from various
countries, England, the Cape of Good Hope, India, and other
places ; they have been bred with little discrimination, and are
of a very mixed and mongrel description. Some few breeders,
however, have paid more attention, and possess very good
herds, though probably not in all cases of the kinds best
adapted to the country; Mr. John Macarthur’s are of the
Lancashire, and the Rev. Mr. Marsden’s of the Suffolk or
polled breed ; these two are perhaps the purest and most un-
mixed of any herds in the Colony. Mr. Throsby possesses a
large and strong variety, and the heaviest oxen yet produced
have been from his herds. A very large proportion of the
horned cattle of the Colony are derived from the Bengal breed;
these may be easily recognised from their affinity to the buffalo;
they are remarkable for large hunches on their shoulders, and
a thick skin, covered with smooth shining hair. They are
small, and of little or no use for the dairy, but fatten readily
upon inferior keep, and make very strong and hardy working
stock ; the quality of their beef is very fine. It is now hardly
possible to trace the other varieties of cattle that have been at
different times introduced into the Colony, nor will it answer
any useful purpose to do so ; the better way for every new
Settler in purchasing his stock, will be to view the herds of the
different breeders, and then well consider the quality of the
land and pasture he will have to put them upon, and make his


selection accordingly. The pure English breeds, especially of
the larger kinds, I am fully persuaded are too good for the
Colony in its present state, and cannot be supported and
brought to perfection upon the natural grass, except in very
peculiar situations, and where they have a wide tract of coun-
try to range over. The smaller breeds of British cattle, such
as the North Devon, South Wales, and Galloway Scots, would
all answer extremely well, and produce more beef and more
milk than the Hereford, Sussex, or large Yorkshire breeds;
but perhaps some animals of these latter kinds, especially the
Yorkshire, would be very desirable for the purpose of crossing
the present race of colonial cattle, the majority of which may be
described as large boned, thick skinned, large head and horns,
coarse neck, heavy fore-quarters, deficient hind-quarters, and
very bad milking stock ; the short-horned Yorkshire are the
reverse of all this : by judicious crossing with these, a breed
might perhaps be obtained, with a lighter fore-quarter, more
meat upon the best joints, and better adapted for dairy pur-
poses, at the same time not too tender, or requiring better
keep than the country, in its natural state, is able to supply.
My own opinion is, that a variety derived from the moderate-
sized English breeds, slightly touched with the oriental kind,
is, under all the circumstances, best adapted to the present
state of the Colony.
Very few of the stock owners have sufficient land to support
the whole of their stock, and are therefore obliged to have re-
course to the unoccupied tracts in the interior. When any
person finds himself overstocked—and very few make the dis-
covery, or, at any rate, will take measures to remedy the evil,
until their cattle are half starved—they go into the interior, or
hush, as it is termed, beyond the occupied parts of the coun-
try, usually procuring the assistance of some of the black Na-
tives, as their guides. Having found a place suited to their
purpose, with abundance of grass, well supplied with water,
and, if possible, with natural boundaries, such as thick brushes.


rocky creeks, or impassable mountains, they then make appli-
cation to the Local Government for permission to occupy the
same, describing its situation, boundaries, and the name by
which it is known among the Natives ; this permission, or
ticket of occupation, as it is termed, is always granted upon
paying a trifling fee ; and conveys to the stock-owner a right
to occupy a tract usually extending two miles in every direc-
tion from his stock-yard; always, however, holding himself in
readiness to quit at six months’ notice from the Surveyor-
General, should the land be wanted for the purpose of coloni-
zation ; and also prohibited from cutting down or removing
any timber, except what may be required for stock-yards or
huts. This ticket of occupation system has been of material
advantage to the stock-owners, by giving them the free use of
the natural pasturage at a cheap rate; but it has also been
attended with many disadvantages. The occupation of the
country, by new Settlers, has of late years been so rapid, that
the graziers have found themselves continually impelled further
on into the interior; and thus their flocks and herds have be-
come every year removed to a still greater distance from home ;
the necessity of their occasional personal superintendence
imposes upon them the obligation of undertaking long and
toilsome journies, with all the disagreeable consequences of
absence from their principal concerns, and privation of domes-
tic comforts. The expense, also, of sending the necessary
supplies to their shepherds and stockmen, at such a long dis-
tance, becomes a very serious matter ; while the uncertain te-
nure, on which they hold the land, hinders them from inclosing
and cultivating as much as would subsist their people ; and at
length when they are compelled to remove, to make way for
new Settlers, the latter find the pasturage ruined and exhausted.
The Government have lately, however, come to a resolution,
to sell lands on very reasonable terms; the large stock-owners
will therefore be able to purchase as much as they may, or at
least ought, to require, for their own use; and they will pro-
E


bably see the necessity and advantage of keeping down their
flocks and herds to the number their own lands will be able to
support, and not spread their establishments all over the coun-
try, as some of them seem disposed to do at present.
In taking possession of a tract of land, or grazing run, as it
is termed in the Colony, the first thing to be done, is to erect
a secure five-railed stock-yard, with strong posts, sufficiently
capacious to contain the whole herd, with proper divisions for
drafting off any portion, should it be required, for market or
any other purpose ; and a small pen for young calves. A bark
hut is also erected, for the residence of the stockmen. The
cattle are then brought to the place, and for the first few days
herded together, and enclosed in the stock-yard at night; when
they seem pretty well reconciled to the place, they are left or
bedded out one night, and yarded the next; then yarded
twice a week, afterwards once a week, till at length they are
left out altogether. Some people make a regular practice of
having their herds brought in at regular intervals, and it is
certainly very advisable, as it keeps them more under subjec-
tion, and prevents their getting so excessively wild, as is the
case with many others, who allow their stock to remain out
many times for months together, without being brought into
the yard. Cattle once accustomed to a run in this kind of
way seldom or never stray from it, during the time the pastu-
rage affords them sufficient food. Unless frequently yarded,
however, they get very wild and shy, and will rarely allow a
man on foot to get near them, but may always be approached
on horseback. Of course, cattle kept in this way cannot be
bred with much care or discrimination; the bulls are allowed
always to remain in the herd; the heifers take the bull at a
very early age, and frequently produce calves at sixteen or
eighteen months old ; the male calves, not intended to be kept
for bulls, are castrated at from two to six months old, but are
frequently allowed to run much longer, and injure themselves
greatly by beating about after the cows and heifers when bull


ing. If a person goes to the expense of procuring the best
bred bulls he can obtain, he is very liable to be annoyed, and
materially injured by inferior animals belonging to other per-
sons who may have herds in his neighbourhood. The cows
also are dropping their calves the whole year round, and many
in severe seasons have great difficulty in rearing their calves ;
very few are ever milked, except, perhaps, two or three for
the use of the stockmen, and sometimes when the cows happen
to be flush of milk, and have more than the calf can take, the
loss of part of their udder is the consequence. In some few
instances, the calves are shut up and suckled twice a day for
a short time, but in most cases they run with their mothers
from the moment of their birth, and frequently are not weaned
till a very advanced age; some people, however, do take the
trouble of attaching a small board to the cartilage of the nose,
to prevent their sucking, at about seven months old. The only
thing that can be said in defence of this system of breeding
cattle, is, that it is perhaps the best that could be adopted in
an open uninclosed country, where the cattle have increased
faster than it was possible to make inclosures for them. Some
few persons, who have very large herds, have so far improved
upon this plan, as to divide their cattle into three portions,
keeping their breeding herd at one place, their bullocks at
another, and their heifers at a third; this division, when it can
be effected, is very desirable, as the bullocks feed more quietly,
and fatten better, when left to themselves ; but it is very diffi-
cult to find a place for the heifers so secluded, that bulls cannot
get access to them ; and in this case, as the strange bulls may
be of an inferior description, the remedy is worse than the evil.
The expense attending a herd of cattle is very small; two men
being sufficient for the care of five or six hundred, and, unless
the distance is very great, two or three journeys in the year
will be sufficient to convey the supplies of provision and
necessaries requisite for the herdsmen ; these men, at least the
principal ones, are generally free men, hired at about £25 per
E 2


annum, besides their ration of meat and flour; they are usually
allowed the use of a horse, keep a number of greyhounds, and
pass the greater part of their time in hunting the kangaroo,
emu, and native dog, and make a considerable profit of their
skins. Of course their cattle are frequently much neglected,
and suffered to wander about at will, over a wide extent of
country: and the herdsmen very often do not see the whole of
them for months together. Many of these people are much
attached to their way of life, which, though secluded and
lonely, affords them full opportunity of gratifying their vagrant
and idle habits, and that passion for the pleasures of the chace
so common to human nature. Hunting and smoking tobacco
are the principal occupations of a stockman’s life.
No doubt can be entertained that cattle kept in inclosures,
managed under a proper system, and put to the bulls at such
a period that they should all drop their calves in the spring of
the year, would be more profitable than double the number
suffered to range at large in the manner above described;
especial care must, however, be taken, that the pastures are
not overstocked, as in this Colony the graziers have no artifi-
cial resources to fly to for assistance in scarce seasons. The
cattle kept about the residences of the Settlers, are managed
more or less after the above plan, according to the state of
improvement their farms have arrived at, and the progress
that has been made in inclosing them. Some persons cause
their stock to be followed by the stockman through the day,
and Shut them up in yards at night; but this plan, unless the
result of necessity, is a very bad one, the cattle, especially
during summer, feeding to most advantage in the night, when
the dew is on the grass. Others follow them through the day,
and shut them in paddocks or large inclosures at night; this
is a much better plan, allowing them the liberty of feeding in
the night, and securing them from straying. Others again
have got their lands completely enclosed, and divided in such
a manner as to be able to shift their stock properly upon it;


these persons can improve and breed their cattle securely, pro-
vided they take care to understock their land ; but the reverse
is too often the case, many stocking their pastures to the ex-
tent of what they will bear in plentiful seasons ; and the con-
sequence is, that in scarce times they are short of food,
and frequently perish from want, or perhaps have to be
driven away into the interior, in a weak and exhausted state,
when numbers die upon the road ; and those which do survive,
even under the most favourable circumstances, are a long time
before they recover their flesh and strength. Every person
ought to regulate his quantity of stopk by the number his land
will support in the worst seasons ; he would then always have
plenty, and escape the deplorable consequences attendant upon
overstocking. This again brings me to urge upon every man
the necessity, as soon as he is able, of making hay, or providing
some other resource against adverse seasons. Plentiful times
frequently occur, when the land will bear, for many months, or
even two or three years together, five times as much stock as
it will at others : unless at these times, therefore, sufficient
stock is kept to consume the grass, a great deal of feed vvill be
wasted, and the pastures much injured ; but then, unless the
farmer provides artificial means, he will have no resource
against the return of scarcity ; his only safe plan, therefore, is
to keep his land constantly understocked. Making Jiay in this
climate is attended with very little labour; I have cut grass in
the morning and carried it at night; aqd have rarely had oc-
casion to let it remain abroad above twenty-four hours ; indeed
yery great care is necessary not to overmake it. I have gene-
rally found it sufficient to tedd it from the swath, rake it into
winrows, turn two of these together, and carry it immediately.
The prices of horned cattle are extremely various, according
to their qualities ; but have been gradually declining for several
years; in fact, from their first introduction. Good dairy cows
are still in great demand; I have known lately offered
for the choice of five out of a herd of about forty, and refused.


About £l2 or £l4 may be stated as their average value; good
two-year-old heifers in calf may be had at about £8 each; four-
year-old bullocks, fit for the butcher, and weighing 700 lbs.
each, will fetch about 10 guineas or £*ll. Cattle are, however,
to be had at all prices, but the Settler will find it to his advan-
tage to purchase from a well-improved breed, even if he pays
rather a higher price. Handsome young bulls of the most
esteemed herds will fetch 25 or 30 guineas.
Dairying has, by a few individuals, been much attended to
of late years, and some cheese produced of a quality very
creditable both to them and to the Colony: the systems fol-
lowed are very various; the farmers, coming from different
parts of the United Kingdom, naturally adopt that plan they are
best acquainted with. The management of dairy cattle is yet
very defective ; the rude manner in which most of the cattle are
bred in the bush-herds rendering them wild and untractable ;
scarcely any will stand to be milked without being put into bails
or bilbows; the greater part are much addicted to kicking,
and very few can be milked without securing their legs. The
establishing and breaking in a good herd requires a consi-
derable degree of patience and perseverance ; very few really
good milch cows are to be obtained by purchase ; and most
new Settlers will find it necessary to buy heifers and break
them in themselves. The system unavoidably pursued by many
persons, also tends to make the cows bad milkers and crafty.
On all new farms a considerable time must elapse before
sufficient land can be fenced, to form enclosures large enough
to afford pasturage for the dairy cows ; and even if small en-
closures could be made for the calves, so as to separate them
from their mothers, the latter would be continually hanging
about the fence, and could never be habituated to go quietly
to their feed, while they could both see their calves and hear
their bleatings ; the plan, therefore, most usually adopted, is
to keep the calf penned up for about six weeks, and to allow
it to suck as much as it can every morning and evening. If


the cow has more milk than the calf can take, she is clean
milked after the latter has done sucking. At the end of this
time they will begin to feed; they are then turned out with
their mothers in the day time, penned up at night, and the cows
turned out to feed ; —in the morning they are brought in and
milked; but very few will give down the whole of their milk,
and some none at all, without the calf being let to them, just to
draw the milk into the speans. By this system, the calf gets
half the milk, and the quantity obtained from each cow seldom
exceeds three or four quarts every morning. A considerable
loss is of course experienced when the calf gets the whole of
the day’s milk; but, on the other hand, it is a sure way of
rearing fine stock. Some persons, whose farms are enclosed,
turn the cows and calves into separate enclosures, and milk
the cows twice a day, only allowing the calves to suck as much
as will cause the cow to give down her milk ; this plan, how-
ever, pinches the calves, and checks their growth; and where
they have nothing but the natural grass to eat, is certainly not
a o-ood one. If some small enclosures were carefully laid
down, with good and nutritious grasses, or the calves had any
other artificial assistance, it might do very well. Some have
attempted to raise calves by hand, with only skim milk ; but
though this plan may have partly succeeded —and I have tried
it with success to a limited extent myself, for the last two
years yet lam fully persuaded, that no good calves can be
reared with the mere natural grass and skim milk ; and that
unless the farmer has first obtained some good cultivated grass,
linseed, good hay, or other artificial food, any premature at-
tempts of this kind will only be attended with loss. It is, how-
ever, probable, that when a farm is completely enclosed, and
got under a proper system, it may answer very well to separate
the calves from the cows at an early age, and either rear them
by hand, or suckle them for the butchers, particularly if the
plan were tried on young heifers, at their first calving: very
few old cows, that have been accustomed to have their calves


i un with them, can ever be brought to give down their miik
without the calf being let to them. It is a circumstance not easily
accounted for, that there does not exist any great demand for
veal; perhaps it may be owing to the impossibility hitherto of
pi ocui ing the article ol good quality ; the expense of rearing
stock, even in the neighbourhood ot Sydney, was so trifling,
and the natural grass of so little value, that few persons would
sell their good calves, unless at a higher price than the butchers
could afford to give. But it might now possibly answer the
purpose of some of the people who reside within a moderate
distance of Sydney, and the other towns, and where their lands
will not support good dairy cattle, to purchase calves of the
dairy farmers, and by suckling them on cows of the more
hardy kinds, keep up a constant supply of good veal for the
maikets. I have lately sold fat calves to the butchers in Syd-
ney at 3 \d. per lb. live weight. The distance to which cattle
must be sent to graze in the interior, is now so great, and
continually increasing, that many of the farmers who reside
within 40 or 50 miles of Sydney, will soon find it to their in-
terest to sell when young, or fat for the butchers, the greater
part of their calves, and only rear the very best for the pur-
pose of keeping up their stock to the numbers their own lands
are well able to support.
Horned cattle are subject to few diseases in the Colony,
unless allowed to suffer from poor keep ; they are sometimes
affected with giddiness in the spring, when the weather begins
to get warm, and the grass is young and full of juices. I have
always found that copious bleeding, and confinement to a dry
pasture, effects a speedy cure. Cows, especially in dry sea-
sons, are very subject to sore teats. The heifers, unless pre-
vented, will breed very young, and the cows breed very regu-
larly to an advanced age.
The principal market for beef is the King’s stores, for the
supply of the troops and convicts in the employ of the Govern-
ment. The supplies are furnished by tender, and delivered at


the various stations and Commissariat stores in different parts
of the country ; the price in September, 1825, was 3 \d. per
pound. The cattle are slaughtered by the Government butch-
ers, at a certain price ; the hide, loose fat, and offal, belong
to the grazier, and these he disposes of in the best manner he
can. Until very lately no beef was killed by the butchers in
Sydney ; many persons who received rations of beef from the
stores, being in the habit of exchanging it with the butchers for
mutton, and this was the only means they had of supplying
their customers with that article. Now, however, considerable
numbers of bullocks are slaughtered, especially in the winter ;
and good beef may at all times be obtained at about 6d. or
7(I. per pound. The rapid increase in the numbers of horned
cattle, may in time reduce the price of beef, or at least of lean
stock, very low. But it seems highly probable that the great
and increasing distance from which the supply must be obtain-
ed, unless artificial means are resorted to, will always enhance
the value of fat cattle ; and hold forth to the industrious farmer
every encouragement to attempt the fatting stock upon turnips
and other artificial food.
The perfection to which the breeding and management of
sheep has been brought in New South Wales, may justly
claim the admiration of every friend to industry, and every
lover of his country. In this branch of rural economy it is,
that the greatest and most decisive improvement has taken
place, since to this object the whole attention and energies of
the most wealthy and intelligent men in the Colony have
been for several years directed.
The principal part of the original sheep stock were derived
from India, a very unsightly and diminutive race, covered
with long coarse hair, and more resembling the goat in ap-
pearance. By degrees this unprofitable breed was ameli-
orated by crossing with sheep from Ireland, England, and
other places ; and it was even found, that from the effects of
climate, in two or three generations, without any admixture of


the breed, their covering began to assume the appearance of
wool, and to retain less and less the character of hair; at
length the real Merino breed was introduced by Mr.
Macarthur and others. From this time the improvement has
been every year more considerable ; and within the last few
years, a great number of Merino and Saxon sheep have been
imported by different individuals ; the price of rams has fallen
in consequence, and they are now within the reach of the
poorest breeders; the progress of improvement will therefore
be much more rapid than heretofore, and it may be safely an-
ticipated, that in twenty years more, nearly the whole sheep
stock of the Colony will approach the perfection of the Spanish
breed. The greatest facilities are presented for the attainment
of this object; the climate dry, and free from noxious damps
and fogs; the soil, more especially in the interior, sound and
firm, covered with an abundance of nutritive grass and her-
bage; the country also open and clear, admitting a free
circulation of air ; all combine to render the country peculiarly
adapted to the constitution of the animal.
The greater part of the sheep, like the horned cattle, are
kept in the interior, upon lands held under tickets of occupa-
tion ; they are kept in flocks of about 300, each having its
separate shepherd. Wattle or hurdle gates made of split wood,
with five bars, are used to inclose them at night. Three
flocks are folded near to each other under the care of a watch-
man, whose business it is to watch them all night, to prevent
any from being stolen, or injury from the native dogs, and to
shift the folds every day. The watchman is provided with a
moveable Avatch-box, and usually two or three dogs, and
generally keeps up fires all night; and if he is at all atttentive
to his duties, there is very little apprehension to be enter-
tained of any loss. The watchman counts the sheep into the
fold at night, and each shepherd counts out his own flock in
the morning; so that if any are missing, it is easily ascertained
whose care they Avere in at the time, and a proper enquiry can


be set on foot. Great care is requisite to see that the folds
are shifted every day, as it both tends to keep the lleeces clean
and preserve the sheep in health. Some few persons still con-
tinue to enclose their sheep in yards at night, but the practice
is very reprehensible ; it is impossible to keep the yards clean,
even if carefully swept every day, which is not always the
case. An idea was once prevalent, that it was dangerous to
turn the sheep out in the morning till the dew was oil the grass,
but most of the graziers are now convinced there was no solid
foundation for that opinion, and get their flocks out as soon
as possible, and keep them out till dark. In the heat of the
summer, when the flies are troublesome, the sheep will not
feed in the middle of the day, but draw up into compact parties
of 50 or 60 under the shade of the trees ; in this state it is ne-
cessary to cause them to be moved occasionally, otherwise
those inside get heated so as to endanger their health. Where
the numbers will admit of it, the sheep are divided into the
ewe flock, lamb flock, and wether flock ; and where the stock
is extensive, they are further subdivided into two-year-old
wethers, three-year-olds, &c.; and in classing and dividing
them into flocks, regard should also be had to the quality ot
their fleeces and state of improvement. The general time for
putting the rams into the flock is in the month of October, but
in some districts somewhat later, according to local circum-
stances ; the rams are usually allowed to continue in the flock
about six or seven weeks. The lambing season commences in
March; and during its continuance, the constant care and
superintendence of the owner or some very trusty person is
requisite. It is a good plan to erect a temporary bark shed to
shelter the new dropped lambs for the first few nights, and
also to keep them and their mothers about the fold for a few
days, until their strength will enable them to follow the flock
through its daily walk as usual. Some difference of opinion
formerly existed as to the propriety of lambing down in spring
or autumn, but most breeders seem now agreed that the latter


is the preferable season. The rains in autumn usually com-
mence in February, and a second spring immediately takes
place. r l he grass grows very rapidly, and the most plentiful
season lor leed is generally the month of April, The winter
is not much felt before June, and by that time the lambs, if
dropped in March, will be strong and able to bear its severity.
This plan was first adopted in the lower and warmer parts of
the Colony, where the winters are short and mild; and it was
found possible to lamb upon the plentiful grass of autumn, and
wean upon the young grass of spring : but in the colder and
more elevated districts, it is frequently necessary to wean
the lambs in the month of August, or early in September,
belore there is any shoot in the grass; and this is the worst
consequence attending the autumn lambing. But it certainly
has great advantages : the heats of summer come on so rapidly,
that the spring-leaned lambs were much weakened; and it
has been found by experience, that winter reared Jambs will
make the most healthy and strongest stock. In feeding sheep,
it is requisite to see that they are fed out from the folds in
the morning, in such a manner that they do not go over
the same ground on two following days ; the more frequently
their walk is changed the better will they feed, and con-
sequently thrive more rapidly; and to promote this pur-
pose, it is very advisable to change the situation of the
folds occasionally to some other part of the run. The
more they are left to follow their own inclinations, and the
less they are driven about, the better. The principal care is
to prevent the shepherds from being over officious. Provided
they are headed, or kept in the proper direction, and not suf-
fered to feed on Avet or unsound,ground, they will seldom come
to any injury. 'The shepherds will sometimes stray to too
great a distance, either through heedlessness, or to answer
some purpose of their own, to be able to return to the folds in
due time, without driving and hurrying the sheep ; this should
be carefully guarded against, as nothing is more injurious than


to put them into the folds in a heated state. So that the shep-
herd can keep the whole of his flock in sight, the more they
are allowed to spread the better they will feed. The native
dog will sometimes get among them, even in the day time,
especially in the lambing season; but if ordinary vigilance is
exercised by the shepherd, very little danger is to be appre-
hended from them. It is, however, very advisable to allow
the shepherd an assistant in the lambing season, as it is impos-
sible for him to look to every part of his flock, and attend two
or three ewes that may be lambing, at the same time. The
shepherds are sometimes attended by dogs, but their usefulness
is very questionable ; and some graziers have prohibited their
shepherds altogether from keeping dogs. The shearing season
commences in October, and should be finished before the end
of November, in all parts of the Colony, except of the lambs,
which may run a month longer. In the county of Argyle there
is a kind of grass, with an extremely light seed-stem, which
dries and breaks off tow ards the end of November or beofin-
ning of December; care should be taken to shear the sheep
before this happens, as it is readily carried about by the wind,
and attaches itself so firmly to the fleece, that it can never be
separated afterwards, till the wool comes into the hands of the
manufacturer. The fleece is always washed upon the sheep’s
back, in some river or pond, and they are allowed a few days
to get completely dry, and for the yolk to rise again before
they are shorn. Considerable difficulty is sometimes experi-
enced in obtaining good shearers, and every person will find
it to his interest, to cause as many of his servants as possible,
to be instructed in this art, which they are generally very
desirous to learn. I have always made it a practice, to cause
any sheep that were to be killed, to be first shorn by a man
that was a stranger to the art; and when any happened to die,
to cause their wool to be taken off in the same manner; by
this means I have instructed, and made good shearers, several


that never had a pair of shears in their hands before. When
this work is performed by hired hands, the usual price is 35.6 d.
per score.
Sheep are subject to few diseases in this country, if properly
attended to ; flukes in the liver sometimes occur, but the rot
is nearly or perhaps quite unknown; the foot-rot is also un-
known ; but the foot-halt, from a small worm or maggot which
insinuates itself between the claws, occurs occasionally ;at a
proper stage ot its growth it may be easily removed, by work-
ing the claws about backwards and forwards. The scab, where
the sheep are badly kept, and the pastures overstocked, or
where they are fed or tolded upon wet land, and proper care
not taken to shift the folds every day, very frequently makes
its appearance, and is sometimes very difficult and troublesome
to eradicate. I have found a strong decoction of tobacco in
brine, with about one pint of spirits of turpentine added to
every gallon, and, in extreme cases, one quarter of an ounce
of corrosive sublimate, in the like quantity, to be, if carefully
applied, a safe and effectual remedy. Blindness, occasioned
by the formation of a scum over the eye, is very common, but
may always be removed by lump sugar and calcined alum, in
powder, blown into the eye with a quill. Sheep also frequent-
ly become what the shepherds term broken-winded; it is a
morbid state of the lungs, in which the cavities and vessels
grow up, and the process of respiration is carried on with
difficulty; it may be discovered by the panting of the animals,
and their wasting in flesh, through not being able to feed
properly ; there is, probably, no cure for it, and the best way
is to kill them for meat as soon as possible. It probably arises
from their being too much crowded in their fold in hot nights,
or from being overdriven and heated.
The price of strong healthy young ewes may be stated at all
prices from thirty shillings to three guineas each, according to
the state ot improvement their fleeces have arrived at. Three


year-old wethers sell to the butchers at from 30 to 35 shillings
each, if in good condition ; fat lambs, of 8 or 9 months old,
at about 20 shillings each. Thorough-bred Merino rams are
from 40 to 60 dollars each ; thorough-bred Merino ewes are
rarely, if ever, to be met with for sale. The best cross-bred
rams may be had from 12 to 16 dollars each.
Sheep kept in the more cultivated parts of the country, and
about the residences of the proprietors, are managed much
after the system above detailed. Folding is not much prac-
tised with any view to manuring the land, many proprietors
being of opinion that it is injurious both to the sheep and their
fleeces to fold them upon cultivated lands ; and that feeding
them upon turnips breaks their teeth and injures their mouths,
and by preventing them from feeding to advantage, disposes
them to premature decay; it being common in this Colony to
keep ewes as long as they will breed, in fact, until they die
of old age. But these objections do not apply to folding sheep
upon clover leys, previous to sowing them with wheat, which
would be a most beneficial practice ; nor to the case of feeding
sheep intended for immediate sale upon turnips. As far as I
have tried folding sheep upon turnips, it fully answered my
expectations ; they ate them with great avidity, and the benefit
to the succeeding crop of barley was very great; the manure,
however, should be ploughed in as soon as sufficient land has
been gone over for a day’s ploughing, otherwise, if the season
be dry, a great part of the manure will be evaporated, and its
beneficial effects dissipated and lost. It may be safely stated
that folding fatting sheep upon green crops would be the
greatest improvement that could be introduced into the agri-
culture of New South W ales.
The good wool produced in the Colony is entirely sent to
England ; its very superior qualities are now well known and
appreciated among the manufacturers, and the most improved
fleeces obtain prices equal or superior to the best Spanish.


The charges of freight, commission, &c. are not very high,
and the export realizes a most liberal profit to the grower.
The wool is disposed of by agents or factors, who make their
returns either by paying the bills drawn upon them from the
Colony, or by sending out supplies to their correspondents,
for the use of their farms and establishments. Many persons
sell their wool to the merchants in Sydney, where it realizes
from Is. to 1,9. 9 d. per lb. according to quality. The coarse
and refuse wool is worked up in the Colony, into a coarse
woollen cloth for labouring men and convict servants ;itis a
very useful and excellent article of clothing, and much esteemed
by them. The average weight of the most improved fleeces
may be stated at about 2h lbs. each.
It may perhaps be expected, that I should here give some
calculations of the profits to be expected by embarking capital
in sheep grazing; the usual returns are undoubtedly very con-
siderable, and probably exceed those to be obtained from any
similar way of employing money at present open to the public :
but, without meaning to question the general correctness of
some that have been already laid before the public, I must
confess that I have little faith in calculations of that description,
as, after all, the realization of the expected gains must depend
upon the care, activity, and judgment of the undertaker, and
a single error may entirely frustrate all his brilliant hopes.
Persons acquainted with such subjects, will be easily able to
make their own estimates from what has been stated in the
course of this work. The system of sheep grazing here de-
scribed is probably the best that could be adopted in the
present state of the Colony, and while the natural grasses are
the only resource depended upon for supplying the sheep with
food ; but it requires an immense tract of country to carry it
on to any extent; a flock of 300 requiring at least 1000 acres
of good natural grass to supply them with food at all seasons.
The extent to whjch it may be carried is certainly very great.


but it has been always found, that the fleeces of sheep, when
earned within a certain distance of the equator, have invariably
lost the character of wool, and gradually assumed that of hair;
what that limit may be in New Holland remains yet to be
ascertained.
The breeds of swine are very mixed, but many of them very
good; some persons inclose a piece of ground with secure
paling and turn their swine into it in the day time, and bring
them into the yards round the barns at night; others that have
tracts of sw amp or rough land in the neighbourhood, cause
them to be followed by a swineherd through the day and
brought in at night; others, where the country is not much
cultivated, let them remain out in the bush without seeing
them for perhaps several weeks together. "W ild yams and
other roots afford them subsistence, especially in swampy places;
but in the neighbourhood of cultivated lands, this practice is
frequently attended with mischief and disagreeable conse-
quences. In seasons when the maize crop is abundant, a great
•quantity of very fine pork is fatted upon that grain, which is
given to them whole; in the higher districts peas are much
used ; as also potatoes, rye, and barley, which are given in a
boiled state, it being impossible in many situations to get the
grain ground. Drake, which is very common among wheat,
is also used in the same way, and is a most forcing food for
hogs; I have always used boiled food for fatting swine, and
found it answ r er as well as if ground. Pork fluctuates much
in price, but usually fetches from 6c?. to 9c?. per pound.
Pairs and markets have been established by the Governor’s
Proclamations, but as yet they are little attended tp ; the
butchers are in the habit ot going round to the residences of
the different graziers to which the stock for sale are generally
brought down, and as most of them live within 40 or 50 miles
of the principal towns, the practice is not attended with much
inconvenience ; a great number of persons have now, however,
F


settled themselves at a considerable distance in the interior,
and the necessity of intermediate places of meeting between
these and the purchasers of fat stock, is becoming more and
more apparent; fairs and markets will therefore grow more
into use, and be more frequented every year.


CHAPTER V.
VARIOUS METHODS OF CLEARING LANDS—CLEARING GANGS
—DRAINING—PARING AND BURNING—FENCING AND EN-
CLOSING-BUILDINGS.
many years succeeding the first settlement, the Colonists
were unprovided with any working cattle, and the use of the
plough was consequently unknown; the scarcity of provisions,
and the state of famine, to which they were often nearly re-
duced, also prompted them to endeavour to obtain some return
from the land they attempted to bring into cultivation, as
quickly as possible ; hence they naturally fell into the system
of stump falling, or cutting down the trees at about a yard
from the ground; and having burnt off the stems and tops,
broke up and cropped the land without regarding the stumps,
which, as the plough was not used, and the hoe was the only
implement of culture, were not much in the way. By degrees
working cattle multiplied, and the plough was gradually intro-
duced ; still, however, the old way of clearing the land was
persevered in, habit having reconciled the Settlers to the un-
sightly appearance of the dead and naked stumps, and to the in-
convenience of working among them. The price of labour too
was high, and the expense of removing them was greater than
many of the Settlers, who were in indigent circumstances,
could bear. At length labour became more plentiful, and the
Colonists began to clear their lands in a better manner, and
F 2


also in many instances to remove the old stumps which had so
long encumbered the soil. Various ways of effecting these ob-
jects were adopted by different individuals, according as local
circumstances or their own judgment pointed out. These
several methods of clearing land I shall now endeavour to
describe.
Perhaps the most expensive, but certainly the most effectual,
way of clearing land is to grub the trees up by the roots; this
plan is best adapted to the more open parts of the country,
where the trees have short bodies, and wide spreading tops ;
where the roots generally spread more immediately under the
surface, and do not run down with many tap-roots perpendicu-
larly into the soil. The best season for grubbing is in the
winter, when the ground is soft and moist, and strong winds
prevail. One man in that season will do more than three will
in the summer, when the ground is hard and the weather calm.
The earth should be thrown out all round the tree for the
breadth of about a yard, so as to lay the roots completely bare.
The labourer should then commence on the leeward side, cut-
ting off every root close to the tree, and again at about a yard
distant; or if they are large, and lie near the surface, following*
them out until they are so deep as to be out of the way of the
plough ; proceeding in this manner, and taking care to clear
his work after him, by throwing out the earth and rubbish,
round to the windward side. If the wind is brisk at the time,
its force, acting upon the top, will generally bring down the
tree, breaking the tap roots, before the lateral roots are well
all cut off. The woolly gums are the most difficult to grub, as
they have generally a second row of roots all round under the
first, and the labourer will usually have to go twice round them
before they will come down. The only tools required in this
operation are a spade, axe, and grubbing hoe. When the trees
are down, they should be cut up as soon as possible, while the
wood is green and soft; lopping off the small boughs and limbs
with an axe, and cross-cutting the principal limbs and stem.


if long, with a saw. They may then be suffered to lie and dry
until the month of September, when they should be got toge-
ther in large lumps and burnt, and the ground immediately
broke up, to be ready for sowing wheat the ensuing autumn.
The larger the lumps, and the more compact and close to the
ground they are made, the sooner they will consume. Open
forest land in the county of Argyle may be completely cleared,
and got into a fit state to admit the plough, in this man-
ner, at. an expense of about twenty-five or thirty shillings per
acre.—Another plan is to stump-fall the trees, and then to open
out the stump all round, so as to expose as many of the roots
to the air as possible, at the same time sapping the stump, as
it is termed, that is, cutting off about a hand’s breadth of the
bark all round, as low down as possible. Stumps treated in
this way, and suffered to remain two or three months, will get
very dry; some large logs and smaller wood are then piled
round in a triangular manner, so as to bring them in as close
contact with the stump as possible ; they are then set on fire,
continually attended, and supplied with fresh fuel until the
stump is consumed. Some trees burn much better than others;
and where they are good burning woods, the destruction of
the stump is easily effected in this manner. In the heavy tim-
bered forest lands of the county of Cumberland, this plan is
now much followed with great success ; care must, however,
be taken that the root is consumed sufficiently low to be out of
the way of the plough. Another plan is to stump-fall the trees
as before, then to open out the stump, and place some dry wood
in all round it; then to sod it up, that is, to completely cover
it with turf, leaving only a small hole on one side to put in
some fire ; this plan requires a good deal of attention ; the fire
will sometimes expire, and in some cases, if covered up too
close, will convert the stump into charcoal. Where, however,
it is skilfully performed, it will sometimes completely destroy
the largest stump, burning it down into the roots a considera-
ble distance. This plan has been much followed in eradicating


the old stumps remaining in lands that had been cleared some
years; these could not be burnt out without bringing wood to
them, which would be a work of some difficulty, as, from the
destruction of the forests, there was frequently none very near
at hand ; but by grubbing the smaller stumps, and using the
wood to set fire to the larger ones, the whole were easily era-
dicated. Grubbing large stumps is a most laborious operation,
and is attended with much more trouble and difficulty than
grubbing the tree in the first instance ; the weight of the top
at that time assisting to break off the tap-roots, and after it is
down, by filling up the hole, the whole tree is completely
brought to the surface; whereas in grubbing a stump, even
after all the roots are separated, the raising the stump out of
the hole is an operation of no little difficulty, and must be ac-
complished before it can well be burnt. Some persons have
preferred digging a deep hole on one side, and by throwing
the stump down into it, have succeeded in burying it out of the
reach of the plough; others have taken off a belt of bark all
round the tree, and killed it while standing, afterwards clearing
the land by grubbing or stump-falling. This is attended with
some benefit, as the tree is then ready for burning as soon as
it is down, but then the wood gets hard and dry, and is much
more difficult to cut up. Some have barked the trees, and set
fire to them standing ; many will completely burn down, but
a great many stumps and fragments will remain, and require
as much or more trouble to be got rid of, than the whole tree
would in the first instance ; and it does not appear that much
benefit arises from the system. Upon the whole it may be
safely concluded, that the best plan is either to grub up the
trees by the roots, or, where the woods are of a good kind to
burn, to stump-fall them, and burn out the stumps. Some
persons have an objection to grubbing, where the land is poor
and gravelly, as it brings too much of the sterile substratum to
the top ; in these situations, burning out the stump is certainly
the preferable plan. The expense of clearing land it is very


difficult to give, with any degree of precision; perhaps when
performed by hired labourers it may be about £*2. 10s. or c£3.
per acre, in the forest lands of the county ot Cumberland.
There is a great deal of severe labour attending it, especially
in the burning off; this part of the work requires at least four
or five men to be able to perform it properly, as very large logs
and trees are to be moved and rolled together. The fires re-
quire attending throughout the night; and those persons who
perform this work by their convict servants, will find it to their
interest to hold out some encouragement, so as to induce
them to watch and keep the fires together all night. Large
tracts of land have been cleared within the last few years by
what are termed clearing gangs , which it will be necessary
here to describe.
When Sir Thomas Brisbane assumed the Government of the
Colony in December, 1821, he found the convict barracks and
Government establishments crowded with men. A great many
had been retained from a consideration of their being good
labourers and useful men : whereas it is quite clear that they
could never be so usefully disposed of, either for the crown or
the community, as by assigning them to individuals who know
how to make a good use of their respective qualifications.
After assigning these to the persons who applied lor them,
there still remained a great many useless characters, whom no
one would take, and for whom there was no source of profita-
ble employment. Proposals were therefore published, that if
any of the land-owners were desirous of having their estates
cleared, the Government would send gangs to perform the
works at the following rates: —
For completely clearing forest land 5 bushels of wheat per acre.
Ditto brush land 7 ditto ditto.
Rooting out stumps, and burning
off, on forest land, where the (
timber is previously felled ....
4 ditto ditto
Stumping forest land 3 ditto ditto.
Burning off forest land 2 ditto ditto.


A great many proprietors acceded to the terms ; which in-
deed Were very much to their advantage; and gangs of 22 men
and an overseer were accordingly dispatched to the different
estates. The men, besides the usual ration, were allowed a
certain gratuity in tea, sugar, and tobacco, and the overseers
3*. Qd. for every acre they cleared. The proprietors had
nothing further to do with them, than to see the work was
properly performed, and to sign a weekly certificate of the
quantity executed, by which the gratuity was issued. This
clearing-gang system has been the means of opening and im-
proving the country, and preparing for the plough many
thousand acres, which would otherwise have remained in a
state of nature. Many persons were much alarmed at the idea
of letting loose, in some degree, so many hundreds of the worst
characters in the Colony; and no doubt the measure ought to
have been accompanied by an immediate and corresponding
increase in the police. The name bestowed on the gangs also
excited the merriment of the Colonial wits ; and they certainly
have been the means of clearing off the hen-roosts and gardens
of many people c and also of clearing the carts of many a be-
lated or drunken Settler or his servants, of their kegs of
rum, baskets of tobacco, or other articles. But though they
may have done some temporary mischief in the shape of
depredation, yet their labours in clearing the country have
conferred a lasting and permament benefit on the Colony, The
plan, however, might have been rendered much more exten-
sively beneficial; the gangs, after having completed a certain
portion of work, say 100 acres, ought to have been removed
to some other estate, and thus the benefits of the system would
have been diffused as widely as possible. Many proprietors
who applied, were never able to obtain a gang, while in the
estates of others they were suffered to remain above three
years; and a great quantity of land was cleared for the large
graziers and others, which it is probable they will never bring
into a state of cultivation. The government seem to have


given the preference to those whom they thought would pay
the most punctually ; but the land itself might always have
been made security for the payment of the stipulated quantity
of wheat; and thus many striving and deserving people might
have been materially assisted. The wheat that was received
in payment for the labour, never remunerated the Government
for the expence incurred in maintaining the convicts while per-
forming the work ; but a very considerable saving was never-
theless effected, since the whole of these people, before this
plan was adoped, were employed in various public w r orks, the
greater part of which were wholly useless.
The quantity of dead wood lying about every where upon
the surface in forest lands, is a great disfigurement to the coun-
try, giving every part a littering and slovenly appearance ; it
also materially injures the pasturage, preventing the stock
from feeding regularly all over the surface ; and tearing and
injuring the fleeces of the sheep. Some proprietors have
caused it to be collected and burnt; the expense of this im-
provement may be about 2s. Qd. or 3s. per acre, and where it
can be effected it is very desirable.
Considerable tracts of land have been cleared by some
wealthy people for the mere purpose of grazing, without any
intention of breaking up the land for tillage; some, however,
contend that this practice is useless, or even prejudicial, as the
drees only afford a beneficial shade and protection to the grass;
but there does not seem any good foundation for the opinion ;
the frosts have certainly more effect upon the grass in open
places than where it is covered with trees, but the food in
summer is undoubtedly more sweet and nutritive, and the
pasturage and free circulation of air more beneficial to sheep.
Many people, also, in clearing tracts of this description, have
left straggling trees, as they contend for ornament; but this
practice does not seem founded either in correct taste or sound
judgment; lofty naked trees, with a few branches and scanty


foliage at the top, can never be very elegant or beautiful ob-
jects, and afford no shade or shelter to the stock; while single
trees that have grown surrounded by others in a thick forest,
invariably become sickly and go to rapid decay, when exposed
and left by themselves in this manner ; their limbs are continu-
ally dying and falling off, till in a few years nothing is left but
bare leafless trunks. The better plan seems to be, to clear
the old forest entirely away, and then to plant small clumps of
exotics, or of trees indigenous to the country ; any mimosas,
acacias, native cherries, or other trees that have a thick
green foliage, and afford a good shade for the stock, should,
however, be preserved ; and care must be taken not to destroy
all the wood and leave the farm without firing, as has been the
case with some over-zealous improvers.
Draining is very little practised ; indeed in many parts of
the country it is not much needed ; open ditches to carry off
the surface-water are generally all that is required. The sides
of these should be formed with a considerable slope, as the
force of water is so great in heavy rains, that it will frequently
undermine and wash away the sides, and small ditches are by
this means sometimes converted into immense gulleys. On
Mr. John Macarthur’s estate some very durable watercourses
have been made, forming the ground into a slight hollow and
sowing the bottom with white clover ; the roots form a perfect
mat, and completety hold the soil together, allowing the water
in the time of rains to flow freely over. Open dry ditches, kept
free from vegetation, would perhaps be the most effectual plan
that could be adopted to stop the progress of the annual burn-
ings of the grass. Under draining is very seldom resorted to :
I formed a very good one upon my own farm in the following
manner: a ditch was dug 18 inches deep, 18 inches wide at
the top, narrowing to 12 inches wide at the bottom; a pipe
was then cut at the bottom of this with a narrow spade,
six inches broad and four inches deep; over this some split


logs or slabs of wood, six feet long, and of sufficient width to
cover the pipe were placed, the sods put in upon them, and
filled up with earth; the expense was about M, per rod.
Irrigation has never yet been attempted; there are some
few situations in which it might be practised ; and the benefits
that would arise from such an improvement, in this waim cli-
mate, would be immense ; few persons, however, are yet in
possession of sufficient capital to attempt expensive impi o\ e-
ments of this nature.
Some few attempts have been made at paring and burning,
and in some cases with much success ; this operation should
not be attempted except with due caution, as in some instances
it is productive of injury; the staple is in many soils very thin,
and will not allow any part of it to be converted into ashes,
without doing serious mischief to the land. Earth and turf
obtained from creek sides, and other places not in cultivation,
may, however, be burnt, and converted into a most valuable
and forcing manure; especially for turnip crops. In some
places new lands that abound much in vegetable matter, and
woody fibre, and when the staple is deep, may be pared and
burnt to advantage. In the summer of 1823, I pared with a
plough, and burnt part of the turf upon about three acres ol
new land; about one fourth of the turf was burnt, and the
quantity of ashes obtained not more than 20 cart loads to the
acre. The land had in all four ploughings, and was then sown
with turnips; and the crop was perhaps one of the finest ever
seen.
Fencing and enclosing land, is the greatest and most im-
portant improvement that can be effected upon it; to the
acquiring a proper knowledge on this subject, the attention of
the new Settler should be early and closely devoted, since,
without doubt, it is the foundation and basis of every other
improvement to be afterwards expected. Enclosing with
post and rail fences of split wood, has been brought to a very
considerable degree of perfection in this Colony; and is


executed in a style of great neatness and stability. This work
is usually performed by free men, who have acquired the
knowledge of this branch of rural labour since their arrival
in the country ; very few common labourers from any part of
the kingdom being at all acquainted with it. The prices at
which it is generally performed, are for four-railed 3.v. 6d.;
for three-railed 2s. 6d.; and for two-railed 1-s. 9 d. per rod.
The best woods for the purpose are the blue-gum, iron-bark,
stringy-bark, and box trees. The tools used in splitting are a
cross-cut saw, scoring axe, set of seven wedges, and tw o mauls
or beetles. In cutting out the mortices, a very singular tool,
called a morticing axe, is used; it has a short handle, large
eye, head about a foot deep or long, and with an edge about
an inch and a half w ide; some use them double headed,
shaped like an adze on one side, and an axe on the other ; and
this perhaps is the best construction. In setting up, a com-
mon spade, and a post-hole spade, are requisites for digging the
holes; and if there are many stones, a small crow-bar or pick-axe
will be useful in loosing them ; an adze or broad axe are used for
trimming and fitting the rails for the mortice. When two men
have agreed with a proprietor to execute a job of this kind,
they go into the bush where timber is most plentiful in the
neighbourhood, and if it is at a distance from any habitation,
they usually construct a temporary hut for their residence
while the job is in hand. They then select the straightest and
freest grown trees, fell them with a cross-cut saw, cut them off
to proper lengths, and billet them out into as many divisions
as the size of the tree will admit; they are then split or run
out with wedges into rails or posts ; not from heart to bark as
is practised in splitting woods in England, but across the
silver grain. In the same manner are split, logs or slabs for
building, rafters, joists, palings, and shingles, except forest
oak shingles, which are split from heart to bark, or the same
way as the silver grain. Posts are cut five feet six inches,
and rails nine feet long. The mortices are cut quite through


the posts, about four inches long, and two inches wide ; the
ends of the rails are sometimes placed one over the other in
the mortice, and sometimes one by the side of the other;
which last is much the neatest plan. The ends are trimmed
away so as to overlap each other, and project through the
mortice on both sides ; two pannels are invariably put up to
a rod, and the posts are alw r ays sunk two feet in the ground,
which allows the fence to be three feet six inches high. In
enclosing lands for cultivation, tour rails are made use of;
the three lower ones being placed pretty close to each
other, completely exclude pigs or other small stock. Lands
for grazing, are generally enclosed with three rails, but large
enclosures intended for horned cattle or horses, and especially
where timber is scarce, are frequently enclosed with two rails
only. The size of the enclosures or paddocks, as they are
termed, should be regulated by the purpose for which they
are intended. Lands for cultivation, may be divided into
pieces of 30 or 40 acres each, where the quantity intended to
be cultivated is considerable. Land for grazing may be
thrown into larger pieces, but it is a common fault to make
the paddocks too large ; the graziers are not able to shift the
cattle properly, and make them eat up the grass clean ; and a
great deal of food is in consequence wasted. These kind of
fences are perhaps, under all the circumstances, the best that
can be put up in the present state of the colony; if sub-
stantially executed, they will stand 20 years, and with a new
set of posts, and a few new rails, may be again set up for
a further term. Timber, however, is growing scarce, espe-
cially in those parts of the country that have been long settled;
and it will be necessary very shortly to have recourse to live
hedges or some other method of enclosing. "V ery few attempts
have been yet made to raise live hedges, and therefore little
can be said about them. The lemon makes a very pretty
evergreen hedge, but is slow of growth ; the thorny acacias ot
India and Brazil have been introduced, and most probably


will make excellent hedges. The whitethorn is said to assume
more the character of a tree, and to bear less thorns than in
Europe ; but this does not appear to be the case with some
growing upon my own farm, and it is probable, that by being
kept properly trained and brushed back, it would grow more
scrubby and make a good hedge. Enclosing with dry stone
walls, similar to those used in Derbyshire and other parts of
England, has never yet been tried in the Colony : it is not a
very sightly, but a very durable method of enclosing, and is
easily kept in repair. In some parts of the country there is a
great quantity of freestone, that lies in thin strata; this will
readily split out, and where it lies convenient to the proposed
work, would probably be an excellent material for enclosing.
Walls of this kind can be set up at a moderate charge, and if
properly executed, will stand for ages.
The time and expense bestowed upon setting up the requi-
site buildings, are among the greatest drawbacks upon the
success of a new Settler; and on this point the best advice
that can be offered to him is, to proceed with extreme caution,
and to build nothing that he does not feel to be absolutely and
indispensably necessary. Happily the materials for such build-
ings as are necessary in the infancy of an establishment are ge-
nerally at hand; and the Settler will do well not to expend a
single shilling this way more than he can avoid, and to put up
with such a dwelling, and such conveniences as may be comfort-
able, which are easily obtained, and defer the erection of more
costly edifices till his accumulating means render such an out-
lay prudent and desirable. The capital that would be required
to build a good house and offices at the first commencement ol
of a Settler’s career, if invested in live stock, and employed in
the cultivation and improvement of his land, would soon afford
him the means of erecting those buildings out of the mere pro-
ceeds ; whereas if sunk and expended in that way at first,
unless his funds are large, he will stand a chance of wanting
the means of supporting himself in it. In treating hereafter


of labour, and the way in which it is maintained, the prudence
of the conduct, here recommended, will be more evident ; and
it will be better to proceed now to describe the buildings ab-
solutely requisite upon a new farm, and the cheapest way of
erecting them.
Many persons on first taking possession of a grant of land,
content themselves with the shelter afforded by a bark hut,
while they put in their first crops, or carry on their first and
most important operations ; and many having once accustomed
themselves to living in this way, will rest content with no bet-
ter habitation for perhaps several years; until absolutely
compelled by the advancing state of the population around
them, to think of erecting a better. But although in cases
where the Settler’s capital is limited, and it is necessary to
apply every shilling to the purchase of live stock and improve-
ment of his land, living in a bark hut may be a necessary and
praiseworthy line of conduct; yet those persons who have
been accustomed to all the comforts and conveniences of a good
house, and especially such as have families, might, by sub-
mitting to such privation, become disgusted with the hardships
of their situation ; and it is certainly a prudent step for every
one, as early as possible, to construct himself a decent
dwelling ; taking care, however, always to bear in mind, that
in such a building, grandeur and ornament must be kept out
of sight; and that comfort and convenience are the only re-
quisites to be studied. The .annexed plan will perhaps be
found to contain all that is necessary for such a building.
This plan comprises a sitting room, three bedrooms, kitchen,
and store room ; besides a loft extending the whole length of
the main body of the building ; which will be useful for stow-
ing away many articles in perfect security ; and a house of
this kind, will be found to contain sufficient comfortable ac-
commodation for a moderate sized family. The kitchen, store,
stiting room, and largest bed room, are under the main roof ol
the building ; the small rooms at each end are skillings or lean-


to’s ; these may be extended cut under the viranda if required.
Its narrow width will allow of split wood being used for the
rafters, joists, and beams, which could not conveniently be
done were it much broader, as it is difficult to run out split
materials straight, when required of a great length. The other
dimensions of the house may be altered according to the size
of the family, or other circumstances. Having selected a pro-
per scite, which should always be on rising ground, so that
the house may stand dry and healthy, the next step is to mark
out the dimensions and to cut out the foundation with a spade ;
some persons lay down sleepers of wood for a foundation, but
the best plan is to raise a wall of rough stone, with well tem-
pered loam for mortar, so as to be six inches above the ground
at every part, when brought to a level; strong corner posts
should also be put down, and firmly set in the ground, at each
corner of the main body of the building ; this plan indeed ex-
poses the part in the ground to decay, but as the timbers used
in the building will be green, and only roughly squared With
an adze or axe, it will be difficult to joint and frame it se-
curely ; particularly as it is intended the building here proposed
should be erected by common labourers, without any, or with
very little, aid from carpenters; and as it is not expected a house
of this description will last for many years, setting the corner
posts into the ground will give it a great degree of strength
and firmness. Having completed and levelled the foundation
all round, risings should next be placed upon it, properly
tenoned into the corner posts; and wall-plates fitted for the
top all round ; grooves about two inches deep and \\ inches
wide, should be cut upon the upper side of the risings and the
under side of the plates, and into these the ends of split logs
or slabs should be fitted above and below, to form the walls,
leaving proper intervals with posts for the doors and windows ;
when the logs are all in their places, the plates may be pegged
down and secured ; the inner partitions may then be made in
the same manner ; the joists and tie beams put on and seemed,


GROUND PLAN & ELEVATION OF A HOUSE.
GROUND PLAN OF A MILKING YARD.
Zondon, Published June 1826. by J. Crcss.lBHolborn, opposite FumiraU Inn




and the roof raised. Shingles are the best covering for every
description of buildings in this Colony, and are split out by men
accustomed to the work at 12s. per thousand ; but proper
wood for the purpose is not always at hand, and as the Settler
naturally wishes to eover in his dwelling as quickly as possible,
a covering of bark will answer every purpose until he has lei-
sure to procure a better. The inside should then be lathed
and plastered throughout, and also the outside under the vi-
randas, where it is out of the weather; the exposed parts
should, if possible, be weather-boarded; and the floors laid
with boards. The quantity of sawn stuff required in building
a house of this kind is so small, that it is hardly worth while
to hire a pair of sawyers to cut it; but in most cases it may be
procured within a moderate distance. Weather-board may be
nailed up green, but flooring board should be suffered to re-
main some time before it is nailed down, to allow for its shrink-
ing. Lime is frequently a scarce article, and difficult to pro-
cure, very little being yet burnt in the interior, even where
limestone is plentiful; the greatest economy must therefore be
observed in using it ; the chimnies may be built of stone, and
well-tempered loam; this, also, mixed with some coarse grass,
will do for the first coat of plastering ; the second coat should
have a portion of lime ; and the whole being well whitewashed
within and without, will form a very comfortable and decent
dwelling. The expense will not exceed seventy or eighty
pounds, when completed and shingled, and it may be executed
by any man of common ingenuity, without the aid of either
carpenters or bricklayers.
Lime is burnt on the sea coast from shells, which are found
in great abundance at Newcastle and other places ; the price
at Sydney, I believe, is B d. per bushel—at Liverpool it is Is.
Brick earth abounds almost every where, and in many places
of good quality. Bricks are usually burnt by free men; they
dig the earth as near to the spot where they are to be used as
it can be found, make the bricks, burn them, and in fact per-
G


form the whole labour at about 12.9. per thousand. Brick
buildings are now becoming very general throughout the Co-
lony ; but new Settlers can seldom make use of that style of
building at their first commencement; dispatch and cheapness
must then be their principal consideration. Sawyers usually
construct a temporary hut in the bush where there is plenty of
timber, and reside there whilst the job they are hired lor is in
hand. Sawing is performed at the rate of about IDs. or 12.9.
per hundred feet.
A dairy and milking-yard are places to the erection of which
the Settler must turn his early attention; the dairy is one of
the first things that will begin to afford him a return; and as
the breaking in his cows and heifers, and forming his dan y
herd, will occupy some time, the sooner he commences the
better. An underground dairy is best, and may be erected at
a small expense by digging into the south side of a hill, build-
ing the walls of rough stone and loam, and covering it with baik
or shingles. Stone benches should, if possible, be formed, for
the milk pans to stand upon; and the floor should also be
paved with stone. The dairy should be divided into two
rooms, in one of which a chimney should be built, for the pui-
pose of heating water to scald the utensils. The milking-yard
should be situated as near as possible to the dairy: the annexed
plan is perhaps as good as can be devised. This plan, it will
be seen, comprises two calf pens, six milking bails, two yards
for the cows to stand in, and a catching pen. The dimensions
and number of bails may be increased or diminished according
to the number of cows likely to be kept. The one here deli-
neated will serve very well for about 30 cows. The calf pens
should be paved with stone, and, if kept well littered, a consi-
derable quantity of dung may be obtained from them; the small
calves should be kept on one side, and the large ones on the
other. As dispatch in milking is very desirable, especially
where cheese is made, the calf-pens should be furnished with
small gates on hinges, which are most convenient for turning


the calves in and out; and the bails should be furnished with
good leg-ropes and cleats, to secure the cows legs. Six or
eight cows may be put into the small yard at a time, which
will render it much easier to.manage them, and prevent their
running about when required to be put into the bails. The
catching pen v. ill be found very handy, for the purpose of
catching young heifers when breaking them in ; this is per-
foimed by putting a rope, with a running noose, over their
horns, by means of a pole; and in a large yard is attended with
much personal danger, when they are very wild and vicious ;
they can, however, be driven into the pen with two or three
quiet cows, and roped without difficulty, by a man standing on
one of the posts ; when properly secured, the rope should be
passed through a hole in one of the logs at the back of the
yard, to the post behind, where a man should be stationed, to
take a round turn, and draw in the slack of the rope as the
animal comes up ; by this plan two men will draw up a strong
and vicious beast without danger, better than six could by any
other means. The back of the yard and the calf-pens should
be enclosed with split logs, and the milking bails and pens co-
vered with a shed. The yard and divisions should be enclosed
with a stout five-railed fence, with strong posts. It must be
observed, that gates hung upon hinges are very seldom met
with ; the usual way of securing such places is, by what are
termed drop rails. The posts are formed of bodies of trees
of a proper size, stripped of their bark; mortices are cut in
each for the ends of the rails ; in one part they are cut of more
than the usual length ; the wood on one side of the mortice, at
the upper part, is cut away through to the side of the post, so
as to allow the ends of the rails to slip in and drop down into
the lower half of the mortice ; a peg is put in over them, which
prevents the cattle from lifting them out with their heads. The
best rails for this purpose are round poles, as they are better
to handle than split wood. This method of closing a gateway
G 2


is cheap and economical, and for some purposes preferable to
hanging gates, which are continually out of repair.
Comfortable huts for the men should be by no means neg-
lected ; many people suffer them to live in dirty and comfort-
less bark huts ; but it is certainly to the interest of every Set-
tler, to get his men comfortably lodged as soon as possible.
The best and cheapest huts are built of logs, plastered within
and without, with a bark or shingle roof, and stone chimnies ;
14 feet long by 12 wide will be found large enough to accom-
modate three men, and it is better not to put too many toge-
ther into one hut.
Stables are not much required in New South W ales, especi-
ally upon a new farm ; the most common log building, w ith a
bark roof, will answer every purpose for some years. Horses
in general are most healthy, and better able to endure fatigue,
when kept entirely in the open air.
Small barns that will take in a moderate-sized stack are best
adapted to the Colony; they should be built with the doors
sufficiently high to allow a loaded waggon or cart to draw in.
The barn may be built with lean-to’s or skillings all round,
which will make useful granaries and stores, or coves for corn
before it is cleaned. A free draft of air through every pait of
the barn is very beneficial; and split logs, without weather-
boards, are no doubt the best materials for the sides. A spa-
cious barn floor is very Useful, as thrashing is sometimes the
only work the men can be employed upon in wet weather, and
is also particularly useful for the purpose of sheaiing sheep
upon. It is frequently necessary to thrash upon the ground
the first year, as it is of no use to lay down a barn floor until
the are properly seasoned: and the Settler should en-
deavour to get some wood cut for this purpose as soon as pos-
sible. The barn should be enclosed by proper yards, in order
that the store pigs may be kept about the barn door when
thrashing is going forward.


A piggery is a most useful appendage to the farm-yard ; the
styes may be ranged in a row, paved with stones, and the
sleeping place laid with logs. Trunks of sound trees, hollowed
out for the purpose, make very good troughs. A yard should
be enclosed in front for the purpose of turning the hogs out
when it is necessary to clean their styes. A shed also should
be erected near at hand, with a large iron boiler set up, for
cooking food for the fatting hogs.
A lodge sufficiently large to contain the carts, ploughs, and
other implements belonging to the farm, is a most useful build-
mg. A grindstone may be set up under it, and some of the
men may be usefully employed in grinding up tools in wet
weather; and the hand-mill for grinding corn may also be
conveniently set up in this situation. A building similar to the
hay barns made use of in some parts of England, being merely
a roof set upon lofty posts, would be extremely useful for the
purpose of preserving hay and straw, and might also be em-
ployed to receive corn in harvest time, especially in wet sea-
sons, as it would thereby be secured at once, without the risk
and delay occasioned by the necessity of thatching stacks.
A secure place where the harness and tools belonging to the
farm can be kept and locked up, is very essential; part of the
stable or cart lodge may be advantageously partitioned off for
that purpose. A small strong yard, with a drawing-up post,
for the purpose of catching and harnessing the working oxen,
is very useful, especially in breaking in young bullocks.
The foregoing are the principal buildings required on a new
farm; in erecting them, the Settler will do well to proceed
with care and caution, and endeavour to set them up in the
order in which he foresees they are likely to be wanted. The
house, men’s huts, dairy and milking-yard, are generally the
first consideration ; then the piggery, cart-lodge, and stable ;
and lastly the barn ; this building will probably not be much
wanted the first year; the small quantity of grain a Settler
is usually able to get in the first season, may be very well


thrashed out upon the ground in the open air, and if he suc-
ceeds in getting up his barn against his second harvest, he is
generally quite in time.
One of the first cares of a new Settler should be to enclose
a sufficient piece of land, for pasturage for his working cattle ;
until this is done, they are necessarily turned out of a night,
and when wanted in the morning, are very often not to be
found; and the whole or best part of the day is occupied in
searching for them ; much loss of time and delay of business
is consequently occasioned, and nothing can go on with regu-
larity, till this very important point is accomplished.
Many persons on their voyage out, and also very frequently
before they leave their native country, amuse themselves with
drawing plans of the house, offices, and buildings they intend
to erect upon their expected grant. These things look very
well upon paper, and may serve to pass away an idle hour;
but, very few of these castle-builders give themselves any trou-
ble to reflect, that to realize their brilliant and tasteful ideas,
would require a sum of perhaps ten thousand pounds, when
they most probably are not in possession of as many shillings,
flvery person, however, when he has actually seen and selected
his grant, and decided upon the situation for his farm-yard,
(which should not be done without the most mature conside-
ration,) will do w r ell to sketch apian of his proposed buildings,
and to let every thing he undertakes be part of this general
plan; his improvements and buildings will then have an uni-
form and regular appearance, and much future trouble and la-
bour will be saved. Care must also be taken to allow sufficient
room for any future additions, winch the advancing state of his
establishment may render necessary. And as his surplus pro-
duce and means of maintaining labour accumulate, his first
temporary buildings of wood, may be gradually replaced with
more substantial and convenient edifices of brick or stone.


CHAPTER VI.
REMUNERATION OF LABOUR —FREE LABOURERS—VARIOUS
REMARKS ON DOMESTIC MANUFACTURES AND OTHER MAT-
TERS CONNECTED WITH THE ECONOMICAL MANAGEMENT
OF A FARM—ASSIGNMENT, MAINTENANCE, AND MANAGE-
MENT OF CONVICT SERVANTS—FEMALE SERVANTS—REGU-
LATIONS RESPECTING GRANTS OF LAND—INFORMATION TO
PERSONS ABOUT TO EMIGRATE, RESPECTING THEIR PASSAGE,
&c.
In order to understand clearly the expense of labour in
New South Wales, and the’manner in which it is remunerated,
it is necessary to bear constantly in mind, that it is customary
throughout the Colony for the proprietor to supply all per-
sons employed upon his farm, whether free-men or convicts,
with provisions and all other necessaries. These articles,
termed in the Colony property, are charged to them at cus-
tomary prices; which are very much above the cost of pro-
ducing them if articles of home growth, or of purchasing them
if imported goods. The profit thus laid on is, in most cases,
50 and in many 100 per cent, above the real market-value :
thus wheat is charged at 10s. per bushel, and salted pork at
Is. per lb.; and tea, sugar, and other articles, in the same
way. In making a contract with brickmakers, sawyers,
fencers, or mechanics of any description, who are free-men,
it is always usual to stipulate that they shall draw the
whole of the provisions and necessaries they may require.


while about the proposed work, from the employer; at the same
time it is always understood at what rate the several articles
are to be charged ; and the knowledge of these prices enables
the people to adjust the price they shall demand for their
work. It is therefore evident, that the price of labour is per-
fectly nominal, and in most cases exceeds by at least one-third
the real money-prices. The system, however, in the present
state of the Colony, is productive of many advantages, both
to the employers and their people ; the Settler is enabled, if he
manages properly, to carry on his improvements out of the
produce of his farm, which passes at once from him to his
people, without the intervention of any middle men, and
thereby saves him all the trouble and expense of finding a
market for his produce, and converting it into money to pay
his labourers ; while the labourer, having a full previous know-
ledge of what he is to pay for his necessaries, is equally well
satisfied. The knowledge of this circumstance will suffici-
ently explain the imperious necessity that every prudent Set-
tler should feel himself under, to proceed cautiously with his
buildings and other improvements at first setting off; to ap-
ply his whole strength and attention to the cultivation of his
land, and to invest as much money as possible in live stock,
until he has succeeded in obtaining a surplus produce both of
grain and meat; he may then gradually increase his establish-
ment, and enlarge the scale of his operations and improvements
with safety. This more especially applies to buildings, to
erect which he will generally have to hire free-men ; and as,
at first, he will have to purchase provisions wherewith to feed
them, which is always attended with trouble, and sometimes
with loss, and as at that time also, he must pay money to the
shopkeepers for every article he requires for his men, it will
amount to the same thing as if he were to pay his men entirely
jn money at once ; whereas if he defers his more important and
expensive improvements until his farm begins to afford a sur-
plus produce, and the increase of his live stock begins to be


available, the greater part of the remuneration of his people
will go out in articles of his own produce ; and the property
or necessaries he may require for their use, will be principally,
or perhaps wholly, obtained in exchange for his dairy produce
and other marketable articles. Thus an estate, if prudently
managed, may be made to gradually improve itself; every
year will produce extended means ol further improvement;
and things may in the course of a few years be accomplished,
which, if attempted prematurely, would exhaust the means of
the most wealthy. I have already had occasion to caution new
Settlers not to proceed too hastily; and I cannot too often
urge the prudence of their commencing their operations on a
scale that they are satisfied is perfectly within their ability to
proceed with ; and upon no account to run in debt, or do any-
thing upon credit; nor to incur expenses rashly, which may
involve them in difficulties, from which it may never be in their
power to extricate themselves.
There are now a very considerable number of free labourers
in the Colony ; most of them were formerly convicts, but have
served their time out or obtained their pardon ; there are also
a great number of men who hold tickets of leave, the nature of
which indulgence will be explained in treating of convict labour-
ers. Many of these free-men hire small portions of land upon
clearing leases; that is, they undertake to clear and enclose
from ten to twenty acres of land in three years, free of rent;
the proprietor furnishing them with provisions for a certain
part of the term, and sometimes with tools ; the conditions of
these clearing leases are, however, very various, and it is
impossible to give them with precision. Many others of the
free-men employ themselves as fencers, sawyers, brick-makers,
and shingle-splitters ; and great numbers hire themselves as
yearly servants in various capacities. The wages of a good
ploughman, shepherd, stockman, or dairyman, are from .£2O
to ,£3O per annum, besides the usual ration of provisions.
Where persons have got sufficient land into cultivation, to


enable them to keep one or more ploughs constantly employed
the whole year through, it will, in many cases, be advisable
lor them to hire good ploughmen, who can work with a pair
ol horses or bullocks without a driver ;as convict servants of
that description are not always to be met with, especially such
as have been accustomed to work with bullocks, which most
English ploughmen have an objection to. There are many
very useful men of good character to be found umong these
free-men ; and where people really have occasion for any par-
ticular description of persons, and can make full use of their
services, the extra expense of their wages is not an object.
Labourers are very seldom hired by the day ; perhaps 3,y. to
4s. may be stated as common wages ; but in general all labour,
not performed by yearly or convict servants, is done by the
job.
The w r ages of free mechanics are in general very high; the
greater part of the best workmen find employment in the towns,
and cannot be tempted into the country unless very great wages
are offered them; the daily pay of good carpenters, brick-
layers, wheelwrights, and others of the most useful description
of tradesmen, is from 85. to 10 s. per day. Most persons,
however, who have any buildings to erect, endeavour to get
it performed by contract, either by the piece or by admeasure-
ment. The generality of the mechanics are a drunken, dissolute
set of people, and a continual source of trouble and vexation
to those who are under the necessity of employing them.
Blacksmith’s work, in making new articles, is usually per-
formed by the lb. the employer finding iron, and the smith
returning 90 lb. of worked for every 100 lb. of bar or other
iron delivered to him; the charge for workmanship is gene-
rally 4c?. per lb. Wheelwright’s work is performed by the
job or piece, much as in England. Some persons who have
large establishments, and a considerable quantity of land under
cultivation, keep a blacksmith and wheelwright of their own
constantly employed upon their farms; various agreements


are made with these men; sometimes (hey are hired by the
year, sometimes by the week, and sometimes are paid by the
job lor the work they perform, and in some few cases they are
convict servants. It is usual to allow men of this description,
and other tradesmen employed upon farms, if they have any
spare time after they have done the work required by their
employer, to execute any jobs that may be brought to them by
the Settlers in the neighbourhood; this plan is attended with
advantage both to the men and the community at large ; and
provided the men, if convicts, are not allowed to go away from
the farm for the purpose, is productive of injury to no one.
When people have succeeded in obtaining an abundant sur-
plus of provisions of their own produce, they may, with ad-
vantage, carry on some of the most common and useful ma-
nufactures, for clothing their own servants, especially as
they will generally have plenty of the raw material of their
own, which if sold would realize them little or nothing ; thus
the dirty and refuse wool from their flocks at shearing time,
and also the fleeces ot such sheep as may die, or which may
be occasionally killed for domestic consumption when the wool
is short, may be very profitably worked up into coarse cloth-
ing for the convict servants ; this kind of manufacture is much
esteemed by them.
It is necessary for every one to kill the beef, mutton, and
other meat required for the use of his family, and people
in his employ; and consequently every one has plenty of
raw hides, which will sell for little or nothing if carried to
market; these hides, with any kangaroo or dog skins they
occasionally obtain, may be readily converted into useful lea-
ther, the black wattle, or mimosa bark, which contains an ex-
cellent tannin, abounding all over the country ; the process is
extremely simple, and attended with very little trouble. By
employing a shoemaker, this leather may be worked up into
very useiul shoes and harness, and will be productive of a very
considerable saving of expenditure in those articles. A small


patch of flax should he grown every year; there are plenty of
wien among the Irish Convicts who are well acquainted with
the culture and preparation of flax; the greater part of the
labour may be performed in-doors, in wet seasons, when the
men are not otherwise employed. This flax may be benefici-
ally worked up into twine for shoemakers, towels, sacks, and
other useful purposes, and, if sufficient labour is bestowed upon
it, may be made into good common linen. There are a great
number of weavers, shoemakers, and tailors, sent out among
the Convicts, whom it is always easy to procure, by apply-
ing for them to the Local Government. They should be
assigned a weekly portion of labour to perform, and all extra
work should be paid for, if they are not furnished with suffi-
cient work by the Settlers of the neighbourhood to employ
their spare time, which will generally be the case. Very good
long wheels for spinning woollen are made in the Colony, at
Ss. each, and flax wheels at 15s. each. Common looms may
be had for from £2 to £3 ; cards and hackels are very dear,
and should be procured from England. Domestic manufac-
tures are, however, very little attended to, especially by the
lower order of Settlers ; this may be attributed to the great
scarcity of women, and the consequent indolent and dissolute
character of those who are in the Colony. Every family
should manufacture its own candles and soap, which is easily
effected, and by which a most important saving is accom-
plished. In general it may be observed, that every family
should endeavour to live as much as possible within themselves
—that is, to supply their wants with their own produce, and
,to buy nothing which they can possibly avoid, or for which
they have any article that may be substituted.
The regulations, under which Convicts have been assigned
to the service of individuals, have undergone frequent changes
from the first commencement of the Colony ;it is unnecessary
here to go into any detailed history of these fluctuations; and
J shall therefore proceed at once to endeavour to describe, as


concisely as possible, the system as it at present stands; a
perfect knowledge of which is most essential to the Settler,
but, unfortunately, the subject is involved in very consider-
able difficulty and uncertainty.
By a Government order of the 7th December, 1816, it was
directed, that each male Convict should receive, in addition to
the usual ration, which was either 7 lbs. of beef or mutton, or
4 lbs, of pork, and either 10| lbs. of flour, or 12 lbs. of wheat
weekly, an annual sum of ten pounds, in lieu of certain over-
hours, and also of all Saturdays, which they had formerly
been allowed to employ to their own advantage; out of this
annual pecuniary allowance, which was improperly denomi-
nated wages, the Convicts w r ere to supply themselves with
clothes and other necessaries. These articles were supplied
to them by their employers, and charged at the customary
prices, according to the general system already described.
This practice was in many instances very much abused; the
masters charging the articles, with which they supplied their
servants, at exorbitant rates, generally contriving to bring
them in debt at the year’s end, and totally precluding the
possibility of their laying by a trifle against the period when
they would be at The servants perceiving that their
masters had no regard for their temporal good, became negli-
gent, and regardless of their employer’s interests, and the
only study of the servant naturally became, to do as little
work, and to get as far in debt, as possible. Other masters,
on the contrary, pursued a more liberal conduct, supplying
their people with necessaries at reasonable rates, and paying
their savings in money, and in some few instances, allowing
deserving servants to take live stock in payment of their
balance, which were suffered to graze with their master’s,
free of cost; this encouragement was no doubt, in some cases,
productive of mischief, and served as a cloak for cattle steal-
ing, and other rnal-practices ; but where judiciously applied
under the master’s ow r n eye, w r as a very great indulgence.


and operated as a strong stimulus to the good behaviour of
the servant, who had then something to lose by misconduct;
and became much more zealous and attached to his master’s
service, seeing his employer had his interest and welfare at
heart.
On Sir Thomas Brisbane assuming the Government, it was
ordered, that all persons should, for every 100 acres of land
granted to them, take and keep one convict until the expira-
tion or remission of his sentence. On this occasion, a very
important alteration was made in the relations of master and
convict servant, which will be best explained by the following
extract of the G overnment order of 11th July, 1822.
“ His Excellency the Governor is pleased to order and direct,
that every grantee of such land as aforesaid, shall bind himself under
bonds, to be executed at the Colonial Secretary’s Office, to take and
receive the said convicts to dwell, remain, and serve, with him on
the lands so granted to him as aforesaid, for and during the term, or
until the sooner determination, of their respective sentences of trans-
portation, and shall not at any time during the said respective terms,
by day or by night, let out the said convicts, or any of them, for
hire or otherwise, to any person or persons ; and shall not, by the
wilful default of him the said grantee, his heirs or assigns, suffer
the said convicts, or any of them, to be at large away from the said
lands, during the said respective terms, contrary to the intent and
meaning of this Order, but shall procure and produce to the proper
Officer of His Majesty’s Government, when lawfully called upon,
such evidence, as the nature of the case will admit, of the continued
dwelling, remaining, and serving with him his heirs or assigns, on
the lands aforesaid of the said convicts, (death and casualties
excepted), and shall compel the said convicts to attend the public
worship of God once on every Lord’s day, provided such worship is
performed within five miles of the residence of the said convict; and
shall, during the said respective terms, provide and allow every
such convict, competent and sufficient meat, drink, washing, lodg-
ing, apparel, and other things necessary for the said convict; and
shall, in all things, treat them with as much humanity and care as


the nature of their employment will admit 3 and shall so provide for
the said convicts, that they be not in any way a charge upon the
said Government, but of and from all charge shall indemnify and save
the said Government harmless 3 the expences of the religious in-
struction and medical care of the said convicts, and the maintenance
of good order among them, alone excepted. To furnish a fund
towards defraying which expences, the said grantee, his heirs and
assigns, shall pay into the hands of the treasurer of the colonial
revenue for the time-being, within ten days after Michaelmas-day,
m every year, for every convict, the following sums, after the rate
of six-pence per month, subject to the following stipulations : viz.
Ist,— six shillings per annum for the religious instruction of every
convict, provided that within five miles of his residence divine wor-
ship be performed every Lord’s Day. 2d,—six shillings per annum
for medical care, provided either that a medical officer be appointed
to visit the said convicts (if sick), once at least in every week, or
that an hospital be established for their reception, within fifteen
miles of their icsidence 3 and 3d, —six shillings per annum for the
maintenance of good order, provided that an officiating Magistrate,
superintendent, or overseer, shall permanently reside within nine
miles of theii icsidence 3 which said sum of eighteen shillings,
yearly, is to be deducted from the wages as established by the
Government and General Orders of the 7th December, 1816, of the
said convict, provided such convict shall not have arrived within
the limits of this territory subsequently to the date of the present
Government Order, or is not at present or shall not at any future
period, be under sentence to serve at any penal settlement, with
reference to all of whom. His Excellency the Governor is pleased
to order and direct, that the grantees of such lands as aforesaid,
shall be absolutely entitled to the extra work and services, that is
to say, the entire work and services, of every such convict so taken
with and attached to the said grant of land, without payment of
any sum of money or thing in respect of yearly wages ; and that
therefore the Government and General Order, of date the 7th day
of December, 1816, so far as relates to the payment of such
yearly wages as aforesaid, be repealed as to such grant-attached
convicts only.”


This order is not very clearly expressed ; what was meant
by sufficient meat, drink, &c. being left wholly undefined ;
but it was generally understood, that the allowance of ten
pounds per annum, was still to be continued to such convicts
as had arrived in the Colony previous to the date of the
order, and also to others who were not assigned by bond;
Which was the case with all those assigned to the old Settlers
and others, not under the operation of the compulsory clause
in the new grants ; and that the allowance was to cease with
regard to the bonded or grant-attached convicts only. Thus
a very important difference was created in the relative situa-
tions of men who arrived by the same ship, very possibly
under sentence for the same offence; this discrepancy put it
out of the power of the majority of the Settlers to enfore the
order at all, and the greater part still continued to allow the
ten pounds per annum as usual. At length, under date of the
13th August, 1823, the following laconic order appeared:
“ The Government and General Order of the 7th December,
1816, so far as it established certain invariable charges for
the various denominations of work, labour, and services de-
described and set forth therein, is repealed.”
This order completely does away with the old system,
without establishing any other in its place, and thus the rela-
tion of master and convict servant was, and still continues,
left in a state of uncertainty, which is a fruitful source of
misunderstandings between them. It should certainly have
been clearly ascertained and defined, what the convict servants
were to be entitled to claim and demand as their right; and
that every thing beyond that, was to be considered as an in-
dulgence, to be extended or withdrawn at the discretion of the
master, according to his estimation of the good conduct of the
servant. The magistrates, with whom rests the adjustment of
all differences between the masters and their servants, have
generally understood the order to mean, that the claims of
the convicts were to be measured by what those employed in


the Government gangs were allowed. This is merely the
ordinary ration, which is frequently varied, and two suits of
slop clothing annually. Every thing beyond this has been
held to be an indulgence, to be withheld at any time at the
will of the master. The greater part of the Settlers, however,
allow their Convicts a superior ration, and other indulgences
which they cannot obtain in the Government service ; being
well aware, that, unless their servants feel that they are de-
cidedly better off with their masters, than they would be in the
hands of Government, they will invariably prefer being in the
latter situation, where they have less labour to perform, and
are less closely looked after. The way, in which Convicts are
maintained, differs very much upon different farms, but the
following may be stated as the ordinary scale of allowance:
7 lbs. of beef or mutton, or 4 lbs. of pork, 1 peck of wheat,
1 lb. of sugar, 2 ounces of tea, 1 ounce of tobacco, per week ;
2 suits of slop clothing, and 2 pairs of shoes per annum, and
occasionally a sufficient quantity of soap to wash their clothes
and themselves. Each hut, containing three or four men, is
supplied with a bucket, iron-pot, and frying-pan ; and each
man is allowed a knife, tin plate, tin pint pannikin for drink-
ing out of, and a tin pot or kettle to make his tea in. The
wheat is issued to them whole, and they are furnished with a
steel mill and fine wire sieve, for the purpose of grinding it,
and separating the flour. The usual mode of making their
floui into biead, is in what are termed hearth-cttJces, which
is thus effected:—A good fire is made up so as to heat the
hearth, which should be formed of a smooth stone; the flour
is then wet up with hot water into a cake, containing per-
haps three or four quarts of flour; it should not be made very
wet, and the outside should be dusted over with flour till it
will not stick to the hands ; the fire and ashes are then raked
on one side, and the hearth-stone swept clean; the cake is
then placed upon it and lightly covered over with hot embers
H


and ashes. In less than an hour, with once turning, it will be
done. The bread thus made is not very light, but perfectly
sweet and wholesome. This method of baking is practised
throughout the Colony, by people who are unprovided with
ovens. The usual method of cooking the ration of meat is
by frying it in steaks or slices. Some persons, in addition to
what is here stated, give their servants a daily allowance of
milk ; most persons allow them to cultivate some potatoes and
other vegetables ; but some proprietors object to this plan,
and prefer supplying them with vegetables themselves; but
this is sometimes neglected, and the people left without any;
and where the master resides upon his farm, and the establish-
ment is not too great, it certainly is best to allow them to
cultivate their own vegetables; my own servants have always
done so, and I have never found the plan inconvenient.
The convicts, on their arrival, are allowed to retain the
flock mattress and blanket they have used on the passage out,
which will generally serve them, without any addition, for the
first year at least. The expence of maintaining a convict ser-
vant for a year, in the manner described, may be estimated
as follows:
£. s. d.
13 bushels of wheat, at 6s. per bushel 3 18 0
365 lbs. of beef, at Ad. a lb. g£.6 1 8
or 208 lbs of pork, at BJ. .... 6 13 8
12 15 4 take the average 6 7 8
A frock and trowsers of the Colonial manufacture, twice
a year 1 1 ®
Two cotton shirts 0 12 0
Two pair of shoes 0 16 0
52 lbs. of sugar, at Ad. per lb 0 17 4
lbs. of tea, at 3s. per lb 1 1 0
Tobacco, soap, and other incidental articles ............ 2 10 0
£.17 12 0


The wheat and meat are here estimated at what may be
supposed to be their average value upon the farms, without
the expense of carrying to market; the cost of production,
however, is much less; the other articles at the prices they
can usually be procured at in Sydney, including the expense
of carriage to the farm. The whole calculation must, however,
be understood as an estimate, and only an approximation to
the truth; the price of all articles fluctuates so very frequently,
that it is extremely difficult to obtain any satisfactory data on
which to rest a calculation of this kind. The sum total will,
however, be found to be pretty near the truth. Allowing 300
working days in each year, clear of Sundays and casualties,
the expense of convict labour will be about 14 d. or 15 d. per
diem. This amount, however, it is evident, may be conside-
rably reduced, when the farm produces a surplus of provisions,
and when many of the articles are manufactured at home, from
the Settler’s own produce.
Many persons, however, still continue to allow their convict
servants per annum, which affords the men an opportu-
nity, if so disposed, to economize, and lay by something
against the time they will be free ; and also causes them to
attach a greater value upon being kept in their master’s ser-
vice. Perhaps the best and safest plan is, to put them upon
the usual allowances at first coming into the service, and to
keep them upon that system for at least a year ; and if in that
time they prove themselves qualified and fit to be entrusted
with a plough, the care of a flock of sheep, or any other situ-
ation where a degree of skill, care, and confidence are re-
quired, then to put them upon wages. They will always re-
ceive' this as a very great boon ; their clothes and other articles
being in this case their own property, they will take more care
of them; and this plan will be found to be a great stimulus to
exertion, and the best security for their good behaviour. Care
must, however, be taken not to extend favours too rapidly to
men of this description, and to be sure that their conduct has
H 2


merited the reward before it is bestowed; otherwise, should
they once conceive an idea that their services are indispensable
to their master’s benefit, they will very seldom be of any fur-
ther use.
In the management of convict servants, the greatest care,
firmness, and circumspection are necessary : this point is de-
serving the serious attention of every new Settler, since upon
his adoption of a good system in this respect, his future suc-
cess must in a great measure depend. The master should
adopt a consistent and uniform line of conduct, never making
himself too familiar with his people, nor yet forgetting that
they are men who, though degraded, have still the same feelings
and passions with himself. Those persons who have had the
care and superintendence of labourers and farming servants at
home, will seldom find much difficulty in managing their con-
vict servants. Kindness will generally be found more effective
than severity ; —recourse must in some cases be had to the au-
thority of the Magistrate, to punish the faults of the most
troublesome; but every Settler may lay it down as a rule, that
the less he has to do with Magistrates, the better it will be for
his interest. By allowing them a liberal ration of good provi-
sions and necessaries, and affording them every well-merited
encouragement within his power, he will always be able, by
withdrawing those indulgencies, and putting them upon a daily
task, to punish their faults much more easily than by resorting
to the Magistrate. In general it will be found that the belly is
far more vulnerable and sensitive than the back, and that de-
priving men of any part of their accustomed enjoyments will
be much more effectual in correcting their faults than the lash
of the flogger. It is, however, extremely desirable, that the
various regulations afiecting the relations of mastei and convict
servant, should be collected into one concise and familiar code,
which might be printed on a sheet of paper, and stuck up in
every convict’s hut in the Colony, in order that they might
clearly understand what were their positive rights, and what


part of their enjoyments they derived from their master’s in-
dulgence ; at the same time a scale of task-labour, suited to a
reduced ration, should be established. The master would then
always have at his command a ready means of punishment, by
being enabled to put them upon this task-labour, and reduced
ration; the men being at all times at liberty to appeal to the
district Magistrate, if they thought themselves aggrieved. It
is true, the masters have now this power to a certain degree,
but it is subject to much doubt and uncertainty, and its extent is
by no means clearly defined. A regulation of this kind would
save the Magistrates a great deal of trouble, and would tend
very much to repress the growth of crime, and encourage re-
formation and good conduct among the Convicts, One most
essential point in the management of convict servants is, never
to allow them to quit the farm without leave ; where this is not
strictly attended to, they will be continually wandering about
the country, forming bad connexions, and collecting idle stories
and reports ; equal care should be taken to prevent strangers
from lurking about the men’s huts, or even coming upon the
farm without real occasion.
The power of the Magistrates over the Convicts is described
in the following extract from an Act of the Legislative Coun-
cil, dated Bth February, 1825 :
u The several and respective Justices, assigned to keep the peace
within the Colony of New South Wales and Van Dieman’s Land,
shall have power and authority, in a summary way, to take cogni-
zance of all and every complaint made against any offender for mis-
behaviour or disorderly conduct, during such his term of transporta-
tion, or subsisting conviction, whether such offender be in the ser-
vice of the Crown, or any inhabitant of the said Colony or its De-
pendencies 3 and upon conviction of any such offender as aforesaid,
to inflict, or cause to be inflicted, such nioderate punishment, either
by sentencing such offender to be worked at a public tread-mill, for
any number not exceeding ten days 3 or, to receive any number
not exceeding fifty lashes 3 or, to solitary confinement, on bread


and water, in any place appointed for safe custody, for any time
not exceeding seven days 3 or, to confinement and hard labour,
for any term not exceeding three calendar months, according to the
degree of the offence 3 and as the same shall appear in justice to
deserve 3 —provided always, that nothing herein contained should be
held to authorize any Justice or Justices of the Peace, within the
said Colony or its Dependencies, to inflict any such punishment as
aforesaid, upon such offender, who shall, or may have been assigned
to, and who shall or may at the time of such misbehaviour or dis-
orderly conduct be in, the service of such Justice or Justices as
aforesaid:—provided also, that a quarterly return of all sentences,
iinposed by the said Justices respectively, shall be made to the
Governor, or Acting Governor for the time-being of the said Colony
or its dependencies 3 —Provided also, that this act, or ordinance,
shall be and continue in force for two years, from and after the pass-
ing thereof 3 and then shall cease and determine.”
The Courts of General or Quarter Sessions have also- a fur-
ther power of punishing Convicts, as may be seen by the
following extract from the last Act of Parliament for esta-
blishing Courts of Justice in the Colony r
“ Courts of General or Quarter Sessions shall be holden in New
South Wales and Van Dieman’s Land, and their Dependencies, at
such times and places as the Governor or Acting Governor of New
South Wales shall by his Proclamation appoint 3 and the said Courts
of Session respectively shall have power and authority to take cog-
nizance of all matters and things cognizable in Courts of General
or Quarter Sessions in England, so far as the circumstances and
condition of the said Colony shall require and admit: And the said
Courts shall have power and authority, in a summary way, to take
cognizance of all crimes or misdemeanors, not punishable with death,
which have been or shall be committed by any felons or other offen-
ders, who have been or shall be transported to New South Wales
or its Dependencies, and Avhose sentences shall not have expired or
been remitted • And also of all crimes or misdemeanors committed
by any such felons or offenders on board of every ship or vessel
during the voyage to New South Wales and the Dependencies


thereof, and the same to punish, if such Court shall see fit, by ex-
tending the time for which such persons may have been originally
transported, or by transportation to such other part of New South
Wales, or the Dependencies thereof, as shall or may be appointed
for the reception of offenders as hereafter mentioned, and as the case
may require, and by hard labour for any time not exceeding three
years ; and also, in a like summary way, to take cognizance of all
complaints made against such felons or offenders for drunkenness,
disobedience of orders, neglect of work, absconding or desertion,
abusive language to their, his, or her employers or overseers, insub-
ordination, or other turbulent or disorderly conduct, and all such
offences to punish by whipping or other corporal punishment, not
extending to privation of life or member, or by removal to some
other part or place in the said Colony or its Dependencies, and hard
labour, according to the nature and degree of such offences respec-
tively ; Provided that a return of all sentences imposed by the said
Court be made to such Governor or Acting Governor aforesaid, and
shall be by him, within six months, transmitted to one of His Ma-
jesty’s Principal Secretaries of State in England. ”
Settlers in want of convict servants apply either personally
or by letter at the office of the Colonial Secretary, stating the
number and description of the men they require ; these appli-
cations are duly registered, and when a ship arrives, the Con-
victs are distributed by the Colonial Secretary according to
this register, with due regard to priority of application. Of
course it is impossible for this officer to know the qualifica-
tions of the men, any further than from their own account;
and therefore any men who, upon trial, prove to be useless,
are returned, and employed in the clearing gangs or public
works. The distribution is, generally speaking, made with
perfect fairness and impartiality; but it is incumbent on me
here to notice one practice, which is certainly very objection-
able. It has been usual to allow any persons resident in Syd-
ney, or who might happen to be there at the time a convict-
ship arrived, and who had applications on the book in turn to


be complied with, to go to the master or surgeon of the ship,
and procure the names of certain men whom they considered
good and useful characters. This was in effect to allow the
men to be picked and culled over by the residents in Sydney,
or those who happened to be most in the habit of going there,
to the prejudice of the industrious and persevering Settlers
who staid at home, and took care of their own business ; and
thus a great number of the best men fell into the hands of those
persons who were the least capable of making a proper use of
their services. The whole distribution ought certainly to be
left to the discretion of the Colonial Secretary, without suffer-
ing any one to select a single man ; every person then would
stand an equal chance of obtaining the most useful.
The manner, in which tickets of leave are now granted, may
be understood from the following extract from the Government
and General Order of 7th November, 1822:
To Convicts, under Sentence of the Law’,
For
Seven Years
Fourteen Years
Life
If
r§
Four
Six
Eight
«
&
One
Two
Three
«^
3
Tickets of Leave will be issued every Friday on producing, at this
Office, a Certificate to the following effect:—
"We hereby certify, that A. B. who came by the Ship C. which
“ arrived in the Year D. has not been convicted of any Crime or
“ Misdemeanor in this Colony; but is, to our certain Belief, an
“ honest, sober, and industrious Character, having served faithfully
“ E. F. residing in the District of G. from to H. I. in
“ the District of K. from to and L. M. in the District
“of N from to .
(signed) O, P. Resident Magistrate;
Q. R, Clergyman of the District ;
E. F. First Master ■,
H. I. Second ditto i
L. M. Third ditto."


I his indulgence conveys to the Convict possessing it all the
most essential privileges of a free-man, during good behaviour;
it allows him to set up in business, or obtain his own living by
bis trade, or labour in any way he may choose, but is at any-
time revocable for misconduct by a single Magistrate. The
Governor is also empowered to extend further indulgences,
where he sees fit: viz. an emancipation, which is not revoca-
ble, and confers all the rights of a free subject within the Co-
lony, but without liberty to quit the territory^; and an
absolute pardon, which allows the party to return home if he
wishes it. Men, who have become free by service, are furnished
with a certificate to that effect by the Governor.
The usual hours of labour are from sun-rise to sun-set, with
an hour 01 an hour and a half for dinner. Ploughmen perform
their day’s work at one yoking, and are then at liberty for the
rest of the day ; w here a considerable number of men are em-
ployed, a bell or some other signal is very useful to regulate
their going to or leaving work. Some people keep a watch-
man about their premises at night, which is a very useful pre-
caution in many respects ; this man takes care to rouse every
one in due time in the morning, and before he quits his post
goes into the pasture and brings the working cattle into the
yard ; the ploughmen, when they come from their huts, have
then nothing to do but to harness up and go to their work,
which prevents a deal of lost time and much confusion.
The obtaining good female servants is one of the greatest
difficulties, to which families are exposed in New South Wales;
the young females of the Colony are very ill brought up, and
very few of them will submit to the restraints of service, in a
well-regulated family. The greater part of the female Con-
victs are most depraved and abandoned characters, and are
oftener a nuisance in a family rather than a benefit; they are
assigned to the service of individuals by application to the
lesident Maigstrate at Parramatta, under whose care the fac_
tory, where they are kept at work, is placed; some of them


turn out well, marry, and become decent and respectable wives
and mothers of families, but the majority are of a very different
description. The difficulty of obtaining good servants is one
of the most serious impediments in the way of carrying on the
dairy, and other branches of domestic economy, much required
in the Colony. It is to be hoped the Government will turn
their attention to this subject, and adopt every means of send-
ing or inducing free-women to go out; the disparity of num-
bers between the sexes is at present very great, and until they
are brought nearer upon an equality, very little moral improve-
ment is to be expected in the population generally, and in the
female Convicts particularly.
Persons desirous of proceeding to settle in New South
Wales, should apply by letter to Earl Bathurst, the principal
Secretary of State for the Colonies, Downing Street, London,
for permission ; in answer to this application they will receive
a letter and summary of the regulations under which grants are
to be made in future, as follows:
Colonial Office, Downing' Street, London.
SIR, lam directed by Earl Bathurst to acquaint you, in
reply to your letter of the that
the printed Memorandum which I enclose, will explain to you the
conditions upon which persons are permitted to hold lands at New
South Wales and Van Dieman’s Land 5 and if, under such circum-
stances, you should think it advisable to proceed to either of those
Settlements, with a view to agricultural objects, the Governor will,
on your making the necessary application to him for that purpose,
and provided he shall be satisfied of your possessing sufficient capital
to enable you to fulfil those conditions, make to you a grant of land
accordingly.
I am directed further to acquaint you, that the general instructions
with which the Governor has been furnished, will render it unneces-
sary for you, on your proceeding to the Colony, to be provided with
any other letter from the Colonial department, than this.
I am. Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
R. W. HAY.


For the information of persons proceeding to New South Wales
and an Dieman s Land as Settlers, it has been deemed expedient
to prepare the following summary of the rules, which His Majesty’s
Government have thought fit to lay down, for regulating the grants
of land in that Colony.
1. A division of the whole territory into counties, hundreds, and
parishes is in progress. When that division shall be completed, each
parish will comprise an area of about 25 miles. A valuation will be
made of the lands throughout the Colony, and an average price will
be struck for each parish.
2. All the lands in the Colony, not hitherto granted and not
appropriated for public purposes, will be put up to sale at the average
price thus fixed.
3. All persons proposing to purchase lands, must transmit a
written application to the Governor, in a certain prescribed form,
which will be delivered at the Surveyor General’s Office to all par-
ties applying, on payment of a fee of two shillings and sixpence.
4. All correspondence with the Local Government, respecting
grants of land, must take place through the same office.
5. The purchase-money is to be paid by four quarterly instal-
ments. A discount of ten per cent, will be allowed for ready money
payments.
6. On payment of the money, a grant will be made, in fee simple,
to the purchaser, at the nominal quit rent of a pepper corn.
7. The largest quantity of land, which will be sold to any indi-
vidual, is 9600 acres. The lands will, generally, be put up to sale
in lots of three square miles, or 1920 acres. Persons wishing to make
more extensive purchases, must apply to the Secretary of State, in
writing, with full explanations of their objects and means.
8. Any purchaser, who, within ten years after his purchase, shall,
by the employment and maintenance of convicts, have relieved the
public from a charge equal to ten times the amount of the purchase-
money, will have the purchase-money returned, but without interest.
It will be computed, that for each convict employed and wholly
maintained by the purchaser for twelve months, £l6 have been saved
to the public.


9. Lands may also be obtained without purchase, but upon differ-
ent conditions.
10. Persons desirous to become Grantees without purchase, will
make their application to the Governor, in Avriting, in a prescribed
form, copies of which are to be obtained at the Surveyor General’s
Office, on payment of two shillings and sixpence.
11. The largest grant that will be made, without purchase, is
2560 acres ; the smallest 320 acres.
12. No grant is to be made to any person without purchase, unless
the Governor is satisfied that the Grantee has both thepporerw r er and
the intention of expending in the cultivation of the lands, a capital
equal to half the estimated value of it.
13. A quit-rent of £b per cent, per anuum upon the estimated
value, will be fixed upon the land granted without purchase.
14. The quit-rent will be redeemable within the first 25 years, next
following the grant, on payment of a sum equal to twenty times the
annual amount of it.
15. In the redemption of his quit-rent, the Grantee will have
credit for one-fifth part of the sums which he may have saved to His
Majesty’s Government by the employment and maintenance of con-
victs ; and for the purpose of making this allowance, it will be
calculated that the Government has saved sGlGfor each convict, em-
ployed by the Grantee, and wholly maintained at his expense on his
land for one whole year.
16. Until the expiration of the first seven years, next succeeding
each grant, without purchase, no quit-rent will become due upon the
lands comprized in it.
17. Every Grantee without purchase, must at the expiration of the
before mentioned term of seven years, prove to the satisfaction of
the Surveyor General, that he has expended in the cultivation and
improvement of his land, a capital equal to half its value, as that
value w 7 as estimated at the time of his grant; on failure of such proof,
the land will be forfeited to the crown.
18. No additional grant of land will be made to any person who
has not proved, as last mentioned, the necessary expenditure of
capital on the lands already granted to him.


19. Persons receiving a second grant of land, without puechase,
W 1 bec ome liable to pay a quit-rent upon the lands comprised in
such second grant, immediately from the date of it.
20. Persons desiring to receive grants of land, without purchase,
on terms different from those above stated, must lay before the Se-
cretary of State a full explanation, in writing, of the circumstances,
which they may conceive to exempt them from the fair operation of
these general rules.
Colonial Office, Downing Street,
November, 1824.
The expense of a passage to New South Wales, for a
grown person, may now be from £7O to £BO for a cabin-
passage; and fiom £35 to £4O for a steerage-passage.
Children are charged somewhat less in proportion to their
age and the room they occupy. A man and his wife occupying
only one cabin, or the same room as a single person, are
charged £lO less than two single people who occupy different
cabins. Passengers are entitled to put any thing they think
proper into their own cabins, without paying freight; but
other goods put into the hold, or any part of the ship, pay
freight, at the rate of about £6 per ton. Cabin passengers
mess with the Captain of the ship, and it is understood, should
be supplied with a good dinner of fresh meat every day, and
every reasonable comfort; including a pint of wine, and a
moderate quantity of spirits and malt liquor each person.
Steerage passengers are supplied with the same provisions
as the ship’s crew; persons who go out in this manner, will
therefore do well to provide themselves with a few articles of
comfort, such as wine, raisins, and preserved fruits, cheese,
butter, spices, tea and sugar, &c. Ten or fifteen pounds
judiciously laid out, will procure a good stock of these
articles ; and persons disposed to be economical, or whose
funds are circumscribed, may effect a very considerable sa-
ving, by taking their passage in this manner, especially where
there is a small party of friends together. But in whatever


way people take their passage, they should always see the
cabins and accommodation they are to occupy, and have
a proper agreement, in writing, of the nature and extent of
the provisions and comforts they are to receive, before they
pay their passage money, as very gross abuses have some-
times been practised in these matters. Many persons 1m e
found, to their astonishment, after being some time at-sea,
that the ship was unprovided with a sufficient quantity ot
some of the most essential articles ; the prospect of a legal
remedy for an imposition of this kind, is a very poor compen-
sation for their disappointment; and even this, unless they
have secured a proper agreement in writing, it is very dif-
ficult, or perhaps impossible, to obtain. The most eligible
way of carrying out property for an agriculturalist, is eithei
in sovereigns or Spanish dollars ; the former bear a premium
of about 14 per cent, against the Colonial currency ; and dol-
lars pass nominally at ss. each, but are exchanged against
sterling bills, or money, at a discount of about 14 per cent.
No persons who are going out with an intention to become
real Settlers, should encumber themselves with goods for
sale; the markets fluctuate extremely, and they might fre-
quently find their merchandize unsaleable, and their capital
locked up from being brought into immediate use. A good
assortment of articles for their own use should, however, by
no means be neglected; in providing which, the following
list may be serviceable; —it is calculated for a person who will
possess from £IOOO to £ISOO, clear of expense of freight and
passage :
A swing plough complete, with extra gear.
Iron-work for another swing plough.
Iron axles, boxes, and tires, for two carts.
Tines for a large and small harrow.
Chains, traces, back-chains or ridgcrs, and iron eames for
six bullocks, with a few spare ones.
Strong chain for drawing timber.


Smaller ditto, for harrowing or drawing with four or more
bullocks.
T wo sets of cleaving wedges, with iron rings for mauls.
Cleaving axes or knives for splitting palings, shingles, and laths.
Two or three full-sized cross-cut saws, with files and sets.
Crow-bar, stone-picks, chissels, and wedges.
One dozen strong spades.
Three or four shovels.
One dozen scoring, felling, top, and other axes.
One dozen large breaking-up, grubbing, and other strong hoes.
One dozen turnip and garden hoes.
One dozen sickles, half a dozen bean and pea-hooks.
Three or four scythes.
One dozen sheep-shears.
An assortment of the most useful and common carpenter’s
tools, including large augurs, shaving or drawing knives,
adzes, and strong morticing chissels.
Ditto bricklayer’s and plasterer’s tools.
Butcher’s cleavers, knives, &c.
A good and a common saddle and bridles, &c.
Hand-mill and flour-sieves, or bolting machine.
Wire sieves, or a winnowing machine for clearing corn.
Churn, sieves, or other utensils for a dairy.
Small scales and weights and strong steelyards.
Locks, bolts, and hinges, for house, barn, and stable-doors.
A moderate assortment of china, glass, and kitchen utensils.
Iron pots of various sizes, and frying-pans.
A good stock of linen, bedding, and clothes.
Nails, spikes of four or five inches, especially the former ;
three-inch nails for rafters, &c. } batten or eight-penny;
single or stout four-penny ; flooring brads; four or five cwt,
of spikes, will not be too many ; the next in point of utility
are batten and shingle-nails.
The following can be be better procured at Sydney :
Tables, chairs, and the more bulky articles of furniture.
Buckets and other cooper’s ware.


Cream dishes for the dairy and other common earthenware.
Harness and leather articles.
All edge-tools, or other articles that are liable to rust or
spoil with salt water, should be packed in good cases lined
with tin, which can be worked up into tin pots, and other
articles for the use of convict servants and other purposes.
A thrashing machine is a very useful implement, where people
have sufficient employment for one; but no new Settler can
make use of a machine of that kind, for the first two or three
years, and as it is an expensive and bulky article, it will
be better not to be encumbered with one. It is possible
there may be some very useful articles omitted in the above
list; but every thing that is not absolutely necessary, should
be dispensed with, as the freight, and the cost of removing
such things after they arrive in the Colony, will be productive
of continual expense, while they will be only so much capital
lying dead and unproductive, which might have been profita-
bly invested in live-stock, or employed in improving the
Settler’s farm.
On his arrival at Sydney, the Settler should lose no time
in selecting his grant, and commencing his operations upon
it. Many and great will be the difficulties and privations of
. his first commencement, but he must make up his mind to
grapple manfully with them, and suffer no considerations of
ease or pleasure to turn him aside from the steady prosecution
of his enterprise. Every day that he loiters away in idleness
will take something away from his means of carrying his
design into execution, while the ultimate accomplishment of
his purpose will still be as distant as ever. The sooner a
person sets about the earnest execution of his project, the
sooner will he get his comforts around him, and the
greater will be his hope of success. Theie aie no diffi-
culties that a man of common resolution and energy of mind
may not overcome; the chief requisite is, that a Settler should
have a competent knowledge of rural affairs, and a taste and


fondness for a country life and occupations. Those who can-
not content themselves (it home, but must be continually
absenting themselves for the purpose of partaking in the
more extended society and dissipation of the towns, can
seldom expect to do any good. Strangers, upon their arrival
in the Colony, should be extremely cautious what intimacies
and connections they form; upon their prudence in this re-
spect, their future respectability and consequence must in a
great measure depend. A very short period, with common
observation, will let them into a knowledge of the characters
of different individuals, and they will be in little danger of
forming improper associations after that. They must be
cautious whose advice they listen to, and consider whether
the parties have not some interested motives for their council.
The choice of their grant must in great measure be regulated
by the extent of their capital and the object they have in
view. Many circumstances are to be considered in choosing
a tract of land; its situation with regard to markets, sea-
ports, or navigable waters; whether the soil is good, its fitness
for the purpose of agriculture and grazing; whether much
labour will be requisite in clearing and enclosing it; whether
it abounds with good water and building materials ; whether
it is easy of access ; and whether it is likely to lie in the way
of any great thoroughfare ; all these and other circumstances
must be duly considered and examined before the Settler
comes to a decision. Many large tracts are now open to
emigrants in the various new Settlements, but I must decline
giving any opinion as to which should have the preference.
The new Settler should make his choice from personal inspec-
tion, and a due consideration of the extent of his capital, and
the objects he has in view.


SUPPLEMENTARY CHAPTER.
TRADE AND MANUFACTURES—CIRCULATING MEDIUM-
ROADS—TRAVELLING—CLIMATE—REVENUE—POLICE—MILI-
TARY FORCE —CHURCH AND SCHOOL ESTABLISHMENT-
CIVIL GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE
—BLACK NATIVES.
The Colony now carries on a very considerable commerce
with the mother country and other places ; but I am not at
present in possession of proper means for entering into any
detail on the subject; its imports may perhaps amount to
£250,000 per annum; they consist of almost every article of
British manufacture, besides wines and spirits of all kinds,
and a considerable quantity of sugar from the Isle of France,
and tea and other articles from China. The principal part of
its return is still made in the bills drawn by the local
Government, for the pay of the civil and military esta-
blishments, and in payment of supplies furnished for the
subsistence of the troops, and the Convicts in the service
of the crown. Its exports are continually increasing both
in number and amount; their value may now be about
£60,000 per annum, consisting of wool, timber, hides, seal-
skins, whale and elephant oil, and a few other articles. The
coasting trade of the Colony is now, also, becoming very con-
siderable, and as new Settlements are forming further north-
ward, where different productions will be raised, this branch


of the Colonial trade will every year become of more import-
ance. The only manufactures in the Colony worth mentioning
are those of coarse woollens, leather, earthenware, and salt.
The coarse woollens are known in the Colony by the appella-
tion of Parramatta cloth, having been first made there;
considerable quantities of it are made by many of the Settlers,
as well as by persons who obtain their living by the manu-
facture ; it is sold at about 2s. 6d. per yard of four quarters
wide, and is much used and esteemed as clothing for labouring
men ; there is also a superior description of cloth made at a
factory near Sydney. Leather of a good quality is extensively
manufactured in the Colony, especially by Mr, Wiltshire, of
Sydney, who employs a very considerable capital in the busi-
ness. Very good common earthenware is made at Sydney,
and Settlers may supply themselves with milk-pans, cream-
jars, and all other articles of this description, much cheaper
there than they can procure them from England. Salt is
manufactured extensively, and sold at 7s. per cwt. Good
grindstones are made at Parramatta and Sydney, and sold at
5.9. each.
The Bank of New South Wales possesses a capital of
held in 200 shares of i-fIOO each. Its affairs are
managed by a President and six Directors, chosen by ballot
from among the Proprietors. This establishment was com-
menced in 1817, and has been found a most useful institution ;
its promissory notes, drawn for a certain number of Spanish
dollars, form the principal circulating medium of the Colony,
and are always convertible into that coin at the pleasure of
the holder. The transactions of this company are principally
confined to discounting bills of short dates, for which they
are allowed a discount of £lO per cent.; they also deal in
treasury bills and other Government securities, and act as a
bank of deposit. Some small part of their capital has, I
believe, been lent out on mortgage of landed estates, but the
amount is very trifling.
i 2


In the early periods of the Settlement, the circulating
medium was principally supplied by the notes of indivi-
duals ; every trader constituted himself a Banker, and issued
his promissory notes, which were denominated currency of
various values. The bills of the local Government, drawn on
the British treasury, are negociable securities, and were then,
and are now, much used in making payments. When it was
required therefore to exchange the Colonial currency against
sterling bills of this description, the former was always
exchanged at a discount, which sometimes amounted to 50 or
100 per cent. Upon the establishment of the Bank in 1817,
the Colonial currency was suppressed; and from that time
until the year 1822, the notes of the Bank, which were
drawn for sterling, and were always convertible at the
pleasure of the holder into sterling Government bills, continued
to form the principal circulating medium. A quantity of dol-
lars had been brought down from India a few years previous,
and by authority of the local Government, a piece was struck
out of the centre of each; this centre piece was called a
dump, and was put into circulation at fifteen-pence sterling
value; the remaining part, or outside ring, was put into
circulation at five shillings value; both parts were stamped
with a suitable impression, and were always received and
exchanged by the Commissary for sterling bills at those
values; they thus formed a very convenient medium of
exchange in lesser transactions, and few counterfeits were
attempted, it not being very easy to carry such practices into
effect in so small a community. A considerable quantity of
Spanish dollars was also in circulation, which were brought
in from time to time by new Settlers and others, and passed
at five shillings each ; there was also a considerable quantity
of English silver coins, Bengal rupees, and many other
descriptions of silver coins, which passed at various values by
tacit and general consent. The drafts of the Commissariat
Officers at the out-stations, termed store-receipts, upon the


Commissary at Sydney, for supplies furnished at those sta-
tions, were negociable instruments, and were much used in
making payments. The circulating medium of the Colony
was thus always of a sterling denomination and value, and
was established upon as secure and certain a basis as could
be expected, or perhaps desired, in a Colony of such very
recent formation. In this state things continued until the
year 1822, when the Local Government adopted a measure,
which completely deranged the whole system previously in
operation, and introduced the greatest confusion and discon-
tent throughout the Colony. I am not now in possession of
materials to enable me to give a proper history of this trans-
action, which it is to be hoped some gentleman, well acquainted
with the subject, will yet oblige the public with; the particu-
lars here stated may, however, enable a person to understand
how exchanges were effected when I left the Colony, in
February, 1825. A very large quantity of Spanish dollars
was imported by the Local Government from India and
China, in 1822, and they were paid away by the Commissary
at ss. each; the persons who received them unwittingly
signing receipts for sterling value to the amount of their
claim thus satisfied; this they very readily did for a time
without suspicion, as the Spanish dollar had hitherto, as
before observed, passed by tacit consent for that value ; the
quantity, however, thus surreptitiously put into circulation,
at length began to attract notice and enquiry; the iniquity
of the system was at once manifest, and the Merchants cam.e
to a resolution to receive dollars at their intrinsic value of
4s. 2d. each only. Thus the holders of dollars, many of
whom had signed sterling receipts for them at ss. each, were
completely defrauded out of one sixth, or Iper cent, of
their property. The Commissary refused to exchange the
dollars for Treasury bills, at the value they had been issued
at; and these bills were from this time, and still continue to
be, sold by tender in the following manner: by Advertisement


in the newspapers, the Commissary gives notice, that on a
certain day, he will be ready to receive tenders for the pur-
chase of bills to be drawn on the Lords of the Treasury, in
exchange for Spanish dollars. The dollars are received at ss,
each, with a discount upon them, which varies according to
the demand for bills among the Merchants for the purpose of
remittance. At the time I left the Colony, the premium upon
bills, or, in other words, the discount upon dollars, was 14|
per cent.; that is, a person to obtain a sterling bill upon
England for £*loo, must pay £’ll4 10s. in Spanish dollars at
ss. each, or 458 dollars. Thus the system has been intro-
duced and perpetuated: the dollars would have been soon
sent away as remittances ; Cut by this expedient of selling the
bills, a certain quantity of them is sure to be retained in
the Colony. The necessity of retaining the greater part as
a circulating medium has, however, been obviated by the
Bank having issued their promissory notes, payable on de-
mand, for a certain number of dollars, so that any quantity
that may be put into circulation beyond what is necessary to
carry on the exchanges between the Commissary and the
Merchants, is sure to be exported. The Government have,
therefore, gained very little by the measure, while the nefa-
rious manner in which it was introduced, has for ever
destroyed the confidence of the public in the integrity of the
present Government: many other ramifications of this system
may also be noticed; thus the dollars were issued to the troops
for their pay at 4.9. 8c?. each ; the Government colonial dues
and duties were paid at the discount of the day; the salaries
of the civil officers, payable from the colonial revenue, were
paid in dollars at 4s. each. Thus the greatest confusion pre-
vailed, the Commissary issuing dollars at one value; the collec-
tor of customs or naval officer, and colonial treasurer, receiving
them at another; the troops at a third ; and the civil officers
at a fourth rate; and this system of confusion prevailed up
to the period of my leaving the Colony. Private bargains


are generally, however, made in what is termed currency,
that is, the Spanish dollars at ss. each; and all the prices of
labour, live-stock, and other articles mentioned in this work,
ai e to be understood as calculated in this manner. Accounts
are now generally kept in dollars and cents, but the dollar
is continually fluctuating in value, and no man can with
certainty measure the extent of his income, or the value of
his property. Since I left the Colony, a considerable quantity
of silver coin, struck expressly for the Colonies, has been sent
out from England, to be put into circulation; and it is
therefore probable, the old system of sterling payments and
accounts will be again resorted to.
There is still a good deal of buying and selling effected by
way of barter, but this system is not so much owing to any
want of money, or secure circulating medium, as to the
infant state of society, and the imperfect division that has yet
taken place in trades and employments. The farmers are
obliged to be shopkeepers, to a certain extent, for the purpose
of supplying their own men, and have therefore no objection
to receive goods in part payment for their produce. The
millers are, also, frequently general merchants and dealers,
and receive grain in payment for goods. Bargains for grain,
wool, or other produce, are frequently made at a certain price
to be paid half in money and half in property: i. e. such
goods as the seller may require, or as may be mutually
agreed upon. This’ barter system, in the present state
of the Colony, is productive of many advantages to all
parties, and obviates the necessity of middle men. Fat
stock, however, is invariably disposed of to the butchers for
money. Dairy produce is frequently sold by commission
salesmen, except fresh butter, which is mostly sold in open
market.
The leading roads from the capital, in all directions, are
now very good; at first they were made in an imperfect
manner, being nothing more than the new earth thrown up


into the form of a road; of course they possessed very little
durability, and the traffic upon them in wet weather cut
them up entirely ; of late, large portions of them have been
covered with good durable materials on Mr. Me Adam’s prin-
ciple, and the leading roads from Sydney, to all the most
considerable places in the interior, are now as good as any
roads in England. The expense of forming these roads has
been defrayed by the Government, who have erected gates
upon the principal roads, where a moderate toll is collected
towards the expense of keeping them in repair. In the more
recently settled parts of the country, the roads are in many
places very bad, and the passage of the rivers and creeks is
textremely difficult and dangerous: these roads are in fact
nothing more than mere tracks, that have generally been
formed by people who have settled themselves, or taken pos-
session of a grazing run beyond the occupied part of the
country. Having ascertained the most practicable route to
the spot they intend to occupy, the track is marked out by
cutting pieces out of the bark of the trees along the line ;
this service is very frequently performed by black Natives,
who have a most accurate local knowledge of the country;
the track thus marked is followed by such as have occasion,
and becomes a beaten path, and at length a road.
Stage coaches have recently been established from Sydney
to all the most considerable towns in the interior; they are
furnished with good horses, travel at a good pace, and
charge moderate fares; many persons keep curricles, gigs,
or other vehicles, which, not being subject to any taxes, are
supported at a small expense, especially by persons who re-
side in the interior and have plenty of horse-food. In the
more distant part of the country, where there are no regular
made roads, the most useful method of travelling is on horse-
back. There are very good Inns in the towns, and also on
the principal roads for a considerable distance into the inte-
rior j but in the newly settled districts, it is frequently neces-




Plate 4.
Page 138.
PARTY BIVOUAC'D FOR THE NIGHT.


sary for travellers to carry their provisions and bedding
with them; the Settlers in general are extremely hospitable
and civil, and will readily receive strangers into their houses,
and afford them the best accommodations in their power.
Some persons travel in light tilted carts, furnished with a bed
and other accommodations; they generally carry their pro-
visions and cooking utensils with them, and stop at any place
on the road at night, where they can find water and grass
for their horses or bullocks. Excursions are frequently madp
by the more enterprising Settlers, into the unexplored dis-
tricts in the interior, sometimes merely for the sake of grati-
fying their curiosity ; at other times in search of grazing runs
for their stock, or eligible situations to take a grant of land;
and frequently for the purpose of hunting the Kangaroo and
Emu. Some of the black Natives are usually procured as
guides, they having a most intimate knowledge of the locali-
ties of the country. The party is provided with a proper
stock of provisions, spare linen, and other necessary comforts,
which are carried on pack-horses ; each person carries his
blanket under his saddle, and generally a great-coat or boat-
cloak strapped before him, with a light tether rope coiled
round his horse’s neck; the fowling pieces are usually
carried by the black guides ; and thus provided, a party may
travel with ease and safety any distance their provisions will
allow. At night a spot is selected for an encampment, or
rather bivouac, where there is water and food for their horses,
with plenty of dead wood for firing; the horses are then
tethered out, or tied to a piece of wood which they can draw
about after them ; the black Natives strip some bark off the
nearest trees that will suit the purpose, and construct a hut
sufficiently large to shelter the whole party, with their bag-
gage, arms, and saddles, from the weather; this they will
execute in half an hour with ease ; in the mean time others of
the party kindle a fire, put on the kettle to boil some tea, and
commence preparing supper; care is taken to collect sufficient


wood to keep the fire up through the night, and if the ground
is damp, some strips of bark are dried and laid upon sticks,
to raise them a few inches off the ground, to sleep upon; in
this way journies into the unoccupied parts of the country
may be performed with safety and comfort, while the weather
is fine. I have performed many long journies in this manner
myself, without any other attendants than two black Natives,
on whose fidelity I could rely. If the object of the party is to
explore the country, little is to be expected from the game
they may kill towards the holding out of their provisions, as
the pursuit of game is apt to disperse the party and obstruct
their progress ; but where the party goes out for the purpose
of hunting, provided with proper dogs, it is unnecessary to
carry any animal food with them, except perhaps a little fat
pork or bacon. Persons engaged in these parties rarely
feel any ill effects from sleeping on the ground in this fine
climate, where coughs and colds are almost unknown. It is
unnecessary for me to go into any detail to prove the excel-
lence of the climate of New South Wales, its salubrity being
well known and universally admitted. An inspection of the
following table will shew the state of the weather from April
1823, to March 1824, which was a remarkably dry and hot
year:


Year and
Month,
Baro
meter.
Thermometer.
Hygrometer.
Rain at the
surface of
the Barth.
Prevailing Winds,
Max.
Min.
Max.
Min.
Max.
Min.
1823.
Inches.
Inches.
Degrees.
Degrees.
Deg.
Deg.
Inches.
April ....
May
June
July
30,458
30,442
30,350
30,115
30,248
30,380
30,200
30,220
30,110
30.300
30.300
30,490
29,772
29,602
29,290
29,840
29,488
29,520
29,300
29,860
29,530
29,430
29,680
29,580
98
74
70
66
70
86
91
89,5
101
105,2
102
97
49.5
35
33
28
32
37
42
45
50.5
53
49
44
78
79
78
76
78
79
80
76
72
68
75
74
40
26
25
27
29
18
20
40
30
9
35
10
7,215
0,556
2,590
5,618
0,752
0,576
2,812
1,688
0,493
1,576
1,125
1,988
Variable.
S. W, & Westerly
Wp Q f prl v
W. & N. W. variable.
S, E. & S, W.
S. E.
Variable.
N. E. E. & S. E.
N. W.' & S. E.
N. W. & S. E.
Easterly.
Westerly,
August....
September..
October ..
November..
December..
1824.
January ..
February ..
March ....
of the whole
Year.
30,490
29,290
105,2
28
80
9
26,989
ABSTRACT OF METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS MADE IN THE VICINITY OF SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
Mean Temperature of Twelve Months, by a self registering Thermometer=64° 4
N, B. Zero of the Hygrometer indicates the greatest Drought.


The revenue raised in the Colony is principally derived from
an ad valorem duty of per cent, upon all commodities
imported that are not of the growth or manufacture of the
United Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland ; from duties
upon spirits, wines, and tobacco; from licences for retailing
wines and spirits ; toll collected upon the public roads ; and a
few minor articles. The amount has fluctuated much of late, in
consequence of the rates of the several duties having been fre-
quently altered; the average amount for the last few years
may perhaps be stated at about annually. This
money is applied, at the discretion of the Governor, in paying
the salaries of some of the civil officers, in the support of the
police, and other matters.
The police of the Colony, though it has recently received
many improvements, is still very defective ; the selection of
magistrates in the interior, is not always the most happily
made. Persons of real merit, well qualified for the office, and
of comparatively independent fortunes, being frequently
passed over to favour others who have more personal interest
with men in power. Some little pecuniary benefit is derived
from serving this office, which is much to be lamented, since
its amount is not sufficient to become an object to any man
who has a due amount of property at stake in the Colony to
entitle him to the distinction. It is true, the magisterial office
brings a considerable degree of trouble, and some little ex-
pense, to its possessor; but most persons will probably agree
with me, that no gentleman is duly qualified for this office,
whose fortune does not place him above receiving any pecu-
niary benefit from it. Considerable difficulty has been expe-
rienced in procuring proper persons to execute the office of
constable ; their remuneration is insufficient to induce men of
good character to devote their whole time to it, although their
situation has been much improved of late; more liberal re-
wards for the apprehension of offenders should certainly be
given ; the number of runaways at large in the bush, at all


times great, has been very considerable lately; they principally
consist of deserters from the clearing gangs, and from the
Government farm at Emu Plains; which, though situated in
the centre of a populous district, and wholly unprovided with
any means of preventing desertion, has most imprudently
been made a place of punishment ior trifling offences, and
subjected to a very strict system of discipline. Run-aways or
Bus/i-rangers, as they are termed, are advertized every week
in the Gazette; and on their apprehension, a reward of one
dollar is paid for every time they have been so advertized;
this unwise system has been the very means of protecting them,
since the constables, even though they know their haunts,
would never look after them until they were worth catching.
The black Natives frequently capture offenders of this de-
scription; and, were they liberally rewarded, would rarely
suffer any to be at large, as from their superior local know-
ledge of the country, and wonderful expertness in tracing foot-
steps or other marks, they are better qualified than white men
for undertakings of this nature.
The military force stationed in the Colony, including those
detached in Van Dieman’s Land, consists of two regiments of
infantry. Too many of the troops are kept in Sydney, where
they are not much wanted, as the number of Convicts now
employed there is inconsiderable ; the establishment of a few
military posts, of from ten to twenty men, in different parts of
the country, would be very beneficial, and greatly assist the
police; no difficulty exists in victualling them, which could
always be done by contract with some of the Settlers in the
neighbourhood ; and if the detachments were frequenly changed,
their state of discipline could suffer little injury. The head-
quarters of the troops might probably be much more conve-
niently situated at Paramatta than at Sydney; the several
detachments might then be relieved with more facility, and the
principal body of military would be nearer those parts of the
v ountry where the greatest number of Convicts is employed.


The salaries of the colonial chaplains, at the head of whom
is an archdeacon, under the diocese of Calcutta, are paid by
an annual grant from Parliament. The churches are supplied
with ministers, who are sent out by the British Government;
and it affords me great pleasure to say, that the church esta-
blishment consists of men who are distinguished by the use-
fulness and regularity of their lives, and assiduous attention to
their sacred calling. There are also two Roman Catholic
chaplains, who are allowed salaries by Government, and who
are not less distinguished for their private worth and zeal in
their profession. The missionaries, sent out by societies in
England, are very respectable men, and are extremely useful
and diligent. Public shools have been established in various
parts of the country, where the advancing state of the popula-
tion required it; one-eighth of the whole colonial revenue is
applied to this purpose, and to the support of the two very
flourishing institutions for the care and education of male and
female orphans.
The Civil Government of the Colony is vested in the
Governor, and the Legislative in the Governor and Council,
who have authority to make laws for its benefit. The criminal
court still retains the appearance of a military tribunal; but
the courts of quarter-session, which are held in various parts
of the Colony, have grand and petty juries, and are conducted
altogether on the model of similar courts in England. The
whole system of Civil Government and administration of jus-
tice will, however, be better understood by the following
abstract of the Act 4 Geo. IV. cap. 96 :
“ An Act to provide, until the Ist day of July, 1827, and until the
end of the next Session of Parliament, for the better administra-
tion of Justice in New South Wales and Van Dieman’s Land,
and for the more effectual Government thereof, and for other
purposes relating thereto.”
Section 1. His Majesty authorised to institute Supreme Courts
of Criminal and Civil Jurisdiction in New South Wales and Van
Dieman’s Land.


2. Jurisdiction of such Courts.
3. The Supreme Courts in New South Wales and Van Dlcman’s
Land to have jurisdiction over piracies and offences committed at
sea, or in New Zealand, and other places in the Indian or Pacific
Oceans.
4. The trial of crimes and misdemeanors, recognizable in the
said Courts, to be prosecuted by information, and tried by the
Judge and seven Officers of the Army or Navy.
5. His Majesty may hereafter institute other Criminal Courts in
any new Settlements.
6. Trial of Actions at Law to be by the Chief Justice and two
Magistrates, unless the parties shall desire to have a jury.
/. Qualification of jurors.
8. His Majesty, by Order in Council, authorised hereafter to
extend the trial by jury.
9. Courts to have equitable jurisdiction.
10. Courts to have ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
11. Courts to issue foreign attachments.
12. Where the cause shall exceed .6500, and shall not be tried
by a jury, the evidence to be taken in writing.
13. Parties allowed to appeal to the Court of Appeals, where the
cause of action shall exceed .£5OO.
14. Appeals may be allowed by the Judges, where the cause of
action shall be less than £5OO, in certain causes.
, G ° Vernor t 0 hold a Court of Appeals. To be assisted
by the Ch.ef Justice of New South Wales in appeals from Van
Hieman’s Land.
16. Appeals to his Majesty in Council to be regulated by Charter.
17. His Majesty to make rules and orders for the conduct of all
business in the said Courts.
18. Regulations as to opening the Supreme Courts. When the
new Judges shall have actually entered upon the exercise of their
jurisdiction, the old Courts to cease.
19. Courts of Quarter Sessions to be held, and the authority
thereof extended. 3
20. The Governor to Institute Courts of Requests; and such Courts
to determine all civil suits under £\o


21. The Governor, with the assistance of the Chief Justice, to
settle Rules and Fees to be followed and taken in the Courts of
Sessions and Requests.
22. Provision for declaring Insolvencies, and distributing the
effects of Insolvent Persons in New South Wales.
23. Regulations as to granting Certificates to Insolvents*
24. His Majesty to constitute a Council in New South Wales '
and the Governor, with the advice of such Council, shall have
power to make laws for the government of the said Colony.
25. In case of actual or apprehended rebellion or insurrection, the
Governor to make laws for suppressing the same, though all the
Council dissent.
26. His Majesty in Council may make and establish any law, which
may have been dissented from by the Council in New South Wales.
27. No tax or duty shall be imposed by the Governor and Coun-
cil, except for local purposes.
28. 59 Geo. 3, c. 114, and 3 Geo. 4, c. 96, allowing certain powers
of taxation to the Governor, made perpetual.
29. No law is to be passed until a copy shall have been laid be-
fore the Chief Justice, and his certificate given thereupon.
30. Laws made by the Governor, &c. within six months from the
date thereof, to be transmitted for his Majesty’s approbation.
31. Laws to be laid before Parliament.
32. Members of the Council to be Justices of the Peace. Oath
to be taken.
33. Regulations as to any vacancy in the Council.
34. All instruments, whereby the Governors of New South Wales
have remitted the terra of transportation of felons, to have the same
effect as pardons under the great seal in New South Wales, and (if
ratified by the Secretary of State) in England.
35. Regulations as to remissions of time of transportation in future.
To be transmitted to the King, and, if approbation signified, to
have the effect of a pardon under the great seal in New South Wales
only.
36. Persons under sentence of transportation, who shall be con-
victed of offences punishable by transportation, may be detained in
New South Wales or its dependencies for the same terms for which
they might have been transported.


37 ' Surgeor, “ 0f COnvict !hi P s ““S' inriict moderate punishment
on convicts guilty of misbehaviour.
■iB. His Majesty to appoint places for the reception of offenders ■
and to prohibit trading vessels from holding intercourse with such
39. Persons assisting in the escape of felons to be deemed guilty
ox a misdemeanour. ”
40. After 30th of June. 1824, the provisions of 2 Geo. 2. c 36
extended to New South Wales -
41. Artificers and others may contract, by indenture, to serve
any person New South Wales, for any term not exceeding seven
42. Persons, with whom any such artificers, or others, shall have
outracted to serve, may maintain action against any person em-
ploying or harbouring them.
43. Court of Sessions, or Justices of the Peace, to punish viola-
tion of such indentures, and to determine differences.
44. His Majesty may hereafter erect Van Dieman’s Land into a
separate Colony, with distinct jurisdiction, after which, appeal
from \ an Dieman’s Land to Governor of New South Wales to cease.
After such order, the Governor of Van Dieraan’s Land may remit
sentences, &c.
45. Duration of the Act.
xMy limits will not allow me to go into any detailed account
oi the manners and customs of the black Natives, although the
subject affords a wide held for curious remark ; those persons
who wish for further information, may consult file work of
Mr. Coll,ns, which contains the best description of them
hitherto published. It will be sufficient here to say, that they
are a mild cheerful, and inoffensive race; they are a mere
. l 0" 01 llUnters > Passionately fond of their wandering life
and averse to labour of every kind ; they have very little jea-
lousy of strangers, and live among the Settlers on terms of
perfect amity and confidence. Quarrels have indeed some-
times occurred between them and the white people, but on
candid enquiry if will be found they have seldom been the
K


original aggressors ; unable to bear the continual ill treatment
ol the unpiincipled herdsmen and shepherds in the interior,
who, in cases that have come within my own knowledge, have
taken away their women by force, and otherwise wronged
them, they have at length been roused to revenge ; mutual
acts ot hostility and retaliation have taken place, by which
many innocent persons have suffered, and the property of the
proprietors of flocks and herds in the interior has been exposed
to much danger. On a late occasion, this state of hostility
had got to such a length in the neighbourhood of Bathurst,
that the Government were obliged to interfere; martial law
was pi oclaimed ; the local Magistrates exerted themselves to
restore order, and after a short time, peace and tranquillity
vvej e happily re-established. In all the country eastward of
the Blue Mountains, and in the county of Argyle, and country
to the southward, not the slightest disturbance has taken place
for many years ; and from the manner in which the Natives
are now intermixed and connected with the Settlers, there is
not the most remote cause to fear that any serious differences
will arise.
FINIS.
PRINTED BY 'JOSEPH CROSS, 18, HOEBORN,
OPPOSITE FURNIVAE’S INN.




Engraved & Published by J. CROSS, 18, Holborn opposite Furnivals Inn London, Octr. 3rd. 1825.
Additions to 1826.


J CROSS,
aHAIP QiaiLlLlO JiniD IPIffIBMQICIBIBa
EngnOm*,
and
PRINTER IN GENERAL,
IS, HOLBORN,
OPPOSITE FURNIVAL’S INN, LONDON,
HAS ALWAYS ON SALE
The best modern Atlases and Maps, of every description,
Mounted on Rollers, Spring- Barrels, or fitted up in Cases, &c. &c.






CONTENTS.
CHAPTER 1.
General description of the Land.-™
PlaitiwAlluviai Lauds—Rivers and Water
CHAPTER IL
natural Productions—Trees—Shrubs—Grasses—dossils, and Minerals—
Quadrupeds—Fish— Birds—Reptiles—Insects . . . . l 2
CHAPTER IH. \
State of Agriculture-—Systems pursued by the different Classes of Settlers
—Working Cattle and Implement".— Crops cultivated—Remarks on
various Impediments to the progress of 'mptovemwi, and on the
frequent fluctuations in the price of Produce—Horticulture .... 28
CHAPTER IV.
Breeding and Management of Live Slock—Horses-Horned Cattle-
Sheep—Swine—Fairs and Markets * : L
CHAPTER V.
Vai jous Methods of Clearing Lands—ClearingOangs— Draining Paring
and Burning—Fencing and Enclosing—Buildings 83
ch un r vi.
Remuneration of Labour-Free Labourer—\ .hops R-a- rU on O'
tuestic Manufactures, and other Matters onateted with flic i/oaer cal
management of a harm—Assignment, Maintenance, and Management
■- f Convict Servants hemale Servants—Regulations, inspecting ('rants
of Laud—lnformation to Persons about f > emigrate respecting their
Passage, &c. ' . . • , ...... 103
SUPPLEMENTARY CHAPTER.
i .ade and Manufactures—Circulating Medium—Roads—Travelling
hmate—Revenue—Police—Military Force--Church and School Es
tabhshments—Civil Government and Administration of Jm re-
Black Natives ........ >v J3^
'
N.B, A large Map of New South Wales, and a Mop of Van Oseman's
Land, just Published, price Bs, each.


