

Rev. Thomas Jones
May 14th,1880.




r: (r *s no
i to
aw Mutexs
Delivered at the Colonial Missionary Society Meeting held in the Weigh-House Chapel
(late Thos. Binney's) by the
REV, THOMAS JONES,
MAY 14th, 1880.
P. S. Macliver, Esq., M.P, for Plymouth, Presided, and the E-ev. S, Hebditcii
took part at the Meeting 1 .
[Rbpbinted from the “Christian World
The Rev. Thomas Jones, late of Melbourne,
who was greeted with hearty cheering, said : I
have great pleasure, Mr. Chairman, in moving
this resolution. A gentleman from London once
to Highgate to see Coleridge, when Cole-
ridge was in possession of all his marvellous
powers; and when he returned he was asked by
his friends what he thought of Coleridge. His
answer was, “ His intellect oppresses me.” Dear
friends, your kindness oppresses me, and I can
hardly keep back the tears. I am glad to see you
all. People whom I left, who ought to be old
men, are looking as young as ever. To hear you
speak, to see the energy of your faith, helps my
faith wonderfully. “ My faith,” said one, “ is
strengthened infinitely when another man belie-
ves in it.” Young Aischa, the second wife of
Mahomet, after Kadijah’s death, looked up into
the face of the prophet, and said, ‘'You love me
more than you did Kadijah?” 11 No, ” said he
‘‘ by Allah, I do not; Kadijah was the first to
believe in me.” (Applause.) 1 am helped by
your faith. I am oppressed by your kindness.
May God bless you ! I am privileged, as an old
man, not as a priest, to put out my hand, and
say, My dear friends in England, may the bene-
diction of God be upon you ! May you ever live
pastors and churches, within the sacred en-
closure of His eternal love ! Now let me give
you a lesson in geography, which many of you
want, and which many learned editors in
_England want. It is about Australia. Australia
is 2,400 miles in length, 1,900 miles wide; it is
more than 26 times the size of great Britain and
Ireland, and six times as large as India. It is
only one-fifth smaller than the whole continent
of Europe. And please to remember, learned
editors, that this great continent is divided into
these colonies—Queensland, New South Wales,
Victoria, South Australia, and Western Australia
Now make use of that, and direct your letters
correctly. I have a friend in Queenscliff, near
Melbourne, who has a friend in England; they
have been in correspondence for 20 years
or more, and his friend in England has not
learned to address his letters correctly, for he
writes, “ Mr. So-and-So, Queenscliff, Geelong,
New South Wales.” Now, it is just 500 miles
from Queenscliff to Sydney, the metropolis of
New South Wales, and no postman can do that
[For Gratuitous Circulation.]
before nine o’clock in the morning. (Laughter)
Not long ago a letter was addressed from Eng.
land to Victoria thus: ‘Victoria, near Melbourne’
( Laughter.) Now, it is the private opinion of all
who live in Melbourne that Melbourne is in
Victoria, and not Victoria in Melbourne ; re-
member that. (Laughter.) Now, I am to speak to
you a few words about Victoria. Its population
numbers about 850,000. It is made up, of course
of English because they are everywhere—of
Irish, of Scotch, and, what is far better than
any, of Welsh. ( Laughter.) There are sprink-
lings of Jews and Germans and “ Heathen "
Chinee” and black Aborigines, and now and
again yon can pick out a sprightly Frenchman
in the streets; but the four great elements of the
population are those that I first named. And
will you please remember, in speaking of the
colonists, that they are not barbarians? Some
of my friends were exceedingly anxious when
I returned to England with my wife and my
two boys, dressed in garments fearfully and
wonderfully made, and half converted into bar-
barians—you see I am as cultivated now as
when you knew me of bid—( Laughter)—that
you in England should know that they are not
barbarians At Port Phillip there was a fine
Scotchman, who came on board with a letter
for me. He was a Presbyterian minister who
had assumed very solemn physical dimensions,
and who takes up more than his share of room
in the atmosphere. (Laughter.) He is a glorious
man, mind you; he has such a circumference of
chest, that if he tumbled into the sea he could
never be drowned, because he could not sink.
He is seventy years of age. and can walk like
a boy. He stood before me with his ruddy face
and his honest brow, with the Ten Command-
ments on it unbroken, and said to me. “ You
see, Mr. Jones, we are not barbarians.” “ Cer-
tainly not,” said I “ you are not at least.” They
are cultivated people, ladies and gentlemen, as
much as you are here in London, and if there
is any reporter here I hope he will take down
these words, exactly as I say them. I have pro-
found respect for them, because you know I
may go back there again. (Much laughter.)
Then we have all the religious phenomena of
England in Victoria. Mr. White wanted to
know what we were doing in Victoria. I will
tell you something about it in a few words. The
great Roman Catholic Church is there, the old


European conjuror, the practised hand at spirit-
ual and religious legerdemain; she is there with
the wonderful accompainments of her presence
—strong, hale, rugged. The Anglican Church
is there, and many of them are doing good and
noble work; they preach the Gospel of the Lord
Jesus Christ, in its purity and simplicity; but.
alas for me ! I never can like a priest. They all
call themselves priests. I find in the New Tes-
tament one Priest, the great High Priest; and I
find also that every Christian is a priest, and
that the Church of God is a Royal priesthood.
(Applause.) I have every respect in the world
for a bishop, as a gentleman; although I wdl
take good care that nobody shall be a bishop over
me—-very good care. I have every respect for mi-
nisters of religious denominations; I have every
respect for curates, but when I find a boy who
has just become a curate, patronising my hoary
head and saying, “ Stand by, I am holier than
thou,” I look upon him with a glance that goes
down to his soul, if there is a soul there. (Laugh-
ter.) Now, my greatest objection to the Estab-
lished Church of England is that she seeks by
machinery settled and fixed to convert good
men into curates and priests. Well, there they
are, many of them doing a noble work. And the
Presbyterians are there, true descendants of
their ancestors, sticking firmly to their creeds,
their standards, their catechism, holding on
with a firm grip to what they call the essential
doctrines of Christianity, preaching now, as
their fathers did 200 years ago, a Calvinistic
theory of this wonderful universe. I want to
speak of my fellows fairly. The Wesleyans are
there doing a work which nobody else seems to
do. The genius of John Wesley is upon them.
They have ministers who are gentlemen only,
intelligent, educated men ; they collect people
in thousands around them, and the blessings of
the poor will rest upon those Wesleyan minis-
ters when they are silent in death and the frost
of the ground shall sit where eloquence was
enthroned. And the Baptists are there. The
Baptists are ourselves, and we are the Baptists,
with the single exception of that —what shall I
call it? —that Baptist heresy. (Laughter.) Now,
stop; 1 have not put my foot into it yet. Then
all the infinitesimally small parties are there;
the spiritualists are there, and that is really a
religion in Melbourne. All the phenomena of
England are there. I must confess it does not
seem to me a very seemly sight—all these di-
visions in the church of Christ. Yet you know
there are two things to be considered. It is inev-
itable. We are differently constituted; 1 can-
not see things in the light in which you see
them; I look at them from a different angle! It
is all in harmony with the analogy of nature, I
have a landscape before my mind, and if I were
to describe it I should be in my own element.
I see the tender sapling; I hear the babbling
and bubbling of the spring and the brook, the
clatter of the flowing rivulet; I see whitewashed
cottages, I behold the waving of the high trees;
I see gardens well cultivated; I hear the songs
of birds, the concert of the forests ; there are
all these various objects, yet 1 know it is one
landscape. I look up into the bright firmament,
the awful city of God where the stars laugh at
each other across that wonderful expanse
There are many stars, but one firmament. I
look at the great armies of Europe—our own
English army; there are many regiments, but
one army, One Government, and one Queen—
God bless her ! (Applause.) These various
churches have different flags, and there are
many regiments. Don’t think me to liberal when
I say that there are thousands of splendid work-
ers in the Roman Catholic Church; that there
are honoured men in the hoary-headed old
Anglican institution; that the Presbyterians do
honour to their Christianity; that the Wesley-
ans, moved by the genius of the wonderful
Wesley, work under the banner of Calvary with
a wonderful power; that the Baptists, lovers
of liberty true to the truth, are the sim-
plest of all religionists, and no body has fought
the battle of right against wrong, liberty against
spiritual tyranny, better than they. And we, the
Independents—well we love Him too; don’t we?
and when we die we shall say, “ Lord Jesus
receive our spirits.” What is all this but the
Divine landscape, the spiritual firmament, the
army of Christ, and we won’t quarrel with each
other. As to our denomination, Mr. Fielden
did what he had no business to do—he gave
you the statistics of affairs in Victoria so
that I cannot talk about them. But I want
to say a few words about our ministers.
Mr. Lawrence is here, a gentleman who has
done noble work in Carlton and Melbourne, who
has been in business, like St. Paul, all the week,
and Preached on the Sabbath like an Apostle
for many long years. He his beloved of the
people—he is a bold and brave Englishman ;
he has built a convenient, commodious, and
beautiful church, and Mr. Allen has just taken
his place now that he has come to England. I
was not present at the Congregational Union
meeting, but I hope you did give him a noble,
hearty welcome, for he is aLondoner. (Applause.)
I understood before I left London that the
ministers out there were inferior to the ministers
here. Now, I am not going to speak a word—
against any of you, mind, but I beg to say that,
taking a dozen of our ministers —there are only
a few of us —and taking a dozen indiscriminately
from English counties, we in Victoria well,
we would stand or fall with you (Laughter.)
There is Mr. Gosman, the Principal of our
College in Melbourne, who could fill any theo-
logical chair in any of our colleges in England
with Credit to himself and honour to the college.
He has strong, original powers ; he is well trained
by education ; he has the brawny arm of a Scotch-
man, and, by the way, he is black, and blackness
and darkness, as you ought to know, are divine.
(Laughter.) No man can be very able as a
preacher of the Gospel unless he is sanguine—
bilious in temperament and dark and black in
complexion. (Laughter.) He is an admirable


logician. I have heard many addi’esses here at
the opening of colleges, but I never heard in
London more able addresses than I have heard
from Professor Grosman. He will be in England
in two or three years, and you must take care
to welcome him as an able brother and an able
thinker, a noble Christian, and an able teacher
of his students. Then there is Mr. Halley, a
Londoner or a Manchester man, I am not sure
which—l think both. (Laughter.) He is secre-
tary of the Congregational Union and Mission
of Victoria. He seems to me to be made up ;
he is not one piece of ability ; but made up of
odds and ends. (Laughter.) It is as if Nature
had been making lots of men, and there were
fragments lying about, and she had put them
together, and made Jacob Halley He is an
admirable person, and keeps together a nice
church at Williamstown. He is a splendid secre-
tary and organiser. He thinks nothing of go-
ing as captain on a picnic of 900 in number.
What do you think of a picnic like that? He
hires two steamers, and takes us down to one of
the little places on the coast of that beautiful bay,
and takes us safely home afterwards. He is
such a man as ought to have been with Welling-
ton in the Peninsular. Under Wellington ?
Well, I rather doubt that. (Laughter.) Over,
perhaps. Then there is Joseph King, the pre-
sent Chairman of the Congregational Union of
Yictoria. He is a gentlemanly, scholarly man,
a good preacher, without any extraordinary elo-
quence, an admirable pastor of a church in whose
love he lives, and faithful to the Master in every
respect. I am glad to say that although we
have no creed there, no written creed, no
catechism, no people in the world preach the
Glospel in greater purity than our ministers in
Yictoria. The delicious tender voice that went
forth from Judea 1,800 years ago, and lias been
vibrating through the atmosphere of the earth
ever since, is echoed and re-echoed in all our
pulpit s in Victoria to-day. There are differences
between England and Victoria, but there is no
difference in our Congregationalism. Christ to
our ministers in all and in all. Then as to
brotherly kindness, I wish to bear this testimony.
I was there with them three years, and I never
heard one harsh word from the mouth of any
one of these, my brethren. They received me
into their heart of love when I went there in
feeble health, and let it go from this distance
that I have them in everlasting remembrance, and
that they live in the embrace of my tenderest
affection, So much for our brother ministers.
And remember that many of them are working
hard for very little consideration. Let me re-
mind you, after what Mr. White has said., that
we do not receive much from this society. We
had £2OO from you last year ; but let me tell Mr.
White if you do not go on in a proper manner
we won’t receive your £2oonext year. (Laughter.)
You know when they settled on a postage stamp
in Victoria, so proud were they in those days of
gold that as they were consulting together as to
what the price of the transmission of a letter
should be, somebody said “A penny.” “Oh no,”
said another gentlemen; “ they ply a penny in
England! we will pay two.” Weil, yon know
it is the old Saxon nature. (Laughter ) Now
about the churches. I will only speak of my
own church. It is a large church. My congre-
gation generally on Sunday evening, consists of
about 2,000 people. It is as intellectual as a
London congregation. There are strong-bearded,
long-headed men by hundreds looking up to you
in earnestness, and seeming to say in the midst
of the mysteries of life, “ O, you little sir, have
you any light to throw upon the mystery ?
Have you any help to give us strong-headed men
of business ? ” They beat you in regularity of
attendance at Divine worship. I was delighted
with that. Of course, there are lame ones every-
where. Q-enorally, you know, the weather is to
blame. People are well on Saturday and hearty
on Monday morning ; but they are a little bit
indisposed on the Sunday. (Laughter.) My con-
gregation at Melbourne was very careful in its
attendance upon divine worship. There is—
I cannot define what I mean —an energy, a
sprightliness, a youthfulness a ; -out them that I
do not find here. lam not exaggerating. You
will find it when you go there. (Laughter.) As
to personal friends, 1 ought to say that 1 re-
ceived every kindness from my church and con-
gregation. Of course, living there three years,
I made a number of personal friends, and I want
to tell you how good my personal friends were
to me. My church gave me a curate, and when
he went away to another place, they gave me
another curate. I felt quite dignified. (Laugh-
ter.) When they thought I was weak, and they
were right —this is a lesson for rich English
churches—they gave me a horse, a four-wheeled
carriage, and a groom. Now, that is one reason
why you should respect me, because a man who
has kept his own carriage, especially a minister,
is entitled to respect. (Laughter.) You may
say that is a rose-coloured picture. Welt, I can
paint no other. There are faults, no doubt;
imperfections and deficiencies ; yes, no doubt;
but 1 leave you to find them out. (Applause.)
I will bury thy sins in the depths of the sea.”
I prefer beauty to ugliness ; 1 prefer harmony
to discord ; I prefer tender w ords to harsh,
clumsy utterances ; I prefer love to hatred ; I
prefer kindness to niggardliness of nature. So,
my dear V ictoria friends, Glod bless you! I have
no fault to find with you. I have painted your
likeness to the best of my ability. I thin you
ought to have cheered then. (tpplause and
laughter.) Now, 1 want Mr. Field on and the
committee of this society to listen to me. I
want to give them one word of advice. lam
sure all my brethren in Victoria would agree
with me. 1 want you to work from great centres
ot population. Lush woik you must do in some
degree, but the chief aim should be to establish
strong churches. At South Yarra, West Mel-
bourne, Lallarat, Sandhurst, and so on, when
you have strong central churches like the human
heart, you will pour out the blood of truth, and


genius of Christianity to the further circumfer-
ence of our denomination ; but if you merely
scatter yourselves widely about the bush with
small men and small churches, you will not do
a tithe of the good you would do by creating
strong, central churches. Now, let me give you
another word of advice. You are bound to
help. Let me dogmatise a litt ! e here. I speak
in the name of the British Empire, and I tell
you you are bound to take a part, and a very
important part, in the evangelisation of the
colonies. There is a great tree described in the
Book of Daniel. It is as high as the heavens ;
its branches cover the whole earth ; all nations
could see it at one time; the beasts of the field
sat under its shadow ; birds made their nests in
its branches; it was great, grand, glorious,
almost awful. That was Nebuchadnezzar and
the Babylonian Empire. Nebuchadnezzar for-
got bis duty, and bis successors forgot their
duty, anil a voice'spake from heaven, saying,
“ iiew down the tree, cut off its branches;
shake off its leaves, scatter its fruit, and let the
beasts of the field sit no more under its shadow.”
It is a symbol of the British Empire. The
branches of this wonderful England spread from
Canada to Sew Zealand ; they shake over the
whole earth, and nations are fed by this won-
derful English tree. Your commerce, literature,
wisdom, pass away to other nations. The colonies
are your branches, and you must take care not
to do as tho Babylonians did, or a voice will
break from heaven and say “ Hew down that
British tree ; let the branches wither ; let the
leaves fall like the autumn leaves of the country.”
Now, can we rise to anything great ? Are we to
be merely small in oun conception P Cannot we
have the grand ideas of mediaeval times adapted
to our present times, when men lived for great
objects, and not merely for making money. O ye
rich London merchants ; O ye men who have the
treasures of the earth, the ends of the world are
calling on you for help ; your brothers and your
sisters are amid the forests of Australia, not
hearing a sermon sometimes for three and even
six months together. I remember being at a
little hotel for a few hours, and an intelligent
lady, the landlady there, spoke to me, with
tears in Lei eyes and she- said—she didn’t
murder the Queen’s English either —-“Mr. Jones,
we never have a sermon here. An Anglican
clergyman occasionally comes; but we never have
a sermon here, and we are rapidly becoming
heathen.” Her husband bad already become a
drunkard there. Now, one or two things must
happen ; you must have the vigorous preaching
Printed by F, Watmuff, 47 Flinders lane west, Melbeurne,
of the Gospel everywhere in Australia, or the
English people must gravitate lower and lower.
I say, then, in God's name, you must help them.
(Applause.) I had a beautiful vision. We
were coming up the Mediterranean, and were
longing to see Europe; we were looking
for the southern headland of Spain, Cape
Grata ; we watched many a long hour, as the
captain had told us that we might expect it.
One said, “ There it is,” and another would say,
“ No, it is only mist and vapour.” Then we
waited another hour, and some one said, “Don’t
you think you see an image there ?” It was
only the same mist. On the Pekin plunged,
through the moving waves of the Mediterranean.
We were on the deck looking out, and our hearts
palpitating to see the beautiful headland of Eu-
rope once more, and we felt quite near home.
At last some one cried out, “ There it is ! there
it is ! ” and it came out in bold relief and bolder
si iH.,-until at last-the lofty, rugged, rocky
of Spain stood out, looking boldly in the face of
the sun, and our hearts all rejoiced Brethren,
excuse a little Welsh poetry. I have been looking
out yonder in Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide,
Brisbane, Perth ; I have been looking over these
five colonies and looking down to a time 300
years hence, and I see something very much like
an image forming in the mist and vapour of the
future. Infidelity says it will never become
real. It is the kingdom of God in the southern
hemisphere. Infidelity is screaming out it will
never be realised. I think I see it. “ No,” says
infidelity, “it is only vapour and mist.” But
look ; it shall be realised; it is coming clearer
and clearer every day ; it shall stand out in bold
relief, a holy community of nations. The New
Testament shall be its book of morals ; Christ
shall be its king, Jehovah shall be its God.
Will you do anything that will help the realisa-
tion of that ? My friends in London have died
one after the other. Thomas Binncy sleeps ;
Alexander Raleigh since I left has disappeared
from among you ; my day is coming soon. Shall
we be worthy of the noble men who sleep in
death, or shall we grow smaller and smaller,
narrower and narrower? No! no! We will
grow. Our young preachers shall become elo-
quent mer: ; they shall take the place of those
who have gone, and you, laymen, must receive
the baptism of liberality from the high heavens.
Mr. Chairman, I have done. I have tried to do
good. Go forth and do whatever you can for
this Colonial Missionary Society. (Loud app-
lause) .




TAT?
6f 6UO
FIDOS'
)\i OC^ J -r
