

Anno Regni
GEOR G 11 11.
REGIS
Magrhe Britannia, Francis, & Hiberni<e y
DECIiMO TERTIO.
At the Parliament begun and holden at IVeftminfler,
the Fourteenth Day o £ January, Anno ‘Dom. 1754.
in the Eighth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord GEORG E the Second, by the Grace of
God, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
King, Defender of the Faith, gjc.
And from thence continued by feveral Prorogations to the Fifteenth
Day of November , 1739. being the Sixth Seffion of this prefent
Parliament.
LONDON,
Printed by John Baskett, Printer to the King’s molt
Excellent Majelfy. 1740.




Anno decimo tertio
Georgii 11. Regis.
An Aft for amending and enforcing the Laws
relating to Rogues, Vagabonds, and other
idle and diforderly Perfons, and for reducing
the fame into one Aft of Parliament; and
alfb for amending the Laws for erefting, pro-
viding, and regulating Houfes of Correftion.
Pereas tbe dumber of IRoffuejsf,
(Bagabomis, “Beggars, ano o*
tber ioie ami oifojoerlg }per*
fons nail? inereafes, to tbe
great lofs, ano an*
nogance of tbe feingoom ; foi
demeog thereof, be it enafteo
bg the ding’s mofl Crcellent
$9a/e£lg, bg ano toitb tbe aooice
anD Confent of tbe ilojos &pi*
ritual ano Cempojal, ano Com*
mons, in this pjefent Ipatlia*
ment affembleo, ano bg tbe autbohtg of tbe fame, CbatJ
all Ipetfons tobo tbieaten to run atoagano leaoe their
fcnibes o? to tbe IpatiQj, ano all Iperfons tobo
Iball unlatofullg return to fucb Iparilb o i Iplace from
tobence tbeg babe been legallg remooeo bg ®|}ec of Ctoo
682 JuQicca
Preamble,
WflM Pfrlbri•)
fhall bc dctra-'
cd


Juiliceg of tfjc Peace, ioitbout b?inging a Certificate front
the parity o? Place tubereunto fjc, tyc, o? tbep belong, anb
alfo all pevfong, toljo not babing toberetoitb to main-
tain tl)cmfclueov -li\)e ible toitbout-Cmplopmcnt % ano re?
fufe to too?fc fo? the ufual ana common Cftlageg giben to
other labour erg in tbe like 2£lo?k J in tbe Par ityeg o ?
piaceg tobere tbcp then are ; ano alfo all Pccfong go*
ing about from ®oo? to 'C>c.o?, o? placing tbemfelbeg in
l])igbtuapg, x o? paliagegftd beg o? gather aimg
in tbe Patitycg o? piaceg tobere they btuell, tyall be Deem*
co iole anb bifo?beiip perfpng ; anb it tyall ano map. be
latofuf fo?,£npSuffice of tbe Peace to commii-fucb ®f*
fenberg (being thereof conbiftcb before bimvbp tbciti'oUm
Confclfionr orbit the ®atb' 4 bf £Dftc'd? Tnofc crebiblelj£!it*
nefg o? OTtneileg) to tbe £)oufc of Cohesion, tbete to be
kept to barb labour fo* anp Cime not eeceebing ®ne
Q3ontb.L .3nb.it,tyalLm.ljnaptye latofuLfo?. anp.pecfon
to app?ebenb, ano carrp before a 31ufiice of tbe Peace, anp
fucb Pctfong going about from IDoo? to Doo?, o? placing
tbemfelocg in o? paffageg, to beg o?
gather ailns-in itbe, patitycg, o? piaceg'tubece tbepb\oeU
anti if tbep-tyaib refill o?.-eCcape : front the, Perfon gpp?e*
benbing tbem,Stb‘ep tyall be fubjeclr,to..the:fame punjty*
mcht ag Bbgueg ahbr-lia'gabonrig 1 ate 'maneliable bp
tbig attfnanb it >tyall latofufifof the 1 foin
Juflicej bP 'Mlarrant unact bis: Isanti anb %eal; to o?*
bet anp ©bcrfecc of, the Poo? .of the Parity o? Place
tobere fuctf ©lfcnbcr tyall beapp?ebcnbeb, to pap the %um
of iFibe %billingg to the Perfong fo app?cbenoing them,
fo?eucr'p ■fiDffenDeb r fcr app^ebenbeb; tobicb tyall be
aliotoeb .to fucb'®berfecr in'big account, be p?obucing
SDjbec,'’ anb a Receipt nnber the of
the peefon to btyom fucb ©unr toag pain ; but if fucb
SDiocrfeec tyall ncgleft of refute to pap the faib &um, the
faib*:juftice,i ; on ®atb thereof f made,’ map, ! bp jffiQarrant
unber big tyanb the fame to be lebieb bp
♦Diftrcfg anb &ale of tbe ®oobg of fucb ©berfeer, tobo in
fucb Cafe tyall not be.alldtoeo the fame in big account.;
*i ann be it further .enafteb bp the 3utbo?itp afo?e'faib,
Chat all Pctfong going -about ag Patent*gatbeterg, o?
®atbererg of aimg, unber falfe P?etenceg of lofg bpi Fire,
o? other Cafualtp, o? going about ag Colleftojg fo? P?i*
fong, ®aolg, o? ijtofpitalg, all iFencerg anb TBeattoarbg,
all common Plaperg of 3!nterlubeg, anb all petfong tuba
tyall fo? tyite, ®ain, o? Retoarb* aft, rep?efent, o? per*
fo?m, o? caufe to be afteb, tcp?efcnteb, b? petfo?mcb ans
b j Interlude,


3lnteclutie, Crngebg, Comebg, SDpera, Iplag, jTarce, 01
other Entertainment of the Stage, oi ang Jpart oi Parts
therein (in cafe fucb Perfon tball not babe ang legal
Settlement in the Place tobcre the fame tball fee afteo,
tepiefenteo, oi perfoimen) toitfjout 9utbciitg bg uirtue of
letters patent from bis Piebeccffois, oi from
lj)is l£is fpcirs, oi Succcflcis, in purfuance of
an 9ft paffco in the Ccntb gear of l£is £sajeflg’s Bcign,
intituleo, An Adi to explain and amend fo much of an Adi
made in the Twelfth Year of the Reign of Queen Anne,
intituled. An ASI for reducing the Laws relating to Rogues,
Vagabonds, Sturdy Beggars , and Vagrants, into one AS} of Par-
liament, andfor the more effectual funifl.'lng Jiich Rogues, Vaga-
bonds, Sturdy Beggars, and Vagrants, and fending them whither
they ought to be fent, as relates to common Players of Interludes ;
oi toitbout licence from tbc loin Chamberlain of tbe
Bing’s louQjolD foi tbc time being, in purfuance of tbc
faib 9ft ; all buglers, all Iperfons p;etcnaing
to be <Sgpfics, o? toanbering in tbe IDabit oi JFoim. of E*
gyptians, oi pietenaing to fcabc Skill in Pbifiognomg,
palmcSrg, oi like craftg Science, oi pictcnbing to tell
JFojtunes, ci ufing ang fubtil Craft to beccibc oi impofc
on ang of !£is Sub/efts, oi plaging oi betting
at ang unlawful ®ames oi Plags; ana all perfons tobo
run atoag ano Icabe tbeir (SElines oi Cbilbien, toberevg
tbeg become chargeable to ang paritb oi Place ; ana
all Ipettg’cbapiren'ana pcblars toancering abioaa, not
being bulgdicenfeo, oi.otfcertoifc autho?i?eb bg tate, anD
all perfons bmnbcring abioaa, ana Icaging in Tj?arns
ana other SDutboufes, not gibing a goob Account of them*
felbcs, anb all Perfons toancering abioaa, ana begging,
Pietcnaing to be Solaiers, clarinets, Seafaring egen,
oi pietenoing to go to troik in fcarbed, ano ail other
Perfons feancering abioao, ana begging, (ball be seem-
eo ifiogucs anb»Oagabonos, toitbin the true Intent ana
yeaning of this 9ft.
Piobibetf altoags, Chat this 9ft, oi ang thing herein
containea, (ball not ertena, oi be conftruco to erteno to
Solaiers teaming Subfiflence, babing lawful Certiln
cates from tbeir Meets, oi the Sccrctarg at 2£lar, oi
to mariners, oi Seafaring C£cn, licenfco bg feme Cefli*
rnonial oi Spiriting unber the Dana ana Seal of feme
3luBice of the Peace, fetting bourn the Cime ano place
of tbeir lancing oi iDifcbnrge, anb the to tebicb
tbeg are to pafs, anb limiting the Cime of fucb tbeir
Patfage tebite tbeg continue in the birett 2£lag to tie
6 05 Iplace
Soldiers with
Sj'SCd
Sutoencc ‘


place to Vohich theg arc to pafs, anD During 'the Cimc
fo limitcD, o? to ang Perfon o? Perfons going ah?oaD to
too?k at ang latoful &Oo?k in the Cimc of barbell, o? at
ang other Cimc, fo as he, the, o? theg carcg' t foith him,*
her, o? them a Certificate in minting,'figncD bg the 801*'
niffer anD One of the CfjurcfgtoarDcns o? ChapeMoar*
Dens, o? One of the ©beefeers of the Poo? fo?,the time,
being; of the parilh, Chapelrg, : ;b? *P,iacc tnhere. theg
Qmll refpeftibdg inhabit. Declaring' that he, Ihe, t o? theg.
bath o? babe a Dtoelling*houfe o? Place there, in tohieb
be; Qje, o? theg inhabit. 1 .
3no be it further cnaftcD bg the 3utho?itg nfo?cfaiD,
Chat all CnD*gatherers offenDing againft an 3ft, maDc
in the Cbirtecnth l?ear of DiS late sifjajcffg filing George,
the JFirft, intituleD, An Ail for the better Regulation of the.
Woollen Manufacture, and for preventing Dilputes amongfl
the Perlbns concerned therein; and for limiting a Time for
profecuting for the Forfeiture, appointed by an Act of the
Twelfth Year of His Majefty’s Reign, in Cafe of Payment
of the Workmens Wages in'any'other Manner than'in Mo-
ney, being comriftcD'of fiich Offehce; anD all Perfons.
as Hogues o?<llagabonDS, anD efcapingfrom
the perfons app?ehenDing them, o? refufing to go before
a Uullice o? Eunices of the peace, o? to be eramincD up*
on Oath before fuch Mice o? Suffices, o? knotoinglg
gibing a falfe account, of themfelbes on fuch Cramina*
tion, after Cdarning giben them of their Punifhment;
nno all perfons toho (hall b?eak o? cfcape out of ang
ipoufe of Co??eftion, bcfoje the Crpiration of the Cenn
fo? toljich theg toere committeD, o? o?Dercn to be confineD
bg (Liktue of this 3ft ; anD all perfons, toho, after hab*
ing been punifljeD as Hogues anD OagabonDS anD Dif*
charged, fljall again commit ang of the fain Offences,
fijall be DeemeD inco??igiblc Hogues toithin the true 3!n*
tent anD leaning of this 3ft. , :
3nD be it further enaftco bg the 3utho?itg afo?efaiD,
Cljat if after the Commencement of this 3tt, ang Per*
If fon bg this 3ft DcfccibeD to be a Hogue o? OagabonD,
‘ lhall be founD in ang Parilh o? Place offenDing againff
this 3ft, it than anD mag be labtful fo? the Conllable,
i|3eaDbo?ough, Cithingman, o? other fuch Officer of fuch
parilh o? Place, o? ang other Perfon there Duelling o?
being, to app?ehenD the Perfon fo offenDing, anD to con*
beg, o? caufc to be conbegeD, him o? her to fome Suffice
of the Peace fo? the fame Countg, HiDing, Citg, Xo*
rough, Cobm*co?po?atc, Dibilion, o? tibectg, in o? near
8 the
Vagabonds
dderibed.
All Pcrfons '
have Power to j
take Offenders.


the fain Parifij o? Place Inhere be o? Ojc fijall be fo app?e*
benneo, in ©?ocr, that fje o? (be mag be p?oceebeb againfl
in fucb fanner as is becein after, birefteo ; anb in cafei
ang Conflable, o? other fucb ©Steer as afo?efaib, of ang*
Parifij o?‘Place, fijjaJJ refufe o? negleft to ufe bis befl
Cnbeabours to appjefienb ang fucb ©ffenber, it fijall be
beemeb a negleft of ©iitg in fucb Conflable o? ©fitter,
anb be (ball be punifbeb in fucb fanner as is herein
after birefteo ; anb in cafe ang other Inhabitant of ang
fucb Parifij 1 o* Place, being chargeb bg ang Juflice of
the Peace fo to bo, Qjall refufe o? neglect to ufe bis bea
Cnbeabours to app?ebeno anb beliber to the Conflable,
o? fucb other Meet of the fame Parifij o? Place, o? to
carrg fucb ©ffenber before fome luflice of the peace.
Inhere no Conaable o? other fucb ©fficcr can be founb,
fucb Inhabitant fo offenbing, as afo?efaio, being thereof
conbifteo bg the ©atb of ©ne o? mo?c crcbible ©Ditncfs
o? Mlitncffcs, before ©nc o? mo?e luflice o? luftices of
the Peace of the fame Countg, iffibing, Citg, TBo?ougb»
Comn*co?po?ate, ©ibifion, o? Libcitg, fijall forfeit the
of Cen to the 2Ke of the poo? of the
Parifij o? Place mhcrein fucb ©ffencc fijall be committeb,
to be lenico bg ©iftrefs anb of the ©ffenber’s
CoobS, bg Warrant from ang fucb luflice o? lufiices *
anb in cafe ang petfon not being a Conaable o? fucb
other ©filter, Iball app?eheno ang fucb ©ffenber, anb
fijall beliber him o? her to a Confiable o? other fucb ©f ;
ficer, o? fijail conbeg, o? caufe him o? bee to be conbcgeb
to fome luflice o? Indices of the peace acco?bing to the
©ireftions of this 3ft, it fijall anb mag be lalnful fo? fucb
luftice o? Indices to remarb ang fucb perfon, bg .making
an ©?bcr, unbet l£ano anb @eal, upon the Conflable, o?
fucb other ©{fleet, as afojefaib, inhere ang fucb ©ffenber
iball be appjcbenoeb, to pag Cen to the Per*
fon fo app?ebenbing him o? her, loithin one s£ieefc after
©emano, anb p?obucing fucb ©?ber, anb upon bis gibing
a IRcceipt fo? the fame > mbich fijall be repaib to
fucb Conflable, o? other ©fitter, bg the Ibigb o? Chief
Conflable of the o? ©ibifion in tobicb fucb Pa*
rifi) o? Place fijall lie, fucb pettg Conflable o? other ©f*
ficer p?obucing fucb ©?ber of the luftice o? Indices of
the Peace, ano a Eeccipt from the perfon to Inborn fucb
iffemaro mas paib, ano gibing a Receipt to the fpigb o?
Chief Conflable fo? the fame > anb the fame iball be al*
lomeb o? paib bg the Creafuter of the Countg, Eibing,
©ibillan, o? ilibertg, io fucb Ipigb o? Chief Conflable,
on
Penalty on re-
filling to take
Vagabonds.
Rc.vard for
taking Vaga-
bonds.


on faio pafiing faio ano oelioering fuch ®?ocr
ano ißeccipto, ano alfo faio cton Receipt fo? t!jc fame, to
fuch Creafurer > anD the fain Jiufliceo4 at the General oi
£Uiarter»feifiono* thall alloto the fame to fuch Cteafuccr
in l)i0 2lcccunto, upon hio p?ooucing ano oelioering up
the Ooucfaero afo?efaio j ano in Citieo< T£o?ougho,
Cofem.o‘co?po?ate, ano other placeo, inhere there are no
fpigh o? Chief Confiableo, fuch petty Conftahleo ano
other ®fficeco Omll he allotceo tohat they Cball fo pay, hy
ftiitue of thio aa, in their refpeuihe accounts upon
their p?ooucing ano oelioering up the like &loucfaeroj
ano in cafe any petty Conftahle o? other fuch ©fitter ihall
refufc oi negleft to pay the faio Cen %hiUingo to the
peefon fo intitleo to the fame, a 0 afo?efaio, it Ihall ano
may he laMul fo? fuch 3iufticc o? Siufticeo of the locate,
hy Warrant unoer lt>ano ano %cal, to letiy the §um of
COscnty %hillingo hy 2Diftifefo ano @>ale of the <J5ooo« of
fuch petty Conftahle, o? other ©fitter, ano thereout to
allom the faio ißcloarO of Cen to the perron
intitleo to the fame, a 0 afo?efaio, ,ano fuch other ißecom*
pence fo? hio Crouhle, ilofo of Cime, ano Crpenceo, a 0
the faio Slufticc o? 31ufticc0 Qjall think fit j ano the ©per*
pluo (if any) fijall he returneo to fuch petty Conftahle,
o) other ©fScer, upon ©cmano ; ano in cafe any petty
Conftahle, o? ether fuch ©fifteer, (hall pay the faio Cen
to any Perfon intitleo to the fame, a 0 afo?e*
faio, ano the faio H)igh o? Chief Conftahle ihall refufe o?
negleft to reimhurfe him on IDcmano, it ihall ano may
he lavoful fo? fuch Eunice o? Juftices of the peace, hy
GHarrant unoer ano %eal to leoy the of
Ciuenty hn tDiftcefo ano &alc of the <2>ooOo
of fuch {high o? Chief Conftahle, ano thereout to alloto
to fuch petty Conftahle, o? other ©fiiccr, the faio Cen
%l)illing0, ano fuch other Eccompcnce fo? his Crouhle,
ILof.o of Cime, ano Crpcnceo, ao the faio 3luatcc o?
fliceo ihall think fit, ano the ©occpluo (if any) ihall he
returneo to fuch Ihigh o? Chief Conftahle, upon iDemanO.
9no be it further enafteo fay the SUitho?ity afo?efaiD,
ieCfaat the 3!ufticeo of the Peace fo? eocry County, IRio*
ing. City, T£o?ougfa, CoUm=co?po?atc, SDiOifion, o? tv
hecty, o? any Ctuo of them, Ihall, JFour Cimeo in the
gear at leaft, o? oftner, (if ncco he) meet in their
fpcftioe !Dioifiono, ano hy tide Warrant commano the
Conftahleo o? other of coery lpuno?eo,
parilh, Colon, ano Ipamlet, in their federal £>ioifiono,
tobo Ihall he afitfteo frith fufftcient of the, fame
Placco,
Meeting ©f the
J IIIV.CCj.


Places, to maße a general P2inp Search in ®ne Bight
thjoughout their federal anD refpcfiine limits,- foi/tht?
fin Ding anD appjchcnDing of Hogues 'anD, ItagabonDS;
p.no fuch as thep (pall fine ano appzchenb upon fuch
Search, thep than enufe to be feerdic any Suffice
02 Suffices of the Peace of the fame Coumpj HiDnig,
Citp, 'Bojough, Colnmcozpojatc, IDinifion, 02 Liberty.
SlnD be it further enaftcD bn the fiuthoj itp afojci'aiD,
Chat inhere an# ißogucs 02 (Uagahonos appfehenDeD bp
anp Confiabie, 02 fucD other ©fitter, 0?. inhabitant of
anp Parilh 02 place, 02 upon fuch P2ibp Search, as afo2c*
faio, Hjall be b2oaght befoie anp iiuifice 01 3iuaicco-.br the
Peace, it Ipall anD map be latoful fo2 fuel) Suffice 02 3iu*
Cites, anD he anD thep ate hercup requiren to info?m him
02 themfclbes, hp the examination upon S)ath of the
Perfon 02 Perfons app2ehenDeD, 02 of anp other perfon,
of the ConDition anD Ciccumfiancc.s of the Perfon 02
Perfons fo appjehenoeo, an,D of the parish dz place
inhere he, (be, 02 thep lucre lafl legallp fettle-) j the Sub*
Cance of tohich examination 02 examinations Hjall he
put into Writing, anD heJuhfcciheD 02 fianeD ha the
perfon 0? Perfons fo examincD; anD the fa’iD iuflfcc 02
3!uCices Qjall URemife fign the fame, ano trttnrmlt.it to
the next General 02 ©uarterfieflions of the peace, to he
holoen fo? the fame Countp, IRiDing, €itp, Though,
Cob)n=co2Po2ate, iDinifion, 02 libcrtp, there to he fileD
ano Rept on lßeco2D j anD in cafe it Qjall appear that fuch
Pccfon hath anp legal Settlement, fuel) Suffice 02 lufiices
of the Peace ipall anD are hcrehp rcquircDi bp a Pafs
iinDcr foanD annSeal, DirefteD in the fanner anD £O2lll
hereafter DirefteD, ano taßing Botice inhere anD foj lohat
Caufc fuel; Perfon mas app2ehenDCD, anD mhithec h? 02
fijc is to pafs, to caufe fuch Hogue 02 ftJagahonD, of
mhatfoener age he 02 foe he, to be conncpeo to the Place
of his 02 her laft legal Settlement; hut if it cannot he
founD that fuch Perfon hath anp legal Settlement, then
fuch Perfon foalt he connepeo hp fuch pafs as afo2efaiD,
to the Place of his 02 her TSirth; 02 if fuch perfon he
unDcc the 3ge of jFourteen gears, anD bane anp jratbec
02 pother lining, then to the Place of the ahoDe of fuch
jfather o? another; 02 in cafe fuch Place of T6irth, 02
Parents fiboDe, cannot he Rnomn, then to the parilh.
Colon, 02 Place Inhere he 02 foe mas lafi founD begging
02 mifo2Dering him 02 herfclf, anD pafleD unapp2ehenocD,
ano foall be there DelittercD to fome ChurchfinacDen, Cha*
pcMuarDew, 02 ©nerfeer of the POO2 of fuch parifo,
: 6 C Colon,
Vagabonds to
be examin’d
on Oath,
and fign their
Examination,
to be recorded,
at the General
Quartcr-ief-
fions.
Manner of
paffing Vaga-
bonds.


CoUm, oi Iplace; tulixcl) Ipafgf djall fje in tfcc o?
to the (ZEffeft foUoloinff j
To the Confflable of the Parif -of in the County
of •or to the Tythingman, or other Officer {as the
Cafe fall he) and alfo to the Governor or Mafler pf the
Hoife of Correction at ’within the ffaid County ;
and likewiff'e to all Governors or Majlers off all Hoiifes off '
Correction , whom it may concern to receive and convey ; and
to the Church-wardens, Chapel-wardens, or Overfeers off' the
Poor off' the Parif, Place, or PrecinCi {as the Caffe ffhall
be) of in the County off'■ ' or either of
them} to receive and obey.
WHEREAS was or were apprehend-
.ed in the Parifh of r;-- ■\c <- or in the Town
of , or other Place [deferibing it ] as a Rogue and
Vagabond, or as Rogues and Vagabonds, and brought before
me, or us,. One, Two, or more of His Majefty’s Juftices of
the Peace, for this County, Riding, City, Borough, Town--
corporate, Divifion, or; Liberty, and upon Examination of
the Lid i ' p taken.before me, [or us] upon
Oath, it doth appear/ that he; Hie, or they, is a Rogue and
Vagabond, or are Rogues and Vagabonds, within the true In-
tent and Meaning of the Statute in that Cafe made and pro-
vided; and that his, her, or their laft legal Settlement is
at ■ r in this County,- or the County
of. or that the faid It,; was,
or were born in the Parifh of .1 in this County,
or in the County of and hath not fmee obtain-
ed any legal Settlement; or that the faid is,
or arc under the Age of Fourteen Years, and hath or have a
Father or Mother living or abiding in the Parifh or Town
of or other-Place [defferibing it] or that
the faid was or were laft found begging, or
mifordering him, hcrfelf, or themfelves, in the Parifh or
Town of or other Place [defferibing it] and palled
through the fame unapprehended, and the Place of his, her,
or their legal Settlement, Birth, or Parents Abode cannot be
difeovered: Thefe are therefore to require you the faid Con-
ftable, or other Officer, [as the Cafe ffhall be] to convey the
laid in the next diredt Way to the faid
Parifh or Town of or other Place, within the
faid County, or next adjacent County [as the Caffe fall happen ,
defferibing //] and there to deliver him, her, or them, to fome
Church-warden, Chapel-warden, or Overfeer of the Poor of
the


the fame Parilh, Town, or Place,- to be there provided for
according to Law : And you the faid Church-wardens, Chapel-
Wardens, and Overfeers of the Poor, are hereby required to
receive the faid Perfon or Perfons, and provide for him, her,
or them, as aforefaid; or in Cafe the faid Place be not within
the fame or next adjacent County, Riding, City, Borough,
Town-corporate, Divifion, or Liberty, then to convey the
faid to the Houfe of Corredlion at
in the faid County or Place; and you the laid Governor or
Mailer of the faid Houfe of Correction to receive tire faid
into your Cuftody, and him, her, or them
to convey, or caufe to be conveyed to the firll Houfe of
Correction in the next County or Place, in the direCt Way to
the faid Parifh or Town of or other Place
[deferibing it] and in like Manner every other Governor of
Mailer of every Houfe of Correction to whom it may belong,
to convey the faid from Houfe of Correction
to Houfe of Correction, until he, Ihe, or they lhall arrive at
the Houfe of Correction belonging to the County, Riding,
City, Borough, Town-corporate, Divifion, or Liberty, to
which the faid Parilh, Town, or Place doth belong; and
the Mailer or Governor of the faid Houfe of Correction to
convey and deliver, or caule to be conveyed and delivered
the faid to feme Church-warden, Chapel-
warden, or Overfeer of the Poor of the faid Parilh or Town
of or other Place [deferibing it] to be there
provided for according to Law; and you the faid Church-
wardens, Chapel-wardens, and Overfeers. of the Poor, are
hereby required to receive the faid Perfon or Perfons, and pro-
vide for him, her, or them, as aforefaid. ?'
Bna be it further cnaftea bp the flutho?itp afoiefaia*
Chat fucb Suffice o? Suffice# lhall make, o? caufe to be
mace a Duplicate of fucb Paf#, ana fign the fame, ana
ftall aftertoara# tranfmit it to the nert General o? Duar*
ter=feCSons of the Peace, to be bolaen fo? the fame Countp,
Biaing, Citp, TBopmgh, Cotomcojpojatc, Diaifion, o i
libertp, there to be filea ana kept on iffecoja; ana the
faia Duplicate, 01 a Copp thereof, (hall ana map be rcaa
in anp Court of ißeco?a in England, Wales, o| the Coton
of Berwick upon Tweed, a# Cbiaence that fuch paf# toasf
maae ana fignea bp fuch Suffice o \ Suffice#.
IPioaiaea aitoap#, ana be it further enaftea bp the 3u<
tho?itp afo?efaia, Chat if anp Perfon herein before ae*
fctibca to be a ©ogue ana (Llagabona, lhall be appiehcnaca
ana brought before anp fuch Suffice o? Suffice# of the Peace,
it
Duplicate of
the rats to be
recorded at tha
Quarter-fcf-
fioru.


it (ball ano mag be latcful to ano for fucb Suffice or Sm
fiiccs, before fucb IPecfon Ojall be fent bg fuel) LSafs, as
aforefaio (if upon examination, as aforefaio, fucb Sm
Gicc o? Suffices (ball fee Caufe) to feno bint or ber to tbs
3 bcufe of Corrcftian, there to be kept to barn Labour, urn
til tbc nert ©eneral cr or for fucb (borter
of Cime, as fucb Suffice or Suffices (ball think fit,
accoroing to tbc Mature of bis o 2 bee ©{fence; ano that
fucb Ipecfon (ball afteilnaros be font aioag bg fucb i?afs,
as aforefaio.
ano be *it further enaftco bg tbe Sutboritg aforefaio,
Cbat tobere ang Ipeifon, ocfcribco to be an incorrigible
IRoguc bg tfiis aa, tball be brought before ang fucb Sm
-ffice o? Suffices of tbe Ipcacc, it (ball ano mag be latoful
to ano for fucb Suffice ; or Suffices to commit fucb IPccfon
to tbc Iboufe of Correftion.of tbe faio Countg, dicing,
Citg, Thorough, Cotomcorporate, ©ioifion, or Libettg,
till ,tbe next ©eneral or ©uatter=§efliono, there to be
kept to bato Labour ; , ano if tbe faio Suffices of tbe
l£>ccce, at tbe, ©encral or as aforefaio,
o? tbe major Part of them, (ball, ,on examination of
tbe Circumflances ofitbc Cafe, aojuoge ang Ipetfon tobo
(ball babe been committee to tbe iboufe of Corjcaicn, as
a IRogue or Qagabono, or as an incorrigible iffogue, to
be an incorrigible IRogue, tbeg, or tbe major l£>art of
tbcm, mag or (ball oroer bim or ber to be octaineo ano
kept in tbe faio rpwufe of Correftion to bars Labour, for
fucb further Cime as tbeg (ball tbinfc proper, not erceeo-
ing %ix flgombs, from tbc Cime of malting fucb ©rber
of §>elttons, ano During tbe Cime of fucb bis or ber Com
finement, to be correfteo, bg tobipping bint or ber in fucb
scanner, ano at fucb Cimes ano places, toitbin tbeir
Sucifoiftion, as, accoroing to tbe iSature of fucb jper*
fons ©ffence, tbeg in tbeir Difcrction (ball tbink fit;
ano fucb iPerfon (ball aftectoaros be fent atoag bg fucb
pars, as aforefaio; ano in Cafe ang fucb incorrigible
ißoguc, fo orbereo bg tbe faio ©eneral or 4Dtuatter*©eox*
ons to be octaineo ano kept in tbe Iboufc of Correction,
(ball, before tbe expiration of tbe Cime for tobicb be or
(be Qjall be fo oroereo to be there octaineo ano kept,
break out or make bis or ber Cfcape from tbe faio iboufe
of Correftion, be or (be (ball, for fucb ©ffcncc, be guiltg
of jTelcng, ano, being Oulg conoifteo thereof, in tbe
Countg or IPlace lobere fucb ©(fence teas committeo, than
ano mag be tcanfporteo bg tbe Court, inhere fucb ,©ffen»
Dec (ball be fo connifteo, to fome of l£is 89aje3g’s Co>
lonics
Vagabonds
may be lent to
the Houle of
Corrcdlion.
Incorrigible
Rogue to be
fent to the
Houfe of Cor-
reftion.
not exceeding
6 Months.
Breaking Pri-
ton. Felony.
5


lonieg o? Plantation# in America, fo? fuefi Cerm ag tfie
fain Court Ifiall think fir, not omening Gotten gear#,
in tfje fame fanner ag fig an 9ft mane in tfie JFourtfii
g*ear of tfie ißeign of Ifiig late l&ing George tfie
irirft, intitulefi, An Act for the further preventing Robbery,
Burglary, and other Felonies, and for the more effectual Tranf-
portation of Felons, and unlawful Exporters of Wooll, and
for declaring the law upon fome Points relating to Pirates;
ant) fig one otfier 9ft mane in tfie gear of tfie (Feign
Of Oig fain late intitulcn, An Adt for the further
preventing Robbery, Burglary, and other Felonies, and for
the more effectual Tranfportation of Felons, tfie SDffcnnetg
tfiecein mentionen ate to be tranfpo?ten to tfie fain Colo*
nieg o? Plantationg; ann if any fuefi Perfon, fo o?ncren j
to fie tranfpo?ten, Ifiall, fiefote fiig o? ficc Cranfpo?tation, !
voluntarily break out, o? make fiig o? fier efcapc from;
tfie fain of Co??eftion, o? being tranfpo?ten, (fiall
return into Great Britain o ? Ireland, befo?e tfie Crpiration
of tfie Cerm fo? tofiicfi fuefi Perfon Ifiall fie tranfpo?tcn,
o? Ifiall be aftertoarng at large toitfiin any Part of tfie
Eingnom of Great Britain, toitfiout fome laiuful Caufe,
before tfie Crpiration of tfie Cerm fo? tofiicfi fuefi Perfon
toag o?neren to fie tranfpo?ten, fie o? Ifie fo breaking out,
efcaping, returning, o? being at large, ag afo?efain, Ifiall
be guilty of jfclony, ann, being lawfully comriften there*
of, Ifiall fuffer IDeatfi, ag in Cafeg of Jfelony, voitfiout
benefit of Clergy.
9nn be it further enaften by tfie 9utfio?ity afo?efain,
Cfiat in Cafe any Perron hereby neferiben to be an into?*
rigible IRogue, ann fcnt to any parilfi o? Place by birtue
of tfiig 9ft, Ifiall aftertuarng be founn begging o? mifo?*
nering fiim o? fierfelf in any other Pari® o? Place, it
Ifiall ann may be latoful fo? any Suffice o? 3!ufticcg of
tfie Peace of tfie County, IRining, City, TBo?ougfi, Coton*
co?po?ate, Dibifion, o? Liberty, tofiere fuefi Perfon Ifiall
be fo founn begging, o? otfiertoife mifo?nering fiim o? fier*
fclf, to commit fuefi Perfon by Warrant unner
ann to tfie !£oufe of Co??eftion, there to be kept to
fiarn Labour fo? tfie of Cfiree ann to be
publickly tofiippen in fuefi fanner ann at fuefi Cimeg,
ag fuefi 31uflice o? lufficeg Ifiall in fiig o? tficir Difcretion
think fit '* ann fuefi Perfon Ifiall aftertuarng be fent atoay,
again by iuefi Pafg ag afo?efain, to tfie Parilfi o? Place
to tofiicfi fie o? (fie toag firfl fent.
9nn to p?ebcnt unneceffary Crpcncc in tfie pairing o?
conveying of IRogueg, (Hagabonng, ann inco??igible Eogueg,
6 D be
and to be tranf-
ported for 7
Years.
I Perfons return-
ing from
i Tranfpora-
t tion, before
the Time, (hall
[ fuffer Death.
' Perfons found
> begging, after
’’ being pafled
; home, to be
i- lent to the
' H®ufe of Cor-
f reftion for 3
Months, and
: whipped;
: and faded a-
; gain.


e be it enafieb bp tbe autboritp aforefaib, that the 3luftice
o? Eunices of tfje Peace tobo Qmll make anp Pafs for
palling or conbeping anp Hogue, (Llagafaonb, orincorrigi*
tile Hogue, or anp Hogues, CJagabonbs, or incorrigible
Hogues, to the Place of bis, bee, or tbeir legal Settle*
ment, o? to tbe place of bis, bet, or tbeir TBittb, or tbe
Slbobe of bis, bet, or tbeir jratber or pother, or tbe
Place tobere fucb Hogue, Oagabonb, or incorrigible
Hogue, o? Kogues, Glagabonbs, or incorrigible Hogues
toas or toere laft founb begging or miforbering bim, bee*
feif, or tbemfelbes, anb paffeb unapprebenbeb, Ibail, at
tbe fame Cime toitb tbe faib Pafs, caufe lifcetoife to be
belibereo to tbe Conftable or other Meet appointee to
conbep bim, ber, or them, a Jl3otc or Certificate, after*
taining boto be, Ibe, or tbep is or arc to be conbepeb bp
l|)orfe, Cart, or on JFoot, anb tobitber, anb tobat ailoto*
ance fucb Confiable or other ©fitter is to babe for con*
beping fucb Perfon or Perfons to tbe place to tobicb
fucb Conftable or ©fitter is to pafs bim, ber, or them,
in tbe JForm, or to tbe Cffeft following, Videlicet:
WHereas by a Pafs [ reciting the Subfiance or Effect of the
fdid Pafs ] I [or we] do hereby order and direft the
laid Perfon or Perfons to be conveyed on Foot (or in a Girt,
or by Horfc, &c.) to the laid Parilh or Town of
in or other Place [defcriblng it] or to the
Houfe of Cor reft ion, at in the Way to fuch
Parilh, Town, or Place [as the Cafe pall be] in ' Days
Time, for which the faid Conftable, &c. is to be allowed the
Sum of and no more.
Given under my Hand (or our Hands ) this
Day, See.
2nb be it further enafieb bp tbe autboritp aforefaib,
Chut tbe Conftable, or other ©fitter, tobo (ball receibe
Jucb Pafs anb Certificate, (ball, anb is hereby reguiteb
to conbep, or caufe to be conbepeb, the Perfon or Pet*
fons nameb in fucb Pafs, in fucb fanner, anb in
fucb Cime, as bp the fame Pafs fball be birefieb,
tbe nett bueft &®ap to the Place tobere be, Ibe, or
tbep are orbereb to be fent, if fucb Place be in the
fame Countp, Hibing, or ©ibifion, tobere the faib
Perfon or Perfons toere apprebenbeb, or anp Countp,
Hieing, or Dibifion nett abioining, thereunto; but
tobercas if the place to tobicb the perfon or Perfons
fo apprebcnoco is to be font, lies in fome biftant Coun*
t 2.


tp, Killing* o? Dihificn, the Deliherp of the perfon
o? Perfons to the ConGahle, o? other fuch Dfficer of
the firfi Cotun, Pari®, o? Place, in the nert Countp,
Kihing, o? Dihifion, is founh inconhenicnt, fince it of*
ten happens, fuch Officer is unp?ohihcn loith, anh can*
not rcahilp furnilh the of conheping them' fo?*
toartss, tuherebp the perfons to he conhcpeh are kept at
great Charge, anh manp times fuffcreh to cfcape; fo?
Kemchp thereof, he it further enaftch, Chat tohen the
place, to tuhich the Perfon o? Perfons app?ehenneh are
to he fent, lies remote, anh there he one o? mo?e Coun*
lies, Kihings, o? Dihifions internetting, the ConGahle,
o? other Officer, to tohom fuch Pars ann Certificate than
he gihen, than fo?thtoith caufe the perfon or . Perfons
therein nameD to he conhcpeh to the nert of Co?*
reftion in the fame Countp, Kioing, o? Dihifion, tohere
he o? thep htoell, anh heliher him, her, o? them to the
(Sohcrno? o? Rafter thereof, together toith the fain Pafs
anh Certificate, taking his Keceipt fo? the fame; anh
fuch ®ohcrno? o? Rafter of fuch scufc of Co??eftion, is
fcerehp requireh to receihe them/ anh giue fuch Keceipt
anh toith all conhcnient to conoep them, in fuch
fanner as hp the faih Certificate is hirefteh, to fome
UDoufe of Co??cftion, in the ahjoining Countp, Kihing,
o? Dihifion that lies in the moll hireft o? proper Koah
totoarhs the Place to tohich the Perfon o? Perfons Co
conhepeh are o?hereh to he fent, o? neareQ to fuch Koah,
anh hcliuer him, her, o? them, toith the faih pafs, to
the ©chctno? o? a&aGcr of the Notice of Co??ettion, in
fuch ahjoining, Countp, Kihing, o? Dihifion, toho is
herehp requireh to receihe the Perfon anh perfons fo
thought to him, anh the Pafs hp tohich h?ought, anh to
gihe a Keccipt fo? the Deliherp of fuch Perfon o? Pet*
fons to him, upon the faih Certificate, anh fijall, toith*
out Delap applp to fome 31ufiicc of, the Peace in- the
fame Countp, Kihing, o? Dihifion, toho lhall make the
like Certificate as hefo?e (mutatis mutandis) anh hcliher
it to the ®oherno? o? of the lafi of Co??cc*
tion, toho fhall anh is herehp requireh, toith all
to conhep the Perfon o? Perfons nameh in the Pafs,
toith anh hp hirtue of the fo?mer pafs, unto the soufe
of Co??eftion in the nert Countp, iHihing, o? Dihifion,
in theftHapto the Place to tohich .fuch Perfon o?Pet*
fons arc to he conhcpehj anh fo in like fanner from
the l£oufe of Co??eftion in one Countp, Kihing, o? Di»
hifion, to the of Co??cftion in another till thep
d come


come to fomc IDoufc of Collection in tbe Count?, ißib*
ing, o? Dibifion, tohctein the Place 10, to Ibhich fuch
Perfon o? pccfono arc fent, there to be kept to barn
labour foi an? Cime not erceebing ©ne anb
then fuch Perfon 0? Perfono fljall be conbc?eb to fuch
Place, ann there belibereb to the Church ; toarben, Cha*
peMbarbcn, 0? ©becfeer of the POOl of the fame place,
loho is hercb? require!) to receibe fuch Perfon 01 Per*
fono, together loith the Pafo, anb piobibe foi thenrac*
coining!?, anb gibe the like ißejeipt of 01 foi fuch De*
liber?, as afoiefaib;- anb the" <®obernoi 0? of
each of Coneft ion, to lohich the Pcrfon 0? Per*
fono remobeb b? birtue of fuch ; Pafo, are brought, 10
hereb? requireb to receibe anb ! conbe? foiloarb fuch Per*
fon anb perfono, anb to procure neto Certificateo foi the
Charge anb fanner-of conbe?ing them, anb to gibclße*
ceipto foi the Dclibev? of all Perfono conbe?eb, in like
fanner 00 afoiefaib. w- - ■ - • 41 /'*.
anb be it' further-cnafteb b? the authoiit? afoiefaib, 1
Chat the Cbnflable, 01 other Meet of an? pari® o£
(Plate UJithiU the Countieo Of Cumberland, Northumber-
land, Durham, '0? 'Colon, Of Berwick ; upon Tweed, anb,
eber? <Sobetnoi 01 gaffer-’of an? IDoufe of. Coneftion,'
toithin the fkib Countieo 0? Colon, .flmll, anb the? are
hereb? anb teqilireb, 1 upon an? perfon oi
Perfono‘being belibereb 7 to them b? a Pafo, loho ®all
babe-been appiehenbeb loithin the Caib Countieo o?
Colon, or brought to them accoibing to the ©ireftion
of thio-Slft, lohofe Place of legal Settlement i 0 in that
Part of Great Britain calleb Scotland, 1 tO COntte?, 0? ;C3Ufe
to he conbe?eb fuch Perfon 01 Pecfono into the nert
an joining Shire, Stetoart?, 01 place in that part of
the uniteb IRingbom, anb to beliber him, her, 01 them
to Tome Confiahle, 01 other ©fficer of the nert Pari®,
I)illrift,'o? Place loithin the faib Shire, Stctoam?, 01
Place, taking,hio ißeceipt foi hini; 1 her, .01 them; ann
fuch Meet i 0 heceh? requireb to receibe fuch Perfon 01
Pctfono, anb gibe fuch ißcceipt, anb to bifpofe of him,
her, 01 them accoibing to lain. / . (
-9nb he it further enaftcb h? the authoiit? afoiefaib.
Chat it (hall- anb ma? he iaiuful foi an? 3luflice of the
Peace of an? Shire 01 Steloartt? inithjn that Part of
Great Britain calleb Scotland, j nert ab/oining! to the Coun*
tiCO Of Cumberland, Northumberland, Durham, 01 Colon
of Berwick upon Tweed, to caufe an? Conflable 0? other
fuch ©fficer, to conbe?v 01 caufe to be conbe?eb an? Per*
fon
Dircflions to \
Conftablca, .
and Mailers of J
Work-houfes. ]
Dircflions for
I’afTcs in Scot-
land,


fon o? perfons apprebenbeb loitbin tbeir 3lurisbiftions,
o? brought to them from that lg>art of the uniteb King*
bom, as IRogues, CJagabonbS, or incorrigible IRogues,
tobofe Place of legal Settlement Iball, upon Cramina*
tion taken accorbing to tbe Ham anD Qfage of Scotland,
appear tO be in that Part Of Great Britain calleb Eng-
land, to the firft ®)oufe of Correftion in the faib Coun*
tieS Of Cumberland, Northumberland, Durham, or Colon
of Berwick upon Tweed, anb to beliber bim, bet, or
them to tbe (Sobetnor or jailer of tbe faib rpoufe, tak*
ing bis IReceipt for bim, ber, or them} mho is berebg
reguireb to receibe fucb Perfon or Perfons, anb gibe
fucb IReceipt, anb fortbtoitb to applg to fome Mice of
tbe Peace in tbe fame Countg or Colon, * mho Iball
caufe fucb Perfon or perfons to be conbegeb to tbe
Place of bis, ber, or tbeir legal Settlement (if loitbin
tbe faib Counties or Colon) or elfe to be conbegeb to
tbe ©oufe of Correction in tbe nert Countg, in tbe moll
bireft or proper Glflag to tbe Place of bis, ber,- or tbeir
legal Settlement, accorbing to tbe Directions of this
3£t.
9nb be it further enatfeb bg tbe Slutboritg aforefaib,;
Cbat in cafe tbe fatter of ang Ship or ftetfel, or other;
Perfon babing Commanb in the Qogage, Iball bring in* 1
to this ißealm from Ireland, the 31fle of Man, the 3lfles of
Jerfey, Guernfey, or Scilly, or ang Of the foreign Planta*
tions, ang ißogue, Clagabonb, or 16eggar, or ang Per*
fon or Perfons likelg to line bg begging, being a Jl3atibe
of ang of the faib 31flanbs or plantations, anb the per*
fon or Perfons fo brought ober Iball be apprchenbeb loan*
bcring, anb begging, or otberloife miforbering him or
betfelf, as aforefaib, fucb Rafter, or Perfon babing Com*
manb in the faib Clogage, Iball forfeit the Sum of JFibe j
PounbS for eberg IRogue, (Uagabonb, or TBeggar fo*
brought ober, ober anb abobe fucb Sum of as j
Iball be neceffarg to befrag the Charges that ang Con*
liable or other Meet Iball be put unto bg Queans of ap*
prebenbirig anb re*conbeging back the Perfon or Per*
Cons fo brought ober > anb that the Conflable or other
SDfficer of ang Parilb or Place, inhere ang perfon or
Perfons fo brought ober iball be founb loanbering anb
begging, or miforbering him or berfclf, as aforefaib, mag
caufe him, or her, or them to be apprebenbeb, anb openlg
inbippeb, anb after carrieb anb put on TBoarb ang Ship
or aieflcl, in oroer to be re*conbcgeb anb fet on Shore in
the fame 3flanb or place from inbence be, Ibe, or tbeg
6 c mere
Mailer of a
Ship, bringing
a Vagabond
from abroad,
forfeits?/, be-
lides the Char •
gcs of carry-
ing fuch Va-
gabond back.


toere biougbt, paging foi the Paffage back of fucb Per*
- fon oi Pcrfono fucb IRatc per as tbc Miceo of tbe
! r Peace at tbeir €Uiartec*feflions Qjall from time to time
appoint to tbe Rafter of tbc fain %bip 01 (Hcflel, foi bio
Carriage back j anb in cafe fucb ConGablc 01 other ®f*
Geer (ball, upon ®atb, make appear before ang. Mice
01 Miceo of tbe Peace foi tbe fame Count? oi place
(tnbicb ®atb fucb Mice 10 bereb? impotoereb to abmi*
hifler) tobat Crpence be bath been put to upon fucb ®c*
cafion y it (ball anb mag be latoful foi fucb Mice 01
Micco of tbe Peace, bg ®iber unber bio 01 tbeir Ibanu
anb ®eal, to bireft tbe Pagment of tbe %um of 99oneg
fo crpcnbcb, a 0 alfo of tbe faib Penaltg of jfibe Pounbo;
anb in cafe fucb Q9aGer, 01 other perfon babing Com*
manb of the faib £bip 01 SJcfl'el, ftall refufe 01 negleft
to pag the fame Qgonieo fo oibeteb to be paib, upon tDe*
manb, it (ball anb mag be latoful foi fucb Mice 01 3u*
Ciceo, bg Warrant unber bio 01 tbeir Ibanb anb ®eal,
to lebg the fame bg sDiGrefo anb of the faib §>bip 01
OelTel, 01 ang of the ®oobo toitbin the fame, tobile founb
01 remaining toitbin the potocr anb 3uriobiftion of fucb
31udfce 01 Miceo» anb if the faib Qbafler, 01 the faib
@bip 01 ftleffel tball be gone out of the Potocr 01 3luriC*
biftion of the faib Mice 01 Miceo of the Peace, the faib
SDiber of the. faib Mice 01 Miceo wag be remobeb
bg Certiorari into &i 0 o@ajeGg’o Court of iung’o TBe neb,
anb there fileb on HUcoib; anb being fo fileb, the 3ubgeo
of tbe faib Court are berebg anb reguireb to
bireft Piocefo foi the Gaging anb arrefiing the faib §bip
01 Oeflfel, anb betaining the fame, until the egjoniea
mcmioneb in fucb ©iber, together toitb the Cbargeo of
iOuing anb erccuting fucb Pioccfo, (ball be full? fatif*
fieb > 01 otbertoife to atoarb Piocefo foi letiging the faib
99oneg, bg Capias, Fieri facias, 01 Elegit, agaillG the 99a*'
fier 01 ®tonero of the faib §bip 01 fclefiel, a 0 the faib
Court (ball think mod pioper.
. • Piooibeb altoago, Chat in cafe fucb Q9afier 01 ®tonero
of tbe faib §bip 01 Ocfl'cl, 01 ang of them, (ball, in the
faib Court of i&ing’o Xencb, Ibeto ang piobable ®iounb
of (Siietmnce bg the faib ®iber, be 01 tbeg mag be abmit*
teb bg the faib Court to trabetfe the faib Dioer, gibing
bg Ol otbertoife, in the Penaltg
of iFiftg Pounbo, to anftoer anb fatiofg the CoGO anb
Cbargeo of fucb Craberfe, in cafe it (ball be betermineb
againG him 01 them.
Jufliccs tofet- I
tie thcßates for i
returning Va- J
gabonds. <
Fine on Mi-
llers of Ships,
how to be le-
vied.
Jiifticc’sOrder,
liow to be tra-
velled.
Gnb


3no tobereas o (tiers Vagrants batie been conticpeo from
Countp to Countp, in o?ocr to be fent to Places in Ire-
land, tbc 31BCS Of Man, Jerfey, -Guernfey, o? Scilly (tbeit
laft legal Settlement) but fo? toant of 3utbo?itp to com*
pel trailers of ano 23ctrcls to take them on T3oaro,
in o?oer to be cameo tbitbcr at reafonable Kates, tbcp
map be Deep chargeable to tbc Maritime Countie0, Cotons,
ano Places in England ano Wales, tobere tbcp map lie fo?
fucb Crpo?tation; be it therefore enafteo bp tbc 3utbo?itp
afo?efaio, Cbat all ano etierp scatter ano gaffers of @bips
ano 23ell'cl0 bouno fO? Ireland, tbc 31flC0 Of Man, Jerfey,
Guernfey, o? Scilly, (ball, ano tbep, ano each of tbcm 10
ano are berebp requireo, upon C&arcant to bint o? tbcm
Oirefteo unoer tbc. ©ano ano §>eal of a 3Iuflice of tbc
Peace of tbc Countp, Coton, o? Place tobere fucb
o? Cteflel (ball lie, to take on TBoaro tbc fame fucb 23a*
grant ano Oagrants a0 ©all be nameo ano erp?effeo in
tbc faio Warrant, ano conoep bim, ber, o? tbcm to fucb
Place in Ireland, tbC 3!fiC Of Man, Jerfey, Guernfey, 0?
Scilly, a0 fucb oi 23effel Iball be bouno to, o? ©all
arrioc at, ano fo? tbe Charges thereof, fucb a&afler ©all
take } ano tbc Conftable, o? perfon ©bo femes bim toitb
tbc faio Warrant, ©all pap him fucb Kate per ©eao, a0
tbc 31uflices of tbc Peace at tbeir Cmartcr*feflions ©all
from time to time appoint, fo? eoerp fucb (flagrant fo
brought ano oelitiereo to bim ; ano fucb Rafter ©all ano
i0 berebp requirco, on tbc T6ack of tbe faio CClarrant to
fign a Receipt fo? tbc fo paio, ano alfo fo? tbc 23a*
grant o? 23agrant0 fo b?ougbt ano oelitiereo; tobicb 2£Iar*
rant, fo inoo?feo, ©all then be pjooucco to tbc 3uQice of
tbc peace tobo figneo ano fealeo tbc fame j ano, upon
bi0 allowance thereof, unoer bi0 ©ano, tbc eytoncp fo
paio ©all be repaiO bp tbc Countp, in fucb fanner as
bp this 9ft the to be paio fo? contieping 23agrant0
from Countp to Countp is oirefteo : 3no etierp Rafter
of fucb %bip o? Oefl'el neglefting o? refuting to reccitie
on Boaro, o? to tranfpo?t fucb flagrant o? diagrams, o?
to inoo?fe ano fign fucb Receipt, as afo?efaio, ©all forfeit
jTitie PounO0 to tbe dlfe of tbc poo? of tbc faio Pari©, to
be letiieo bp tDifttefS ano %ale of tbc faio &bip, o? anp
(£>0000 toitbin the fame, bp ddlarrant unoer tbc ©ano ano
%eal of anp Mice of tbc Peace fo? tbc fame Countp,
Citp, o? Coton*co?po?atc, returning tbe ©tietplus <if anp
be) upon iDemano, after the faio penaltp ano Charges
of libping tbe fame.
2nD
Mailers of
the
turning Va-
Brant 3,


Jullicesto fettle
the Allowance
per Mile for
pa fling Va-
grants.
: anb be tt further-'enafteb bp the authoritp aforefaib,
Chat the 3lufticcs of the peace of anp Countp, Kibing,
Citp, Thorough, CoWmcorpo?atc,< Dibifion, o? Libettp,
(ball anb map at the General o? Ctuarter*feffions of the
Peace, from time to time, limit,* appoint, anD bireft
what Kates or allowances per o? othetWife, Ihall
be mane fo? the palling, conbe’ping, or maintaining of
Kogues, dagabonbs, o? incorrigifaleKogues, tobepaflfeb
or conbepeb as aforefaib ; anb map libewife make fucb
other fiDrbcrs, Kules, anb Direftions fo? the more regu*
lar proceebing' or afting therein, Within their refpeftibe
Limits anb lurisbiftions,' as thep in their Difcretion
ffiail think pwper; which Kates, allowances, fibers,
Kules,'anb Direftions, Ihall from time to time be ofa*
ferbeb anb fubmitteb 1 to' bp all 3luflices orthe Peace,
Conllables, Officers, anb other Pcrfons Within the came
Limits anb 3iuciSbiftions rcfpeftibelp.'i ’
anb be it further enafteb, Chat in cafe anp pettp
Conllable o? other fuch ©fficer of anp pari® o? place,
Ihall tying to' anp Itygh o? Chief Conllable anp fuch
Certiflcate as afojcfaib,! as Ihall be giben him bp anp
Eunice o? 3lußices of the Peace of the proper Countp o?
Place, afeertaining how, anb for What Kates or allow*
ances he Ihall be reguireb to conbep anp Kogues, da*
gafaonbs, or incorrigible Kogues as aforefaib, together
With a Kcceipt or Bote from the ChurctyWarben, Chapel*
warben, or ©berfeer of the Poo?; *o? tfoberno? or Rafter
of anp of Correftion, to Whom the Perfon or
Perfons fo to be conbepeb teas or Were bcliberebj the faib
Itygh or Chief Conllable Ihall anb map pap unto fuch
pettp Conllable or other Officer, the Kates or allowances
afeertaineb in anb’bp inch Certificate, anb no more, tab*
ing from fuch pettp Conllable o? other Officer, fuch Cer*
tificate, anb his Keceipt for the fame j anb the faib Itygh
or Chief Conllable * Ihall be alloweb the fame, fo paib,
bp the Creafurer of the Countp, Kibing, Libertp, o?Di*
bifion, on his paffing his accounts, upon his probucing
anb belibering up fuch Certificate anb Keceipt, anb gib*
ing his obm Keceipt for the fame to fuch Creafurer; anb
the 3luflices at the General or €Uiartet*feffions, Ihall al«
loto the fame to fuch Creafurer in his accounts, upon his
probucing anb belibering up the douchers aforefaib ; anb
in cafe anp Itygh or Chief Conllable than refufc or neg*
left to pap the faib pettp Conllable the Kates or ai*
lowances afeertaineb in anb bp fuch Certificate anb Ke*
ceipt, on Demano, it Ihall anb map be lawful for anp 3iu*
dice
High Confta-
ble to pay the
Rate forpa fling
Vagrants by
Certificate
from the J u-
ftice ;
to be allovvedin
his Accounts
by theT reafur-
er of the Coun-
ty}
and the Trea-
furer, by the
J ufticcs in
Quartcr-fef-
fions.
480


fiice 01 3!uflices of tbe ipeace of tbe fain Count?, CUD*
ing, Libectp, 0? IDibifion, bp (Klarrant unDer JpanD
ano to leap Double tbe ®um afcectaincD in anbi
bp fucb Certificate, bp tDifiiefs anD ®aie of tbe <£>oods
of fucb sigb 0? Chief Confiable, anD tbcceout to alloto
tbe faiD pettp Confiable, 0? other ©filter, tbe af*
certaineD in anD bp fucb Certificate anD ificccipt, nnD
fucb other IRecompence fo ? bis Ctcuble, Hofs of Cime,
ano Crpences, as the faiD 31ufiice 0? Siuflices fljall think
fit, anD the ©berplus (if anp) (ball be returncD. to fucb
l£igb 0? Chief Confiable upon ©cmanD; anD in. Cities,
Cotung-co?po?atc, anD other places tobete there is no
foigb 0? Chief Confiable, fucb pettp Conttables, 0? o*
tber ©fitters, fljall be allotocD tofjat tbcp Iball fo pap,
purfuant to the IDireftions of fucb Certificate,, in their
tefpeftibc accounts, upon their p?oDucing anD Delibeting
up fucb Cloucbets. .
anD be it furtber enafteD bp the autbo?itp afo?efaiD,
Chat tbe Creafutcr of the Countp,. Citp, mining, ili-
bettp, o? Dibifton, fljall, from time to time, pap out of
anp publick Qboncp in bis $anDS, to tbe &obcrno? 0?
of tbe ipoufe of Co??eftion butbin the faiD Countp,
Citp, ißiDing, Libettp, 0? IDibifion, all fucb Sfi?cncp as
be Iball bane erpenoeD in conbeping, 0? caufing to be com
bepeo, IRogues 0? OagabonDS in purfuance of this 3ft ;
tbe faiD tfboberno? 0? Rafter p?oDucing to bim fucb Cer-
tificate as before DiretteD, togetber truth a IReceipt 0?
JSote from tbe <Jsobccno? 0? of tlje ipoufe of Co?*
teftion, 0? tbe Cburcb-toarDen, Cbapcl-trmrDcn, 0? ©ber*
feet of tbe Ipoo?, to tobom fucb IPecfon 0? Iperfons fo to
be conbcpcD, teas 0? tneve DelibereD, anD gibing bis obm
Receipt fo? tbe fame, anD tbe 3iuflices at tlje (©cnetal 0?
©uacter-feflions Ibali alloto the fame to fucb Creafutcr
in bis accounts, upon bis p?oDucing anD Delibeting up
fucb Vouchees, as afo?efaiD.
p?obiDeD altoaps, anD be it further enafteo bp tbe au*
tbo?itp afo?efaiD, Chat in cafe anp fucb pettp Confiable,
0? other ©fficer, oj ©oberno?, 0? Rafter of anp ipoufe of
Co??eftion, Iball counterfeit anp fucb Certificate,
0? Jl3otc, 0? malie, 0? {motoinglp permit to be mate, anp
alteration in fucb Certificate, ißeceipt, 0? Jlsote,.be fimil
forfeit tbe of JFiftp IpounDS: anD in cafe be Iball
not aftuallp conbep, 0? caufe to be conbepeD, the IPcr*
fon 0? Ipcrfons tbeccbp intenDeD to be conbepeD to the
IPiacc inhere, bp Oirtuc of anp Jpafs to be maoc as afo?e*
faiD, be, H)c, 0? tbep ought bp fucb pettp Confiable, 0?
6 jf other
High Conlla-
blc not obey-
ing the Jiillicc*
Order, to pay
dju.,k.
: Trcafurcr of
rthe County to
■ pay Charg.es to
1 Mailer ot the
: Workhoule.
1
|
Counterfeiting
'oralteringCe:-
titicatc, to for-
feit 50/.


other fucb SDffictfr, o* ®oberno* o* smaller of ang lS)oufc
of Co**eftion, to be conbegeb, o* (ball not beliber bint,
bet, o'* them to tbe proper Petfon anb place to Web be,
®e, o* tbeg ought to be conbegeb, 01 ang ®oberno* o*
QSMer of ang of Co**eftion, o* ang Cburcb'toar*
ben, CbapeMoarben, o i ©berfeer of tbe Poo*, tball re*
fufe to reccibe ang fucb Petfon o* perfons font to them,
o* to gibe a ißeccipt o* Joote as befo*e birefteb i that, in
ang of tbe faib Cafes, tbe faib Conflable, Officer, <®o*
bctno*, c* sgafier of tbe soufe of Co**cftion, Church*
toatben, Cbapcl*toatben, o* Oberfeer of tbe poo*, (ball
forfeit tbe %um of Ctoentg pounbs * Web faib refpeftibe
iFo*fciturcs (ball be lebieb bg DiOrefs anb of tbe
Offenbet’s ®oobs, bg Warrant o* ©*ber of tbe 3luQiccs
of tbe peace of tbe Countg, Ribing, Citg, T£o*ougb»
Coton*co*po*ate, SDibifion, o* (Libertg, tobeve fucb Of*
fence (ball be committeb, at their General o* Quartet*
fcffions ; one to be paib to tbe petfon o* Pet*
fons tobo (ball fits make 3!nfo*mation again*! ang fucb
Officer, anb tbe otbet ajtoietg to be paib to tbe Creafu*
tec of tbe Countg o* Place, to be applieb bg bint as Part
of tbe publick §tock} anb tbe Oberplus (if ang) alter
fucb JFo*feitures lebieb, anb tbe Charges of Diflcefs fa*
tisfieb, (ball be tetutneb to fucb pettg Conflable o* otbet
Officer, o* to tbe ®obetno* o* jailer of tbe of
Co**eftion, o* Cbutcfctoatben, CfmpeMoarben, o* Ober*
feet of tbe Poo* refpeftibelg upon (Demanb.
9nb be it enafteb bg tbe 3utbo*itg afo*cfaib, Chat tbe
patilb o* Place to Web ang Rogue, Oagabonb, o* in*
co**igiblc Rogue (ball be conbegeb bg Pafs, as afo*efaib,
(ball take Cate to emplog in C£lo*k, o* place in fome
’CiQo*k=boufe, o? aims*boufe, tbe Petfon o? perfons fo
conbegeb to them, until be, Ibe, o* tbeg Iball betake
tbemfelbes to fome &etbice, o* otbet Cmplogment j anb
in cafe ang fucb Petfon o* Perfons Iball tefufe to too*k,
o* Iball not betake tbemfelbes to fome Setbice o* Cmplog*
ment, tbe ©betfeers of tbe Poo* of tbe fame Patilb o*
Place, o* One of them, mag caufe fucb Petfon o* Per*
fons to be cattieb befo*e fome Uuftice of tbe Peace of tbe
Countg, Ribing, Citg, TBojougb, Coton*co?po*ate, Di*
bifion, o* (libertg, in o*bet to be fent to tbe Wife of Co**
reftion, there to be kept to barb (Labour.
anb tobeteas there ate fometimes in patilbes, Colons,
anb Places, Petfons of little o* no Cflates, Vobo bg
(Lunacg, o* otbettoife, are furiouflg mab, o* fo far bifo**
beteb in their Rentes, that tbeg mag be bangetous to be
petmitteb
Penalty on Of-1
ficers negleft- (
Jig Duty.
Vigfaht refuf-
ing to Xvork. to
be fent to tne
Houfe of Cor-
rection.
Lunaticlcs to
be taken Care
of;
482


permittee to go abioab t be it tbetefoic enafteb bp tbe
autboiitp afoiefaib, Cbat it tyail anb map be labtful foi
anp Cloo oi moie of tbe 31uflices of tbe Peace of anp
Countp, Colon, oi Place in England, Wales, ahb Coton
of Berwick upon Tweed, lobece fucb lunatick o t mab Per*
fon ftall be founo, bp Warrant unbet tbeir IDartbS anb
Seals, birefteb to tbe Conftables, Cburcfcloarbens, anb
SDberfeers of tbe Ipoo? of fucb Parity, Colon, oi Places
oi fome of them, to caufe fucb Perfon to be appiefccnbeb,
anb kept fafelp lockco up in fome fecure Place, loitbiit
tbe Counts 01 Place tobere fucb Parity oi Colon tyail
lie, as fucb Juftices tyail, unber tbeir sanbS anb Seals,
bireft anb appoint j anb (if fucb 3!ufliccs fine it nccefl'arp)
to be there ebaineb, if tbe lan legal Settlement of fucb
Perfon tyail be in anp Parity, Colon, o? Place, toitb*
in fucb Countp oi Place; anb if fucb Settlement tyail
not be there, then fucb Perfon tyail be fent to the Place
of hi# oi her lafi legal Settlement bp a Pafs, anb tyail
be lockeb up oi ebaineb, a# afoiefaib ; anb tbe Charges
of keeping anb maintaining fucb Perfon, buring fucb
Sle&raint, lobicb tyail be foi anb buring fucb Cime onlp
as fucb Hunacp oi agabnefs tyail continue, tyail be fatif*
ficti anb paib bp ®iber of. Ctoo oi mojc 3!uQices of tbe
Peace foi tbe Countp, Colon, oi place Inhere fucb Set*
element tyail be, out of tbe Cflate of fucb Perfon, if be
d tye bath an Cflate to pap anb fatisfp tbe fame, ober
anb abooe lobar tyail be fufficient to maintain his oi her
iTamilp (if anp) anb if be oi tye bath not fucb Cflate,
then the Charges of keeping anb maintaining fucb Per-
ron, buring fucb ISeflraint, tyail be fatisfieb anb paib bp
fucb ©Haps anb as the pool of fucb Parity,
Colon, oi place are bp the Halos in being to be piobi*
beb foi.
Piobibeb alioaps, Chat thief 3ft, oi anp thing therein:
containeb, tyail not ertenb, oi be confttueb to ertenb to
reflrain oi abiibge the Pierogatibe of the filing, oi the
Polocr oi autboiitp of the iLoib Cbancclloi, Hoib fileep*
er, oi Commiffioners of the Cieat Seal Of Great Britain
foi the time being, oi the Cbancelloi oi
of the Countp Palatine of Lancafter foi the time being,
oi of the Chamberlain oi (Hice'cbamberlain of,the Countp
Palatine of Chefter foi the time being, touching oi con*
cerning fuefr lunaticks > anp thing in this 3ft containeb
to the contrarp nottoitbflanoing.
9nb be it further enafteb bp the autboiitp afoiefaib,
Chat in cafe anp Conllable oi other Mcer, oi Couetnoi
oi
Bat not in Prc»
judice of the
Laws in Being.


Penalty on Of-(
fieefs not
complying
with this Adi,
o? Rafter of ang Iboufe of Co??cftion, flmll ncg*
left to perform bis Dutg in app?cbenbing o? conbeging
Hogues, ClagabonbS, 0 o? inco??igibie Hogues, o? Iball be
otberbrife befeftibe, remits, o? negligent in bis Outg, in
The Crecution of this aft j o? in cafe ang Perfon o? per*
Tons (ball bitfuvb o? binber the Crecution of this aft,' o?
Iball refeue ang Perfon app?ehenbeb, c? palling from
Place to Place bg Oiituc thereof,'/o? ’ Iball be abbifing,
nibing, o? affifling to bis o? bee Cfcape, anb Iball be
thereof conbiaeo upon tbe Oath of'One o? mo?c ccebible
Gxllitnefs o? soitneffes, before One o? mo?e 31unice o? 3lu*
flices of tbe Peace of tbe Count?,"Hibing, Citg, ißo*
rough, Cobm*co?po?ate, Oibifion; 'O? ilibertg, tobere
fucb Offence ■ Iball be committcb (tobicb Oath tbe fain
31uflice o? 3luflices are betebg impotoereo to amninifler)
tbe Petfon o? perfons fo offenbing, fo? eberg fucb Of*
fence Iball forfeit ang %um not crceebing jFibe peunbs,
no? lefs than Cen to tbe Ofe of tie Poo? of
tbe Parilb o? place inhere fucb Offence Iball be commit*
teb, to be lebieb bg iDiflrefs anb of the ©ffcnber’S
®oobs, bg (Rtlarrant* from fucb 31uttice o? Slußices, re*
turning tbe Obcrplus (if ang be) upon Oemanb, after
the faib JFo?feitUce anb Charges of making anb keeping
the faib IDiflrefs ©all be paib anb j fatisfiebj»anb if fuf*
flcient IDiflrefs cannot be founb, it Iball anb mag be
laloful to anb fo? One o? mo?c fucb 33uftice o? 3iuflices to
commit the Perfon fo offenbing to tbe IDoufe of Co?*
teftion, there to be kept to barb Labour fo? ang Cime not
ejrceebing Ctoo months. «■ • ! ' 1 •
' anb tobereas perfonS' herein befoje beferibeb to be
Hogues, tlagabonbs, o? inco??igib!e Hogues, are much
encourages in toanbering about, bg the deception tbeg
too often meet toitb in tillages anb places Inhere tbeg
are permittcb to lobge in Iboufes, TBarns, o? other Out*
boufes o? TBuilbings, bg abeans tnbeteof, anb their fall*
ing fick there, great* Cjrpences are fometimes b?ougbt
upon Parilbes; fo? Hemebg thereof, be it cnafteb bg the
9utbo?itg afo?efaib, Chat if ang Perfon Iball knolningig
permit o? fuffer ang fucb Hogue, ftJagabonb, o? inco?*
rigifale Hogue to lobge o? take Shelter in bis o? her
Jboufe, "Barn, o? other Out*boufes o? 'Builbings, anb
Iball not app?ebenb anb carrg fucb Hogue, (Uagabonb, o?
inco??igible Hogue befo?e fomc 3luflice of tbe peace, o?
gibe Botice to fome Conftable o? other fucb Officer fo to
bo, fucb Petfon being thereof lalnfullg conbifteb, either
on Confeffion, o? upon Oath of One o? mo?e crebifale
CGlitnefs
and on Perfons'
refcning Vaga-
bonds.
Penalties on
Perfons har-
bouring Va-
grants, dsV.


SClitnef* oi ft!3itneo’e*, ! before Ctoo o? mo?e of IDiJ 00a*
fed?’* 31udice* of the peace of ,t{je Count?, Citp, Bib*
ing, Ti3o?ough, CotOl^co?polate,• , Dibifion, 0? libett?,
tohere fuel) ©ffence (ball bo committeb, 5wU forfeit an?
not erceebing Jfo?t? no? unber Ceri
Shilling* ; one S£oiet? thereof to tbe 3!nfo?mer, anb the
other QSojet? to the Ofe of the poo? of the parity o?
Iplace inhere fuch ©ffence fhall be committee to be le*
bieb b? Diticef* anb of the <S>oob* anb Chattel* of
fuch ©ffenber, b? Warrant from fuch return*
ing the ©berplu* (If an?) upon SDemnnQ, after fuch Jfo?*
feiture, anb the Charge* of fuch Didtei# fhall he fatif*
fieb ; anb if an? Charge lhall .be brought upon an? pa*
rift) o? place b? s©ean* of an? fuch ©ffence, the fame
fhall be anftoereb to the ,faib parity 0? Place b? fuch
©ffenber, anb be lebieb b? Didref* anb of hi* 0?
her <2toob* anb Chattel*, a* afo?efaib ; anb fo? luant of
fulficient Didref* to anftoer fuch ifo?fciture 0? Charge,
a* afo?cfaib, fuch ©ffenber tyall be committeb b? fuch
3udice* to the Ipoufe of Co??eftion, there to be kept to
barb labour fo? an? Cime not erceebing Ch?ce £@onth*.
P?obioeb alioa?*, Chat it (hall anb ma? be latoful to
anb fo? the Church'foarben* anb ©berfeer* of the Poo?
of an? Paritye*, Colon*, 0? Place*, to p?obibe lobg*
ing 0? other Belief fo? an? Perfon 0? Perfon* ibho fhall
toant the fame, anb fctyilft the? are in fuch paritye*,
Colon*, o? Place*, (hall, b? an? fubben 0?
other accibental ‘6@i*fo?tune, be renbereb * incapable of
being immebiatel? remobeo, until he, flje,' 0? the? can
be remobeb, tuithout Danger of hi*, her, 0? theic life
o? libe*, b? a Paf*, a* is herein before bireftcb, the Cr*
pence tohereof fhall be alloloeb them in their account* t
anb it fhall anb ma? be laloful to anb fo? all Rafter* 0?
®oberno?* of an? to lobge 0? harbour an? fiefc
o? impotent Perfon 0? Perfon*, acco?bing to their re*
fpeftibe JTounbation*, 0? to gibe 00one? in aims, in a*
large anb ample fanner a* the? ate bounb to bo, 0? ma?
bo b? their refpeftibc Jrounbation*, to an? fick 0? impo*
tent Perfon 0? perfon* j an? thing herein containeb to
the contrar? in an? loife nottoithdanbing.
anb be it further enafteb b? the autho?it? afo?efaib.
Chat an? Perfon* aggriebeb b? an? paf*, 0? other
aa of an? 3tudice 0? Indices of the Peace out of §>ef*
Cons, in o? concerning the Crecution of this aa,
ma? appeal to the new General 01 ©tuarter*fe(Con* of 1
6 <3 the
Church-war-
den r, is c. may
relieve ca'.ual
Poor.
Perfons ag-
grieved may
appeal to the
Quarter-lei-
fions.


the County, ,lßibing, liberty, oz Dibifion, gibing tea*
tollable BotiCc thereof.,
Pzobiceb altoays, anb be it further enafteb, Chat in
all Cities anb Colons, .©hereby ftlirtue of fpecial 2fts
of parliament, the Charge of patting GJagrants is to
be befrayeb'in other fanner than is fay this 9$ bireft*
eb, oi ©here fuch Vagrants, fay Virtue of fpecial %ta»
tutes, are to be appzehenbeb anb conbcyeb to the places
©hither they are to be fent, fay any Perfon oz Petfons,
oz Meets, other than tfaofe namcb foz that Purpofc in
this 2ft, fuch Charge (ball be faozne anb befrayeb in
fuch Cities anb Colons, in like scanner as before the
mailing of this 2ft } anb the Perfon oz Officer liable to
fuch Bernice in the fain Cities ano Colons, by. Virtue
of the fain fpecial 2fts of parliament, lhall continue li*
able, as if this 2a hab never been inabe.
, Pzobibcb alloays. Chat this 2ft, oz any thing therein
containeb, oz any 2uthozity, thereby given, ©all not.in
any toife enenb to bifinhent, pzejubice, oz hinber the
IDeitS 0? 2tttgn3 Of John Dutton Of Dutton, late of the
County of Chefter, Cfquire, beceafeb, their ©cits oz
afltgns, foz, touching, oz concerning any liberty, Pzi*
bilege, Pze-'eminence, anb 2uthozity, Jurifbiftion oz Jn*
heritancc, ©faith they, their J£>eirs, oz 2(figns, no© lain*
fully ufe o? have, oz laiofully may oz ought to ufe ©itfa*
in the County Palatine of Chdler, anb the County of
Chetter, o? cither of them, by reafon of any ancient
Charters of any Kings of this lanb, oz fay reafon of any
Pzefcription oz lainful GJfage oz Citie tofaatfoeber.
. Snb foz the better Crecution of this 2ft, be it fur*
ther enafteb by the authority afozefaib, Chat upon the
Pzcfcntment of the <2>zanb Jury oz <szanb Juries, at
the affixes, Czeat oz General ®aol Delivery,
faelb foz any County oz liberty, that there is no IDoufe
of Cozzeftion, anb that it inill be ncceflary to pzobibe
SDne o? moze soufe oz of Cozzeftion in any fuch
County, o? in any IRibing, liberty, oz Dibifion in any
fuch County, oz that the ©oufe oz £oufes of Cozzeftion
alrcaby pzovibeb therein refpeftively, is oz arc not fuf*
ficient, anb that it iuill be neccfl*ary to pzobibe One oz
moze soufe oz s>oufcs of Cozzeftion there, oz that fuch
soufe oz Routes of Cozzeftion is oz ate not convenient
oz fufficient, oz ©ant to be enlargcb, the Juflices of the
peace of any County, EUbing, liberty, oz Dibifion,
being at the General oz duarter*feffions aflembleb, oz
the ma/oz part of them, ©all have full po©er anb 2u*
thozity
Special I j«;s
tor pilling ' a-
crant-s not to
be akcrcJi
Ctaufc con-
cerning John
Dutton ot CVv-
fter.


thejitp to builv, erect, o? enlarge one o? mo?c fit o? com
venient Iboufc o? Routes of Co??eftion, o? to tmp o? pur*
ebafeone o2"mo?e fit o? convenient fpoufc o? insures Co?
that ipuvpofe, With a convenient. Ti?acbfive 02 ©utlet, o?
convenient 'ißacltfinefif 0? ©inlets thereto avjoining; 02 to
purchafc lanv, anv cteft fuch fpoufe o? of CTo?*
reftion upon IPart thereof, anv to lap out the refi of fuch
Lanv fo2 fuch TBacfefive 02 TSacfefives, SDutlet 02 ©ut*
lets, toithin anp fuch Countp, IRiVing, lihertp, 02 Di*
vifion, accoiving to the true intent anv (Effect of fuch
}p2efentment; anv tfje faiv iufiiccs being fo affemblcV;
at the General 02 £Uiartec»feffions, 02 the majo? jpnrt of!
them, map anv (ball conclave anv agree upon raffing fuch;
0? %ums of as upon Craminarioh of able
anv fufficient SQojfimen, 02 anp other \Jpcrfons, (ball
appear to be nccelfarp, fo? builVing, erecting, 02 enlarg--
ing fucb I)oufe 02 IDoufcs of Co??eftion, 02 fo? purchafing
a Doufe, soufcs, 02 lanv (if thought neccfiarp) fo? that
IPurpofc; anv if it Qjall he thought nrceifatp fo? that
Jpurpofe, to bup o? purchafc anp ipoufe, It>aifcs, 02
lanv, the ihoufc, fcoufes, 02 lanv fo purchafcv, iball
be convepev to fuch Ipetfon 02 Ipetfons,' as the faiv iu*
dices fo aifemblcv at their General 02 ©uartec*feffions,
02 the majo? IPart of them, Iball thinlt fit, in dull,
anv fO2 the Hfes anv IPurpofcs afo?efaiV. !i
3nV be it further enaftev bp the 9utho?itp afo?efaiv.
Chat the 3iuflices of the IPeacc fo? anp Countp, iHiving,
Citp, Tso?ough, ‘ Coton-co?po2ate, Dtvifion, 02 lihertp,
at their General 02 ©matter* feffions, 02 the majo? IPfitt
of them, Iball anv ate berebp requirev, from time to
time, to tafee effectual Care, that the Routes of Co?2ec=
tion alreavp piovivev, 02 bereaftec to he p?ovivev, uiith*
in the limits of their refpeftive iurifviftions, crccpt
fuch s>oufcs of Co?2eftion as have been, 02 iball be ereft-
ev o? maintainev bp anp particular jrounver o? Jfounv*
ets, (ball be Vulp fittev up, furnilbev, anv fuppliev tvitb
fufficient implements, materials, anv JTurniture, fO2
beeping, relieving, fetting to too?&, emploping, anv co?-
refting ail ivie anv vifo?Verip IPerfons, IRogucs, Claga*
bonvs, inco22igible JRogues, anv others, toho Iball be fent
to, confinev, o? continucv in the famej anv Ctoo of the
iuflices of the Ipeace, toithin the refpeftivc s>unv?evs, sDi*
Vifions, 02 iurifoiftions, inhere there Iball he anp
02 of Co??eftion, 02 anp Ctoo iuflices, who Iball
be appointee at the General 02 ©uarter*feffions fo? that
IPurpofc, Iball anv ate berebp tequitev to vtfit the fame
ttoice.
J offices rusty
raife Mo ey,
and catilelioa-
ics.ot Correc-
tion to be
built.
Houfesof Cor-
rcftion to be
provided with
all Neceflirics.
b


ttoice, oi oftner, if nccD he, in ctterg gear, anD to er*
amine into the Cllate anD Management thereof, ann to
report the fame to the nert General o? duarter-fefliono,
to the intent that if ang thing: he amifs therein, the
fame mag hg ®?Der of fuch General o? duarter*fefltono
be refo?meb anD amenDeD: 3nD the faiD 3luOiceo at
their refpeftitte General o i €Uiarter*feOGono, fljaU haue
tfce like Pettier anu 3utho?itg oner the soufeo of Co?*
reft ion to he erefteo o? purchafeD hg Oirtue of this 3ft,
a# theg hatte hg Virtue of ang Lam noto in jFo?ce otter
thofe alreaDg ereftett anti pjouiDeD. 3nD further, Chat
if the faiD <£otterno?o, o? MaQero of the fain of
Co??eftion, Ihall not fee o? keep the faiD iDle anD Dif*
ojDetlg Perfono, doguca, £lagahonDo, o? inco??igihle
Eogueo to harD Labour, anD punilh anD co??eft them
acco?Ding to the !Diteftiotio of the (Klarranto o? ®?Deco
hg tohich theg Ihall he committeD to, o? DctaineD in their
CufloDg, o? fljall othertoife mishehatte themfeltteo, o? he
Defeftitte, tcmifo, o? negligent in their dutg ; the faiD
3!ufliceo, at their faiD General o? €Uiarter*fefficno, are
herehg tequiteD to fet anD impofe fuch JFinco anD Pe*
naltieo upon them a 0 theg Qjall think fit anD contteni*
ent, in the fame banner a 0 Jfineo anD Penaltieo mag
he fet ariD.impofeD on <Ssottetno?o o? 60afier0 of l|)oufeo
of Coueftion, fo? the 3l2eglefto therein mentioncD hg
an 3ft of parliament, pafieD in the ©ettenth gear of
the deign of ding James the JTirfi, intituleD, An A«a
for the due Execution of divers Laws and Statutes, hereto-
fore made againft Rogues,' Vagabonds, and Sturdy Beggars,
and other lewd and idle Perfons, ttlhich JFineo anD Penal*
tieo ihall he paiD to the Creafurer of the Countg, RiD*
ing. Liberty, o? Dittifion, anD Ihall he accounteD fo? hg
him, a 0 part of the Publick o? Countg %tock j anD
the faiD 3!utliceo, at their refpeftitte General o i Ciuarter*
feffiono, mag, from time to time, appoint o? remotte
the eotterno? o? <£ottetno?o, pallet o? MaQero, o? o*
ther offi'ceto of fuch s>oufeo of Co??eftion, anD make
fuch d?Deco anD Regulation# a# theg Ihall think fit,
fo? the better gotterning anD regulating of the faiD
of Co??eftion, anD fo? emploging, relietiing, anD puniQj*
ing the Perfon# therein, o? fo? fen Ding them to o? from
thence, acco?Ding to the true intent anD yeaning of
this 3ft; anD in cafe the Perfon o? Perfons remotteD
hg flDjher of ang General o? £tuartec*felfiono, Ihall re*
fufe o? negleft to quit the PoiTeflion of fuch soufe of
Cojjeftion, from Whence he ot theg: are oiDereD to he
remotteD,
Juflice? to have
the fatne Pow-
er over new
built Houles,
as over thole
built under
former Laws.
Juftices to re-
gulate Houfcs
of Corrcftion.


rfcmobeb, fo? tbe of Cen ©apo nert after Jl3o*
tice givicit him o? them in &Hriting bp the Clerfe of
the peace, it (ball anb map be, latoful to anb fo? anp
Ctoo o? mo?e sufiiceo of the peace of tbe fameCountp,
Bibing, ©ioifion, o? Place (upon piobucing to them fucb
ioDincr o? :! an attefleb Copp thereof, ano
upon ©atb befo?e. them mabe’bp.©ne o? mo?e credible
221itnef0 o? a23itnefl*eo, of fucb Notice babing been giben
to the Petfon o? Perfono fo remobcb, anb of bio o?
tbeir babing refufeb .0? ncglefteb to quit pofletfion) bp
Warrant unber tbeir sanbo anb %ealo, to bireft tbe
Sheriff of tbe fame Countp, ißibing, IDibifion, o? Place,
to remobe bim o? them out of fucb of Co??eftion,
anb be 10 berebp autbo?iseb anb requireb to clear tbe
Poffefiton thereof, in like fanner a 0 upon a UXxii of
Habere facias Poffeffionem.
anb tobereao babe arifen, anb map arife,]
tot ere autbo?itp i 0 giben. to anp 31uflice 0? 3!uOicco of'
the Peace to commit ©ffenbero to the Iboufe of Co?* J
reftion, fo? ©ffenceo cognisable befo?e them, out of the
General 0? ©uatter-feflitono of the peace, bob) long ©f*
fenbero map be there betaineb, anb in tobat fanner
treateb, tobere the Cime anb fanner of tbeir puniCb*
ment 10 not bp JLatu crp?eflp birefteb, limiteb, 0? ap*
pointeb ; be it therefore enafteb bp the autbojitp afo?e*
faib, Chat tobece anp ©ffenbew fijall be committeb a 0
afo?efaib, bp CJirtue of anp lato noto in being, 0? here*
after to be mabe, anb the Cime anb spanner of tbeir
punilbment 10 not erp?eflp limiteb, birefteb, anb ap*
pointeb, the faib 3(uftice 0? 3fufticeo fball commit fucb
©ffenber to the l>oufe of Co??eftion, there to be kept
to barb: labour until the nert ©eneral 0? ©uarter*fef*
fiono, 0? until bifebargeb bp bue Courfe of lato; anb
it Iball anb map be latoful fo? Ctoo 3!ufliceo (of tobicb
the 3iutlicc tobo committeb fucb ©ffenber to be ©ne)
to bifebarge the faib ©ffenber befo?e the faib"
if tbep fee Caufe; anb if be flmll not be fo bifebarg*
eb, the faib ©elfiono map either bifebarge them, 0? com
tinue them in Cuflobp fo? fucb Cime a 0 tbep ftall fee fit,
not crccebing Cb?ee spontbo.
anb to befrap the Cjrpenceb of app?ebenbing, pafitng,
conbeping, anb maintaining !Rogueo, 2Jagabonbo, anb
inco??igiblc Eogueo, anb lifcetoife the Crpenceo of ereft*
ing, purebafing, enlarging, altering, anb repairing
i£oufeo of Co??eftion, anb of purebafing lanb to ereft
them upon, anb fo? TSacfcfibeo anb ©utleto, anb of fitting
6 lj) Up
Directions
concerning
Vagrants in
Houfes of Cor-
rection*


up anp furnilljing fuch soufes of Co??eftion, anp of fenp*
ing perfons to anp from the fame, anp employing them
there, acco?Ping to the Dircftions of this aft, anp fo?
Pefraping all other Crpcnces ncceffarp fo? the Crecution
of tins aft, not herein before pjobiPeP fo? j be it further
enaftep bp the autho?itp afo?efaio, Chat the 31uflices of
the Peace at the General o? o? the
.majo? Part of them, map anp lhall caufe fuch %um o?
%ums of as lhall be neceffarp fo? all o? anp of
the Purpofes afo?efaip, to be palp bp the rcfpeftitie Cre*
furers out of anp 6£onep raifeP, o? to be ralfcP, bp Dir*
tue of an aft mapc in the lafl Def Con of parliament,
intitllleP, An Ad for the more eafy alleging, collecting, and
levying of County Rates.
anp be it further enaften bp the autbo?itp afo?cfaip.
Chat if anp Pecfon o? Perfons lhall be fueo fo? anp
fatter o? Ching tohich he o? thep lhall po in Crecution
of this aft, he o? thep map pleap the General 3iffue, anp
gibe the fpecial Quarter in CbiPence; anp if the Qcroift
lhall pafs fo? the Defenpant, o? the Plaintiff lhall be non*
fuiteP, o? Pifcontinue his &uit, the Defenpant lhall re*
cober Pouble Cons j anp that this aft lhall be Peemep to
commence from the firtt Dap of June, in the of our
Lo?p ®ne thoufanP fenen h«nP?eP anp fo?tp j anp from
that Cime, an aft mape in the Ctoelfth of the late
Dueen Anne, intitUleP, An Ad for reducing the Laws re-
lating to Rogues, Vagabonds, Sturdy Beggars, and Vagrants
into one Ad of Parliament, and for the moreeffedual punifh-
ing fuch Rogues, Vagabonds, Sturdy Beggars, and Vagrants,
and fending them whither they ought to be fent, fljall be,
anP is herebp repcalen; but all the acts therein mention*
ep to be repealep, are herebp PeclaveP to be anp continue
tepealeo.
The Money
railed for main-
taining Va-
grants, and
building Hou-
fes, &e. lhall
he paid to the
Treafurer.
General IHue.
Ths Aft to
commence'
from i 'June,
1740.
All ot’’er Afts
repealed.
D
finis.
