

AN ADDRESS
UPON THE
CLAIMS or THE MAMA,
BY THE
REY. DR. BELLOWS,
OF ALL SOUL'S CHURCH, NEW YORK.
WITH
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE DRAMATIC PROFESSION OF ENGLAND.
BY J. B. BUOKSJOWB, ESQ.,
AND TO THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES, BY
THE HON. GEORGE COFFIN, M.L.G,
COMEDIAN.
PRICE SIXPE2XTOE.
i&tlsoutne:
CHABLWOOD & SON, PRINTERS, 7* BOURKE STKE ET, EAST.
1859.




AN ADDRESS
UPON THE
CLAIMS OF THE DRAMA,
BY THE
REV. DR. BELLOWS,
OF ALT, SOUL’S CHURCH, NEW YORK.
"WITH
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE DRAMATIC PROFESSION OF ENGLAND
BY A B. BTJCKSTOJSTE, ESQ.,
AND TO THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES, BY
THE HON. GEORGE COPPIN, M.L.C.,
COMEDIAN.
PRICE SIXPBMGS.
IHslfcoutne:
CHARLWOOD & SON, PRINTERS, 7, BOURKE STREET, EAST.
1859.


TO THE THEATRICAL PROFESSION
AND THE PUBLIC OF AUSTRALASIA.
Although dramatic literature has been enriched by the productions of clergymen, and
although Bishops of the Church of England have not scrupled to take part in the perform-
ance of a stage play before royalty, (and on a Sunday, too, of all days in the week !) it is
not often that a minister of religion has the courage to stand forth as the advocate, champion
and defender of the drama. It is in this character, however, that the Rev. Dr. Bellows, the
author of the following pamphlet, presents himself; and his able and admirable work has
not unnaturally created a great sensation, not only in America, where it has been largely
circulated, but also in Great Britain, where it has been republished, with a charitable
object, by J. B. Buckstone, Esq.
The claims of the drama have been seldom set forth so clearly, fully, eloquently and con-
vincingly ; and the Rev. Doctor’s words carry all the greater weight with them because
they emanate from a member of that sacred profession, which generally conceives it to be
its duty to anathematise the stage, and all but excommunicate those who tread its boards.
If such an eloquent appeal had originated with a dramatist or-a performer, it might have
been regarded with suspicion as the one-sided idea of an interested party, but no such
objection can lie against that noble and generous defence of the stage for which we are
indebted to the pen of Dr. Bellows. But, I must not omit to remark, the sentiments ex-
pressed by the American Divine, are little more than an echo of those of a dignitary of the
Church of England—that great and good man—the Rev. Sydney Smith, late Canon of St.
Paul’s Cathedral. Fifty years ago —so much was that gifted writer in advance of his age
—Mr. Smith penned the following animated vindication of the Stage:—-“There is some-
thing in the word Playhouse which seems so closely connected in the minds of these people,
(speaking of the charaeters in one of Hannah More’s novels), with sin and Satan, that it
stands in the vocabulary for every species of abomination. And yet why ? Where is every
feeling more roused in favor of virtue than at a good play ? Where is goodness so feelingly,
so enthusiastically learnt ? What so solemn as to see the excellent passions of the human
heart called forth by a great actor —animated by a great poet ? To hear Siddons repeat
what Shakspere wrote; to behold the child and his mother—the noble and the poor artisan
—the monarch and his subjects —all ages and all ranks convulsed with one common passion
—wrung with one common anguish, and with loud sobs and cries, doing involuntary homage
to the God that made their hearts ! What wretched infatuation to interdict such amusements as
these ! What a blessing that mankind can be allured from sensual gratification, and find
relaxation and pleasure in such pursuits ! As to the spectacles of impropriety which are
sometimes witnessed in parts of the theatre, such reasons apply, in a much stronger degree,
to not driving along the Strand, or any of the great public streets of London, after dark ;
and, if the virtue of well educated young people is made of such very frail materials, their
best resource is a nunnery at once. It is a very bad rule, however, never to quit the house
for fear of catching cold.’’
As regards the animadversions upon the stage, dramatic literature, and the theatrical
profession, which are made with so much candor, discrimination, and impartiality, by the
Rev. Dr. Bellows, I am sure that every intelligent follower of the histrionic art, will
entirely concur with that gentleman in opinion that the evils he alludes to do exist, that


they ought to he removed, and that their remedy rests quite as much with the public as.
with the profession.
“ I charge, “he says,” the vices and follies of the theatre, as of other amusements,
and of our general society, to the withdrawal, the self-separation of the moral and religious
portion of the community , as a class, from the pleasure-loving resorts of the people. I believe that
all the specified classes of evils connected with the theatre, would disappear to as great
an extent as they ever disappear, even in respectable society, if, after having recognised the
essential innocency and necessity of public amusements in general, and of the stage in par-
ticular, the sober and virtuous people of this and every city would go to the theatres, in
moderation. This would at once take the ban off this diversion as a thing essentially and
hopelessly wrong—-an enormous injury to actors, and also to the public, whom it drives to
their pleasures, in defiance of what they themselves suppose to be right. Next, then-
presence there would be the only possible and effective censorship, in a country like ours,
securing the selection of plays of a harmless and spotless character, and their performance
in a manner decorous and unblameable. Further, the same influence would exclude —for it
has partially done it already—drinking places and improper characters, as such, from the
play-house, and finally, their countenance, requirement, and support, would give actors and
actresses the strength and courage they so much need, to rise above the perils of their
laborious and exciting vocation, and to take their place with other respected and respectable
callings, upon the common platform of moral and Christian amenahleness.
With respect to the tone and spirit of Dramatic Literature itself, I would merely remark
that the Drama has, in all ages, faithfully reflected the prevalent sentiment of its own.
epoch. It was coarsely vigorous in the reign of Elizabeth; grossly licentious in that of
Charles the Second; and, speaking of the standard productions of standard playwrights,
almost unexceptionable in the reign of Victoria. But whatever its character may be, ox-
may have been, the public are no more justified in visiting it with unqxxalified censure, than
a plain woman would be in vilifying a mix’ror for refusing to reflect an agreeable,image of
herself.
I have great faith in the stage as an educational agency, and believe that it is capable of
instructing the public mind, refining the public taste, and purifying the public morals,
under the pleasant guise of a delightful pastime ; bxxt, to render it effectual for this pxxrpose,
it must receive the coxxxxtenance and support of the respectable classes of society. Otherwise
first-class and irreproachable entertainments are liable to entail a loss xxpon those who
produce them; and neither managers nor actors are more self-denying and self-sacrificing
than ministers of the Gospel. The latter do xxot pursue their vocation gratxdtoxxsly, trusting
to the ravens for a daily supply of sustenance; and I am afraid that histxionists, being
equally liable to the pangs of hunger, and equally necessitated to provide themselves with
shelter, food, and raiment, would be averse to sustain the noblest characters, expound the
purest sentiments, and deliver the suhlimest langxxage to an empty theatre, with no prospect
of pecuniary reward.
I have taken xxpon myself the responsibility of republishing the following address of Dr.
Bellows, in Axxstralia, because I think its cirexxlatioxx will be no less beneficial to the public
than to the stage. My own election to a seat in the Legislative I accept as an ixxdication
that the old-world prejudice against actors is exploded here, that they labor xxnder no civil
disabilities, and are subject to xxo such ban as is placed upoxx them in other coxxntries; axxd
if there be a minority in the community which still believe the theatre to be the vestibule to
the abode of Lucifer, I commend this pamphlet to their careful and dispassionate perusal,
assuring them, in coixclusioxx, that every effort to amend and purify the stage, to extend its
legitimate influence, and subordinate its power to the spread of civilization, morality and
innocent enjoyment, will meet with the cordial approbation of every respectable actor and
actress, and command the co-operation of
GEORGE COPPIN.


TO THE HEY. DR BELLOWS, NEW YORK.
Sib, —At the request of the Members of the Dramatic Profession of this country, in the
metropolis and the provinces, it is my pleasant task to express their gratitude to you for
your generous and able advocacy of the influences of the Stage—for your defence of its
claims, and explanation of its duties.
That the advice given to Managers of Theatres, and to Actors, will not be lost in Englai d
I feel assured, from the general acknowledgment of the wholesome truths contained in every
page of your brilliant discourse, and the universal gratification its perusal has given to all
persons interested in the important subject.
The English actors have feebly attempted to express their gratitude by reprinting your
work in this country, with the intention of distributing it fai and near, while they cannot
but feel doubly grateful, when a gentleman of your guarded position in society, braves the
censure of the intolerant and the ignorant, in order to do a great right to the exponents of
an art, where no distinction can be obtained but by great industry, incessant application,
and the possession of peculiar mental, personal, and physical qualities, given by Providence
but to few.
The tone of true Christianity which pervades the following address, becomes the more re-
markable when contrasted with the bigotry, unhappily too prevalent in this country, where
cheerfulness, healthy amusement, harmless gaiety, the temperate enjoyment of the blessings
bestowed by the Creator, of sunshine, light and life, are constantly being frowned down by
selfish and gloomy men, whose unchristian fanaticism is fast losing for them the affections
of a great portion of society, which, instead of regarding them as pastors, are becoming to
look upon them as pests.
That there are very many exceptions to the above class, who can distinguish between
bigotry and religion—many eminent members of the church, who have not only defended
the drama but have adorned it by their works, we well know and cheerfully acknowledge,
and to them, Sir, and yourself, we still hope to learn, in the words of the hymn-book—that
“Religion never was designed
To make our pleasures less.”
That is to say, not only the pleasures arising from sincere piety, but those that are innocent
and wdiolesome, amongst which, reason, justice, and common sense will ever place the
elevating and instructive pleasures of a well-conducted stage.
In the name of the entire Dramatic community of Great Britain, I thank you, Sir, again
and again; and believe me to be.
Your obedient servant,
JOHN BALDWIN BUCKBTONE,
Theatre Royal, IJaymarket, London.


AN ADDRESS
UPON THE CLAIMS OP THE DRAMA.
“ As I am about to ask the attention of a promiscuous audience to a long discourse, I
must at the outset guard you from disappointment, by stating distinctly the objects and
nature of my address. It is the argument of a serious man, whose aim is the public
good, with serious people, on the claims of public amusement in general and the theatre
in particular; and this argumentis conducted as in the presence of the dramatic profession
and in their behalf. My purpose would be greatly misunderstood if I were supposed to
be reasoning with society in general, or with men and women of the world. It is the
sober and religious portion of the community I address. It is their opinion and preju-
dices I controvert. I shall venture to speak of the religious community as a class; not
intending to claim or admit that all the piety and scrupulosity of society is in its keep-
ing; not pretending that all members of it share its characteristic opinions and preju-
dices, but with the assumption that it has characteristic opinions in regard to amuse-
ments and the theatre which need investigation.
“ Into this argument with the religious I propose to weave a criticism of the stage,
and such hints to the dramatic profession as my poor wisdom can suggest. Having,
then, the double object to accomplish, of addressing serious people in the presence of
actors, and in the presence of serious people, I shall doubtless sometimes say what is-
pertinent only to one of these classes, without always intimating which it is. I must
beg the audience to keep the difficulty of my task in mind,Avhile I throw myself on
their discrimination, indulgence and patience. (
“I shall be a little dull at the start, but boldly promise to grow more interesting as-
I proceed.
“I begin, then, with asserting that there is nothing essentially wrong in the stage,
or in the player’s vocation ; nothing which should necessarily place the theatre under
the ban of the church, or the dramatic profession aside from other honest callings; or
which demands their suppression as radically injurious and unchristian.
“In saying thus much, I say what thousands of serious and thoughtful Christians,
both teachers and disciples—in short, what the class I particularly address—will utterly
repudiate. The stage with them is the most essentially wrong of all institutions, because
it is the most attractive, dazzling and complete of public amusements ; and all public
amusements—not to say amusements in general—fall under their sincere and earnest
suspicion and Christian jealousy. How much, then, the theatre ?
“It is, then, with the defence of amusement as the principle, that the defence of the
stage must begin ? if the class lam arguing with is to be reached. If amusement be
wrong in the principle; if to forget care, duty, death, the future, for any hour of the day,
be dangerous—if not to be uninterruptedly engaged in contemplating and advancing the
moral and serious interests of life, is culpable and offensive to Christianity—if fun, frolic,
laughter, jest, humor, wit, the excitement of social intercourse and the indulgence of the
lighter and gayer tastes of human nature, have no legitimate times and places, and no
important and indsspensible offices, then, of course, it is useless to talk of defending the
most amusing of all amusements. But I now stand here to maintain and to show that
amusement is not only a privilege but a duty, indispensible to health of body and mind,
and essential even to the best development of religion itself. For what is it? It is the
play of our nature when temporarily released from toil and anxiety. Its very essence is
absence of painful effort and serious thought, absorption in the present, to the forgetful-
ness of the past and the future. Nothing amuses which does not make a man forget
himself, by calling into controlling activity pleasurable thoughts and emotions. Now,
life is essentially toiling and anxious. It is made so by outward circumstances and in-
ward constitution. It is our glory that we are made to work and to think anxiously and
soberly. The burden which nature puts upon our shoulders in calling us into a world


that does not spontaneously produce its fruits, and into a crowded and competitory so-
ciety, is one that presses into action the energies and faculties of body and soul as
nothing else could. But what is this burthen, compared with that which God has laid
upon us in our rational and moral nature, in our appetite for knowledge, love of power,
sense of right, fear of death, hope of heaven ? Tho vast stimulus which our physical
and moral wants, 4 our bodily and mental passions, give to our nature, makes life to most
men toilful, anxious, serious and sad. And this is what life must be and ought to be.
This is what Christianity labors to make it. For, by clearing up the duties and obli-
gations of humanity, placing new and graver hopes and fears before it, calling man to
a higher and more difficult aim, it multiplies the labor, the anxiety, the seriousness and
sadness of life. He; must think more, feel more deeply, work harder, in view of his
new obligation to God and to men. And in this earnest work, and deep emotion, and
wider sympathy, he finds the real dignity and glory of his being. He who does not
work, think, feel, is a degraded, lost and miserable soul. The man, the rule and order
of whose life is not work, anxiety, seriousness, is a poor creature on his way to nonen-
tity, or worse, to moral ruin and future misery.
“ Now, the true question is, how shall humanity do most work, support most anxiety
have the most genuine seriousness ? Experience has taught us that neither body nor
mind can stand an unbroken strain, and we are learning by degrees that the conscience
will, and aspirations require sleep and rest as much as intellect and muscle. The Crea-
tor has accordingly endowed us with various faculties, tastes and sensibilities which have
a spontaneous activity, whose object seems to be chiefly to delight and amuse. Inde-
pendently of their more serious uses, he has indeed attached a pleasure to the exercise
of all our faculties ; but some of them seem to have for their manifest end pleasure to
ourselves or others. Laughter, irresistible propensity of youth, is we know plysiolo-
gically, eminently conducive to health of the body, which it exercises in a potent and
universal manner ; and, unquestionably, humor, which is the inner side of laughter, is
equally important to health of mind. Our sense of the beautiful, the ridiculous, the
witty ; our taste for music, flowers, spectacle ; our enjoyment of food, society, motion;
our love of sport, of the fields, of games ; all these ineradicable tastes evidently have a
mission, nay several offices; first and chiefly, perhaps, to confer a positive and unspeak-
able sum of pleasure, a substantial benefaction of Providence, which it would be impiety
not to recognise and gratefully own ; but secondly, to qualify, correct and improve the
operation and product of the more solid and utilitarian functions of humanity; but
thirdly, to rest, cheer and invigorate mind and heart, that we may more abundantly and
successfully pursue the toil, and bear the anxieties of life, and achieve its moral and
spiritual ends. Thus, to work best, man must play a due portion of the time; to
bear the heaviest burthens, he must have his heart lightened now and then; to think
most profoundly, he must not think too steadily. When the world, on any plea of
prudence, or wisdom has overlooked these principles, religion and morality have suf-
fered. In former times monasteries and nunneries, caves and pillars held the pure
fanatics and ultraists, the idiots and hypocrites whom violated nature sent there. Now
insane asylums and hospitals shelter the victims furnished for their cells by the head-
long sobriety and mad earnestness of business, which knows no pleasure ; or, of study
which allows no cessation ; or of conscience and piety which frown on amusement;
while the morbid morality, the thin wisdom, the jaundiced affections, the wretched
dyspepsia, the wreck and defeat of body and soul, which a community deficient in out-
door sports, genial society or legitimate gaiety exhibits to the thoughtful eye, is hardly
less saddening than the hospital or mad-house.
“ Amusement, then, is not merely defensible. The want of it is a calamity and an
injury to the sober and solid interests of society. None are more truly interested—did
they know their own duty and policy—in seeing the community properly amused, than
the organized friends of morality and piety. They ought to know that nature avenges
herself sooner or later, and better sooner than later, for the violation of the laws ot
physical and moral health; and that the suppression of the sportive, careless and plea-


sure craving propensities or aptitudes of our nature, involves an inevitable derangement
and sure decay of the higher organs and faculties. Instead, therefore, of interfering with
business, duty, sobriety, piety—with scholarship, economy, virtue, and reverence—
amusement, viewed merely as a principle, advances and supports them all. The intellect
that plays a part of every party works more powerfully and to better results, for the rest
of the time ; the heart that is gay for an hour is more serious for the other hours of the
day; the conscience that reposes for a space is more active when it wakes; the will that
rests is more vigorous than the will that is always strained.
“You see, then, that I put amusement among the necessaries and not the luxuries of
life. Like sugar, which was long thought a mere palate pleaser, but which now turns
out to be an indispensible constituent of the blood, and one of the most nourishing and
neeessary articles of human food, amusement is a serious, practical interest and concern
of society, and not a mere indulgence and weakness, to be excused and apologized for.
Society is the better, the safer, the more moral and religious, for amusement. It is as
good a friend to the church as it is to the theatre; to sound morals and unsuperstitious
piety, as it is health and happiness. The very word recreation carries its argument in
its etymology. To recreate is to re-create, and pleasure and piety have, in this direction,
an identical aim—to re-new and edify our nature. Amusement, it is true, recreates in
a very different manner from, piety. It does not make the bone and sinew, but supplies
the roundness of the muscle, the fat and moisture of the system—and while one gives
strength and size, the other gives flexibility, ease and grace. Both are necessary to
build up the perfect man.
“ But here I shall be met with the suggestion that, allowing all this, amusement,
falling in with the tastes, the sloth, the self-indulgent propensities of humanity —being-
in its very nature easy, careless and gay—tends always to excess—provides amply and
extravagantly for its own gratification—is in league with the vanity, vices and danger-
ous passions of the human heart, and instead of countenance and encouragement from
the serious class needs only its rebuke and restraint. Nay, that the very object of re-
ligion is to produce a seriousness, self-denial and consecration, which pleasure in every
form assails and renders difficult; that it attaches to the world those whom piety is
seeking to detach from the world - produces giddiness where religion would give
sobriety, and promotes self-forgetfulness and indifference in those whom God’s word is
seeking to make thoughtful and anxious. Many good and wise people who have net
the least idea of seeing amusement go out of fashion, and who would confess that what
they themselves call innocent amusement is necessary and legitimate; who look at the
sports of young children—the game at ball or the skater’s flight, the walk in the country,
the nutting party, a game atchequers or chess, the music, the piano, the wit and humor
of a true story —with sympathy, nevertheless think their duty to resist the principle of
amnsement, lest under any concession of its lawfulness excess should find shelter.
“ There is, however, no greater mistake in the world than to imagine that, taking
society together, the love of a nusement is an overweening passion of humanity. Doubt-
less it is the ruin of a class. But selfishness, the root of depravity, and the mother of
human evils, finds its chief outlets and manifestations in the serious and anxious pas-
sions of men ; —in cupidity, the love of power, envy, jealousy and malice. Out of the
grand desire to appropriate wealth, power, place, or to avoid want, submission and in-
jury, spring the worst characteristics of society. Falsehood, fraud, violence, anger,
cunning, slander, meanness, apathy, vice and crime, originate in selfishness, which is
ordinarily unsocial, stern, sober, laborious, and as far as possible from pleasure or di-
version. Instead of being self-forgetful, disposed to relaxation, playful, or gay, it is
sullen, introspective; tightly girded, and in no mood for delight. For certainly we
must not confound things different, and call the grim satisfaction with which the miser
pursues his gains, the tyrant his victims, the rogue his prize; with which envy surveys
the mortification of a competitor, or hatred the misfortune of an enemy, or jealousy the
pang of a rival—amusement.
“ Nor are the vices of society, drunkenness, lust and gambling, to be placed among


the relaxations and amusements of mankind. They are the serious and horrible out-
breaks of lawless appetites, which do nothing to recreate but only to destroy. If they
are often found in connection with the pleasures of the world, they are just as often
found in absolute separation from them. Indeed, the lack of the wholesome excitement
of pleasure is commonly seen producing the noxious excitement of vice ; and intemper-
ance, lust and gambling have devastated communities in which public diversions have
been scrupulously forbidden. It is a terrible fact that the first hundred years of Puri-
tanism in blew England was marked alike by ascetic public manners and prevalence of
vices almost unheard of in our free and more indulgent society; and it is even now as-
serted that the soberest of our Sister State contributes more than any other state in the
Union to the sad catalogue of Female frailty.
“ There is hardly a more baleful error in the world than that which has produced
the feud between morality and amusement, piety and pleasure. By presenting as the
mark for reproduction the recreations instead of the sins of society—by confounding
amusements with vices—the moral feeling of the world has been wastefuily diverted
from its opposition to absolute wrong and depraving affections, into opposition to
things innocent, indifferent, or hurtful only in excess: and thus a very mischievous
■confusion has been introduced into the natural and the Christian conscience of evil.
Consider the thick darkness, the absence of interior light and moral order, which is
likely to reign in a soul that has been instructed to put dancing, and the frequentations
of shows, spectacles and balls, into the same disallowance and reprobation in which
lying, slander, hatred and unchastity are kept, and to reckon the love of fun, gaiety
and social excitement as a depraved and Satanic affection. What but moral confusion,
secret protest, insidious revenges, private vices, latent scepticism, and laxity in direc-
tions not open to observation or suspicion, can result to many from such unwarranted
and unnatural classifications ? It is true the second generation often pays the penalty
of the asceticism of the first, but the first usually has a ruinous pity on itself', anil
treats its resolution in dark and deadly ways. We cannot afford to waste our moral
feeling, our sensibility to sin, our powers of self-control and of resistance, upon false
issues or artificial sins. We want all the tenderness and all the energy of conscience—
■all the amenableness of duty, all the fear of God, we have or can cultivate, wherewith
to encounter real sins - the actual temptations of the devil, the positive wrongs to
which human life and character are exposed. Every artificial wrong, every thing
pronounced evil which is innocent, every restraint volunteered, every self-denial which
is unnecessary, is a positive weakening of our moral forces—ammunition used up in a
sham fight, when the real enemy is just at our doors. It is no uncommon thing,
therefore, to see asceticism accompanied by cruelty to others, sanctimoniousness asso-
ciated with sourness of heart and separateness from the world, or disgust and con-
tempt for its pleasure, offset with spiritual pride, harshness of judgment and malignity
of temper.
“It will not answer, then, for the religious class to hold amusements or pleasure
responsible for that depravity of manners and insensibility of conscience and heart
which they so justly deplore. They had much better attack the egotism, pride, cove-
tousness, indolence, appetite, the vehement passions and desires of men in directions
and at points where the natural conscience and the grace of God will assist and sustain
their onset. It is not in the amusements, but in the serious occupations of society—
in business, domestic cares and collisions, rivalries, and competitions of interest, con-
flicts and strifes of feeling, in bursts of passion, or secret, unsocial vices, that reverence,
obedience, the love of truth and virtue and God are lost. Nor has morality or religion
in any business to indulge its own laziness and lack of discrimination, by denouncing
in the gross what has a mixture of good and evil in it; or to affect, from policy, a
disapprobation of the principle of amusement, when it only at heart condemns certain
kinds and degrees of it. Such want of frankness and truth involves the proper censors
of manners in suspicion and contempt, and finally puts the recreation of the world,
where unhappily much of it now is, in open defianoe of piety or disgust for the church.


“I am not here to deny or conceal the exposure to excess, and actual lapse of the
young into excess, in the love and pursuit of pleasure. The moment that it becomes
anything more than a relaxation from toil—the unbending of a bow kept ordinarily at
its strain, the exception and not the rule, the leisure of the busy, the fun of the serious,
the nlay of the worker, the self-forgetfulness of the thoughtful, the recreation of the
weary and exhausted—it is in excess. But things are not to be abandoned because
their use requires judgment and self-control. The best things are most open to abuse,
and amusement, like food, love, power, money, requires to have the dangers of its
pursuits pointed out, but not its lawfulness or its innocency, in its place and degree,
denied or concealed.
“It being established, then, that amusement is not a thing to be afraid of; that it
is a good and not an evil, a necessity and not a luxury of civilization ; an interest of
society, which the religious class, instead of regarding with hostility and jealousy,
ought to encourage and direct, I come next to enquire what place the stage has among
the amusements of society, and what title it has to the countenance of serious people.-
‘‘l suppose it would not for a moment he denied that if the theatre were compatible
with Christian sobriety, it would be the most complete and interesting of all amuse-
ments. Nothing but scruples of conscience and a fear of countenancing a Reductive
pleasure, keep even the most sober portions of the community from an occasional visit
to the play house. I must except, of course, those who by disuse of their sensibility
to pleasure have lost the power of being amused, and those whose original tempera-
ment is constitutionally averse to pleasure. But those, few or many, must not
mistake their defects for advantages. It is a much greater misfortune not to have the
ordinary taste for amusement than it is not to have the ordinary ear for music. That
must be a stupid nature that does not powerfully feel the attractiveness of the stage,
when occupied by such persons as Garrick, Talma and the Kembles; and, purified
from what must offend the taste or conscience of good men, the stage filled with
moderately good performers, would allure and gratify thousands of sober and discreet
people, as'nothing else could. The indifferent performances of amateurs are listened
to with an intense gratification, which, after deducting all the interest of personal
sympathy with the volunteers, demonstrates the inherent charm of the stage. There
was never a dialogue spoken in a school exhibition which was not ton times as exciting
as any monologue, and every additional person added to the scene increased its fasci-
nation in a geometrical ratio. If a few rags of scenery or costume were thrown around
the pci-formers, how potently was the charm enhanced ? In short, in precise propor-
' ti'on to an approach to the public stage was the amusement complete. But why linger
on so plain a point? The stage is the most winning of amusements, because the
combination and aggregate of all others. The theatre is itself a magnificent place—
the audience a great party in becoming attire. If there were nothing behind the cur-
tain—an elegant room, brilliantly lighted, with graceful tiers of galleries, full of well
dressed people in good humor, and seated in knots of acquaintances, talking, bowing
or gazing, admiring and being admired —would be fascinating to the social and
sesthetic instincts of human beings. But there is more than this, even, outside the
curtain. A great orchestra of music, capable—by its own unaided powers—of de-
lighting an audience. Besides a social party, a grand concert—and the curtain not
yet risen. But the curtain rises and displays— what ? A gifted person, , reading an.
elegant narrative, or a melodious poem, in a highly cultivated.voice ? That indeed
would be a high pleasure, such as we sometimes eagerly seek elsewhere. No, but a
whole company of persons, especially endowed by nature for the occupation, and
trained to its'practice, engaged in representing some historical or fictitious story,
carefully, and by high and rare genius, wrought to a moving plot, in which-each scene
and. act "helps on a conclusion—where the passions, weaknesses, virtues and , compli-
cated motives of humanity, seized in their most affecting and interesting aspects, are
not described, but actually represented by persons of. talent and skill, carefully co-
operating to one grand result. The time of the. drama may be a .thousand years back,


the place five thousand miles off, but the costumes and scenery, with earned artistic
care, reproduce what history and art have taught them, and we behold what a little
exercise of the imagination makes the very action, the persons, country, town, and
castle, the dramatist has summoned us to see. Can we wonder that an imitation of
life itself, in its rarest, most passionate, and heart moving moments and
experiences—where the alchemy of genius and art fuses into a few hours,
the whole conduct and course of a splendid human career—a deep domestic
calamity, ambition’s bloody road to a throne, love’s great sacrifice, jealousy’s
torturing fears, avarice’s pinching and grasping way—Hamlet’s thought-
palsied melancholy Lear’s phrenzied paternal grief—Juliet’s innocent passion
Macbeth’s remorse—that a pleasure so rich, costly, and variously and curiously
compounded as this, based upon the deepest, most numerous sensibilities of our nature
should prove universally and permanently attractive ? The drama condenses what is
most intensely interesting or affecting in real life, or what, from the constitution of our
nature, genius knows might by real life, into a compact, rounded, and finished story,
omitting what is common-place, irrelevant, or simply painful, and by a careful adher-
ence to the great rule of art, which never forgets that its end is pleasure, extracting
fi’om crime, or vice or passion, whatever in their actual occurrence it would shock us to
jehold, leaves what moves our passions and affections, with pleasing, though tearful
sensibility. The stage takes this drama, and by a living sculpture clothes this won-
drous work of literary genius with flesh and blood, substitutes for paper and print,
men and women, voices for words, for the dull pictures of the imagination, actual
scenery—for descriptions of costume, elaborate dresses —nay, it invokes gifted men,
and yet more gifted women, to take these places, and with boundless study, consider-
ation, expense, builds the temple, collects the properties, and arranges the scene, which
is to convert the written into the acted drama! And is it possible to conceive that
human ingenuily can ever invent any other amusement which can equal, much less
exceed, this deeply founded, slowly wrought, and most costly contrivance, for the
public delight and recreation of human beings ! Supposing it to be innocent, I perceive
W> element wanting to render it theoretically a perfect pleasure. It appeals to the
intellect, the imagination, the heart, the senses. It has the charm of poetry and music.
It unites the interest of a story with the fascination of a spectacle. It calls by turns
on our emotional and on our critical faculties. Now inviting us to yield to the illusion,
now to admire the skill which deludes us—it adds to the sympathy we feel for the
persons represented—that we feel with those who represent them —that we feel for
the genius which made them representable—and Shakspere, Hamlet, and Garrick, nil
pull at our heart-strings in one delicious moment of admiration and sympathy. Poetry,
invention, story, mimetic talent, elocution, personation, spectacle, beauty, passion,
architecture, painting, music, society, light, all combine iu the theatre to make it the
most brilliant, complete, and untiring of public amusements.
“Now I am not pretending, you perceive, that the charm of attractiveness of the
stage depends firstly arid mainly upon its moral teaching, or its moral influence.
Amusement loses its quality when instruction becomes its object, and it would be very
delusive to anticipate that people would attend the theatre for educational purposes,
or cease to attend it because it were proved uninstruetive. The instruction to be got
from the drama or the stage, must always be incidental, and perfectly subordinate to
the pleasure got from them. Ido not doubt there is potent instruction and moral influ-
ence, in Hamlet, Macbeth, the Tempest , the Gamester, the Hunchback, Uncle Tom's Cabin,
the Rent Day. But it is the satisfaction and pleasure of seeing these plays depend upon
their moral influence, or if their performance could he justified only by their direct use-
fulness to morals, I fear 1 should lose my case with the serious class. Considering the
moral necessity of being happy, it is the various wholesome and immense amount; of
pleasure and recreation which the theatre gives that first enlists me in its support. It
amuses so large a part of our humanity, amuses the senses and the soul. It calls out,
to gratify and refresh them, sensibilities and passions which the ordinary life of the


world does not bring into play, and thus rests the other and earnest powers and feel-
ings of our nature. Eemoving us from the region of the actual to that of the ideal,
from the sphere of the common and natural, to that of the extraordinary and artistic,
it changes our world and ourselves, draws upon an entirely new set of powers and
sensibilities, while it allows the old set to go to sleep, and thus to repair their waste-
while the circle of our development is.completing. All amusement does this, and the
theatre only more because it is the most amusing of amusements. It rests and recreates
by calling into more pleasing and intense activity, the qualities, affections, emotions,
ordinarily dormant in the work-day life of society. There, instead of ministering, wo
are ministered unto; instead of acting, we are acted for; instead of planning and
scheming, we are watching schemes and plans ; instead of feeling for ourselves we are
feeling for others; instead of toiling after a distant consummation, we are enjoying
a consummation which is perfected in five acts. Our love of beauty, harmony,
heroism ; our sympathy with daring patriotism, passion; onr love of light, form, colour,
elegance, splendour; our admiration for genius, talent, skill; all these sensibilies,
which in actual plodding life, mercantile, domestic, or professional, get little exercise
or indulgence, are in the theatre ministered to; and gratified in a way which recreates
our common nature.
“ The use of the theatre (supposing it to be free from moral objection, which I by
no means assume), is that it gives so much pleasure, which is a positive and large
addition to the general sum of human happiness ; and that in giving this pleasure, it
satisfies an immense need of recreation, and quite independently of any direct influence
on the moral interests of society, builds up, and supports, and cheers the life and sonl
of man. I dare not make light of pleasure. God has taken too benevolent an
interest in producing it, and there is too much pain and drudgery, and necessary care
to be off-set by it, to allow me to think it a small thing that any considerable mass of
human beings are pleased. I will not demand of amusement that it shall directly
instruct, warn, elevate or improve. If it give genuine pleasure, and if it do not cor-
rupt, deprave, or injure, I will bless it, and without a single misgiving, invoke the
benediction of heaven on its head. Do not, then, perversely read backwards all that
has been said of the fascinations of the theatre, as if it were so much against it, and
not so much in its favour. If it shall afterwards appear that the stage has essential,
immoralities, and perils to society, and the soul, wrought into its very nature, and
inseparable from it, then we will allow that its attractiveness is a misfortune; its
various charms those of a syren, that woo to destruction; and that genius, art, beauty,
and splendour, have conspired, in the theatre, to make vice seductive, and folly capti-
vating. But I submit that, in the theory of the stage (a very different thing possibly
from the fact) we have yet found nothing to condemn —nothing .essentially wrong, or
otherwise than right. There is nothing wrong in amusement, except in excess, nor in
the theatre, the finest of amusements. The dramatic faculty is divinely implanted.
It gives life and reality even to portions of the scriptures. The drama is a species of
literature which the world’s greatest geniuses have chosen for their own, gaining im-
mortal renown for their labours there. The stage is the drama made more real,
and brought within the easier and full enjoyment of the bast and poorest judges. So
far we are in smooth water.
But the breakers begin to threaten us, even at the very next turn.
It is alleged—and that is the professed sentiment of the serious class —that, prac-
tically, the drama has been a corrupt and corrupting kind of literature—putting'into
licentious and depraving verse and story, the worst and most seductive experiences of
humanity; that it has pandered to vile and vulgar tastes, dramatists having often or
usually been loose and unprincipled characters, and their readers the more gay and
careless portion of society. Doubtless there is truth, and there is also exaggeration in
this statement. The great dramatists, whether ancient or modern, Sophocles, Euri-
pides, or Aristophanes, Calderon, Lope de Vega, Corneille, Ilaoine, Shakspere, are,
with the exception of the coarseness which belonged to their respective ages, not open


to such charges, although the minor lights unquestionably deserve severe chastisement.
But there is nothing peculiar in the abuse of dramatic literature. We do not aban-
don and discountenance poetry, because Eochester wrote immoral verses, and Moore
and Byron poems which nobody should read. We do not give up llichardson, and
Scott, and Dickens, and Thackeray, because Fielding and Smollett, Eugene Sue
and Dumas, have often abused their great powers. The best things are most open to
abuse ; and dramatic literature, you will confess, has not been oftencr, or worse per-
verted and depraved than religious literature. Indeed, the church seized upon the
drama when she was most busy in manipulating the human mind into superstition,
and perpetrated greater blasphemies and obscenities in the so called Mysteries, written
and acted in the middle ages, than the dramatic writers of England, and France have
ever foisted into their most abominable plays. The drama is a kind of literature whose
permanency is guaranteed by the constitution of man. Beginning with the very origin
of literature, and continuing thus far on its history, with every promise of ending only
with its life—we must expect it to reflect and share the fortunes of humanity, and to
find itself now in the hands of the ennobled, and now of desecrated genius; here the
instrument of the unscrupulous, there the vehicle of truth, honor, and inspiration. But
how many dissolute and depraving dramatists and dramas would not the judicious and
the conscientious consent to bear with and guard against sooner than lose Shakspere alone
out of the world ? The mischievous jack-o’-lanterns, and false lights of land and sea, may
shine on for ever, if we can only extinguish them by blowing out the stars and quench-
ing the sun. We cannot obliterate Washington to wipe Arnold out of American history,
though treachery hung by his skirts alone to the fortunes of the race. Wo must let
the tares grow to the harvest for the sake of the wheaf. The drama stands in its own
right, and in the right of its great priests, the wonderful interpreters of humanity, and
great recreators of the race ; and all the apostates and criminals who have desecrated
its pure and beautiful shrine, cannot make its nature otherwise than lawful and hon-
ourable, and entitled to the protection of univeral reason and justice. It is indeed
deplorable, that the written drama should have ever thrown its fascination around vice
and crime, as it is always terrible when genius and wit, when art and skill, enter the
service of the devil. Most sad it is that pleasure should ever be associated with folly,
or amusement extracted from sin. But literature is not responsible for the abuses to
which levity and immorality turn any of its powers ; and it is not the drama, but the
public and the dramatic authors who are to be censured for the production and en-
couragement of lax, immoral and corrupting plays. On this point I shall speak more
fully and to better advantage at another period of this address.
“And now, if, whatever the theory may be, the drama itself has been practically
degraded and abused as a species of popular literature, until sober and discreet people,
as a class, have thought it wise and necessary to discountenaee the reading of plays,
how much more ought the theatre, the acted drama, to he discountenanced and destroyed,
when we consider how its actual, practical character differs from its theoretical one;
and how little what is said in defence of the ideal stage applies to the real one ! For
what has the theatre not been during its modern existence, if the allegations and accu-
sations of the religious class, uttered in a thousand tones, aie to be taken without abate-
ment ? li as it not been as much the focus of vice as the centre of pleasure ? ‘ Have not
intemperance and licentiousness found a congenial home within its walls? Have not the
extravagant fashions , the unscrupulous wit; the reckless passion of the world, been its
chief patrons,-and found themselves in their natural and unreproved place before or be-
hind the footlights? Have not actors and actresses, as a class, been regarded by the
pulpit as.licensed sinners—utter strangers to sobriety and purity; as persons whose
very occupation condemned them to the abandonment of morality and decency ; wdrose
Bible was Shakspere whose table of commandments the rules of the green-room —their
judgment seat the. public—-‘their best heaven the'applause of the .boxes —their only hell
the condemnation of the pit ? Have not the yoftng stolen off to the play-house; and
have not its exciting and passionate scenes, its glittering audience and'bewitehulg-actors,


its ready bar-room and as ready courtezans, softened and betrayed their feeble virtue, and
finished in positive vice what "began in youthful folly? Have not indecent exposure,
obscenity or profanity of wit, inuendo and levity, characterized the stagey Has not the -,
theatre been the haunt of gamblers, jockeys, men of pleasure, women of the world, of
all the light and careless portion of the community, and is it not essentially so now r
Moreover have mot highly immoral plays, in which successful villany or roguery has
been applauded, the" feats of some Jack Sheppard or Paul Clifford romantically
held up to the admiration or imitation ol youth the betrayal ol female virtue excused
the authority of wise-parents made contemptible—the rules of morality held up to
ridicule, and the habits of piety satirised and scorned? I lave not the serious friends
of order, purity, industry, and .religion, .felt the theatre to be the very essence of
worldliness, wickedness, temptation and sin—an institution to be excluded to the
latest moment from, every well governed community - to be avoided by all sober and
public spirited citizens, and placed under the special baa of formal religion, as tne
devix’s own domain, the very gate ol hell? _
“How, 1 have a profound though a cautious respect for general impressions, and
particularly for. the instincts of the religious community, and from all I have read, or
learned by*direct observation or special inquiry, 1 believe that the ordinary verdict of
serious minds, and of the pulpit, respecting the theatre, has many painful elements of
truth in it. lint I believe equally that it exhibits much extravagance, confusion and
illogical reasoning More particularly, I complain that this verdict leaves entirely out
of view the uses of the theatre, considering only its abuses; that it takes no pains to
recognise what is good in its eagerness to point out what is evil oi lO niseiiminate
between what is essential and what is accidental in this institution: that it confounds
the evils.around, with the evils within the theatre, and, to come directly to the point,
f.uls to inquire and explain why, and by whose fault, and in accordance with what
law, it is taat the immorality and recklessness of society, its lolly and vice, have
clustered about the theatre. Ido not deny the fact, but 1 deny the totadj condemna-
tory inferences drawn from the tact, dor in truth the theatre is the veij place vhcie,
for no fault inherent in itself, the pre-existing follies and .vices ox society will necessarily
become apparent. We do not expect to find the foln.es and vices of socle tv, the levity
and ease of a community gathering round schools and colleges, workshops and chinches,
scenes of labor and care, any more than we expect to find flies settling upon ihubaib
and aloes, and not on molasses and honey, hut it would be quite as reasonable to give
up sugar because, vermin are fond of it as to give up pleasure because foods and knaves,
the light and the wicked, make it their chief rood. Be can so folly spends l.is whole
time in laughter, sobriety does not propose to disuse the risible muscles, because
drunkenness ruins thousands, and gluttony tens ol tnousands, virtuous society ooes not
expect to give up eating and drinking. _ _ .
“One very large: class of the perils of humanity is inevitably and indissolubly asso-
ciated with its pleasure-loving propensities. It is of the essence ol plcasuie to lu I
conscience to sleep, and throw humanity off its attitude of resistance, a. his nor its
weakness, but its strength ; its use and charm come of its carelessness and abandon.
If it did not do this it would not be the recreation of society. 11 men were thinking
of their dutv, or their business, self discipline, of judgment to come, ol serious and.
solemn concerns in their amusements, they would straightway become no longer
amusements, but trying occupations. It is, of course, then of the very nature of
pleasure to expose and try the-character, the powers of resistance are lelaxed; the
mind and heart are deft to the impressions of the time and scene. Just here, then, is
the place where the positive, tangible vices of society must, appear, or rather, one gieao
class of them -those that affect the senses. But this by no means settles.the character
of pleasure, any more than it settles the character of the gustatory nerve, that it did
not give us pleasure to eat there would be no gluttony ; to drink, no intemperance.
The pleasure of eating and drinking is a universal and positive blessing, aim not to be
ascribed solely, with some utilitarian philosophers, to the necessity of supplying 'men


\\ Xcii a motive for labor, but to the Creator s benevolent desire to communicate happi-
ness. If the love of pleasure, dangerous as it is, were taken from humanity, if
pleasure itself were destroyed, consequences would ensue, vastly more demoralizing
and fatal than any now proceeding from its abuse. And when we are dwelling
exclusively upon the evils of pleasure in any of its forms, it would correct some of
our extravagance to stop and meditate awhile upon its origin, its uses, and its
necessity.
The attractiveness of the the/itre, even to vice and folly, is nothing against it, until
it can be proved that they are attracted there by what'is bad and depraving. It is
not enough to show that they carry there what is bad and depraving, or that°they are
not kept away by what is bad and depraving there, hut that they are attracted by
what is bad and depraving. I suppose them to be attracted precisely by what would
attract me and you, or any innocent or well-intentioned person—by the"love of plea-
sure, spectacle, society, talent, beauty, light, architecture ! and I suppose them to be
very innocent, so far as the enjoyment of these things is concerned. That, knowing
their presence, and coarseness and unscrupulousness, the stage should cater to it, is a
monstrous evil; that folly and weakness should find those waiting for them there to
practice on its propensities; that they should carry their vices and tastes with them to
the theatre, is a dreadful and undeniable misfortune to society. But lam yet to see
flow, because the wicked and the careless like what the good 'and the careful also like,
namely, pleasure, it makes pleasure wrong; and how, because the theatre, in its cha-
racter of an amusement, attracts the vicious and depraved, it proves it to be a vicious
and depraved amusement. Have the vicious and depraved no human and universal
tastes left ? Are they not still men and women ? Are not some of their doings and
feelings such as the good and the innocent can share ? Tor my own part, I believe
the theatre has, in every age, exhibited the vices and follies of society rather than
created them ; and that it has owed its reputation for evil, mainly to the fact, that it
has been the only place in which the decency, or virtue, or propriety of society has met
the indecency, the vice, and disreputableness.
“ Now, if the theatre had produced this indecency, vice, or disreputahleness, or en-
couraged it, we should utterly condemn it; but I believe, on the contrary, notwith-
standing its imperfect administration, it has done something to correct it. Perhaps
the most innocent hours of the vicious have been those in which they were publicly
amused under the protection of society. For the innocent pleasure, which even vice
and folly get out of their existence, is the only part of their career we can look at
with any satisfaction ; all else is loss and ruin.
“ But, whatever the effect of the theatre is, or has been, having nothing essentially
wrong in its principle, and having proved itself to be, in fact, what in theory it has
already shown itself to be, the most attractive and permanent of amusements, a fixed
and indestructible fact it seems to me, that avowed moralists and Christian leaders
and guides have committed a grave and hurtful error in their mode of dealing with it.
They have made the drama and the stage answerable for all the vices and follies
which have gathered round them—a course as unjust as to make the market respon-
sible for the dogs and rats, the thieves and knaves, sure to find a harvest in the most
frequented and necessary place.
“ I know it will be replied, that patience with evils connected with what is neces-
sary does not justify patience with evils associated with what is unnecessary; that
because commerce makes a dangerous life for sailors, we are not to place the dange-
rous life for actors which the theatre produces, upon the same plea of a great social
necessity—that the vices and follies of trade, of religion, of domestic life, all of which
are cardinal, and necessary and natural interests of humanity, do not stand at all upon
the same ground, of absolute discountenance, which the vices and follies of an arti-
ficial, unproductive, and unnecessary amusement occupy. But there are various
forms of necessity, and I am not sure that the necessity of being amused is not as
fixed and fatal, a necessity as that of being fed and warmed. j t i s no t necessary in


the same sense, and yet it may be equally a necessity. We do not commonly place
leisure, laughter, love, among the necessaries of life, alongside of bread and water,
fire and shelter. Yet in a broad view of social interests and human requirements]
they would be found to rank with them, not in the same class, but under the same name
of actual necessaries, of a true, healthful and vigorous social life. That may well be
said to be necessary, which age after age, and in precise proportion to the influence of
civilisation, and even of Christianity, is found supported and sustained in the very face
of the church, and under the formal ban of religious society. That the theatre has
survived the usage it has received from the pulpit and the moralist, exhibits at least
its wonderful vitality, and when we perceive that genera] censure and discouragement
have not the slightest effect either in putting it down, or in improving it, why do we
not begin to inquire what might be done by treating it with candour and sympathy,
to save its uses and correct its abuses, to turn its fascinations to the account of human
happiness, and detach it from the artificial associations which are the real objects of
our suspicion and dislike.
“ When I consider that eight theatres are open in this city, for six nights of every
week, that they are constantly frequented, though in very different degrees, by all
classes of the community; except a portion of those technically styled professors of
religion; that the tastes, morals, manners, happiness of hundreds of thousands of
people are affected by them for good or evil, to a degree which almost renders the
theatre a rival to the church, I confess that the vastness of this metropolitan interest
is too serious an element in our whole civic character and human prospects, to make
me willing to ignore it; or, the hope of crushing it being preposterous, to allow me to
sit easy while it remains hostile to morality, or in open competition with religion. I
must, for my peace sake, see of what good it is that gives life to this sturdy tree,
which has been so long stricken with the lightnings of the church, and still survives
in greenness. I must dp what I can to direct the efforts of piety and morality against
what is vulnerable in the theatre, that their arrows may no longer be wasted upon its
adamantine portions. I must strive to obtain a truce between the theatre and the
church, the dramatic world and the religious world, long enough for candid considera-
tion of their mutual causes of jealousy and suspicion, their seated opposition and
alienation, endeavour, after all our efforts to crush the theatre have failed, to get the
public and the dramatic profession to unite with the moral and serious portions of the
community, or, what is more difficult, the moral and serious portions with them, to
reform the theatre; to reduce it to its theoretic, innocent, and beneficent office, to
make it a legitimate interest and honest charm of society, under the smile of virtue
and the protection of religion.
“You will not suppose me ignorant of the alarm or misgiving with which such a
hope and effort are sure to be received by the class with whom lam arguing. They
will say, that instead of reforming the theatre, we shall deform the church; that
religion loses its power over men the moment it shows any sympathy with their self-
indulgent tastes, and that an absolute distrust and discountenance of the theatre, a
complete and thorough separation from it, as from plague and pollution, is the only
way to escape its pernicious influence. This, I am aware, is the almost universal
method of dealing with the subject among serious persons, and it is because I distrust
the general principle which keeps the world and the church at arms’ length, that I
am emboldened to oppose it in the strongest and most marked form which this opposi-
tion or distinction has ever taken. I speak as a friend and humble disciple of the
church; a full believer in historical, organized Christianity, a sorrowful observer of
the decline of worship, of faith and of reverence in our American society. But I
think the weakness of the church as an institution, mainly due in our "day to its
neglect to claim the world as its charge, and to assume its superintendence. I utterlv
repudiate “ the touch not, taste not, handle not,” principle, as unsound in theory",,
impotent in practice. In proportion as the church has shut itself up in its peculiar
life and sanctity, it. has created vices in itself and allowed them in the world—in pro-
portion as the world has excluded, banished, or lost the church from its pleasures and


its companionship, it has degenerated in virtue and encouraged fanaticism and dog-
matism of a religious class.
“ Religion is the salt of the world: not to be hoarded in hard and polished crystals
as in its original islands, glittering upon the distant view of passing navigators, hut
rather to be gathered, and ground, and mixed with the daily food of society, giving
purity and flavor to all we feed upon. Christianity is the leaven of the world,
inedible in the lump and useless in separation, but mixed with the substance of prac-
tical life, lending wholesomeness, gusto and nutritiveness to what would otherwise be
crude, heavy and hurtful. Who shall teach, who perform this, if not the church ?
Christ kept the company of publicans and sinners, and was called “ a man gluttonous
and a wine-bibber,” and the church has only cultivated self-righteousness, fanaticism,
and false, fervor in itself—and a more unbridled vice, levity and crime in the world,
when it has understood its duty so little as to draw a visible line between the church
and the world —establish different standards of morality, for those inside and those
outside its pale; abandoning.social life and public amusement, and what is most uni-
versally attractive and dangerous, to the unaided charge of the world, and entrenching
itself in a monotonous, unlovely and selfish, seclusion of its own.
“ To this policy must we ascribe its obvious loss of power in the world. Much of the
genius, taste, literature, poetry, art of society, are already out, and fast , going out of the
church ; and philosophy, social and natural science, are now, to an alarming extent, in
open or secret alienation from it. But, thank God, the world is gaining much that the
church is losing, for the precepts and spirit of Christ, separated from ecclesiastical and
dogmatic deformities, are, under self-proving and' self-recommending forms, creeping
into the customs, affections, and policies'of the world at large.
“ If the visible church and the clergy would not see themselves left, like the Pyra-
mids in the desert, monuments of a vast population, and a vast dominion fluff once sur-
rounded them, but now, out of the line of the commerce,-tire uses, and the interests of
the world, the gigantic tombs of forgotten kings and priests, it becomes them to .take
their invited place at the head of the real concerns of society, advising partners in the
business and pleasures of the world, —guides, friends, sympathisers and helpers of the
race, in all its efforts to instruct, amuse and save itself. lam a servant, not merely of
religion, but of the church, and hope to live and die in this service —but if there is to
be a great gulf fixed between the church and the world, as between heaven and hell,
minister of Christ as I am, I would sooner take my place and part with the world .than
•with the church—with common humanity than with any elect portion of it"—with con-
fessed sinners than self-assumed saints—for 1 believe that Christ, who is the light of
the world, and not of the church alone, is more permanently a resident with the com-
mon heart, and fortunes, and feelings of mankind at large, than of any fraction of hu-
manity, however select or self-appropriative of his name and’patronage.
“If, then, the theatre were as bad as the place from whence the hapless, erring wo-
men came, who play such an. effective part in our Saviour's ministry, —and it often has
that special claim on our mingled pity and help—l should not account it Christian to
abandon the stage to itself, or to permit any self-saving scruples to make it an interest
of society which Christians are not bound to scrutinise and oversee. I desire to speak
with forbearance of the mistakes and prejudices of the pious—for I know how honest
and real many of them are. But I must be faithful to my own light and to the race.
Those who, under that strange, but utter .blindness as to their own frame of
mind, to which truly good men are liable, arc willing to separate themselves from .the
fortunes of their race —to save their own souls without much diminution of their joy,
that millions of their fellow-creatures are losing theirs—to regard the common and or-
dinary life of the world as profane, and not under the blessing of God, or the blessing
of our Lord and Saviour, may consistently join in denunciations of amusements in
• general, and the theatre in particular. But as, by God’s grace, I belong not to Gris body,
and share none of its partial views, or exclusive hopes, and prospects, I depart, in no
degree, from my principles as a minister of Christ, or a teacher of morals and religion,


in including the theory and the practice of amusements in the scheme of my pulpit in-
structions, and my social responsibilities, or in countenancing the principle, and so far
as examination may justify it, the institution of the theatre.
“ Assuming, then, that the theatre is a great and important fact—an institution so
vital and popular, that even the serious evils connected with it cannot crush it—assum-
ing it as already proved, that its foundations lie deep in the wants of human nature
and municipal society—assuming that the course hitherto pursued by the church and
the organised friends of morality in regard to it, has had little good etfect, I would now
inquire what course duty, policy, and piety prescribe, in regard to the theatre. To
answer this question we must recall and classify the evils already referred to, which
good citizens and Christians deplore, and then ask ourselves, in view of the considera-
tions already produced, how they arise, and how they may be abated. These evils fall
under four heads—
“ 1. The indentification of the theatre with frivolity, worldliness, moral indifference,
and spiritual apathy, and its general tendency to reproduce them.
“2. Its direct or covert association with, and encouragement of, intemperance and
licentiousness.
“ 3 The immorality of plays, either in their general spirit and drift, or in their de-
tails, with the use of manners, costumes, language, insinuation, intentionally shocking
to modesty and destructive of reverence.
“4. The bad effect of theatrical life upon actors and actresses —in a word, the un-
worthy personal character of the dramatic profession.
“ These evils, as we have seen, have been immense, and are still confessedly great.
They have some of them been much greater than they are, and little thanks are due to
the church, or the custodians of public morals, that they have been reduced. The first
is, perhaps, nearly as great as ever—the second has decidedly lessened—the third has
recently increased —the fourth has hopefully diminished. From what does these evils
mainly arise ? Who is resposible for them ? and who can abate them ?
“I believe from my very soul, and to what other conclusion has the whole evidence
tended, that the church, and so-called gravity and moral worth of society, are really
though indirectly and unintentionally ; the authors and propagators of the malignant
disorders and perilous influences of the theatres, leaving both the dramatic profession
and the public at large comparatively blameless, and answerable only for its more
venal sins.
“The Catholic Church, in mediaeval times, in the prosecution of its selfish design to
control the human mind, had resuscitated the heathen drama—which in former ages
had refined and elevated the morals of Greece and Rome—in the shape of its own
odious mysteries and moralities. The inherent instincts of human nature speedily
reverted to the ancient standard, and gave birth to secular performance, more genially
and truly depicting the hopes and passions of our race. Jealous of such a rival, its
competitor, both in revenue and popular influence—it forthwith excommunicated
actors, and denied them Christian burial. This commenced that wicked, selfish, and
narrow policy which, adopted and reinforced by Puritan prejudices, was continued and
strengthened by the Protestant church, and now so largely possesses the serious class,
that the theatre, the most popular and inevitable of public amusements, has been
mainly abandoned to the unblessed and reckless care of those willing to defy both
church and morality. What is to be expected of a community from which good men
are taught to flee —of an institution avowedly made over to the devil and his children ?
What could the theatre be expected to become, in itself, its influence, its actors, under
such a curse, but barren of figs, and prolific only in thorns and briars ?
“In sober truth, it redounds to the credit of human nature, and to the essential
purity of art, to the wholesomeness of public amusements, and the self-elevating char-
acter of the theatre, that under this terrible reputation and moral eclipse—desertion
by the good and cherishing by the evil—the drama has maintained a decency, exerted
an influence, and produced a class not indictable by the ordinary standards of society,
but only by the special class who seek to maintain a dogmatic standard. The vices


of the theatre have uniformly been those of the time—no more no worse. The
theatre has no serious vices of its own, like trade, with its fraud and perjury
like the church, with hypocrisy and arrogance. The minor of bad times, it has
reflected the vices that passed before it, not those it originated. Drunkenness has
carried its victims, licentiousness its votaries into its precincts. Profanity and coarse-
ness from the pit and boxes have required profanity and coarseness from the stage,
while vulgarity and ignorance have demanded rant and fustian. What is the theatie
that we should expect it to be wise and moral, and pure and reverential, to an
audience that, by the theory of the class I address, cares little for these qualities, and
when it has no character to lose by any pandering jt may practise to the degraded
tastes of the rabble or reckless? Were the clin ch itself frequented only by the
ignorant and the wicked, how long do you imagine the pastors would be pure and
the doctrine sound ? No interest, no class, can bear the withdrawal of the virtuous
portion of society. The theatre has borne it quite as well as the church would, as
the state of religion in Mexico or in France, or even in portions of Protestant
Germany might testify.
“The levity, excess, association with vice, and general lack of moderation in the
theatre, —its opposition to, or defiance of religion—its lax morals and bad taste, be
they more or less, are due, mainly, in ray judgment, to the unhappy separation
between the church and the world—the guides and examples in morals and virtue,
and the public at large ; and to the special emphasis which this separation has had in
the case of the theatre. What are we to look for, in general, when the young and
the old no longer mingle in the same society, when the g ave and the gav keep them-
selves systematically apart, and society is divided into those who partake and enjoy
amusement, and those who abstain from and d. cry it. Will it not necessarily occur,
that one class will ruin itself by excess in pleasure, while the other is seriously injured
and narrowed by the lack of them ? Is it not clear, D American society, that, the gay
are too gay, the grave too grave, the young too flighty, the old too sad ; that places
of public amusement are too exclusively, and to the great injury of their habitual
frequenters, attended by a special class, when the intermingling of the class who now
utterly shun them would at once act with a twofold charm, namely, to make general
society, home, and intercourse with the sober, less uninteresting and repulsive, and
the p'aces of amusement not so exclusively attractive, by being adapted to higher,
purer, and less supetficial tastes? In addition to its other offices, the theatre is now
a sort of blind protest against the sad seriousness of trade, and the hard gravity of
piety. It says, there is some fun, frolic, nonsense, beauty, leisure, still left in the
world. When domestic life and the religious life, shall both learn how to invest them-
selves with the charms of art, and the mild and pleasing graces of sympathy, we may
anticipate some diminution of the excessive taste which the young people of our day
have for the theatre. But until the more sober citizens and our religious people allow
themselves some generous participation in the pleasures and amusements of the world,
they will neither know what art is, nor what its powers and fascinations are. Brought
up on a bard diet of duty, they have learned to live in a corner of their wide and com-
plex nature, and cannot understand this outbreak of their children into the fields of
romance, passion, and aesthetics. It is an insurrection of Nature for her rights, and an
insurrection which will ripen into a revolution. It becomes us, by timely concession,
to see that something better than anarchy follows.
“ 1 charge, then, the vices and follies of the theatre, as of our other amusements,
and of our general society, to the withdrawal, the self-separation of the moral and re-
ligious portion of the community, as a class, from the pleasure-loving resorts of the
people. 1 believe that all the specified classes of evils connected with the theatre,
would disappear to as great an extent as they ever disappear, even in respectable so-
ciety, if, after having recognised the essential innocency and necessity of public amuse-
ments in general, and of the stage in particular, the sober and virtuous people of this
and every city would go to the theatres, in moderation. This would at once take the


ban off this diversion as a thing essentially and hopelessly wrong—an enormous injury
to actors, and also to the public, whom it drives to their pleasures, in defiance of
what they themselves suppose to be right. Next, their presence there would be the
only possible and effective censorship, in a country like ours, securing the selection of
plays of a harmless and spotless character, and their performance in a manner decor-
ous and unblameable. Further, the same influence would exclude—for it has partially
done it already—drinking places and improper characters, as such, from the play-
house, and finally, their countenance, requirement, and support, would give actors and
actresses the strength and courage they so much need, to rise above the perils of their
laborious and exciting vocation, and to take their place with other respected and
respectable callings, upon the common platform of moral and Christian amenableness.
I'hese suggestions are not speculations. They are based upon what is already
begun and now going on. The existence of a place like Niblo's Garden—and honor-
able mention should never fail to be made of that pioneer in theatrical reform in this
community—William Niblo, which sober people of the less tightly laced religious
sects cou.d attend, without absolute loss of standing, has worked no small revolution
in the external decency of theatrical manners and surroundings in this city and
Country. That disgusting and odious gallery, once allotted to vice—formerly deemed
inseparable from the theatre, —has been almost universally abandoned —while the bar
has at least retired from public sight, and is, we trust, finally to retire from secret
existence. It is encouraging to learn, that even now, the saloon for confectionery
and ices is more profitable, in some theatres, than the drinking shop; and that where
a good orchestra exists, comparatively lew leave their seats for any other refresh-
ments.
“ Is it not patent, too, that every theatre purifies itself to meet the precise taste for
purity which it meets in its patrons? As I learn from others, for 1 have very small
personal experience, you might graduate the approaches to absolute spotlessness of
words and motions, from a very remote to a quiet satisfactory, or at any rate en-
couraging nearness to the standard of true morality, by observing the character and
class ot the audiences who support the various theatres of New York. lam assured
by Christian gentlemen of Boston that the principal tbeat-e in that city is as free from
a reproach of impurity or irreverence as the ordinary circle of good society, And
whit but the partial relaxation of the code which has excluded moral worth and
sobriety from the theatre, has effected this partial reform? Does not progress lie only
in this direction ? And it is because of the abundant proof, from all quarters, that
progress is making, that I have been encouraged and compelled to become a labourer
in this field. But even now it is impossible to read the accounts of the stage, the
plots ot the plays, without perceiving how urgently the theatre stands in need of a
graver censorship—of the fear and of the support of a wiser, more thoughtful, and
more solid portion of the people. Ido not suppose, even now, that the theatre,
in the character of its plays, is at all worse than much of the literature which finds its
way, unreproved into our parlours and bed-rooms, and we may thank the indulgence
of a sickly appetite for French novels, for the popularity of the prurient, morbid, and
undermining drama of the French school, which, because it is decent in words, tbe
innocent do not perceive ta be indecent in conception, and debauching in its main
dnfe. It needs a Christian intelligence, a firm, sure, moral instinct, to be able to
recognise and fitly characterise much of the insidious poison and fascinating corrup-
tion of the stage. But I truly believe, that a dozen men of unquestionable purity,
largeness and elevation of tone, could at a single representation, make it impossible
for such plays as the late alarmingly popular “ Camille,” with others of its class, to
be reheard. It is by no means certain that their authors are impure, or intend wrong,
but they write on wrong and mischievous theories; and their works are performed on
wrong and mischievous theories. Entire and unanimous reprobation must be fixed
upon this whole school of plays, and the great genius which has helped to elevate


them by her surpassing talent, must be kindly entreated and encouraged to seek a
nobler fame in a better and more permanent field of action.
•‘Thousands are panoplied in innocence, and escape the wrong from such plays;
but the last restraints which held others on the brink of ruin, are loosened, and they
follow the fascination into the pit of destruction, Ought not the clergy, the fathers,
the professors, the learned, the wise, and responsible men of this community to be lend-
ing their restraining and chastening presence, their supervision, and judgment, to
elevate and improve a place of resort which their children, their pnpi's, their com-
panions, their parishioners will at any rate attend ? I hesitate not clearly to say, they
ought —even at the expense of being shocked or disgusted—clearly they ought, from
duty alone. But take away superstition and fear of reproach, they would not reqmie
to go from duty alone. They would enjoy the relaxation which their psescnce puri-
fied—they would moderate by sharing a taste which is made excessive by the exclu-
siveness in which it is indulged—and the inflammatory passions to which it appeals.
Let great works, sterling comedy or solemn tragedy, hold the stage, and the deeper
emotons, satisfied to the full, would not covet this tickling of the sentimental nature,
which makes one bad play, only create a morbid appetite for another, and which carries
so many to most harmful excess. On every account, then, the monitors and guiles of
the people should share their amusements, when not sinful in themselves. Their vices
they may not share nor partake—their tastes and pleasures they may and ought. You
need not tell me that the silent remonstrance, the settled reproof, which the absence of
the religious class from its scene give to the levity and immorality? of the theatre, are
its most effectual and only Christian checks. I reply, that these have proved utterly
ineffectual —nay, have reacted upon the church and public morals—that the theatre is
none the better, and the church much the worse for this frown. It affects only the lace
that wears it. Besides, positive influence is a thousand times more powerful than
negative. One good man going to the theatre, does it more good than one hundred
good men who stay away can do it. I believe it is Mrs. Mowatt who states, in her
“ Becollections of the Stage,” that she has known the sudden discovery, by the manage-
ment, of the presence of a single person of eminent and virtuous character, in the audi-
ence, chasten and qualify the whole performance; silencing ribaldry, repressing inuendo,
and putting the whole company on their good behaviour; and the managers of theatres
in New York directly confirm the fact, as proved by their own experience. What
might not the expected and certain presence of a small proportion of known and posi-
tive friends of purity, reverence, and decency in the theatre, do to change what is ob-
jectionable in the whole character of plays and players, the spirit and temper of the
theatre ?
“ I come now, finally, to the consideration of the influence of the theatre on the
dramatic profession itself, which was, in my original intention, the main purpose of my
address. You will excuse me, ladies and gentlemen of the theatre, for having so long
talked over your heads, to the religious community, but it has really been in your be-
half and service, and I promise to confine myself wholly in what remains, to your
immediate case.
“ It is unquestionably true, that the exclusion of the theatre from the sympathies of
a large and commanding portion of society, reprobating it as immoral and dangerous,
has exerted a most unhappy and injurious influence upon the dramatic profession.
Make any calling disreputable, pronounce and maintain it to be, under ordinary circum-
stances, a disqualification for general society—hold it in constant and steady associa-
tion with all the vices of the senses—and you have done all you can to degrade its
tone, and to render it really dangerous and worthy of suspicion. If all surgeons were
compelled to be barbers, and were held in the repute of barbers, you can see what the
probable state of that profession would be. Were the English clergy of the lower
grades still everywhere put below the salt, and ranked among the upper servants of
great houses, as Macaulay shows us they were, even in the time of James 11., they


would continue the servile and sensual body they then were. Were butchers still
made incapable of serving on juries, when life was at stake, because of the alleged
cruelty of their trade and nature, they would probably justify their character for
ferocity, were it only in scorn of the silly injustice of the law. While other pro-
fessions or callings once and long regarded with suspicion, have risen above public
odium, yours, members of the Dramatic Profession, has suffered the most obstinate
and cruel reprobation. Almost every inducement which society could offer to lead
discreet, orderly, and virtuous lives, has been taken away from players. Not only the
religious but the irreligious world, have held them to be a class of persons who, to
have adopted their calling, must be lost to self-respect—and to pursue it, must abandon
all pretension to virtue. Outcasts from the church, social pariahs—the very Jews and
Gipsies of Christian civilization —what could sustain any class at the average height of
human worth, under disabilities so extraordinary and degrading? When transcendent
genius and the rarest social gifts have enabled a few to climb the barrier which has ex-
cluded their class from society, the very grounds of their reception have added nothing
to the respectability of their general body, and offered no inducement to the moral
efforts of the rest. Not worth but beauty and genius have accomplished the victory,
and these are neither moral nor voluntary. Indeed, the exceptional manner in which
the dramatic profession has been treated—the capricious and arbitrary mode in which
individuals who could bring brilliancy, beauty, or wit, into general society, have been
lilted over the fence under pretended respect for their worth, but really of selfish desire
for their company —the occasional intermarriage of an actress with a nobleman —the
adoption and petting of favorites —all this generosity to a few, at the expense of ins-
tice to all, has added to the injury and to the perils of the of the profession. What
your profession needs and claims is, to he recognised as a legitimate and honest calling, of
Christian civilisation —not inherently or essentially wrong—not on any separate or arbi-
trary footing—one among the other respectable and responsible vocations, in which every
member is to stand or fall on his own individual merits, his character to be scanned and
scrutinised as much as other men's, and no more ; and his worth and claims as a character
distinguished from his worth and claims as an actor—precisely as it is in every profession
beside. A good man is not always a good lawyer, nor a good lawyer a good man. A good
man is not always good actor, nor a good actor a good man.
‘'l presume that you would not deny that yours was a dangerous profession —dan-
gerous as I shall presently show, to the moral nature—and you, of course, do not ex-
pect, and have no right to expect, that any of the moral scars and stains which this
perilous trade has actually put upon you, the world shall overlook. If you claim, as
in proper respect you must claim, the ordinary protection of Christian society—the re-
establishment of your social position on the same level with other crafts —you do at
the same time recognise your amenableness to the moral obligations an 1 judgments
which they consent to, or are compelled to be tried by. Unhappily, as unjustly,
your faults and follies, your vices and vanities are not now' judged with the same se-
verity as those of other men and women, for the degrading reason, that you are con-
sidered to have abandoned the moral ground of life, in the very adoption of your calling.
If an actor or actress happens, from natural rectitude, purity, and force; or,
far better, from settled principle, to be a spotless character, it is spoken of in a tone of
surprise, which is more insulting and injurious to the profession, than if it were not
recognised at all. What I demand for you, in the name of Christian brotherhood,
and of universal morality, is a complete restoration to the common rights and the
common protection of society. Your calling is a lawful calling lawful, in that it is
the exercise of providential gifts and talents for the gratification and well-being of so-
ciety, itself a divine order—lawful, in that its highest and best fulfilment involves
necessarily not the least infringement of one of God s laws, or Christ s precepts
lawful, in that it is recognised by the law of the land. Mr only so, it is an intellec-
tual and artistic calling—demanding a somewhat rare organisation—physical and mental


■—for Us pursuit, and requiring, for high success, a degree of general information, culture,
and self discipline, which should elevate it to the ranh of the liberal professions. It is
your duty, therefore, to claim, and our duty to concede to you, precisely the same hind of
justice and charity, the same hind of severity and censure, which the other honorable
pursuits of life are visited with—You have a duty and a right to demand that your
private characters shall still be held as sacred as those of other public persons—your virtue
and discretion as readily admitted—your weahness as truly deplored, and your guilt as
resolutely punished. The license of the world—which would throw the scarf of its
own seif-indulgeuce over the ministers to its pleasure, in place of the mantle of
Christian charity, can give you only a degrading cover. There is poison in the veil,
it is Medea’s gift to Creusa. .NT,! awav with the forbearance of the world to actors
and actresses! Away with its glosses for their vices, its hypocritical ignoring of their
wickedness ; its betraying tenderness towards the sins of its favorites ; and welcome
back the even-handed justice, the discriminating judgment, the fair, righteous verdict,
due to all, on the single merit of the character—tried in the uniform scales of
Christian and social morality
41 I have spoken of your life as a peculiarly perilous one—perilous to the moral
nature —and before I explain particularly why it is so, let me say, that the post of
moral danger may be the post of moral honor. It by no means follows, that because
a line of life is hazardous to virtue, it is a life forbidden to a moral being. There
may be reasons for adopting it which are imperative such as a strong constitutional
proclivity, making any other course exceedingly difficult—an early education, fitting
for nothing else—a powerful combination of providential circumstances, shooting up
to that path—or a mental will, which had shaped that cour-e before responsibility
began. If the theatre he a social necessity, the profession of the actor is a lawful
om—and its moral perils, while they should make it a calling slowly and reluctantly
ad >ptod by those who have a choice, are not such as to excuse any want of virtue,
probity, or the strictest decorum in any of its professors. If they were such, the
calling would be self-condemned. Perils and temptations are not of tne nature of
compulsive forces—and we are, none of us, having adopted a morally perilous voca-
tion, to claim on that account any larger charity than other men of other callings—
only we are to put forth a greater and more constant effort to counteract these dan-
gers. The life of a player is a morally perilous life, chiefly because it is a public
life —and public life in every lorra is trying to the character. The actor shares with
the politician, the clergyman, the dangers of a career in which he is continually
appealing to masses—where he is an object of interest to masses —where strong
temptations exist, to substitute immediate reputation for self-respect —and to make
fine words and skilful manoeuvres do the work of sound principles and patient per-
formance of duty. Public life, in all its forms, is surrounded with flatterers and
fawners, and tempted to the bargain and exchange of its opportunities for the oppor-
tune sof others. All men who live by the tongue, whether it he in the utterance of
their own thoughts or those of others, whose reputation and livelihood are in the ear
of the public, are greatly exposed men, and it would be a long step in self-knowledge
if the members <T the clerical profession recognised the fact, that the seriousness of
their subject does less than they think to save them from the dangers which
essentially belong to the talking vocations. The error of mistaking the glow of
composition for the flame of faith, or the pleasure of uttering generous sentiments for
the honour of holding them, or natural sympathy with eloquent passions for the
courage and resolution of a good life—this is a danger which rostrum, pulpit, and
stage may equally snare—and the consciousness of which, I confess, increases my
sense of fraternity with your calling. And yet it remains solemnly true, that your
profession is a dangerous profession, however lawful and necessary it may be, and
sharing, in some respects, its perils with others. It is peculiarly open to vanity,
levity, and sensuality—more dangerous than it need bo, on account of the present


state of public opinion—but necessarily dangerous in any state of public sentiraen.
Aiming to please, and finding its chief incentive in the applause it nightly excites,
peculiarly exposed to jealousy, required to affect sentiments, and personate charac-
ters not its own, usually in contact only with its own class, feeling deeply the need
of animal spirits and physical energies, most conveniently supplied by artificial
siimu ants, wot king chit fly in the night, vascillating between long seasons of leisure
and short periods of excessive labour—at the mercy of a capricious public—here
very kind, and there very cruel—overpaid in its favorites, and underpaid in all who
are not—splendid for its stars, but dull for its stocks—what elements are wanting to
make your professh n one of very singular moral trial ? It must not, however, he
forgotten, that it has its own advantages. It is not addicted to cupidity, nor wedded
to mean and sordid habits. It does not breed hardness of heart, and hypo risy of
conduct. It is free from cant, and singularly exempt from the vices calling for the
police or the prison. It should b.' better known than it is, that actors (as a class)
are far from being men of the world, in the bad sense of that phrase —they are
usually persons of more simplicity, credulity, and generosity, than of knowingness,
design, and self-seeking. Like sailors, more than any other people, their faults
spring from the genial, child-like and affectionate side of their nature, and are rather
faults of weakness than of wickedness. Vt ho hut an unworldly actor could allow his
estate to be wasted by his trustees, as the English papers repoit 'ir William Don’s
to have been ? In these days when society is ridden ny the nightmare of thrift, and
ungodly greed of gain, forgiving any vices that are economical and conducive to the
public wealth, it is not easy to estimate all the moral advantages which the lovers of
poe ry and art, and seivants of the drama, derive from their unproductive pursuits,
and their essentially self-sacrificing callings. Hut, with these allowances all made,
it still becomes actors and actresses to understand and consider the moral perils of
their ciaft, and to recognise the deep need they have of all the safeguards which a
cultivated conscience and a religious faith can throw about them. If any class should
he scrupulous observers of the laws of temperance and purity, students of sober
literature, keepers at home, watchful and observant ol domestic ties, practisers of
great plainness of costume, in their private walks, quiet in manners, and careful
seekers of friendship and intercourse with other classes than their own, it is yours.
Emphatically, if any class should he church-goers, it is yours. 1 know you owe the
visible church little thanks, but the gospel and public worship do not belong to its
admiuist ators, and God am Christ have nut wronged, and will not wrong you. Do
not sacrifice your duty to your Maker, your Saviour, and your souls, to your iudig-
nation at priests and parsons.
*• 1 cannot conclude w ithout a very serious word, addressed to managers of theatres
here and elsewhere. You l ave a large class of persons connected with the dramatic
profession, under your control and influence—besides your regular and permanent
companies, the various members of choruses, ballets, spectacles, and middlings of
every description. I understand that your powers are necessarily quite despotic
that you choose the plays that are performed, ass gn the parts, and have the pros-
perity of individual actors and attaches very much in your own hands. 1 can hardlv
conceive a position of more responsibility than yours, or one in which more of good
and evil can be done. First in regard to the character of the plays and entertain-
ments you furnish, you will hardly rise at once above the public taste, or be wiser or
better than the community that supports you. But you will certainly find it for your
interest in the long run, to exclude every kind of play and entertainment from your
list from which a virtuous heart must recoil, or at which an innocent cheek must
blush. Be sure you gain nothing by the grossness or immorality of the plays you
present. People will go to see great talent, and great dramatic triumphs, in spite of
the indecency or viciousness of the plots and incidents, but they would go a great
deal more to see genius and power united with purity and truth, f take no narrow,


squeamish view of the range of subjects proper for the stage, but plays which make
light of moral distinctions, excuse vice, reward crime, or ridicule religion, are essen-
tially mischievous, and cannot be defended anywhere. If managers wish to place
themselves on the same catalogue with pimps, they have only to continue to quote
the public taste as an apology for producing immoral and depraving plays. All
honour is due to those among them who strive to produce the legitimate drama, and
I know and believe that some managers feel a laudable and artistic loyalty to their
profession, and make sacrifices to the exactions of taste, propriety, and purity, which
the public do not sufficiently appreciate. I entreat you to consider what an enormous
influence you possess, for good or evil, and not to refuse to co-operate with a rising-
class of moral and serious persons, who are aiming to reform and redeem the sta^e.
But, great as your responsibilities are to the public, I know not that they are not
greater to the persons you employ. If you are tyrannical in temper, loose in morals,
partial in administration, unprincipled in pecuniary transactions, I know no class of
men that can be greater oppressors, or greater depravers, than the managers of
theatres. Your power is necessarily great, your opportunities boundless, yourexam-
ple irresistible. _ You have the living of young women at your mercy, the reputation
of young actors in youi \ou can advance your favorites, and clog your objects
of dislike—reward the pliable, and punish the well-principled. You °can establish
rules of strictest decency and justice in your domain, or allow folly, riot, and vice to
reign there. You can act as the aiders and abettors of wealthy sinners outside,
making your theatres hot,beds of licentiousness and vice, or yon mav convert them to
schools of artistic taste and moral culture, !>ince my interest in this subject has been
known, I have been made the depository of complaints and supplications which I will
not repeat, because lam unwilling to believe. Moreover, I have reason to hope that
decided moral improvement in the internal management of theatres is now in pro-
gress. and one most honorable to those who encourage it. I certainly make no
specific charges against your important order, here, or elsewhere. But knowing
your peculiar opportunities and experiences—with the character of your whole pro-
fession in your keeping—l feel bound to warn you of the absolute necessity of rising
above every temptation. &
“And so, gentlemen of the American Dramatic Fund Society, I conclude my lono-
address, wishing that I had had time to make it shorter, and 'less unworthy of the
occasion. A heaven-supported determination to do an act of justice and public duty
could alone have overcome my reluctance to encounter either favorable or unfavorable
publicity. The mere rumour of this address has already let loose the never too
charitable tongue of the religions press, in censure and disparagement, whde my
course has been intelligently approved by the secular papers. l" trust neither will
waste much time in personal blame or praise of me, but will rather devote themselves
to an honest discussion of the fundaraeiual principles involved in this subject. If it
cannot be understood bow a minister of Christ can feel an honest love for art, and
pleasure, and the amusements of the people, much less a brotherly sympathy’with
actors, as a class, I shall not wonder nor complain. The question of motives and the
imputation of worldliness and levity, are expected quite as a matter of course. But
firm in the love and confidence of a well-tried, intelligent, and sober constituency {
can surely afford to wait for justice. 3%
“ In the ra P id unfolding 0 f the great drama of American civilisation, its principal
scene this capital city, the part has fallen to me to show the relation of public amuse
ments to public morality, and to claim for the stage a new and better position in
society. r
“ In tte ver 7 depths of my conscience, I have been impelled to this effort. It has
been honestly made, im the fear of God, and in view of judgment to come That
some blessing to your profession, the drama, our country, and mankind, may follow
>t, can only be my humble hope and prayer.” J




