

Rewaious pans.
6o» h
CONGREGATIONAL CONFERENCE.
AN ADDRESS,
DELIVERED BEFORE
THE CONFERENCE
CONGREGATIONAL MINISTERS AND DELEGATES,
ASSEMBLED, FROM THE FOUR COLONIES OP
NEW SOUTH WALES, VICTORIA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND TASMANIA,
IN SYDNEY,
During the Week commencing February 15th, 1857,
ITS CHAIRMAN,
THE REV. F. MILLER,
OP HOBARTON.
WITH THE CONFERENCE MINUTES
OF EACH DAY’S PROCEEDINGS.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLBANK,
11, BRIDGE STREET.




F l2.S‘Cj'a
ADDRESS.
Bear Brethren and Friends—
Few who were present at the Conference held ill
Melbourne two years since, can fail to remember the admi*
Table and elaborate Address of the Chairman on that
occasion. It illustrated, ably and happily, the topic
assigned to him—“ Congregationalism in the Colonies.”
Your Chairman, on this occasion, has not been requested
to address you on any prescribed topic. It has, however,
occurred to him, that the position which his brethren have
kindly called him to occupy, may have some relation to the
fact, that he entered on Colonial Work more than twenty-six
years since; and that, at that period, there was no other
Congregational Minister, labouring as such, in Australia, —
Under these circumstances, some acquaintance is possessed
with the earliest developments of Congregationalism in these
Colonies. It may therefore be permitted, on this occasion,
to supply some of the reminiscences thus suggested, as well
to present such additional notices of the past, as have been
hastily gleaned from other sources.
An application for an Independent MinisteT, to labour
in Van Dieman’s Land, emanated from Mr. Hopkins in 1828,
and was addressed to the London Missionary Society i the
Directors declined to respond to it, but, they transmitted it
to Highbury College, where it was brought under the notice
of the Students. One of their number entered on the service,
and was set apart to the exercise of the Ministry, in Van
Dieman’s Land, at St. Thomas'’ Square Chapel, Hackney, ill
April, 1830. The Rev. Dr. Halley delivered the Intro-
ductory Discourse, exhibiting the spiritual wants of the field
of labour in view, and the importance of supplying them,


Might not Dr. Halley be induced to permit the publication
of that Discourse in these Colonies now? It would be
interesting and cheering, after the lapse of so many years, to
review the sentiments and pleadings of one, who advocated
the claims of these far-off settlements, when but few were
prepared to recognise them; and when, to the great body of
Christians in England, Tasmania was a land unknown. In
the Charge, delivered by the Rev. Dr. Border, this general
ignorance was suggestive of some impressive admonitions,
which are worthy of quotation.
“You, my dear Brother, if a guardian Providence permit, are to settle in a
far distant land, but little known to us, you will naturally feel interested in
enquiring into its peculiarities of soil and climate, and productions. This
curiosity will not need to be altogether repressed, but it will need to be restrained
within the limits of due subordination. It is important to keep in mind that you
are not to be ambitious of the reputation of a naturalist, or a botanist, or a
mineralogist, any more than you are to be ambitious of the gains of an
agriculturalist, or a merchant. You go out with higher aims, you are to be
occupied in nobler pursuits, your concern is not with the soil or its productions,
but, with its living and dying population, you go to save souls from death—
souls in danger of the wrath to come.”
The young man to whom this charge was addressed,
entered on his solitary work as the first Congregational
Minister in these Colonies, in September, 1830. The first
Independent Chapel in Tasmania was opened in April,
1832. In that year, another labourer (the Rev. Charles
Price) entered on the Colonial field. It would not be
practicable to speak particularly of all who subsequently
exercised their ministry in Tasmania. It may, however, be
named, that some honoured brethren, who are now occupied
elsewhere, commenced Colonial service in that island; —the
Rev. J. Beazley, in 1836, and the Rev. Messrs. West and
Morison, in 1838. There are, at present, in Tasmania,
eleven Ministers and Missionary Agents, including two, who
render occasional aid.
We proceed to refer to the origin and establishment of
Congregationalism in New South Wales. The work in
Sydney is traceable, under God, to a few Christian men,


who banded together for this purpose, two of whom* happily
remain here to this day. A statement of their views and
objects was published in 1828; from which it appears, that
the leaders in this enterprise, were, Mr. J. Hayward,
Mr. A. Foss, Mr. E. Hunt, and Mr, R. Bourne. They
secured the co-operation, as Treasurer and Acting Secretary,
of two gentlemen not connected with their denomination.
The first Independent Chapel in Australia, was that
originally erected in Pitt-street, Sydney. It was commenced
in 1830, and was completed in due course; but, it remained
unoccupied a considerable period. Application had been
made to the Rev. Drs. Henderson and Campbell to select a
Minister, but as it was long unproductive of the desired
result, attention was directed to the Rev. C. Price, who had
recently arrived in Van Diemen’s Land, and commenced his
Ministry at Launceston. He was invited to remove to
Sydney, and acceded to the call; and by him the Chapel in
Pitt-street was opened in February, 1833. But another
Ministry was, after a short time, exercised there, in conse-
quence of the arrival of the Rev. W. Jarrett, in pursuance
of the primary application to Drs. Henderson and Campbell.
Mr. Price’s Ministerial services were then transferred to
Port Stephens, in connexion with the Settlements of the
Australian Agricultural Company. On the appointment of
an Episcopal Chaplain in that locality, early in 1836, Mr.
Price returned to his original sphere of labour in Laun-
ceston.
In 1834, the Pastor of the only Congregational Church
then in Van Dieman’s Land, was contrained, by ill health, to
leave his flock without any Ministerial supply, and, for the
first time, visited Sydney. He conferred specially with the
Pastor of the only Congregational Church then in New
South Wales, on the urgent need of Ministerial help in these
Colonies, and agreed with him to address the Congregational
Union of England and Wales, on the subject. The com-
munications thus transmitted were published in the Con-
* Mr. A. Foss and Mr. E. Hunt.


gregational- Magazine; and, in connexion with the pressing
representations of Drs. Reed and Matheson, concerning
Canada, and of otherffinaaUnad some influence in inducing
the formation of the Colonial Missionary Society, in London.
One, who pleaded with special urgency for a field from which
he anticipated an early removal, was, in after years, reminded
by an officer of the Congregational Union, of the happy residt
to which his sickness had contributed, and of the deep
thankfulness which was due to Him, who had graciously
rendered the season of trial subservient to His cause. *
The Society thus established, afterwards rendered impor-
tant service to New South Wales, by the selection of the
Rev. Dr. Ross, for the vacant Church at Pitt-street, as well
as by the supply of other Ministerial aid since that time. Of
the advantages realized under the Ministry of Dr. Ross,
evidence was afforded by the erection of a new and commodious
House of Prayer, in the opening services of which I had the
privilege of taking part in January, 1846.
An afflictive visitation brought to a close the valued
ministry exercised here. While sympathising with the
retired Pastor, we greet the “brother beloved, 11 who has
succeeded him, and rejoice that he is with us on this
occasion.
It is cheering to observe that several other brethren are
occupied in this Colony, For many years there was but one
Congregational Minister settled in New South Wales; but
measures for Church extension have been vigorously prose-
cuted and liberally sustained, so that there are now twelve
Congregational Ministers engaged in this field of labour.
Of South Australia, some brief notices may be supplied.
* As another illustration, it may be named * that the renewed illness of
their Pastor, after returning from Sydney, led the Congregational Church,
in Hobart Town, to send to England an appeal for help, which, through the
kindness of Mr. Thomas Wilson, resulted in the arrival (in August, 1835), of
the Rev. J. Nisbet, who subsequently became the Pastor of a second Church
in Hobart Town; that Church is now under the charge of the Rev. George
Clarke; Mr. Nisbet having been laid aside from stated service by impaired
health.


There the advantage of an early occupancy of the ground was
happily secured. Soon after the establishment of the
Colony, the Rev T. Q. Stowe entered on his work. He was
sent forth by the Colonial Missionary Society, and arrived at
Adelaide, in October 1837. He and his family endured all
the inconveniences incident to early settlement, in an un-
formed town; while his first chapel was erected, (as he
himself has expressed it,) in twenty minutes. It consisted of
a rude Tent. This was subsequently exchanged for a Shed,
but eventually a commodious place of Worship was erected,
and was opened in November, 1840.
The progress of Congregationalism, in South Australia,
and the force and effect with which testimony has been borne
against state grants, in aid of religion, are very encouraging.
There are now twenty Congregational Ministers in that
Colony, not including some who are laid aside from their
work. We must deeply lament that Mr. Stowe belongs to
the latter class, and earnestly desire that his hope of again
rendering some service to the cause of Christ, in South
Australia, may be speedily realized. He intimates that the
people lately under his charge are “ most comfortably suited
with a Pastor, in the Rev. Mr. Evan, a truly able and
estimable man.”
The flourishing Colony of Victoria, (known originally as
the Port Phillip settlement), was first supplied with a Con-
gregational Ministry through the instrumentality of Mr.
Hopkins. At an early period, the Rev. W. Waterfield, was
thus introduced into that sphere of labour. He commenced
his Ministry in Melbourne, in May, 1838, when the popula-
tion was about seven or eight hundred. The Independent
Chapel, (the foundation stone of which was laid by Mr.
Hopkins, in September, 1839,) was the first House of Prayer,
of a permanent character, completed in Melbourne.
In 1843, Mr. Waterfield removed to Van Diemen’s
Land; and was succeeded, after an interval, by the Rev.
A. Morison, At that period, Mr. Hopkins was again in
Melbourne, and in conjunction with another visitor from
Hobart Town, promoted the formation of a Society, for


extending and sustaining Ministerial Agency at Port Phillip.
An appeal for such agency was presented to the Colonial
Missionary Society in London, but, at that season, without
success. Had there been a due response, important positions
might have been occupied in early days. It is well that
attention was eventually awakened, especially by the dis-
covery of Gold; and that, from the Colonial Missionary
Society, and from other sources, valuable aid has been deri-
ved. There are now eighteen Churches and fifteen Ministers
of our denomination in Victoria: but what are these among
its ever-growing population ?
To Congregationalism in Western Australia, but scanty
reference can be made. It was through the instrumentality
of a resident at Perth, Mr. Henry Triggs, that public
worship was established about twelve years since, and an
Independent Chapel subsequently built. Eventually the
Colonial Missionary Society appointed the Rev. J. Leonard
to labour in this sphere. Another Minister, the Rev. J,
Johnston, was afterwards sent to Freemantle, where there is
also a Chapel. Both these brethren have to struggle against
great difficulties ; and much self-denying toil will be required
to secure more cheering results than have hitherto been
realized.
The sketches we are now furnishing Avould scarcely be
complete without some reference to Congregationalism in
New Zealand. Personal reminiscences may here again
be supplied. In December, 1848, impaired health demanded
renewed journeyings; and I was thus led to visit, first
Auckland and then Wellington. In the former town, a
welcome was accorded by Mr. John Rout, who, eighteen
years before (being then resident in London) had taken an
active part in securing the first Minister for Tasmania, and
in arranging for his passage. At the time of this visit, there
was no Congregational Minister in Auckland; but Mr.
Rout and other friends were advised to look to Sydney for
help. After some time, the Rev. J. Macdonald, on retiring
from the Missionary work in Samoa, was encouraged to
settle in Auckland, Ignorant of this movement, the Colonial


Missionary Society sent the Rev. T. Hamer to the same
place; so that there are now two Congregational Ministers
in that town.
In Wellington, Congregationalism was first developed
under the following circumstances: Mr. Woodward, a member
of a Church, in London, emigrated to New Zealand; and,
on the voyage, conducted service on board. Although engaged
in secular employment, he was solicited, especially by some
of his fellow-passengers, to continue his ministrations on
shore. He complied with their request, and hence the forma-
tion of the first Congregational Church in New Zealand. This
was organized in Wellington, where a Chapel was erected.
This building, when I visited that town, in January, 1849,
was almost a ruin, through the recent earthquakes. But
another Chapel has since been erected, in a more eligible
situation. It is understood that arrangements are in progress
for the settlement of a Minister in lieu of Mr. Woodward,
who desires to give place to one who can be fully devoted to
the work.
It appears that in all the Colonies of Australasia, there
are now about sixty-three Congregational Ministers.* It
is cheering to one who was permitted to commence the work,
to announce the fact, and to recognise so many brethren
around him, some of them occupying stations of influence
and usefulness far superior to his own. But while there is
ground for congratulation and thankfulness, there are also
reasons for regret. It is to be lamented that the London
Missionary Society, while establishing Missions in the West
Indian Colonies, did not, at an early period, minister to
England’s Exiles and Emigrants in Australia. Such a
course would evidently have tended to the advantage of the
Society’s Missions in the South Seas. Our Wesleyan
brethren were “ wiser in their generation;” and, moreover,
* A considerable addition to this number may be expected, especially as the
Rev. J. L. Poore has lately proceeded to England to secure such help; having
previously obtained in the four Australian Colonies special contributions
towards this object, amounting, it is understood, to above £2OOO.


possessed in their organization peculiar facilities for such
action. While labouring in the South Sea Islands, they did
not overlook the Colonial field in that vicinity. They
commenced their work in New South Wales in 1815;
and in Van Diemen’s Land in 1820. Hence their prominent
position in these Colonies, arising from prompt and diligent
action; and hence their ability now to take charge, as a
distinct confederation, of their Missions in the South Seas.
It will be occasion of thankfulness, when the London
Missionary Society can be relieved, in like manner, by
Congregational and other Churches engaging to sustain and
extend the Missionary work in the Islands of the Pacific,
which, from their comparative proximity, possess peculiar
claims upon the Christians of Australia.
But, in order to fulfil the high responsibilities of our
position, we urgently require augmented and appropriate
agency. It is an observation of Isaac Taylor, “ that a
religious body, within which there is vitality, will ordinarily
supply itself with an adequate proportion of Ministers.”
It is to be hoped that our Churches may so advance in
numbers and zeal, that candidates for the Ministerial and
Missionary work may not be wanting; and that our scheme
for establishing a Theological Institution, will no longer
remain inoperative. It is pleasing to find that there is in
Sydney one student for the Ministry, who has recently
entered on his course. It is morever, a fact, not devoid of
interest, that he is a son of the Rev. Dr. Halley, who, nearly
twenty-seven years since, pleaded for that Colonial field in
which this youthful student now desires to be occupied.
In comparing the present with the past, an encouraging
change is observable in the tone of public sentiment in relation
to State aid to religion. Some of us can recollect the time when
such help was rarely discountenanced ; and when the refusal
to receive it excited strong surprise and reprobation. But
advancing light has been realized; and now, far beyond the
limits of our own denomination, the conviction is gaining
ground that State aid, especially on the undiscriminating plan
adopted here, must eventually cease and determine. It is,


however, very important that those who object to the com-
pulsory system should exhibit, in a practical form, the more
excellent way. No clamorous contention for the voluntary
principle will avail, if Christian liberality and zeal be wanting,
and if contributions be not supplied, on the ground that the
highest authority demands them, although the State is not
competent to enforce the claim. We must cultivate the
Christian conscience, and exhibit the will of Him who has
redeemed us unto God by his blood, if we would combat the
pernicious conclusion that voluntaryism warrants a man to
give or to withhold, just as he may please.
This sense of Christian responsibility, while regulating
the appropriation of money, should be extended to other
departments of effort. We live in an age of organizations;
and there is some danger lest Christians should delegate their
own duty to societies, and be content to save souls by proxy.
While recognising the advantage of associated effort, we must
all feel that, in order to the accelerated advance of the high-
est cause, fidelity and zeal must be individually developed.
There is a wide and attractive field in these lands, alike for
separate and combined efforts. In addition to the general
body of our fellow-colonists, among whom we commonly
labour, there are some special classes which should not be
overlooked. It may seem almost nugatory to refer to the
Aborigines ; and yet, surely, claims exist which cannot be
nullified by past failure or neglect, or by the peculiar diffi-
culties of the work. Varied reminiscences might be supplied
with reference to the Aborigines of Tasmania, Some of us,
in early times, witnessed the scene, when, after resisting force
and evading capture, they were gathered by kindness, and
brought band after band into Hobart Town—men, women,
and children, with their customary train of dogs. They were
removed to Hinder's Island, but were afterwards placed again
on their native soil. One who saw them, when collected from
their wanderings, many years since, lately visited and coun-
selled the scanty remnant, now located at Oyster Cove,
Some interest and responsibility must be felt, with refer-
ence to the numerous foreigners who are found in Australia,


and particularly the many thousands from China. Long had
Christians prayed that that vast empire might be opened to
the gospel. In a limited measure, direct access has been
afforded, but further and unexpected facilities have been sup-
plied for evangelizing the people. The gold discoveries have
attracted multitudes to these shores, and now Christian phi-
lanthropy is seeking to enrich them with treasures better
than gold. It must be our concern, that evangelizing
efforts among them may be extended, and that God may
answer prayer for China, by granting an abundant blessing to
her sons in these lands. Who can tell but that some of them
may return to their friends and country, to make known there
the unsearchable riches of Christ ?
Will surprise be excited when another class is named, as
needing practical and devout sympathy? It has been specially
requested that the seed of Abraham should be thus brought
under your notice. It is stated that in Melbourne there are
more than 4000 Jews, and they are numerous in Sydney and
other parts of Australia. As “ the gospel is the power of
God unto salvation to everyone that believeth, to the Jew first
and also to the Greek,” there is no reason why the class now
specified should be hopelessly abandoned to delusion. Chris-
tians who associate with Jews should surely aim to win them
to the Saviour. But additional agency is necessary, specially
adapted to deal with the peculiarities of the Jewish mind.
Hence the establishment of a Jewish Missionary Society has
been proposed for the employment of this agency among the
Jews in these colonies; such Society to be formed upon a
broad and Catholic basis, with a view to engage the sympathy
and co-operation of every section of the Church. Your con-
currence in this movement is earnestly desired.
It may, perhaps, be thought that at a Conference to con-
sider denominational interests, topics, such as have now been
noticed, are scarcely in place. But Congregationalism is not
the end we are called to advance, but is simply contributory to
that end. Our sectional position demands our attention, in
order that we may subserve the higher interests of the king-
dom of Christ. Our churches are organized on principles


which we judge to be scriptural, not that they may boast of
such organization, or rest in its possession, but that they may
more effectually cultivate and extend spiritual religion. Hence
the manifold calls for effort should be kept in view, that our
churches may be maintained in a state of healthy activity.
Due regard should doubtless be had to those labours which
are denominationally important. But, while discharging these
labours, it has not been our wont to seclude ourselves from
other sections of the church in selfish or bigoted isolation.
We desire to cultivate large-heartedness; and, while we main-
tain our destinctive views, to recognise the higher and vital
truths which are common to the brotherhood of saints. At
our former Conference, we welcomed a deputation from the
British and Foreign Bible Society, so that it cannot now be
unsuitable to advert to modes and spheres of Evangelical
service, in which we may unite with other Christian bodies.
It is true, however, that our primary duty at this Confer-
ence is to deal with denominational interests and necessities.
Important* subjects will be brought under your notice by
brethren nominated to this service. It must be our desire that
the highest wisdom may guide our deliberations, and that
truth and love may be promoted by them. It must also be
our concern that our proceedings may tend to definite and con-
tinuous action. We can scarcely conceal from ourselves that
our last Conference has been somewhat barren of practical
results. It was, however, cheering and quickening to com-
mune together; and we may hope that schemes then projected,
although partially dormant since, will now receive further
consideration, and be happily developed in action. In order
to success, it is obvious that the self-reliant temper must be
repressed, and that devout and lowly trust should be exercised.
We are thankful for the practical wisdom, the high intelli-
gence, the Christian devotedness which may distinguish breth-
ren who now meet together; but for the efficient application
of their gifts and graces, we are dependent on a Power which
is not of earth. Hence we connect with our Conference
special exercises of devotion ; and we pray that hallowed feel-
ings and elevated aims may pervade all our assemblies.


It will be deeply felt by every Christian heart, that our
great necessity is an enlarged measure of Divine grace ; and
that our absorbing concern must be, to realize in our
Churches and in our own minds, higher developments of the
spiritual life. In the sketches and reminiscences which have
been presented, no attempt has been made to indicate, except
by implication, our moral progress and position. It only
seemed possible to note the early movements in which some of
us shared, and then to state the numerical result, with
reference to the existing supply of Ministerial agency as
compared with former times. Had it been convenient or
practicable to compile a more minute record, we should,
doubtless, have been led to regard with sacred interest some
of the scenes presented to our view ; we could have traced
intermediate movements and moral changes, well worthy of
our contemplation; we could have pointed, for instance,
to itinerant Missionaries who traversed extensive districts
where spiritual destitution prevailed, and who were instru-
mental in reclaiming many a wanderer, and in bringing the
highest blessing into many a household and many a heart.
Some who thus laboured, now occupy another sphere, and
some have entered into their rest. But their work has not
been fruitless, as those who visit these fields of early service
thankfully see.
We might also refer to encouraging progress in training
our youth for Christ. We, in common with others, feel the
difficulty of retaining under desirable influence those who have
realized such training. But with all the disadvantages arising
from the restlessness and waywardness of the youthful mind,
we have reason to thank God for the multitudes that have
been brought under scriptural instruction, and for repeated
instances of spiritual good and early consecration to Christ.
Some of us, who have been occupied for years in the field,
have seen this fruit, and have been cheered by it, in the midst
of weariness and fainting.
But, after all, our work has but just been commenced.
We are called to prosecute and extend our labours with lofty
aims and earnest aspirations. It is true there are manifold


barriers to spiritual cultivation and advancement. The fre-
quency of change induces many difficulties,"WGral obstacles,
which fallen humanity will everywhere present, are peculiarly
rife in the shifting scenes, the feverish excitement, the social
agitations, the prevailing worldliness of Colonial life. But, if
we would be true to our Mission, not only as Congregational-
ists but as Christians, we must grapple with difficulties, with
earnest, trusting, and resolute hearts. We must adopt the sen-
timent of Brainerd, when toiling among the North American
Indians, “ Prayer, with painstaking, through faith, can accom-
plish anything,” and we must work, not only diligently but
unitedly. There must be no separating spirit of jealousy or dis-
trust. There mnst be no such moral anomaly among us, as the
clashings and contentions of rival churches. One is our master
—our cause—our aim—and all we are brethren. If there be
aught in our Ecclesiastical system, which pride or selfishness
may readily pervert, let us see if it be practicable to correct it,
whether by the general union now proposed, or by other
suitable measures. But especially let us guard against the
disuniting force, which the undisciplined heart supplies.
No scheme of polity, no plan of co-operation will avail,
unless we sedulously cultivate that love which “ suffereth
long and is kind, which envieth not, vaunteth not itself,
is not puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh
not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil, re-
joiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth ; beareth
all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth
all things,”
I may be permitted, in conclusion, to suggest that some
measures should be adopted to secure, from time to time, the
moral statistics of our denomination ; and especially to ascer-
tain how far we are favoured with indications of the Divine
presence and power. Is there reason to bewail the paucity
of conversions among us—or, is there encouraging evidence
that God is adding to our churches “ the saved ” I There are
nearly 600 members in the Congregational Churches in New
South Wales. No account can be supplied of other colonies.
But it is a question of vital importance, with reference to the


extension of the work—“ls the Lord among us, or not?”
May every labourer be cheered by tokens of the Divine favor,
and may all our Churches, “ walking in the fear of the Lord,
and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, be edified and multi-
plied ! ”
CONGREGATIONAL CONFERENCE.
During the week commencing February 15, 1857, Ministers and Delegates
from the Congregational Churches of the Australian Colonies met in fraternal
Conference in the Congregational Church, Pitt-street, and also held important
meetings in the several churches belonging to their body in Sydney and its
suburbs.
The Conference was presided over by the Rev. F. Miller, of Hoharton, who,
twenty-six years ago, was the only Congregational Minister in these colonies,bnt
now is surrounded by nearly seventy ministerial brethren, in addition to whom it
is expected that several more will shortly arrive, as the Rev. J. L. Poore is on a
mission to England, supplied with funds from the churches of the four Colonies,
to secure the services of efficient Ministers.
On Monday, February 16, an introductory devotional meeting was held in
the Congregational Church, Newtown, presided over by the Rev. S. C. Kent,
and addressed by the Revs. E. Griffith and C. Price. The Revs. F. Miller, W.
Slatyer, and J. Gibson, conducted the devotional engagements.
On Tuesday, February 17, the Conference met in the Congregational Church,
Pitt-street, at 10 a.ra., and was opened by singing and prayer.


The Chairman (the Rev. F. Miller) read the circular calling the meeting.
The following names of ministers and delegates from the churches were
hen received.
From Tasmania. —The Rev. F. Miller, Hoharton; the Rev. C. Price,
Launceston; and H. Hopkins, Esq., Hoharton.
From Victoria. —The Rev. R. Fletcher, St. Kilda ; and the Rev. W. Moss,
Prahran.
From New South Wales. —Revs. R. Ross, M.D., and J. West.
Pitt-street Church. —Rev. W. Cuthhertson. A. 8., Hon. D. Jones, Esq.,
M.L.C., and Messrs. Fairfax, Foss, Nott, Eager, Garran, and Symonds.
Redfern Church. —Rev J. Beazley, and Messrs. John Thompson,
Richardson, S. Thompson, and Jenkyns.
Bourke-street Church. —Rev. W. Slatyer, Rev. B. Quaiffe, and Mr. J.
Gould.
Balmain Church. —Rev. J. T. Gordon, and Messrs. Hunt and Parker.
Newtown Church. —Rev. S. C. Kent, Hon. T. Holt, Esq., M.L.A., and
Mr. Harrison.
Maitland Church. —Rev. E. Griffith.
Newcastle Church. —Rev. J. Gibson.
The Rev. Wm. Fletcher, A.M., just arrived from England, was also present.
The Secretary (the Rev. S. C. Kent) read the proposed order of proceedings.
The Rev. C. Price, W. Slatyer, and Messrs. Hopkins and Garran were
appointed an Executive Committee, for the preparation of business to he laid
before the Conference.
The Chairman then delivered his address.
The following resolution was moved by the Rev. W. Cuthbertson,
seconded by A. Foss, Esq., and carried unanimously:—“That the cordial
thanks of this Conference he and are hereby presented to our respected Chair-
man, the Rev. F. Miller, of Hoharton, for his most able, important, and
interesting address, and that he he solicited to permit its publication and
circulation, by the Congregational Union of New South Wales.”
The Rev. R. Fletcher introduced the subject of a general Union of the
Congregational Churches of the colonies.
After some discussion, the following resolution was passed:—“That the
Revs. Messrs. Fletcher, Price, Beazley, and A. Garran, Esq., he requested to
consider and report upon the feasibility of a General Union for the Colonies.
The Rev. J. Beazley read a valuable paper on Lay Agency, the dis-
cussion arising out of which was adjourned until the following day.
In the evening a public meeting was held in the Congregational Church,
Redfern, presided over by the Rev. J. Beazley. Addresses on Religious
Revivals were given by Revs. W. Cuthbertson, E. Griffith, and W. Moss.
On Wednesday, 18th, the Conference resumed its sitting, at the same
time and place as on the previous day.


After the subject of Lay Agency had been fully discussed, it was moved by
A. Garran, Esq., and seconded by Rev. J. Gibson, and carried nem.
con., “ That this Conference presents its thanks to the Rev. J, Beazley for his
valuable paper on Lay Agency, and desires to record its opinion that the
circumstances of these Colonies not only affords ample scope for such agency,
but imperatively require it; and that it is exceedingly desirable that every
practicable effort should be made to draw out suitable agents, increase their
qualifications, and to systematize the plan of operation; and in this view
commends the subject to the careful and practical consideration of the separate
Churches and Unions.”
The Rev. William Slayter introduced the subject of Collegiate Edu-
cation; the discussion on which occupied the whole of the morning, and was
adjourned until the following day.
In the evening a Conversazione was held in the school-room of the Congre-
gational Church, Pitt-street, The Rev. W, Cuthbertson presided. The friends
present were addressed by the Revs. R. Fletcher, E. Griffith, F. Miller, C. Price,
and S. C. Kent,
On Thursday, 19th, the Conference again assembled. The following
resolutions on Collegiate Education were carried unanimously:—
1. “That it is the opinion of this Conference that the necessities of the Churches
in these Colonies, and the calls for missionary and evangelizing labours, render it
desirable to take immediate steps for training up a Colonial Ministry; believing,
as it does, that there are suitable young men, who if enconraged and assisted!
would gladly give themselves to the work of the Ministry.”
2. “That all wishing well to and desiring the extension of our denomination,
should, to the extent of their ability and opportunity, encourage such young men,
and aid in defraying the expenses incurred in their education.”
3. “ That this Conference deems it desirable that in training young men for
the Ministry, the advantages offered by the local University be embraced, combined
with theological instruction from qualified Tutors resident near such University.”
The Committee on plan for General Union reported that for the present
there seem to be insuperable objections to the holding of Annual Con-
ferences, and recommended triennial Conferences, at the same time leaving
it open to hold Conferences at any period or place which circumstances may
point out as convenient. The Committee also suggested the desirableness of
maintaining a fraternal correspondence between the separate local Unions, both
by the mutual interchange of Annual Reports and by communications relative
geneially to the progress of Christ’s cause. And further, that a useful degree
of intercommunication would be obtained, if occasionally at the Union Meetings
in each Colony a delegate from one or more of the neighbouring Colonies could
be present.
'The Statistical Committee presented a form of Statistical table.
On the motion of the Rev. R. Fletcher, seconded by H. Hopkins,
Esq., it was resolved—
“ That the statistical table now presented be adopted ; that it be remitted


to the Sub-Committee to fill it up as far as practicable during the sittings of
this Conference, and that the completion of the tables, by correspondence and
other means, he committed to the Rev. S. C. Kent and Mr. Foss, on the rising
of this Conference.”
A. Garran, Esq., A.M., read a most suggestive, instructive, and compre-
hensive paper on education for the colonies, the further consideration of which,
after an interesting debate, was adjourned until the following morning.
In the evening, a meeting on Colonial Missions was held in the Congre-
gational Church, Bourke-street, Surry Hills, over which H. Hopkins, Esq.,
presided, and which was addressed by the Revs. R. Fletcher, W. Cuthbertson,
C. Price, E. Griffith, W. Moss, and J. Beazley.
On Friday, the 20th, at 10 o’clock, a.m., the Conference resumed its
sitting.
No resolution was passed upon the subject of Education for the colonies, as
it was not thought desirable for the Conference to come to a deliverance upon
the matter.
The Rev. William Moss introduced a discussion on the combination of
the Colonies for foreign mission work. The following resolution was passed:—
“ That in the opinion of this Conference the combination of the evangelical
denominations in these Colonies for foreign mission work, especially in the
contiguous regions of Western Polynesia, would be productive of highly
beneficial results, and that, although at present it hardly appears practicable to
consolidate such an Union, it should be kept in view as an object at which it is
desirable to aim.”
The Rev. R. Fletcher then introduced the subject of denominational
literature. After a long and full discussion, the Conference unanimously
adopted the following resolutions : “1. That this Conference thinks it
desirable to establish a Periodical. 2. That the Rev. R. Fletcher, of
St. Kilda, Melbourne, be requested to become the Editor of such Periodical, and
to cause it to be published at such intervals, and in such form, as may be resolved
upon by the committee, viz.: The Editor, and the Revs. W. Cuthbertson, J.
West, and A. Garran, Esq., and those gentlemen who have kindly consented to bear
the loss (if any) incurred in its publication during the first year j those gentlemen
being—Messrs. Fairfax, Foss, Jones, Hay, and Hopkins. 3. That the Editor be
authorised to pay the contributors for their articles as far as practicable.”
The Conference adjourned until Monday.
In the evening a United Communion was held in the Congregational Church,
Pitt-street, when the members of the various Churches of the Congregational order
partook together of the memorials of Christ’s death.
The Rev. R. Fletcher presided, and several ministers assisted in the service.


On Monday, the 23rd, the Conference met at half-past 10 a.m.
The Rev. William Cuthbertson introduced the following topic;—“The
best way in which the kingdom of Christ can be extended in these Colonies by
Congregationalists.”
After discussion, it was moved by Rev. J. Beazley, and seconded by Rev.
William Moss, “That this Conference earnestly and affectionately recommends
to the Churches of the Congregational order, and especially to the Colonial
Missionary Societies in these Colonies, strenuous efforts to extend the kingdom of
Christ among our increasing population, by the employment of Evangelists and
itinerant Pastors, by open-air preaching, and by lay agency in its varied modes,
of action.”
H. Hopkins, Esq,, generously engaged to give £5O towards carrying out
the above resolution.
The Rev. C. Price having spoken at length upon a Sustentation Fund and
a Provident Fund, the following resolutions were proposed and carried nem. con :—
1. “That this Conference recommends the subject of a Provident Fund to
the consideration of the several Churches, and that the Secretaries of the various
Congregational Unions be requested to correspond with one another, and with the
Secretary appointed to arrange for the next Conference, with a view to bring for-
ward some definite plan when such Conference shall be held.”
2. “ That Conference recommends to the consideration of the several
Churches the subject of an educational institution for the children of Congrega-
tional Ministers in the Australian colonies, and of Missionaries in the South Sea
Islands, and that it to the Secretaries of the various Unions to corres-
pond with one another, and with the Secretary appointed to arrange for the next
Conference, with a view to bring forward some plan when such Conference shall
be held.” t
The Rev. R. Fletcher was elected chairman of the next Conference, and the
Rev. F. Miller, Secretary, to arrange for its meetings.
It was resolved, “ That this Conference suggests that the next meeting be
held in Hobarton in February, 1858, if found practicable.”
It was further resolved, “ That the thanks of the Conference be given to the
Rev. F. Miller, for his able Presidency, and to the Rev. S. C. Kent for his effi-
cient services as Secretary.”
In the evening a public devotional meeting was held in the Congregational
Church, Pitt-street. The chair was occupied by the Rev. Dr. Ross. Addresses
were delivered by the Rev. R. Fletcher, E. Griffith, W, Moss, C. Price, F.
Miller, and W. Cuthbertson; and the devotions were conducted by the Revs.J,
Beazley and S. C. Kent.
Thus ended a series of meetings which will long be remembered with
pleasure by those who were privileged to take part in or attend them.
It is worthy of remark that although the most full and free discussion of each
subject brought before the Conference was encouraged, every resolution was
passed unanimously.
Beading and Wellbank, Printers, Bridge-street.
