







AN ACCOUNT OF THE ENGWURRA OR
FIRE CEREMONY OF CERTAIN CEN-
TRAL AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
Royal Society of Dictoria.
By Professor BALDWIN SPENCER
AND
F. J. GILLEN,
Special Magistrate and Sub-Protector of Aborigines, Alice
Springs.
(Read 8th April, 1897).
Reprinted from Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, issued July, 1897, Vol. X. (New Series), Pt. I.
Ford & Son, Printers , Carlton , Melbourne.




ART. III. -An Account of the Engwurra or Fire Cere-
mony of Certain Central Australian Tribes.
By Professor BALDWIN SPENCER, M.A.,
AND
F. J. GILLEN,
Special Magistrate and Sub-Protector of Aborigines, Alice Springs.
[Read Bth April, 1897.]
(Abstract).
Amongst certain Central Australian tribes the last of the
initiatory rites through which a man must pass before he is
admitted to full membership takes the form of what may be
called a series of ordeals by fire.
Such a fire ordeal has not hitherto been described so far as we
are aware amongst Australian natives, and, during the recent
summer, the authors had the opportunity of witnessing the
Engwurra ceremony as enacted by the natives of the Arunta
tribe living in the Macdonnell Ranges in the centre of the
continent. Similar ceremonies are known to the authors as
occurring in other tribes, such as the Ilparra and Warramunga
whilst a slightly different one called the Wilyaru occurs amongst
the TJrrabunna tribe. Of considerably greater importance however
than that referring to the fire ceremonies themselves, which only
occupied a comparatively short time, was the information which
the authors were enabled to collect with regard to the organisation
of the tribe in respect to the existence and curious arrangement
of the totems, and also in regard to the meaning and significance
of the churinga or sacred sticks and stones of the natives.
Before entering into details it is necessary to refer briefly to
the organisation of two tribes which may be taken as typical
examples, one in which descent is counted in the female and the
other in the male line.
2


Of the former we may take the Urrabunna, living to the west
of Lake Eyre, as an example. In this the whole tribe is divided
into two exogamous intermarrying divisions, each of which we
will speak of as a phratry. One of these is called Matthurrie
and the other Kirarawa. A Matthurrie man must marry a
Kirarawa woman, and his children are Kirarawa, that is, they
belong to the mother’s moiety. In addition to the phratry name,
each individual bears a totem name, that is, he or she is a member
of a group of individuals—the whole group being distributed in
various localities over the district occupied by the tribe—who
are supposed to be especially associated with some animal or
plant, the name of which they bear. Each of these groups is
called by the natives a Thunthunnie, and no man or woman may
eat the animal or plant associated with his or her own totem or
Thunthunnie. Further still, there are particular totems restricted
to the two phratries, and by means of them further restrictions
are placed upon marriage—a Matthurrie man of one totem having
to marry a Kirarawa woman of another totem. A few of these
and the marriage relationship is shown in the following table :
Man _ Woman. Children are
'phratry. Phratry. Totem. Phratry. Totem.
Matthurrie Cicada, marries, Kirarawa- Crow, Kirarawa Crow.
Dingo „ „ Waterhen ~ Wat-erhen.
” Emu „ „ Eat » Rat.
Swan „ .. Pelican „ Pelican.
This shows at once that both as regards phratry and totem the
children follow the mother.
Taking now the Arunta tribe 1 we may describe its organisation
in outline as follows. There are four subphratries so coupled
together as to give clear evidence of the former existence of two
main phratries. These four subphratries are called Panunga and
Bultharra, Purula and Kumarra. Panunga and Bultharra
represent one moiety or phratry, Purula and Kumarra the other.
Further reference will be made to this point later on. We can
tabulate the marriage arrangements as follows :
l The Urrabunna tribe is practically identical in organisation with that described by
Mr. Howitt as occurring in the adjoining Dieri tribe, and the organisation of the Amnta
tribe has already been, to a certain extent, described by Messrs. Fison, Howitt, Stirling,
and Gillen.


slan ' Woman. Children are
Panunga marries Purula - - Bultharra.
Bultharra „ Kumarra - Panunga.
urula „ Panunga - - Kumarra.
Kumarra „ Bultharra - Purula.
In other words a man must marry a woman belonging to the
moiety of the tribe to which he does not belong, and his children
belong to his own moiety, but to the other division of it.
As we have said, this is the arrangement in mere outline,
practically conditions are more complicated. For example, not all
Panunga women are eligible as wives to each and every Panunga
man. To a Panunga man the Purula women are divided into
two groups (and vice versci if we speak of a Panunga woman),
which are called respectively Ipmunna and Unawa, and it is only
the latter who are eligible to him as wives, and who are called
his tribal unawas, or wives, though he only actually marries a
limited number. In this way it will be seen that each sub-
phratry is subdivided into two groups, so that as a matter of
fact we actually get eight and not four divisions, and each one of
these eight has in the northern part of the tribe a distinct name,
four others, viz., Uknaria, Appungerta, Ungalla and Umbitchana
being added to those already mentioned. The original Panunga
is now divided into Panunga and Uknarria, the Bultharra into
Bultharra and Appungerta, the Purula into Purula and Ungalla,
and the Kumarra into Kumarra and Umbitchana. With this
further division, while matters are, to a certain extent, compli-
cated, yet in other ways they are simplified. In the southern
part of the tribe all the women belonging to the division, into
which say a Panunga man must marry, are called Purula ; in the
northern half of the tribe, half of the original Purula retain the
old name, the other half have acquired 1 a new name, viz., Ungalla.
In the same way the Panunga has been divided into Panunga
and Uknarria. A Panunga must now marry a Purula (that is, a
woman belonging to only one-half of the original group of the
same name) and an Uknarria marries an Ungalla.
• U t^ 9 5 1VISIOn lnto eight has been g radual] y adopted from the Ilparra tribe, which
inhabits the district immediately to the north of the Arunta. At the present time the
division into eight is slowly spreading southwards through the Arunta.
2a


So far as the phratry is concerned the matter of descent is
comparatively simple—the child goes into that of its father—
but, in the case of the totem, it is at first sight most perplexing.
You may, for example, examine first a family in which the father
is a witchetty grub and the mother a wild cat, and you may find
that, supposing there are two children, both of them are
witchetty grubs. In the next family examined, perhaps, both
parents will be witchetty grubs, and out of two children one
may belong to the same totem and the other may be a wild cat,
and so on, the totem names being apparently mixed up in the
greatest confusion possible.
The following table gives the actual totem name of two
families, selected at random, who are now living amongst the
Arunta in the northern part of the tribe, and may be taken as
accurately representative of the totem names found in various
families throughout the tribe. Of course the names vary much
from family to family, and in various parts of the country, certain
totems predominating in some parts and others in other parts.
You may, perhaps, for example find yourself in one district of
more or less limited area and find one particular totem largely
represented : travelling out of this district you may find that
special totem but seldom present until you come into another and
perhaps distant part—it may be forty or fifty miles away—when
again it becomes the principal totem. The reason for, or rather
the explanation given by the natives of, this curious local
distribution of the totems will be seen subsequently.
Family I.—Father, little hawk. Wife No. 1, bandicoot;
daughter, witchetty grub. Wife No. 2, kangaroo; no children.
Wife No. 3, lizard ; two daughters, one emu, the other water.
Family 2.—Father, witchetty grub. Wife No. 1, lizard ; no
children. Wife No. 2, Hakea flower; four sons, respectively,
witchetty grub, emu, eagle-hawk, Arrakurta; two daughters,
each witchetty grub.
Taking these 1 as typical examples, it will be seen that the
question of totem has nothing to do with marriage so far as
either making it obligatory on a man of one totem to marry a
woman of another, or so far as the totems of their children are
directly concerned.
i These are only two out of very many examined by the authors.


!T US tote “ re^ktions *• Arunta, Luritcha
and Ilparra tribes agree, as the authors know from personal
serva ion, w list they have strong reason to believe that large
and important tribes living to the north are in accord with them
on all important points. These tribes are the Warramunga,
VVaagai, Illeowra, and Wickliffe,
duriJTl WhilS " fc Watchin - and questioning closely the natives
during the perrormance of the Engwurra ceremony that the
authors were able to find out the way in which the totem names
or the individuals originate.
The total period occupied by the Engwurra was more than
rz WaS held llear t 0 AHce S P rin § s and was
attended by representatives from various parts of the tribe, some
prelenT ™ & ° f aboUt tw ° huridred "dies to be
present The men were summoned by messengers bearing the
acred chunnga, and about the middle of September they began
assemble. A special level piece of ground, somewhat trian-
gular in shape, bounded on one side by a river with its belt of
unber and on another by a range of rugged quartzite hills, and
° tlUrd by low sorub > was selected as the spot for the
ngwurra ground. The main encampment to which the women
and children went was fixed on the opposite side of the river so
that no females or uninitiated males could see what was taking
place in the Engwurra ground. The component groups of the
camp could be distinguished by the spots on which they built
leir wurlies, those who came from the south erecting them on
the south of the ground, those from the north on the north side
and so on. Each party which came in brought with it a larger
or smaller number of the sacred sticks and stones which are
called chunnga.
We have already referred to the division of the tribe into two
moieties, one consisting of the Panunga and Bultharra men, and
the other of the Purula and Kumarra, and in connection with
e sOl n,g o the chunnga on the Engwurra ground this fact
was brought out very prominently. All those belonging to the
anunga and Bulthurra were placed on a special platform made
in the branches of a mulga tree on the range bounding the
southern end of the ground, while those of the Kumarra and
Purula were placed on a small platform at the northern end of
the ground.


In speaking of one another also, men of the two moieties use
different words to describe their own and the other moiety. For
example, if you are speaking to a Panunga man he will refer to
the Kumarra and Purula as being Mulyanuka , and to the
Panunga and Bultharra as JVdknakia. In just the same way a
Ivumarra man will call his own moiety Ntikrakia and the other
Mulyanuka.
The evenings of the first three weeks were occupied by the
performance of two ordinary corrobborees at which all members
of the camp, women and children included, were allowed to be
present. Before these were concluded the leader of the
Engwurra went down to the ground where the ceremonies were
to be performed (the ordinary corrobboree ground being some
distance away) and here he made a long low mound of earth
about forty feet in length, two in width, and one in height, and
ornamented the top with small boughs of Eucalyptus. This was
called the Parra and apparently is meant to represent a tract of
country. By its side the great majority of the ceremonies were
enacted. At the end of the three weeks the men who were to be
finally initiated, together with the older men, separated themselves
from the women who remained in the main camp, and lived on
or close by the Engwurra ground for nearly three months.
During this period there was a constant succession of sacred
ceremonies, all of which were concerned with the totems.
The idea of the whole ceremony was evidently first to test the
powers of endurance of the younger men who had implicitly to
obey the directions of the older men and secondly to impart to
them the sacred secrets of the tribe concerned with the totems
and the churinga.
Without going into details it may be said that each of
the very numerous separate ceremonies was concerned with a
particular totem and further with a totem associated with a
particular spot. The native name for these sacred ceremonies is
Quabarra 1 and the names of a few will serve as illustrations of
the long series. There was for example the Quabarra Unjeamba
of Ooroominna which means a ceremony of the Unjeamba or
Hakea flower totem of a place called Ooroominna ; the Quabarra
1 The ordinary corrobboree is called “ Altherta ” by the Arunta people.


Ura P' tcherawhich a ceremony of the “ wild
cat totem of Urapitchera, a place on the Finke River: the
Quabarra Oktrra of Idracowra which means a ceremony of the
kanga tote of Idracowra, a p]ace Qn Finke J
the Quabarra Lnchmhera of Imanda, which means a ceremony
on £ Hih Rref & **
In this way each ceremony was concerned with some particular
t tern and not only this but with a totem or rather a special
vision o a totem of some particular locality, and further still
i,nr y tT own t and presided ° ver 4
was coiiceld and with *** *
what TrZ ° arefUlly aftCT 6aCh P«' f ™ce as to
presented, the authors were able to gather together a
IfrdloTh t
regard to the totems, but, for the present purpose, the following
brief outline of the myths or traditions wMohhavL sprung! 1
ccount for the curious totemic system of the tribe will suffice
ancl tors whTT ieS 7" WiUl Certai « mythical
dream 77 “ What ca]l the “ alcheringa” or
earn times. These ancestors are so intimately associated in the
IT 6 the anima,S ° r P k “ ts name ZyTori
S™ 8 *"" t the *»«*». 4 Z
identity of the I or as a kangaroo-man. The
identity of the human individual appears to be sunk in that of
he object with which he i, as„,i. K d »„ (rom „
supposed to have originated.
These alcheringa men and women are represented as collected
together in companies, each one of which consisted of a certain
r; 1 ° f lndl viduais. The members of each company were of
the same totem and belonged to the same moiety of the tribe
that, they were either Purula and Kumarra, or Panunga and
f alcherln g a > for exam P ]e - we meet with
traditions referring to several groups of “wild cat” men, most
0 J p m u ? mP ° Sed ° f PUrUla and Kurnarra but some of Panunga
and Bultharra, the kangaroo men seem to have been Purula and
1 i.e., Dasyurns genffroyi.


Kumarra, and the witchetty grub men Panunga and Bultharra.
At the present day no totem is confined to one moiety of the
tribe, but in each “local centre” of a totem we always find a great
predominance of members belonging to one half, as for example
at Alice Springs, the most important centre of the witchetty
grub totem, where amongst a large number of Panunga and
Bultharra men there are a few Purula and Kumarra.
These alcheringa ancestors are represented in tradition, some
of them as originating and staying in certain places, such as the
witchetty grubs at Alice Springs, others such as the wild cat
groups are represented as wandering about over the country in
various directions, but along certain definite lines, the route of
which is accurately preserved in tradition.
Every alcheringa man and woman carried about a large number
of the sacred churinga, 1 the meaning and significance of which
has not previously been known. At certain camping places as
the alcheringa ancestors travelled on, or at spots where they
originated, certain individuals are represented as having gone
into the ground and as having been transformed into sacred
churinga. Certain also of the latter were placed in the ground
at these camping places.
Each churinga is inseparably associated with a spirit individual
-—in the case of the individuals who turned into them, the name
is even preserved—and so we find at the present day that the
whole country occupied by the Arunta is dotted over with
numerous spots at each of which numbers of sacred churinga
are buried, each of which is associated with a spirit individual.
In this way there have been formed what the natives call
oknamkilla , that is spots, each of which is, as it were, inhabited
by spirit individuals the totem of whom is of course that of the
alcheringa individual whom they represent or who carried the
churinga with which each one is associated. These oknanikilla
may hence be appropriately termed local totem centres, and if we
take one alcheringa group of ancestors such as the wild cat for
l The form of these, some of which have been figured and described by various writers
such as Messrs. Stirling, Gillen, Etheridge, etc., are well illustrated in the Report of the
Horn Expedition, vol. iv., pi. 7. Their use as sacred objects has been described by writers
such as Messrs. Howitt, Fison and Gillen. They are of the nature of the “ bullroarer,” the
use and importance of which was first pointed out in Australia by Mr. Howitt.


example, it will now be seen that we have over the country and
also, it must be remembered, in spots well known to the natives,
groups of wild eat spirit individuals.
When a woman conceives it is supposed that it is one of such
a group of spirits who goes inside her and thus it naturally
follows, granting the premises firmly believed in by the natives,
that the totem of the child is determined solely by the spot at
which the mother conceived, or, what is the same thing, believes
that she conceived, the child. A single example of one of numerous
actual instances known to the authors must suffice to illustrate
the actual usage. Not long ago a witchetty grub woman, living
at Alice Springs, her husband belonging to the same totem, went
on a visit to a neighbouring emu group, here she conceived, and
the child, afterwards born in a witchetty grub locality at Alice
-Springs, belongs to the emu totem ; it must do, the natives say,
because it entered her in an emu locality; had it entered the
mother at Alice Springs it would as inevitably have been born a
witchetty grub.
Not only is this so, but every spirit-child, when entering a
woman, is supposed to drop the churinga which until then it
always carries about. After the child’s birth the father and one
or two old men, having learnt from the mother where conception
took place, actually go in search of the churinga. They either
find one, or if they do not, then they manufacture one out of the
mulga or other hard wood tree which lies nearest to the spot.
At the latter there is usually some gum tree or prominent natural
object, such as a rock, which the spirit-child has been supposed to
specially inhabit, and this is spoken of as its nanja tree or stone.
During the life of the human individual who is its reincarnation
this is Ins nanja tree or stone and the churinga is his churinga
nanja. °
Each local group of a totem has a sacred store-house, such as
a cleft m some more or less inaccessible spot in a rough range,
and here, under the custody of the head man, or alartunja, of
the group, all the churinga are kept. No woman or uninitiated
man goes near this sacred store-house, or ertnatiiluiiga, under
penalty of death.
feuch, in brief outline, is the totemic system of the Arunta,
Ilparra, and Luritcha tribes, and as before said the same
probably applies with slight variations to tribes further north.


The greater part of the Engwurra was occupied with
performing these sacred ceremonies of the totems, whereby a
knowledge of the doings of the alcheringa ancestors was
communicated to the younger men, and the sacred churinga
some of which belonged to them, others to more recent ancestors
and others to still living individuals, were carefully examined and
explained.
After about three months, during which time the younger men
had been living mainly in the Engwurra camp, an important
change in the proceedings took place. The young men were, in
parties of three and four, put under the charge of certain of the
older men who had already been through the ceremony and
received collectively the name of Upongwurra , a word which
implies an absence of certain forms of decoration, such as grease,
and had their foreheads and the hole through the nasal septum
decorated with twigs of a particular species of Eremophila.
Between each young man and the elder man in charge of him
the relationship of Apmurra was established, that is, the young
man might not speak to, or in the presence of, the older one.
Daily, just at sunrise, the Upongwurra were sent in a body out
of the Engwurra camp under charge of two or three old men
and to the accompaniment of the loud whirring and booming of
churinga or bullroarers. It was now their duty to remain out in
the bush securing food for the old men, to whom it was brought
in at night time.
Now also began the fire ordeals which were of three forms.
The first took place in the main women’s camp at sunrise or
sunset or both. All the Bultharra and Panunga women in one
spot and all the Purula and Kumarra in another, gathered
together and, each party having made a fire, awaited the approach
of the Upongwurra, who were driven towards them in a body by
older men, protecting themselves as well as they could with shields
and boughs of Eremophila from the burning grass and boughs
which the women threw over their heads.
After having been thus treated by each group of women
separately, the Upongwurra turned and fled to the Engwurra
camp, near to which the women, of course, dare not come.
The second tire ordeal took place out in the bush, and was
repeated on two separate days. The older men made a large hot


re m a secluded spot amongst the ranges, and having placed
green boughs on the red-hot embers made the young men lie
down upon it, each one for perhaps three or four minutes, in the
stifling smoke and heat. This was undoubtedly, as the authors
can testify after trying the heat of the fire, at all events a very
unpleasant and rather severe ordeal.
The third was less severe and will be described shortly.
While the Upongwurra were out of camp the old men still
went on performing ceremonies, reserving many of them, however,
or night-time, when, specially towards the end, there was little
rest to be had. Singing and ceremonies went on with little
intermission, often till two or three o’clock in the morning The
ceremonies, though it is not necessary to describe them here
were, it must be remembered, such as required elaborate prepara-
tion m the way of decorating the performers, and often occupied
m this way from three to six hours.
Two days before the last ceremony was performed, under the
direction of the old man who had been in supreme charge
throughout, a small gum tree about twenty feet in height was
cut down and carried into camp. After being smeared all over
with human blood and having had the upper end decorated with
a tuft of eagle-hawk feathers, a chilarra or head-band worn
across the forehead by natives and a nose-bone, it was fixed
upright in the ground close to the Parra. On the last night all
the Upongwurra were brought in and after having lain for” wo or
three hours in a long line and in perfect silence, with each man’s
head upon the Parra (this they did every night during the last
two weeks), they got up, and a number of small fires were made
round the base of the pole. The latter was called the Kau-aua
and is the most important and sacred ceremonial object of the
tnbe. The whole of the night was spent in painting the backs
o the Upongwurra with various designs characteristic of different
totems, but the painting on each man had no relationship of
necessity to his own totem, and was always done by the old man
to whom he was apmurra.
In the women’s camp two large shallow holes were dug out,
each about two feet deep, and in these—by the Panunga and
Bultharra in one and by the Kurnarra and Purula in the other-
fires were made.


Just before sunrise the decoration of the Ilpongwurra was
complete, and in single file they passed across the river out from
the Engwurra ground on to the women’s camp, and halted about
fifty yards from the fires, behind which the women stood moving
their hands up and down as if to invite the men on.
Then each old man led his apmurra men up to the fires, on
which they were placed in a kneeling position by the women. The
Bultharra and Panunga women put the Kumarra and Purula
men on and vice versa. In a short time it was all over, and
turning back, the Ilpongwurra, now transformed into Erliara, or
fully initiated natives, returned to the Engwurra ground.
All that remained now to complete the ceremony was for the
ban of silence between the men who were apmurra to each other
to be done away with. The younger ones had still to remain out
in the bush until they brought in an offering of food to their
apmurra. When this was done, and it usually took place after
an interval of time varying from one to four weeks, the older
man performed some sacred ceremony, at the close of which
the mouths of all those present were touched with some sacred
object which had been used in the ceremony, and in this way
the ban of silence was removed.






