

(%J < (JWfltf/X-M /
AN ADDRESS
UPON
THE WATER SUPPLY
FOR THE CITY AND SUBURBS
DELIVERED BY
MR. JOJELN LUCAS, M.. 3?.
IN THE TOWN HALL,
BEFORE THE MAYOR AND ALDERMEN OF THE CITY OF SYDNEY.
SYDNEY:
J,y
GIBBS, SHALLARD, AND CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
108 PITT STREET.


f d 757/


h U /54-
AN ADDRESS
UPON
THE WATER SUPPLY
FOR THE CITY AND SUBURBS
DELIVERED BY
NT ~R. JOHN LUCAS, ML !P.
IN THE TOWN HALL,
BEFORE THE MAYOR AND ALDERMAN OF THE CITY OF SYDNEY. ’
SYDNEY:
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS
108 PITT STEEET.




WATER SUPPLY
Camperdown, October 24th, 1878.
Fellow-citizens, —
Some of my friends have asked me to publish in a pamphlet the address I
delivered-on the 26th ultimo, in the Town Hall before the Mayor and Aldermen of
Sydney. I hesitated to do so when it was first mentioned to me, as there was a fair
report of my remarks in the Herald; but it was urged that a newspaper report,
however good, is diurnal, and that a pamphlet is likely to be more read and more
permanent. And when I considered that the report in the Herald omitted nearly
all my quotations from “ The Report and Evidence taken by the Royal Commission,”
appointed for the examination of the best means for the better supply of
London with water for domestic use, for flushing sewers and drains, for cleans-
ing streets ; and also for the best means of using existing works, and of erecting
any new works requisite, and maintaining them in action. This Royal Commission,
whose names are attached to the report, consisted of Carlisle, Ashby, Edwin
Chadwick, and T. Southwood Smith. This Commission obtained the evidence and
services of such men as Hawksley, Henley, Barlow, Captain Vetch, Batemen, Lee,
Rawlingson, Roe, Lovic, Morris, and several other of the most eminent civil
engineers in Europe—Dr. Lyon Playfair, Professor Way, Dr. Angus Smith,
Professor Clark, and many other eminent chemists in England ; and also my quotation
from “ The Report, Proceedings, and Minutes of Evidence of the Select Com-
mittee of 1865 on the Thames River,” and believing quotations from the evidence
of such men as above-mentioned would be more convincing to my fellow-citizens
than anything which I could say, I will, therefore (caring little for the trouble or
cost, so long as I can relieve my native city from this most grievous burden—the
Upper Nepean Water Supply), publish in pamphlet form my address as published
in the Herald , merely placing in their proper position the quotations I made, and
the conversation at San Souci.
Hoping that the little pamphlet may be extensively read, as I believe the
prosperity of this city and suburbs, and the interests of every human being
living therein, is deeply interested in the question to which it refers—Water, cheap
water, good water for domestic use, for manufacturing and sanitary purposes.


Upon the conclusion of the ordinary business of the City Council, Mr. John
Lucas, M.P., who was present for the purpose of addressing the Council
upon Water Supply, on rising said he was much pleased that the Mayor and
aldermen had kindly afforded him an opportunity of addressing them on the
important question of the Water Supply to the City and Suburbs. He believed that
if the scheme recommended by the Commissioners were carried into effect, it would
ruin the city for many years. . . , ~ £ . ,
He was examined, as a witness, before the Commissioners, and was the hrst to
direct attention to the Upper Nepean as a source of supply, and then informed
them within twenty feet of the elevation which they would obtain; but he
had no idea that they would take the water thirteen miles round, and erect the
costly and dangerous dam at Prospect, and other very expensive structures. He
thought they should have taken advantage of the railway cuttings and embank-
ments (which could be done at two-thirds the cost of their scheme), and the water
delivered by gravitation to an elevation a hundred feet above the highest part ot
His present intention was to quote some opinions of Mr. Clark, the hydraulic
engineer, upon the advantages of the George’s River scheme, and to refer also
to that gentleman’s objections to it. He would then give them his (Mr. Luoas )
objections to the proposed scheme for bringing water from the Upper Nepean
Mr Clark reported that the water-shed or catchment area of the George s Kiver
was more than ample—in fact, much larger than the Upper Nepean water-shed—
being as 375 square miles as against 325 ; also, that that large drainage area was
chiefly through a sandstone country, and that the sources were similar to those
of the Cataract and Cordeaux (from which the Upper Nepean scheme drew its
PP He reported also that the George’s River, with its branches and bays,
formed a natural reservoir with an area of 4,000 acres (above three times the size
of the proposed Prospect Reservoir); also that the whole of the drainage of that
immense water-shed fell into that reservoir, and that reservoir brought the water
(without one shilling’s expense other than the dam) to within four and a quarter
miles of the present pumping works, at Botany, and within seven and a half miles
° f S Mr. B Clark reported that George’s River with its jutting points and bays offered
extraordinary facilities for the construction of impounding dams, together with the
necessary weirs by which flood water could be discharged. That gentleman also
went on to say, “It may be truly said that there are but few places where the
same facilities exist as are there found for such constructions, where long promon-
tories or tongues of rock stand opposite each other with extensive bays and branches
between, and if Mr. Lucas’s scheme was adopted, he said that the water could
be drawn off at the head off Townsend’s Bay; that four and a quarter miles of
piping would conduct it to the Botany pumping works, and then another line ot
* See Commissioners’ Eeport.


pipes from Botany would bring it to Sydney.” The cost Mr. Lucas estimated
at £288,750 (which estimate Mr. Clark’s never disputed), would be as follows:
The dam ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 90,000
Weir over Cummin’s Point ... ... ••• •••
Stonework at Rocky Point, Sans Souci ••• . • • •••
Four and a half miles of piping, at £17,500 a mile ... ... 78,750
Additions to Botany Pumping Works ... ... ... L>,ooo
Another set of pipes from Botany to Sydney ... ••• 30,000
Capitalizing £2,000 a year, at 5 per cent., additional working
expenses at Botany Pumping-house ... ... ••• 40,000
283,750
Interest at 6 per cent, for two years ... ... ••• 14,185
Total ... ... £297,935
That will include the interest of money whilst in course of construction —viz.,
two years.
Mr. Clark also reported that 12,000,000 gallons a day could be delivered
from Greorge’s River, at less than two-thirds the cost that it could be delivered
from the Upper Nepean.
Mr. Clark said, “ It appeared to have been adopted as a foregone conclusion
that a supply by gravitation should be obtained, and that a pumping scheme would
not be desirable ; and in some of the papers before me I find that the liability to
accident and interruption from the failure of machinery is put forward as a reason
why a pumping scheme should not find favour.” He said also, “W e are accus-
tomed to go to sea for long voyages, trusting entirely to the proper and continued
action of the steam engine; we travel on railways without fear of such failure, and
if there be one use of the steam engine more than all others where it can be made
applicable with confidence it is the pumping of water. And as a matter of economy,
where engines of proper construction are adopted, the cost of pumping a thousand
gallons of water a hundred feet high (where coal can be obtained at 20s. per ton), is
a one-fourth of a penny.”
And to support Mr. Clark’s estimate, as to the cost of pumping, I find that in
London, that it costs £25 to pump seventy-two million gallons one hundred feet
high.
Mr. Wickstead, the engineer to the East London Water Company, estimates
the cost of pumping at Is. for raising eighty thousand gallons one hundred feet;
or, in other words, 9d. per house, for lifting a year’s average supply one hundred
feet.
' And in Holland they pump, with three Cornish engines, ten times as much
as it takes to supply London, or one thousand million gallons per day.
So at Mr Clark’s rate, six million gallons a day will cost £2,190, and twelve
million gallons £4,380 per annum, and if capitalised would increase the cost by
£43,800 or £87,600, respectively.


The Commissioners proposed six million gallons a day to be increased to
twelve million. The Sewage and Health Board, however, passed a resolution at
their meeting on the sth of March, 1876, to the effect that no supply would be
considered adequate unless it would ensure a delivery of at least thirty million
gallons daily.
It may fairly be doubted, however, whether thirty million gallons a day would
be adequate twenty years hence. The next two paragraphs will give an idea how
the demand for water increases when the supply is ample.
The supply of water to Glasgow was in 1840 twenty-six gallons per head of
the population. In 1845 it rose to thirty gallons. In 1852 it rose to thirty-five
gallons. This was considered a large supply ; but when the water was brought from
Loch Katrine forty gallons was looked upon as the extreme. Nevertheless in 1864
the demand and supply reached forty-five gallons per head of the population.
In London, in 1848, the supply was thirty-five millions of gallons per day;
in 1850 the Board of Health reported that a supply of forty-six million gallons
would be all that would be required ; still, in 1856 the daily delivery amounted
to eighty-one million gallons, and in 1865 the actual delivery amounted to one
hundred and eight million gallons. Thus in fifteen years the demand and supply
rose from thirty-five million gallons to one hundred and eight million gallons daily.
If in these old and settled cities with a cold climate, the demand has increased
so enormously, viz., from thirty-five million to a hundred and eight million, or
three times the quantity, in fifteen years, who can estimate what will be the demand
ten years hence in this city and suburbs, where the population, manufactories,
and other demands for water are increasing so enormously.
We require, and must have, a cheap and an unlimited supply in the suburbs —
more so than in the city—the suburbs where there is no Hyde Park, no Public
Domain, no Moore Park, Prince Alfred Park, &c., &c.—“ but they must have parks”
—where no provisions have been made for sewer or drainage, where the streets are
miserably narrow (the average width is from twenty-five to thirty-three feet), some
of these are now, and all will in a few years have densely crowded populations, and
it is absolutely necessary. Yes ; our prosperity, our health, in fact our very existence
as a healthy and prosperous people depend upon a cheap I cheap ! and unlimited
supply of water. Not only for domestic and manufacturing purposes, but for sanitary
purposes, to cleanse the miserable narrow ways —mis-called streets.
If in fifteen years the London demand has increased three-fold, could we
wonder if our demand were in seven years to increase three-fold. If so, then seven
and a half years hence we shall require fifteen million gallons a day at least, as
above five million gallons a day have been pumped into the city, without Eandwick,
Waverley, Newtown, Balmain, Petersham, Ashfield, Five Dock, Burwood, and
Homebush, receiving any supply.
Well may our Sewage and Health Board report that no scheme should be adopted
unless it would supply thirty million gallons a day. I think they are far more
below the extreme demand than were the London Commission in 1850, which
reported that forty-four million gallons a day would be ample for London, where


in fifteen years the supply amounted to one hundred and eight million gallons a
day; and I believe ten years hence our demand will be up to thirty million gallons
a day, and will continue to increase correspondingly.
Every house in the city and suburbs must have its bath; and as Mr. Clark
reports that it will cost only one farthing to pump 1,000 gallons one hundred feet
high, consequently thirty-three persons each using 30 gallons at a bath can bathe,
the whole costing only one farthing. Should not every person bathe? Yes; and
I believe twenty years hence a hundred million gallons will be too small a supply.
We must have cheap water —an abundance of water —where shall we get it ?
The Upper Nepean scheme provides for six million gallons a day, to be increased
to twelve million gallons a day. It will take seven years to complete that scheme.
At that time I believe we shall require fifteen million gallons a day at least. Still
short; still limited ; and before it is completed we will require an increased supply.
Mr. Clark reports that George’s River Reservoir, without receiving one drop
from rain or drainage, and after allowing for evaporation would supply twenty-four
million gallons a day for twelve months—that is, if the dam was erected at Tom
Ugly’s Point; but if erected at Sans Souci, the reservoir would be increased one-
fourth, consequently the supply would be increased to thirty-two million gallons a
day for twelve months.
With a rainfall of only inches during the year, it would supply one hundred
million gallons a day.
With the smallest rainfall for the last thirty years—viz., 26 inches—it would
supply three hundred and eleven million gallons a day.
And with the average rainfall for the last thirty years—viz., 48 inches—it
would supply five hundred and seventy-six million gallons a day, or five times as
much as the quantity used in London with its three and a half million inhabitants,
and one-third the length of tunnel, which Mr. Moriarty proposes to carry the water-
round to the Great Dam at Prospect would turn the whole of the Upper Nepean
water into the George’s River reservoir, and increase its gathering ground to 700
square miles.
Mr. Clarke in his report, page 30, states —“ That the objection to the con-
version of a salt water estuary to a fresh water lake has been well answered in the
prize essay previously alluded to.”
The following are extracts from the Prize Essay referred to by Mr. Clarke :
“ To prevent any dispute as to the degree of salinity in George’s River, your
essayist has purposely ignored its comparative freshness, and now proceeds to treat
it as if it was sea water, containing 2,380* grains of salt per gallon, and, therefore, in
answer to the first portion of the 4th question, begs to state.
“ That as the reservoir at low neap tides (question 2) contains, 4,886,460,000
gallons, and at the level of tbe high spring tides, 10,587,330,000 gallons, the
difference between the two quantities will show the quantity of fresh water that
can be added to the salt. Thus:—
10,587,330,000—4,886,460,000= 5,700,870,000 gallons.
• George’s River water contains only 1,478 grains per gallon.


“ Suppose then, the reservoir was allowed to fill with fresh water to a further
depth of six feet, or up to the level of high water at spring tides, and the reservoir
ran down again to a low neap tide level; in the course of the operation the salt
in the original 4,886,460,000 gallons would be mixed with 10,587,330,000, of
which 5,700,870,000 would be fresh water, and as your essayist would suggest the
construction of the discharge tunnel at a considerable depth below low water mark
(at neap tides), he thinks it fair to assume that as a minimum the amount of salt
discharged will be in the same proportion as the quantity of water discharged is to
the quantity of water retained ; or, as 5,700,870,000 is to 4,£86,460,000.
The first change, then would reduce the 2,380 grains per gallon to ... 1098.4 gr.
The 2nd change ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 502.3 gr.
„ 3rd „ 231.8 „
„ 4th „ 106.9 „
sth „ 49.3 „
„ 6th „ 22.7 „
„ 7th „ 10-4 „
” 77 AO
„ Bth „ 4.8 „
9th „ “ »
;; ioth „ 1-os-,,
;; uth „ 46,,
“ Assuming that the ingress of salt water into the aforesaid reservoir was
permanently arrested when the water stood at the level of low neap tide, and that
the reservoir were allowed to fill the level of high spring tides by the fresh water
flowing down the river; and that by means of discharge outlets the water were
allowed to fall again to the level of the low neap tides, the quantity of salt would
be reduced in proportion as 2.156 ; 1, or as 2380 grains: 1098.4 grs. per Imperial
gallon.
And by repeating this process nine times this water would be rendered
fresh enough for domestic purposes, as it would contain 2 grains of salt. The water
supplied to London contains from 12 to 27 grains. The essay says—
“ Referring to the returns of the Government Astronomer of New South
Wales it will be found that the average rain fall during a period of twenty-nine
years, viz., from 1841 to 1869 inclusive was as follows ;
January 4.041
February 4.939
March 1 4.446
April 6.779
May 4.573
June 5.134
July 4.425
August 3.221
September 2.802
October 3.497
November 2.823
December 2.715
Supposing the reservoir to be closed against the admission of salt water on the
31st December it is obvious that it would require to be filled up to the level of


high spring-tides, and kept at or above that level; so as to prevent the influx of
salt water at high spring-tides through the aperture of discharge, as well as to give
sufficient head to insure free discharge during all states of the tide.
For this purpose it requires 5,700,870,000 gallons to fill it up to the level of
high spring-tides, and supposing this quantity be increased to 8 million of gallons,
it will require 4.47 inches of rain upon the watershed to give that quantity; after
which, as previously shown, it will require 36,650 millions of gallons to pass
through the reservoir in order to eliminate the salt. To supply this quantity
requires a rainfall of 19.76 inches (exclusive of two-thirds of what falls on the
reservoir itself). Adding these two quantities together, 4.47 and 19.76 we have a
total of 24.23 inches which would be supplied by the average rainfall of January,
February, March, April, and May.
Thus in five months the salt water would be reduced to 2.6 grains per gallon,
and 8,000 million gallons of fresh water left in store for the supply of Sydney.
Every person will admit with Mr. Clark that the objection to the salt water
is well answered by the Prize Essay.
The following is an extract from a letter written by Mr. Lennox, the gentle-
man who constructed the dam across George's River at Liverpool. With respect t©
the salt water, Mr. Lennox says : “ A sluice (not in the dam) would scour all the
salt water out of the reservoir above the dam before it is completed, and as the
salt is in solution, it would go out with the water. When the Liverpool dam was
being constructed, he (Mr. Lennox) allowed the salt water to run off at low tides ;
so that, before the dam was completed, the water was fresh and good; but the
people were afraid to use it until Dr. Hill (the Colonial Surgeon) tested it and said
it was quite good.
“ When the Sugar Company had their works at Canterbury, their works and
machinery suffered very much through using the salt water. I constructed a small
dam across Cook’s River for the Company. After the first rain after the dam was
finished, the water above the dam was perfectly fresh and good, while the water
below the dam remained quite salt, and has remained so ever since (1851), The
people of Canterbury commenced to use the water for drinking within six weeks
after the dam was completed.”
Mr. M‘Kay, the Queensland Commissioner to the Philadelphia Exhibition,
wrote a very graphic account of the dam at that city over the Schuylkyl. The tide
water rises six feet; and it appears, in many other respects like the George’s River,
the water became fresh, and the citizens of Philadelphia, eight hundred thousand,
are abundantly supplied with water at one time as salt as George’s River now is.
After these facts, who will doubt that, if George’s River were dammed, the water
above the dam would in a few months become fresh and pure.
Mr. Clark’s objections to the George’s River scheme were that Bunbury Curran
Creek, which ran through some shale country, drained into George’s River.
Bunbury Curran Creek drained into the river several miles above the dam at
Liverpool. The Commissioners’ scheme ran above twenty-four miles through the


worst shale formation in the country. In fact, in the Upper Nepean scheme he
is favourable to shale. (See his Report, page .) The cuttings were from 30 to
40 feet deep, so that, according to Mr. Clark, shale drainings are objectionable in
one scheme but not in the other.*
Mr. Clark’s second objection was that drainage from manufacturing establish-
ments was at present received into the river at Liverpool. There were two indus-
tries at Liverpool—a paper manufactory and a wool-scouring establishment, which
could reasonably be compelled to purify any water passing from their works into
the river.
What, however, was the drainage at Liverpool compared to some in
England, where the sewage of several large towns, with a population of above a
million people, discharged the whole of their sewage into the River Thames above
the point where the water is drawn from that river to supply London.
A dead animal was discovered in the Yan Yean. Such an outcry was made in
Melbourne that the Government called upon their chemist, who reported that it
would take three thousand dead bullocks to make any perceptible effect on the
quality of the water; and the Yan Yean is only one-third the area of George’s
River.
The Liverpool people could be compelled to filter their water if thought
desirable. It should be borne in mind that the works at Liverpool were twenty-four
miles above the site for the proposed dam, and at the extreme end of a reservoir of
5,000 acres, or 8 square miles ; but if those two works were to be bought up, the
cost of doing so would be a trifle compared with the cost of the Commissioner’s
scheme. If those two industries were allowed to work on, they would not in 12
months discharge into George’s River so much objectionable matter as the wind
would in one day blow into the open cuttings in the Upper Nepean Scheme.
Mr. Clark reported that there was no difficulty in constructing the dam at
George’s River, and that the safety of the structure depended upon the ample
* Note. — As regards Bunbury Curran Creek, during the drought of 1875-6 great fears were entertained
lest the Botany water supply should fail, consequently the public mind became very unsettled, and the
Government took steps to avert the threatened danger, and visited both Penrith and Liverpool to
judge of the feasibility of obtaining a temporary supply. The following paragraph, which appeared
in the Sydney Morning Herald, is an account of their visit to Liverpool:—
Yesterday afternoon the Honorable John Robertson, accompanied by the Honorable John Lackey,
the Honorable W. B. Dailey, the Honorable Saul Samuel, Mr. Whitton (Engineer-in-Chief), and Mr.
Moriarty (Engineer-in-Chief for Harbours and Rivers), visited Liverpool by special train to inspect
George’s River dam, in order that some information might be obtained as to its capabilities, should it be
found necessary to make use of it in obtaining a supply of water for Sydney in the event of any possible
emergency, until more perfect arrangements could be made. All the gentlemen present were of opinion
that arrangements might be made for supplying from George’s River any local deficiency that might
arise in Sydney. The Sewage and Health Board has urged upon the Government the desirableness of
bringing water from Liverpool by rail for the supply of the suburbs along the line.
This dam was broken through about three years ago, and of course the tide was flowing over
it until it was repaired; yet, after a protracted drought, and when it would be most likely to be
brackish, it was tested with the result above mentioned, which is a further proof that the salt can be
washed out of George’s River.


dimensions of the waste weir which should he capable of discharging in twenty-
four hours a quantity equal to the depth of six inches over the entire catchment area
of 375 square miles. That gentleman found that a weir could be constructed 2,180
feet long, and said that to carry otf the above-mentioned depth of water the water
would require to run over a weir feet deep, or less than he (Mr. Lucas') had pro-
posed, but yet more than was usual in such cases.
Mr. Clark also reported that the only difficulty in the George’s River scheme was
the waste weir. At the same time he reported that no place in the world afforded
greater facilities for such a structure, and pointed out where one of sufficient
capacity could be made, having a capacity of 7,630 square feet, which would be
ample; while he (Mr. Lucas) proposed one having a capacity of 12,000 square feet.
Why make so much discussion about that weic, when Mr. Clark showed that
there was no difficulty in connection with it ? Indeed, not half the difficulty that
would be found in the proposed wash weir and the dam at Prospect. These
paltry and laboured difficulties would lead people to suppose that Mr. Clark was
creating imaginary objections to justify his passing over the Greorge’s River scheme
and adopting one inferior in every particular.
Mr. Clark’s next objection is, That navigation of George’s River, although at
present confined to wood and fishing boats (seven in number, and of a united
capacity of fifty-six tons), was not worthy of consideration: but, said Mr. Clark—
“ The future should be considered. Manufactures which have been commenced at
Liverpool may extend.”
In what direction ? Any works which could use salt water could find far more
convenient sites in Port Jackson, Middle Harbour, Lane Cove, or Parramatta
River, with their bays and inlets, without going outside the Heads and fifty-one
miles up a river in some places so shallow that a four-oared gig could not find
sufficient water to float.
And the cheap freights Mr. Clark speaks of. Why some goods at present were
brought by rail from Liverpool at Is. Bd. per ton. Would it be possible to bring it
for three times that amount by boats, even under the most favourable circum-
stances ? Mr. Clark must have been sadly in want of an objection when he hit
upon the idea of stopping the navigation of George’s River as a reason why it
should not be selected as a source of water supply for the city and suburbs.
Absurd as the last was, the next objection was far more ridiculous. Mr. Clark
reported that Botany Bay was a shallow inlet of the ocean into which George’s
River and Cook’s River (the latter a very small stream) discharged their waters, and
if George’s River flood waters and tidal action were stopped, it was not difficult
to see that Botany Bay would diminish in depth by the accumulation of drift and
sand from the shores of the ocean and other causes (what about the drift leaves,
cattle manure, &c., which every wind would blow into the open cuttings in his pet
scheme) and become useless for the purposes of navigation.
If such would be the result of damming George’s River, that alone would
justify the expenditure, as forty-nine square miles of land would be reclaimed


worth £IOO per acre, or yielding a total of £3,000,000, besides opening up hundreds
of thousands of acres of land. That land, although in the immediate neigh-
bourhood of Sydney, was less known and more isolated from the metropolis than
land in the interior of the colony, and all in consequence of Botany Bay and
George’s River forming barriers to its approach.
His (Mr. Lucas’)objections to the Upper Nepean scheme arose from the fact that
the rivers were in gorges, through which the water ran very rapidly. The sides of these
gorges were thickly covered with timber. A dam ten feet high was to be built in
the channel of the Nepean to turn the water into a tunnel four and a half miles
long, to the Cataract River, where another small dam was to be constructed to
turn both streams into another tunnel one and a quarter mile long. It must not
be forgotten that during floods one hundred times as much water as would flow to
Sydney rushed down these gorges, bringing with it the largest trees, immense
quantities of sand and grass, and other rubbish, which would most assuredly fill
up the dams and choke up the proposed tunnels. That was a serious objection.
He believed those tunnels would frequently be filled with debris, which would be
difficult to clear out. *
Persons who had seen the quantities of mud, sand, timber, and other
matters a flood frequently deposited on the banks and flats of the Hunter,-the
Nepean, and the Hawkesbury, where the trees and debris were less plentiful and
the floods far less rapid, would know how easy those channels would be choked ; and
contractors would know how long it would take to empty a tunnel four and a half
miles long with only the ends to work at.
Mr. Lucas’ next objection was, the number of falls—sixteen. Unless gates
were fixed it would cause a great portion of the water-course to be dry; and it
would be very costly to remove the rubbish which would be sure to blow into it.
Mr. Lucas’ third objection was, that if gates were con-tructed at the top of
each fall men must be stationed at each, and have a telegraph from one to the
other. Conducting the water forty-six miles along open cuttings, through thick
scrubs and timbered country and open pasture land would necessitate some of
the cuttings being forty feet deep and eighty feet wide at the top. Every windy
day tons of gum leaves, rotten grass, dry horse and cattle manure, would be blown
into these wide cuttings, and made to fall into the slow water-courses, where they
would decompose, and be carried on to the great dam at Prospect. It would then
be impossible to imagine a more perfect decoction for the creation of the lower
species of animal and vegetable life so destructive to the health and life of human
beings.
So objectionable were open cuttings considered by the Board of Health in
London that it was proposed to do away with the New River as a source of
supply for London, and the following is some of the evidence against open
cuttings :
* Note.— lt may be stated that gates can be provided. If one consider the formation of the locality,
they"will come to the conclusion that one half hour’s rain storm will send the water down with such
rapidity that the damage would be done before the gates could be used—especially at night.


The following extracts will show the very great objections to open cuttings:—
This Eoyal Commission to inquire into the health of the City of London,
reports: —“We must, for securing to the population of large towns water of
superior quality, still revert to the principles of public works of water supply con-
structed in the Roman empire—namely, to conduct it in covered instead of open
channels, and store it in covered instead of open reservoirs and to show the vast
importance of a cool delivery, and freedom from the filth collected in open channels,
they quote at great length from the evidence of several of the most eminent civil
engineers and chemists in England, whom they examined as witnesses, and the
following are a few extracts from the Commission’s quotation :
“Capt. Vetch remarks that the New River is 18 feet wide and 4 feet deep, with
a length of about 39 miles, with a fall of 22 feet. lij. warm seasons, so long and
broad a surface exposed to the atmosphere gets heated to a degree favourable to the
production of vegetable and animal life of the lower forms. The high temperature
of the winter further facilitates the decoction of leaves and other vegetable matter
which gets blown into the New River, to the manifest injury of the water; but
there are other pollutions of a worse character to which all open channels are
subject. True, the New River Company have 5 acres and 38 acres of settle pools
to deposit the solid matter, but exposed as they are to the heat of the summer, the
tendency thus afforded to the germination of animal and vegetable life, and the
decoction of vegetable matters create more evil than good. If the New River
water was conducted in covered stone, brick, or iron channels, it would arrive as
cool as when delivered from the spring; it could not recive any pollution in its
course, and being exposed to neither light nor heat, no tendency could be created
to germinate animal or vegetable life.”
John Thomas Cooper, the eminent practical chemist who resides at Blackfriars
Road, states : —“The water frequently comes in tainted with the smell of decayed
animal or vegetable matter, it having, in fact, a slightly putrescent smell and taste,
and such water certainly should not be supplied to a population.”
Professor Clark is of opinion “ that the disregard to coolness, and the polluted
collections in the open channels was the greatest cause of intemperance in London.
He says it was with no small concern that he learned how few of the inhabitants of
London, and especially the lower orders, drank water. In making my experiments
upon these waters, when I inquired of the servants how they liked particular waters
it was with perfect surprise I discovered that they—generally mere lads—knew
nothing about the taste of waters. They are the same sort of persons as would be
accustomed to drink water in other places, but unpleasant tastes in water drives
them to other beverages here.”
Dr. Thorn, Dr. Sutherland, Professor Playfair, and several others all speak
strongly of “ the bad effects the delivery of open channel water—from its pollution
and want of coolness—has upon the people of London, particularly the lower class,
which it drives to alcoholic or fermented drinks.”


The Commission goes on : —“ For sanitary purposes the quality of coolness is of
very great importance. Cold impedes and even arrests decomposition
The disregard to coolness and pollution—the consequence of open channels, as the
New River and River Lea —indisposes the poorer population to the use of water as
a beverage, consequently they are driven to habitual indulgence in ardent spirits
and fermented liquors. The stomach is nauseated by tepid water, and being
compelled to take a certain quantity of fluid daily, if water does not agree with the
people they must take some other drink, and with such water the medical evidence
states they cannot live without stimulants.”
“The evidence taken by this Commission has established the principle of covered
channels and covered reservoirs, and that if the New River works belonged to the
public they ought to be abandoned, and the Roman principle of covered channels
and reservoirs reverted to, as Captain Vetch proposes.”
Even Mr Clark admits the necessity of covered works, for in his report upon
the Maitland supply (fol. 8), he says : —“ln order to preserve the purity of the water
it is desirable it should be kept in covered reservoirs. It is to be conveyed in
pipes—no open canals—not only to exclude leaves, dust, &c., but also the light,
which engenders the growth of vegetable aud animal organisms. All the reservoirs
proposed are to be covered with a roofing of galvanised iron supported upon
suitable timber.”
Again, at page 39, “he says it will undoubtedly take some time for the
water, after its first admission into the Prospect Dam to attain its proper condition
and brightness. The loose rubbish, vegetable and mineral, which the water will
take up in the new channel and reservoir ” (yes, and which will be renewed by
every breath of wind), “ will be held in suspension for a time.”
In the face of this, he (Mr. Clark) recommends a scheme having 36£ miles of
open cuttings and reservoirs. When the London Commission of Health recommends
that the New River should be abandoned in consequence of its open channel and
settling beds, and that in future all water for town supply should be conducted at
least four feet below the surface of the earth to insure coolness and purity, and that
the distribution pipe should also be so laid.
If the state of coolness is considered of such consequence in the temperate
climate of England, is it not much more so here ? Then should we carry out so
costly a scheme which proposes to convey the water miles in open channels and
open reservoirs, exposed to our summer heats ? To me it appears perfect madness.
The London Commission reports that “If the same water coming through
pipes or a covered brick channel was compared to that coming through open canals
the difference would be very striking. Open canal water would be tepid and alive
with animalculge. The microscope would show that vibro-fluviatias, eel-like
Note. —If open channels are so objectionable in the temperate climate of England, are they not
infinitely more objectionable here ? We are to have open channels 34 miles long, with our summer sun
beaming on the water, and the thermometer at 120.


animals, were in great abundance. Such water is quite unfit for domestic purposes*
Pipe water, if conveyed four feet below the surface, would arrive as cool as when
delivered from the spring. It would be free from all pollution, and being exposed
to neither light nor heat, no tendency would be created to germinate animal
or vegetable life.”
Another objection he (Mr. Lucas) has to the scheme was that the great dam at
Prospect would be 80 feet high and 7,128 feet, or miles long. It would have to-
hold back forty-nine million tons of water and be constructed on the slope of a hill.
Who would not like to live in the vicinity of such a dam ? If it were to burst it
would drown half the people in Parramatta.
He (Mr. Lucas) had never heard of a dam so long, so high, and to keep back
such an immense weight of water. We frequently hear of even small dams bursting
with great loss of life and property. He considered the Prospect Dam exceedingly
dangerous; and nothing would induce him to live within miles of it.
Again, the mode of conducting the water from Prospect to Sydney, viz., by
aqueducts, syphons, iron troughs, and pipes, was objectionable. He further
objected to the proposals because it was not a gravitation scheme, as four million
gallons a day would have to be pumped. In fact, it was a gravitation scheme to
the lower levels only, and a pumping scheme to the high parts of the city and
suburbs.
Both Mr. Clark and Mr. Moriarty propose to move the Botany Pumping
Works to Crown Street, to pump the water to the higher levels. Mr. Moriarty states,
page 125 of our Commissioner’s Report, that four million gallons a day will have
to be pumped to the higher levels of the city and suburbs. How ridiculous to call
this mongrel a gravitation scheme.
His next and most serious objection was the cost. Mr. Bell’s estimate
of the Upper Nepean scheme was £4,000,000, or £63,000 per mile. His, Mr.
Lucas’, estimate was £1,920,000 cost of works, and £680,000 for interest and the
cost of supervision whilst in course of construction (eight years). Together the
amounts were £2,600,000, or £41,270 per mile; cost of works, £1,920,000,
or £30,490 per mile; cost of interest and supervision, £680,000, or £10,780 per
mile. In Glasgow the supply was over 26 miles, for £761,000, or £30,000 per
mile.* Mr. Clark’s estimate was £1,250,000, or £19,000 per mile. The city, Pad-
dington, Darlington, Woollahra, Glebe, and Camperdown, all received a supply, and
at ss. per room gave £50,000 per annum as a revenue which was all absorbed by
the present interest and working expenses; so that any additional cost must
increase the price of water. The interest must be paid, and the working expenses
would increase very materially. The following figures would show what would be
* It will be seen that my estimate only exceeded by £490 a mile the actual cost of the Glasgow Works*
where labour is so much cheaper.


the cost of water if the Upper Nepean scheme were adopted, according to the
several estimates: —
Total. Annual interest. Per room. Equal to a tax of
If it costs what Bell estimated £4,000,000 ... £200,000 ... 20s. ... 25 per cent.
~ Bateman 2,960,000
~ Lucas 2,600,000
~ Glasgow 1,890,000
And if the works are completed
at Clark’s estimate 1,250,000
148.000 ... 15s. ... 18 „
130.000 ... 13s. ... 16 „
94,000 ... 9s. lOd. 12 „
62,500 ... 6s. ... 8 „
The-above will be independent of the rates at present paid, as the present revenue
is swallowed up.
Mr. Clark’s reports in favour of the George’s River scheme, were: —
“1. That it possessed an immense watershed of 375 square miles or 239,000
acres, an area three times as large as that which supplies London.
2. That the large gathering ground was chiefly a sandstone country, similar
to the gathering ground of the Commissioner’s scheme.
3. That the rain falling on those immense gathering grounds fell into
natural reservoir—George’s River, with an area of from 4,000 to 5,400 acres.
• 4. That that reservoir was capable of supplying 32,000,000 gallons daily for
twelve months without one drop of rain.
With inches of rain during the*year it would supply 100,000,000 gallons a
day; with 16 inches of rain 311,000,000 gallons daily; and with the average rain-
fall, 570,000,000.
5. That the whole of this water was brought within 4| miles of the present
pumping works, and within miles of Sydney, without one shilling expense.
6. “ A pumping scheme is quite equal to a gravitation scheme other than
the cost of pumping ; that with coals at £1 per ton, pumping would cost only one
farthing per 1,000 gallons.” (So that pumping 12,000,000 gallons daily, would cost
only £4,562 a-year to capitalists, which at 6 per cent, would amount to £91,250,
which would bring the cost of George’s River (making it equal to a perfect gravi-
tation scheme) to £389,185, whilst the mongrel, half-pumping, half-gravitation,
Upper Nepean scheme, would cost above six times the amount, without giving
anything like the supply.)
7. That 12,000,000 gallons a day can be delivered from George’s River for
two-thirds the cost for which it can be delivered from the Upper Nepean.
8. That no place afforded greater facilities—with its long tongues of land and
extension bays and branches—for the construction of impounding dams and waste
weirs tharl George’s River.
9. That the objections of turning a salt water estuary into a fresh water lake
is well answered in a prize essay, which essay states the time in which the water
would be fresh, viz., within six months, after the dam was finished, which would
be at least four years before the water could be brought from the Upper Nepean.


10. The success of this scheme was wholly contingent upon the dam and weir
both of which could be constructed without any difficulty.
11. That there was no difficulty in constructing a dam, and the waste weir
proposed by Mr. Lucas was more than sufficient to carry off the flood.
Mr. Clark’s objections to the George’s River scheme were
1. “That Bunbury Creek,” which ran through some shale country, “drained
into George’s River.” Well, that creek fell into the river several miles above the
Liverpool dam, and in the most severe drought there had been for years the water
was tested and pronounced to be excellent.
2. “The paper-mills and woolwashing establishment at Liverpool. They
could be compelled to filter their waste water, or £30,000 or £40,000 would buy
them out—a trifle compared to the cost of the Commissioners’ scheme.
3. “ That the success of the scheme depended upon the proper construction of
the dam and waste-weir.” Mr. Clark at the same time told them that no other
place afforded such facilities for the construction of those works, and that the
waste-weir proposed would be more than ample. Mr. Clark frequently told him
(Mr. Lucas) that his dam was an excellent idea.
4. “ That it would stop the navigation of George’s River.” This would be
admitted by every one to be no great loss.
5. “ That it would be the cause of filling up Botany Bay.’ If damming up
George’s River would fill up the bay, that result alone would justify the expendi-
ture. Such miserable, paltry, and laboured difficulties would lead a person to
suppose that Mr. Clark was creating imaginary objections to justify his passing
over George’s River as a supply, and adopting one inferior in every particular.
It might be asked, why should Mr. Clark, a stranger to all parties, report in
favour of one scheme in preference to others, unless the one he selected was the
beat ? Upon a little reflection, a person must come to the conclusion that, under
all the circumstances, he could not be expected to select any other than the
Commissioners’ scheme. Mr. Clark, on arriving in the colony, soon found that it
would be to his interest to recommend the Commissioners’ scheme. Mr. Moriarty,
Mr. Bennett, and the Surveyor-General, all Commissioners, were at the head of
the Engineering and Surveying Departments, and would have the supervision and
planning the necessary works for any scheme which might be adopted, consequently
the success or failure of any scheme would in a great measure lay in their hands.
If he recommended the George’s River scheme, Mr. Clark might think they
would obstruct it in every direction, perhaps make the works more costly and
more numerous than required, and perhaps purposely bungle it to make it a failure.
And they would possibly take care that it would not be a success. #
Mr. Clark might think he would be blamed by the Institution of Civil
Engineers for adopting the scheme of unprofessionals, and that his professional
reputation would be damaged. On the other hand, if he recommended the
Commissioners’ scheme, would he not think Messrs. Moriarty, Bennett, and
all the party would do all in their power to make it a success; and the Govern-


ment (the paymasters), who would support their officers, would be, no doubt,
glad that their Commissioners’ scheme had been selected; and probably Mr.
Clark would imagine that his trip to New South Wales would be a great
success—in fact, must be, with all the powers at his back. “Then,” would
he not say, “ What care I, if it is the most costly—what care I if the water
becomes polluted by gum leaves and horse and cattle manure being blown in its
thirty miles of open channels, or if it is delivered to the citizens cool and fit to
drink. It will take eight or ten years to complete the works, and by that time it
will affect me very little whether it is a success or a failure. From every point of
view it will be better for me to go with my professional brethren, and get the good
will of the Government. I will recommend the Commission scheme, although the
water has to be brought sixty-three miles. And what care I what it costs ? Let
those who use it pay for it, as they pay me.”
During the course of his remarks Mr. Lucas referred to several works in con-
firmation of some of his statements, and particularly those connected with his
contention that a large water supply should be secured for future generations. He
was listened to with attention, and at the conclusion of his address was accorded a
vote of thanks for the trouble he had taken in preparing and laying what was
deemed information of a valuable character before the meeting.
I had an appointment to meet Mr. Clark at Sans Souci at ten o’clock one
morning. I kept my time, but Mr. Clark did not put in an appearance until after
one o’clock. The following is the substance of a conversation upon that
occasion. He said he had been detained at Port Hacking; he asked me some
questions about Woronora. He said he had been exploring Port Hacking, and
had a gang of men boring with the view of testing its suitability for the construc-
tion of a dam.
“ The construction of a dam at Port Hacking,” I said ; “ may I ask for what
purpose ?”
Mr. Clark : “ For the purpose of making a reservoir of the Port Hacking
Lucas : “The Port Hacking River is more salt than the St. George’s River;
is it not ?”
Clark; “Well, yes; the dam will not be above two miles from the ocean,
while at George’s River it will be, at the least, eight miles from the Heads.”
Lucas: “ Then you don’t think the salt water a great objection ?”
Clark : “No doubt I should prefer if it were fresh ; but there is a gathering
ground of about fifty square miles, which will soon swim it out.”
Lucas : “ And the size of the reservoir ?”
Clark : “ About 2,000 acres.”
Lucas : “ Don’t you think fifty square miles a small gathering ground ?”
Clark; “ I have been considering how it can be increased; it was with that
view I was asking you about Woronora. As you are aware, at some places the


Woronora runs close to the Port Hacking, and I was thinking of driving a tunnel
from one to the other.”
Lucas: “ Then, I suppose, you would bring the water over George’s River.
How would you do that, over a dam ?”
Clark : “ Oh, no ; I would bring it across on screw piles.”
Lucas : “ The Port Hacking would be purely a pumping scheme ?”
Clark: “Yes; purely. It is a vulgar prejudice that against pumping. It
will cost only one farthing to pump 1,000 gallons, and its proximity to Sydney
would more than compensate for that.”
Lucas : “ Yes; but Greorge’s River is four or five miles nearer to Sydney than
Port Hacking. I suppose the same difficulties would exist at Port Hacking as at
Greorge’s River in constructing the dam and weir ? ”
Clark : “No ; not so great in Greorge’s River. Indeed, I never saw a place
with greater facilities for those works than George’s River.”
Lucas: “ With all due deference to your professional knowledge, I cannot
think that it would be desirable to leave George’s River with a reservoir of 4,000
acres, with a gathering ground of 375 square miles, and go four or five miles further
away to a reservoir of only 2,000 acres, with a gathering ground of 50 square miles,
and to tunnel two or three miles to draw water from the former to increase the
supply of the latter, and then to bring the whole back over the George’s River.”
We left the luncheon table, and I said to a gentleman, “ This Clark is either
a , or he would not have wasted so many weeks of his highly paid
time (£SOO a month with all expenses) groping about Port Hacking.” From that
day forth I lost all confidence in Mr. Clark’s integrity. In a few days after I
heard that he had withdrawn his men from Port Hacking.
In a pamphlet which I published about two years since upon the water
question, it may be seen by Plan No. 5 there attached, that between the pipes
(which would conduct the water from Townsend’s Bay to the pumping-house) and
Botany Bay, there are about 2,000 acres of land. This would make an excellent
site for all our objectionable trades, as they could not be a nuisance. They would
have an unlimited supply of water, and all the objectionable matter and fluid could
be sent into Botany Bay, which is seven miles across. The heads are a mile and a
half apart, and the ocean is continually forcing its surf into it. A railway from
Sydney could be constructed upon the line surveyed for the Botany Railway.
There are no engineering difficulties, and in 4£ miles would bring the traffic to the
site I propose for the objectionable trades, and this railway would be the nucleus
of a suburban railway to Botany and Cook’s River Dam, and in providing a site for
soap boilers, tallow chandlers, tanners and curriers, and such trades, we will be
surmounting a difficulty which has been increasing for many years, and must before
long be disposed of. Thus, you see, the George’s River scheme, besides having the
three necessary elements of a good water supply, namely, cheapness, plenty, and
purity, has the additional advantages of being—first, close to the city, and therefore
very much less liable to pollution; second, drawn from a watershed, which would


T Aff
enuo
finr*
appear from its very barren and sterile character and so little fit for settlement that
there is not one human being to every 10,000 acres living upon it, to have been
intended by Nature as the shed from which our water should be drawn ; and third,
that of relieving us of one of our greatest difficulties—a difficulty which has been
claiming the anxious attention of all thoughtful people in this Colony for some
years, and that is the purging of our city and suburbs of the nuisances which arise
from the trades of soap boiling, candle making, &c., &c., thereby enabling our
people to live in peace and comfort, see their little ones grow up strong and healthy
men and women, fit to cope with the world, instead of growing up weakly, a burden
to their friends, a misery to themselves, and almost useless to their country.




