

AN APPEAL
FROM
EARL GREY AND SIR WILLIAM DENISON,
TO
British Justi ce and Humanity,
AGAINST THE PROPOSED CONTINUANCE
OF
TRANSPORTATION TO VAN DIEMEN’S LAND,
IN A LETTER
TO THE LIBERAL PRESS OF THE NATION,
(WITH PETITIONS, AND AN APPENDIX).
BY C. G. STEVENS,
MEMBER OF THE ANTI-TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE, VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
“Vincula vero, et ea sempiterna, certe ad singularem pœnam nefarii sceleris
inventa sunt. Itaque municipiis dispertiri jubet. Habere videtur ista res iniqui-
tatem si imperare velis: difficultatem si rogare.... Adjungit gravem pœenam
municipibus..... Eripit etiam spem quæ sola hominem in miseriis consolari
solet. Vitam solam relinquit nefariis hominibus.”— Cic. in Cat. iv.
LONDON:
JOHN SNOW, PATERNOSTER-ROW.
TRELAWNEY SAUNDERS, CHARING-CROSS.
[Price Sixpence.]
1851.


TO
SIR WILLIAM MOLESWORTH, BART., M.P.
&c., &c.
Sir,
I have taken the liberty of thus addressing the
following Letter to you, as the foremost of British
Senators, to whom Van Diemen’s Land especially, and
the Australian Colonies in general, are under the, greatest
obligations.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
The Author.
London,
May 18 th, 1851.


AN APPEAL, ETC.
Gentlemen,
You have repeatedly laid the Colonists of Van Diemen’s
Land under great obligations for your generous and able defence
of their liberties and exposure of their wrongs; but more
especially by your prompt castigation of Sir William Denison,
whose ignorance or recklessness of the constitutional defences of
our country against the rapacity and oppression of Colonial
Governors, led him to cleave down their Supreme Court, —to
remove the puisne Judge, and to request the Chief Justice “ to
take eighteen months’ holiday,” while he had settled a cause in
favour of the Government, by a local Bill that both Judges
pronounced to be “ illegal and a breach of the Constitution.”
And were it convenient, it would not be now beneath the
dignity and functions of great leading journals, to repeat the
lesson, that the injurious never forgive, by exhibiting the
manner in which Sir William Denison has ever since that time
systematically slandered the Colonists, because they resolved to
transmit to their children, sacred and unimpaired, the Tribunal
of Public Justice, —to expose his destruction of their inter-
colonial trade by retaining (what was asked for as temporary)
a fifteen per cent, duty, which, as eight voyages can be made
between the Australian Colonies in a year, taxes the capital
employed to the enormous amount of 120 per cent, per annum,
—his augmentation of the Government expenditure, &c. I
will not, however, ask space enough for a full exhibition of his
doings, nor inquire whether Mr. Gladstone was ironical, when
some time ago he talked of “ the able Governor of Van Diemen’s
Landbut I will ask you to lay before your readers and the
nation some brief notice of the master-grievance of that ill-fated
country —that social, political, and moral wrong, whose malignant
sublimity dwarfs every other grievance, not onty of theirs, but
ol any free people, in any country, and in any age, —incom-
parably more weighty than that for which Great Britain lost
America, and for which, if not speedily cured or attempted, will
cost this country to preserve Australia, more than her people
and the age will allow her to expend ; —a wrong, I repeat,
which, if Earl Grey could continue as he hints, it would not be
surprising, nor perhaps calamitous, if the righteous Judge should
take the compendious method which it offers of abolishing at a
stroke a grand portion of this world’s crime and misery, by
submerging in their Ocean Tasmania and Norfolk Island, on


which that vice and wretchedness have been accumulated by
the guilty or infatuated policy of the Colonial Office.
You are aware that ever since 1840, when the Imperial
Government consented to the petitions of New South Wales,
that transportation to that colony should cease, Van Diemen’s
Land and Norfolk Island have been the sole receptacles of
British convicts; —that experiment on experiment, in rapid suc-
cession; has been tried by Lord John Russell, Lord Stanley, Mr.
Gladstone, and Earl Grey, to terrify into submission, or charm
down into decency and rectitude, the thieves, homicides, and pros-
titutes, whose rooted perversity and vicious habits had exhausted
the patience of the twelve Judges ; —that the Colonial Office has
been instructing the nation at a cruel expense, that the men
and women whose characters remained unimproved while dis-
tributed through the empire, and subject to the institutions and
moral influence of twenty-five millions, would be changed when
thirty thousand of them should be collected in a group, to feel
the sanctifying neighbourhood of twenty-two thousand free
Colonists, and a few more children ! Secretaries of State for
the Colonies have taught, that “ Evil communications do corrupt
good manners in England, Ireland, and Scotland, when aban-
doned creatures operate singly on their fellows ; but that an
entirely different result takes place at the Antipodes, when they
come to the grand rendezvous and radiate their crimes and
examples in the mass! —that should a convict be punished in
England, and then let at large among its teeming population,
his recognition would be certain, and the stigma attached to his
felony render his return to virtue impossible ; but just send him
to Hobart Town, clothe him in yellow or gray, number him, file
his history at the police-office for the perusal of felon-constables,
march him backwards and forwards through the city two or
three times a day for a few years, from his labour to the nick-
named Penitentiary,—where more hardened villains scout the
first signs of improvement as cowardice or saintship,—why,
then, they effectually conceal him from knowledge, and pro-
digiously fortify his last fragment of self-respect; and when
thrice re-convicted, in a small population, they then have hope!—
as though they never heard the credible and affecting appeal, by
a re-convicted transport, which “ wrung the heart, and brought
tears to the eyes ” of Judge Burton, when he was about to
sentence him for murder, “ Let a man be what he will when he
comes here, my Lord, he soon becomes as bad as the rest; a
man’s heart is taken from him, and there is given him
THE HEART OF a BEAST.”


Against the ruinous effect of this hypocrisy, or these blunders,
Van Diemen’s Land has been protesting for ten years unceas-
ingly since 1845, when there was published in the Limes , and
by its comparative übiquity all over the world, a lengthy peti-
tion, accompanied by an able, letter illustrating its complaints
from the Cato of Van Diemen’s Land, R. Pitcairn, Esq. ihose
complaints were admitted by the Government and the nation
to be just. Lord J. Russell said, the taxation could not be
increased, and Lord Stanley, that the oppression “ was unex-
ampled in any other society living under Constitutional Govern-
ment.” Immediate redress was promised. £24,000 per annum
was to be paid at once towards gaol and police expenses for
re-convictions (which, contrary to all honesty, the Colonists had
already borne to the amount of £199,000); but even this con-
tribution was withheld for two years, and when it was given, the
Land Fund was resumed in exchange. They said a change
must be made; and Lord Stanley was employed to introduce
his panacea for the past evils of penal discipline, called the
t( Probation, or Gang System,”—a scheme now admitted on all
sides to be not only the most signal failure, but most demo-
ralizing to the prisoner, and afflictive to the Colony, an
experiment which Earl Grey, in 1847, described as assisting to
produce “ a state of things frightful to contemplate, and a
disgrace to the British flag.”
Petitions, long, detailed, and unanswerable, describing the
growing evils of transportation, were despatched to both houses
of Parliament; and Lord Stanley replied, with a promise of
discontinuance for two years, preparatory to entire cessation:
but even this was not fulfilled!
The Colonists re-petitioned, and Earl Grey declared in the
House of Lords, in March, 1847, that transportation to Van
Diemen’s Land was totally abolished, and the Governor, Sir
William Denison, echoed the announcement in the Legislative
Council on the 20th of July, following. These are his words,
which refer also to Lord Stanley’s promise:
“I take the earliest opportunity of laying before you the decision of Her
Majesty’s Government, that transportation to Van Diemen’s Land should not be
resumed at the expiration of the two years for which it has already been decided
that it is to be discontinued. Her Majesty’s Government, in coming to this
decision, has acted in accordance with the expressed wish of a large proportion ot
free inhabitants of this colony.”
The same dispatch contained the promise of “ Free Institu-
tions,” which had been withheld for the express reason that
Tasmania was a penal Colony. The Colonists celebrated the
announcement of both as a jubilee ; especially the abolition ot
transportation, for they cared not for “Free Institutions with-


out. They waited, as may well be supposed, with intense, but
pardonable anxiety, for the Bill containing their moral and
political manumission. Every signal of an English ship was
hailed as the welcome argosy, and drew many to the wharves.
Still there was delay, inexplicable delay, and convict vessels
continued to come in, but brought no Bill. In this state of
expectation, and “hope deferred,” but never relaxing their
efforts, never omitting to fortify themselves, and the resolution
of the Home Government, by petitions and remonstrance, they
remained till 1850, to be petrified with astonishment, or sickened
with disgust; or roused to indignation by Earl Grey’s affirming
(in the debate on the Convict Bill), that “Van Diemen’s Land
would be continued a penal Colony ; that convict discipline
was improved ; that the Colonists are less averse to transport-
ation than'they were in 1846 ; that millions have been spent by
the British Government to fit up the island for a penal Colony,
and that the Colonists established themselves with their eyes
open to the state of things of which they complain.”
I cannot depict to you the excitement which spread, like
lightning all over the island. The Colonists resented, in every
form of language, this renewed act of injustice —this imputation
on their character—this misrepresentation of their sentiments —
this frustration of ten years’ labour and expense —this temptation
of their lo} r alty—this second flagrant breach of solemn promises
given in the name of the British Crown. Two large public
Meetings were at once convened by the Sheriff in the principal
towns,in answer to requisitions signed by 164 gentlemen, of whom
were three members of the Legislative Council, sixty-three magi-
strates, the remainder barristers, solicitors, bankers, landowners,
flockmasters, and merchants. Another was called in the Central
District, and a second in Hobart Town, by the mechanics, in
all of which were carried resolutions and petitions, [See Petition,
No. 1, p. 20,] denouncing the secret betrayal of their interests
by Sir William Denison, and the faithlessness of Earl Grey, and
praying again for immediate abolition. The veracity of both
was put to the test of immense assemblies in the three following
questions :
(I copy from the Launceston Examiner, but heard them
myself.)
Ist. Is it not false that convict discipline is improved? —
Unanimous affirmation.
2nd. Is it not false that the people of this Colony are less
averse to receiving prisoners than in 1846?—Unanimously
affirmed.
3rd. Is it not true that most of the persons in favour of a


modified form) of transportation in 1846 are directly opposed to
it now?—Unanimously affirmed. The result of these Meetings
was the formation,of a “League” to abandon convict labour,
and to take every constitutional method of resistance.
Such is a brief statement df a grievance that would require
volumes fairly to expose. I shall now examine the pleas of
Earl Grey and Sir William Denison, and show why they
advanced them.
.I. The Secretary for the Colonies asserts that “ convict
discipline is improved,” and therefore the pledge is broken.
Lord Grey either made this statement at random, or he
received it from two gentlemen who thrive on the ruins, material
and moral, of the Colony—Sir William Denison, who has £2,000
per annum as Governor of Convicts, and Dr. Hampton, who
controls them for j 61,200 a year. To say that no small improve-
ment had been effected in the details of discipline might be a
risk, and would argue absolutely no attention to the vilest
abuses and the appeals of the people on behalf of common
decency; but whether any material change for the better has
been made, I appeal from those interested deponents,—
Ist. To the Members of the Legislative Council, the magi-
strates, and the whole body of employers, who observe the
conduct of prisoners every hour, who have better opportunities
of knowledge, no motives for mis-statement, and whose negative
I have already quoted.
2nd. To the improbability of the case, that, if in 1847, “ the
state of the Colony was frightful to contemplate, and a disgrace
to our flag,” it could not very well be improved by the sub-
sequent addition, to so small a community, of 7,000 convicts!
3rd. To the moral impossibility of improvement on the
general principle, I have already suggested that crime is every-
where reproductive —a principle too deeply seated in the con-
victions of intelligent men to be shaken by the testimony of
two gentlemen that owe so much to the success of their
reports. And
4th. That too many clergymen, medical, and subordinate
officers, have been dismissed the convict service for revealing its
abominations, to admit the credibility of such witnesses.
11. The second plea of Earl Grey is, that he did “ not anti-
cipate resistance, for the Colonists are less averse to receiving
prisoners than in 1846.”
I can scarcely resist the temptation to ridicule which this
assertion affords; but I am checked by the recollection, that it
was made by an English nobleman, in the confidence of the
Crown, addressed to the House of Lords, on a subject of such


vital importance to the interests of humanity, and based, pro-
bably, on the despatches of Her Majesty’s representative. I
shall offer no remarks on the negative character of this plea,
nor inquire what “resistance” and “less averse” imply, but
draw attention to its source and soundness. And in doing so,
I shall take it for granted that, in March, 1847, there were
good reasons for the following statements of Earl Grey and
Mr. Hawes, and that both were perfectly sincere:
“ March, 1847.—Earl Grey stated in the House of Lords, on reviewing die
whole system of transportation, that it had been ‘ ineffectual, expensive, and ruin-
ous, both to the Convicts themselves, and the Colonies to which they were trans-
ported.’ . . . That the Government had resolved to make a change, which
amounted to nothing less than the total abolition of transportation. . . . .
When a system of this nature was carried on at the antipodes, it was utterly im-
possible that any other result should follow than that which had been actually
witnessed. The system was frightful, and it was a disgrace to the British nation
that such a system should have existed under the British flag. . . . In Van
Diemen's Land a state of things existed which it was most painful to contem-
plate. . . . That he had often heard of abuses on board the Hulks, but he
firmly believed that the very worst managed hulk that ever existed in
was well managed when compared with the penal gangs of Van Diemen s Land.
. . . Whilst the system had been expensive to the Mother Country, to the
Colony it had been absolute ruin. The charge thus thrown upon the Colony had
made it bankrupt. By this system many of the most valuable settlers iirVan
Diemen’s Land had been (breed to quit the island, and thus a most serious blow
had been inflicted on the prosperity of the Colony. . . . That it had thus
received a check from which it would not recover for many years. It had been
said by the noble Lord (Stanley), that the free people of this country could not
bear the sight of the infliction of penal labour among them. . . . How much
more unjust to inflict this spectacle upon the small community of Van
Land, ... To insist upon maintaining transportation to Van Diemen’s
Land would be to drive away the free colonists, at whatever pecuniary sacrifice to
themselves, to take refuge in South Australia, New South Wales, or some of the
neighbouring Colonies j Van Diemen’s Land would become what Norfolk Island
was, a vast horde of criminals, 20,000 or 30,000 in number, with nothing but
their keepers ; with no society of free men to watch over the conduct ot the
officers.”
“June 4,1847. —Mr, Hawes, on the adjourned debate on Prisons’ Bill, com-
menced by observing, “ that in listening to the debate, he had been surprised to
find that the question was viewed almost exclusively with reference to the interests
of the Mother Country, and that hardly any one spoke ot the mischievous and
deadly results of transportation in the Colonies. If the object had been to invent
and apply a system which would demoralise and degrade the Colonies, a more
effective system for that end could not have been conceived. . • All the
accounts which have been received of the effects of transportation in Norfolk
Island, in New South Wales, and in Van Diemen s Land, led to the same
conclusion.”
These solemn denunciations comprehend, you observe, not
only the peculiar evils of Lord Stanley’s system, but all the deadly
effects of transportation through its entire history; hence Earl
Grey proposes, not a change in the discipline, but entire and
immediate abolition, and as you have seen, sent out a despatch
to the Colonies to that effect. Whence then the source of his
assertion? Could it come from Van Diemens Land? Not
without supposing political chicanery in the Governor almost


without a parallel in the annals of political corruption ; for while
Earl Grey, in March, 1847, was expressing his natural philan-
thropy towards the colonists, and kindling the just indignation
of his noble audience by reciting the cruel wrongs of Tasmania,
Sir William Denison, either instructed from home, or hoping to
gain material for advising the continuance of transportation, was
issuing circulars to the principal magistrates and settlers of Van
Diemen’s Land, requesting answers to three queries concerning
this subject, of which the first, and it is all I need quote, as it
virtually includes the other two, respecting mode- of discipline,
was,
“ Do you consider it desirable that the transportation of con-
victs to this country should cease altogether?” Now partial
and managing as was the distribution of the circulars, their
publication was acceptable enough. The Colonists welcomed
the opportunity of settling the question for ever, and vindicating
themselves in the eyes of the world from the imputation of pre-
ferring gold to virtue. Public meetings were called all over the
island. Pamphlets, broadsheets, letters, &c., became the staple
literature for the time, and the country exhibited overwhelming
majorities against transportation. The gentlemen favoured
with circulars conferred, and met at the principal towns, and
furnished the following answer to His Excellency :
“ That having viewed the question both as it affects the moral
and pecuniary interests of the Colony, we are of opinion that
transportation should cease altogether, and at once.” This re-
solution was supported by twenty-five short paragraphs, {See
Appendix, p. 22,] which for depth and accuracy of moral and poli-
tical philosophy, and condensed experience on this subject, has
no superior in parliamentary records. Petitions embodying these
views were sent to the Q,ueen, and both Houses of Parliament,
signed by 5,9 52 inhabitants. Another by 624 parents, repre-
senting 3,355 children. Nor was there a single public meeting
for a counter petition. These documents were handed to Sir
William Denison in the months of April, May, and June, 1847.
Whence then, I ask again, the source of Earl Grey’s assertion
that Van Diemen’s Land is less averse to receive prisoners than
in 1846 ? Will it be believed that Sir William Denison, with
the answers of the Magistrates and the settlers in his hands,
with petitions signed such as I have described, and with his
knowledge of public feeling from the press, writes to advise the
continuance of transportation, in a despatch to Earl Grey, dated
July 12th, 1847, from which I quote: “ The convicts should be
sent to this colony where arrangements for their supervision and


control are complete, or can be made so. The advantages of
this plan will be that the Mother Country will get rid of the
felon population at little more than tjie cost of transporting to
this Colony, and there will never be more than 12,000 under
punishment at one time ! ” At the republication in the island
of this despatch (on which probably his Excellency never calcu-
lated, for he was a novice in Government, having been in the
Colony only five months, and therefore ignorant of the question
on which he wrote) the inhabitants were thunderstruck, and if
anything could add to the intense abhorrence with which this
act is contemplated by the Colonists, and which will make the
name of Governor Denison a synonym for that species of mis-
demeanor that it displays,—it is,
Ist. The hypocritical pretences of concern for their morality
with which he prefaced his Circular of inquiry, and,
2ndl} T . That when he wrote this despatch there were nearly
32,000 prisoners in that penal Colony, whose exploits for that
year are recorded in the following schedule, taken from the
Government Statistics:
“ Brought before the police-office, 21,072, not including those
(very large numbers) taken before the Visiting Magistrates at
convict stations, Norfolk Island, Port Arthur, Maria Island,
&c. Of these 21,072, there were discharged, 2302; leaving
convicted by Magistrates and committed for trial, 18,770.”
Now if you add to these 18,770 —those suffering punishment
for crimes of 1846, —those convicted by Magistrates at convict
stations, —those under original sentences from England, and at
the depots waiting to be hired; how many of the thirty thou-
sand convicts of 1847 were not under punishment, and how
many that had enjoyed the privilege of freedom were not re-con-
victed ? Should Ibe told that this schedule includes the free ;
I answer, that this is its worst feature, for, by the free is meant,
free by servitude almost entirely : for in certain months of 1846,
1847, 1848, 1849, the reconvicted of the free by servitude were
589. The convicted of those who had never been prisoners,
twenty-nine. Why the local Government, in these schedules,
does not give these distinctions, they know best.
Such was the state of penal discipline, and its influence on
the society of Van Diemen’s Land, when Sir William Denison
issued his circular, and affected concern for the moral evils of
transportation in these words :
“ In considering this question you must balance the moral
evils which you say, and which 1 am quite prepared to believe,
does result from the presence among a limited and comparatively


speaking condensed population of a large number of convicted
felons, against the material advantages you have enjoyed, and
do still enjoy, to a certain extent, in a reduced cost of labour.”
You have seen how he treated their reiterated prayer for aboli-
tion on moral grounds.
But the tergiversation of Sir William Denison does not end
here. On the 12th of November following his despatch of July
the 10th, he wrote another, No. 163, forwarding a protest against
the decision of a public meeting, because the unanimous assembly
would not hear half-a-dozen advocates of “ modified transporta-
tion.” I quote his words : “ I forward this document, having
the signatures of several very respectable gentlemen, but I am
bound to say that I believe the great majority of the community
to be in favour of the cessation of transportation.” Now —when,
and from whom, did Sir William Denison derive this belief,
which he expresses in November? In April, May, and June,
when the magistrates, settlers, and public meetings answered his
March circular ! Well, then, when he wrote the despatch to
Earl Grey, on the 12th of July, on the direct subject of trans-
portation, why did he never mention his appeal to the country
and its decision, but leave both, and “ the great majority,” too,
out of the document, and recommend that “ all Britain’s convicts
should be sent to Van Diemen’s Land? ” Had the opinions of
the country been re-canvassed ? Had more public meetings
been held ? Had any other means of conviction been supplied
to his Excellency, from any quarter, between the 10th of July
and the 12th of November ? No—the battle had been fought,
and the victory won, and the memoirs of its struggle and
triumphs given (with the answers of the magistrates, petitions,
public meetings, and instructions founded on them, to the
London agent), in the Launceston Examiner , of the 26th of
June.
What induced Sir William Denison to proclaim his belief in
November? Why, between the 10th and 20th of July, he re-
ceived the despatch of Earl Grey that he proclaimed in the
Legislative Council on the 20th, abolishing transportation ; and
Earl Grey’s ponderous demolition of couvictism, pronounced in
the House of Lords, in March, was re-published in the Colony;
and now Sir William Denison, who felt himself at liberty in
July to say nothing of the country’s decision, feels himself bound
(that is, the affectation of honesty he employs) “ to inform his
Lordship that the great majority are in favour of entire cessa-
tion ! ’’ —that is, in July he wilfully conceals the evidence he
professed to obtain “ for the Secretary of State,” and secretly


advises him against it to continue transportation ; and in Novem-
ber, with only the same evidence, he makes a virtue of necessity,
and affects a fairness and candour which shows that he is not
ignorant of what is due to truth. In July, when “ the great
majority ” left him no shadow of apology for silence, much less
opposition, he practises both; and in November, when a little
protest by “ several respectable gentlemen ” offers him a plau-
sible pretext to advise the continuation of transportation, he feels
bound to do nothing of the kind, but only mention “ the great
majority.” Such is the unique Governor of Van Diemen’s Land,
who, by example, and instruction, and crest, urges the Colonists
to virtue and heaven. (Heraldic motto, “ Denique coelum !”)
But if Earl Grey managed to torture, from the Governor s
July despatch, any support for continuing transportation, the
process must have been still more circuitous and peculiar to
derive from it the means of asserting that “ the Colonists were
less averse to it than in 1846,” for their opinions were withheld.
Had they been mentioned, however, and misconstrued, the
November despatch, the five petitions of 1847, the one of 1848,
and the other of 1849, must have relieved his per-
plexity, and cured his unbelief.
Whence, then, is the source of Earl Grey’s assertion ? Have
the Colonists, since 1849, repented their choice, and recalled
their petitions ? No. Have even counter-petitions been sent
to lessen their power ? No. Earl Grey has no information to
warrant it; and, indeed, needed none. And if any more secret
despatches had been sent, his Lordship’s own speech in March
1847 would have demolished every selfish subterfuge they had
contained. I believe that as the sentiments Earl Grey expressed
in March were natural to him, and his indignation just, so his
promise was sincere, that transportation should not be renewed
to Van Diemen’s Land ; and its execution was only delayed till
he should bargain with New South Wales to submit her neck
once more to the chain, or impose it on the Cape, that bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke. But, since the wise and manly
virtue of both have refused the bargain, or resisted the impo-
sition, Earl Grey, with less wisdom, moral courage, and huma-
nity than should belong to an English peer and statesman, now
violates his promise to Van Diemen’s Land, and in the face of
his own dread description of the evils of transportation, and
the Colonists’ more bitter experience, would sacrifice the final
interests of the island, as he does the honour of the crown.
But should Earl Grey reply that he himself, too, like Lord
Stanley, has changed the system, and has assumed that its effi


cacy would warrant his assertion of diminished abhorrence on the
part of the Colonists, I answer, it is not only perfectly gratui-
tous, but as perfect a delusion.
His system of passing convicts through a reformatory discipline
in England, and then transporting them as “ exiles,” to Van
Diemen’s, Land, besides being chargeable with the grand fatal
objection, common to all, of accumulating so many prisoners
“in a limited and condensed population” (I use Sir William
Denison’s words), has many evils peculiar to itself:
Ist. That it deprives the Colony of what has always been
the mercenary argument of the minority (now happily dwindled
to nothing), for the continuance of transportation; viz., “ the
expenditure of British gold in the process of punishment.”
2nd. It gives the local government next to no control over
men so transported.
3rd. It introduces the unhappy creatures with the liberty of
semi-freemen, and the stigma of convicts.
4th. Into a market so completely over-stocked with labour
that starve or steal are the only alternatives.
sth. Frustrates, therefore, the benevolent wishes of the nation,
and wastes the cost of reformatory discipline—a truth terribly
proved to those who see the men land and surround the public-
houses in groups to drink the health of long-lost liberty, or
meet them passing through the country searching for masters,
whom they were led to believe would hail them from the ships,
and thus
6th. Increases pauperism and crime ; and throws on the Colony
the expense of their support or re-conviction, and
7th. Renders completely successful, and completely proved,
the official duplicity and indifference to the interest of the
Colony, of Sir William Denison, who in his March circular
(1847) kindly warned the Colonists from a hasty decision against
transportation by reminding them of “ the material advantages
they had, and even then, enjoyed, from the presence of con-
victsand on the following 10th July, advises the Secretary
of State to continue transportation on a plan that would
defraud them of that miserable compensation! He writes;
The advantages of this plan will be, that the Mother Coun-
try will get rid of the felon population at little more than the
cost of transporting to this Colony.”—Proh deorum hominum-
que fidem!
Yes, “ the advantages of this plan would be,” that, as the
average impunity (in England) of every considerable thief is six
years, during which he steals £l5O per annum, and as the


Mother Country sent 16,000 in four years, if only 6,000 of them
were thieves of this class, she saved herself during the term of
their impunity, £2700,000, and flung these and their minor
operators on the Colonists, to suffer their plunder, or to pay for
their reconviction ! Let no one hereafter talk of the injustice
of a single act for which a man becomes transported, in the face
of such legal exactions as these; and let no one be surprised that
extensive tradesmen in Van Diemen’s Land deduct, on “ taking
stock,” ten per cent, for the annual “ weeding ” of convict ser-
vants, or that scores are entirely ruined!
Again: 111. Earl Grey further says that “ many millions
have been expended by the British Government in fitting up
Van Diemen’s Land for the reception of criminals,” and there-
fore it must be continued a penal settlement. Did his Lordship
forget this argument in 1847, when he promised complete
abolition ? He did not; he gave it, but as a reason for sweeping
it away for ever. “It (convictism, says he,) has been ineffec-
tual, expensive, and ruinous, both to the convicts themselves,
and the Colonists, expensive to the Mother Country, to
the Colony absolute ruin.” This was his declaration to, the
peers. And would the noble Lord perpetuate this ruin, because
it has been expensive ? Is not the “ absolute ruin ” of the
Colony a fair proportion of the costs of unsuccessful experi-
ments ? Will he weigh the frustration of the nation’s philan-
thropy, the final demoralization of the prisoners, the bankruptcy
or expulsion of the Colonists against so many thousand pounds?
Shall twenty millions be paid to a handful of slaveholders for
the emancipation of the negro ; and the sacrifice of the wretched
buildings erected for convict purposes in Tasmania (not worth
,€20,000) be deemed too costly to save from further infliction
both the prisoners and the Colonists, of whose “ruin” they
are the accursed monuments ? But, besides, the British nation
has gained enormously by convictism, while the Colonists, as
Earl Grey admits, have been ruined. If it be true, as I have
already stated, that every accomplished thief costs the parent
state £9OO sterling during the term of impunity, what then has
she not saved by expelling from her population all she has
poured into Van Diemen’s Land, whose average standing num-
ber is 30,000 ? And what have not the Colonists lost ? But
the Colonists still save the Imperial Government a large annual
sum in finding labour and maintenance for 14,000 ticket-of-
leave and assigned convicts. Take the average of £3O for the
boaid and wages of each, and the Colonists expend every year,
on those whom otherwise the Exchequer must support, £420,000,


not to mention the cost of oversight, losses by wilful and
negligent breakage, waste, andpeculation.
These arguments I take to be irresistible, but I would rest
the issue on Earl Grey’s own representation, —“ Expensive to
the Mother Country, and ruinous, to the Colonists.” Who, then,
has devoured the substance of both the Colonists and the
Exchequer, but officials and convicts, who have spent it, —
the former in blunders and luxury, and the latter in crime ?
The 18,770 convicted and committed in 1847, could say some-
thing about it; their forerunners and successors yet more; and
such purchases by the officials of “Victoria Valley” for £15,000,
which lets for £65 per annum, might afford instruction too.
To make a road at great cost that begins and ends in the
bush; to buy 100 acres of land for £SOO, expend £1,700 on
buildings, and afterwards sell for £230; to build female factories
in swamps, and erect mills where there is no water to turn a
wheel nine months in the year, —may be very good reasons for
trying all such experiments under the eye of the Home Govern-
ment ; but the most impertinent and ridiculous for continuing
transportation to Tasmania.
IV. Earl Grey still further alleges, that, “ the settlers esta-
blished themselves in Van Diemen’s Land with their eyes open
to the present state of things, and therefore they have no reason
to complain” that he breaks his promise. But why did not his
Lordship use this argument in 1847? when, in answer to their
complaints, he pronounced in England and the Colonies that
transportation to Van Diemen’s Land was abolished? Then the
British Government had no moral right, and it was a disgrace to
its flag, to perpetuate convictism that was now complained of
and exposed,—then, was his pity awoke towards the Colonists
for their sufferings, and his indignation at their wrongs : then,
he repelled with appropriate scorn the maudlin sentimentalism,
and local humanity of Lord Stanley, who said “ the free people
of this country could not bear the sight of penal labour among
them,” by asking him, “ How much more unjust it was to in-
flict this spectacle upon the small community of Van Diemen’s
Land?”
But if Earl Grey, at his convenience, can cool his resentment
and call back his pity, which in this case, alas ! never acquired
any stubbornness from practical indulgence, can he recall his
promises too ? Pity may be shown without creating claims to
assistance, but promises bind the honour, in the present in-
stance, of the Crown, and add, to the instincts of humanity, the
obligations of justice and truth. But what if the settlers reply


(and they do), that this is the worst fiction that was ever imposed
upon the country ?—that it is entirely destitute of truth, —that
in the early settlement of the Colony they were invited to Van
Diemen’s Land to receive acres of land for the maintenance of
so many prisoners, which then were few; that in 1 822, the
Government arbitrarily resumed the convicts, and required in-
stead of their support, the expenditure of so much money in
improvements, thus leaving the Colonists to find labour where
they could, and to infer that the capital they employed gave a
claim to land that would soon cease to form a penal settlement,
—that up to 1839 and 1840 only one-fifth of British transports
were sent to Van Diemen’s Land, when the Imperial Government
by another arbitrary Act made it the receptacle of all the crimi-
nals of the empire. Now, no Colonists beyond solitary indivi-
duals have arrived since 1840; but, from 12,000 to 15,000 have
been expelled since then, by the presence of so many convicts.
So untrue is it, that “ the settlers established themselves with
their eyes open to the evils of which they complain.” Suppose,
however, that some had “established themselves” since 1840:
in that year, all the Colonists were warned by Lord John Rus-
sell to prepare for a great change, his intention being to dimmish
and limit the number of convicts to 500 per annum of the
“ worst offenders,” —which, of course, would have gone princi-
pally to Norfolk Island. Lord Stanley promised in 1846 dis-
continuance for two years, preparatory to total cessation, which
Earl Grey proclaimed in 1847 ; and yet the Secretary of State
tells the nation and Colonists, in 1850, (after he had sent 7,000
more convicts) that they established themselves with their
“eyes open.” Such are the answers that the Colonists give to
the flimsy excuses which they regret to see advanced by an
English nobleman, to conceal the violation of a promise made in
the name of the British Queen.
It is sometimes asked, however, by the enemies of the Colony,
and with an apparent air of triumph, “ Are not convicts, never-
theless, employed by the Colonists ?” Nothing can surpass the
combined cruelty and absurdity of the objection. The Colonists
complain that free labour is driven out by the bond, and they are
reduced to this deplorable necessity; when some witling replies:
“It is all very true; you implore deliverance from transport-
ation ; you have spent thousands of pounds, and years of labour,
to obtain it; but no notice is due to your anxieties, efforts, and
expense till all your wives are scullions and washerwomen; your
shops closed for want of porters ; your farms untilled, and sheep
neglected, for want of labour; or you leave your hard-earned


estates, and your stocks in trade, the wrecks of a general ruin,
to be gathered up by a paternal Government, and decamp/’ It is
cruel to make, and dishonourable to combat, such objections.
But, finally, “Are not the Colonists an incapable, uninformed,
self-indulgent, and factious band ? ”
This calumny has been received by the honest ignorance of
some, as it has been circulated by the interest and malice of
others, whose consciences are swift witnesses against their tongues
and despatches. It was first broached in the Colony by the re-
publication of Sir William Denison's letters to Earl Grey, after
the Colonists had exposed his insane act of poisoning the foun-
tain of public justice ; but the Secretary of State's castigation
of the rash and unconstitutional proceeding of his Excellency
ought in all fairness to suggest the value of his testimony.
On such evidence, and ex parte, it is to be regretted, that
Lord John Russell, whose better knowledge of the Colony
qualified him to contradict the accusation, in a moment of
policy or indifference, alluded to “ the disorganized and dis-
orderly state of Tasmanian society" in mitigation of Sir
William Denison's sentence. The Bishop of Tasmania, how-
ever, an eye-witness, affords a very different testimony, and one
more worthy of reliance, for when referring to this matter on a
public occasion, he exclaimed, “ God forbid that I should ac-
quiesce— God forbid that I should sanction such misrepresentation,
or by silence admit its truth. In the course of my duties I have been
led a good deal among the Colonists, and I can say, as the result of
experience, that the settlers are English to the core” And I have
travelled through, and sojourned in, many dependencies of the
British crown, have resided some years in Van Diemen's Land,
but have never met, in other Colonies, nor in any provincial
population of England of equal dimensions, a body of men more
intelligent, high-minded, loyal, and liberal, and more attached
to the English constitution than the Colonists of Van Diemen's
Land; nor one that spends larger voluntary sums for the pur-
poses of literature, philanthrop} r , and religion. I shall not go
into details, but quote an extract from a letter, by Dr. Gaunt
of Launceston, to Earl Grey, in 1848, the truth and exactness
of which I can affirm :
“ On the Ist of January there were in Van Diemen’s Land, belonging to the
Church of England, 53 places of public worship; Church of Scotland, 13 ; Wes-
leyan Methodists, 21 ; Independents, 14; Baptists, 4; Church of Rome, 4 ;
Jews, 2 : in all one hundred and eleven places of public worship in a commu-
nity of 22,236 free adults. We also furnish a civil list of £\ 36,000 per annum.
We have upwards of 20 hospitals and other charitable institutions; 11 literary
and scientific societies ; 2 mechanics’ institutes and lecture-halls ; several public
libraries; 10 societies for the promotion of Christian knowledge and religious
improvement. Independent of schools for the education of the poor, infant-schools,
and Sunday-schools, we have several very respectable private academies ; and, in
B


addition to these, we have the following public educational establishments :
Christ’s College, Bishopsbourne; Hutchins’ Grammar School, Hobart Town;
Church Grammar School, Launceston ; High School, Hobart Town.
For this last institution £4,000 were subscribed by the Colonists in a month.
We have also Banking and Insurance Companies; and lastly, our London agency
supported by our subscription annually, amounting to £6OO per annum.”
I only add to this enumeration the support of five able twice-
a week Journals.
Perhaps I may here be reminded that these are not symptoms
of degradation from the neighbourhood of convicts. I reply that
the objection is suicidal, and assumes that men should not
complain of a process of degradation till they are sunk too low
to perceive it \ —that the morally blind is expected to see ; that
no precaution should be taken till virtue is impossiblethat
the proper time for alarm is, when danger is swallowed up in
ruin . —another method, surely, of “ creating solitude and calling
it peace.” The Colonists do not complain that they are per-
sonally depraved by convictism —they never said they were ; they
repel the daring calumny. They are generally men of robust
intellect, virtue, and enterprise, who have either left the parent
state to get rid of some abuses, or resigned its institutions at the
costly sacrifice of early associations, to improve their fortunes
and the prospects of their families. Their British homes were
not gaols, nor their parents turnkeys, nor were they, as children,
the daily spectators of the commission or punishment of crime ;
and the noble efforts they have made, in spite of syren-songs of
t( Exchequer,” to create for their offspring a purer country
before they lay their own heads beneath its sod, have nerved
them with great firmness of purpose and moral power. They
can answer for themselves; but they plead for the prisoners,
and tremble for their children,—made familiar with felony from
their earliest youth; and humanity and justice alike should
preserve sacred from such captious trifling the patriotic and
parental anxieties of men who seek the reward of their trials
only in the virtue and respectability of their country and their
families. They have no lucrative office to fill for seven years,
with an iron chest in possession, or dignity and a pension in
reserve ; as they live, they expect to die on the spot!
On the other hand, they are neither insensible nor indifferent
to the interests or difficulties of the Parent State, with respect
to its criminals : indeed, they have made more sacrifices to
relieve those difficulties than any similar population will ever
again make in the history of human crime ; but they submit
that it is no more incumbent on them to solve the problem of
secondary punishments, or endure eternal and destructive expe-
riments in execution of them, than on the counties of York and
Middlesex, or the Isle of Wight.


If the question is not settled on the obviously equitable
principle, that the nation which creates should punish or reform
its crime, the Colonists would suggest that immediate attention
he paid to the philanthropic but strangely neglected advice of
that ornament of his profession and human nature, Archbishop
Whately, who writes, in a letter to the Rev. H. Bishop:
“Thus, under a reformed system of secondary punishment,
supposing transportation abolished, it strikes me as desirable,
with a view to the preservation from a return to evil courses of
persons released from penitentiaries, &c., after the expiration of
their punishment, that such as may have evinced a disposition
to reform, should be at their own desire furnished with means of
emiat i ng to various colonies, British or foreign, in which they
may mix, not with such men as their old associates in crime, but
with respectable persons unacquainted with their history, and
may thus be enabled, as the phrase is, ‘to turn over a new
leaf.’ This of course implies that they should not emigrate in
a body, nor as a distinct class.” In such a distribution, how-
ever, Van Diemen’s Land could have no participation justly for
more than half a century to come.
But should Lord Grey, in an evil hour, obstinately persist in
the unjust and mistaken policy he has announced, and attempt
to force, in any form, transportation on Van Diemen’s Land, he
will peril the interests of both the Colony and the Crown.
The sister Colonies of New South Wales, Port Philip
(Victoria), Adelaide, and New Zealand, perceiving that it is no
longer safe to negotiate with the Colonial-office, and that Tas-
mania is to be made a cesspool from which to filter through
Australia the criminals of the empire, have already formed
“ a league ” with Van Diemen’s Land, and drawn up a common
protest and petition, [See Petition, No. 2, p. 21 ,] now in pro-
cess of signature: and it remains to be seen whether the
unanimous and determined expression of these rising nations
in favour of justice, humanity, and religion, can be any longer
opposed or neglected. This is no faction that can be cor-
rupted, divided, or crushed, but three hundred thousand people,
whose banners are blessed by all the Prelates and Clergy,
Moderators and Ministers of religion of every name, and bear
as their symbols the wealth, the intelligence, and virtue of this
Great Confederation ; and their watchword is adopted from the
Edinburgh Review : —“ H e may talk loudly of the imperial
rights of the Mother Country ; but neither God nor man will
long permit us to promote our own good by the destruction of
others, nor to exercise the monstrous privilege of turning a
Colony into a pest-house of disease”
A COLONIST.


PETITION, 1850.—[No. I.]
To the Honourable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, in Parliament assembled,
The humble Petition of the Colonists of Van Diemen’s Land, in Public Meeting
assembled, Showeth, —
That we again come before your Honourable House to remind you of the
pledge given by Her Majesty Queen Victoria, that Transportation to Van Diemen’s
Land should for ever cease.
That in violation of this sacred promise, and in opposition to the dictates of
common reason and common humanity, the English Government has continued to
pour criminals into this oppressed Colony without any intermission—without
intermission even during the period for which Mr, Gladstone had assured the
people of England that transportation to Van Diemen’s Land had been suspended.
That the expediency of continuing or discontinuing transportation to this Colony
is not now a question for discussion; that it has been decided by the promise of
the Queen, and that we claim the fulfilment of that promise.
That we, nevertheless, notice the pretences under which attempts have been made
to persuade the English Legislature that the Royal promise ought to be disregarded.
That it has been asserted that this Colony is now less adverse to receiving
convicts, under what is called an improved system, than it was in 1846; that, on
the contrary, the Colonists are more than ever opposed to transportation.
That it has been further asserted, that many millions of money have been spent
by the Government of England in fitting Van Diemen’s Land for the reception of
convicts ; and that this assertion is utterly unfounded.
That it has been further asserted, by the Queen’s Ministers, that “ the free
settlers established themselves in Van Diemen’s Land with their eyes open to the
present state of things.” That if this were true, it was the bounden duty of the
English Government to have protected the Colonists against their own error; but
that the assertion is so utterly untrue, that what is called the present state of things
—that is to say, the system of transportation, against which the Colonists have for
five years implored your interference—had no existence until the year 1842; that
from that period scarcely a free settler has established himself in Van Diemen’s
Land ; that thousands have abandoned the Colony solely in consequence of that
system ; arid that Earl Grey has himself declared, that “ by this system many of
the most valuable settlers in Van Diemen’s Land had been forced to quit the
island;” and that “to insist upon maintaining transportation to Van Diemen’s
Land would be to drive away the free colonists, at whatever pecuniary sacrifice
to themselves.”
That Her Majesty’s Ministers have made some feeble efforts to induce other
and stronger Colonies to receive convicts; thus demonstrating that even in their
own judgment Van Diemen’s Land ought to be relieved ; but that the spectacle
of the insults and ttie injuries heaped upon Van Diemen’s Land has determined
those Colonies to resist to the last a similar infliction upon themselves.
That the Colonies nearest to Van Diemen’s Land now perceive that their safety
is involved in ours; they see that whatever numbers of convicts may be poured
into this Colony, it is impossible that they can remain here, and that they must
be spread over the continent; and that New South Wales has already commenced
measures to protect herself.
That the misrepresentations made in England by the Ministry, and by the
Local Government of Van Diemen’s Land, respecting the state of the Colony, the
wishes, feelings, conduct, and character of its inhabitants, and the results of the
existing system of transportation, have been again and again exposed and refuted ;
but living at the opposite extremity of the globe, months must elapse before the
Colonists can hear of the fictions invented for their ruin, and many more must
pass away before they can contradict them. In the meantime the object sought
is attained ; shiploads of convicts are poured in upon us, and the falsehood is
forgotten before the refutation is received.
Your petitioners humbly pray that such measures may be adopted by your
Honourable House as shall be best calculated to carry into effect Her Majesty’s
most gracious promise, by abolishing at once, and for ever, the transportation of
criminals to Van Diemen’s Land. And your petitioners will ever pray.


PETITION.—[No. 2.]
To the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the Australasian Colonies of New
South Wales, Victoria, Van Diemen’s Land, South Australia, and New
Zealand, Showeth, —
That it is the glory and happiness of your Majesty’s petitioners to form a part
of your Majesty’s empire; united by mutual ties of interest, affection, and duty ;
proud of possessing the domestic and moral habits, the literature, the laws, and
the religious faith of Great Britain; and conscious that the illustrious nation
which has given them birth has impressed upon them a character not unworthy
of herself.
Your Majesty’s petitioners humbly represent that as the past belongs to the
Parent state, the future belongs to them ; and among the bright visions of the
future, there is not one more cheering than that which exhibits these Colonies as
the grateful refuge and pleasant home of millions of industrious and honest men—
the redundant virtuous population of Great Britain and Ireland.
Your Majesty’s petitioners humbly represent, that the magnificent capabilities
of these Colonies, as fields of emigration, are greatly impaired, and your peti-
tioners, as Colonists, are grievously injured, by the wrongs inflicted directly on
Van Diemen’s Land, and indirectly on all the other Colonies of Australasia by
transportation. Its appalling results to Van Diemen’s Land have been disclosed
by Parliamentary inquiries, and have been repeatedly attested, and depicted with
expressions of horror, by your Majesty’s ministers. Your Majesty’s Government
has been pledged to its discontinuance; but nevertheless, the exportation of con-
victs to that island continues unabated.
Your Majesty’s petitioners further represent, that the actual result, if not the
avowed object, of the present system of transportation is to inundate, through
Van Diemen’s Land, all the Australasian Colonies with the worst convicts of the
Mother Country; and that such a policy is not only an outrage upon your peti-
tioners, but a breach of your Majesty’s most gracious promise, conveyed by the
circular despatch of the Right Honourable the Earl Grey to the Colonial
Governors, dated 7th August, 1848, that no criminals should be transported by
Great Britain to her Colonies without their consent, expressed through their
several legislatures.
Your Majesty's petitioners further represent, that the consequence of your
Majesty’s Government persisting in their present penal policy, will be to subject
to a perpetual stream of hardened and incorrigible criminals the whole of the
Australasian dependencies, and to make them, against their repeated protests, the
great receptacle for the crime of the empire. And that your petitioners must, in
consequence, suffer most of the moral and all the pecuniary evils of direct trans-
portation —evils which are not only the occasion of an exhausting drain upon their
charity and benevolent institutions, and of enormously increased taxation for
police and gaols, but the cause of social depravity, degradation, and wretchedness.
Your Majesty’s petitioners further represent that, although the social and moral
mischiefs of the system render its merely economical results comparatively insig-
nificant, they cannot but advert to the fact, that the criminals so cast upon them
are, many of them, diseased in body or mind, are most of them improvident and
intemperate, and thus a large proportion of them become a burthen on the industry
and resources of these infant communities.
Your Majesty’s petitioners further represent, that they desire to transmit to
their posterity an inheritance unincumbered by the pauperism, and unpolluted
by the crime, of the empire.
Your Majesty’s petitioners humbly submit, that although the stupendous power
of Great Britain enables her to continue these aggressions with impunity, injustice
so revolting has aroused your petitioners to unite in solemn appeal to those
eternal principles which should preserve the weak from the oppression of the
strong, and which should more especially control and restrain a Parent State from
thus injuring her offspring. Among the blessings which our common religion
has bestowed upon the world, it has established the intercourse of mankind upon
the basis of acknowledged duties—duties not less binding upon nations than upon
individuals—and there is none of greater significancy than our duty to our neigh-


hour. And they submit that their relation to the Mother Country, as Colonists,
so far from repealing, should render of stronger obligation that rule of justice
which it becomes commonwealths, as well as private persons, to reverence and
practise, and which commands them so to do unto others as they would that
others should do unto them.
Your petitioners therefore humbly submit to your Majesty, that the inundating
of feeble and dependent Colonies with the crime of the Parent State is opposed to
that arrangement of Divine Providence by which the virtue of each community is
destined to combat its vice ; and is contrary to the principles of the sacred code
promulgated by the great Legislator of the universe.
Your Majesty’s petitioners, therefore, humbly beseech your Majesty to procure
the immediate cessation of transportation to Van Diemen’s Land ; and further,
that your Majesty will be graciously pleased to abandon altogether a penal
policy which your Majesty’s petitioners feel to be so injurious, so unjust, and so
oppressive.
And your Majesty’s petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray, &c.
APPENDIX.
MEETING AT CAMPBELL TOWN.
A most important meeting was held at Campbell Town, on Thursday, 15th
April, to consider the transportation question.
F. Hartwell Henslowe, Esq., Police-Magistrate of the district, was called
to the chair.
P. Smith, Esq., proposed as a resolution the following document, which he
explained had already been adopted at a meeting of gentlemen at Ross, who
assembled to deliberate upon the subject in accordance with the views entertained
by His Excellency in issuing the circular. It was signed by Messrs. W. Ker-
mode, R. Q. Kermode, J. Maclanachan, R. Harrison, W. Harrison, P. T. Smith,
J. Smith, S. Horton, T. Parramore, A. Jackson, G. C. Clark, G. Scott, and
others.
In answer to the Ist query, the undersigned have bestowed on it their best
consideration ; and they can arrive at no other conclusion than that “ it is desir-
able that transportation should cease altogether.” They have viewed the question
both as it affects the moral and pecuniary interests of the Colony, and in both
respects they are of opinion transportation should cease altogether and at once ;
1. Because it is a great mistake to suppose in reference to the pecuniary bene-
fits of transportation, that convict labour is cheap because it is low, or that low
wages necessarily produce high profits, the fact being that in all countries wages
rise and fall with the profits, and profit falls with wages, and that the poorest
countries are those where wages are lowest, and that the condition of this colony
is not contradicted by the experience of other countries in reference to the forced
and unnatural state of the labour-market.
2. Because convict labour is nominally cheap, but in reality dear, from its
compulsory and vicious character, and the constant conviction, supervision, and
restraints required for its profitable employment.
3. Because convict labour does not admit of the formation of a tenantry, the
first grand essential to subdivision of land, a virtuous population and solid pro-
sperity ; experience having proved that a convict tenantry tends towards the
establishment of nests of petty thieves and grog-sellers, commonly called
“ Rookeries.”
4. Because so long as transportation continues it is hopeless to expect free
emigrants of either sex, low wages, and the convict character of the Colony, equally
repelling the respectable female, and the industrious mechanic and labourer from
our shores.
5. Because if transportation continue, the few remaining free people of either
sex must ultimately be driven out from the same causes which preclude the hope
of new arrivals, the fact being that large sums have been devoted to emigration,
and now it is rare to hear of a free mechanic or labourer, and nearly impossible to
obtain a free female servant; thus draining off the last qualifying ingredient, and


leaving the landholder, tradesman, and others, the only resource of an unmixed
criminal class for service, and ultimate absorption among themselves.
6. Because the undersigned cannot consider that greater evils can arise from
the shock to society, which a sudden cessation of the supply of labour may occa-
sion, than can be considered essentially connected with transportation under a
proper system of management. First, on the ground that the shock unless trans-
portation is to be perpetual, is only postponed by permitting its continuance; for
cease when it may, the shock, if any, will be felt, and by avoiding it now, when
according to the last Gazette the convicts amount to 30,000, it is left to be
encountered in possibly worse times, with a population reduced in numbers and
deteriorated in moral strength, and therefore less able to bear it. Secondly,
because the evils alluded to resolve themselves into pecuniary losses and diffi-
culties, which, if real, the moral fortitude which demands the sacrifice is the best
guarantee for success in the struggle to surmount it. Thirdly, because for the
reasons given in the first answer it is believed those evils and that shock are for
the most part imaginary or counterbalanced by opposite advantages.
7. Because under the convict system, in connection with other causes, the his-
tory of the Colony has been a history of violent action and re-action, in so far as
abundant labour and a large Government expenditure induce speculation, occa-
sion over-production, and benefit no class, with few exceptions, but paid officials
and their dependents ; for, in spite of both, grain has not remunerated the grower
since wages fell to their present rates, and meat and flour have been subject to
all the gambling fluctuations of home and foreign competition for Government
contracts. tt
8. Because the words “ transportation under a proper system of management,
are delusive and unintelligible; experience having proved the inefficacy of every
system of management hitherto adopted, both for the reform of the criminal and
the solid benefit of the Colony, and at the same time shown that experiments have
been made by our Secretary of State to be set aside or modified by another, in
utter ignorance or disregard of local circumstances, in violation of the common
principles of human nature, and with the professed determination to make Colonial
interests subservient to Imperial purposes.
9. Because, under any system of management —no matter how perfect or how
contrived —to promote the reform of the criminal, and well-being of the Colony,
the tendency of a criminal population must be towards vice, and under no circum-
stances ought a system, having such a tendency, to be encouraged for the sake of
any pecuniary advantage whatsoever.
10. Because transportation, however modified in amount or arrangement, brands
the Colony, before all the world, a penal one; makes it a shame and a by-word to
other countries : is destructive to its character as a free settlement; injures com-
mercial credit; exercises surely, though imperceptibly, a corrupting influence
over the free inhabitants, and perpetuates the dread of moral contagion, and pre-
vents emigration.
11. Because, as long as transportation continues, it is both hopeless and unwise
to expect any form of self-government, the spirit and energy of the one being
directly opposed to the effective management of the other.
12. Because self-government is essential to the well-being and prosperity of the
Colony; experience having proved the incapacity of the Colonial-office for
governing a distant Colony through information furnished only by the local autho-
rities; the utter insufficiency of a council of officials and nominees of the Crown to
regulate the revenue and expenditure, to make laws, and to command the respect
and confidence of the community; experience having also proved the evils resulting
from the policy of the Colonial-office changing with every change of Ministry.
13. Because transportation is productive of a rapid increase of pauperism fear-
fully disproportionate to the demand and supply of useful labour : Ist, from the
excess of the supply over the demand ; 2nd, from the emigration of good labour
only to the neighbouring Colonies ; 3rd, from the many causes producing the
premature decay of a large number of convicts.
14. Because the disproportion of the sexes is a frightful source of evil, which
is increased with every departure to the other Colonies, inasmuch as more females
emigrate in proportion to males than are left behind; and because the balance
between the sexes cannot be restored by transportation.


15. Because there is no sufficient reason for apprehending a deficiency of
labour, as the present number of convicts is equal to the wants of the Colony for
several years; and because the same wages which induce emigration will
restrain it,
16. Because when an additional supply of labour is wanted, this Colony has an
irresistible moral claim on the Mother Country for the same number of emigrants
which have been forced out by the compulsory introduction of an overwhelming
number of criminals for imperial purposes, as a very inadequate compensation for
the moral and physical injuries thereby entailed on the free inhabitants.
17. Because, independently of this claim, the labour-market of the Australian
Colonies is essentially one; and as no skill or labour can be kept long in one
Colony which is more wanted in another, so, when the demand arises, free labour
will flow into this Colony, as convict labour has hitherto flowed out.
18. Because the charge on the Colony for police, gaol, and judicial expenses,
is unexampled and intolerable, and the burden is in no degree alleviated, but
rather aggravated, by the Lords of the Treasury consenting to pay £24,000 of those
expenses, and assuming the land-fund as a compensation or equivalent.
19. Because a judicious management of the waste-lands, together with the
reduction of the police and other expenses to a level with those of any free com-
munity of the same size, would provide ample means of emigration for the wants
of the Colony.
20. Because the general recommendation in favour of transportation is not only
cheap labour in private service, but gratuitous labour for public works; and yet
the fact is indisputable that all expenses incurred by the Colony, by reason of its
convict population, over and above the necessary expenses for governing a commu-
nity of an equal number of free people, are a direct tax for the payment of that
labour.
21. Because few of the public works performed by convict labour have contri-
buted to the real advancement of the community; and because the incredible
waste, mismanagement, and misdirection of labour on the roads, bridges, buildings,
and other works, make it a grave question whether their actual benefit and value
equal the convict imposts on the Colony.
22. Because the continuance of the gang and self-supporting system, in defiance
of the wickedness of the one, the short-sighted policy and extravagance of the
other, are an evidence that it is delusive to expect the approval and adoption of
any modification or arrangement of the convict system but what agrees with
English views of penal discipline, and English purposes; and unless, therefore,
the Colony is prepared to submit to the exclusion of free labour, and to entire
dependence on convict labour, under the arbitrary management and disposal of
the Comptroller-General, abolition must be immediate and unreserved.
23. Because one of the chief recommendations to transportation was the Com-
missariat expenditure, and the consequent employment of labour and capital,
which advantage is now almost nominal from the adoption of the self-supporting
system, and the growth of wheat, barley, hops, and other produce in competition
with the free man, in connection with the direct import from home of all the
supplies for convict purposes, such as clothing and tools, formerly supplied by the
merchant, mechanic, or tradesman.
24. Because penal science is conducted in this colony on narrow and unwise
principles of management, equally useless for reform and economy, and utterly
regardless of the welfare of the free inhabitants, because it treats them merely as
agents for employment or reform.
25. Because no nation or people were ever ruined in the possession of a pro-
ductive soil, active habits, and healthy morals; because no sound prosperity can
exist based on the import of crime; because no virtue can stand firm exposed to
long-continued evil association and example; because no blessings can descetid
to posterity by impurity and vice; and because no spectacle can be more mournful
than the voluntary surrender of the highest and best interests of a people to
present convenience and uncertain gains.
Signed (when adopted) on behalf of the Meeting,
F. Hartwell Henslowe, Chairman.
London; Printed by William Tyler, Bolt court.
