

AN ACCOUNT
OF
THE COLONY OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
PREPARED FOR DISTRIBUTION AT THE
INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION OF 1862.
By FREDERICK SINNETT.
TOGETHER WITH
A CATALOGUE
OF ALL
THE PRODUCTS OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
EXHIBITED IN THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN COURT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION.
LONDON:
ROBERT K. BURT, 90A, HOLBORN HELL, CITY,
AND CRYSTAL PALACE, SYDENHAM.
1862.




AN ACCOUNT
OF
THE COLONY OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
PREPARED FOR DISTRIBUTION AT THE
INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION OE 1862.
By FREDERICK SINNETT.
TOGETHER WITH
A CATALOGUE
OF ALL
THE PRODUCTS OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
EXHIBITED IN THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN COURT OE THE
INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION.
LONDON:
EOBEET K. BTTET, 90a, HOLBOEN HILL, CITY,
AND CRYSTAL PALACE, SYDENHAM.
• 1862.




PREFACE.
A suggestion having been made to the Government of South Australia that a brief
reliable account of this Colony would be a contribution that might be desirably and
advantageously made to the Great Exhibition of 1862, the duty of preparing this small
volume was confided to myself. While the Government reserved, and have exercised, a
certain right of supervision (which it was only just that they should possess, as the
work was to be published under authority), it was a matter of understanding, that the.
official editorship should not extend so far as to destroy the author’s right to express
individual opinions, and to deal with the subjects he had to write about, according to
his own method and judgment. Hence, while some few passages I had written have
been excised, it is not to be understood that the Government endorses every opinion
herein expressed—but merely avouches the general truthfulness of my account; and
for my own part, matters likely to involve conflict of opinion have been as much as
possible avoided. The semi-official nature of the publication has, however, been of
this advantage to its fulness and accuracy, that the resources of the Government
departments have been freely thrown open to me for information; and, indeed, I have
gratefully to acknowledge that in the public offices, as well as among private societies
and individuals, I have, with few exceptions, met with the most cordial readiness to
afford me all the assistance I asked for.
I have to plead, in extenuation of such shortcomings as may be detected—but
which I shall not be so impolitic as to point out by anticipation—that I was desired
to complete my work in time for transmission by the mail preceding the one that
actually carries it home. Had I known that I should have had nine weeks instead
of five in which to procure and arrange my materials, I believe I should have been
able to digest them better than I have done. But almost at the last moment it
was found impossible to complete the valuable accompanying map in time for the
February mail. The majority of these pages were then already in type, and as there
seemed to be no opportunity for material improvement, except by complete recon-
struction and rewriting, I let well, or ill, alone, and the book goes to England with
most of its original faults of hurried arrangement upon its head.
Some discussion has been raised here since it was known that the present work was
in preparation, as to whether it should be printed in Adelaide or London. Most of
the opinions which have been expressed have been in favour of the course that has
not been adopted—-that it should be printed here. The main argument of those
who have held these opinions was, that it would not tell well for the Colony that we
should seem to require external aid for the creditable issue of a little book like this.
I can hardly think, however, that any one will suppose the decision arrived at to
have been consequent upon our poverty as to typographical means. One edition has
been struck off here for local use, and simple motives of convenience and economy
have, I believe, determined that the large number intended to be issued in England
should be printed there. Eortunately, for myself, at all events, I have not been
consulted upon this momentous question.
Finally, I have only to say that I have done my very best to avoid any kind of
fictitious colouring, and have written as impartially as I would have written to my
own brother, if he had asked me for facts about the Colony, and the opportunities it
offered for new comers or for investment. No doubt, when what I have written has
passed through the alembic of criticism, some residuum of error will be discovered;
but lam quite sure that there has been no deliberate adulteration. The present
account of this Colony is the best I could give, at somewhat short notice and within
limited space, after having had the advantage of twelve years’ residence and exten-
sive travel in Australia, and with the aid of cordial assistance, official and otherwise.
. v '
Adelaide, March Bth, 1862.


CONTENTS.
HA? OP SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
CHAPTER I.
HISTORY OF THE COLONY.
Early Explorations, 1. Foundation
of the Colony, 2. The Wakefield
System, 3. The South Australian
Commissioners, 4. Kangaroo Is-
land Colonel Light, 5. Early
Quarrels and Early Governors, 6.
Colonel Gawler’s Over Drafts, 7.
Governor Grey —The Burra Mine
—Speculations, 8. Colonel Robe—
Sir Henry Young, 9. The Gold
Discoveries—The Bullion Act, 10.
Sir R. G. MacDonnell—General
Progress of the Colony, 11, 12.
CHAPTER 11.
CONSTITUTIONAL AND POLITICAL
CHANGES.
character of Colonial Politics—No
“ Taste ” for Politics, 14. Original
Form of Government—lntroduc-
tion of a Partially Representa-
tive System, 15, 16. The Present
Constitution, 17. The First Min-
istry, 18.
CHAPTER HI.
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OP THE COLONY.
The Adelaide Hills, 20. The Adelaide
Plains, 21. Agricultural Districts,
22. Pastoral Districts, 23. The
Far North, 24. Lake Torrens, 25.
The Far Interior, 26.
CHAPTER IV.
EMIGRATION, WAGES, PROVISIONS, ETC.
What Constitutes “ The Welfare of
the Colony?” 27. When Assisted
Immigration is desirable, 28. As-
sisted Immigration to be resumed,
29. Emigration Regulations, 30,
31, 32. Rates of Wages for Ten
Years, 33. Present Rates of Wa-
ges, 34. Average Rates of Wages,
35. Prices of Food, 36. Occupa-
tions of the People, 37, 38. Pros-
pects of Emigrants, 39.
CHAPTER V.
OPPORTUNITIES AND PROSPECTS OF
VARIOUS CLASSES.
Investments of Capital, 40. Profes-
sional Men, 41. Lawyers— Doctors
Engineers, 42. Merchants, 43.
Shopkeepers Squatters, 44.
Squatting Property, 45. Agricul-
ture, 46. Wine Growing, 47, 48.
The Labouring Classes, 46.
CHAPTER VI.
THE CITY OP ADELAIDE.
The Torrens, 51. The Streets of
Adelaide, 52. Adelaide Shops, 53,
54, 55. Corporation Funds—Civic
Offices, 56.
CHAPTER VII.
MINES.
The Burra Burra, 58, 59. The Ka-
punda, 60, 61, 62,63. Yorke’s Pen-
insula, 64. Water, Jetty, and
Railroad, 65. The Wallaroo Mines,
66. The Moonta Mines, 67. The
New Cornwall—The Duryea, 68.
The Great Northern Mining Com-
pany, 69, 70.
CHAPTER VIII.
RELIGION AND EDUCATION.
Religious Statistics, 71. Church of
England, 72. Wesleyan s Lu-
therans Congregational'ists, 73.
Church of Scotland —Bible Chris-
tians, 74. Free Church of Scot-
land—Primitive Methodist 3, 75.
Presbyterians, Unitarians, Jews,
&c., 76. Secular Education, 77,
78.
CHAPTER IX.
PUBLIC WORKS AND PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS.
Railways, 79. Main Roads—Water-
works, 80. Electric Telegraph,
81, 82. Penal Establishments—
Adelaide Gaol, 82, 83. The Stock-
ade, 84. The Hospital, 85. Lu-
natic Asylum, 86. Destitute Asy-
lum, 87. South Australian Insti-
tute, 88, 89. Principal Public
Buildings—Post Office, 90. Cus-
tom House Botanical Garden,
&c., 91.
CHAPTER X.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.


SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
CHAPTER I.
HISTORY OF THE COLONY.
EARLY EXPLORATIONS.
About five-and-thirty years since, the inhabitants of the only
Australian Colony then in existence—New South Wales—began to
push out exploring parties with considerable vigour. For a quarter
of a century after that penal settlement, better known for many
years as Botany Bay, had been established, an event which occurred
in 1788, the inhabitants were confined within a very small area
bounded by the Blue Mountains—a sharply-ridged chain of hills run-
ning in a northerly and southerly direction, and commencing about
fifty miles to the westward of Sydney. But it gradually came to
be understood that Australia could be turned to larger uses than to
afford, at its south-eastern corner, a little nook on which to estab-
lish a great English prison. The great pastoral resources of the
country were in course of development, Mr. John McArthur’s in-
troduction of the Merino sheep having proved a decided commercial
success, and having induced a considerable number of settlers to
embark in sheep farming, which has since proved, upon the whole,
the most profitable pursuit that has been carried on in Australia,
The increase of the flocks rendered an extension of territory occu-
pied for pastoral purposes imperatively necessary. So early as
1813, indeed, Mr. Evans had crossed the Blue Mountains, and in
1816 and 1823, Mr. Oxley, the then Surveyor-General of New
South Wales, conducted two expeditions, one in the direction of
Bathurst Plains, and the other in the neighbourhood of Moreton
Bay. Messrs. Hovell and Hume, in 1826, reached the sea-coast
of what is now the Colony of Victoria ; and the following year,
Mr. Allan Cunningham discovered Darling Downs, and subse-
quently associated his name with fresh discoveries in the direction
of Moreton Bay. In 1828-9, Capt. Sturt conducted an expedition
along the banks of the Macquarie, and made the important dis-
covery of the River Darling. On his return from this expedition,
it was generally believed that the Darling as well as the Lachlan,
the Murrumbidgee, and other streams having a westerly course,
emptied themselves into an inland sea ; and in 1831, Capt. Sturt
was again dispatched into the interior, with the view of verifying
this hypothesis. Lie descended the Murrumbidgee to its junction
B


with a large river, which he named the Murray, and of which it
was soon afterwards ascertained the Lachlan and Darling and many
other streams were tributaries.
Few modern explorers have had the privilege of conducting an
expedition more interesting in its progress and more important in
its results than Capt. Sturt's boat voyage down the Murrumbidgee
and Murray in 1831. He did not, of course, escape hardship and
suffering, but equally, of course, he was spared the most trying of
all wants in most Australian exploring expeditions—the want of
water —and any one who has ever either experienced or imagined
the excitement of travelling in unexplored regions, may conjecture
the sense of pleasurable exultation with which Capt. Sturt and his
companions streamed, day after day, and week after week, down
the current of a noble river, utterly uncertain as to what each day
would disclose : but each day also becoming more and more satisfied
as to the magnitude of the discovery they had been fortunate
enough to make.
They were, indeed, exposed to a severe disappointment at the close
of their downward voyage. In south latitude SI 0 and east longitude
139° 30' is situated the “ Great Bend” of the Murray, which, after a
long westerly course, turns there, almost at right-angles, to the south.
As this course proved continuous, the hypothesis that the Murray
would be found to lead to an inland sea was exchanged for the hope
that it would empty itself into the Southern Ocean, through a sea-
moutli available for commerce; instead of which, its waters were
found to disperse themselves over a large lake, full of shoals. A sea-
mouth, from the Lake, has since been discovered indeed, and steam-
boats, of moderate draught of water, now trade regularly in and out
of the Murray ; but when Capt. Sturt first saw Lake Alexandrina,
as he named it, he imagined that there was no available sea-entrance,
and, under that dispiriting belief, slowly and laboriously re-ascended
the river and returned to Sydney. The results of this journey, how-
ever, the accounts that Capt. Flinders had given of the Gulf St.
Vincent and Spencer’s Gulf, and the examination of the country be-
tween the Murray and the former gulf (in the course of which Capt.
Barker lost his life in the year 1831), were sufficiently important
to induce an influential English association to select this part of
Australia as the place at which to found a settlement on certain
principles of colonization, then comparatively new ; but which have
since been sanctioned by the ablest political economists, and the
practical value of which has been confirmed by the success of the
Colony so founded—the Colony of South Australia.
This system is generally known as the “ Wakefield System,” the
fundamental principle being that the land should be gradually
disposed of in blocks of moderate size, and at what Mr. Wakefield
■ called “ a sufficient price,” the proceeds to be employed in intro-
ducing fresh emigrants ; thus, as the introduction of more people
caused a demand for more land, the sale of that land enabled an
additional population to be introduced, and so on indefinitely.


Owing to some disasters that overtook South Australia during the
first years of its existence as a Colony, the Wakefield system fell
into disrespect among some careless thinkers, but the system was
in reality in no way responsible for the evils which occurred, and
which were due to the mismanagement of the Colonization Com-
missioners, to the want of experience of the large body of Colonists
who arrived in the first instance, to a “ mania ” for land gambling
which set in (amid which land orders of all kinds were sold on long
credit at prices certain to ruin the last purchaser), and to various
other causes. But the essential principles of Mr. Wakefield’s
scheme have not only been maintained here, with occasional inter-
missions, to the present time, but have been applied with marked
success in Victoria, New Zealand, and other Colonies.
In the present condition of Western Australia we have a lament-
able example of the old system, which found favour before Mr.
Wakefield’s theories were propounded. In that unfortunate Province
immense tracts of land were given away to the early settlers, but
as there was no self-supporting fund with which to introduce labour,
the land remained barren and worthless; the owners, though
nominally gentlemen of great landed estates, could neither let, nor
use, nor sell their broad acres, though naturally continuing to cling
to them, in a hope, like that of Mr. Micawber, that something
would eventually “turn up” to give} them value. After a long
course of ill success, Western Australia finally reached a depth,
from the midst of which she implored to be converted into a penal
settlement. This petition was granted in 1819, and while the other
Colonies of Australia are rapidly rising in wealth and population, the
Swan River Settlement is, in a great measure, dependent upon the
expenditure of British public money upon the penal establishments.
Had the fundamental principle of Wakefield’s system been wisely
applied in the foundation of Western Australia, it is probable that
her present position would have been a very different one.
Adopting Mr. Wakefield’s principle as the fundamental one upon
which this Colony was to be established, an attempt was made in
1831 to obtain a charter for a company, by which South Australia
was to have been “ planted,” to quote the words of Colonel Torrens,
“ after the model of the British settlements planted in North
America in the seventeenth century.” But this scheme of a char-
tered company broke down, and little more was done in the matter
till 1834, when an Act (4 & 5 Wm. IV. c. 95) was passed,
appointing a commission to manage the proposed work of coloniza-
tion, and settling the principles upon which it was to be carried
out. Under this Act it was provided that the proceeds of the land
tund should be devoted to emigration, that no convicts should ever
be sent to South Australia, and that a Constitution should be
granted to the new Colony as soon as its population reached
50,000. The functions of the Commissioners, and of other officers,
were also fixed by this Act, and the subsequent disasters which
overtook the Colony have been deemed by high authorities to have


been largely consequent upon the uncertain and divided responsi-
bilities of its early officers. Mr. Wakefield, in giving evidence before
a Committee of the House of Commons, spoke of the Act as
having “relieved everybody of responsibility to anybody.” Under
this Statute, however, the Colony was actually founded and
settled, and South Australia soon after ceased to be a mere
name upon prospectuses—an abstract idea to be worked upon
at public meetings—a suggestion to be drummed by deputations
into the reluctant heads of Ministers and Under-Secretaries—and
became a concrete reality, a living community upon the face of the
earth.
For some time, however, great difficulties beset the work of South
Australian colonization. The knowledge of the country possessed
in England at the time the first ships were despatched was of the
vaguest and most speculative character. Capt. Sturt had seen the
Murray, and had surmised that there was good land between that
river and St. Vincent’s Gulf. Capt. Barker’s party had, to a small
extent, confirmed the rumour. There were the coast surveys of
Flinders to go by, and there were the allegations of a few sealers
on Kangaroo Island, who had visited the main land, that it was fit
for habitation and agriculture. It also appears that some Capt.
Jones, of whom I find no direct records, had reported a harbour,
which turned out to have no existence. The first vessels which
arrived (in 1836), were dispatched by the South Australian Com-
pany, a still existing and flourishing corporation, founded by Mr.
Angas, who was very actively concerned in the foundation of the
Colony, in which he now resides, and who transferred to the
Company a large amount in “ Land Orders,” or rights of selection
of land in the Colony, which the Commissioners had, in accordance
with the provisions of their Act, disposed of for cash in London.
So little did the Commissioners, or the Company, or indeed any-
body, know about this part of Australia, when its colonization
began, that the Company’s ships went to Nepean Bay, in Kangaroo
Island, and the first rights of selection were exercised there.
The fact that there was a tolerable harbour was probably what
led to this strange selection ; for the land, with the exception of a
few acres, was covered with a dense scrub. The “town” of Kings-
cote—the oldest in South Australia—has, accordingly, not been
startlingly progressive. I was there about a year ago, and was never
more at a loss than to discover what induced the very few people I
saw to live there. The place consists of about half-a-dozen houses,
chiefly occupied by the descendants and connections of one old
gentleman, who was among the first to land there in 1836, and
who still lives there in patriarchal simplicity. The inhabitants live
principally on the produce of their gardens, on fish, and on wallaby
flesh. These miniature kangaroos, about the size of hares, abound
in the scrub, and are certainly excellent food. But it was difficult
to guess what exportable articles Nepean Bay could produce in
exchange even for the very limited supply of clothes, spirits,.


groceries, and tobacco, which sufficed for the modest wants of its
score or so of inhabitants.
To have hit Kangaroo Island was, indeed, about the worst shot
the first settlers could have made. The greater part of the island
is covered with dense scrub, in which several persons have lost their
lives—as, when once entangled in it, it is not only difficult to find,
but even to force, one’s way through the thick-set branches. Fresh
water is extremely scarce, and the patches of available country of
insignificant extent. At the last census (1861), the population of
the entire island, which is about eighty miles long and twenty
broad, was found to be 175.
On the 20th of August, 1836, Colonel Light, the first Surveyor-
General, arrived in Nepean Bay, in the Rapid, and speedily ascer-
tained the total unfitness of that site for the future capital. Colonel
Light continued, however, to survey and examine Nepean Bay and
its neighbourhood till the 7th of September, when he sailed, in the
Rapid, for Gulf St. Vincent, and, the following day, landed at the
mouth of “a fine stream of fresh water.” He says, in his journal,
“ the soil was rich beyond description. My hopes were now raised
to a pitch I cannot describe. I walked up one of the hills, and was
delighted to find that, as far as I could see all around, there was an
appearance of fertility, and a total absence of those wastes and
barren spots which the accounts I had received in England had led
me to expect.”
He remained here for some days, surveying and examining the
country as far as Yankalilla, and was delighted with the results of
his investigation. He then sailed up the Gulf again, and discovered
the entrance to what is with doubtful propriety called the “ river,”
at Port Adelaide. In rainy weather, a considerable quantity of
fresh water forces its way into the channel, some distance above the
present port; but, in summer, the fresh water stream is almost
lost, and the river becomes simply an inlet from the gulf. Colonel
Light was, however, delighted with the fine anchorage, and the
beautiful appearance of the country, and very speedily came to the
conclusion that in this neighbourhood would be the proper place for
the head-quarters of the settlement.
In obedience to his instructions, however, he soon afterwards
sailed for Port Lincoln, leaving Mr. Kingston, Mr. Finniss, and
other members of the survey party to carry on a more minute
examination of the eastern shore of the gulf. Colonel Light’s
opinion of Port Lincoln, however, was very unfavourable, and lie
soon returned to Holdfast Bay—an anchorage a few miles to the
south of the entrance to the port, and where our most popular
watering-place, Glenelg, now stands.
On the 28th of December, 1836—a quarter of a century and a
few months ago —Captain Hindmarsh, the first Governor of South
Australia, arrived with a staff of officers, and a few immigrants, in
Holdfast Bay, and the Colony was then proclaimed. In the mean
time, other vessels had come in, and the disappointment felt was


very great at the fact that no land had been surveyed in blocks, no
town laid out, nor even the site of the intended capital selected.
The consequence was, that the new colonists began quarrelling
among themselves with the utmost promptitude and acrimony.
Poor Colonel Light was by many of them held blameable in the
highest degree, and he was equally abused for everything that he
did, and for everything that he left undone. I have before me a
pamphlet which he published in 1839, detailing the proceedings of
this period ; and it is somewhat amusing to remark now how many
prosperous gentlemen, whom one now may see shaking hands in
Adelaide streets, and having a word or two about old times, hated,
and reviled, and thwarted, and maligned one another at the outset.
Perhaps they deemed it “ safest to begin with a little aversion.”
Poor Colonel Light, however, did not live into the period of
reconciliation, but died in October, 1839. At his death, the
colonists endeavoured to atone for their hostility to him when
living by erecting to his memory a small monument, not quite. so
ugly as might have been expected, in one of the city squares which
bears his name.
Finally, Adelaide was laid out where it now stands—on the banks
of the Torrens, about seven miles from the port, at which place a
number of allotments were also marked off for commercial purposes.
The Home authorities do not seem to have seen the necessity for
all the initiatory wrangling I have alluded to, and, in 1838, Captain
Hindmarsh was superseded by Colonel Gawler, and Mr. Fisher (now
Sir James Fisher, President of the Legislative Council) removed
from his post as Resident Commissioner. His duties were vested
in the new Governor, who was thus placed in a somewhat anoma-
lous position—owing responsibility, as Governor, to the King of
England, and, as Lands Commissioner, to the South Australian
Commissioners in London, who themselves seem to have been
responsible to nobody.
If it appeared necessary to recall Captain Hindmarsh in a hurry,
it soon appeared still more necessary to recall Colonel Gawler in
red-hot haste. On his arrival in Adelaide, he found the affairs of
the Colony in great confusion ; the wealthier, or reputed wealthier
members of the community had not improved their position by
gambling in land orders and by inveterate quarrels, and the labour-
ing classes were leaving the province in considerable numbers. Flis
position, and that of the Colony, were so critical at the time, that
it might be unjust to Colonel Gawler to allege that he acted other-
wise than rightly; but he adopted a course that nothing but
extreme and exceptional circumstances could justify. He com-
menced a series of public works (roads, bridges, &c.), which have
since indeed proved useful, and not a bad investment of public
capital for the most part; but what was chiefly contemplated in
undertaking them was, remunerative employment for the labouring
class, and the administration of a sort of financial tonic to the
depressed men of business.


The circumstances of the case were, however, transitory and
exceptional, and, so far, Governor Gawler might have been justified
in pursuing an exceptional course; but the worst of it was, that
the works he undertook he had neither adequate money nor credit
to pay for. Prior to his arrival in 1838, indeed, the accounts of
the Colony had got into great confusion—the salaries of the public
officers were unpaid—the surveys were at a stand still the
treasury was empty —and the full amount for which the Colony
was entitled to draw upon the Commissioners in London during
the year, had been drawn for during the first six months ; hence it
clearly became absolutely necessary that the new Governor should
overdraw his account, and he seems to have thoroughly recognised the
truth of the proverb—“ That what is worth doing is worth doing well.”
According to the report of a Committee of the British House
of Commons, appointed in February, 1841, to inquire into the
affairs of this Colony, “the bills drawn in 1838 amounted to
£18,121 ; during 1839, to more than £44,000 ; and during 1840
(Governor Gawler’s year), to upwards of £123,000.” This illus-
tration of “progressive development” was one for which the Com-
missioners were unprepared. In August, 1840, it became evident
to them that the whole amount of the original loan (£200,000)
which they were empowered to raise, was quite inadequate to meet
the demands upon it, and they refused to accept any more bills—
in short, “stopped payment.” Since the preceding May, they
had accepted bills amounting to £71,597, which had been drawn
by the authority of Colonel Gawler. Between the date of the
stoppage and the following February, bills to the amount of
£69,247 were presented and dishonoured, and many more bills
were known to be drawn, though still unpresented. At this day
it may seem almost absurd that the Colony should have been in
difficulties for amounts which would make but a small appearance
in the books of many a private Adelaide trader of 1861 ; but
South Australia did only a very small business in the year 1840,
and the dishonour of Colonel Gawler’s drafts was ruinous to many,
though the bills were subsequently all paid, and the credit of the
Colony in so far redeemed.
Colonel Gawler’s successor in the Government of South Australia
was Captain (now Sir George) Grey, the present Governor of New
Zealand, and recently the Governor of the Cape of Good Hope.
He arrived in May, 1841, and found that the extent of the Colony’s
indebtedness was greater than he had anticipated. While the
revenue was only £30,000 a year, the annual expenditure had
reached the amount of £150,000, and a public debt of £300,000
had been contracted. He used the pruning-knife unsparingly, and
succeeded in reducing the annual expenditure below £30,000, and
he employed the surplus revenue in reducing the debt.
In the meantime, our good mother-country, with not a little of
that kind of admonition which prodigal sons must be content to
put up with when being helped out of their scrapes, came to our


assistance. The British Parliament voted £155,000 towards the
payment of our liabilities, and the remainder was funded and
secured on the resources of the Province. The whole has long
since been paid off.
During Captain Grey’s administration, the Colony made great
advances. The colonists began to understand the Colony and their
own relations to it. Living upon their capital, and selling land
orders to one another, had for some time ceased to be considered
the true method by which the members of a community become
wealthy ; although, in later years, a somewhat similar though less
extravagant scene has been re-enacted here with mining scrip.
The cultivation of farms and gardens, and the rearing of stock (of
which great numbers were now constantly arriving overland),
absorbed in a profitable manner the attention of a large section of
the inhabitants ; although then, as always in all Australian colonies,
the urban distributing class continued to be injuriously large as
compared with the rural and producing class.
Probably, however, South Australia would have advanced with
much more slow and gradual steps, had it not been for the discovery
of the Burra Mines. After the gold discoveries in California and in
the colonies adjacent to this, it would take a very great deal of
copper to astonish the world; but public expectation in matters
metallic was more moderate in the year 1845. In another part of
this pamphlet I have given fuller particulars about the Burra Mine,
and need here only say that it speedily became world-famous—
•that it converted several colonists in humble circumstances into very
wealthy men ; that it afforded profitable employment to a great
.deal of capital and labour ; that it attracted many new comers of all
classes to our shores; and gave a needed stimulant to the com-
mercial prosperity of the place. All this, however, was not without
a drawback. The search for mineral wealth was naturally more
keen after such a treasure had been found, and there was a prone-
ness amongst people to buy mining shares when they saw £5
investments yielding £25 a-year. Many mineral discoveries were
made, and Companies were formed, and prospectuses were issued;
and pretty nearly every prospectus had another Burra to recommend.
There was a natural collapse and reaction ; a ruinous loss to too
credulous speculators ; and an abandonment of operations in mines
of which many will, no doubt, yet prove of great value. Of all the
mines started between that time and this, valuable as many of them
will no doubt yet prove, I believe I am right in saying that until
the last three or four years none has continued to be steadily and
profitably worked except the Burra and the Kapunda. The latter,
though far inferior to the Burra, has yielded handsome returns, has
given extensive and profitable employment to capital and labour, and
has gathered in its neighbourhood a prosperous inland town, rendered
of extra importance at the present moment as being the furthest
point to the north as yet accessible by railway from Adelaide.
From Captain Grey’s time to the present day, the most important


history of South Australia has been that of its industrial progress.
The successive changes in its constitution will be found briefly
detailed in a separate section. But before closing this rapid
survey of our past, one or two circumstances will need to be
referred to.
Colonel Kobe, who succeeded Captain Grey as Governor in
October, 1815, aroused a great deal of animosity by enacting
measures which the large power then possessed by the Governor
enabled him to do—the one imposing a royalty on all minerals
raised in the Province, and the other providing for State endow-
ment for religious services. Both of these measures were strenu-
ously resisted ; the first on the ground that it was in direct violation
of the terms on which purchasers of land had acquired the fee
simple to their properties ; and the second on the ground that it
Avas at variance with the fundamental principles on which the
Colony was understood to be founded, and which did not recognise
it as part of the business of the State to interfere with the religion
of the inhabitants by taxation or othenvise. Whether it was that an
indiscriminate endoAvment of all the recognised forms of religious
belief Avas not felt to be so severe an infringement of personal
rights as the imposition of a royalty upon minerals, it is not for me
to determine, but the resistance made to the proposed royalties was
so strenuous, that that had to be abandoned at once. Indiscrimi-
nate aid to the various recognised forms of religious belief endured,
however, until a representative legislature Avas established, Avhen all
State aid was abandoned.
Colonel Robe’s successor Avas Sir Henry Young, during Avhose
occupation of power the Colony underwent many important
changes. Personally, his name is more identified Avith the interest
he took in promoting the navigation of the Murray, than with
anything else ; for during his presidency a partially representative
legislature came into being, and the actual power of the Governor
became greatly curtailed. Public acts of importance could no
longer be spoken of as the acts of the Governor. His power be-
came principally negative, or of that indirect kind which a man in
such a position may bring to bear by influencing the opinions and
conduct of his nominal advisers, and those with Avhom he is in the
habit of associating.
It was during Sir Henry Young’s tenure of office that the
Australian Colonies Avere convulsed by the great discoveries of gold
Avhich folioAved so fast upon one another in New South Wales and
Victoria. To these I need only refer here in so far as they affected
South Australia; and, for a time, it appeared to many persons as
if this Colony must be absolutely ruined. Shipload after shipload
of male emigrants continued to leave the port during many con-
secutive months, Avhile thousands more Avalked or dro\ T e their teams
overland. The little trodden overland route became the scene of
active traffic—the principal camping places being every night lighted
up by the numerous camp fires of parties of travellers. At the


same time tliat the men went the money went with them ; the
banks were drained of coin, and trade practically ceased. Scores of
shops were closed, because the tradesmen had followed their cus-
tomers to the diggings. The streets seem to contain nothing but
women ; and strong fears were entertained that there would be no
harvest sown, and that, allured by the more glittering attractions of
the gold Colony, the small landed proprietors, who formed so
important a section of our society, would permanently remain away,
selling their land here for whatever trifle it would fetch. These
fears proved groundless, and the great bulk of the South Australian
diggers returned to their homesteads, bringing their gold with them,
and becoming grain producers for the gold diggers of the neigh-
bouring Colonies.
The passing of the Bullion Act, as it was called, helped greatly
in bringing about this result, though the Act had many censurers
then and since, who alleged that it was utterly at variance with
those principles of good government which were deducible from the
laws of political economy. The essential provisions of the Act
(which was only to be in force for one year) were that the banks
were permitted to pay their notes in assayed gold at the rate of
£3 1 Is. per oz. of standard purity, and that notes issued against
bullion valued at that rate were made legal tender except at the
banks themselves. Now, as gold was at that time not selling for
more than £2 15s. in Melbourne, it was alleged with some truth
that our one pound notes were a depreciated currency, and that their
nominal was beyond their real value. As a corollary it might be
said that creditors were defrauded by law when they were compelled
to receive payment in gold (or equivalent notes) at the rate of
£3 11s., for which they could only obtain £2 15s. worth of sterling
coin. On the other hand, it must be remembered that natural
causes had suddenly enhanced the value of the coined sovereign.
For £2 15s. in Melbourne you could buy gold worth nearly £4 in
London (being above standard purity). In effect, the creditor got
more gold for his debt than he would have done had he been paid
in sovereigns ; and it was only the large quantity of uncoined gold
raised in Australia, and the distance it had to be sent to be converted
into coin, that caused an immense transitory discrepancy in the
exchangeable value of the two. But the best feature of this excep-
tional Act, called for by exceptional circumstances, was, that apart
from the legal limit to the period during which it was to operate, it
was absolutely certain that natural causes would bring about the
old state of things. It was absolutely certain that in a very little
time ingots which were worth £3 17s. lOd per oz. in London would
be worth more than £3 11s. here, and that the banks would no longer
avail themselves of the Act, but would pay their notes in specie by
obvious preference. Again, one of the expectations of the originators
of the Act—and it was an expectation which the event justified—
was, that it would lead to considerable purchases of Crown lands, and
thereby operate against the dreaded abandonment of the Colony ;


and the Government, in receiving payment in what the opponents
of the Act called a depreciated currency, had perfect security that
they were being paid in what in a few months would be worth its
nominal amount. Finally, the Act had the immense merit of
answering its purpose ; miners flocked back with their gold, or sent
it over and invested it here, and in an incredibly short time South
Australia, instead of being abandoned, was partaking in fair measure
of the general prosperity of the neighbouring Colonies.
Sir Henry Young was succeeded—after a brief interregnum, during
which Mr. B. T. Finniss, the Colonial Secretary, held the reins as
Acting Governor—by Sir Bichard Mac Donnell, who arrived here
in 1855, and is with us still (February, 1862), though about to give
place to Sir Dominic Daly, whose advent is now daily expected.
On his arrival, Sir Richard Mac Donnell found that a sudden
and excessive influx of ill-selected immigrants, comprising 4,500
males and 7,400 females, was causing great embarrassment. By
providing supervision, food, and shelter, serious consequences to the
immigrants themselves were avoided; whilst the aid of country
authorities and the settlers was invoked to relieve the town and the
labour market of this unexpected burden, and the Treasury of the
expense of maintenance. Country depots were established, both
north and south, to which immigrants were dispatched for engage-
ment by neighbouring residents : and by these and similar vigorous
measures, the immigrants became gradually absorbed in the general
population. It is not, however, by many such crises as the above,
which marked the beginning of Sir Richard Mac Donnell’s career in
the Colony, that the period of his government has been chiefly
distinguished.
The history of the last six years in South Australia has been the
history of steady industrial and political progress. The introduc-
tion of the new Constitution has been the most remarkable event
of this epoch; and the change thus produced will elsewhere be found
described in detail. It is over the whole face of the country that
the history of this period has been written. Roads have been im-
proved and bridges formed, so as quite to change the character of
inland travelling for hundreds of miles from Adelaide ; surveys
for railways have been carried on to a large extent; the railway of
8| miles to the port in one direction, and the Northern Line to
Kapunda (52 miles) in another direction, have been opened; tele-
graph lines throughout the country have been established, as well as
telegraphic communication with Sydney and Melbourne ; the City
of Adelaide has been supplied with water; a large extent of country
has been surveyed for purchase in sections; the coast has been
lighted where necessary; numerous buildings for public purposes
have been constructed by the Executive, including a new Hos-
pital, Parliament House, Government House, Government Offices,
Mounted Police Barracks, and the Institute with its free library;
the Murray has been navigated as far as Albury, and the first
steamer taken a considerable distance up the Darling by Capt.


Cadell, with whom were Sir Richard Mac Donnell and four others.
Nearer home, the new mining district of Wallaroo, on Yorke’s
Peninsula, has been discovered and fairly tested, so that what
was two years ago a sheep-run, now exhibits townships, mines,
and all the customary adjuncts, including the commencement of a
railway and a system of drainage. Further from Adelaide, the
Far North has been explored by Mr. Stuart, Mr. Goyder, Major
Freeling, Mr. Babbage, Sir Richard Mac Donnell, Major Warburton,
and others. During the period under consideration, indeed, the
cause of inland exploration, which had for some time slumbered,
received a remarkable impetus, and the first named of the gentle-
men just mentioned, Mr. Stuart, as is now well known, succeeded
in pushing his discoveries almost to the northern coast of Australia.
He is now absent to finish his nearly completed work. It was
during the administration of Sir Richard Mac Donnell that the
South Australian Volunteer Force attained its present efficiency
and numbers (viz., 2,054 of all arms—horse, foot, and artillery),
although during the term of office of Mr. Finniss, that gentleman
had greatly exerted himself in this cause, and a force of about 800
men had been raised.
On the 3rd December last, Sir Richard Mac Donnell, in prorogu-
ing Parliament and in a valedictory speech to the Legislature,
briefly enumerated the principal changes of the past seven years in
the following words, with which this section of the present work
may be fitly closed:—
Had I time, it would be interesting to recall to your recollection the most salient
points in the history of that epoch. This, however, is not a moment to attempt such
a task, though I cannot but remind you that when I landed here, in June, 1855, there
was not a mile of railway opened in the Colony, and yet there are now fifty-seven
miles in use, over which annually rolls a traffic of more than 150,000 tons, and
320,000 passengers. Your coasts have been lit with three additional first-class
lights; and three additional harbours have come into extensive use. Your population
has grown from 86,000 to nearly 130,000 ; whilst the exports of Colonial produce
have risen from less than £690,000, in 1855, to £1,808,000 for the year ending the
30th of last June.
When I landed there was scarcely sixty miles of made road in the Colony, whereas
now, independent of those in the city, there are nearly, if not over, 200 miles ; and
instead of 160,000 acres only in cultivation, there cannot be less now than 460,000 —
a number greater in proportion to the population than obtains in any other portion
of her Majesty’s dominions, or indeed, in any other part of the world with which I
am acquainted.
It is, moreover, since 1855, that the first telegraph post was erected in this Colony,
and yet you already possess 600 miles of telegraphic communication, and nearly
1,000 miles of wire, together with twenty-six stations. It is also since 1855, that the
explorations of Mr. Stuart and others have added so much to our geographical know-
ledge, filling up the large blank spaces which had so long defaced the map of South
Australia, and usefully opened up the country to further settlement.
Above all, it is since my arrival here that the great experiment has been tried of
entrusting the general mass of the people, through their immediate representatives,
with power to control completely the taxation and expenditure of the country, and
direct its general legislation. lam bound to say, that although such an experiment
must be more or less hazardous anywhere, there is less risk accompanying it in South
Australia, owing to the character of the people and the division of property here,
than would attend it in almost any other country. I may add, that if I were to
select any one reason as the paramount cause of responsible government working
hitherto with so great a measure of success, I would attribute it to the fair ana


equitable view which generally prevails as to the mutual and necessary dependence
of the various great interests of the Colony one on another. The sentiments avowed
on that subject at public meetings and in the debates of Parliament, form not merely
a pleasing and healthy contrast with what takes place in other Colonies, but give the
best and strongest guarantee that society here will continue united for the advance-
ment of the common weal, and will thereby have the greatest chance of promoting
the general prosperity.
CHAPTER II.
CONSTITUTIONAL AND POLITICAL CHANGES.
Though it is but a quarter of a century since this Colony was
founded, many important changes have occurred in the system of
government prevailing here ; and I propose, briefly, to give the
dates at which, and circumstances under which, these changes were
made. Some persons will, perhaps, be inclined to laugh at the
notion of politics and ministerial crises, and so forth, in a little place
like this, but it is probable that the disposition to do so will be
inversely proportional to the intelligence of the reader. It is
easy to talk about “ a tempest in a tea-pot,” or to sneer at
“parish politics,” but this way of looking at the subject will not
bear examination. Petty schemes and petty jealousies, it is true,
are over-abundant here, and in so far as they influence our politics,
these are, no doubt, contemptible. But that which saves them
from being properly classed as “parish politics,” is the kind of
topics with which we have to deal, 4s compared with those of a
parish. A parish in England might contain a million of inhabitants,
and its politics would still be altogether petty, because its larger
interests would be managed at Westminster and at Whitehall.
Though our population is under 135,000, it is our own fault if our
politics are petty; because almost the whole well-being of that
number, so far as it can be affected by legislation, or good or bad
government, is in our own hands to make or mar. Almost the
whole range of subjects that the legislator can discuss are within
the scope of our Parliamentary action. The grandeur or pettiness
of politics does not seem to me proportionate to the mere number
of persons affected, but to depend rather upon the extent to which
their interests are at stake. Here our Parliament, with some small
limitations as to Acts that might clash with Imperial interests,
exercises the same powers over the community that the British
Parliament exercises over the British Islands. We may make our
politics petty by discussing them in a petty spirit, wanting in
knowledge, and judgment, and earnestness, but there is the fullest
scope for the exercise of opposite qualities. All those questions
that are considered the great questions of British politics, lie open
to us to answer and to act upon. We have, moreover, opportunities
for political improvement, and for effecting legal and social reforms,
which the vast vested interests, that fetter action, and the complexity
of institutions existing in an old and populous country, render far


more difficult there. Hence our politics should even be in advance
■of those of the mother-country, and here we should be discussing
how to give effect to principles which have not yet, there, passed from
the domain of abstract philosophy into that of practical legislation.
Moreover, though our numbers are at present insignificant, “it
needs no ghost to rise from the grave to tell us ” that hereafter that
fault will be remedied, and that the present Colonies of Australia
will be populous nations. One glance at the History of America
should suffice, too, to remind us how powerfully what we now do
may affect the future welfare of a great section of mankind. The
politics of America were but petty politics, according to the
numerical standard, when certain mistakes were made, which grew
and grew in their consequences, till the new world is in the con-
vulsions of a civil war, and the old world likely enough to be dragged
into the contest.
If critics, at a distance, considered duly how much the policy
adopted by our Parliament and Government affects the condition of
our present generation—how far ignorant misgovernment may sink
us—how much wisdom might raise us —what a wide field for specu-
lation and practical sagacity lies before those who have the foresight
to regard Australia as a second America in its infancy—they might
justly censure our doings in many respects, it is likely enough ; but
they would censure us much more justly for undervaluing than for
overvaluing our political opportunities and responsibilities.
Indeed, such undervaluation and its consequent indifference, I
take to be among the most distinct vices of our society, and among
the least favourable symptoms of our social condition. A very con-
siderable number of our “ upper ten hundred,” or whatever the
number may be, think it decidedly “ fine ” to adopt a scornful
_psewdo-fine-gentleman’s view of local politics. I asked one of this
kind, recently, whether he had voted at an election for a member
of the Legislature, then going on. “ No,” said he ; “ I’ve no taste
for such things.” There are many people of the same class
Avho adopt the same tone. They do not consider it a matter of
“taste” whether they meet their bills and support their families ;
but they not only consider it a mere matter of taste whether or
not they exercise their political powers, but rather an evidence
of good taste to neglect them. In the meantime, by a curious
perversity, they declare the Colony to be, or to be in imminent
peril of being, ruined by universal suffrage and our democratic
institutions.
It would be quite foreign to the purposes of this pamphlet to
discuss whether it was or was not precipitate to throw so great a
preponderance of power into the hands of the un-propertied class;
but it is the mere statement of a fact which ought not to be
omitted here, to say that the large constitutional power which this
class possesses is strengthened by active organization, and that
what is considered the Conservative section of the community has
sacrificed a considerable share of the power it might have retained,


through want of organization and by neglect. Such, I believe, is
more or less the case also in the other Australian Colonies. The
tone adopted towards us by some influential sections of the London
press—varying between distant patronage and epigrammatically-
phrased contempt for the miserable minuteness of our political con-
eems—has probably had much to do with making indifferentism
fashionable here. It is to be hoped that cause and effect will
betimes pass away together. Whether Australia is destined to
achieve such national and commercial greatness as America has,
nr had, attained, no one can say. But as the progress of discovery
disperses the old notion that the major part of Australia is a desert,
the probability that such may be the case becomes greater. In that
case, I can hardly see a more important task than that of bending
rightly the young branches of the great tree destined to stand here
for ages to come. We have the experience of America to guide us,
and her disasters and mistakes to warn us. The Colonial policy of
Great Britain is now such that we need fear neither a sudden dis-
ruption of those ties which very few Colonists desire to sever; nor
that, if ever such severance should become—in some distant period
—desirable, it will be other than a matter of quiet arrangement.
Under these admirably advantageous circumstances, to us—l speak
of all Australia—is assigned the duty of largely determining the
future character, future welfare, of the last great swarm, that
there seems a fit place in the world for the Anglo-Saxon race to
send out. I can well understand that this is a duty we may fail in,
but I cannot understand how it can/be a petty one. Certainly
those who think it a fine thing to express want of “taste” for
taking part in it on this ground, must feel that they are thrown
away upon any but the most colossal undertakings.
I do not pretend that our political affairs have been administered
with so high a conception of our political responsibilities as ought to
control us. Individual ambition, and private friendships and ani-
mosities, and party tactics, and intrigues for possession of loaves and
fishes, have operated here as in older communities; but Ido not
know that they have done so to a higher degree than in the great
countries of to-day. It is but a trite observation to say that human
nature is the same everywhere, but it contains a truth apparently for-
gotten by those who argue as if human thoughts and aspirations were
necessarily lower in an infant community than in an established one.
I must not be tempted into further disquisition upon this topic,
however, and will pass at once to a plain abstract of the consti-
tutional changes that have occurred among us.
From the arrival of Governor Hindmarsh, on 28th December,
1836, the Government was conducted, and laws were enacted, by
the Governor and a Council; the Members of which were appointed
and removed by the Governor, subject to the approval of the Secre-
tary of State in London. At the same time, the Commissioners in
London, through whose exertions the Colony had been founded,
were represented in Adelaide by one of their body, known as the


Resident Commissioner. This officer held certain powers inde-
pendent of the Governor, and, during a short time, a seat in the
Council; his communications being addressed to, and instructions
received from, the Board of Commissioners in London.
When Colonel Gawler succeeded Captain Hindmarsh, as Gover-
nor, the separate appointment of Resident Commissioner was
abolished, that post being united with the office of Governor; to-
fill both of which Colonel Gawler was recommended by the London
Commissioners, to whose discretion the Secretary of State had left
the nomination. Colonel Gawler arrived and assumed the govern-
ment in October, 1838.
In December, 1840, Lord John Russell appointed Captain Grey
to supersede Colonel Gawler in the government of the Colony ; the
office of Resident Commissioner being again combined with the
higher post.
In July, 1842, during Governor Grey’s tenure of office, the British
Parliament passed an Act repealing the two former Acts of 1834
and 1838, constituting South Australia as a separate Colony, and
establishing the London Board of Commissioners—and thus abolished
the office of Resident Commissioner. The new Act of 1842, further
provided for a Legislative Council, consisting of the Governor and
not less than seven other persons, to be nominated by the Queen,
or in such manner as she might direct. This new Council was first
established in June, 1843, and, the selection of its Members being
left to Governor Grey, he appointed the Colonial Secretary, Mr.
Mundy; the Advocate-General, Mr. Smillie ; and the Registrar-
General, Captain Sturt, as official Members ; together with four
other colonists holding no appointments under the Government.
Such, with various changes from time to time in the individual
Members, continued to be the governing Council of the Colony
until the close of February, 1851.
In August, 1850, the British Parliament, by Act No. 59 of 13
and 14 Viet., conferred, for the first time on the colonists of South
Australia, the power of returning elected Members to serve in the
Legislative Council. The number of Members of the whole Council
was not to exceed twenty-four, of whom one-third were to be
nominated by the Queen; whilst to the old Council was left the
task of passing an Electoral Act, regulating the boundaries of the
districts and the conduct of elections. By the Imperial Act the
qualification of elective Members was fixed at not less than £IOO
annual value, or £2,000 total value of freehold property. The
Council was to last for five years, subject, nevertheless, to proroga-
tion or dissolution by the Governor; a Civil List of £13,000 was
also reserved to her Majesty.
The Council of seven Members performed its last duty of pass-
ing the necessary electoral law, and was then at once prorogued
by Lieutenant-Governor Sir Henry Young ; its existence being
shortly afterwards finally terminated by the issue of writs for the
election of sixteen Members of the new Council.


The new Council met on 20th August, 1851, and was composed
of four official and four non-official Members, appointed by the
Governor on behalf of the Queen, and sixteen elective Members.
Before long, however, the colonists and the Council began to
crave for still further extended powers of self government, the
prospect of which had been so frequently held out by the Home
Government, and to obtaining which the neighbouring Colonies had
begun to turn their attention.
Accordingly, in 1853, the Council passed, and the Governor
reserved for the signification of her Majesty’s pleasure, a Bill to
establish a Parliament in South Australia. The chief characteristics
of this Constitution were as follows : —A Parliament consisting of
a Legislative Council and a House of Assembly. The Council was
to consist of twelve or more Members, appointed for life by the
Governor; whilst the Assembly was to consist of thirty-six Mem-
bers, elected for three years, subject to prorogation or dissolution
by the Governor. The qualification of Members and voters for the
Assembly was the same, viz., either a freehold estate of £2O
annual value, or leasehold estate of £lO annual value, the occupa-
tion of a house worth £5 a year, or the fact of being rated to a
Municipality or District Council. The President of the Council
was to be appointed by the Governor, but the Speaker of the
Assembly elected by its Members. By a separate Act, reserved for
the signification of her Majesty’s pleasure, on the same day, a
Civil List of £lB,OOO per annum was secured to her Majesty, and
four years’ salary secured as compensation to each of those official
Members liable to lose office on political grounds.
Considerable dissatisfaction at certain portions of the Act having
been manifested throughout the Colony, a numerously-signed peti-
tion against the Queen’s assent being given was sent to London,
and ultimately the Bill was referred back by Lord John Russell
for further consideration. In order to allow of this to the fullest
extent, Governor Sir Richard Graves Mac Donnell (who had lately
assumed the government as successor to Sir Henry Young), in
June, 1855, dissolved the Council which had passed the former
Bill, and thus placed the settlement of the new Constitution in the
hands of the country. Sixteen elective Members having been
returned, and eight nominees appointed, the Governor summoned
the Council to meet on Ist November, 1855. This Council pro-
ceeded to draw up the Constitution now in force.
It may here be as well to point out the salient features of this
Constitution, which was assented to by her Majesty, which has not
as yet been altered, and which appears likely to continue the law
of the land for some years. In the first place it is worthy of remark,
that the Act only provides a Constitution, leaving all matters
connected with the elections of Members and the boundaries of
districts to be dealt with by separate legislation. The convenience
of this has been felt on five separate occasions, when it has been
found necessary to amend the first Electoral Act, passed in the
c


session of 1855-6. None of these changes, however, have involved
the Constitution.
The Parliament consists of a Legislative Council and a House of
Assembly. The former is composed of eighteen Members, six of
whom retire every four years, their successors being then elected
for twelve years ; nor is the Governor able to dissolve this body. It
is elected by the whole Colony voting as one district, and the qualifi-
cation of an elector to the Council is as follows : —He must be
twenty-one years of age, a natural born or naturalized subject of
her Majesty, and have been on the electoral roll six months,
besides having a freehold of £SO value, or a leasehold of £2O
annual value, or occupying a dwelling-house of £25 annual value.
The qualification for a Member of Council is merely that he must
be thirty years of age, a natural born or naturalized subject, and a
resident in the 'province for three years. The President of the
Council is elected by the Members.
The House of Assembly consists of thirty-six Members, elected
for three years by seventeen districts, but liable to dissolution by
the Governor. The qualification for an elector is his having been
on the electoral roll for six months, and his having arrived at
twenty-one years of age; and the qualification for a Member is the
same. The Speaker is elected for the Parliament by the Members •
of a new House on its first meeting.
The Ministry consists of the Chief Secretary, the Attorney-
General, the Treasurer, the Commissioner of Crown Lands, and the
Commissioner of Public Works, all of whom require to be Members
of the Legislature, or if not, to find seats within three months of
accepting any such office. On a change occurring in a Ministry,
no re-election, after taking one of the above posts, is required, which
saves both time and expense ; but a Member accepting any other
office of profit or pleasure under the Crown, vacates his seat. There
are also the usual disqualifying causes, such as insolvency, treason,
&c., &c., and Members can resign their seats.
All appointments to the Government service are vested in the
Governor and Executive Council, with whom also rests the power of
dismissal. Judges, however, can only be removed by the Sovereign,
on the address of both Houses.
All money bills must originate in the House of Assembly, and
any appropriation of the revenue, or of any taxes, must be first
recommended by the Governor to the Assembly.
Judges and ministers of religion are ineligible for election as
Members, as well as aliens who have not resided five years in the
colony.
A Civil List of i? 13,500 per annum is reserved to her
Majesty.
Elections of Members of both Houses are conducted by ballot;
but all such matters are regulated by the Electoral Act, apart from
the Constitution.
'• Any amendment of the Constitution is required to be passed


through its second and third readings in each House by an absolute
majority.
Such are the chief provisions of the present Constitution in South
Australia.
This second mixed Council, under the Constitution of 1850, lasted
from November, 1855, until March, 1857 ; although the new Con-
stitution providing for two Houses having been assented to by the
Queen, was proclaimed in the Colony in October, 1856. The first
elections of the two Houses took place in March, 1857; and in the
following month met, for the first time, the two entirely elected
Chambers. A recapitulation of the various Ministerial changes
which have taken place under the system of responsible govern-
ment would hardly interest English readers. I wish to point out,
however, that many of the changes which have occurred were
avowedly merely for the moment only, and that, apart from a few
personal resignations and substitutions, we have had two Ministries
holding office for two years and eight months, and one year
and four months respectively, during the five and a half years
that have elapsed since the introduction of responsible government.
The amount of change has been greater, it may be, than it ought
to have been; but it is less than might be believed by English
readers, who are guided by some of the remarks of the London
press. It is too often forgotten apparently that New South Wales,
Victoria, South Australia, and Tasmania are separate provinces,
with separate Parliaments and Governments; and the several
changes that occur in each are apt to be lumped together, and
debited to the political fickleness of Australia, as if they all
occurred in a single State.
CHAPTER III.
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COLONY.
The first glimpse of land after a long voyage is always interest-
ing and exhilarating, and when the land so seen is the one that the
voyager has crossed half the globe to reach—his selected home—the
place which certainly for many years, and perhaps for the re-
mainder of his earthly existence, is to be the battle-field of his life,
he must be very unimpressionable indeed if those first hours spent
in sight of Australian shores are not deeply marked upon his
memory. It is more than a dozen years since I had this experience,
and I have travelled over a large part of Australia, and seen its
coast for many hundreds of miles since then ; but my first sight of
the Adelaide Hills is as fresh in my memory as the last look I took
at them to-day. We had made a voyage of a hundred and three
days from Plymouth—which, in those times, was not considered
a despicable passage, and we had sighted Kangaroo Island shortly


before nightfall. Of the Kangaroo Island shore, we saw nothing
but a long low line of what might have been cloud, but which
I have since become better acquainted with as a scrubby, and
most unprepossessing-looking coast. But when soon after day-
light, on a bright Australian morning, we were on deck again,
the scene had quite changed. A fair wind was carrying us rapidly
up the Gulf of St. Vincent. We were near enough to the shore
to distinguish houses and trees, and lines of fencing. The whole
face of the country was green with the rains of the passing winter,
and bright with the sunshine of the advancing spring. The
blue ripple of the narrow waters, tipped “ with tender-curved lines
of creamy spray,” would of themselves have afforded a pleasant
■change to the eye, after it had dwelt for months upon the long
monotonous roll of the ocean, and a sail or two—we had seen none,
if I remember rightly, since we crossed the tropic of Capricorn, in
the Atlantic —gave additional life and animation to the whole
scene. Its main feature, however, was the range of hills I have
already alluded to—the Adelaide Hills, or the Mount Lofty Range,
as they are indifferently called. After a long sea voyage, no doubt
any hills would seem beautiful; but the Mount Lofty Range will
bear the test of long and intimate acquaintance, and will seem
beautiful still. They approach the coast about a dozen miles south
of Adelaide, and gradually trend away inland towards the north.
The height of Mount Lofty is 2,412 feet, and though under other
circumstances of climate and formation they might be more rugged
and peaked, and fantastically mountainous than they are, per-
haps they would not be more beautiful on that account. The
distinct range is about thirty miles in length. from north to
south—the hills gradually increasing in elevation from either
end as they approach Mount Lofty, which occupies a fairly
central place, and is wooded to its summit. The majority of the
other hills are wooded too, but a sufficient number of them are
either bare or grassy, which give great variety to their colour, while
their contour is beautifully broken and variegated, and full of
such lights and shadows as no painting of them that I have ever
seen has rendered with any justice. It must be confessed that, in the
heat of summer, the dull green of Australian leaves and the sombre
brown of parched herbage, prevail over other tints. But, at different
seasons, and at different hours, they glow with a multitude of vary-
ing hues. Towards sunset, particularly in spring and autumn, they
will often suddenly be clothed with brilliant purple, as if every
blade and leaf upon them had been changed into blossoming heather ;
and again, in other states of the atmosphere, they will show nothing
but their true colours, and their apparent distance will be so reduced
that a stranger might suppose they rose abruptly from the very
end of the street. The streets of South Adelaide are laid out at right
angles—nearly east and west, and north and south—so that, looking
eastward along any of the former, the Mount Lofty Range terminates
the prospect.


The range I have been describing begins to rise about four miles
to the eastward of Adelaide, and is of vast advantage to the City,
apart from its beauty, as seen from our streets and terraces. For
many miles the lower slopes are dotted with the gardens, and vine-
yards, and villas of our wealthier citizens; while a good many
people who can afford the luxury of special summer residences,
have perched their homes on the higher summits, and even to
within a hundred yards of the top of Mount Lofty, where they
have the advantage of cool breezes and beautiful views, both of
sea and land. Among the Mount Lofty Hills, the Onkaparinga,
the Sturt, the Torrens, the Para, and numerous small tributary
streams take their rise. Here are grown, in the highest perfection,
those English fruits and vegetables which fail to thrive on the
hotter and more arid soil of the plains. From one of the gorges
Adelaide derives its present abundant supply of excellent water ;
and the various gullies, with their pretty, though too scanty, water-
falls, afford pleasant camping ground to innumerable pic-nic parties
from Adelaide, on holidays—for taking which, I am happy to say,
our citizens are not slow in seizing a reasonable pretext. As
Adelaide advances in age and population, the vast benefit her
citizens derive from the proximity of this beautiful range will be
more and more abundantly felt.
Between the hills and the sea ars spread the great “ Adelaide
Plains,” now assiduously cultivated for miles in every direction, and
upon which great quantities of wheat and other crops are annually
raised. Farmers here occasionally suffer from the effects of hot
winds and want of rain ; and it appears as if good and bad seasons
succeeded one another in cycles of considerable duration ; but the
laws governing them, and the rotation in which they may be expected
to succeed one another have yet to be ascertained. The past two
seasons are considered by many persons to be the first two seasons
of a cycle of comparatively rainy weather ; the previous seven years
were injuriously dry. But, owing probably to the influence of the
hills in attracting clouds, long-continued periods of excessive
drought—which have caused immeasurable damage in other parts
of Australia—have here been unknown. Wheat, oats, barley, and
other grain are constantly and successfully cultivated on the Adelaide
Plains, and plums, peaches, nectarines, vines, olives, oranges, and
other fruits common to climates in which these flourish, thrive here
luxuriantly. Pine-apples and strictly tropical fruits require protec-
tion—whilst strawberries, cherries, gooseberries, raspberries, and
the like, only come to perfection in exceptional seasons, and are
supplied from the hills; where, in a cooler climate, and amid more
abundant moisture, they reach the highest excellence. Indeed,
scarcely any country can excel South Australia in the quality and
variety of its cultivated fruits ; in illustration of which I may quote
from a card exhibited in a fruiterer’s window, in Adelaide, last Christ-
mas, inscribed, “ Our Christmas dessert,” and which presented
the following tempting catalogue : “ Apples, pears, cherries, plums,


apricots, peaches, figs, walnuts, Spanish walnuts, paccan walnuts,
black currants, white currants, red currants, gooseberries, red goose-
berries, red raspberries, yellow raspberries, white raspberries, melons,
grapes, oranges, lemons, limes, citrons, loquats : all the fruits
mentioned were purchasable in the shop at the time.
Passing to the eastward from the Adelaide Plains, we ascend into
the range, and get into a great tract of hilly country that extends
for a width of about twenty miles, until it falls away into the wide
belt of plain and scrubby country that borders the Murray along a
large part of its course. A considerable portion of this hilly country
is extremely fertile, and yields large quantities of wheat and other
agricultural and horticultural produce. Many inland towns have
arisen in the hill district, the principal ones being, Mount Barker,
Strathalbyn, Nairne, Hahndorf, and others ; the last-named town-
ship, as its name would imply, has been settled, and is chiefly occu-
pied by Germans. These useful and thriving members of our
community have, indeed, in the agricultural districts, generally settled
in communities of their own ; and, in different parts of the country,
you may travel for some miles in districts where German will stand
you in better stead, as a medium of conversation, than English.
To the south a largely-cultivated agricultural district extends to
our southern seaboard, and embraces the greater part of the country
included between the Murray on the east, and St. Vincent’s Gulf on
the west. Within these limits lie the well-populated and prosperous
neighbourhoods of Morphett Vale, Willunga, Aldinga, Rapid Bay,
the Inman Valley, and others. Good roads have been finished far
into all the neighbourhoods here enumerated ; and, among the faci-
lities of traffic in the south, the tramway between the Goolwa and
Port Elliot must not be forgotten. It is now decided that this tram-
way shall be extended to the greatly-superior anchorage of Victor
Harbour. A large portion of the produce of this northern district
is shipped direct from ports along the coast, and without passing
through Adelaide or the port; and numerous steam mills in the
district enable producers to ship away their main produce either as
grain or flour, according to the state of markets.
To the eastward of the Lower Murray, and in what is generally
known as the South-Eastern District of the Colony, the greater part
-of the land is very good, and is chiefly occupied for pastoral pur-
poses. Agriculture is, however, extending in this direction ; and
the recent establishment of Port Mac Donnell has already aided, and
will no doubt still further aid, the development of our agricultural
resources in this direction. The neighbourhood of Mount Gambier,
which has long been one of our richest pastoral districts, is now
gradually getting into additionally profitable occupation by the
agriculturist.
To the north, beyond Gawler, the agriculturist has already a
large hold of the country along the Light, and the Wakefield, and
towards the Burra ; but, beyond this, agriculture has not yet been
attempted upon an extensive scale. Here and there, for a long


distance, further northward, the pastoral occupants of the country
grow small crops for their own use upon sections of land purchased
about their homesteads ; but the great bulk of the country is held
upon squatting tenure and for pastoral purposes only.
The diversity of climate presented by our hills and plains, and
northern and southern districts, has been productive of benefit in
several ways. Seasons favourable for the hills are less so for the
plains, and vice versa, and thus the general agricultural prosperity
of the Colony is more equalized than it would be if the whole Colony
were of one character, and throve and suffered by the circumstances
of season together. A secondary advantage consists in the fact
that our harvest operations are spread over a larger period of time
than would otherwise be the case, so that the labourers’ season of
harvest earnings is more extended, and the farmers are not all
crying out for hands to gather in their crops at one time. On the
lower slopes of the Gawler Ranges and on the Adelaide Plains, the
hay harvest commences in October and the wheat harvest in No-
vember, and in the neighbourhood of the Bremer the seasons are
much the same. About Morphett Yale the harvest commences
about a fortnight later, and about Mount Barker and on the Light,
and other places, at least a month later. In the Clare neighbour-
hood the harvest season is much the same as near Adelaide. Be-
ginning on the Adelaide Plains with the hay harvest, the itinerant
harvest labourer is thus enabled to / make his operations extend
over the greater part of four months ; and, as the labours of plough-
ing and sowing are correspondingly distributed over time, the evils
of scarcity of employment at one time, and scarcity of labour at
another, are mitigated considerably. The extra labour demand for
shearing fortunately occurs in winter, so that even those who have
no settled occupation, but roam about and take the chances of the
seasons for employment, are able to get work at good wages during
a large part of the year..
The country occupied for pastoral purposes now extends from the
south-eastern angle of the Colony' almost to its northern frontier,
and to the westward for some distance inland from Fowler’s Bay
and Streaky Bay, near the head of the great Australian Bight. In
the vast area lying between these distant points, however, there is
still much country unsettled and unknown. A map of the runs of
the Colony shows them adjoining one another for some hundreds of
miles, then gradually separated by belts of unoccupied country, and
then, on the outskirts of settlement, outlined here and there on the
map like islands in an ocean.
For many years, the prevailing idea was that all the country
lying north-east from Spencer’s Gulf was barren and worthless.
This idea was fostered by the account given by the intrepid ex-
plorer Mr. Eyre, who, in the early days of the Colony, made a
memorable journey, first to the north and then along the coast
westwards to King George’s Sound. For energy, and courage, and
perseverance, Mr. Eyre has perhaps never been excelled by any


Australian explorer; but lie had an unfortunate habit of keeping
too close to the sea-coast —an unfortunate knack of getting into the
worst country to be found in the neighbourhood—and a somewhat
liberal fancy for condemning all the country for an indefinite dis-
tance inland as sterile and useless. Some of the finest northern
runs in South Australia occupy ground which, on Mr. Eyre’s map,
is, with a bold sweep of the pen and the imagination, declared to
be utterly barren. The country inland from the great Australian
Eight, has long laboured under similar condemnation by the same
severe judge; but the gradual settlement of portions of the coast,
and the explorations of Mr. Stuart and others, now justify the
belief that Mr. Eyre was here, as in the north, much too indiscri-
minate in his censure. Of course I only hazard an individual
opinion in saying, that probably before many years, a large part of
the country recently discovered by Mr. Stuart will be occupied; and
that it will be found to be connected at least by belts of available
country to within a very short distance of the head of the Bight. It
seems probable, too, that the northern portion of the country within
the present limits of settlement will be found in some important re-
spects inferior to that lying north of it again. From Port Augusta,
for perhaps three hundred miles northwards, the climate is of a most
uncertain kind. It appears to be too far inland and too far north to
secure with regularity the winter rains that visit the southern portions
of the Colony, while, on the other hand, it is not far enough north
to secure with regularity the summer rains of the tropics. Some-
times it comes in for the one, sometimes for the other, and sometimes
for neither, experiencing droughts of two or three years’ duration,
mitigated only by scanty dew and an occasional thunder-storm.
During the seven consecutive dry seasons which I have alluded to
a few pages back, this district suffered severely. I happened to
see part of it, pretty nearly at its worst, in August, 1859, and I had
previously been occupied in surveying and exploring considerable
portions of it eight years earlier, when it was first being settled.
The contrast between the appearance of the country on these occa-
sions was very great. Where in 1851 vegetation had been abun-
dant, in 1859 it was almost as dry and dusty as an English high
road in summer ; in many places the grass had not grown for a
couple of years, and such tufts of it as remained were so dry and
burnt up that they crumbled into powder beneath a touch of the
foot. Of course this utter dearth of vegetation was not universal,
or the country must have been altogether denuded of stock ; as
it was, sheep and cattle appeared to have acquired the art of ac-
commodating themselves to circumstances in a wonderful manner,
picking up a living where there seemed nothing to eat. Neverthe-
less, large numbers died of sheer starvation, particularly round
water-holes—where water-holes were few and far between. The
luckless animals came to drink, but had not spirit to roam far in
search of food, and after bootless grazing in the neighbourhood
where no herbage remained, they returned to drink again. Thus


they slowly starved to death ; and many of these water-holes are
described as having been most offensive for miles round with the
stench of the decaying carcases.
Since the time when this occurred rain has been tolerably
abundant in the north, and several years may probably elapse before
any similar drought will be experienced there again. The district,
in spite of all the disadvantages described, is closely settled and
thickly stocked. Its general character and appearance varies greatly.
A reference to the map will show how the Flinders Range runs like
a backbone through a great part of the Colony. To the west of
this range, and between it and Spencer’s Gulf and Lake Torrens,
there is a dead-level plain, destitute of grass, but largely covered
with saltbush and “ bluebush ” —stunted-looking shrubs, two or
three feet high, but upon which sheep fatten well. The range
itself is generally high, barren, and precipitous, and in many places
inaccessible by man or beast. Its highest hills reach an elevation
approaching 4,000 feet, and, from the abrupt manner in which they
rise from the level plains, lose none of their true height in appearance.
To the east of Flinders Range, and to the north of Mount Re-
markable, are spread the wide Willochra Plains, which extend some
fifty miles to the northwards, where the hilly country extends itself
in great broken ranges far to the east. Among these ranges, how-
ever, are considerable tracts of available country, and some of the best
runs in the district. This hilly country falls away to the eastward
into the great Eastern Plains, which, commencing but little to the
north of the Burra, extend far into the interior of the island, con-
necting themselves with that long-regarded bugbear of Australia,
Sturt’s Desert, which was supposed for years to be a fair sample of
all that remained unexplored.
A comparison of the map accompanying this publication, with any
map six or seven years old, will show that our portraiture of the
interior has undergone considerable modification. Indeed, a good
deal of the geography of our elder * maps was very conjectural.
That grand horse-shoe curve of Lake Torrens, which figured so
long and so conspicuously, seemed really to have acquired by time
a vested right to remain permanently marked on our atlases. It
was one of Mr. Eyre’s bold sweeps over the map —but in this
instance, I believe, he was really quite justified by what he saw in
conjecturing what he conjectured; and although in the process of
time the great horse-shoe curve was accepted as an established
reality, and depicted upon the maps with hard outlines, Mr. Eyre
was satisfied with dotted lines. For a dozen years after his
adventurous journey, Lake Torrens was only known by his account,
and that was confirmed by the fact that a sub-expedition from
Captain Sturt’s great expedition into the interior, reached salt
water from the north-east, where Mr. Eyre’s horse-shoe led them,
to expect it. My own small experiences were altogether confirma-
tory of Mr. Eyre’s views. In 1851, when out with private and sub-
sidiary exploring and surveying parties, I saw, from various hills


what I took to be the inner curve of the great lake along its whole
course, insomuch that I was quite incredulous when I first heard
of the non-existence of a supposed old acquaintance. The fact was,
that there were many distant lakes to be seen in that direction,
and mirage and imagination filled up the outline. The map of
this curious district of salt lakes is still quite incomplete ; but much
of it has now been carefully surveyed, and the old horse-shoe has
been broken to pieces. Lake Torrens itself, however, still retains
its place on the map, though shorn of its dimensions and altered in
shape.
Our knowledge of this part of the country has been largely in-
creased of late years by the exertions of many travellers ; but it is to
the perseverance of Mr. Stuart—one of the most intrepid and suc-
cessful of Australian explorers—that we are mainly indebted for a
dispersion of old illusions concerning the supposed sterility of the
interior. These illusions were fostered by the accounts given by
Mr. Eyre, after his journey to King George’s Sound in the year
1839. It was only by endurance, courage, and perseverance of the
highest kind, that he accomplished this ; but too much reliance was
placed upon his account of a country which he did not really see,
and as to which his surmises have not been justified by subsequent
more exactly-ascertained facts. These surmises, moreover, acquired
extra weight from the fact that Captain Sturt., in his great inland
expedition in 1815, also found nothing but barrenness. It now
appears that Captain Sturt was simply unlucky in taking a course
that led him along utterly bad country. The great mistake seems
to have been in the assumption that the country, in its general
character, was like that traversed by these two eminent explorers in
their widely-separated routes ; which, in fact, lay at right angles.
Mr. Stuart's routes have been intermediate between the two ; and
he has opened up to our knowledge an immense tract of country,
the precise area of which is yet unascertained, but which certainly
contains tens of thousands of miles of country yet unoccupied by
white men, but quite fit for their occupation. Mr. Stuart has fairly
demonstrated that an enormous area hitherto deemed sterile is not
so in fact: the limits of that area remain yet to be ascertained.
At present, a current objection to the value of his discoveries is,
that the distance of the country from the sea will forbid profitable
occupation ; but difficulties of transit are precisely among the diffi-
culties which human ingenuity, in the present age, is most success-
fully overcoming, and are of a kind that need not greatly check our
increased hopes for the future productiveness of Australia, as our
growing knowledge of its geography informs us that at least large
portions of its area, from centre to circumference, are available for
the purposes of civilized life.


CHAPTER IV.
EMIGRATION, WAGES, PROVISIONS, ETC.
In the first chapter of this account of South Australia, allusion
was made to the principle adopted in the foundation of the Colony—
that the proceeds of the waste lands were to be devoted to bringing
out labourers and working women and their families. That this is the
cheapest and best known method by which an over-populated country
can found Colonies wherewith to relieve itself of a burden, and
wherein those who are burdensome and poor in the mother-country
may become useful and prosperous in a new home, probably admits
of no doubt. But there are two widely-different aspects under which
the question of colonization may be regarded. The Englishman looks
on the question as it affords relief to England’s poor, increase to her
influence and trade, and outlets to individuals having fortunes to
seek. Colonists, generally, look on the matter wholly from a colonial
point of view. How will increased, or diminished, or suspended im-
migration affect the Colony ? Since the new Constitution has come
into force each Australian Colony has had its own land fund at its
disposal, and consequently all laws and arrangements referring to as-
sisted immigration are apt to be made in disregard of any but colonial
interests. Unfortunately, however, the difficulty of the case has not
ended here, because people in Australia differ very widely as to
wherein the “ welfare of the Colony” resides. A narrow-minded rich
man, with numerous flocks to be shepherded, and no wishes beyond
the augmentation of his fortune, considers that “ the Colony ’ would
be at its acme of prosperity and the millennium hardly to be desired
longer if he could get shepherds at £lO a year. A narrow-minded
poor man thinks the prosperity of “the Colony” identical with high
wages and nothing else. Trade may stagnate, capital quit the
country, fertile lands remain untilled, and the means of maintaining
a large population be undeveloped, but as long as wages are high
“ the Colony,” according to this view, is prospering.
I need not labour to prove that the truth must lie somewhere
between these two extremes. Even if the latter view were right,
the desired condition could not long be maintained, and the workers
for wages, even if their numbers were stationary, would soon find
their remuneration falling off. That the former view of what con-
stitutes the prosperity of “the Colony” is wrong is still more
apparent. Colonization would, indeed, be a petty work if it only
succeeded in enriching a few, while the great bulk of the people
remained as badly off as they are in the mother-country. Is it
possible, then, to lay down with anything like distinctness rules by
which we ought to be guided in determining whether it still is, or
has ceased to be, desirable to employ the public funds of the Colony
in promoting immigration ?
Clearly, in the first place, it would be a mischievous employment
of the funds of an old country to use them in importing labourers
there. There the tendency of population is to increase faster than


the capital that can be associated with it to profitable purpose, and
it is only with the slow advance of science that the land can be
made to* yield more than it does. Hence it follows, clearly, too,
that the time for aiding immigration in a new Colony has also
passed when the natural increase of population supplies as many
labourers as the available land and capital can support in comfort.
And we may go further and say, that the point is reached when the
further importation of immigrants would do permanent injury to
the labouring class. On the other hand, the point is not attained
while the introduction of more hands would promote production
without lowering the standard of comfort of the labouring class.
This being granted, I think we may go further in assigning specific
limits to the set of circumstances amid which to seek for the precise
point at which it becomes undesirable to employ public funds in
promoting immigration. Low wages, for the mere sake of enriching
the capitalists, do not constitute a national good. High wages, and
a stationary population, and unadvancing arts, and commerce, and
agriculture, also, do not constitute the sumvium bonum. What
we have to seek lies between the two conditions ; but it may be
affirmed, that when the introduction of population exceeds what
conduces to the permanent welfare of the labouring class, it goes
beyond what public funds should be employed in assisting.
The permanent welfare of the labouring class, however, does not
consist in high wages alone. It consists largely in opportunities of
advancement for the more industrious, and intelligent, and prudent
among them. A state of things, therefore, amid which, while wages
were kept up, the saving labourer, who had converted a portion of
his wages into capital, could find no profitable employment for it
—amid which other than the labouring classes were unprosperous,
and the development of resources became unprofitable—amid which
earners of wages had reached in that social station as much worldly
advantage as they could expect to attain,—would not be one conducive
to the permanent advantage of the labouring class, however high
wages might be. If a hundred labourers spend all they earn, I will
not indeed say that at the end of five years it makes no difference
whether they have earned 7s. 6d or 10s. a day. They have had
the enjoyment of the odd half-crown, and that is just as much, and
more, to the welfare of “ the Colony,” as if the capitalist had had
an extra thousand a year, and had spent it upon his enjoyments.
But the amount of his wages is a matter of much greater permanent
importance to the man who saves the odd half-crown for a few years.
And it is a matter of vital importance to him that, at the end of a
certain term of small savings, he shall find other interests than
those of the labourer for wages, in so prosperous a condition that
he may turn himself and his money to good account, and may raise
himself out of the class of the hand-to-mouth labourer for wages,
however high those wages may be. The reasonable and legitimate
hope of doing so, in fact, is the motive that prompts the active and
prudent man to emigrate The reasonable hope of doing so is what
keeps him active and prudent after he has emigrated.


As a consequence of the foregoing observations, then, it may be
inferred, that an introduction of labour sufficient to satisfy the wishes
of selfish men already rich, is not to be desired ; that a limitation
of the introduction of labour sufficient to satisfy the wishes of selfish
poor men, looking no further than for present high wages, is not to
be desired ; that an introduction of labour which, while it would
promote the increase of the national wealth, would keep wages so
low as not to afford labourers, within a moderate period, an opportu-
nity of permanently rising out of that class, is not to be desired :
but that the thing to be sought is, just so much introduction of
labour as will leave labourers the means of comfort and accumula-
tion, and the opportunity of profitably investing what they accumu-
late ; which state of things can only exist while wages are not so
high but that capitalists can profitably employ their capital in the
augmentation of their own and the general wealth.
In the foregoing observations, I have made no attempt to state
the point at which the Colony stands as to these matters. I have
only endeavoured to lay down some abstract rules by which people,
not seeking merely the particular advantage of an existing class,
may be assisted in arriving at conclusions for themselves. The
pro-emigration and anti-emigration questions are here always so
associated with the local politics of the day, that I should be giving
too political a complexion to a publi6ation which it is especially
desired should steer clear of local politics, if I were less abstract in
my treatment of it. I may, however, venture to state my firm
personal belief that, in the present state of the Colony, a large and
steady introduction of labour would far more greatly augment the
permanent welfare of prudent members of the working class—by
increasing their chances of rapid advancement after they had
accumulated a little capital—than it would injure it by a reduction
in the rate of wages. Indeed, I may, I believe, go further, and say
that, judging from past experience, the spring that has been given
to production by an increase in population has been generally such
that, after a temporary decline, absolute wages even have risen to
a higher level than they had before maintained.
The House of Assembly of this Colony being elected by universal
suffrage, and by the absolute majorities in the seventeen electoral
districts into which the country is divided, that which the majority
of the working classes believes to be for its advantage is not likely
to be neglected in our legislation. It may, therefore, be cer-
tainly considered significant of the fact that increase of population
would promote the welfare of all classes in the community, that in
the last session of Parliament a resolution was passed, pressing upon
the Government the importance of resuming the system of aiding
Immigration with public money. This resolution will be acted
upon, and the Government have accordingly, within the past few
weeks, revised the immigration regulations, and have supplied the
subjoined full and explicit directions as to the steps to be taken by
persons in Great Britain desirous of being assisted to emigrate to


this Colony, and by residents in the Colony desirous of obtaining'
assistance for friends in Great Britain willing to emigrate :
Assisted Passage Peculations under which Settlers may obtain assistance out
of the Public Funds towards the introduction to this Colony from Britain,
of Persons, in aid of the costs of whose passages they may contribute certain
SUMS.
Conditions.
1. Any person, resident in this Colony, desirous of procuring a passage from the
United Kingdom to South Australia, for emigrants of the undermentioned classes,
coming within the following regulations, may effect that object by contributing in
this office such of the sums of money named hereunder as may apply in each instance
(for Application Form, see Schedule A).
2. On payment of the money at this office, a certificate will be issued (Schedule B)
guaranteeing passages to an equivalent number of persons as per scale hereunder, on
presentation of the certificate to the South Australian Emigration Agent in London,
provided they are approved on inspection by such Emigration Agent.
3. The certificate will have twelve months’ currency; will be transferable, but only
to persons of the same nationality as those named in the certificates; and in no case
will the contributor have any portion of the money paid refunded to him: but, in.
order to prevent any injustice arising, through the non-emigration of any of the
persons for whose benefit the certificate was in the first instance obtained, the
Emigration Agent will receive, in Britain, any money balance which may be
required under the regulations, to entitle the persons who actually claim imder the
certificate, to passages.
Classes Eligible.
4. The following are the classes eligible for passages:—
i. Married agricultural labourers, shepherds, herdsmen, and copper miners, not
exceeding forty-five years of age.
ii. Single men, or widowers without children under sixteen, of any of the above
classes, not exceeding forty years of age.
hi. Single female domestic servants, or widows without children under sixteen,
not exceeding thirty-five years of age.
iv. Married mechanics (when required in the Colony), such as masons, brick-
layers, blacksmiths and farriers, wheelwrights, sawyers, carpenters, &e. ;
also gardeners, not exceeding forty-five years of age.
v. Single men of class iv. (when required), not exceeding forty years of age.
vi. The wives and children of married emigrants.
5. The emigrants under these regulations—personally, in the case of single adults
of sixteen years and upwards, and by the head of the family in other cases—must,
prior to embarkation, sign an undertaking in the sum of £2O ; which, however, will
not be enforced unless the person, or any one or more of the persons named in such
undertaking, or on whose behalf such undertaking shall have been given, shall leave
or attempt to leave South Australia within two years after arrival.
G. The Emigration Agent will, after approval by him, issue embarkation orders to
persons thus nominated and approved in rotation, according to date of acceptance, so
far as may be consistent with their sanitary precautions, regulating the proportion of
young children proper to be embarked with adults in vessels; regard being always
had, also, to the current rate and proportion of Government emigration to this
Colony.
Payments toivards Passages..
7. The following sums must be paid in aid of the passages of:—
£ s. d.
For each male 4 0 0
„ female 3 0 0
Children under fourteen years of age half the above rates.
Qualifications.
8. Eligible Candidates. —The candidates must be in the habit of working for wages at
one of the callings mentioned above, and must be going out with the intention of
working for hire in that calling. They must be sober, industrious, of good moral
character, in good health, free from all mental and bodily defects, within the ages
specified, appear physically to be capable of labour, and have been vaccinated or had
the small-pox.


Ineligible Candidates. —Passages cannot bo granted to persons intending to proceed
to the other Australian Colonies; to persons in the habitual receipt of parish relief;
to parents without all their children under sixteen then in Britain; to children under
sixteen without their parents; to husbands without their wives, or wives without
their husbands (unless, in the last three instances, the parents, husband, or wife, be
in this Colony); to single women who have had illegitimate children; or to persons
who have not arranged with their creditors.
Application and Approval.
9. The first step is to address the Emigration Agent in London, or his nearest
selecting agent, for an application form (Schedule C), which must be accurately filled
up and returned to the officer issuing same. If the applicants are married, the certi-
ficate of their marriage must be sent at the same time. Time and place for a personal
inspection of the applicants will thereafter be appointed, and they will also be in-
formed what other certificates (if any) are required in support of their applications.
The candidates will, on or after inspection, bo informed whether or not a passage can
be granted. If it can, they will, as soon as possible, receive an embarkation order
from the Emigration Agents, in London ( which is not transferable), naming the ship
in which they are to sail, and the time and place of joining her.
Outfit, §c.
10. Candidates must find their own outfit, which will be inspected before embark-
ation by an officer duly authorized by the Emigration Agent. The smallest quantity
that will be allowed is—for each male over twelve, six shirts, six pairs of stockings,
two warm flannel shirts, two pairs of new shoes or boots, two complete suits of strong
exterior clothing, four towels, and 2 lbs. of marine soap; and for each female over
twelve, six shifts, two flannel petticoats, six pairs of stockings, two pairs of strong-
boots or shoes, two strong gowns (one of which must be made of a warm material),
four towels, and 2 lbs. of marine soap.
[N.B. —If any difficulty is experienced in procuring good marine soap where the
applicants reside, there will bo ample opportunity for purchasing it after their arrival
at the depot.]
Two or three coloured shirts for men, and an extra supply of - flannel for women
and children, are very desirable.
The quantity of baggage for each person over twelve must not exceed twenty cubic
or solid feet, nor half a ton in weight. It must be closely packed in one or more
strong boxes or cases not exceeding fifteen cubic feet each. Larger packages and
extra baggage, if taken at all, must be paid for. Mattresses and feather beds, fire-
arms, and offensive weapons, wines, spirits, beer, gunpowder, percussion caps, lucifer
matches, and any dangerous and noxious articles, cannot be taken by emigrants.
Cautions.
11. Candidates must not reckon upon passages, or make any preparations for de-
parture, unless they receive notice that they havo been approved on inspection.
Persons cannot be received on board ship without an Embarkation Order issued by
the Emigration Agent, nor unless they are in a fit state of health for the voyage.
Any false signatures, mis-statements, or omissions to state a material fact in the
candidate’s papers, or any attempt at deception whatever, or evasion of these regula-
tions, will debar such candidate from all after consideration for a passage to this
Colony; and in the case of false signatures will, moreover, render the offender liable
to a heavy penalty under the Passengers’ Act.
Failure to attend at the time and place of embarkation, without having previously
given to the Emigration Agent timely notice, and a satisfactory reason, or any insub-
ordination or misconduct in the Emigration Depot, or on board ship before sailing,
null subject candidates to the loss of their passages.
All communications by intending emigrants to this Colony are, until further notice,
to be addressed, post paid, to G. S. Walters, Esq., Emigration Agent for South
Australia, No. 5, Copthall Court, London.
Assisted Passages obtainable in England under certain circumstances.
When, and in case the applications from persons resident in the Colony shall be
insufficient in number, the Emigration Agent in England w-ill be authorized to grant
assisted passage certificates or embarkation orders to persons in Britain, subject to,
however, and in accordance with the foregoing regulations, so far as the same are
applicable.


Regulations for the Selection of Persons in Britain for Free Passages to this
Colony.
Classes Eligible.
The following are the classes eligible for selection for free passages:—
i. Married agricultural labourers, shepherds, herdsmen, and copper miners, not
exceeding forty-five years of age.
H. Single men, or widowers without children under sixteen, of any of the above
classes, not exceeding forty years of age.
hi. Single female domestic servants, or widows without children under sixteen,
not exceeding thirty-five years of age.
iv. Married mechanics (when required in the Colony), such as masons, brick-
layers, blacksmiths and farriers, wheelwrights, sawyers, carpenters, &c.;
also gardeners, not exceeding forty-five years of age.
v. Single men of class iv. (when required), not exceeding forty years of age.
vi. The wives and children of married immigrants.
Qualifications.
[Same as under Assisted Passage Regulations.]
Application and Approval.
[Same as under Assisted Passage Regulations, except as to the following clause]: —
The emigrants under these regulations—personally in the case of single adults,
and by the head of the family in other cases—must, prior to embarkation, sign an
undertaking in the sum of £2O; which, however, will not be enforced unless the
person, or any one or more of the persons named in such undertaking, or on whose
behalf such undertaking shall have been given, shall leave or attempt to leave South
Australia within two years after arrival.
Outfit , sc.
[Same as under Assisted Passage Regulations.]
Cautions.
[Same as under Assisted Passage Regulations.]
Regulations under which Remission Certificates, available in the Purchase of
Crown Lands, may be claimed where Immigrants have been introduced by
Private Persons.
Persons having resided in South Australia for at least one year, who may introduce
from the United Kingdom, at their own cost, immigrants of either of the classes
specified in the Assisted Passage Regulations, shall be entitled, on the arrival of those
immigrants, to receive from this office a certificate for an amount equal to the cost
which might have been incurred by the Government for the emigration of such
persons; such certificate to be receivable as cash at the Treasury for the purchase of
Crown Lands on or after muturity, and the amount expressed therein to be based
upon the average contract rate payable per statute adult for emigrants by the throe
Government emigrant vessels then previously reported as chartered; Provided—
i. That such persons have been inspected and approved by the Emigration Agent
in England, or that notice of such intended introduction of immigrants be
addressed in writing to this office at least six months prior to date of their
arrival in the Colony.
ii. That, on landing, a certificate be obtained from the Immigration Agent at Port
Adelaide, to the effect that the immigrant so introduced is eligible for
acceptance by the Emigration Agent at the date of departure from England.
hi. That on presentation of the money certificate at the Treasury after its maturity
(two years after date), there be attached thereto a declaration, in form of
Schedule at foot hereof, that the persons in respect of whose introduction the
certificate was issued, have been constantly since arrival, and are then, resi-
dent in South Australia, and have not, during such residence, been reci-
pients of public relief.
Following upon this statement of the manner in which poor
persons in Great Britain may obtain assistance in emigrating, some
information as to the classes of persons likely to do well here may
naturally be expected; and a great deal of information upon this
subject may be obtained by a careful examination of the annexed
table, showing the rates of wages that have been obtainable for


various kinds of labour during each of the ten years from 1852 to
1861. The table is copied from a statistical volume annually issued
here by Government: —
Jm
**
1
CO
oo
o
Cl
■o
CO
£
i
I
•>§
a
•<
t
s'
1
<*>
§>
3^
•<
’I
O
►v
«D
£
•2
R
, §
I
R
1852.
1853.
1854.
1855.
1856.
1857.
1858.
1859.
1860.
1861.
Domestic Servants, with board and lodging, per
£
3.
d.
£
8.
d.
£
1.
d.
£
8 .
d.
£
8.
d.
£
8,
d.
£
S .
d.
£
8 .
d.
£
8.
d.
£ i. d.
45
0
£45 to £52
33
0
0
55
0
0
55
0
0
45
0
0
45
0
0
47
10
0
48
0
0
0
45
0
0
Females
20
0
0
25
0
0
23
0
0
17
0
0
15
0
0
20
0
0
21
0
0
22
0
0
22
0
0
£22 to £26
Farm Servants, with board and lodging, per annum—
47
10
0
57
10
0
55
0
0
52
0
0
52
10
0
60
0
0
57
0
0
55
0
0
55
0
0
£60 to £65
Single men
39
10
0
52
0
0
52
10
0
44
0
0
43
0
0
47
10
0
45
10
0
45
0
0
46
0
0
£45 to £52
Trades, &c. —
Blacksmiths, with out hoard and lodging,
per diem
0
10
0
0
15
0
0
14
6
0
12
4
0
11
6
0
10
6
0
12
3
0 10
6
0 10
0
11s.
Bakers, with board and lodging
0
7
0
0
7
9
0
8
0
0
7
0
0
6
0
0
6
0
0
6
0
0
5
3
0
4
7
4s. 6d.
Bricklayers, without board and lodging
,,
0
10
0
0
13
6
0
14
0
0
11
0
0
10
6
0
10
9
0
10
6
0
9
9
0
9
0
9s.
lirickmakers, ditto per 1,000 brks.
0
10
0
1
5
0
1
2
6
1
2
6
0
18
0
0
16
0
0
16
0
0 14
6
0 14
0
14s.
Bullock-drivers, with board and lodging, per annum
27
10
0
40
0
0
45
0
0
43
10
0
45
0
0
45
0
0
45
10
0
43
0
0
43
0
0
£45 to £46
Butchers, ditto
per diem
0
7
0
0
8
9
0
8
6
0
7
6
0
6
6
0
6
6
0
6
6
0
5
6
0
4
7
5s. 6d.
Carpenters, without board and lodging
0
10
6
0
13
6
0
14
0
0
11
6
0
11
0
0
11
0
0
10
10
0
9
9
0
9
0
9s. 6d.
Cabinetmakers, ditto
0
10
6
0
14
0
0
14
0
0
10
9
0
11
0
0
10
0
0
10
6
0
9
6
0
9
6
9s. 6d.
Carriagemakers, ditto ...
0
10
6
0
15
0
0
14
6
0
12
9
0
12
6
0
11
0
0
11
9
0
11
6
0 10
6
10s. 9d.
Coopers, ditto
0
8
9
0
11
0
0
11
0
0
10
0
0
9
3
0
9
0
0
9
0
0
9
0
0
9
0
8s.
Day Labourers, ditto ...
0
6
6
0
7
6
0
8
6
0
7
0
0
6
9
0
6
3
0
6
0
0
6
6
0
7
0
6s.6d to7s.
Harvest Labourers, ditto
0
6
6
0
7
6
—
0
9
0
0
9
0
—
—
—
—
—
Masons, ditto ...
0
10
6
0
13
6
0
14
0
0
11
6
0
10
6
0
10
9
0
10
6
9
9
0
0
9
0
9s.
Millers, ditto
0
9
0
0
11
0
0
11
0
0
11
0
0
11
0
0
11
0
0
11
6
0 10
0
0 10
0
lls.
Miners, ditto ...
0
6
6
0
7
0
0
7
0
0
5
9
0
6
0
0
8
0
0
7
6
0
6
9
0
6
6
7s. lid.
Painters and Glaziers, ditto ...
0
8
0
0
9
0
0
11
0
0
10
0
0
9
6
0
8
6
0
8
6
0
9
6
0
9
6
9s. 6d.
Plasterers, ditto ...
0
10
3
0
13
6
0
14
0
0
11
6
0
11
0
0
11
0
0
10
9
0
9
9
0
9
6
9s. 6d.
Sawyers, ditto
per 100 ft.
0
12
0
0
16
6
0
17
6
0
14
0
0
10
6
0
11
0
0
10
6
0 11
9
0 11
0
lls.
Saddlers, ditto
per diem
0
8
6
0
11
0
0
11
0
0
10
0
0
11
0
0
10
0
0
9
6
0
9
0
0
9
0
8s.
Shoemakers, ditto
0
12
0
0
12
0
0
10
0
0
8
6
0
8
6
0
9
0
0
9
3
0
9
0
0
9
0
8s.
Shepherds, with board and lodging
per annum
40
0
0
42
0
0
41
0
0
33
0
0
38
0
0
41
0
0
40
0
0
40
0
0
40
0
0
£40
Tailors, without board and lodging
per hour
0
0 10
0
0 104
0
1
0
0
0
114
0
0 10
0
0 10
0
0
10
0
0 10
0
0
9
lOd.
Tanners, ditto ...
per diem
0
8
0
0
11
0
0
10
6
0
10
6
0
9
6
0
9
0
0
9
9
0
9
0
0
9
0
9s.
Wheelwrights, ditto ...
0
11
0
0
14
6
0
15
6
0
12
4
0
11
6
0
12
0
0
11
6
0 11
0
0 11
0
lls.
—
D


In continuation of the same subject, I will next extract from the
South A ustralian Register, the most extensively-circulated news-
paper in the province, the following table, showing the rates of
wages obtainable at the present time.
Per Annum, with Board and Lodging.
Domestic and Dairy Servants — Female.
Barmaids, £26 to £3O.
Dairy Girls, £23 to £26.
General Servants, £22 to £26.
Good Cooks, £26 to £4O.
Housekeepers, £24 to £3l.
Housemaids, £2O to £26.
Kitchenmaids, £lB to £2l.
Laundresses, £26 to £3O.
Nurses, £2O to £23.
Nurse Girls, £8 to £l6.
Upper Nurses, £23 to £3O.
Waitresses, £23 to £3O.
Domestic and Farm Servants — Male.
Boys about 13 or 14 to tail cattle, £l2 to £ 15.
Bullockdrivers (Men) for stations, £45 to
£5O.
Ditto for the roads, £45 to £6O.
Ditto for farms, £45 to £5O.
Gardeners, £4O to £6O.
General Farm Servants, £4O to £52.
Hutkeepers (according to distance), £26 to
£3l.
Married couples, £55 to £7O.
Milkmen, £45 to £52.
Ploughmen (single), £4O to £52.
Shepherds, single (according to distance),
£39 to £52.
Per Week, with the usual Rations.
Bakers, £1 to £1 18s.
Barmen, 15s. to 20s.
Bush Carpenters, £1 to £1 ss.
Butchers, £1 10s. to £2.
Confectioners, £2.
Cooks (male), 15s. to 255.
Grooms, 15s. to 255., and occasional per-
quisites.
Slaughtermen, £1 5s to £2.
Farm servants, 20s. to 255.
Ostlers (with perquisites), 12s. to £l.
Per Scale below, without Rations.
Brickmakers, per 1,000, without burning,
14s.
Fencers, per rod, 3 rails, 2s. 6d. to 3s.
Sawyers, per 100 ft., cedar, 11s.
Ditto, per 100 ft., deal, Bs.
Stonebreakers, per cubic yard, 2s. 6d. to
ss. 9d.
Wire fencing, per rod, 3 to 5 wires, and
cross-rail, Is. 6d. to 2s.
Per Day, without Board and Lodging.
Blacksmiths, Bs. to 10s.
Bricklayers, Bs. to 10s.
Cabinetmakers, Bs. to 10s.
Carpenters, Bs. to 10s.
Carriagemakers, Bs. to 10s.
Coopers, 7s.
Engineers, 9s. to 12s. 6d.
Galvanized Ironworkers, 9s. to 10s.
Ironfounders, 13s. to 15s.
Labourers, 6s. to 7s.
Masons, Bs. to 10s.
Millers, Bs. to 12s.
Miners, ss. to 7s.
Painters, &c., Bs. to 9s.
Plasterers, Bs. to 10s.
Plumbers, 10s.
Quarrymcn, 7s. to 95., and piecework.
Saddlers, 7s. to 9s.
Shoeingsmiths, Bs. to 10s.
Shoemakers, 7s. to 9s.
Storemen, 7s. to Bs.
Tailors, Bs. to 95., or 9d. per hour.
Tanners, &c., Bs. to 10s.
Watch and Clockmakers, 12s. to 14s.
Wheelwrights, 9s. to 10s.
Per Week, without Rations.
Carters, £2 2s.
Farm and Female Servants in great demand.
Having given, in the above tables, a statement of the amount of
money earned at various callings during each of the past ten years,
as well as the wages now current, it becomes necessary, to enable
the reader rightly to estimate the real purchasing power of these
sums, that corresponding information should be given as to the
prices of provisions now, and during the past.
The statistics, which have been prepared in the Chief Secretary’s
office, relative to the prices of food, do not go back so far as do those


relating to wages. The following table, however, supplies the
required information for a period of six years :
Approximate Return of the Average Prices of various Produce , Merchandize , %c., during the Tears 1856,
to 1861.
Wheaten Flour, .perfcon. of 2,000 lbs.
Wheat per bushel of 60 lbs.
Wheaten Bread per lb.
Homed Cattle (working bullocks) ea.
Horses (saddle and light cart)., ,,
Sheep, fat , T , t
Butter, fresh per lb.
salt „
Cheese, —Colonial
English
Beef ;;
Mutton
Pork
Rice
Coffee ,,
Tea ;;
Sugar „
Salt „
Wine —Port per pipe
Sherry per butt
Colonial per gall.
Brandy
Beer —Porter perhhd.
Ale „
Tobacco per lb.
1856.
1867.
1858.
1859.
1860.
1861.
£21 5s.
8s. 3d.
3d.
£10
£22 10s.
16s. 6d.
Is. 4d.
6|d.
Is. 6d
Is. 4M.
8|d.
Is. 6|d.
5d.
5d.
10|d.
4|d.
Is. 6d.
2s. 6d.
4d.
2d. '
£52 10s.
£42 10s.
£1 3s.
£7 10s.
£8 12s. 6d.
3s. 5£d.
£19
7s.
2§d.
£7 10s.
£23
18s. 6d.
Is. lid.
7
Is. 6d.
ll|d.
8d.
Is. 4±d.
5|d.
5d.
9d.
5d.
Is. 4d.
2s. 9d.
5d.
l|d.
£60
£50
£1 5s.
£7
£8 7s. 6d.
3s. 6±d.
£16 4s. 7d.
6s. 8d.
2|d.
£10
£15 to £50
18s. to 21s.
Is. 2|d.
7d.
Is. lid.
Is. 5d.
lOd.
Is. 2d.
5d.
5d.
9|d.
3d.
Is. 4d.
2s. 6d.
5d.
2d.
£60
£50
5s. to 15s.
£1 5s.
£6 15s.
£8
3s. 3d.
£22 15s.
9s.
3d.
£6 10s.
£15 to £40
16s. to 21s.
llid.
7d.
2s. Id.
Is. 5d.
8|d.
Is. Id.
6d.
5|d.
9d.
3d.
Is. 4d.
2s. 6d.
5d.
2d.
£60
£50
5s. to 15s.
£1 3s.
£6 15s.
£7 10s.
3s. 6d.
£17 10s.
7s. 2d.
2fd.
£6
£15 to £40
18s. to 22s.
ll|d.
7d.
Is. 8d.
Is. 2d.
9d.
Is. Id.
6d.
6d.
9d.
3d.
Is. 7d.
2s. 6d.
6d.
2d.
£60
£56
4s.6d.tol3s.9d
£1
£6 15s.
£6 10s.
3s. 3d.
£14
5s. 8d.
Ifd.
£5
£10 to £30
12s. to 18s.
lid.
5d.
lid.
9d.
8d.
Is. 7d.
4|d.
4fd.
9d.
3d.
Is. 6d.
2s. 9d.
5d.
l|d.
£60
£56
3s. to 10s.
£1 Is.
£7
£8
4s.
It will further assist the painstaking reader in arriving at a just
estimate of the real value of wages here, to examine the following
table, the figures in which are copied from a late number of the
South Australian Register , showing the prices of bread, meat,
dairy produce, vegetables, and fruit, current at present.*
Bread and Flour.
d. s. d, $, d. s d
Bread, per 21b. loaf .... 0 3to 0 3f Flour, per lb o 2
* The P rices of m »ny articles (such as butter, fruit, and vegetables of various kinds) fluctuate with
the season. Those articles against which ‘ ‘ none "is written, are out of season now (March),


Butchers’ Meat.
s. d. s. d.
Beef, per lb 0 2| to 0 6
Lamb, per quarter .... 3 0' „ 4 0
Mutton, per lb. ...... 0 3 „ 0 5
s. d. s. d.
Pork, per lb 0 8 to 0 9
Veal, per lb 0 6 „ 010
Dairy Produce.
Bacon, Colonial, per lb. 0 10 „ 1 0
Butter, fresh, per lb. .. _,, 1 4
Butter, potted, per 1b... nominal.
Cheese, Colonial, per lb. 0 8
Ditto, English, per lb. 18
Lard, per lb 0 10 „ 1 0
Eggs, per dozen 1 0
Hams, Colonial, per lb. 10
Hams, English, per lb. 14
Milk, per quart 0 4 „ 0 6
Ducks, per pair ...... 7 0 „ 8 0
Fowls, per couple 5 0 ~ 6 0
Geese, each 8 0 „10 0
Pigeons, per pair 2 6
Rabbits, per pair 5 0 „ 8 0
Turkeys, each 7 0 ~12 0
Vegetables.
Artichokes .......... none
Asparagus none
Beans, Broad, per peck 0 6 „ 0 9
Ditto, French, per 1b... 0 2 „ 0 4
Brocoli none
Cabbages, each 0 4 ~ 1 0
Capsicums, each 0 2 ~ 0 4
Clnlies, per doz 0 3 ~ 0 4
Carrots, per bunch .... 0 ~ 0 4
Cauliflowers none
Celery, per stick 0 6 „0 8
Cucumbers, each 0 1 „ 0 2
Garlic, per lb 0 9
Horseradish, per stick 0 3 ~ 0 6
Leeks 0 2 „ 0 3
Lettuces, each 0 2 „ 0 4
Marrows,Vegtble., each 0 2 „ 0 4
Onions, per lb 0 1 „ 0 2
Parsley, per bunch.... 01
Parsnips, per bunch..».. 0 3
Peas, per peck 1 0 „ 1 6
Potatoes, per lb 0 1
New Potatoes, per 1b... 0 1 „ 0 1|
Pumpkins 0 6 ~ 1 0
Radishes, per bunch .. 0 1|
Seakale none
Rhubarb, per bunch .. 0 6 ~ 0 8
Shalots, per lb 0 4 ~ 0 6
Tomatos, per lb 0 3 ~ 0 4
Trombones, each 0 4 ~ 0 8
Turnips, per bunch .... 0 4 „ 0 6
Watercress, per bunch 0 1 0 1|
Fruits.
Almonds, dried, per lb. 10
Ditto, green, per lb. .. nolle
Apples, per lb 0 1 ~ 0 3
Ditto, dried, per lb 0 10
Apricots, per doz none
Bananas none
Blackberries none
Cherries none
Citrons 0 3
Cocoanuts none
Currants, black, red, and 1 „
white )
Damsons,per quart.... 0 4 „ 0 6
Pigs, per dozen ...... 0 2 ~ 0 4
Pilberts, per lb none
Gooseberries none
Ditto, Cape none
Grapes, per lb 0 1 „ 0 2
Lemons, each 0 2 „ 0 6
Limes none
Loquats none
Medlars none
Melons, Sugar, each .. 0 4 „ 1 0
Melons, Water, per lb. 0 1
Mulberries, per lb 10
Nectarines none
Nuts, Spanish,per 1b... 0 9 ~ 010
Ditto, Brazil, per lb. .. 010 ~ 1 0
Oranges none
Marmalade, do none
Paccan nuts, per 1b... 10
Pears, per lb 0 2 „ 0 4
Peaches, per dozen.... 0 4 ~ 0 8
Pineapples none
Ditto, Moreton Bay .. none
Plums,American,perqt. 0
Pomegranates none
Quinces none
Raspberries none
Shaddocks none
Strawberries nose
Walnuts, per lb 0 9
Ditto, Colonial ...... none
In another chapter I have indicated, in the description of a street
in Adelaide, that division of labour is tolerably well carried out here,
and that the mere “ Jack-of-all-trades and master of none ” will
not find himself quite so much at a premium in South Australia, as


with English views on the subject of colonization he may be apt to
expect. It may be well, however, in addition, to print the follow-
ing table, showing the occupations of the entire adult male popula-
tion of the Colony, as ascertained by the census of 1861:
Males.
Farm Labourers and Servants 7,985
Farmers 7,090
Labourers (branch of labour undefined) 3,306
Overseers on Stations, Stockmen, Shepherds, Hutkeepers, and
Station Labourers 3,099
Miners—Copper 1,264
Carters, Slabbers, Engine-Drivers, Stokers, and
others on Mines 247
Smelters, Oredressers, &c 157
Miners and diggers (otherwise undefined).... 152
Gold 55
Lead 33
1,908
Builders, Carpenters, Building Surveyors, Timber Merchants,
Sawyers, See 1,346
Tailors, Shoemakers, Dressmakers, Outfitters, Hatters, &c. .. 1,099
Shop and Storekeepers, Warehousemen, Dealers, Hawkers, &c. 1,026
Blacksmiths, Whitesmiths, Founders, Mechanical Engineers, Sec. 919
Vegetable Food, chiefly, and Drinks—Bakers, Confectioners,
Greengrocers, Sec 862
Carriers, Draymen, Bullockdrivers on roads, Lightermen, &c. 857
Masons, Bricklayers, Slaters, Hodmen, Stuccomen, &c. ...... 854
Engaged in Sea Navigation—Sailors, Ship Stewards, &c. .. 779
Domestic Servants (General),Cooks, Coachmen,Grooms (Private
Servants) u.... 691
Animal Food, chiefly—Butchers, Poulterers, Fishmongers, &c. 649
Horticultural —Market Gardeners, Gardeners (Master), &c. .. 591
Other Artisans and Mechanics —Printers, Bookbinders,
Coopers, Sec 565
Quarrymen, Brickmakers, Road and Railway Labourers, &c... 490
Inn and Lodginghouse-Keepers, Inn Servants, &c 462
Commercial Clerks, Assistants in Shops, Storemen, &c 456
Coach and C art Makers, Wheelwrights, Implement Makers, Sec. 394
Pastoral —Squatters, Stockholders, Graziers, Sheepfarmers, &c. 392
Officers of General Government —Judges, Resident Magistrates,
Government Clerks, Surveyors, &c 370
Bankers, Brokers, Accountants, Auctioneers, Commission
Agents, &c 319
Owners and Drivers of Coaches, Cabs, Watermen, &c 288
Woodsplitters, Fencers, Bushmen (otherwise undefined), &c. 235
Teachers, Schoolmasters and Mistresses, Governesses, Music
Teachers, &c 221
Army, Navy, Police—Officers, Soldiers, Constables, Wardens,
Turnkeys, &c 215
Cabinetmakers, Furniture Dealers, Carvers and Gilders, Tur-
ners, &c 199
Tanners, Fellmongers, Soap Boilers, Wool Sorters, Charcoal
Burners, &c 183
Other Occupations—Proprietors Labour Markets, Billiard
Table Keepers, &c 162
Clergy, Ministers, Priests, Missionaries, and their subordinates,
Sextons, Pew-Openers, &c 144
Workmen in Government Employment—Messengers, Office
Keepers, Chainmen in Survey Parties, &c 142
Merchants 129
Other Professions —Authors, Editors, Reporters, Photo-
graphers, Musicians, &c 115
Carried forward 38,542


Brought forward 38,542'
Porters and Messengers (not Assistants in Shops or Stores) .. 109
Physicians, Surgeons, Oculists, Dentists, &c 106
Water Carriers, Wood Carters, Woodmen, &c 88
Dispensing Chemists, &c., Sick Nurses, and others in subordi-
nate capacity 79
Law Clerks, Law Stationers, Bailiffs, &c 71
Contractors (branch undefined) 71
Annuitants, “ Independent Means,” &c 67
Lawyers, Barristers, Attorneys, Conveyancers, &c 62
Architects, Civil Engineers, Surveyors (Land), Draftsmen, &c. 61
Gentlemen (not otherwise described) 56
Officers of Corporations, District Councils, &c. .. 54
Vignerons, Gardeners (Servants), Labourers, &c 44
Persons deriving Income from Houses—Householders, House
Proprietors, &c 42
Overseers (branch of labour undefined) 32
Cattle-dealers and Salesyard Keepers, Farriers, Poundkeepers,
&c 23
39,507
Kesidue of the Male Population—
Children, Relatives, Visitors, &c. (not otherwise defined) .... 17,228
Scholars, whether in Public or Private Schools, or at Home .. 7,022
Unemployed, “ No occupation at present,” &c 572
Occupations not stated 511
Prisoners 157
Patients in Hospitals, Asylums, Depots, &c 51
25,541
Females.
Domestic Servants (General), Cooks, &c 4,926
Farm Labourers and Servants, &c 3,093
dressmakers, Milliners, &c 1,122
Teachers, Schoolmistresses, Governesses, Music Teachers, &c. 437
Shepherds’ Wives assisting as Hutkeepers, &c 394
Inn and Lodginghouse-Keepers, Inn Servants, &c 196
Farmers’ Wives assisting, &c 152
Shop and Store Keepers, Dealers, Hawkers, &c 127
Assistants in Shops, &c 95
Animal Food, chiefly—Butchers, Poulterers, Fishmongers, &c. 83
Vegetable Food, chiefly, and Drinks—Bakers, Confectioners,
Greengrocers, &c 83
Annuitants, “ Independent Means,” &c 47
In Government employment—Office-keepers, Nurses, &c 41
Horticultural—Market Gardeners, &c 28
Other Professions—Authors, Musicians, &c 18
Persons deriving Income from Houses—Householders, House
Proprietors, &c 14
Pastoral—Squatters, Stockholders, Graziers, Sheep-farmers,
&c 9
Other occupations 8
Other Artisans and Mechanics —Printers, Bookbinders, &c. .. 5
Owners and Drivers of Coaches, Cabs, &c 5
Midwives 4
Cabinetmakers, Furniture Dealers, Carvers and Gilders,
Polishers, &c 4
Ladies (not otherwise described) 3
Sick Nurses, and others in subordinate capacity, &c 2
Carrier 1
Wood Carter 1
Engaged in Sea Navigation—Ship Stewardess 1
10,899


Residue of the Female Population—
Wives, Widows, and Single Women (of no specified occupa-
tion) 23,898
Children, Relatives, Yisitox-s, &c. (not otherwise described) ~ 19,752
Scholars, whether in Public or Private Schools, or at Home.. 7,004
Patients in Hospitals, Asylums, Depots, &c 175
Prisoners 34
Unemployed, “No occupation at present,” &c 13
Occupations not stated 7
50,883
Total 126,830
The unenumerated and migratory population of the Colony was
estimated at the last census at 1,170, a figure probably not far from
the truth, but, at the same time, arrived at, perhaps, with some
reference to the fact that it brings the total population of the
Colony out in a round number, viz.—128,000.
CHAPTER V.
OPPORTUNITIES AND PROSPECTS OF VARIOUS CLASSES.
I will venture upon a few general remarks upon the prospects
that this Colony holds out to emigrants of the various social
classes. I will begin with capitalists—who may be divided into
two classes, those who intend to embark their capital in some kind
of business, which they mean actively to superintend, and those who
propose merely to “ live upon their means,” that is to say, those
who propose merely to invest their money in secure ways and to
live upon the proceeds. I will speak of the latter class first.
As the prospects of the Colony have become more settled, and as
more and more foreign capital has sought investment here, the
interest of money advanced upon unexceptionable security has
gradually though slowly declined, and will probably gradually and
slowly continue to decline. At present loans may be made upon
improving freehold property worth double the amount lent, in sums
of several thousand pounds, for periods of several years, at the rate
of from eight to ten per cent. The security obtainable for such in-
vestments is as complete as that upon which from three to four per
cent, can be obtained in England. lam only acquainted with one
important case in which such investors have suffered during the
last several years, and that was in the case of a very costly mill
erected at a time when there was, as I have elsewhere stated, a
kind of mania for building costly mills in Adelaide. The owner
borrowed large sums from successive mortgagees, and, subsequently
failing, the latter mortgagees were obliged to take to the property
which, however nominally valuable, is at present unavailable and
yields no return. I know another instance in which the agent for
an English capitalist foreclosed a mortgage, and had to report a loss
to his principal of some hundreds of pounds. The agent was much


concerned at the calamity, which arose from his having over-esti-
mated the value of some ill-built house property; but, as°it appeared
that he had for many years returned ten or twelve per cent, to his
principal for several thousands invested, the latter was not greatly
to be pitied, nor his agent much to be reproached. The real state
of the case, as I have said, is that money may be lent on mortgages
as safe as those which in England would bring in three or four per
cent., at from eight to ten per cent. An occasional mistake in the
valuation of a security may, of course, be equally made in either place.
Capitalists who prefer larger returns and less perfect security
have an illimitable held before them. From the purchase of im-
proved land or established sheep stations to the purchase of shares
in untried mines, and in any number of intermediately speculative
investments, they have boundless opportunity of choice before them.
They must select their own kind of security according to the pre-
dominance of the sanguine or cautious elements in their own
characters. Some years since, the taking in of rich greenhorns was
the regular business of a not unnumerous class, but it is otherwise
now. Of course, sharpers are like the poor, and we cannot expect
that they shall altogether die out of the land, but the predatory
class has so declined in numbers and consideration, that capitalists
of moderate prudence, who will abstain from making important
investments until they have been some months in the Colony,
are in no more danger of being duped than they are in all parts of
the world. Of those kind of investments which may be at all
classed as speculative, investments in old-established squatting sta-
tions probably yield the lowest percentage, because for many years
squatting property has been yielding large returns, and no* causes
why. it should cease to be so are apparent. One of our leading
auctioneering firms, through whose hands an enormous amount of
squatting property has passed during the last few years, has, at my
request, estimated the average percentage now to be gained upon
such investments, and makes it about twelve to thirteen per cent.
This estimate relates merely to established squatting property,
managed by overseers. Where the investor goes into the bush and
works and manages for himself, the gains cannot be estimated in
the same way. They depend mainly upon his own skill, and judg-
ment, and industry, and must be estimated according to the expense
of stations the increase of stock, the value of wool, and meat, and
tallow, and so forth. Partnerships in established businesses are
generally to be purchased; but it is, of course, impossible to say
what rates of profit may fairly be looked for in such transactions.
Each transaction must be considered according to its special circum-
stances. Probably, however, the average profits of such purchases
bear about the same ratio to those of perfectly secure investments
here, that the profits of similar risks do to those of secured invest-
ments m England. In other words, the average profits of invest-
ments involving risk of loss are here higher than the average profits
of investments m England involving equal risk, and that approxi


mately, in the same ratio that obtains in the current interest of
money in the two places.
For professional men the prospect is less hopeful than for capi-
talists—the field is full; and although here, as elsewhere, men of
ability may force a position for themselves, the competition is severe,
and the prizes to be gained not remarkably great. The chief ad-
vantage that professional men struggling into business have here is
common to most small communities. Any manifestation of special
excellence that they make brings them more quickly into good
reputation than it can do in a place like London, where the vast
social ocean swallows down all but the strongest and most fortunate
individualities. Secondly, in a rapidly-growing place the demand
for additional professional men increases more rapidly than it does
in a comparatively stationary community; but, to set against this,
it must, unfortunately, be added, that new comers of the pro-
fessional class flock to Australia in too great a proportion to the
numbers of other classes that accompany them. Thus the over-
crowded state of the professional field remains unrelieved.
Let us consider the three old and recognised professions of
divinity, law, and physic in their order.
There is no State Church here—and, for some years past, the
system of granting State aid to all denominations indiscriminately,
has been abandoned. All sects have to support their own minis-
ters, and although, as I show elsewhere, this change in the law has
not been attended by that decay of religious establishments which
its opponents predicted when the change was made, the fact re-
mains indisputable—that clergymen of all persuasions are, with a
few individual exceptions, a poorly-paid body of men. Perhaps the
change has fallen most heavily upon the clergy of the Church of
England; because the members of their congregations had to learn
the habit of providing for what they had been accustomed to have
provided for them. Here, as elsewhere, the clergy of various sects
often eke out their incomes by school-keeping; and here, as else-
where, unfortunately, schoolmasters are paid by no means in
proportion to the value of their services—if these be properly
performed. The incomes of schoolmasters are, however, augmented,
under certain conditions, stated elsewhere, by State aid.
The profession of the law is not divided here—as it is in England
and in the neighbouring Colonies into barristers, attorneys,
&c., &c. A lawyer here is a “barrister, attorney, solicitor, and
proctor,” and vacancies upon the judicial bench are filled without
reference to the branch of the profession in which the gentlemen
to fill them were originally brought up. The distinction is quite
disregarded. Thus two of our present Judges were English attor-
neys; the Attorney-General served his time in a solicitor’s office
here, the Crown Solicitor is an English barrister. In effect, a divi-
sion of labour takes place, because some men have a specialty for
court business, and some for conveyancing, and so on; but I believe
it has been found more convenient, both to lawyer and client, to


leave this matter to adjust itself than to force men to keep in par-
ticular grooves of practice, to which they were committed at the
outset of life, and before their specialties had developed them-
selves. It is a decided convenience to the client to be able to go
to his counsel and talk to him face to face without any impediment,
instead of having to get an attorney to write down a long explana-
tion, to be submitted to counsel; in which case, while the proba-
bility of mistakes is increased, the certainty of being charged for
them is complete.
The present position of legal practitioners here is, however, in
other respects, not satisfactory—at least to themselves. The intro-
duction of the Real Property Act has greatly diminished the profits
of conveyancing, as this is now easily accomplished, in the majority
of cases, without the intervention of a lawyer at all. I need hardly
inform the intelligent reader, that the lawyers have fought against
this measure with the most harmonious concentration of purpose;
but as the public have not been persuaded that this resistance has
been purely patriotic and disinterested, lawyers and the rest of
society are apt to be even more in antagonism than they are in
other places. Perhaps others than legal practitioners may not
regard it as greatly against the Colony, that more lawyers are not
“in demand," and that those already here are voluble in com-
plaining of the diminished earnings of the profession.
There is nothing exceptional, so far as I am aware, in the position
of medical men here, unless it be that none are exclusively devoted
to special branches, but that all act as “general practitioners.”
Perhaps, in Adelaide, there may be half-a-dozen men making large
incomes, and a much more considerable number still struggling to
do so. A competent man could probably always be certain of a
living by going to a sufficient distance from the metropolis, but he
would have to be content with small earnings until the gradual
spread of population in the slow course of years surrounded him
with patients.
The number of engineers, architects, and surveyors here is con-
siderable. Except in the Government service, however, there is
very seldom any strictly civil engineer’s work to be done. One
man, probably, could do all the private civil engineering in the
Colony, and not be very hard-worked either. With only one or
two exceptions of any magnitude, all roads, railroads, bridges,
wharves, jetties, &c., are carried out under official superintendence!
Ability in this, as in any other direction, may, no doubt, force a way
for itself ; but I fear that the applications for professional employ-
ment of the kind I am writing about are generally far more nume-
rous than the posts to be filled. There is a considerable private
employment for architects; but here again, it has to be stated that
the workmen are somewhat in excess of the work to be done. The
same remark applies to surveyors. There is always a good deal of
surveying going on, both under Government and for private persons,
but surveyors are in greater number than can find full and profita


ble employment. It is only in the general advancement of the
Colony that we can look for any improvement in the prospects of
the three allied professions last under consideration.
The mercantile class is, of course, a very large and important
one in a young and active community; but it is almost impossible
to speak about the prospects of merchants in Adelaide in a way
that would be of use to people in England. Certainly, mer-
chants and traders of all kinds are in superabundance, but the
prospects of any individual coming here with intent to trade would
be so entirely dependent upon his personal character, and personal
means and connection, that an attempt to speak distinctly of his
prospects as one of a class would be quite futile. Merchants
generally complain that “things are exceedingly dull;” but it is
almost as difficult to satisfy a merchant with the state of “ things
in general,” as it is to satisfy a farmer with the state of the weather.
One fact to be noted is, that situated as we are, in close proximity
to a Colony of much greater aggregate wealth than this, although
not, perhaps, on the whole, equally prosperous in proportion to its
population, dealers in imported goods are entirely governed by the
operations of the larger Melbourne market. Hence the “ dulness ”
complained of by mercantile men—that is to say, the difficulty of
disposing of goods at what they consider satisfactory prices—-is
no criterion as to the prosperity of other classes. Nor is it easy
to understand that the Colony at large is worse off for getting
foreign goods at desperately low prices wherein is involved
the gravamen of the charge brought by merchants against “ the
state of things ” —inasmuch as the great bulk of goods come here
as consignments for sale on commission, and the loss, if any, falls
upon the shipper abroad. One is rather reminded of that story of
Sheridan, who, when congratulated on being able, in the midst of
his debts, to keep up his spirits, replied that it was much more
wonderful how his creditors contrived to keep up theirs. What
induces British shippers to keep on sending goods year after year
to a bad market, as we are told this is, I am not sufficiently versed
in business to explain. How they keep up their spirits and taste
for this prolonged losing game is among the mysteries of the world.
What the mercantile class here really suffers from I take to be
simply the fact that the actual quantity of goods sold is not in due
proportion to the number of persons engaged in selling them.
The foregoing remarks upon the position of Adelaide merchants
will, in a great measure, apply to the shopkeepers ; but I believe
the latter to be, as a class, more prosperous than the former. It
is easier to open an office and call one’s self a merchant than it is
to open and stock a shop, and to most people’s thinking more
pleasant and “ genteel ”to boot. Shopkeepers are not, therefore,
so much troubled by the competition of a numerous class of men
who, while only scraping together a bare livelihood, or slowly
losing a small capital, do, nevertheless, contrive to get some busi-
ness, and to diminish the average earnings and increase the keen


ness of competition among the merchant class —by merchants,
commission merchants being here almost invariably understood.
The shopkeeping class is a numerous and wealthy one. A
gentleman of large and long experience in the Colony, to whom I
was speaking of the relative earnings of various classes some time
since, declared his belief that, on the whole, the shopkeeping class
had been the most prosperous of any since the foundation of the
Colony. He was probably in error, the squatting class having
almost indisputably been the most prosperous; but he rounded off
his remark by pointing to a shop on the opposite side of the street,
and saying that, within his knowledge, the members of three con-
secutive firms had there made their fortunes, and retired. Nor was
this by any means a solitary instance.
Squatting—that is to say, sheep and cattle farming on unsold
lands, rented in large blocks, from the Government—has, especially
within the last ten years, been the most remunerative pursuit carried
on in the Colony. The enormous increase of their flocks and
herds, the vast territory they occupy, and the national importance
of what they produce, are well known. Here it need simply be
remarked, that many of them are enabled to live in grand style
in England ; and that our greatest nabobs, the men of leisure
and fine houses and fine carriages, are almost invariably squatters.
One proof of the remunerative character of the pursuit is, that
all sorts and conditions of men have thriven in it indiscriminately.
Gentlemen from England, without experience ; professional men,
turning to the bush rather than to their professions; men of capital
or education, or neither, or both; representatives of all these
classes have grown wealthy by squatting, and that not in isolated
cases, but almost as a general rule. Nay, you find plenty of rich
squatters who, it is palpable, could not have got on in any calling
demanding much mental power, either natural or acquired—men
who have been fortunate enough to take to the one pursuit in
which they could not help making money in spite of themselves.
These remarks must, however, be qualified by the admission that
such success has only attended those who have luckily obtained good
runs, and have held them during the last ten years, which have been
years of prosperity to the squatters. In this pursuit, as in most
others, the race has not been invariably to the swift nor the battle
to the strong ; and in adverse times, and under adverse circum-
stances, some energetic and able men have failed in pastoral pursuits.
Prior to the last ten years the occupation was by no means so
prosperous as it has since become. Many squatters were then in
difficulties, and most of them were in debt to their town agents ;
but since then the tables have been turned.
The question will naturally arise—is this field full, like so many
others ? I can only say, I think not; but, certainly, there is little
chance now for new comers without capital; at least, such men
must be prepared to go through many years of drudgery and discom-
fort before their knowledge will give them an opportunity of ac


quiring' an interest in squatting property. Young men coming out
from England, with the expectation of getting overseerships im-
mediately, might as well stop at home, and write to her Majesty
requesting her to give them the command of a new shot-proof steam
frigate, or a chaplaincy at Windsor. But there is always a demand
for thoroughly-competent and experienced overseers in a pursuit
that enables so many principals to live in affluence, without personal
participation in the management of their stations; and such over-
seers are very generally taken into partnership, and so get oppor-
tunities of acquiring an independence.
The questions arise, however—what probability is there then
that squatting will continue as profitable as it is ; and what proba-
bility is there it will continue to be susceptible of indefinite expan-
sion into new country as it has been? In answer to the first
question, it has to be admitted that squatters holding their runs
from the State, on terms liable to change, and being, moreover,
subject to assessment charges, alterable at any time by Parliament,
hold their fortunes more at the mercy of political changes than
other classes. Many of them complain loudly of what they have
been subjected to in this way, although hitherto they have, I
believe, had no just cause for complaint. But jealousy of their
prosperity may, at some time, lead to the imposition upon them
of undue burdens, which would materially alter their position.
Secondly, their success, during late years, has been partly caused
by the high price which wool has commanded in the home markets.
Whether this is likely to be altered is a matter of which a sounder
judgment can be formed in England than I can offer here. Apart
from these two dangers, no causes of decline are apparent.
With regard to the possibility of extension—that is, the possibility
of profitably occupying, for pastoral purposes, remote country not
yet taken up —this is a question in controversy; but, for some
years after the Colony was founded, it was held that country could
not be profitably occupied forty or fifty miles north of Adelaide.
When I first came here, in 1849, the majority of the squatting
stations did not extend more than 100 miles, though there were
outlying stations for 100 miles more; and it was then said it was
impossible profitably to go further. Now far to the north of this
point all the country is occupied, and the further stations extend to
between four and five hundred miles from Adelaide ; and now, and
at all intermediate periods, the theory of impossibility of profitable
extension has had numerous advocates. I cannot, however, find any
more salient arguments against further extension than have been
advanced at each of these periods; and, in the meantime, the dis-
coveries of Mr. Stuart and others have established that an immense
tract of country, the limits of which are utterly unknown, is open
and fit for occupation, if the distance from the seaboard be not too
great. I can only say that, during the rapid and great extension
that has actually taken place, precisely the same arguments have, at


all times, been forthcoming to prove that it could not go furtner,
as are now advanced to prove the same thing.
The prospects of agriculturists have next to be referred to ; and,
considering that for some years wheat-growing has been the pursuit
with which South Australia has been especially identified, it is
perhaps not treating agriculture with proper respect to have given
pasture precedence. For some time after the foundation of the
Colony it was gravely alleged by many people that the country was
altogether unadapted to the growth of wheat. At the Great Exhi-
bition of 1851, South Australia took the prize for having grown the
finest wheat in the world, and thousands of acres are now annually
devoted to the production of this grain. The price of wheat has
varied greatly during the past ten years. According to official
returns before me, the average price during those years has been
6s. 6d. per bushel; but, in getting at that average, one or two years
of excessively high prices (1855, for instance, when the price reached
15s. 6d.) have been included. At present the price is low, from
4s. 6d. to ss. This price, however, is said to be one at which
wheat can be grown to reasonable profit in ordinary seasons.
The class of farmers who succeed best, probably, are men with
sufficient means to purchase a small freehold and stock it, but without
sufficient means to tempt them into “gentleman farming.” That
capitalist farmers may do well, there is no question. Too many shrewd
and moneyed men continue to farm and grumble year after year,
and somehow perpetually to grow richer upon a succession of alleged
losses, to leave any doubt that farming on a large scale may be
made to pay. But it is, probably, nevertheless true that a man
with his eighty acres or so, cultivated by himself and his family,
makes more in proportion to his investment than his wealthier
neighbour. The number of such small farmers is very large, and of
this number a very large proportion are freeholders. By the census
of 1861 it appears, that out of 39,507 males of enumerated occupa-
tions, 7,985 were farm labourers, and 7,090 were farmers. How very
important a section of our community is that including what may
be called yeomen and “ peasant proprietors,” these figures suffice to
show. Their value in steadying the population, if the phrase be
permissible, has been already proved. When the gold fields were
discovered in Victoria, and nine-tenths of our male population took
ship or crossed the border, alarmists predicted that we should see no
more of them. But the attachment a man feels to a home of his
own, that he has begun to make comfortable, proved its strength; and
the great bulk of these wanderers came back to spend on the im-
provement of their farms the money that they had acquired on the
gold fields. The majority of small farmers do not confine their
attention exclusively to agriculture, but fill up the leisure of them-
selves and their teams by wood-carting, carting stores and ores
between various mines and the port and city, and in other ways.
A patch of vines is now a very general feature in South Australian
homesteads, and garden and orchard have long been so. Even when


seasons are not satisfactory, and they do not make much money,
our small farmers and their families, at all events, generally live in
comfortable abundance. There is rarely any lack of meat, and bread,
and vegetables, and dairy produce; and fruit abounds fit for the
middle arcade in Covent Garden market. Indeed, fruit is so cheap
and abundant, that, within a very few miles from town, it pays better
to give the peaches to the pigs than to gather and cart them for
sale. Home-made wine is now very common, too, and where the
farmer does not make his own, he can buy from a neighbour at a low
price. Tea and sugar are everywhere in Australia regarded as
absolute necessaries of life.
Allusion has been made to the patches of vines about South
Australian homesteads ; but wine-growing is now rapidly becoming
a separate pursuit, and before many years, probably, we shall not be
sending away wine in sample quantities, but by cargoes at a time.
The production of wine here is, however, still in its infancy, and
for the most part our wine-growers are comparatively inexperienced;
or if they have gained knowledge in the vineyards of Europe, they
have not yet adapted it to the widely-different circumstances in
which they are now placed. One consequence of this has been that
in numerous cases vineyards were planted a few years ago with
vines unsuited to the particular soil and position selected, or different
varieties have been planted, ripening at intervals from February to
April, and thus rendering it almost impossible to conduct the opera-
tions of the vintage with any degree of success. Another serious
drawback is, that but few of our vine-growers have either sufficient
cellar room or sufficient capital to hold their wines until they
mature. In many cases publicans, who have to suit the palates
of their colonial wine customers with a strong luscious wine and
their pockets with low prices, buy up the produce of certain vine-
yards when the wines are about six months old, and, of course,
before the fermentation is completed. These wines are drawn off
from the wood perhaps a fortnight after leaving the cellar of the
maker, and thereupon a large section of the public found their esti-
mate of the “ Colonial wines.” But such liquors bear no resem-
blance to what our wines become with proper treatment. If the
most critical connoisseur of wines were set down in the cellars of
some of our best wine-growers, he might taste samples which he
would be compelled to pronounce equal to any wines of their class
to be found in any part of the world. We may particularly instance
a pure Riesling wine, made by Mr. Joseph Gilbert, at Pewsey Yale,
and a red wine resembling Burgundy, the produce of the same
vineyard, of which he has, we believe, samples from every vintage
since 1852 ; also, a pure Riesling wine and an Espanoir, made by
Mr. Henry Evans, at Evandale ; a Shiraz and Donzelino, a superior
claret and an excellent Yerdeilho, made by Mr. Patrick Auld,
at the Auldana Yineyard ; and a particularly delicate, fragrant, and
grateful wine, something between Hock and Sauterne, made by Mr.
Peake, at the Clarendon Vineyard. Mr. Waterhouse, at Higher


combe, on an elevated site among the hills near the sources of the
Torrens, makes a red wine resembling Burgundy, which has a high
reputation here. Dr. Kelly, the author of a well-known treatise on
wine-growing in Australia, has selected Morphett Yale for the site-
of his vineyard. Thus the suitability of a large part of the Colony
for wine-growing has already been fairly tested, and every year a
largely-increased acreage is planted with vines. Samples of most
of the above-named wines, as well as many others, have been sent
to the International Exhibition.
One thing which is wanted in the Colony to give our wines a
fair chance in our own and foreign markets, is a class of traders to
step in as “ middlemen” between the producer and consumer; men
purchasing wines from the growers—say after the first fermentation
is over—and maturing them under their personal superintendence.
Referring to the introductory chapter of Dr. Kelly’s work, entitled,
“ The Vine in Australia,” we find that, as the eldest colony, New
South Wales took the lead in wine-growing, and produced samples
which have been brought into comparison with first-class wines in
Europe, and have stood the test of that ordeal, Adelaide following-
in the wake of the elder Colony, has imported thence the varieties
of grapes there found suited to the Australian climates, as well as
the best kinds grown in Spain. The greatest obstacle which our
vine-growers have had to contend with in extending their vine-
yards lias been the abstraction of nearly all the available labour in
the Colony by the gold diggings in Victoria and New South Wales ;
and even at the present time vineyard extension is in numerous
instances retarded, not merely by the actual scarcity of labour, and
its consequently high price, but by the uncertainty whether, after
a vineyard has been planted, sufficient labour will be obtained to
cultivate the vines. lam told there are many acres of good soil,
in capital situations, ready ploughed and trenched, and intended
for vines, but still lying fallow, solely in consequence of the state of
the labour market. Still extension is rapidly taking place. Thus,
one gentleman planted 100 acres last season ; another, in 1863, will
have eighty acres in bearing ; and there are many others whose
acreages range from fifty to twenty. The latest official returns give—
Years
1856.
1857.
1858.
1859-60.
1860-61.
Acres under Vines ....
•<*
CO
1,065J
1,626
2,2011
3,180
From the report of the Superintendent of the Census, respecting
the Agricultural Statistics for the year March 31, 1861, we extract
the following : “ The apparent decrease in gardens, and increase in
acreage under vines, is chiefly attributable to greater care having been
taken in distinguishing between them. The increase of 97.9 acres
under vines is not, therefore, altogether to be considered as land
newly devoted to vine culture. The planting of vine progresses
with vigour—the number not in bearing being 1,948,510, against


1,577,881 returned in the previous year; whilst 420,280 came into
bearing; making a total of 1,874,576 actually under crop. The
total number of gallons of wine made was 182,087, or only 1,763
gallons more than returned in the previous season. * * *
The weight of grapes returned, as sold or otherwise disposed of,
i.e., not converted into wine, was 23,398 cwts. Seventy-five wine
presses are noted against sixty-one last year. * * * *
It is remarked that the vines planted during the past two or three
years have been more carefully selected with regard to adaptability
to soil and aspect, and their value as wine-producing varieties."
A wine-producing association has been already formed, composed
chiefly of large capitalists and experienced vignerons, who are pre-
pared to operate upon a large scale, and to make it an especial
feature of their business to reserve their wines from the market
until they are in some measure matured.
With respect to the position and prospects of the labouring
classes, the most important information is, perhaps, that contained
in the wages tables, coupled with the prices of provisions. But
there is a good deal that these do not include ; and, probably, the
most important point of all is, that the opportunities for effecting a
rise in the scale of life are so far more numerous here than they are
in old communities. It is this fact that identifies the true prosperity
of the labouring class so completely with the general progress of the
Colony, and makes it to the interest of the careful and well-conducted
members of that class, that wages should not be so high as to impede
the growth of capital. A few years’ residence in a colony makes
every one acquainted with a great many personal histories, and
every day one jostles scores of wealthy men in the streets of Adelaide
who have risen from the ranks, and of whom, perhaps, scarcely apy
would have had an opportunity of so rising had they not emigrated.
It would be very interesting and valuable if one could state what
became of each person in a number of ship-loads of emigrants; but
this is, of course, impossible. To refer to my own small experience,
I may mention the fortunes of two men, who came out in the same
ship with myself in 1849, and who were employed under myself for
a short time at, I think, 3s. 6d. a day. One drives about in a
dashing vehicle, and was the other day entertaining the Governor
at the inauguration of an important work which he was carrying
out from the resources of his own large capital. The other I only
recognised a few weeks since. I recognised his name as that of a
well-to-do landowner, and met him running a winning horse at one
of our metropolitan race meetings. Out -of the same ship-load I
could mention several others, who would, perhaps, not be obliged
to me for a more pointed reference to their ‘'day of small beginnings."
The position of the labourer who remains a labourer is certainly far
better here than in England; but it is on the facilities for social
advancement that I should be more inclined to rely, if I wanted to
paint the prospects of labouring emigrants in glowing colours.
35


CHAPTER VI.
THE CITY OF ADELAIDE.
Adelaide stands on an extensive plain, about six miles from the
nearest point of the sea-shore, and about five from the hills. The
rise from the sea to the hills is so gradual, that King William-
street —the central street of South Adelaide—is not more than
about seventy feet above high-water mark. A short distance to
the eastward of the city, the slope becomes somewhat sharper; and
in travelling in that direction for three or four miles, we find that
we have risen three or four hundred feet. Soon afterwards the
positive slopes of the hills begin, and in many places these are
abrupt and even precipitous—but of these hills I speak elsewhere.
The city is divided into North and South Adelaide by the River
Torrens—a stream which rises in the Mount Lofty Range, flows
across the plains in a westerly direction for fifteen or sixteen miles,
and then either loses itself among the “ Reedbeds,” or forces its
way into the Port river, according to the season and the volume of
water coming down from the hills. I see by some old Parliamentary
Papers, that Mr. John Morphett, writing home to England imme-
diately after the foundation of the colony, speaks of the site of the
capital as having been fixed on either bank of “ a pretty stream.”
Some old colonists even now confirm this view, and say that its
appearance has much altered for the worse since those days—that
it has worn a deeper channel in the soft soil of the plains—that its
yielding, earthy banks are more precipitous than they were—that
in summer the wide chasm of river bed is more out of proportion
than it used to be with the slender rivulet that trickles along its
centre.
A lively writer from a neighbouring Colony said, that in summer-
time you might dam back the Torrens with an Irishman’s hat.
But though the insignificant appearance of the stream almost seems
to justify the calumny, the actual body of water contained in the
Torrens is considerable, though flowing concealed beneath its
shingly bed. Until 1860, the city of Adelaide was supplied witb
water by carts from the Torrens, just below the City Bridge ; nor
has any scarcity ever been experienced. The Torrens still continues
to supply us, but it is now through the agency of a costly system of
water-works. A weir has been thrown across the river before it
emerges from the hills, a large reservoir has been constructed a little
lower down, and thence about seven miles of 18-in. iron piping bring
a copious supply into town. The service is constant, and the pressure
high, so that fire-engines have been superseded. It may be also
mentioned here, that baths have been erected by the corporation at
an expense of £2,000, and that you can now luxuriate in a warm
bath, or a cold plunge and a swim, at a very low cost. The
addition of Turkish baths is also contemplated.


The visible stream of the Torrens is not much affected by the
water-works. In winter, or after a succession of thunder showers, it
foams along in muddy turbulence; in dry weather it sinks into
insignificance. But it appears no longer liable to heavy floods,
such as in former years washed away our bridges one after another;
and this change is explained by the fact, that the hilly country, which
the Torrens drains, is now extensively cultivated, and that the heavy
and sudden rains which formerly rushed down the hill sides, and
swelled the stream into a torrent, are now in a great measure
absorbed in the loosened soil. Before quitting the banks of the
“pretty stream” which separates North from South Adelaide, let
me add, engineers agree that at the cost of a few thousand pounds
the banks of the river within the city boundary might be sloped
down, and one or two weirs constructed, which would turn the dry
chasm, which now offends the eye, into a succession of fine sheets of
water. That portion of the “ Park Lands” which separates North
from South Adelaide—and which even now is in some places
extremely pretty —would, were such an improvement effected, be
susceptible of highly-omamental horticulture.
The ground on which South Adelaide stands rises from the sea so
gradually that the gradients of the streets are nowhere more than
sufficient for drainage purposes. The streets are laid out at right
angles, and run, approximately, north and south and east and west.
South Adelaide also contains five squares of handsome extent, and
now enclosed and planted. Four terraces form the boundaries of
South Adelaide, and front towards the four cardinal points of the
compass, from which they take their names. Each of these terraces,
too, looks towards an open space of “Park Lands.” The Park
Lands of Adelaide altogether comprise about 1,940 acres, and the
value of this reserve becomes every year more apparent as the
city increases in population. A broad central street (King William-
street) divides South Adelaide into two east and west halves ; and
Hindley and Rundle-streets, which are continuations of one another
on each side of King William-street, are the most thickly-populated
and active streets of the city. Formerly, Hindley-street was essen-
tially the main street; but the current of trade, the causes of which,
are difficult to trace, has partially deserted Hindley-street, and
has flowed more to the eastward, and along Rundle-street and its
tributary thoroughfares. The very heart of the business part of the
town now is at the point where King William-street crosses the line
of Bundle and Hindley-streets ; but, for a considerable distance in
each direction—along North-terrace, Bundle-street, Hindley-street,
Currie-street, and Grenfell-street—the rows of houses, shops, and
warehouses are continuous, and the land is of very high value.
Business premises continue to be valuable much further towards the
south of the town. The squares and terraces are all well built
upon, and it is only among the intermediate streets of the south of
Franklin and Flinders-street that many vacant acres are to be found.
Of the total number of 700 acres of which South Adelaide consists,


it appears, by the city books, that 221 are now unbuilt upon.
South Adelaide was, however, laid out upon a scale of unwise
magnitude at first; but the questionable system, according to which
134 country and one town acre were sold together in a single land
order in England, at the foundation of the Colony, very likely com-
pelled Colonel Light to give the town a larger acreage than he
would independently have preferred. The unnecessary size of the
town has augmented the cost and difficulty of providing an efficient
water-supply for the whole city, and the supply of gas (which will
be afforded by a company that has recently raised the necessary
funds, and sent to England for plant and pipes) will, for the present,
be confined to the more populous streets.
North Adelaide, containing 312 acres, is occupied by private houses
and shops for supplying the immediate wants of the inhabitants.
The river, as I have said, and a strip of park land half-a-mile wide
at the narrowest part, divide the two portions of the town. The
site of North Adelaide is somewhat hilly, and the streets, squares,
and terraces are not invariably at right angles, but are laid out to
accommodate themselves to the undulations of the ground. From
many parts of North Adelaide the views of the hills are beautiful.
The chief streets are well metalled and drained, and the supply of
water into the houses is now unlimited. Many of our wealthiest
people have chosen this part of the city for their dwellings, and have
built handsome and spacious houses here. It is also the favourite
dwelling-place of a large number of those whose business requires
attendance during many hours daily, and who would find the hills,
or Glenelg, or even the nearer suburban villages—such as Ken-
sington and Norwood—inconveniently far. Cars and omnibuses
are incessantly passing from North to South Adelaide, from early
morning till late at night. It may be mentioned here that the
Torrens between North and South Adelaide is spanned by three
carriage bridges (one of iron and two of wood), and by two or three
wooden foot-bridges, of much convenience in affording “ short cuts/’
The impressions a stranger forms of Adelaide at first sight depend
chiefly upon his previous conceptions and expectations. If, unlike
philosophical Baillie Nichol Jarvie, he expects to find “a’ the
comforts o’ the Saut Market” wherever he goes—if he looks for the
beauty and regularity of a first-class English street—he will bo-
much disappointed. It is only here and there that capitalists have
raised rows of uniform and contiguous buildings. For the most
part every man has built on his own land, according to his own
means, to suit his own purposes, and to satisfy his own taste—or
illustrate his want of it—as the case may be. Accordingly, hand-
some houses and shops are often flanked by small, rickety edifices,
that look incongruous and out of place. But the evil is being
gradually cured, in obedience to the ordinary laws of political
economy. The owner of a shabby little dwelling or place of business
in a good site, discovers that he is in effect paying a high rent for it
—that he is sacrificing the interest of the money he could get for


his piece of land—and that this sum constitutes a much higher rent
than the business he can carry on upon his premises, or the accom-
modation of his residence, are worth. He sells his lease or his
freehold accordingly to a richer man, who puts up a more suitable
building. In this way, along the terraces, in Bundle, Hindley,
King William, Grenfell, Currie-streets, and others, the vacant gaps
are gradually being filled up, and the tumble-down sheds of a
former day are being replaced with substantial buildings.
If our criticising stranger has, on the other hand, come prepared
to begin “life in the wilds” and the “roughing it” system in
Adelaide—expecting nothing but a quite embryo town —he will be
surprised to find numerous and handsome warehouses, and offices,
and shops, the plate-glass windows of many of the latter making
tempting displays, and having ample stocks concealed within to back
up the ostentation and to save it from being an imposture. This
morning I took a short walk along one or two of the principal
streets with a note-book in my hand, and noted the succession of
shops. If the reader will join me, we will take the walk again
together.
We will start, if you please, here at the corner of Bundle and
King William-streets, and walk eastward along the former. We
will walk along the southern side, and enjoy, as Mr. Pickwick did
in Goswell-street, the prospect of “ over the way.” Bundle-street
is essentially a “shop street,” and in proposing a short walk along
part of it, it is for the purpose of showing how far “ division of
labour” is already carried among our retail traders.
The corner shop over the way, you observe, is that of a linen-draper
and outfitter; there is a decided dash of the Minories about it; and
those waxen dummies, in their model reach-me-downs, have not stood
the climate quite so well as could be wished. Their complexions
have suffered, and an incipient tendency to gutter down into their
boots betrays itself in their delicately-moulded features.
Next comes a bookseller, where you can subscribe for the
“Cornhill,” or “ Temple Bar,” or “ Once a Week,” or “All the Year
Bound,” or “ Macmillan,” or what not. There you can get the
last new book that was to upset the world ; and, perhaps, for a few
extra shillings, an “ Overland Copy” of the refutation that. has
upset the book that was to have upset the world. The proprietor
will also supply you with a pamphlet, about the size of this, being
his monthly catalogue of books on sale.
Next we have another linen-draper’s, and then a “Berlin wool
repository.” I wonder whether that lady stepping out of her
carriage, to buy a sweet thing in slipper patterns or anti-macassars,
reflects that five-and-twenty years ago the kangaroos were
hopping there. Adjoining Berlin wool, is Australian mutton,
in a trim butcher’s shop ; and then there is another bookseller’s
shop—rather of a serious turn in its literature, but not disdaining
stereographs and account books general stationery, and especially
homoeopathic medicine. Then we have another linen-draper s,


and then a seedsman’s, and then a pastry-cook’s; and then
there is a pretty little shop just erected, and still empty, that
will just suit you, if you want to set up some genteel light
business. Next door is a “Staffordshire warehouse,” with piles
of crockery in the front shop, and piles of crockery in the back
shop, and crates of crockery in the warehouse behind, and shelves
of crockery in the show-rooms upstairs. Then comes a shoe-
maker’s, and then another linen-draper’s, and then another linen-
draper and then a tailor’s, and then a public-house, and then
another linen-draper’s, and then a grocer’s, and then another linen-
draper’s, and then another grocer’s; then—really, after all this
crinoline, the sight is agreeable—an undertaker’s, with the last new
things in coffin-furniture, and hatchments with astonishing heraldry,
and requiescat in pace, and all the adequate “ plant” for getting up
the best style of professional affliction. Then there is a dispenser of
drugs, and then another grocer’s, and then another linen-draper’s,
and then another grocer’s, and then a lithographer’s, and then a
tailor’s, and then another linen-draper—this last linen-draper having
evidently given his mind to the further subdivisions of trade, and
having devoted himself almost exclusively to garments of which, of
eourse, one doesn’t know the names or uses—but which are of a
lineny and calicoy texture, and have what, I believe, is called “ open
work,” about the edges. Then comes a fruit shop, and then a
music shop, and then another linen-draper’s, and then another linen-
draper’s, and then a shoemaker’s, and then a watchmaker and
jeweller’s, and then a shoemaker’s, and then another linen-draper’s,
and then a painter and paper-hanger’s, and then another jeweller’s,
and then another linen-draper’s, and then a public-house, and then
a shoemaker’s, and then another linen-draper’s, and then a confec-
tioner’s. Let us go in and have an ice, and rest a little from this
intolerable succession of linen-drapers.
Now we can start again. Ah ! what shop is this next door? By
the miscellaneous property ticketed in the window—by the “ side
entrance”—above all by those three golden balls—it is ! it is ! one
of the establishments of my übiquitous “ uncle.” Then we come to a
linen-draper’s again, of course, and then to a bootmaker’s, and then
to a fruit shop, and then to a toy shop, and then to a tinsmith’s, and
then to a saddler’s, and then to another fruiterer’s, and then to a
public-house, and then to a grocer’s, and then to another toy shop
with a good deal of the Berlin wool repository in its composition.
Next comes a chemist, and then more boots and shoes ; and then a
pastry-cook’s, and then another linen-draper’s, of course. “ What,
will the line stretch out to the crack of doom?” The next shop
is another linen-draper’s, too ! Then comes an ironmonger’s, and
then a butcher’s, and then another Berlin wool repository, and then
a tailor’s, and then a fruit shop, and then positively another Berlin
wool repository, and then another linen-draper’s ; and, if the repe-
tition of the word makes you ill, here we are at a chemist’s, and you
can go in and get something that may, perhaps, do you good.


This brings us to the corner of Pulteney-street, and we will go
no further in this closely-enumerating way. I have enumerated in
their precise order every shop along the one side of Bundle-street,
from King William-street to Pulteney-street; and the reader, I hope,
will have got a clear idea that in Adelaide people with money in
their pockets need not dress themselves with sheepskins and
skewers, but that, on the contrary, it is a place affording every
facility for the genteel amusement of running up bills. Without
being so minute, however, as we have been so far, we may glance
along another street or two. And along the .side of the street we
have paraded, examining " over the way,” it is to be observed that
the shops run more to saddlery, and tobacco, and upholstery, and
com, and drugs, and photography, and less to linen-drapery than
they do on the other side.
For some distance westward from King William-street, Hindley-
street a good deal resembles Bundle-street in its character, and is
terribly given to linen-drapery too. But, further westward, though
still, every now and then some strong old-fashioned shop opposes
a bold front to the change, you see that this part of Hindley-street,
at all events, has seen its best days. Ironmongery and grocery
appear still to get on, but it is clear that “ soft goods” can’t make
a living. There are many empty shops, and night auction-rooms,
and furniture-brokers of the “ Hebrew persuasion” abound, and the
smart fruit shops are exchanged for rather seedy-looking green-
grocers’, and—what is always a bad sign—the oyster shops get
numerous, and, for the most part, have a look that oyster shops are
apt to acquire—a look of having been up all night, and of having
omitted to wash themselves in the morning.
King William-street, where it crosses Bundle and Hindley-
streets, is elegantly shoppy, but, for the most part, it is devoted to
the larger and more sober pursuits of life. Here are the Exchange,
and the Bank of Australasia; and there are the National Bank,
and the Imperial Insurance Office, and the Savings Bank, and the
South Australian Insurance Office ; and there are mining-companies’
offices ; and architects’ offices, and an alarming row of lawyers*
offices; and, adjoining Victoria-square, there are the Government
Offices, and the Post-Office, and the Police Court. Grenfell-street
and Currie-street are chiefly occupied by merchants’ warehouses
and counting-houses; but some of our largest merchants are content
with curious back slums and by-streets tributary to Bundle and
Hindley-streets. North-terrace has been much patronized by the
doctors. Wakefield-street, near Victoria-square, is entirely occupied
by places of worship—the Boman Catholic Cathedral, the Scotch
Church, and the Unitarian Church standing close together. Not
far off is a large Wesleyan Church—but most of the principal
denominations of Christians have more than one place of worship
in North and South Adelaide.
Going south from Victoria-square, the buildings become more
scattered. Here and there you see a good private house; but the


majority of the houses are second-rate. In this part of the town,
too, businesses are carried on that demand space more than situation.
Here are some breweries and mills; several splendid buildings of
the latter class standing empty and worthless, unfortunately.
A few years since a perfect mania for building costly mills pre-
vailed, and ruined several previously wealthy men. There are still
several large steam-mills at active work in Adelaide and at the port;
but it is to be feared it will be some time before there will be
occupation for the remainder.
Quite to the south of the town—along South-terrace and its
immediate neighbourhood—the houses, chiefly private dwellings,
increase in number and improve in character. South-terrace fronts
the South Park Lands, and thus we have reached the limits of the
city in this direction; and I only hope the reader is not tired of
being dragged about the streets so long.
If so, let him rest for a moment, and submit to be fed with a few
facts and figures. The city is divided for municipal purposes into
four wards, the annual values of which have been assessed for the
present year for rate-levying purposes, as follows :
Gawler Ward £49,000
Hindmarsh Ward 45,000
Grey Ward 35,000
Bobe Ward 24,000
£153,000
By assessments upon this amount the Corporation derives an income
this year of about .PS,OOO ; this sum being supplemented by a grant
from the General Revenue of about equal amount. The money
obtained from these sources is spent upon making streets and other
public improvements; the remainder of the civic income, which
amounts altogether to about i? 21,000, suffices to defray salaries,
establishments, &c.
There are thirty-three miles of made streets in Adelaide, with
macadamised roadways, curbed footpaths, water-tables, &c. Water
is carried in pipes down all streets, and is now introduced into most
houses—an incalculable blessing to the inhabitants, though it has
probably been obtained at an unnecessary expenditure of public
money. In the matter of gas-lights we are rather behind the age
—oil for the street lamps, and camphine and kerosene for the shop-
windows, being all we have yet attained to. Within a year,
however, we may expect the city to be efficiently lighted with gas—
the necessary pipes and apparatus having already been ordered
from England.
The City Council numbers nine individuals—a Mayor, and two
Councillors for each of the four wards; and under the operation of
a recent Act, amending the Constitution of the Corporation, it has
improved in character. All the members of the Corporation are
elected by the ratepayers; and there are two auditors elected in the
same manner. The officers are Town Clerk and Assistant, City
Surveyor and Overseer of Works, Inspectors of weights and measures,


vehicles, slaughterhouses and markets, and nuisances. There are
also a Park Lands Ranger and Conservator of the River, three
Rate Collectors, a Gardener, and a Messenger.
CHAPTER VII.
MINES.
Even in the richest mineral countries in all parts of the world
mining adventures are to some extent precarious. Practical and
scientific knowledge may diminish the risk, but cannot obliterate
it; and the occasional prizes drawn in Mother Earth’s great lottery
are so large, that they lead, as a matter of course, to the invest-
ment in many tickets that prove to be blanks. We have not
escaped such mistakes. The enormous success of the Burra Mines
led to the formation of numerous companies, the very names of
which have, for the most part, been now forgotten, except by those
who had the misfortune to be shareholders. Occasionally the ill-
luck has been adroitly shifted upon English shareholders ; in some
instances the mines have been abandoned, never to be worked
again; in others, the works are merely in abeyance, and will some
day be resumed with great advantage. The departure of our adult
male population, which occurred on the discovery of gold in the
neighbouring colonies, led to the indiscriminate abandonment of all
mining operations here, with the exception of those at the Burra and
Kapunda, and those connected with the search for precious metals.
Silver and lead mines were among the first to be opened in South
Australia; and the working of one or two of these has been resumed
with, I understand, satisfactory results.
The metal, however, which forms the great source of South Austra-
lia’s mineral wealth up to the present time has been copper; and the
deposits of copper have been found here in an abundance almost as
remarkable as that of gold in Victoria. The great wealth of the
Burra Mines has long made them famous, while the astonishing
yield of some of the mines on Yorke’s Peninsula makes it probable
that the Burra itself will not be able to maintain its place as the
richest of South Australian mines. Again, in what is called here
the Far North, that is to say, the district commencing north of
Spencer’s Gulf, and continuing thence indefinitely northwards,
mineral discoveries of the highest value are now authenticated, and
nothing is required but improved facilities for transit, by railway
or tramway, from Port Augusta northwards, and the introduction
of adequate labour and capital, to make this part of the country one
of the richest in South Australia. It is here that the mines
belonging to the Great Northern Mining Company are situated;
and of these a more particular account is given hereafter. In
describing the operations at a few of our largest and most-established


mines, and their present position as to yield, hands employed,
wages paid, &c., precedence must be given to South Australia’s first
great mine—the Burra Burra.
These copper mines—the vast productiveness of which is now a
matter of almost world-wide celebrity—are situated about ninety
miles from the city of Adelaide in a north-easterly direction, and
are comprised within the northern moiety of the Burra Creek
Special Survey of 20,000 acres, which was taken on the 16th August,
1815, by Messrs. C. H. Bagot and G. F. Aston (for themselves and
others, who were afterwards associated together as the Princess Boyal
Mining Company), and Messrs. W. Allen and S. Stocks, jun. (on behalf
of themselves and others, who afterwards incorporated themselves
with the South Australian Mining Association). The union of the
two parties, represented by Messrs. Bagot and Aston and by Messrs.
Allen and Stocks, was entered into simply for the purpose of
obtaining the special survey, which each party had previously been
most earnestly but vainly endeavouring to secure, neither being able
to command what was in those days a vast sum of money, viz.,
£20,000, the price required by Government for a special survey of
20,000 acres of land. Messrs. Kingston and Jacob were appointed
to survey the land; and, immediately on the survey being defined,
a straight line was drawn transversely through the centre, from east
to west, and, in accordance with previous arrangements, on the 20th
September, 1845, lots were drawn for choice : the northern moiety,
or the Burra Burra Mines, fell to the lot of Messrs. Allen and
Stocks’s party ; and the southern moiety became the property of
Messrs. Bagot and Aston’s party (afterwards known as the Princess
Boyal Mine). The amalgamation of the proprietors represented by
Messrs. Allen and Stocks with the South Australian Mining Asso-
ciation took place before the division of the survey, and the
following officers were appointed to manage its affairs, viz.:—
Directors—Messrs. Charles Beck, James Bunce, John Benjamin
Graham, John Bentham Neales, William Paxton, William Peacock,
Christopher Septimus Penny, Emanuel Solomon, and Samuel Stocks,
jun.; Secretary—Henry Ayers.
No time was lost in developing the northern portion of the sur-
vey. Immediately it was known that it had become the property
of the South Australian Mining Association, the directors set to
work in real earnest, with great vigour and success. On the 29th
of September, 1845, the first blast was made in the rock of rich
copper ore which projected on the surface ; and from that day the
operations—which were then commenced with ten miners, a smith,
and a captain—have been continued almost without intermission, to
the extent of yielding direct employment on the works to upwards
of 1,100 individuals, and indirectly to many thousands of persons.
The works were at first carried on in a very rude manner, without
the aid of machinery, or any of those useful auxiliaries which exist
in the mines of Cornwall, and with but very few experienced miners.
Notwithstanding these disadvantages, the produce of the mines or


the first six years amounted to nearly 80,000 tons of copper ore,
of a richness surpassing anything ever before met with in the
history of mining; and, although the bulk of these ores had to be
carted over 100 miles of unmade road to a port of shipment, and
thence shipped to a market some 16,000 miles distant, a profit was
obtained on the working of the mines for that period of no less a
sum than £438,552 —nearly half a million sterling; the company’s
working capital being, in September, 1845, the modest sum of
£1,500. This prosperous career was, however, destined to receive a
check towards the close of 1851, when the discovery of gold in the
neighbouring colonies of New South Wales and Victoria attracted
all classes from their usual occupations to that of gold digging, a
calling which proved especially alluring to miners, who of all other
men were best able to prosecute the search for gold. To such an
extent did this attraction prevail, that, in the early part of 1852,
the number of hands at the mine was reduced from 1,042 to 366,
and subsequently to only 100. The pumping-engines were stopped,
the water was allowed to rise to its natural level, and remain in the
mine—the operations being then limited to the dry levels. This
state of things continued until the latter part of the year 1854, and
might have remained so until the present time, had not the then
Governor, Sir H. E. F. Young, and his Government, duly estimating
the vast importance of resuming the operations of this great
establishment to its utmost limits, taken prompt measures to intro-
duce a large number of Cornish copper miners. It was on the
arrival of these that the directors felt justified, in the month of
January, 1855, in clearing the mine of the water, and resuming the
works in full. Subsequent results have not been so brilliant, inas-
much as the increasing depth of the mine leaves a less margin of
profit upon each ton of ore extracted. There does not appear, how-
ever, to be any falling off in the supply of ore, and the operations
of the mine proceed with undiminished activity, with a vast amount
of benefit to the colony at large, and with satisfactory profits to the
proprietors. The annual yield of ore, for many years past, has
averaged from 10,000 to 13,000 tons, of from 22 to 23 per cent, of
copper; in round numbers, about 2,500 tons of metallic copper,
worth to the Colony, at the least, £225,000 per annum. The direct
expenditure of the concern within the province since its commence-
ment amounts to £1,640,000, of which upwards of £1,000,000 has
been expended in wages alone. The gross profit stands at £836,000,
of which £677,600 has been divided among the shareholders,
£147,840 added to the capital stock, and £10,560 remains undivided.
The greatest number of hands employed was during the year 1859,
when it amounted to 1,170 individuals. The wages paid to the
workmen, of course, vary according to the state of the labour market.
Common labourers’ wages have fluctuated from 255. to 40s. per
week; miners, from 355. to 60s. per week; tributers making very
much more occasionally ; mechanics, from 425. to 112 s. per week.
The following is a classification of the persons now employed, with


the wages paid to them, viz.:—Miners, 350, at 355. to 40s. per
week; ore-dressers, men, 176, at 30s. per week ; boys, 57, at 15s.
per week; engine-drivers, 9, at 40s. per week, with overtime;
mechanics, 21, at from 425. to 70s. per week ; labourers, 71, at
from 275. to 30s. per week ; whim-boys, 20, at from 9s. to 12s. per
week. The present officers of the Association are: —Directors —Messrs.
John Beck, Arthur Blyth, M.P., John Charles Boord, Thomas
Graves, Archibald Jaffrey, George Strickland Kingston, M.P., Wil-
liam Peacock, M.L.C., and Secretary Henry Ayers, M.L.C. The
management of the mines being under the superintendence of
Captain Roach. Of the pioneers of this institution, only Messrs.
Peacock, Kingston, and Ayers continue to share in its management.
Until the recent discoveries at Wallaroo, and the less proved, but
perhaps not less valuable discoveries in the far north, the Kapunda
Mine occupied, without question, the second place among the
sources of South Australia’s mineral wealth. It has been steadily
worked for years, with handsome results, which would have at-
tracted greater attention had it not always suffered by unavoidable
comparison with the more brilliantly successful Burra. Not only
has the Kapunda Mine for many years yielded a large amount of
copper, and employed a large number of men, however, but it gave
existence to what is now the prosperous inland town of Kapunda,
perhaps the largest secondary town in the Colony. It is not
dependent upon the adjacent mine alone, but is the commercial
centre of a large and fertile agricultural district, and is the present
northern terminus of the North Railway. As to its adjacent town,
indeed, the Kapunda is altogether in advance of the Burra Mine.
The Burra town is called Kooringa, but, with the exception of a
handsome inn, and one or two other buildings, it is a miserable
place. Formerly, the majority of miners and their families used to
burrow in subterranean . tenements, which they scooped out in the
sides of the Burra Creek, and they certainly made their curious
dwelling-caves astonishingly comfortable. They often contained
several rooms, fire-places, good furniture, and bright prints and
ornaments, generally including a hue collection of polished mala-
chite, and other specimens of copper ores. Their dwelling-places
were inconvenient in some respects, however. Strangers walking-
on the banks of the creek were liable to tumble into holes, which
proved to be the chimneys of the Cornishmen ; and every few years
a flood would come and commit such havoc in the warren, that this
sort of family mansion has fallen into disrepute. I believe a few of
the underground houses are still occupied, but the majority have
been abandoned.
The habitations in the upper air which are now used are, however,
scarcely preferable. They are, for the most part, small and ill kept,
and ugly, and necessarily put down anywhere at haphazard, in the
dust of the road, without the least attempt at garden or adornment
of any kind. The reason of this is said to be, that the Burra
Company, to whom the land belongs, will not part with it. The


builders of bouses, therefore, feel no security in spending money on
their hired allotments, nor any pleasure in adorning a place where
they are only in fact “ camped out.” It is to be hoped that some-
thing will be done to lead to the improvement of Kooringa, for at
present it is no credit to the Colony, and does no justice to the
great mine that adjoins it. Ivapunda, on the other hand, is a com-
paratively neat, well-built, and regular town, containing, with the
conjoined townships of Helston and Victoria, about three thousand
inhabitants.
The principal public buildings are, Post Office and Telegraph
Station, united Court House and Police Station, Mechanics’ In-
stitute, Bank, Public School, Episcopal Church, Wesleyan Chapel,
Bible Christian Chapel, Congregational Chapel and manse adjoining.
Besides these, there are a large number of excellent stores ; at least
six schools, three of them with licensed teachers; a Mechanics’
Institute, and Reading Room. Amongst the shops are five butchers,
one watchmaker, two chemists and druggists, one photo-artist, two
bakers and confectioners, two cabinet makers, seven or eight
grocery, eight drapery, six or seven shoemakers, three timber yards,
metal foundry, two machine makers, three cart and dray-makers,
one coach-maker, two painters and glaziers, two tinsmiths, seven or
eight ironmongers, three tailors, two saddlers and harness-makers,
seven publicans, three wheat stores. The mill and brewery are
from two to three miles away, on account of water. There is a con-
siderable trade done in the township from the agricultural settlers
around, but it owes its origin to the Kapunda Mine, and also its
continued success—the outlay at the mine being from £3,000 to
£I,OOO per month ; nearly all this put in circulation in the imme-
diate neighbourhood.
The Railway Terminus is close to the township, and the buildings
there are considered the best on the whole line, and it is a busy
scene, as all the traffic from the North comes this way, including
that from the Burra and the agricultural district of the Upper
Light, besides a good deal from both east and west.
For the following succinct account of the Kapunda Mine, and the
manner in which it is worked, I am indebted to the Manager, Mr.
W. Oldham.
These mines are situated in the County of Light, about fifty
miles north-east of Adelaide. They were first discovered in the
year 1843, by Chas. Samuel Bagot, Esq., now of London (the
youngest son of Capt. C. H. Bagot, who was for many years a
Member of the Colonial Legislature), and also by Francis Stacker
Dutton, Esq., M.P. The ore was cropping out on the surface, and
was discovered during a search for some straying sheep. The land
was then unsurveyed, and the property of the Crown, forming a
part of Capt. Bagot’s sheep-run.
The survey and purchase having been completed, the first ore
was raised on the Bth January, 1844. On 23rd January, the first
five dray loads of ore left the mine. On 4th March, 1845, the first


horse-whim commenced work drawing water, and kept the mine
dry to the fifteen-fathom level for some time ; but as the works
were extended, it was soon found that it would be indispensable to
procure engine-power, and during 1847 a 30-inch cylinder double
action engine, with a supply of pumps, was obtained from England,
and erected on the mine, commencing work on Ist July, 1848.
Shortly afterwards machinery was added for crushing ore, and for
drawing or hauling ; and this engine, with a brief interruption,
caused by the breaking of the main shaft in June, 1850, has been
at work ever since.
As the extent of working increased, so did the water; and, in
1850, a larger engine was purchased and erected, commencing
work in January, 1851. Both engines were employed in pumping
for some years; but, latterly, all the water has been brought to
one shaft, now sunk a depth of sixty fathoms, to which level the
mine is kept in fork by the last-mentioned engine, which is of
36-inch cylinder single direct action. The other engine is used in
hauling and crushing.
In December, 1849, the first smelting furnace commenced work,
and was shortly followed by a second ; and, for some time, a large
portion of the ores were reduced to regulus before shipment.
The great attractions presented by the gold fields of Yictoria
during the year 1852, induced most of the men to leave. The
smelting works ceased altogether on 17th March, and were not
resumed till March, 1855.
Nearly all the miners, also, left; and it was with considerable
difficulty the engine was kept going, and the mine kept dry: at
one time there were but four miners. During 1854, however,
and especially in the early part of 1855, large numbers returned,
or came to work, and since then there has not been any material
interruption.
The ores comprise almost every variety, as yellow ore, or pyrites,
blue and green carbonates, muriates, grey and black sulphurets,
oxides, bell-metal and peacock ores, and native copper, or malleable.
The percentage, also, varies much from 66 downwards.
The entire quantity of ore raised from the commencement to the
close of the year 1861, was 35,280 tons of 21cwt., and of an average
produce of just twenty per cent. The quantity raised during the
past year was 3,306 tons, of an average of ISTSO per cent.
As to the present state of the mine, the deepest level is sixty
fathoms below the surface, at which depth it is kept drained. The
deepest level in which tributers are working is fifty fathoms from
surface.
The underground workings are nearly all confined to the original
Section of eighty acres. No. 1,271, extending nearly from north to
south. Two other Sections, Nos. 1,284 and 1,405, south of the
original Section, also belong to the Company, as well as a con-
siderable portion of No. 1,429, and some allotments northward—
wt of No. 1,400.


The engines on the mine are as follows :—One 30-inch cylinder,
6-feet stroke, double action condensing, now used only for hauling
and crushing ores. One 36-inch cylinder, 8-feet stroke, single
action, direct expansive and condensing, used only for pumping—
those at present attached being a 12-inch plunger column, and
drawing lift at the bottom—between five and six strokes per
minute keep the mine in fork.
Each of these engines has two large tubular boilers of about
thirty feet by six feet, all of which were built on the mine, as well
as another spare boiler. One ten-horse power portable high pres-
sure engine employed in turning, boring, chaff-cutting, &c. &c.
There is also on the works, but not yet erected, one 50-inch
cylinder condensing engine and a tubular boiler, in plates.
One set of stamps and a plunger-jigging machine, for ore dressing,
to be erected immediately; one water wheel, and perpendicular and
circular saws.
The buildings now erected are, the two engine-houses and boiler-
houses above-named, with crusher and lathe-house attached, and
draining case.
A large and very substantial erection of stone, with slate roofing,
just completed, and comprising engine-house, boiler-house, crusher,
and mine stores.
This is intended for the reception of the present drawing engine,
as the ground around it is sinking. There is one metal foundry
or cupola, one brass foundry, smith’s shops and iron store, car-
penter’s shop and timber yard, and saw pits, weighbridge and office,,
and a counting-house, with manager’s residence attached—a com-
modious and handsome building. There are also residences for the
accountant, clerk, agents, and engineer, and about thirty other
cottages, occupied by the workmen and miners ; also houses for the
pitmen, timbermen, sumphmen, and a range of barracks, or changing
rooms, for the miners ; also a magazine for powder, store for candles,
stores for mine material, stables, &c.
At the smelting works there are five ore-reducing furnaces, one
copper roaster, one refinery, copper store, and ore shed, all sub-
stantially roofed ; also superintendent’s residence and office, smith’s
forge ; brick kiln, and brick shed for fire bricks which are made on
the mine, of very superior quality, from clay and sand obtained in
the immediate neighbourhood.
Besides the drawing done by the engine, there are eight horse
whims, two double whipseys, and several single ditto ; and on the
ore floors are twelve jigging sieves, picking tables, &c., &c.
The last return shows the number of hands employed, as follows:
Men. Boys.
Officers, agents, clerks, overseers 8
Engineers, enginemen, stokers 10
Pitman, timbermen, tutworkers, &c 43
Tributers (raising ore) 106 23
Tradesmen, carters, labourers, kibble-fillers 82 13
Smelters and furnacemen 36
liasons (2), labourers, smiths, &c 17
’brtaf men 302 36 boys.


Besides a large number of woodcutters, carters, and others, who are
completely dependent upon the mine for their means of subsistence.
All the ores raised are now reduced to fine copper before ship-
ment ; 595 tons were shipped in 1861. The expenditure during the
year being £48,300; the greater portion of which is circulated on
the spot for wages, fuel, &c. <£*8,713 was paid for fuel for the
smelting works alone ; timber being alone used.
The railway terminus is on the Section adjoining the mine
property.
Whether the mineral wealth of the far north, or that of Yorke’s
Peninsula, will eventually prove most considerable, time must show.
But at Yorke’s Peninsula the immense advantage has been enjoyed
of ready accessibility to the sea-board, The most prolific mines yet
opened are not more than six miles from Wallaroo Bay, from which
they took their name, and the character of the country rendered
cartage peculiarly light and easy. How far inland over the surface
of Yorke’s Peninsula the valuable lodes run is still uncertain; but
even if all the 27,000 acres of mineral claims, which cover so large
a space on our Land Office maps, were to prove available, the
greatest distance of land carriage to which the ore would be
exposed would be about fifteen miles—the average width of the
entire Peninsula not exceeding twice that distance. It is, however,
practically certain, that by far the greater majority of the claims which
were so hastily taken out are destitute of copper. Most of these
claims were indeed taken out, not only without copper having been
found, but without its having even been sought upon the spot.
The immense yield of Mr. Hughes’s shafts was no sooner ascertained,
than sections in the neighbourhood were taken out in the quite vague
hope that they might prove equally productive. One good mine
would, of course, be well worth having at the expense of a vast number
of forfeited deposits, and as the mania for Yorke’s Peninsula mines
increased—as the hopes of speculators were occasionally sustained
by the actual discovery of copper, and as fresh companies were being
formed day after day,—the map, that a few weeks previously had been
an absolute blank, became ruled over with the boundary lines of
sections as closely as if it had been fine farming land in the immediate
neighbourhood of Adelaide. The mania was, however, fortunately, a
shortlived one; and over many a mile of Yorke’s Peninsula, innumer-
able survey pegs in the scrub speedily became the only memorials of
the gust of excitement that had swept over the district. It seems
highly probable, indeed, that many other valuable mines will be
opened in Yorke’s Peninsula; but at present a short list will contain
the names of those that have been proved to be so. The original
Wallaroo Mines have, however, been so productive as to have
entirely changed the face of that part of the country. Two rapidly
rising towns, a population of about 3,000, and an active commerce, are
now established where, little more than two years since, there was
nothing but a solitary sheep-station.
Apart from the productiveness of the Wallaroo Mines, and their


proximity to the sea-shore, this part of Yorke’s Peninsula was r
in some respects, singularly unfitted for the sudden reception of a
large population. It is practically destitute of fresh water. There
i was one little spring on the beach at Wallaroo, which scantily
supplied, in former years, the small wants of Mr. Hughes’s sheep-
station. Otherwise, there was no other fresh water for twenty miles,
nor could any be obtained by digging. All that was found was-
salt; and the water that the mining engines now bring to the
surface is all salt too. At Port Arthur, at the head of St. Vincent’s
Gulf, which is now the landing-place of much of the traffic to*
Wallaroo and Kadina—passengers being conveyed across the Penin-
sula in carts and omnibuses—there is no fresh water. All along
the road across the Peninsula—about thirty miles—there is no
fresh water; and I believe for many miles on either side of the
line of march, there is no fresh water either.
The expedient hit upon to overcome this evil was distillation.
Large distilleries were established, at which the salt water from
mines was purified ; and perhaps for the first time in the records
of the world, a population of some thousands, with all their
horses, and cattle, and domestic animals, drank aqua distillata.
The great demand continues to be thus supplied, though large
tanks have now been made, in which considerable quantities of
rain-water from the roofs are stored. One enterprising speculator
has constructed an immense galvanized iron roof, without any
house under it, for the sole purpose of affording a collecting ground
for rain; and his “tap” is so much prized by connoisseurs, that it
commands the exceptional price of 3s. per hogshead. The price
of the ordinary distilled article is only 2s. 6d.
The shipping-place for all the mines that have yet been brought
into actual work at Yorke’s Peninsula, is Wallaroo Bay, where
the Government have laid out a township. The bay is somewhat
exposed to south-westerly gales, but the holding ground is excellent,,
and has already been severely tried. The shelter from all other
winds is tolerable, and from northerly and easterly winds complete.
The situation is rather pretty, and a cliff immediately to the south
of what is becoming the business part of the town presents a fine
site for future terraces of private houses. Of 264 lots, into which
the township of Wallaroo was laid out, and which contained 161
acres, 251—containing 154 acres—have been sold by Government
at prices averaging £44 3s. 4 d. per acre.
A jetty is being built, and a railway inland to Kadina is being
laid down by, and at the expense of, Mr. A. H. Gouge, a gentleman
of considerable experience as a contractor for public works in this
Colony. In his present important undertaking he is entirely un-
assisted by Government, but he proceeds under the authority of a
special Act of Parliament, which concedes the required land as well
as some wharf frontage to him for a term of years, but which, at the
same time, binds him down as to tolls and fares, and gives him no
legal security against competition, should Government or private
F


rivals determine upon constructing an opposing line. This railway
is now being rapidly proceeded with, and will be completed in
about two or three months. In the first instance it will he worked
by horse traction.
The line terminates at its eastern end at Kadina, the town laid
out in the immediate vicinity of those mines which have hitherto
proved the most productive in the district. Kadina, as well as
Wallaroo, has been planned and sold by Government. It contains
ninety-eight acres, of which ninety-four have been sold at an
average price of £SB 17s. 2 d. The two places are related to
one another, as to distance, situation, and functions, much as
Adelaide is related to Port Adelaide. Kadina has not as yet made
so much progress as Wallaroo, however, the major portion of
the miners and those dependent upon them having preferred
to remain upon the actual mining ground. Several handsome
stone buildings, nevertheless, testify to the confidence which some
of its inhabitants feel in the new township of Kadina. The mine
which was originally known as the Wallaroo Mine—others in the
same district being now often included under that name —was dis-
covered by a shepherd named Boor, on the 17th of December, 1859.
In the following February four Cornish miners were employed, and
thenceforward operations were rapidly extended till they reached
their present condition. It would occupy too much space to
describe the intermediate stages of development; and I must be
content to state very briefly the results at present attained. The
principal workings have been named the Home workings and the
Wombat workings, at each of which there are several shafts. At
the Home workings the sinking is to twenty fathoms, and at that
depth a drive has been made in the course of the lodes (generally
east and west) for a distance of forty fathoms. At the east end of
this drive the lode of ore is five feet wide, and at the west end
fifteen or sixteen feet wide. At the ten-fathom level drives have
been made for more than 100 fathoms. The buildings erected
here consist of an engine-house, smith’s and carpenter’s shops,
manager’s residence, stables for sixty horses, timber yard and sheds,
still-house and tank, and a doctor’s house. A little way off, and
between the Wombat and Home workings, are the residences of the
principal mining captain, officers, &c. Most of these buildings are
substantial stone structures.
At the Wombat workings the sinking has been proceeded with
to the twenty-five fathom level; but the lowest drives are at the
twenty fathom, and extend for about 115 fathoms. At the ten
fathom level the drives extend for 155 fathoms ; the lode varying
from four feet to twenty feet in width. Here there is an engine-
house, a powder-magazine, a drying-house, in which clothes are
dried for the miners to put on when they come above ground ; and
in the neighbourhood are numerous miners’ residences and dwellings
of those employed in catering to their wants. At these various
workings the total quantity of ore raised, up to the 31st of January,


1861, was 11,870 tons—of which 5,370 have been shipped to Mel-
bourne and Sydney ; about 6,000 tons remaining at the mines and
at the Wallaroo Smelting Works. These works at present include
ten reducing furnaces and three refineries ; and ten extra reducing
furnaces are m process of erection. The ores have averaged from
fifteen to twenty-five per cent, in richness. Altogether there are
about 400 men directly employed at these workings ; besides which
there are about ninety men employed by the same proprietary at
their smelting works at Wallaroo, which are not, however, as yet
in full operation. The average wages of miners at these mines are,
from 455. to 60s. per week. Ordinary labourers earn 355. per week.
Two steam-engines, of a united power of about 180 horses, are
already employed here, and three more, of a united power of 195
horses, have been ordered in addition.
The Moonta Mines are situated on Yorkers Peninsula, near a
place called Tipara, and about ten miles south by west from Kadina.
They are close to the coast, but the nearest convenient shipping-
place is at Wallaroo. They have been comparatively recently
opened, but are of immense promise. At the date of the last report*
there were sixty-eight men working there. As at Wallaroo, there
is no fresh water, and distillation is the main source of supply of
this necessary. A line of road through the scrub has been cut to
Wallaroo, and the cartage is at present performed by bullock-drays
—the present cost of cartage being 13s. per ton, at which some
extensive contracts have been made. Between four and five thou-
sand pounds have already been spent at Moonta on shafts and
other works. The wages of various kinds of labour are the same
as at Wallaroo. The quantity of ore hitherto shipped from Moonta
has not been great —about 200 tons—but about 450 tons more were
already awaiting shipment at the date of the last report. The
quantity of ore now being raised is estimated at about J 00 tons per
week ; and this will be augmented as the works proceed, fresh men
being put on as rapidly as the progress of the sinking will permit.
The ore raised is of higher percentage than. at Wallaroo, a good
deal reaching 30 per cent., and but little being below 20 per cent.
Near the surface the ore is chiefly green carbonate, mixed with
clay ; but at seven or eight fathoms depth it changed to black and
yellow ore, interspersed with large lumps of metallic copper, some
of them several pounds weight. The first discovery of these rich
deposits was made in May, 1861, and thirty eighty-acre sections
were immediately claimed under the mineral regulations. Twelve
of these sections are now leased to the proprietary. The buildings
at Moonta are as yet of a temporary character, and there is no
steam-engine, but one is on its route thither now, and will probably
be at work before these pages are in the hands of English readers.
Next to the Wallaroo and Moonta Mines, the most successful
* This account of the Moonta Mines was written early in February. Most of the
figures would need to he raised to make it correct at date of publication.


undertaking of this kind on Yorke’s Peninsula has been that of the
“ New Cornwall Mineral Association/' as to which the Board of
Directors have supplied the following particulars. The principal
workings are between two and three miles inland from the Home
and Wombat shafts of the Wallaroo Mines. The company was
formed in April, 1861, with a nominal capital of £50,000 in 25,000
shares of £2 each; but of these, 10,000 shares were reserved by the
proprietors of the “ claims” as paid-up shares. On the remaining
15,000 shares £1 each has been called up. The leaseholds of the
company include fifteen sections of eighty acres each.
There are about forty-five men working on the mines at present,
and more will be taken on early. An engine (twenty-one inch
cylinder) has been erected on one of the sections, and all the build-
ings, carpenters’ shops, smith’s shop, and offices necessary thereto,
are nearly completed. The engine is now ready for working ; and
as an engine-shaft is sunk, and pumps, &c., ready, favourable results
are anticipated. From the lodes intended to be worked by the
engine, copper ore to the extent of 800 tons has been raised, and
some of it of a very high percentage ; say forty per cent. Valuing
the ore raised and in sight at lowest price, there is sufficient at grass
to cover the expense incurred in developing the mines, building-
stores, houses, engine, &c. A small engine is in course of erection
on another of this company’s sections, intended to work one of the
lodes found on the property of Captain Hughes (the Bingo lode),
and which is expected to lead on to this land and yield much ore.
There has not been much attention paid to the other sections as
yet, but nearly all are considered so well situated as to justify the
leasing thereof for fourteen years.
Arrangements have just been completed to erect ore-reducing
works at the New Cornwall Mines. At these works the ore will be
converted into copper by a process recently patented by Mr. R. V.
Rodda. Specimens illustrating the process have been forwarded to
the International Exhibition.
The workings of the Duryea Mining Company are situated about
three miles to the southward of Kadina, and a considerable expen-
diture has already taken place upon the ground. The secretary
has kindly supplied me with the subjoined details.
The company commenced work on Mineral Section 471, at Wal-
laroo, and at eighteen feet below surface found green carbonate of
copper. At twenty-one feet below surface drives were made in
various directions, in each copper was cut, all dipping down. At
about twenty-five feet, water was cut.
Another shaft (the Duryea) was then commenced, and at lOfm.
3ft. a fine course of mundic with black quartz was cut, and under-
laying, a fine lode of black ore was cut, 7ft. to Bft. 6in. thick, dipping
down to the south. Specimens of this ore were assayed, and found
to contain 64 per cent, of copper. The water making very freely,
a fine high-pressure horizontal engine was erected, and an engine-
shaft has been sunk to the depth of fifteen fathoms. At twelve


fathoms a drive was made from the Duryea shaft to the engine
shaft, in which two winzes have been sunk, one nine fathoms and
the other four fathoms. From these winzes rich black ore has been
raised, yielding from 52 to 57£ per cent, of copper.
On the mine are erected several stone buildings; viz., store,
smith’s and carpenter’s shop, houses for captain and tradesmen at
the mines, with other buildings of iron and wood.
The company possess fourteen other sections of eighty acres each,
upon several of which copper, iron-stone, and gossan have been
found; but for the present these are not actively worked, being
held back until the works on 471 are in a more advanced state.
Several mines have been opened “in the far north ” —that is, in
the tract of country north of Port Augusta—but though several of
them are of high promise, want of capital, and the difficulty of
getting the ore down to the shipping-place, till better means of
transit are supplied, have caused the suspension of almost all mining
operations in that direction, with the exception of those carried on
by the Great Northern Mining Company.
This company is composed of an English proprietary, whose pro-
perty consists of eleven mineral leases, about 290 miles to the north of
Port Augusta. The management is by a London hoard of directors,
with a committee of management in Adelaide. The subscribed
capital is £160,000, of which £BO,OOO are paid up. The working
operations of the company in the Colony commenced in June,
1860, and have been prosecuted with considerable vigour and success.
The operations have hitherto been carried on without the aid of
machinery, but it is now found requisite to erect a steam-engine,
whims, and ore crushers, which, it is calculated, will be completed in
May, and tend greatly to increase the produce of the mines.
The committee have shipped to England 600 tons of ore, and
have now in course of shipment 90 to 100 tons. The character
of the ores hitherto sent away has been that of the usual car-
bonates and grey ores, giving a high produce, say from 27
to 30, and some as high as 40 per cent.; but the present
deep levels are turning out sulphuret ores. The number of
hands employed at the mines, in all capacities, has been 149 ;
but the erection of the engine and machinery, and the preparing
the necessary shafts and surface works, has lately interrupted
the regular course of ore raising, which will, however, soon be
resumed.
The committee of the company have been in negotiation with
the Government to have a township laid out near the principal mine
(Nuccaleena), and have succeeded in obtaining the assurance that
it shall be done forthwith. The Government has also decided to
sink wells along the line of traffic, and tenders for them are now
invited. These works will be productive of great advantages to the
district, enabling cartage to be obtained on more favourable terms.
The committee, at the commencement, had to pay £5 10s. to £7
per ton for cartage; but improvements along part of the road,


and the late favourable season, have admitted of their reducing
the price to £4 10s. per ton, at which rate they find no difficulty
in obtaining sufficient for their present requirements; but, with
the prospective increase of traffic from this company’s and other
mines in the north, a tramway, which can be carried up the western
plains for a distance of 150 miles without any difficulty, is greatly
to be desired; and it is hoped that English capitalists will give
their attention to this undertaking.
Near Strathalbyn several mines producing copper and lead were
opened many years since, and considerable returns made from them.
More recently the Wheal Ellen Mine, in the same locality, produc-
ing lead, silver, and copper, with gold in the gossans, has been dis-
covered. The returns from this mine, the proprietors believe, will
be increased when the machinery now in course of erection is com-
pleted.
In the Bremer country a number of mines were opened prior to
the discovery of the gold in Victoria. Many of these gave great
promise of large results, but were suspended owing to the scarcity
of labour consequent on the population being drawn off to the gold-
fields. Working has been renewed in one of these—the Bremer
Mine—now the property of the Worthing Mining Company
(English). A sixty-inch cylinder engine, and other machinery,
with smelting furnaces to correspond, have been erected with every
prospect, it is said, of making this a permanently-paying mine.
The Kanmantoo Mines, forming part of the estate of the South
Australian Company, have been worked for many years past, and
large quantities of ore have been raised. This property is now let on
a royalty to a colonial company, who are likely to increase the returns
very considerably. Smelting furnaces, for converting the ores from
this mine into regulus, or fine copper, have been erected at Scott’s
Creek, some few miles distant, and are adding largely to the profits
of the undertaking.
The wdiole of this district is highly mineralized, and the mines
already discovered are capable of affording employment to a very
large additional population.
CHAPTER VIII.
RELIGION AND EDUCATION.
There is no State Church in South Australia, and for several
years no portion of the proceeds of taxation has been applied to the
maintenance of religious establishments, except in payment of the
salary of the Colonial Chaplain. On what grounds this exception
is justified I do not know ; but probably there are sufficient ones,
as the strictest anti-state-aid advocates among us appear to be care-
less on the subject. At all events the exception is a financially un-
important one.


According to tlie census of 1860, the religious statistics of the
Colony, so far as division into sects is concerned, are contained in
the following table :
No. of Percentage
Persons. on total.
Church of England 43,587 36-948
Roman Catholics 15,594 13-219
Wesleyan Methodists 14,322 12-141
German Lutherans 11,235 9-524
Independents 6,268 5-314
Church of Scotland 4,821 4-086
Bible Christians 4,216 3’556
Free Church of Scotland 4,137 3-508
Primitive Methodists 3,672 3-129
Baptists 3,424 2-902
Christians 1,658 1-405
United Presbyterians 1,572 1-333
Other Denominations 573 0-486
Unitarians 493 0-417
Hebrews 360 0-305
Moravians 217 0-183
New Church 192 0-163
Society of Friends 124 0-106
Mohammedans and Pagans 112 0-095
Not specified 1,390 1-179
Total 117,967
The heads of most of these denominations have furnished me with
the facts embodied in the present chapter. The only specific refusal
to furnish such information came from a quarter in which I did not
look for it. The Roman Catholic Bishop gave me a refusal equally
courteous and decided ; and, with all respect, I must add, his reasons
for refusal appear to me as illogical as they were politely expressed.
He empowered me to state the grounds of that refusal. These were,
that he considers the distribution of the funds provided by the
State in aid of education, to have been applied in a manner injurious
to the interests of those over whom he is the spiritual head; and
that the reading of the Scriptures, accompanied by the verbal
explanations of laymen, is pernicious to Roman Catholic children.
He has consequently avoided all dealings with the Local Govern-
ment, and has refused to give them statistical information for
which they have applied. This little work being a semi-official
one, he would not give me information which he would willingly
have supplied for private publication. I feel quite sure that his
lordship’s refusal was conscientious and not unfriendly; but I
remain at a perfect loss to understand why any real or supposed
unfairness of treatment of Roman Catholics here, should render
it undesirable that Roman Catholics in Great Britain, who may
read these pages, should be deprived of accurate information as to
the position of their church in South Australia.
In describing the position of other sects as to which I have been
able to obtain information, I will place them in the order of their
numerical importance, as it appears from the census table I have
quoted.


The establishment of the Church of England consists of the
Bishop, who was consecrated in 1847, and twenty-eight clergymen,
all in priests’ orders. Of these, two are attached to the Collegiate
School, and the remaining twenty-six have parochial or missionary
cures. Their average income is per annum. Ten of them
are graduates of the Universities of Oxford, Cambridge, or Dublin.
Eight, who are not graduates, are from English Colleges, such as
St. Bees, King’s College, Islington Missionary College, and St.
Augustine’s, Canterbury, the remainder being literates. Fifteen are
in English orders, and thirteen have been ordained in the Colony.
The official clergy of the diocese are the Dean, the Archdeacon,
-and four Canons, of whom two are Rural Deans, and one is Examin-
ing Chaplain.
Only one of the above, the Colonial Chaplain, receives any
pecuniary support from Government. The rest are dependent on
voluntary support.
There are besides eleven honorary lay readers.
The general management of the affairs of the diocese is in the
bands of a Synod, constituted by voluntary compact, consisting of
three orders : the Bishop, the licensed clergy, and the representative
laity. Each of these orders possesses a right of veto. Each con-
gregation in Adelaide is represented by four lay synodsmen ; all
other congregations have severally two representatives. Synodsmen
must be communicants of the church.
For ecclesiastical purposes, the several congregations are denomi-
nated parishes, the affairs of which are managed by a vestry, com-
posed of the minister, churchwardens, and seat-holders.
The buildings in use by the Church of England are chiefly of
three kinds ; viz., churches, parsonages, and educational establish-
ments.
I. The churches are forty-eight in number, with, accommodation for £
8,963 persons ; besides which, there are local services attended
by 1,200 more. The estimated cost of these churches is .... 51,200
(This is exclusive of St. Peter’s College Chapel.)
11. There are nineteen parsonages, estimated at having cost 14,500
To some of these glehes are attached, valued at 1,000
111. Educational Establishments :
(1) St. Peter’s Collegiate School, which has cost 18,000
(2) Six parochial school-rooms 3,800
Total cost of buildings £88,500
N.B.—The above are all entirely free from debt.
The Sunday schools are thirty-two in number, with 268 teachers,
and 2,620 scholars.
The voluntary contributions of members of the Church have
provided certain trust funds for its benefit.
Besides the Episcopal Endowment Fund of £17,500, provided by
Miss Burdett Coutts, there are the Leigh and Allen Funds, yielding
an annual income of £2,500.
The sum of £2,000 capital is in course of investment for the
endowment of the Dean and Chapter.


Parochial Endowment Funds of from £2O to £7O 10s. per
annum, have been formed in eleven parishes.
There is also the property of the Church of England Endowment
Society, the capital of which promises to be, at the end of the first
seven years, £IO,OOO. This is intended for parochial endowment.
The only sources external to the diocese from which pecuniary
assistance is supplied are, the annual grant of the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel of £SOO in aid of recently-formed cures,
and the annual subscription of the Bishop of St. Asaph of £IOO for
endowment.
There are several projected new churches and parsonages, towards
which considerable sums of money have been collected, of which no
note is taken in the above statement.
In Adelaide itself, North and South, there are five churches, with
accommodation for 2,800 persons, and three school-rooms for 650
children ; and besides the total of forty-eight churches, others are
about to be built at Mount Gambier, in the south-eastern district,
800 miles from Adelaide ; at Melrose, 200 miles due north from the
same ; at Kadina and Wallaroo, the two new mining townships on
Yorke’s Peninsula. There is a church at Port Lincoln, and a
clergyman for the district. Also at Robetown, Guichen Bay, on
the south coast. A new missionary district has been formed, ex-
tending from Clare to New Melrose, and a clergyman is coming out
to reside on it. From Melrose, the stations connected with the
Coonatto Run will be visited by the resident missionary ; while the
minister stationed at the Burra visits periodically those to the north
and east of that township. In addition to such visits, the Bishop
himself, or his missionary chaplain, visits, from time to time, the
outlying districts in the bush.
Next to the Church of England, the largest body of religionists
in the Colony is that of the Roman Catholics; but for reasons
already assigned I am unable to give any particulars about them.
Their number, according to the last census, was 15,594.
Next in numerical order come the Wesleyan Methodists. There
are fifteen ordained ministers : 182 local preachers ; 216 class-lead-
ers ; 3,324 communicants; eighty-nine churches, in which are 13,844
sittings; forty-nine other buildings used for public worship, the exact
number of sittings in which cannot be given. There are ninety-four
Sabbath schools, conducted by 998 teachers, in which are 5,952
scholars. The total amount raised by voluntary contributions in
South Australia, towards Wesleyan Church purposes, during the
year ending 31st December, 1861, was £15,880 15s. 6c£. The entire
cost of Wesleyan Church property in the Colony has been £67,582.
The German Lutherans number 11,235 ; but I have not been
able to procure particular information about the affairs of this sect.
The Independents, or Congregationalists, number 6,268. They
have thirty-one chapels and eighteen other meeting-places in the
Colony. Six new chapels have been opened during the past year;
viz., McLaren Yale, Aldinga, North Adelaide, Angaston, Gawler,


and Beaumont. Of these, two are entirely new interests, one a
removal to another building, and three rebuildings on a larger
scale. There are four chapels in course of erection : Hindmarsh-
square (Adelaide), Milang, Port Elliot, and Kadina. The number
of ministers holding pastoral charges is twenty-three; number with-
out charges, seven, two of whom arrived during 1861. According
to the last return, in June, 1860, the number of Sunday schools was
thirty-four; scholars attending Sunday schools, 1,865; Sunday
school teachers, 249.
The members of the Church of Scotland are 4,821 in number.
There are five churches : one in Adelaide ; one at Morphett Yale ;
one at Inverbrackie, Woodside ; one at Barossa ; and one at Went-
worth, Darling Junction. The latter is properly within the boundary
of New South Wales, but its connection by the River Murray lies
altogether with Adelaide. There is only one minister in Adelaide,
and one at Wentworth, recently removed from Inverbrackie ; but a
third is at present on his way out from Scotland for Inverbrackie.
In regard to the support of ministers, they are maintained, like
those of all the other denominations, entirely by the voluntary con-
tributions of the people, in the shape of subscriptions and pew-
rents. In Adelaide, an endowment of £2OO a-year was raised by
sums subscribed and invested at interest: this, with the pew-rents,
form the stipend. At Barossa there is an endowment of 100 acres
of fine land. The other churches have no endowment, but depend
entirely on voluntary efforts. The Church of Scotland, its head
here states, is not progressing as it might do, from the difficulty of
getting out ministers ; and he adds, “ They seem to hesitate to trust
themselves altogether to the voluntary system ; but I do not think
that any one who has his Master’s work at heart need fear of
finding the people Ml in their duty.”
The Bible Christians number 4,216; they have societies in all
the thickly-settled parts of South Australia, except in the South-
eastern district. The denomination commenced its operations in
the Colony in November, 1850, on the arrival of two ministers sent
out by the Bible Christian Missionary Society. At that time one
chapel had been built at Kooringa, occupied by a church of about
forty members.
In 1855 the society had twelve chapels, containing 1,200 sittings*
four other preaching places, accommodating seventy-five hearers ;
one minister’s residence ; six ministers; 261 members; 423 Sun-
day scholars, and seventy-two Sunday school teachers; whilst the
moneys raised during the year, for all purposes, amounted to a little
over £6OO.
At the district meeting, recently held in Adelaide, the statistics
of the denomination in South Australia were made up to Christmas,
1861, with the following result:—Chapels, fifty-one, containing
7,750 sittings ; other buildings used as preaching-places, thirteen,
containing 400 sittings ; total sittings for 8,150 persons. Ministers’
residences, five ; school-rooms, seven ; schoolmasters’ residences,


five ; ministers, thirteen; local or lay preachers, seventy-three ;
members in church fellowship, 1,178 ; Sunday schools, forty-three ;
Sunday scholars, 2,333 ; Sunday school teachers, 361; number of
persons attending the various places of worship, estimated at 6,000.
Moneys raised for denominational purposes during 1861, upwards
of <£7,000, of which amount i? 5,300 have been spent in the
erection of new chapels or the liquidation of debts on connexional
property.
The cost of erecting the various buildings belonging to the de-
nomination has been as follows :
£ s. d.
Chapels 21,660 0 0
Ministers’ residences 1,720 0 0
School-rooms 9,020 0 0
Schoolmasters’ residences 400 0 0
Total £26,800 0 0
There are debts upon several of the buildings, amounting in the
aggregate to £9,085. With this exception, the cost of the build-
ings belonging to the denomination, together with the interest paid
from time to time upon borrowed capital (amounting altogether to
a larger sum than the entire debts at present), have been defrayed
by voluntary contributions from its members and friends.
With reference to the cost of the school-rooms, it may be re-
marked that several of them were built, and were at first used, as
chapels, but have since been replaced as places of worship by larger
structures. In addition to the seven school-rooms mentioned above,
thirteen of the chapels are also used for day schools.
The Free Church of Scotland has 4,137 members.
The first movement in the way of forming it was made in 1850.
In the month of March, 1850, the Rev. John Gardner (formerly
of Birkenhead, Cheshire) entered the Colony; and since that time
ten churches in connection with this body have been built, two
having been built previously to the arrival of any minister. These
buildings are distributed among the following places:—Adelaide,
Port Adelaide, Smithfield, Gawler, Clare, Mount Barker, Strath-
albyn, Mosquito Plains, Penola, Mount Gambier, Morphett Yale,
and Aldinga. The churches at the following five places are, how-
ever, now without ministers :—Smithfield, Gawler, Clare, Morphett
Yale, and Aldinga.
A Presbytery has been formed, and this Court meets once a quarter.
The various ministers are dependent on their respective churches
for support. In connection with the various churches are Sabbath
schools, numerously attended.
The Primitive Methodists number 3,672; but lam not in pos-
session of any other facts concerning this body.
A sect simply styling themselves “ Christians ” exists in the
Colony, and the census gives their numbers as being 1,658 ; but it
may be suspected that a good many people have filled up their
census papers with this comprehensive title, without intending par-
ticularly to identify themselves with the sect that has given itself


this name. A member of the denomination supplies the subjoined
statement. “ This church has no written creed but the Bible, be-
lieving that the Word of God is all-sufficient, and alone sufficient,
to unite and hold together in Christian fellowship those who love
Christ and desire to honour him by keeping his commandments.
The number of members at the present are eighty-five. The chapel
in Adelaide has been erected by the freewill offerings of the mem-
bers of the church, and that of sister churches in the Colony. It
will seat 300. All the sittings are free. There are four churches
of the same faith and order in the Colony ; one at Hindmarsh, one
at Point Sturt, one at Willunga, and one at the Alma.”
The United Presbyterians number 1,572 ; but I am unfurnished
with details respecting them.
The Unitarians are 493 in recorded number. They have one
church and one minister in Adelaide, and are in a satisfactory
financial position.
The Jews number 360, according to the census returns, and about
three-fourths of them reside within the City of Adelaide and its
suburbs. They have a place of worship in Bundle-street, with an
average Saturday congregation of about thirty-five, although on
special holidays they muster in about double that number. The
character of the service is similar to that of the Duke’s-place
Synagogue in London, and is after the German and Polish style.
The congregation is in communication with Dr. Adler, the High
Priest in England ; and they have a special burial-place granted by
Government, and adjoining the West-terrace Cemetery.
The Moravians are returned as numbering 217 members in the
Colony ; but I am not possessed of further information respecting
their position here.
The New Church, or Swedenborgians as they are more frequently
called outside their own community, are 192 in number, and they
have a small chapel in Adelaide accommodating about seventy per-
sons, and in which service is held every Sunday morning. They
have also a monthly conversazione, at which a lecture on the writings
of Swedenborg is delivered. The society makes no public collections,
and the minister and other officers perform their duties gratuitously.
Voluntary contributions suffice to defray the small expenses incurred,
and the society is free from debt, as well as having a small accu-
mulating fund for building purposes.
The Society of Friends number in the Colony 124, and they have
a meeting-house in Pennington-terrace North Adelaide, capable of
holding about 200 persons, with seats for 150. The average at-
tendance is about twenty. There is also a meeting-house at Mount
Barker, near the township, capable of holding fifty people. The
usual attendance is ten. No buildings have been erected since last
year; and whenever money is required for repairs, &c., a subscrip-
tion is raised among the members of the society. The Friends,
or those meeting with them, in the Colony, being very much
scattered, a large proportion are unable regularly to attend the
meetings.


Passing from the religious establishments to the machinery of
secular education possessed by South Australia, it may be premised
that the schools are broadly divisible into those which are entirely
self-supporting, and those which are aided by Government funds.
The system of education established and subsidized by Govern-
ment, was brought into operation in 1852, and was founded on an
Act of the Legislative Council passed during the year preceding.
It comprises a Central Board of Education, consisting of seven
members, with a Secretary, and a Chief and a Second Inspector of
Schools. District councils are authorized to act as District Boards
of Education, with a view to promote and guard the interests of the
schools in their respective localities, and they correspond with the
Central Board in Adelaide. District school-houses are also erected
partly at the expense of the Government, at the recommendations
of the District Councils, wherever the residents locally interested
subscribe an amount equal to one-half of the cost of the buildings ;
the Board being authorized by the Education Act, under certain
prescribed conditions, to furnish the remaining half.
Teachers being approved by the Board, after examination (on the
production of a satisfactory certificate of qualification, and after the
practical effect of their teaching has been tested with satisfactory
results) are licensed by the Board to teach in specified localities, on
a memorial in their favour being received by the Board from persons
desirous of securing their services. They are thus entitled to a stipend
varying from £4O to £BO per annum (payable quarterly), propor-
tioned to the estimated efficiency of their schools and the numbers of
scholars attending them. The stipend is ‘ additional to the school
fees, which, for teaching the ordinary branches of an English
education—namely, reading, writing, arithmetic, grammar, geo-
graphy, and history—are limited, as a maximum, to one shilling per
week (or in that proportion per month or quarter), but leaving the
teachers at liberty to make an extra charge for any other subject
of school instruction that may be taught in their respective schools.
Orphans and other children, duly certified to be destitute of the
means of education, have their school fees paid by the Government
at the rate of sixpence per week.
The Scriptures are read daily in the schools, verbal explanations
being allowed; but no religious instruction of a denominational
character is permitted during school hours.
Licensed teachers are supplied at cost prices with school books
and other school requisities, from a depot kept at the offices of the
Central Board.
The number of schools in connection with the Board at the close
of 1861, was 219; the number of scholars, males, 5,811; females,
4,900 ; total, 10,711 —showing an increase on the preceding year
of 868, and an average for each school of nearly fifty.
The estimated cost of public education, including aid to Mechanics’
Institutes, and other educational objects, for the year ending June
80, 1862, is £16,816.


The greatest impediment to the satisfactory working of the
Government educational system is found to be the irregular atten-
dance of the scholars, and the very early period at which they
generally leave school; both evils mainly attributable to the high
price of labour, which renders the employment of their children’s
assistance, by parents, in many cases a necessity, and in others a
temptation.
Nearly two-fifths of the schools of the province have no connec-
tion with the Government educational measure. The Collegiate
School of St. Peter’s is under the mastership of Rev. G. H. Farr,
A.M., and four or five assistant masters. There are several other
establishments where the classics and mathematics, and some of the
modern languages are taught, and there are likewise numerous
other private boarding and day schools.
The total number of scholars at all the schools of the province,
according to the census taken in April, 1861, was 15,344 ; or, one
for every eight and a half of the population. This _does not include
the scholars who are under private instruction in families, the
number of which, owing to the fact that the scattered character of
the country population precludes the children from being able to
reach the schools, is very considerable.
CHAPTER IX.
PUBLIC WORKS AND PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS.
Railroads occupy so important a place among the public works
of modem countries, that an abstract of what has been done here in
the matter of railroad construction may fitly have precedence in
this chapter. The subjoined facts relating to our railways have
been gleaned from a report to Parliament on the subject of our
Public Works. It should be premised that our railways are,
as yet, altogether Government concerns, paid for out of the
general revenue, to which receipts and profits are carried. The
capital invested in their construction, and in the construction
of some other of our public works, is indeed partly borrowed,
but the cautious rule established, early in our constitutional career,
that only two-thirds of the money required for any public works
should be raised by foreign loan, and that the remainder should
always be forthcoming out of general revenue to justify further
borrowing, has operated as a salutary check upon reckless ex-
penditure in this direction. One experiment in the way of railway
construction by private enterprise is, indeed, being made at
Wallaroo, where a railroad, some six miles in length, and in-
tended to be worked in the first instance by horse traction, is being
laid down by a private capitalist. But our main railways are


Government undertakings. We have two locomotive lines leading
into a common terminus on North-terrace: the one to the port is about
seven miles in length, the other, northwards to Kapunda, about fifty
miles in length. The average cost on the fifty-seven miles has been
£13,560 per mile. Both are single lines, hut due precautions have
been taken for public safety, and during the time that they have
been worked not a single fatal or even serious accident has occurred
upon them. The traffic on the port line commenced on the 21st
April, 1856. The north line was opened as far as Gawler (twenty-
six miles) in August, 1857; and to Kapunda on August 13th,
1861. On both lines the work is of a solid kind, and a good speed
is maintained upon them. On the port line the rails are of 601bs.
to the yard, and are laid on longitudinal sleepers. On the Gawler
line the construction is similar, but the weight of rails is only
561bs. On the Kapunda line (between Gawler and Kapunda) the
weight of rails is 651b5., and they are laid on cross sleepers. On the
port line, and on the north line as far as Gawler, the gradients are
excellent, and the curves very wide. From Gawler to Kapunda
the country is less favourable, and both gradients and curves are
sharp, but they have, as I have stated, been constantly worked
without accident. At no distant time the Northern railway will,
probably, be continued to the Burra ; and the growing importance
of what is called the Far Northern district will lead to further ex-
tension in that direction. It is at present a question whether rail-
way extension should proceed northwards from the Burra, or
whether a separate system should be commenced from Port
Augusta. Thence to the northwards for at least 150 miles along
what are known as the Western Plains, the country is of so
dead a level as to present facilities for railway or tramway con-
struction which cannot anywhere be surpassed ; and it may be
regarded as a certainty, that those facilities will be taken advantage
of in some way in the course of the next few years, and that
improved means of transit, which they now alone require, will be
provided to open up the great resources of wealth, mineral and
otherwise, which it is known exist in that district of the Colony
commonly described as the “Far North.”
The Main Roads are under the control of a Central Board,
appointed by Act of Council, who meet generally twice a month to
receive the reports of the surveyors superintending the four districts,
and transact general business. The direction and names of main
roads are declared by Act No. 13 of 1861; but detailed plans are
prepared and particulars gazetted previous to the issue of an order
for the declaration of specifications.
An annual vote is taken in the House of Assembly for the sum
requisite for their extension and maintenance. The total cost from
1853 to end of 1861, with other particulars, are subjoined.
Total length, of declared main lines 739 miles, 20 chains.
Total length metalled and completed, about 210 miles.


Total Expenditure.
North District. £ s. d.
Declared roads, 298-60 Metalled and completed (about), 65 164,651 11 4
North-Eastern District.
Declared roads, 89-20 Metalled and completed (about), 44 142,469 19 9
South-Eastern District.
Declared roads, 178- Metalled and completed (about), 59 144,007 16 10
South District.
Declared roads, 173-20 Metalled and completed (about), 42 137,745 7 4
739-20 210 588,874 15 3
Miscellaneous, office expenses, and compensation for land 62,247 2 4
£651,121 17 7
Among the most important of our public undertakings are the
Adelaide Water-works. The city is supplied, on the gravitation
principle, with an unlimited quantity of water, at high pressure, on
the constant supply system. The works have been carried out by,
and at the expense of, the Colonial Government, at a cost of nearly
£250,000, raised under Acts of the Local Legislature passed in the
years 1856, 1858, and 1861. The source of supply is about ten
miles from the city in a north-easterly direction, where a stone
weir has been built across the River Torrens, at a cost of £5,000 ;
the water is thence conveyed about three miles through a twenty-
one inch main to a storage reservoir. The reservoir is situated at
Thorndon Park, distant seven miles from the city, and having a
water area of twenty-six acres. Its greatest depth when full is forty
feet, and it contains 150,000,000 gallons; sufficient for the supply
of the city for six months. The top water level is 150 feet above
the highest point of the city. The cost of the reservoir, with the
necessary buildings, &c., has been £58,000. The water is conveyed
from the reservoir through an eighteen-inch pipe to the boundary
of the city, from whence it diverges to North and South Adelaide
respectively, by fifteen and sixteen-inch mains. The street mains
vary in size from twelve inches to three inches in diameter. Up-
wards of forty-five miles of street mains have been laid in the city,
and twelve miles, in addition, will be laid as soon as received from
England. For the protection of the city against fire, nearly
] ,000 fire-plugs have been fixed. Eight thousand tons of cast-iron
pipes have been imported from England for this work, at a cost of
about £BO,OOO, in addition to <£*2o,ooo worth of machinery. The
number of vessels employed in bringing these materials to the
Colony was upwards of fifty. Since the introduction of water into
Adelaide, public baths have been established, and are much ap-
preciated.
Like the Railways, our Electric Telegraph is wholly in the hands
of the Local Government, as also are the lines in the neighbouring
Colonies. As a medium of communication, the electric telegraph is
eminently adapted to meet the circumstances and wants of a young
and sparsely-peopled Colony, with its small but rapidly-rising town-
ships scattered over a great area. New ones are continually springing


into existence, as the enterprise of man discovers new fields of in-
dustry, and these possessing necessarily, as compared with the Old
Country, indifferent means of intercourse, we may account for the
rapid extension of the telegraphic system in Australia.
This department is under the direction of Mr. Charles Todd,
M.8.M.5., late Superintendent of the Galvanic Department and
Assistant Astronomer at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. Mr.
Todd was sent out by the Home Government in 1855 ; and early in
the following year the first line was opened, connecting the port
and sea-coast with Adelaide. This line is about ten miles in length,
and has four wires as far as the port. Until recently, it was worked
on Henley’s magnetic system, employing two needles ; but last year
the needle instruments were displaced by Morse’s Recording Tele-
graph, using, however, permanent magnets in place of line voltaic
batteries. In April, 1857, another Tine was opened to Gawler
Town, twenty-six miles, worked also with magnetic electricity ; and
during the same year, communication was established with Goolwa,
a rising port near the mouth of the Murray, about fifty-five miles
from Adelaide—Morse’s system being then introduced, to conform
with the lines in Victoria.
In 1856, Mr. Todd, having laid before the Government a scheme
for connecting South Australia with Victoria and New South
Wales, was dispatched to Melbourne to make the necessary nego-
tiations, and returned overland to fix the route of the proposed
line. At this time, the only lines at work in Victoria were one to
Geelong and Port Phillip Heads, and another short line to Sandridge.
In New South Wales they had not yet introduced the telegraph.
Telegraphic communication was established between Adelaide and
Melbourne—about 700 miles—in July, 1858, and with Sydney in
November of the same year. It now reaches Brisbane, the capital
of the new Colony of Queensland. Since then, lines in South
Australia have been extended in the north as far as Kooringa,
the site of the celebrated Burra Burra Copper Mines—including
Kapunda, a mining town of considerable importance, and Clare.
Also to Mount Barker and Strathalbyn, from which place a
second intercolonial line to Victoria has been erected ; and lines
are being carried to Wallaroo and Yorke’s Peninsula, to Yankalilla,
and from Mount Gambier to Mac Donnell Bay, near to Cape
Northumberland.
The following statement will serve to show the extent to which
the telegraph was used during the year 1861, with about 1,000
miles of wire : —76,709 messages were transmitted, yielding a
revenue to South Australia of £7,382 9s. B d., and i? 3,792 6s. Id
to Victoria and New South Wales ; or a total of J? 11,174 15s. 9d.
There are nearly 4,000 miles of line in operation in Australia
at the present time, and the success which has attended the
recent attempts of Stuart and Burke to cross the Australian
Continent, induces the belief that, within a few years, we shall
have a line from Adelaide to the Northern Coast, in the neighbour-
G


hood of Cambridge Gulf. Indeed, Mr. Todd, some two years back,
submitted to the Government an estimate of the cost of such a
line, which he sets down at J?200,000.* He proposes that a
company should be invited to meet us with a cable, to connect
the north end of the land line with Java and the Indian telegraphs;
so that on the restoration of the Red Sea line, telegraphic com-
munication should be established between Australia and England.
The observatory is conjoined to the Telegraph Department, but
the astronomical portion has not yet been erected; meteorological
observations are, however, carried on at the Observatory, and also
at many of the Telegraph Stations, each of which furnishes a
daily weather report, including the height of the barometer, the
temperature of the air and evaporation, direction and force of
wind, amount of rain, &c.
The Penal Establishments of South Australia are not very
extensive ; but, fortunately, they appear to be fully adequate
to our requirements. Apart from police stations and local
“ lock-ups ” (the state of which would not, and I trust never will,
personally interest any of my readers), the Adelaide Gaol and the
Dry Creek Stockade more than supply our modest wants. The
Adelaide Gaol is constructed to contain 192 prisoners ; but the
average number confined there does not exceed that of those now
incarcerated—about eighty. The Stockade is designed to contain
300 prisoners: the number now confined there is seventy-four,
and the average during the last three years has been seventy-nine.
The Stockade is used for male prisoners only, and only for those
who have been regularly tried and sentenced for somewhat serious
offences. Female prisoners, debtors, men sentenced for short terms,
persons awaiting trial, and petty offenders committed by Magis-
trates, are all sent to the Adelaide Gaol. This building, which
stands on the southern bank of the Torrens, just below the city,
was one of the early buildings of the Colony, and, unfortunately
for the contractors who built it, was paid for by Colonel Gawler in
some of those dishonoured bills of which mention has elsewhere
been made. Though strong doubts were entertained at that time
as to whether we could grow wheat and wool, there seems to have
been a firm conviction that crops of criminals would flourish upon
South Australian ground, and provision was made accordingly.
The Gaol, I believe, is the only public building of those days which
has not required either to be rebuilt on a vastly augmented scale, or
to be enlarged beyond all recognition.*!* It is, indeed, a considerable
structure, and the papers “of the period ” crowed not a little over
its handsome proportions ; the writers being evidently elated at the
* Mr, Todd’s estimate for whole of the line, from Adelaide to Java, is £427,000.
t The erection of the Stockade may he cited against the purport of these remarks;
hut before the Stockade existed, our serious offenders were transported to Van
Diemen’s Land, and all are now retained here. The Stockade was erected, moreover,
not because the Gaol would not hold all the prisoners, but to facilitate classification,
and to permit the profitable employment of long-sentenced men on adjacent Govern-
ment stone-quarries.


evidence it afforded that South Australia was making rapid advances
among the solid elements of true civilization. Its ground plan is
easily described. Draw an octagon, and cut off three of its sides
with a straight line ; the five short sides and the one long one will
then give you approximately the block plan of the Gaol. The long
side is 120 yards long, and the others in proportion. In the
centre is the entrance, with guard-room and offices, and over it the
chapel and Governors residence. The irregular figure obtained as
I have described, is that of the outer wall, which is lofty, built of
stone, and topped with a pile of loose bricks, arranged as brick-
makers arrange their bricks in the field to let the air blow through
them before they go into the kiln. Any one attempting an escalade
would be almost sure to bring down a yard or two of these bricks
with a prodigious clatter. No one has ever yet escaped over that
wall. Inside the outer wall, at the distance of ten yards or so, is a
second wall, similar in construction but of less height, and between
the two walls a sentry keeps watch at night. The inner wall is that
of the various ward-yards, which are divided by other walls radiating
from a small yard behind the Governor’s house to the angles of the
figure described. Each yard has its own set of sleeping cells and
eating-room. Thus there are five wards, which are now used:—
1. For women of confirmed bad character. 2. For other women
sentenced for short terms or awaiting trial. 3. For debtors.
4. For male prisoners awaiting trial; and 5. For male prisoners
undergoing their sentences. There are only eight officers in the
Gaol, including the Governor and a female gaoler. At night it is
found sufficient to have two men on guard at a time ; one in the
little central yard, from which the dividing walls radiate, and the
other in the space between the outer and inner wall. No one has
ever escaped from the Gaol, though there have been some escapes
from working parties outside. The strong horticultural taste of
South Australia shows itself in the approach to the Gaol, which is
by a broad road skirted by several acres of carefully-kept garden,
stocked with many trees both for fruit and ornament. These are, of
course, tended by working parties of prisoners ; and lately, the
almost incongruous addition to a gaol, of a vineyard, two or three
acres in extent, has been made. Whether it is hoped that South
Australia will reach so happy a state that even every malefactor
shall sit under his own vine and fig-tree I know not ; but in the
meantime, at all events, a very ugly little piece of the Park Lands
has been made ornamental, and useful work has been found for the
prisoners. I recently paid an unexpected visit to the Gaol for the
purpose of this account, and the place seemed very clean, well con-
ducted, and orderly. The only person in the hospital was a young
man who, though convicted of forgery, had been sent to the Gaol
instead of the Stockade, as he was at the time of his conviction in
such bad health that it was feared the severer discipline of the
latter establishment might have been fatal to him.
The Stockade is distant from Adelaide about seven miles, and


stands on the edge of a deep dry creek, the banks of which afford
almost inexhaustible quarries of hard stone, which, when got out
and broken, makes admirable road metal; and which, in the getting
out and breaking, provides abundantly the “ hard labour” to which
the majority of prisoners in the Stockade are sentenced. The main
building is a solid three-floored edifice of cut stone, divided into
137 cells, each prisoner having a separate cell. The secondary
buildings consist of Governor’s house, chapel, kitchen, wash-house,
solitary cells, &c., &c. An immense tank underlying the principal
yard contains a superabundant supply of fine rain water collected
from the various roofs. The prisoners, many of them in chains,
work in the quarries during the day in well-guarded parties. The
guards are armed with loaded rifles, the contents of which are
promptly discharged at any prisoner attempting to transgress the
prescribed bounds. A sergeant’s guard of soldiers is quartered in
an adjacent barrack. Each prisoner is locked up at night in his
own cell, and to his own cell he carries his rations, and there eats
his solitary meals. The dietary scale includes abundance of wheaten
bread and fresh meat, and would be even perniciously good in
any community where contrasts were likely to be drawn between
ample feeding within and scanty fare without prison walls. Here,
let it be thankfully stated, there is no danger of making imprison-
ment attractive from that cause.
In each of the floors of cells there is a gong in the corridor, and
this gong each prisoner can strike with a wire in his own cell in
-case of sickness. By pulling the wire, a small plate of iron is dis-
engaged and falls outwards, so as to indicate the cell from which
the summons comes; but punishment follows the use of this
apparatus upon insufficient grounds. Breaking up a yard of road
metal to a two-inch gauge is the allotted day’s task of each prisoner.
If he does less, unless from clear physical incapacity, he is punished:
if he does more, the balance is placed to his credit in reduction of
his sentence. This privilege does not extend to men sentenced for
life, nor to those convicted more than once; and there are some
other exceptional cases provided for. Many of the men in the
Stockade are there for very long terms—twenty years and upwards
—or for life. The long-drawn, hopeless isolation and monotony
of such sentences it is horrible to reflect on. Among the prisoners
for life that I saw, a month since, when I visited the place, was an
unfortunate aborigine, whose sentence, very likely, it would be un-
wise to abridge, but who might be fairly pitied for all that. His
original crime had been an assault upon a girl, of a kind which, in
all civilized communities, is properly visited with very heavy
punishment, but which, probably, did little violence to the con-
science of one of a race of savages accustomed to conduct their
courtships by knocking down and carrying off the women of inimical
tribes. When being arrested, he contrived to get hold of the police
trooper’s sword, and so to slash and stab him that, after some years,
the man died of the indirect consequences of his wounds. The


black fellow has now been in the Stockade for seven years; and
although he seemed healthy enough, the Governor said he was not
likely to live many years longer, few among the aborigines ever
surviving even such prolonged confinement. There is a use in his
incarceration till death, however, although at the first glance it
seems a purposeless cruelty. From time to time other aborigines
are sent to the Stockade for shorter terms, and carry back among
their fellow-countrymen the story of “Billy’s” fate, and what it
was that led to it.
The special punishments of the Stockade are solitary confinement
and flogging. For breaches of prison discipline the Governor, or
Superintendent, can inflict three days’ solitary confinement ; and a
Court., consisting of the Visiting Magistrate and two other Magis-
trates, can order 150 lashes, and solitary confinement for 30 days.
The Stockade quarries are connected with the Northern Railway
by a branch line which runs right into them, and along which the
broken stone is conveyed away. From the top of the quarries
there is a wide view of the Adelaide plains to the northward; and
it must be sad enough, though it may be right enough, for the
prisoners to see the trains go steaming away into the country, while
they remain for years and years confined to their dismal area of
toil and punishment.
The principal Institutions in Adelaide for the relief of infirmity
and distress, are the Hospital, the Lunatic Asylum, and the Des-
titute Asylum.
The Hospital is a large building in the Italian style. It was
designed by Mr. E. A. Hamilton. Only the centre and one wing
have been completed, and more than suffice for our present wants,
except that the erection of two or three small additional wards for
the reception of particular classes of cases, is recommended by the
Colonial Surgeon. The cost of the building, up to the present
time, has been £23,000.
The Hospital stands on a pleasant and moderately-elevated spot
just outside South Adelaide, at its north-east angle. The grounds
belonging to it are many acres in extent, and it commands a fine
view- of the hills. It contains, besides offices and residence for the
house surgeon and the dispenser, eight large wards, a theatre and
operating-room, dispensary, waiting, consulting, and board-rooms,
kitchen, w T ash-houses, with hot air drying-room, bath-rooms, &c. &c.
It is, indeed, a very efficient building, and one thoroughly creditable
to the Colony. It has accommodation for 172 patients, but there
are seldom more than 100 inmates. It is entirely supported out of
the public revenue, voluntary contributions not being sought. The
annual expense to the State is something under £4,000 a year.
There is no particular disease incident to the Colony, and the
appearance of the wards differs in no way from what may be seen
in ordinary English hospitals. The total number of patients ad-
mitted during 1860 was 733; during 1861 the number was 713.
Not far from the Hospital is the Lunatic Asylum ; the two build


ings being separated by the Botanical Gardens, of which I give a
description in another page. The building is in the Elizabethan
style, and cost about £B,OOO. Though not very strikingly defective
in its arrangements, it is not so well suited to its purpose as is the
Hospital. Though not oppressively gloomy, the great care taken by
modern architects to give the utmost possible lightness and cheer-
fulness to such buildings has not been observed. In some of the
corridors the windows are so high from the ground that it is difficult
to see out of them ; and little art has been employed in any part
of the building to disguise the fact of its being a place of confinement.
Its system of management seems quite in accordance with modem
and enlightened views of the management of the insane, except that
there appeared to be a lack of means of recreation and employment.
Force is entirely disused, there not being a single strait-jacket or
similar relic of barbarity in the place. A large number of the
lunatics work in a vineyard, orangery, and garden of about ten acres
in extent, which has recently been very usefully added to the estab-
lishment ; and the Superintendent assured me that, though the
lunatics here work with axes, spades, pickaxes, and other tools,
which half a century ago any one would himself have been thought
mad to put into a madman’s hands, no accident or attempted
violence has resulted. When I visited the establishment the dinner
hour was approaching; and in most of the wards the tables were
laid out with knives and forks, and no apprehension of ill conse-
quences appeared to be entertained. There was less noise and fewer
-outward manifestations of insanity than in other asylums that
I have visited elsewhere ; and, indeed, in one or two cases the
lunatics addressed me in such rational style to complain of the hard-
ship of being confined when in full possession of their faculties, that
it was only by recollecting the total absence of all motive for con-
fining people unnecessarily long in a public asylum, that I was able
to overcome the impression that injustice was being done. Fewer
people, than at other asylums I have visited, came forward with wild,
incoherent stories and fancies; though, of course, such cases were
not quite wanting. One man, who was drawing water from a tap,
said something about his being identical with Sir R. G. Macdonnell
(the Governor of the Colony), but he was not very complimentary
to his partner in this viceregal duality, who, he said, had lately
been “at Gawler Town, making a great fool of himself.” I asked
how he knew this, when he gravely answered me, that all Sir Richard
thought, and said, and did, “came out through that tap.” I sug-
gested that it must be mesmerism; but he said, “ No, it was elec-
tricity, and that electricity was the life of a man.”
The Lunatic Asylum is not large enough for the requirements of
the place. On the occasion of my visit there were 171 patients,
and the Colonial Surgeon said that they had been obliged to put
some of them to sleep in the corridors, although in the majority of
the cells there were two beds, and they had also made the experi-
ment of a dormitory with eight or ten beds in it.


The Destitute Asylum was not specially built for its present
purpose, but consists of several buildings which have been pressed
into the service. It is rather an infirmary than a place for the
relief of destitution. Indeed, no provision whatever exists in the
Colony, it appears, for affording relief to able-bodied destitute
males. That no such provision is imperatively needed speaks much
for the general prosperity of South Australia ; but, I should think,
there must be exceptional cases which ought to be provided for.
The Secretary to the Destitute Board, who told me that there was
no such provision, said he supposed, if there were such cases, they
were met by private charity. It may be so; but, setting other
considerations aside, it opens a door to imposture if it is possible
for a man to say to you, “ I have not been able to get any work
these ‘x? days, and I and my family are starving,” and if it be
impossible for you to answer, “ Go to such and such a place, then,
and you will be relieved.” Upon the basis of such a state of things,
a skilful professional mendicant ought in these Colonies to be able
after a few years to retire from business, and “ become respectable
and keep a gig.” It appears to me that the general prosperity of
the place is sufficient to make it safe to provide appointed places
where all applicants could obtain coarse food and rough shelter on
application. Four or five years since I passed a household law
that, as a rule, a meal was never to be refused, and money never to
be given, to beggars ; and it has not occurred (speaking at a rough
guess) once in a month that a beggar has made his appearance. A
few weeks ago, indeed, I was startled out of a shilling in Grenfell-
street, by a woman who told me the piteous tale that she wanted to
go to Magill (about four miles off), and required that sum to pay
for an omnibus ! I was not complimentary to myself afterwards for
having yielded to that petition, which was very likely repeated with
success a score of times. But, really, a lady in such genteel distress
appealed rather to one’s gallantry than one’s charity; and what was
to be done ?
To return, however, to the Destitute Asylum. The provision
there is for aged, and infirm, and chronically diseased and disabled
men, and for deserted women in distress, and for deserted and orphan
children. There is a school for the latter, that had just turned out
its scholars as I entered the place, and they were very busy munching
peaches and nectarines! It seems that two or three good folks in
the neighbourhood of Adelaide send the surplus of their gardens to
the Destitute Asylum; one of those pleasant acts in which the
proverbial coldness of charity is dispersed by the warm beams of
kindliness and good nature. I have elsewhere stated that many
kinds of fruit are in excessive abundance here; peaches going to
the pigs by the bushel every day during the peach season, even
within a few miles of Adelaide.
The total number of persons, men, women, and children, receiving
relief from the Destitute Board, at the close of last year, was—


Indoor 107
Outdoor 188
In the country 181
Total 476
The average number of all kinds on the books, during the past half-
year, the Secretary informed me, was 576.
One of the most creditable buildings in Adelaide is that occupied
by the South Australian Institute. It stands on a good site, fronting
North-terrace, and was erected at a cost of £7,000. The Institute
itself is the result of many changes and amalgamations; but the
oldest of the societies in connection with it was founded in London
two years before the settlement of the Colony. The South Australian
Literary and Scientific Institution was established at a meeting held
in London, on the 29th of August, 1834; Lieut.-Col. Napier (of
Scinde renown) being the President. A committee of nine gentle-
men was appointed, and of these six afterwards emigrated to this
Colony. The objects contemplated were those common to all such
societies, and a modest library of 117 volumes was selected to start
with, and in due time reached Adelaide much damaged by sea
water. This small stock of books was soon increased by private
donations; but when financial troubles beset the Colony, in Col.
Gawler’s reign, the Institute became comatose till 1844. when a
“ subscription library,” founded on ordinary book-club principles,
was organized, and was subsequently associated with it, but made
no great progress for some years. Eventually, in the year 1856, an
Act, intituled “ An Act to establish and incorporate an Institution,
to be called the South Australian Institute,” passed the Legislative
Council, and received the assent of the Governor of the Province.
This Act brought into existence a Board of Governors, to manage
the new Institute, consisting of six members, of whom three were
to be appointed by the Governor, and the remaining three to be
elected by various societies which had sprung up in the meantime,
and which it was proposed should be incorporated with the Institute.
It was also provided that a sum of not less than £SOO should be
placed on the Estimates annually, as a grant in aid of the Institute.
The machinery so provided having been brought into operation, a
meeting of the members of the South Australian Library and
Mechanics’ Institute was held, September 5, 1856, at which a
resolution was passed, declaring the said society to be dissolved.
Under the rules of the society, the effect of this step was, that the
books and other property of the society passed into the possession
of the Colonial Secretary, the Chief Justice, and the Colonial
Chaplain, as trustees. As previously arranged, these trustees sub-
sequently transferred the said property to the Board of Governors
of the South Australian Institute, who thereupon took steps to
make it available for the use of the public, continuing for some
years to retain the rooms occupied by the former society. Under
the new dispensation, the public enjoy the power of using the
reading-room, including the use of the library, subject only to a


discretionary power vested in the Board of Governors, for the
purpose of enabling them to exclude persons of bad character. A
subscription of ss. per quarter, or 20s. per annum, entitles the sub-
scriber to take out from the library two works at once, also to free
admission for himself and a lady to the quarterly soirees, and to
free admission to lectures, &c.
A suitable amount having been voted by Parliament, it was
determined to erect the present Institute building. This was com-
menced in the year 1859, and opened in January, 1861. It contains
on the ground floor a reading-room, 54ft. by 26ft.; library, 36ft. by
26ft.; entrance-hall, board-room, and coffee-room. On the first
floor are three rooms, intended for class-rooms and for the meetings
of societies. The first floor of the building also contains a gallery,
about 84ft. by 15ft., lighted from above, part of which is appro-
priated to the School of Design, the remainder is fitted up as a,
museum. The north side of the building is left unfinished, in
prospect of a lecture-room, &c., being added at some future time.
The Adelaide Philosophical Society and the South Australian
Society of Arts have been incorporated with the Institute. Each
of these societies, as well as the body of subscribers to the library,
enjoys the power of electing one of the Governors of the Institute.
The museum-rooms have been partially fitted up with cases, and
a gentleman appointed as curator. This branch of the Institute,
however, can only be regarded at present as being in a state of
infancy.
By the report read at the annual meeting, held October 14,1861,
it appeared that the
Total number of volumes in libraiy was 10,691
Total number of subscribers 743
Number of persons who have made application to be allowed to
use the reading-room during past year 342
Total ditto since establishment of Institute, October, 1856 ~ 3,123
The reading-room is supplied with all the best English magazines
and reviews, literary and scientific; also with a selection of news-
papers, English and Colonial.
Among the principal public buildings in the Colony, mention
should be made of the following :
Government House, the residence of her Majesty’s Representative,
is situated on the North Park Lands of South Adelaide, and the
comer of the City Bridge-road, and facing North-terrace. It was
commenced in the early years of the Colony, under the supervision
of Mr. G. S. Kingston, hy whom it was designed. The old building
being found inconveniently small for public entertainments, in the
year 1856 it was considerably enlarged, and completed in accordance,
as nearly as possible, with the intention of the designer. The style
is Italian. The addition to the building cost £IO,OOO. The grounds
are entered by a large gateway and lodge, or guard-house, where
sentinels are constantly on duty.
The Government Offices are built on the north-east corner acre
of Victoria-square and King William-street, the site of the old


buildings, which have been partially replaced by a new block of
offices in the Italian style, chiefly fronting King William-street,
but designed by Mr. E. A. Hamilton, at that time Colonial Archi-
tect, to be ultimately continued along the south side facing the
square, each front having a centre building and a right and left
wing. The new Government Offices were commenced in 1857, and
were so far completed early in 1861; a portion of the old offices
still standing. The total cost has been about £13,000.
The Parliament Houses are situated on the North-terrace, not far
from Government House and adjacent to the Railway Terminus.
The style is that of James I. ; the building was designed by and
erected under Mr. Bennett Haysinlßss,andcostupwards of £15,000.
The Supreme Court, on the south side of Victoria-square, is a
handsome building, and cost about £IO,OOO in its erection. The
portico is Grecian Doric, and the flanks Italian. It was built in 1849.
The Post Office, Local Court House, and Police Station, opposite
to the Government Offices, were completed in 1850. These
buildings are Grecian in style, with clock-tower in Italian, and cost
about £7,000.
The growth of its correspondence is always, to a considerable
extent, indicative of the progress of a community; and I therefore
avail myself of a report recently issued by Captain Watts, on the
occasion of his retiring from the office of Postmaster-General, which
he had filled for upwards of twenty years. This report details the
progress of the Post Office, year by year, from 1836 (when the
Colonial Storekeeper did all the work of the Post Office Department
himself, as a sort of overtime job, for which he received a salary of
£3O per annum) to 1860, when the Post Office Revenue reached
£14,582. I would gladly make more copious extracts from Captain
Watts’s report, but the restrictions of space compel me to content
myself with the following table, the column for 1861 having been
added by Captain Watts’s successor, Mr. Lewis :
Number of Post Offices in the Colony
Number of Persons employed
Length in miles of mail routes, inclusive of Port \
Lincoln S
Number of overland mails dispatched from 1
General Post Office every week f
Number of letters passing through the post
Number of newspapers passing through the post
Revenue
1840.
1860.
1861.
6
9
278
7
41,103
60,101
£232 4s. 5d.
146
177
1,837
663
1,360,3411
1,052,077 /
£14,5S2 8s. 9d.
160
193
2,295*
727
Not completed.
£16,496 2s. 4d.
The Railway Terminus was erected under Mr. B. H. Babbage, in
1854, at that time engineer of the line. The style of the structure
is Italian, and cost about £7,000.
The Armoury, Police Barracks, &c., were built from a design of
Mr. Bennett Hays, in the Tudor style, at a cost of £12,000.
The new Custom House, Court House, and Police Station at Port
Adelaide constitute an extensive range of buildings, designed by
Mr. E. A. Hamilton, in the Italian st}de, and were built in 1861,
costing upwards of £7,000.
* Number of miles travelled by tbe mails in the year 1861, 478,426.


The Adelaide Observatory is erected on the Park Lands near
West-terrace. The residence only is completed at present. The
style is Italian ; was built in 1860, and cost about £2,500.
Telegraph Stations are erected in various parts of the Colony,
wherever the telegraph lines have been conveyed. They are gene-
rally commodious buildings, in the Italian style, and have cost from
£/00 to £l,OOO. A Head Station in Adelaide is in contemplation.
The Court Houses and Police Stations dispersed over the Colony
are generally unpretending buildings in various styles, costing about
£7OO or £BOO.
The Botanical Garden contains about forty acres of undulating
ground, very prettily laid out for purposes both of ornament and
classification. It is at the north-east corner of the town, and be-
tween the Hospital and Lunatic Asylum, and commands a fine view
of the hills. It was commenced in 1855—the previous botanical
garden having been a very small place on the banks of the Torrens
above Government House. The new gardens are laid out in various
departments, for a scientific arrangement of plants, pleasure grounds,
an arboretum, &c., &c. There is a good house for the director,
three propagating and green-houses, and a handsome domed con-
servatory. Since water has been brought into the town, the beauty
of the place has been greatly increased by the introduction of foun-
tains and ponds, now well stocked with various kinds of waterfowl.
There are also several aviaries and cages, and enclosures for animals
—the gardens being zoological, as well as botanical, at present.
The collection, except of native animals, is as yet small, but receives
occasional accessions. There are more than three thousand species
of plants represented in the Botanical Garden, and this number is
continually increasing. The garden is already rich in succulents,
ferns, florists’ flowers, and bulbs. The garden is supported by an
annual grant, and the public are admitted every day during day-
light, except on Saturdays and Sundays, when the hours are more
restricted. It was established by an Act of the Legislature, and is
controlled by a board of governors, certain members being ex
officio, and others appointed by the Executive.
CHAPTER X.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
In another chapter allusion has been made to the facilities
which a new community possesses for effecting valuable legal re-
forms, which are more difficult to bring about amid the vested
interests and complexities of old States. The “ Real Property Act,”
introduced by Mr. Torrens, who now administers it as Registrar-
General, is the most comprehensive attempt at this kind of advanced
legislation that has yet been made in the Colony; and in spite of the
most violent judicial and professional opposition, its essential prin


ciples, which have now been applied here for some years, are being
gradually adopted in the neighbouring colonies. The resistance
which the measure has met with on the part of those either directly
pecuniarily interested, or interested by esprit de corps, or by a
reluctance to see an assiduously-acquired system of occult lore
become obsolete and valueless, has at least had the advantage of
bringing out the defects of the new law and expediting its im-
provement. The law is, no doubt, still imperfect; but that its
essential principles will remain in force here and in the other
colonies, appears now tolerably certain. Wishing to give as reliable
an epitome of the Real Property Act as I could, I applied to Mr.
Torrens for information, and with his customary readiness to
afford information as to the important cause to which he has
devoted himself, he has supplied the following account :
The system under which “ Land ” is transferred, charged, and
otherwise dealt with in South Australia, claims attention as well
by its intrinsic importance as because of the interest which the
question is now exciting, both in the mother country and the
colonies.
Unfortunately, the first settlers brought out with them the
English law and practice of conveyancing, with all its fictions,
complications, and circuities, devised of old for evading the tyrannical
exactions imposed under feudal tenures. This law and practice,
applied to the clear titles and free tenures by Crown grant which
obtained in the Colony,, induced upon them, in the short space of
twenty years, the same involvements, uncertainties, and expenses
which burden titles in the mother country.
In a Colony of yeomen, proprietors of the soil they cultivate, and
where land, instead of being monopolized by the wealthy, is the
ordinary possession of the masses, this was felt to be intolerable ;
and, accordingly, in the year 1856, a project for assimilating the
mode of dealing with property in land to that which regulates
dealings in shipping and stock was devised. This project became
law in July, 1858. It has since been matured and tested by the
experience of nearly four years, and has been found effectual for
every requirement.
It needs but that the case be plainly stated in order to bring
conviction to every mind that the evils to which landowners are
subjected, under the old law, have a common origin in the retro-
spective and dependent character of titles.
Such a title is a chain no stronger than its weakest link, and each
transaction, by adding a fresh link, increases at once the complexity
and the risk that some informality or error may invalidate the
entire chain.
The ancestral line of parchments must be perused by the gentle-
men of the long robe, and a fresh genealogical tree, under the name
of an abstract, drawn at full length from the root to the last leaf
of its parchment foliage every time that a new title-link is born into
the family.
This evil is cumulative ; and as the services of gentlemen specially


educated for tlie peculiar intricacies of this work are indispensable,
its cost is proportionately great.
From this it follows that any system, to be effective, for the
reform of the law of Real Property, must commence by removing
the past accumulations, and then establish a method under which
future dealings will not induce fresh accumulations.
This is effected in South Australia by substituting “Title by
Registration ” for “ Title by Deed,” and applying the “ Stock-book
system ” to dealings in real property.
All lands alienated from the Crown subsequent to this Act are
declared to be under its provisions. The earlier titles are brought
under its provisions upon the voluntary application of the pro-
prietors, who, together with tlieir applications, are required to de-
posit the deeds and other evidences of ownership.
These are referred for examination to two conveyancing so-
licitors, specially retained by the Crown, who are prohibited from
professional practice. The solicitors are required to report inde-
pendently of each other upon every title, and these reports are
submitted to a board styled “ The Lands Titles Commissioners,”
whose province it is, under advice of the solicitors, to reject applica-
tions altogether, or to determine to what extent, and during what
length of time, the claim of the applicant to be recognised as owner
of the freehold shall be notified and advertised. Notices, with
plans of the land which is the subject of application, are served
through the post upon the persons in possession, and upon the
occupiers and proprietors of contiguous lands, and are also ex-
hibited in the offices of the District Corporations and Councils, at
the Local Courts, General Post Office, Supreme Court, and other
public places. These claims are also advertised three times at
least in daily and weekly papers. The period to elapse after ad-
vertisement may be varied, at the discretion of the Commissioners,
from one month to two years, but is usually two months. If,
within the period so limited, any adverse claim is lodged, the case
is referred for decision to the Supreme Court; and the land cannot
be brought under the Act until final judgment be had, or the
adverse claim is withdrawn. Where no question is raised within the
period limited, the land is brought under the Act, and a certificate
issued to the applicant, vesting him with title indefeasible in the
fee simple, or as tenant for life, as the case may be. In the case of
tenants for life, the persons entitled in reversion and remainder
must join in the application, and their rights are notified on the
certificate of title granted to the tenant for life in possession.
All grants from the Crown, and certificates of title representing
the freehold, are issued in duplicate. One original is delivered to
the proprietor, the other is bound up in “The Register Book.”
Each grant or certificate constitutes a separate folium of this book,
on which are recorded memorials of all lesser estates, interests, or
dealings, existing at the time or subsequently created, until the
ownership of the freehold is changed by transfer, insolvency, will,
or intestacy. The duplicate grant or certificate in the hands of


the proprietor bears the same memorials, and upon change of
ownership through any of the above events it must be delivered up
to be cancelled. The duplicate in the register is at the same time
cancelled, and a fresh certificate is executed to the new proprietor,
constituting a fresh folium of the register, on which are brought
forward the memorials of all lesser estates or interests, leases or
charges, then remaining current affecting the land.
Transfers, leases, charges, whether of the fee or freehold, or of
any less estate or interest, are created by entering memorial of the
transaction on the folium of the register constituted by the grant
or certificate of the land which is the subject of the dealing.
Simple forms, with instructions and examples for the guidance of
persons dealing, and adapted to each description of transaction, are
supplied at the Registry Office.
These, when filled up, must be executed in duplicate, witnessed,
and the identity of the parties proved before a Justice of the Peace,
or certified to the satisfaction of the Registrar by a solicitor or
licensed broker.
Upon memorial of any instrument so executed and attested being
entered in the register, a certificate of the day and hour when such
entry was made, stating the volume and folium of the register
where it may be found, is endorsed, both upon the original and du-
plicate, under the hand and seal of the Registrar. All instruments
thus registered are numbered in consecutive series ; one original is
delivered to the proprietor, the other is filed in the registry strong-
room. Instruments when executed are merely personal contracts
between the parties, upon which action for damages may be raised,
but they do not bind the land. The entry on the folium of the
register alone passes the property, creates the charge or lesser
estate, discharges or transfers it. The certificates of registration,
endorsed on instruments, render them conclusive evidence in all
courts of law or equity, unless fraud be proved.
Upon transfer of the freehold in part only of the land included
in a grant or certificate, that grant or certificate is surrendered,
cancelled, and fresh certificates issued, the one to the proprietor,
for the portion retained, the other to the transferee, for the portion
transferred.
Transfers of leases and charges, surrenders of leases, and acquit-
tances of charges, are endorsed on the original instruments, which,
in the two last-named cases, must be surrendered to the Registrar
to be cancelled.
Under this method no accumulation of instruments (the fatal
objection against all other systems of registration) can take place,
as each estate or interest is represented so long as it exists by one
instrument only. Each proprietor, whatever may be his estate or
interest, holds in his own custody one original of the instrument,
which affords conclusive evidence of his title in all courts of law and
equity. The other original is bound up in the register, or deposited
in the registry strong-room, available for all purposes in the event
of loss or destruction of the first; an arrangement which likewise


affords something like guarantee against injury through the fraudu-
lent alteration of instruments in the hands of interested parties.
Search and investigation of title are unnecessary, as each instru-
ment discloses the nature of the property held by the proprietor,
with all that a party dealing can require to know, as the title of a
purchaser or mortgagee bona fide is declared indefeasible.
A percentage of one halfpenny in the pound, on the value, is
levied on the first bringing of land under the provisions of the Act,
and also upon the transmission of fee simple estate by will or in-
testacy, to constitute an assurance fund, out of which compensation
may be awarded in the event of any rightful proprietor or heir
being deprived through the indefeasibility given to certificates of
title and registered dealings. This fund is guaranteed by the
general revenue of the Colony ; but no claim has as yet been raised
against it, although over 2,700 separate estates have been brought
under the Act.
No notice of trusts can be entered on the register; but a pro-
prietor desiring to settle his estate through the instrumentality of
trustees, may deposit in the registry, for safe custody and reference,
any instrument declaratory of trusts executed by the trustees to
whom he transfers the property, and by caveat prohibit the regis-
tration of any dealing, except in accordance therewith or with the
sanction of the Supreme Court. He may also direct the words “no
survivorship” to be entered on the certificate of title ; the effect of
which will be that without the sanction of the Supreme Court no
dealing with the property can take place until any vacancy, occa-
sioned by death or otherwise, in the original number of trustees has
been filled up. Persons beneficially interested in any settled estate
may, in like manner, by caveat, bar all dealing therewith until
fourteen days’ notice thereof has been served at an address given in
such caveat.
These provisions are found to afford ample security. Any pro-
prietor desiring to settle his estate without resorting to the in-
strumentality of trustees, may reduce his own interest to that of a
tenant for life, by registering an instrument of transfer appointing
reversioners and remaindermen, who shall inherit such estates, and
in such order of succession as he may direct.
The ancient fictions of transferring the legal estate upon mort-
gage is abolished, and a simple hypothecation or charge substituted;
but no other interference with the general law, as between mort-
gagor and mortgagee, landlord and tenant, or as relating to trans-
mission through insolvency, will, or inheritance, is attempted.
These latter events, as also the marriage of female proprietors, are
simply required to be authenticated in a prescribed manner to the
Kegistrar, in order that he may know whom to recognise as
authorized to deal with the property.
The system has been in operation over three and a-half years,
and has given entire satisfaction to the landowners.
At the close of 1861, the number of applications for titles under
the new system was 2,747 ; the value of the land subjected to it


was £1, 030,532; the sum secured thereon by mortgage was
£471,183 145.; and the total number of transactions completed
was 5,776.
The procedure is so simple and ready of accomplishment, that
parties dealing for the most part transact their own business, and
brokers are licensed to assist the uneducated. The services of the
professional conveyancer are not, however, superseded; they are
still called in when wills, declarations of trusts, settlements, and
leases with unusual covenants, have to be drawn; and such of
them as are content to accept a remuneration proportioned to the
diminished labour and responsibility, are by many preferentially
employed. The cost of transferring freehold estate, including fresh
certificate of title, is thirty shillings. The cost of leasing, or of
charging land as security for a sum of money or annuity, is ten
shillings. The cost of transferring or surrendering a lease, or of
transferring or acquitting a charge, is five shillings ; and the pro-
ceeding in ordinary cases may be completed within half an hour.
In addition to the saving of some ninety per cent, in the cost of
conveyancing, the colonists of South Australia derive important
benefits from this measure.
]. In the prevention of Chancery suits and cases on the title, by
cutting off the retrospective or derivative character of the title
upon each transfer or transmission; so that each freeholder is in
the same position as a grantee direct from the Crown.
2. By the substitution of simple and inexpensive procedure in
ejectment and foreclosure, rendered possible through the simpli-
fication of title.
3. By the extraordinary facility and security with which land,
under this system, is made the basis of credit, whether by
registered charge or equitable loan, on deposit of the one instrument
which represents the title.
4. And chiefly by restoring to its intrinsic value a large amount
of property depreciated or unmarketable through defective evidence
or technical imperfection in title.
Mr. J. S. Mill, the eminent political economist, has remarked
that “to make land as easily transferable as stock would be one
of the greatest improvements which could be bestowed upon the
country.” The “ Society for Promoting the Amendment of Law,”
under the presidency of the venerable Lord Brougham, in one of
their reports affirm that “It has been estimated by persons of
experience and authority in such matters, that a cheap, simple,
expeditious, and accurate system of transfer of land, would add
four or five years’ purchase (some will say ten) to the marketable
value of land.”
This is no longer a problem for solution in South Australia; it
is a realized fact.


CATALOGUE OF ARTICLES,
THE
PRODUCE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
EXHIBITED IN THE
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN COURT
OF THE
GREAT EXHIBITION BUILDING,
1862.
*** The person in charge of this Court, Mr. Gould, will point out any article inquired for,
and give full information in relation to all articles exhibited.
MINES AND MINERALS.
Cornwall Copper Mine.
Large block of ore weighing six tons,
composed of rich grey oxide and
gossan.
Copper Ores from the Great Walla-
roo Copper Mines, Yorke’s Penin-
sula, South Australia, the property
of Captain Hughes and Partners.
Green carbonate. Irony copper ore
(liver cOpper ofe). Sub-oxide of cop-
per (horseflesh ore). Copper glance
(vitreous copper ore). Grey and red
oxide. Hard grey ore (fahlerz).
Silver-grey ore, with green carbo-
nate of copper. Silver-grey ore.
Green carbonate of copper. Black
ore. Copper pyrites (peacock cop-
per ore).
Copper Ore from the Burra Burra
Mines, South Australia.
1. Sulphuret of copper, in matrix of
limestone, from a depth of 60
fathoms, yielding from 30 to 50
per cent, of metal. 2. Red oxide of
copper, associated with hydrated
oxide of iron. 3,4, 5,6, 7. Red
oxide of copper, in silicious matrix.
8,9, 10. Red oxide of copper in ma-
trix of oxide of iron, similar to No. 2,
but Hot so rich in copper. 11, 12, 13.
Green carbonate of copper, With man-
ganese. 14. Dressed ore, blue and
green carbonates of copper. 15.
Dressed ore, green carbonate of cop-
per, malachite. 18. Sulphuret of cop-
per, associated with iron, from the
lowest workings of the mine, a depth
of 60 fathoms, yielding 50 per cent,
of copper. 19. Green carbonate of cop-
per, malachite, in silicious matrix.
20. Green carbonate of copper, in
steatitic matrix.
Copper Ore prom the Karkulto Mine,
the property of the Burra Burra
Company, 86 miles from Adelaide,
South Australia.
16, 17. Carbonate of copper, in matrix
of oxide of iron more or less car-
bonated, from a depth of 25 fathoms.
21. White carbonate of iron, contain-
ing patches of yellow and peacock
ores of copper.
The Duryea Copper Mine.
1. Gossan. 2. Quartz, found occa


sionally in the lode. 3. Green car-
bonate of copper and gossan 4. Iron
pyrites or mundic. 5. Black oxide
of copper.
RocJc Specimens.
6. Blende, found in connection with
mica slate. 7. Mica slate, found in
connection with blende. 8. Elvan
or porphyry.
Wirrawilka Copper Mine.
Large block of copper ore, of high per
centage, upwards of 30 per cent.
Cumberland Copper Mine.
Large blocks of rich ore, from 30 to 40
per cent.; also samples of galena,
or lead ore, found in the same lode.
Wheal Ellen Silver-Lead Mine.
Carbonate of lead, and galena; also a
pig of lead, produce of the smelting
works at the mine.
Samples of red oxide of copper found
in the same mine.
Mount Rose Copper Mine.
Large block of fine copper ore, of rich
per centage.
Worthing Copper Mine.
Samples of ore and regulus from the
smelting works at the mine.
Preaminna Copper Mine.
Samples of oxide of copper.
Great Northern Copper Mine.
Large block of rich red oxide of cop-
per, of high per centage.
English and Australian Copper
Company.
Samples of fine copper, in cake and
ingot, from their smelting works at
Kooringa and Port Adelaide.
Kapunda Copper Mine.
These ores comprise almost every
variety—as yellow ore, or pyrites;
blue and green carbonates; muriates;
grey and black sulphurets ; oxides ;
bell metal and peacock ores; and.
native or malleable copper. The per
centage also varies much, from 66
per cent, downwards.
Kapunda Smelting Works.
Samples of fine copper, in cake and
ingots.
Kirwan Copper Mine.
Large collection of rich samples of
various descriptions of copper ores.
Spring Creek Copper Mine.
Fine samples of rich red and grey
oxides of copper, of high per
centage.
Aclare Silver-Lead Mine.
Collection of various varieties of car-
bonates of lead and galena. Exhi-
bited by Mr. Singleton.
Kodda’s Patent Process for Smelting
Copper Ores.
One case of samples, showing the
various stages of the process.
LIST OP SOUTH AUSTRALIAN WINES EXHIBITED.
Name of Grower.
Vineyard.
Grape.
Vintage.
Henry Evans
99
Shiraz
1857
»
Riesling
Muscatella
1857
1860
»
1860
}> *•••••
Joseph. Gilbert
Pewsey Yale
Yerdeilho
1852
»
99 ......
Riesling .........
1852
1854
99
William Green ....
Pinean
1858
Edward Hector ....
Patrick Auld
G. S. Kingston ....
1858
Donzelinho
1860
Marino
Molla Negro ....
1861
Henry Evans
>f
Shiraz
1858
99 •••••••••*
Espanoir
1857
1860
Charles Wills
Verdeilho
1858
G. H. Barnard ....
Mixed
1860
David Randall ....
1860
Carbonet
1860
99 • • • •
Joseph Gilbert
Pewsey Yale
Scyraz
1854
Patrick Auld
Auldana
Palo-Mino-Blanco .
1859
1860
William Scott
Brookside
Muscat, of Alex. ..


WOOL SAMPLES.
Weight of Length of\
Fleece. Staple. \
6 lbs 9 inches 1
H „ .... 7 „ l
4 „ .... 4 „
5 ~ .... 11 „
6j ~ .... 10 „
7 ~ .... 9 ~ /
William
Peacock
and Sons.
Other Exhibitors —Hon. Geo. Hawker;
John Murray, prize ram fleeces;
Patrick Kelly; Anstey & Giles;
Bowman Brothers, 1 case; J. Ander-
son, 1 case, 14 different samples.
Alpaca and Angoba Wool.
6 fleeces of each. Exhibited by J.
F. Haigh, Esq., of Port Lincoln.
WHEAT SAMPLES.
Allan Bell, 1862, weight per impe-
rial bushel, 68 lbs. 1 oz.; James
Hay, 1861, 67 lbs. 7 oz.; Hackett
Brothers, 1861, 67 lbs. 5 oz.; John
Dunn, 1861, 66 lbs. 12 oz.; J.
Waddell, 1861, 66 lbs. 10 oz.; J. B.
Buttfield, 1861, 66 lbs. 8 oz.; W.
Wedd, 1861, 66 lbs. 5 oz.; Allan
Bell, 1861, 66 lbs. 4 oz.; J. Stevens,
1861, 65 lbs. 10 oz.; J. McDougall,
1861, 65 lbs. 8 oz.; Griffin Cant,
1861, 65 lbs. 8 oz.; E. Wehl, 1861,
64 lbs. 10 oz.
Babley.
Griffin Cant, weight 56 lbs. 12 oz. per
imperial bushel.
Floub Samples.—Steam Mills.
Harrison Brothers, 5 cases; John
Hart & Co., 2 cases; J. Stevens, 2
cases; S. White, 2 cases; W.
Duffield, 2 cases; J. Dunn, 4 cases;
T. Magarey, 2 cases ; Beeby &
Dunstan, 2 cases.
PHOTOGRAPH VIEWS
Op Public Buildings in Adelaide.
1. Library and Institute. 2. Smelting
Works of the English and Australian
Copper Company, Port Adelaide.
3. Savings Bank of South Australia.
4. Residence of F. H. Faulding,
Esq., Glen Osmond. 5. General
Hospital, Adelaide. 6. Bank of
South Australia. 7. Bank of Aus-
tralasia. 8. Portrait of John Me
Dougall Stuart, the celebrated
South Australian Explorer. 9.
Roman Catholic Cathedral. 10.
Union Bank of Australia. 11. Pres-
byterian Free Church. 12. Railway
Goods Shed. 13. Bishop’s Court, the
residence of the Right Rev. Dr.
Short, Lord Bishop of Adelaide.
14. Custom House, Port Adelaide.
16. Parliament House. 16. Supremo
Court House. 17. Government Of-
fices. 18. J. Mellor & Sons’ Steam
Works. 19. Photograph Portraits
of Natives (several). 20. Mr. John
Dunn’B Steam and Water Mill.
21. Photograph of the present Go-
vernment House, Adelaide.
Oil painting of the Government House
in the year 1838, and locality of the
present site of Government House.
MISCELLANEOUS
ARTICLES.
Silver Work. —Four EmuEggs,mounted
in frosted silver. By J. Wendt, of
Adelaide.—Testimonial presented to
J. Ridley, Esq., the inventor of the
reaping machine: Candelabrum
in the shape of a palm tree in frosted
silver. By Shomhurgk, of Adelaide. —
Inkstand, in frosted silver, and Emu
Egg; testimonial presented to Lady
Macdonnell, by the Adelaide
Archery Club. By Wendt.—Silver
Candelabrum, presented to Lieut.-
Colonel Freeling, R.E., by the
colonists of South Australia. Made
by Hunt and Roskell.
Samples of Turnery in native "woods.
By F. G. Hales, of Adelaide; goblets
and other articles.—Very fine speci-
men of Nautilus Shell, the argonaut a
tuberculata. J. Skipper, of Port Ade-
laide.—Several Emu Eggs.—Eggs
of the Australian Pheasant. —Sam-
ples of various kinds of Marble, from
J. Kellett’s stone-cutting works. —
Collections of Native Birds, in glass
cases. Exhibited by Henry Jones,
Esq.,and C. Goode,Esq.—Collection
of Birds and Reptiles. Exhibited by
the Commissioners for South Aus-
tralia. —Collection of Steam-made
Biscuits, six varieties. Exhibited by
Mr. Murray, of Coromandel Valley,
South Australia.—Dried fruits:
Almonds, muscatel raisins, apricots.
Exhibited by Messrs. J. Graves and
J. Campbell.—Preserved Fruits and
Jams. Exhibited by A. H. Davis,
Esq.—Collection of South Australian
Gums. Exhibited by J. A. Phillips,
Esq.—Samples of Native Woods.
Exhibited by Mr. Benda, of Ade-
laide.
Printed Books. —A complete set of the
Acts of the Legislature, from the
earliest days of the colony to the end
of 1861. A complete set of the Votes
and Proceedings of Parliament to
the end of 1861. A complete set of
the South Australian Hansard Re-
port of Debates in Parliament. The
above are exhibited by Mr. Francis
Dutton, one of the Commissioners for


South Australia. “ Farm and Gar-
den,” a weekly publication, edited
by E. W. Andrews, Esq., and ex-
hibited by him.
The Daily Papers of Adelaide. —“ The
Register,” “ The Advertiser.”
Weekly Papers. —“ The Observer,”
“ The Chronicle.”
Maps of the Colony, and plan of Ade-
laide.
One case of Soap from Mr. Burford’s
soap manufactory.—A collection of
Dried Flowers. Exhibited by Mr.
T. o‘Halloran, jun.—Curiosities
brought from centre of Australia,
by John McDougall Stuart. —Inlong
glass case: Three collections of Mine-
rals, exhibited by Dr. Maurau,
William Rollison, Dr. Englehardt.—
In circular glass case: Specimens
of Malachite, exhibited by J.
Crabb (a very superb specimen).
J. B. Graham (ditto). Sir R. Mac-
LONDON: PAINTED BX 808881 K. BUET, HOLBOEN HILL, CITY.
donnell (fine specimen). Hon. H.
Ayres. Mr. Ewart. Mr. Bedford
Clisby. Mr. Skipper.—Entrance to
Court. Malachite Table. J. B.
Graham, Esq. Manufactured by Hall
& Co., of Derby. Two large slabs
of Slate from the Mintaro slate quar-
ries, 6 feet square.
F. S. Dutton’s Collection of Minerals.
Heaping Machine. —lnvented hy John
Ridley, Esq., the machine manufac-
tured by J. Mellor & Sons, of Ade-
laide. There is also a Working
Drawing exhibited of another Reap-
ing Machine, by James Craig, of
Adelaide, who has patented several
improvements on Mr. Ridley’s origi-
nal invention. Messrs. Mellor &
Sons also exhibit a pair of steam-
made Wheels, composed of several
kinds of South Australian woods.
Also gum plank and felloes made
of gum plank.


MAP
OF THE PROVINCE OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
OffeczaZ Surras
' IN THE OFFICEOF THE
Printed by R K. Burt, Holborn Hill. London and Gystal Palace, Sydenham.






