

AN APPEAL
TO THE
Congregational Churches of
Australia ;
BEING
A Paper read before the Ministers and Delegates of the
Congregational Union of New South Wales, on the 27th of
October, 1881, and now published at their request.
A. W. MURRAY,
OF THE LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
“ Attempt great things for God, expect great things from God, "—Carey.
“Come Over and Help Us.”
“Go Ye INTO ALL .THE WORLD, THE GOSPEL TO
every Creature.”
Sydney :
THE COLONIAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY, LIMITED, PRINTERS,
315 PITT STREET


p t£s23


AN .APPEAL
TO THE
Congregational Churches of
Australia ;
BEING
A Paper read before the Ministers and Delegates of the
Congregational Union of New South Wales, on the 27th or
October, 1881, and now published at their request. .
A. W. MURRAY,
OF THE LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
“ Attempt great things for God, expect great things from God.”— Care//.
“Come Over and Help Us.”
“Go Ye into all the World, and Preach the Gospel to
every Creature.”
Sydney :
THE COLONIAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY, LIMITED, PRINTERS,
315 PITT STREET


EXPLANATORY NOTE.
While the discussion to which the reading of the Paper now given
to the Churches was in progress, Mr. Charles E. Wigzell, one of
the delegates from the Rev. Thomas Johnson’s Church, Bourke
Street, Sydney, offered to bear the expense of printing one thou-
sand copies of the Paper or two should they be required, for general
circulation throughout the colonies.
Mr. Wigzell’s generous offer was gratefully accepted; and
with thanks to him, and earnest desires that the Head of the
Church may make this humble effort instrumental in furthering the
important object at ■which it aims, it is now sent forth on its high
errand.
A. W. M.
Marrickville, near Sydney,
November 3rd, 1881.


Are the Congregational Churches of Australia
doing their duty to the Heathen ?
Christian Brethren—
By request of your Committee I appear before you
on this occasion to lay before you a few thoughts on the pre-
sent position of the Congregational Churches of Australia with
reference to foreign missions.
It may seem somewhat presumptuous in me to undertake
to address you on this subject, seeing that it has been laid,
before you again and again by our brother, Mr. Sunderland,
and that on many accounts he is the proper person to address
you on the subject. However, lam not solely responsible for
the present arrangement. Had my suggestion to our worthy
Secretary been adopted, Mr. Sunderland would have occupied
the place which Ido this afternoon. So, without further ex-
planation or apology, I will proceed to discharge to the best of
my ability the duty which, by the action of your Committee,
devolves upon me.
The question which I propose to discuss is the following :
—Are the Congregational Churches of Australia doing their
duty to the heathen ?
I put the question in this general form, because, if it is
applicable to the Congregational Churches of New South
Wales, I suppose it is no less so to the sister Churches in the
other colonies; and lam equally desirous to urge upon their
consideration the claims of the heathen as upon ourselves. I
long intensely to see a general movement in the interests of
the great cause, and on that account I shall speak as freely
with reference to the other colonies as to that of New South
Wales.
But how shall we arrive at a satisfactory solution of the
proposed question ? Happily, there is no difference of opinion
among us as regards the obligation under which we lie to give
the Gospel to the heathen. We all admit that, to the full ex-


tent of our means and opportunities, we are bound to give the
Gospel to every creature, and, as loyal subjects aud soldiers of
our Great Master, we have no disposition either to shirk or
disregard our marching orders.
So far then, the way is clear. We admit the duty. Are
we doing our best, according to our means and opportunities,
towards its discharge 1 Perhaps the most satisfactory way of
arriving at a just conclusion will be to take a comparative view
of our position; to institute a comparison between what was
attempted and achieved when Congregationalism was in its in-
fancy, with what is being done now when it has reached some-
thing approaching to vigorous manhood.
In January, 1853, the subject we are now considering
was discussed in this city. The occasion was the visit of the
first “John Williams.” She had come from the islands on her
annual visit, and she had on board two missionaries, one of
w hom was from Rarotonga, the other from Samoa ; and anothei
Samoan missionary, who was returning to his station, having
been on a visit to England, was in Sydney. Thus there were
three missionaries to plead the claims of missions, and. that
added interest to the occasion. The visits of missionaries to
Sydney were much less frequent in those days than they aie
now.
Little had, as yet, been attempted in the interests of mis-
sions to the heathen, beyond holding a meeting to advocate
their claims, and make a collection in aid of the London Mis-
sionary Society once a year, during the visit of the mission
ship. There were only three Congregational Churches in New
South Wales at the time, two of which were in this city—Pitt
Street and Redfern —and the other at Maitland. The Rev.
Dr. Ross was pastor of Pitt Street Church; the Rev. Joseph
Beazley of the Church at Redfern ; and the Rev. J. T. War-
raker of that at Maitland. The Church at Maitland, if indeed
a Church had been formally organized, was not in a position
to do anything for foreign missions, so it may be left out of the
calculation. Thus, what was done, was by the two Churches,
Pitt Street and Redfern, with a little help from our Presbyte-
rian friends. , _ ,
X XCI/XX 1.1 lOiiviw. .
Missionary sermons were preached in Pitt Street and Red-
fern Churches, and public meetings were also held in those
places; and the claims of Missions were pleaded with much
earnestness by the missionaries and others. A few gentlemen
connected with these Churches—some of whom are still among
us, while others have moved elsewhere or gone to their rest—


were much impressed by the appeals and representations of the
missionaries, and, like wise men, they determined to take im-
mediate action, and the result was that an Auxiliary to the
Parent Society was formed, the same that exists at the pre-
sent day ; and, at the same meeting at which the Society
was formed, a resolution was adopted and forthwith carried
into effect, to apply to the Directors of the London Missionary
Society for two missionaries to be located on the island or
group that might be judged most eligible, the newly-formed
society sending home <£3oo to cover the expense of their pas-
sage and outfit, and pledging itself for their permanent support.
The application was favourably received by the Directors, and
not many months passed before the brethren Creagh and Jones
arrived: and, as you all know, they were located on the Loyalty
Islands, where they continue to this day. Such was the out-
come of a movement at a time when there were only two Con-
gregational Churches in Sydney.
See then, dear brethren, what may be accomplished by
the combined and hearty co-operation of a few earnest souls.
The amount of money raised on the occasion referred to was
over £l,OOO ; and who can estimate the value of the precious
fruits that have been reaped, and that will continue to be
reaped in the mission field, all of which owe their origin to the
movement which we have described.
Now let us look at our present position, and, in doing that,
we may as well take also into account the numbers and re-
sources of the sister Churches in the other colonies. In New
South Wales there are, I find by the Year Book, close upon
forty Churches; in Victoria there is rather over that number;
in South Australia the number is about thirty-three ; in Tas-
mania thirteen ; and in Queensland seventeen; in all about
one hundred and forty; whereas thirty years ago the entire
number of Churches throughout these colonies did not exceed
twelve or fourteen, if indeed it had reached that number. And
the movement in Sydney to which I have referred was entirely
independent of the other colonies.
Now comes the question which I beg you, dear brethren,
ministers and delegates of the Congregational Churches of New
South Wales to ponder. If these two churches were able to
initiate and carry out to a successful issue such a movement as
that which I have described, what might not our forty churches
do ? and, if the other colonies, with their one hundred churches
could be induced to unite in a combined effort, O what a
grand movement might be made !


I do not forget that many of the churches in all the
colonies are in a feeble struggling state, and so, are not in a
position to do much for foreign missions; but, were all these
subtracted, there would still remain a number sufficient to
accomplish something on a scale vastly greater than anything
that has yet been attempted. Are there not single churches
even in this, and in each of the other colonies whose resources
would allow of their undertaking the support of a missionary
each ? and, if so, what might not the combined efforts of all
the stronger and more wealthy churches accomplish ?
What then do we propose ? Let our position be calmly
looked at, and our circumstances considered; and, if as the
result of such consideration, we shall come to the conclusion
that we are not doing all we might, and ought, for the heathen,
let immediate steps be taken to make amends for past neglect.
I am sure we would not willingly continue to fail in our duty.
We would not withhold from our less favoured fellow-crea-
tures the boon which we hold in trust, and it is the last of our
thoughts to be unfaithful to our Divine Lord. Let therefore a
resolution be taken to attempt something without delay. Let
this Union initiate a movement with a view to a combined
effort by all the churches of Australia, or as many of them as
can be induced to unite in such an effort; and let some clear
definite proposal be laid before the churches fitted to arouse
zeal, and awaken enthusiasm in the great cause whose claims
we plead. What I would suggest, of course with all due
deference, is that the united energies of the churches be direc-
ted to one field, bearing some proportion to the great country
in which our lot is cast—and such a field is not far to seek.
Within about eighty miles of our own shores lies the great
island of New Guinea —a most inviting field for missionary
labour, —and a field having, as it seems to me, very special
claims upon the Congregational Churches of Australia.
Let me state in a few words the leading reasons why I
suggest New Guinea as a suitable field for the combined ener-
gies of the Congregational Churches of Australia.
° 1. Australia, as we are being constantly reminded, has
before her a great future; and the Christian Church will, no
doubt, increase in numbers and resources as the country ad-
vances in population and material prosperity and Congrega-
tionalism, as a branch of the Church of Christ, will not, we
trust, be left behind in the march of progress, and thus a mis-
sion field that will afford an adequate outlet for her growing
resources will be needed; and where, we ask, can a field be


found that so fully meets the requirements of the case as New
■Guinea 1
2. And another cogent reason why the Congregational
Churches of Australia should turn their attention to New
Guinea is found in the past history and present state of our
Mission on the island. It is now full ten years since the Mis-
sion was commenced, and there have never been more than
two or three missionaries resident on the island for any con-
siderable time, and at the present time there are only three.
True, Mr. McFarlane is now on his way, accompanied by one
young missionary, and, if those now in the field remain, that
will raise the number to five; but what are five missionaries
in such a field ? It is now, I believe, settled beyond dispute
that New Guinea is the largest island on our globe ; and after
ten years’ occupation of it as a mission field, our staff of la-
bourers numbers five ! Oh ! brethren, what shall I say of it ?
Five labourers to cultivate such an enormous field, and gather
in such a mighty harvest !
Why, when the Samoan Mission was commenced, six mis-
sionaries were sent at the outset, and the Mission was reinforced
at short intervals again and again; and the success which
crowned our labours proved the wisdom of the course adopted.
And here is an island larger than all the islands of Polynesia
put together, left with five missionaries !
Let me not be understood as reflecting upon the directors
of the London Missionary Society. They are doing all that
their resources will allow ; nor do I forget our native teachers.
They are generally worthy and useful men, but in order that
their labours may be turned to account, and their health pre-
served—and even their lives reasonably safe on an island like
New Guinea —-it is absolutely necessary that the number of
foreign labourers should bear a fair proportion to theirs. They
are the rank and file of the army, and, valuable as they are in their
place, they cannot go on long, or effect much substantial work,
without an adequate number of leaders. What then is to be
done to meet the present pressing emergency I —to give the
mission a fair start, and place it in something like efficient
working order—to manage its affairs and provide for its exten-
sion and permanence. In order to do this fifteen or twenty
missionaries—that is such a reinforcement as would, with
those now in the field, or on the way to it, increase the number
to that extent, should with the least possible delay be sent.
Unless the mission be reinforced, not with ones or twos but
with fives or tens, it will certainly continue to drag on in the


future in the same unsatisfactory way as it has in the past —
the expense, of necessity, being altogether out of proportion to
the amount of work done, and the evangelization of the island
will not be accomplished for generations to come.
But where are the needed reinforcements to come from T
The Parent Society has its hands full. Had not the Central
African Mission come in the way, the case would have been
different. The expenses of that, however, are so great that
missionaries can only be~sent by ones and twos to New Guinea,
and that, as we have seen is altogether inadequate. Where
then, dear brethren, can we look ? I confess I can see no door
of hope for New Guinea at present apart from the Congrega-
tional Churches of Australia. They are in the neighbourhood
of the field ; they have not, at present any sphere of missionary
labour to which they can look as their own; they have no
living bond of connection with the great work of evangelizing
heathen nations, and in this respect, they are in an isolated and
anomalous position; and this surely is a disadvantage, if it is not
something of a reproach. Here is a call, and a very urgent one,
for them to take their fitting place in the missionary enterprise.
They are in possession of the needful resources—what valid
reason therefore can be assigned why they should not at once
respond to the call ? For my part I can see none, and, if you, my
brethren, will forgive my boldness, I will put before you a
definite proposal. Let this Union commit itself to an attempt
to raise funds sufficient for the support of, say four or six
missionaries: and let a correspondence be opened with the
Unions of the other colonies, with a view to their co-operation.
If this were done I do not doubt of success to a greater or less
extent. At all events there would be the satisfaction of having
made an effort towards the accomplishment of a great and
worthy object. And should the other colonies decline united
action, New South Wales could act alone at the outset, and
set an example which in all probability, their neighbours would
sooner or later follow.*
But where are the men to come from? Well, Ido nob
doubt that the men would be forthcoming were the means of
supporting them provided, and the proper means used for obtain-
ing them. It is true that some sections of the Christian Church
have found, and do find difficulty in obtaining men for foreign
* At a missionary meeting held at the close of the late sittings of the Episcopal
Synod, the following resolution was unanimously adopted :
“ That for the full prosecution of this work it is desirable, in the several dioceses of
Australia, and Tasmania, that united action should be taken ”


service; but it is to the honour of the Congregational body in
Great Britain that, ever'since the formation of the London
Missionary Society, the supply of men has generally been in
proportion to the amount of money at the disposal of the
directors, and not seldom it has far exceeded that. Besides,
brethren, to find men is God’s part; to provide the where-
withal for their maintenance is ours. Let us set vigorously
about the doing of our part; and Ido not think God will fail
in his.
These are the leading thoughts which occur to me in con-
nection with this great subject; matters of detail I leave.
Should the subject be taken up and action resolved upon, these
will be easily dealt with. Much deliberation and consultation
will, of course, be necessary to determine what steps shall be
taken to secure the co-operation of the other colonies, and ad-
just modes of operation, the relations which shall subsist be-
tween you and the parent Society, and numerous other matters.
But all difficulties will vanish before a hearty and unanimous
determination to make a movement. Let it be distinctly un-
derstood that I do not advocate separate or independent action
from the Parent Society ; to attempt that would certainly not
be the way to gain our object. But on that point, I dare say,
we are all of one mind.
And let me remind you, brethren, that what I am recom-
mending is not a novelty, no mere experiment, but a thing that
is being actually done by our brethren of two other denomina-
tions in these colonies. There are in the New Hebrides ten
Presbyterian missionaries, and of these five are supported by
the Presbyterian Churches in Australia and New Zealand, and
about two-thirds of the cost of maintaining the missionary
schooner “ Day spring ” are also borne by the Churches of Aus-
tralia and New Zealand.
And about five years ago the Wesleyan Churches of Aus-
tralia and New Zealand took upon themselves the main respon-
sibility of supporting the whole of their South Sea Missions,
stipulating that the Mission Committee at home should supply
any deficiency that there might be after they had done their
best. The deficiency one year amounted to <£3,000, that being
the highest figure ; another year it was only £SOO, that being
the lowest. For the past year the amount charged upon the
home Committee was a little over £I,OOO ; this year £SOO is to
be allowed, and after that the experiment is to be tried of dis-
pensing with home aid altogether. And when it is borne in
mind that the average annual expenses of the Missions are


£12,500, about £5,500 of that sum being raised by the Churches
in Australia and New Zealand, we have surely before us an
example that ought powerfully to stimulate us to go and do
likewise. The large balance, over £6,000, is made up chiefly
by contributions from the mission stations. It ought to be
mentioned that, before the mission ship “John Wesley” was
disposed of the annual expenses of the Missions averaged
£15,000, and that is the reason why so much help was required
from home at that time.
Now let me add a word to guard against an impression
which may have been conveyed to some minds, viz., that I think
the New Guinea Mission a failure. That is by no means the
case. The truth is that the success which has attended our
efforts is quite as great as could reasonably be expected, con-
sidering the inadequate manner in which the Mission has been
sustained. Much pioneering and exploring work has been done ;
some important literary work has been accomplished; we have
to a great extent secured the confidence of the natives where
we are known; and, most encouraging of all, there are a few
instances of conversion, so decided that the brethren on the spot
have seen their way clear to organize a Christian Church. Thus
the foundation is laid, and, sooner or later, the superstructure
must rise : but when, and how, and by whom—who shall say 1
But I must have done, I have drawn very largely on your
time and patience dear brethren; and the only apology I can
offer is the importance of the subject on which I have been
privileged to address you. I suppose we are all prone to over-
estimate the importance of certain subjects ; —and it will very
naturally be supposed that I am in special danger of attaching
undue importance to the subject of missions to the heathen. It
is not for me to say that such a supposition would be without
foundation. Of one thing, however, I may be permitted to re-
mind you, viz., that my judgment of missions—be it erroneous
or otherwise —has not been hastily formed. It rests upon the
experience of a lifetime ; hence, if missions had been in any
sense a sham, I have had ample opportunity to find that out;
but now, in the calm review of my long course, and, expecting
ere a great while to be where only realities will stand, I testify
to you this day that I entertain a deeper conviction of the im-
portance of missions, and that I have a stronger and more in-
telligent faith in missions, and a more ardent love for missions
than I had when, full of youthful enthusiasm and buoyant hope,
I bade farewell to my native land six and forty years ago.
Wonder not, therefore, dear brethren, that I speak strongly and


earnestly on this great subject. God grant that the considera-
tion of it to-day may lead to, some practical result! Those
whose cause I plead belong emphatically to that class who can
neither plead their own cause nor recompense their benefactors,
but with reference to whom may I not, without taking an un-
due liberty with the Master’s words, say, “ Inasmuch as ye did
it unto one of the least of these, ye did it unto Me , and those
who thus render service to Him will doubtless reap a rich re-
ward. I verily believe, dear brethren, that no step which you
.could possibly take would more certainly bring upon yourselves,
your families and your Churches, a large measure of the Divine
blessing, than that of throwing yourselves heart and soul into
the great cause of Christian Missions.
A friend has suggested the desirableness of adding to
the above paper a brief description of the island of
NEW GUINEA.
The name, Hew Guinea, was given to the Island from a
fancied resemblance of its inhabitants to those of the coast of
Guinea in Africa. It is, with the single exception of Australia,
the largest island on the globe. It is from fourteen to fifteen
hundred miles in length, and from four to five hundred miles
in breadth at its widest part. It is bounded on the south
by Torres Straits, on the west by the Moluccas Sea, and on the
north and north-east by the Pacific Ocean. The most strik-
ing geographical feature of the great eastern peninsula,
beyond which our efforts have not yet extended, is a lofty
mountain range, apparently extending throughout its whole
length, with peaks rising to a height far surpassing any-
thino, in Australia. The loftiest of these, Mount Owen Stan-
ley, °is between 13,000 and 14,000 feet above the sea level.
There are said to be three remarkable table-topped mountains
near the centre of the island, estimated to be quite 20,000 feet
in height, whose summits appear to be covered with snow, and
visible from a great distance. New Guinea was dis-
covered in 1511 by the Portuguese commanders D’Abreu and
Serram. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the
northern coasts were frequently visited by Dutch and English
navigators, and in 1774 an English officer in the service of the
East India Company resided some months at Port Davy, on
the north-east coast. He was in search of spice-producing dis-
tricts, and maintained friendly intercourse with the natives.
Until the year 1828 there is no record of Europeans having


established friendly relations with the natives on the south
coast. Captain Cook, who visited that part of the coast in the
“Endeavour” in 1770, was the sole authority respecting the
natives till 1828, and no Christian missionary, so far as can he
ascertained, ever set foot on any part of the island till 1871—
just ten years ago.
The choicest gifts of Providence have been bestowed in
ample measure on this great island. Its shores are covered
with groves of cocoa nuts, and it produces in abundance the
banana, sago, betel, figs, oranges, limes, and other tropical fruits.
The interior abounds with valuable timber, as ironwood, ebony,
canary-wood, and also with valuable spices and fragrant bark.
Its forests, rivalling those of South America and Ceylon in
luxuriance, afford shelter to multitudes of beautiful birds,
among which are crown pigeons, black cockatoos, parrots, lories,
and birds of Paradise. So far as I am aware, there are no
beasts of prey, and very few animals of any sort, except wild
hogs, a species of kangaroo, and wild dogs, and there are doubt-
less monkeys in some parts of the island, and there may be
savage beasts also. Snakes, no doubt, abound, and there is no
lack of alligators in the rivers.
There are two distinct races of people on that part of the
island with which we are acquainted —the one dark coloured,
like the natives of Western Polynesia; the other light, resem-
bling the Eastern Polynesians. As to the number of people
on the island, we do not venture an estimate ; I have seen a
conjecture putting it at 880,000. But when it is remembered
that we know less of the interior of the island than we do of
the interior of Africa, it will be at once seen that no reliable
estimate can possibly be given. Those parts of the island with
which we are acquainted are pretty thickly populated, but
many years must pass before any reliable information can be
obtained.
Viewed from a commercial standpoint, that part of the
island, with which Australia has any connection at present, is
almost a blank, and so it is likely to remain till the spread of
Christianity among the natives render life and property secure,
and create desires and wants such as do not now exist. New
Guinea is now what the islands and groupes of the South
Pacific were half a century ago ; and when Christian Missions
have, by the help and blessing of God, done for it what they
have done for them, an extensive trade will no doubt be de-
veloped between that great land and the Australian colonies.
Colonial Publishing Society, Limited, Printers, 315 Pitt Street.




} f
$
I '
0 «
• ••
/
* ‘ I % ; .. ' ,
\
/
\ /
