



||||ji|| HIS is the story of a triumph ... a
lli iSI tr i um ph °f modern industrial science.
It is an Australian story, appealing not
only to those who perceive the very real
romance of scientific achievement, but to the
keen reasoning of the executive who demands
a “behind-the-scene” knowledge of every
important product he buys.
Electric lamps play so important a part in
every business that it becomes increasingly
necessary that buyers shall know exactly
certain lamps should be the only ones to receive
consideration from a thoughtful purchaser.
In these pages is revealed —for the first time —
the “inside story” of the factory and plant,
situated at Hamilton, near Newcastle, N.S.W.,
which produces all Australia’s high-grade
lamps, and which is capable of providing
sufficient lamps, year in and year out, for every
home, municipality. Government Department,
Railway and Tramway Department, office,
factory, theatre, church, street and road in the
entire Commonwealth .
CONDOR EDISWAN MAZDA OSRAM PHILIPS SIEMENS


AN AUSTRALIAN
TRIUMPH
£180,000 TO ERECT AND EQUIP
The factory of Electric Lamp Manufacturers ( Aust.)
Ltd., fitted with the most intricate machinery and
fascinating test apparatus known to modern industry-
THE TENNIS COURT for the recreation of the employees.
THE EXECUTIVE OFFICES command a clear view of the whole of the factory equipment.
IN Australia is a two-storey building which
cost £lBO,OOO to erect and equip . . .
a building packed with the most intricate
machinery and fascinating test-apparatus known
to modern industry ... a building which em-
braces 24,400 square feet of space on one floor
alone! It is a home of modern magic, the amaz-
ing plant of Electric Lamp Manufacturers
(Australia) Ltd.
In 1930, several of the world’s largest manufac-
turers of incandescent electric lamps decided to
carry out actual production in Australia. In
April, 1931, not only were factory and equip-
ment complete, but large orders for high-grade
lamps were being executed.
In Government Departments, houses, factories,
streets and buildings of all kinds, in every
corner of Australia, lamps from this factory,
made by Australians , are bringing increased
brightness, health, efficiency and economy to
tens of thousands of Australians.


What kind of electric lamps are they? That is
an important question. The Australian Lamp
Factory has arranged that all present and future
patents of leading overseas lamp manufacturers
are made available to them. This means that by
buying the products of this factory, yon are pur-
chasing lamps conforming to the highest stan-
dards ever imposed in this highly specialised
industry, and equal in quality to the very best
produced in any part of the world.
Just think . . . this one factory, having the
advantage of all the research work and achieve-
ments of the great scientific laboratories of the
world, is capable of supplying all the electric
lamps Australia can possibly need for many
years to come!
The Australian men, women and girls who make,
test and pack these millions of lamps are the most
highly skilled operatives securable. Every single
lamp must conform strictly to the specifications of
the British Standards Institution.
IT IS INTERESTING TO NOTE THAT EVERY
FILAMENT MUST BE ACCURATE TO WITHIN
TEN-MILLIONTHS OF AN INCH.
How this rigid standard of accuracy is attained
will be shown in later pages, but it is definitely
interesting to observe the attitude of every indi-
vidual operative in this factory to his or her
work. They like and enjoy their work—that
fact is obvious to every visitor. They take a
pride in every phase of it. Operating in ideal
surroundings, realising that they are at the huh
of a great and “unusual” industry, they are
doubly appreciative of the facilities arranged
for their comfort and happiness—luncheon,
rest and locker rooms for the men, women and
girls; a factory which has so many, and such big
windows that gloom can never enter; a special
system of ventilation, modern and never-failing,
which keeps the atmosphere fresh and clean;
even a day and night tennis court to prove the
sincere and genuine concern of the Company
for the physical and mental contentment of its
employees!
THE TOP FLOOR
covers 24,400 square feet of space . . . some idea of its size and the extent of machinery
installed may be understood when it is realised that the clock in the centre of the picture
marks the middle point of this floor.
The almost entire absence of noise, the cleanliness and absence of excessive heat are the
features that impress the visitor most upon first going through this maze of machinery.
AN AUSTRALIAN TRIUMPH


One hesitates to use the word “employees” to
describe the large group of Australian men,
women and girls to whose truly amazing skill
and care so much of the success of this industry
is due. It is indeed a credit to Australia that in
the space of three years , operatives can be found
who are now able to compete with any in the
world.
Let us watch them for a few minutes. Let us
observe the almost uncanny workings of what
must surely be the most ingenious machinery
ever evolved by man ... '
So highly technical is the process of making a
THE VENTILATING SYSTEM.
A most important feature of this
factory, where practically every
machine contains a series of gas flames.
The Ventilating System, which is a
highly efficient one, keeps the whole
factory at an equable temperature.
The photograph gives a perfect ex-
planation of the whole system. The
electric motor attached to the rafter
drives a fan and sucks the heated air
from the cowl over the machine, then
expels it through the window, thus
maintaining a continuous current of air
throughout the factory.
high quality electric lamp, that a written descrip-
tion of every phase and procedure would
require a complete volume. To the intelligent
observer who visits the factory itself—whether
he be technically-minded or not—the “mys-
tery” and complexity fades under the explana-
tions and demonstrations of the machines in
actual work. It is possible, however, in these
pages to present the “highlights” of modern
electric lamp production in such a manner that
its absorbing interest and vital importance to
buyers of lamps are clearly revealed by camera
and pen.
AN AUSTRALIAN TRIUMPH


THE ENGINE ROOM
located on the ground
floor supplies the several
types of gases and various
forms of electricity re-
quired by the factory
machinery. Here again
the absence of noise is
most striking.
One goes to this factory knowing probably as
much about electric lamps as the average busi-
ness executive who, from time to time, must
purchase quantities of them—i.e., one knows
that certain brands and trade-marks can be
relied upon as finger-prints to quality. Into
one’s mind, as into those of other buyers, had
crept the occasional question as to whether the
value of these brands was over-rated or whether
it was founded on a basis which would stand
up to personal and first-hand investigation at
the place where the lamps are made.
This assertion is made at the outset: —It is
quite impossible to watch the methods em-
ployed at this, the only electric lamp producing
plant in Australia, and to retain any doubt as
to the ultimate economy of buying only the
lamps produced at the Australian factory. The
list of brands printed at the end of this booklet
is not included for mere advertising purposes.
That list is definitely and beyond doubt the one
infallible guide for the intelligent buyer of
lamps. This statement is made with full com-
prehension of its sweeping character.
THE BULK STORE
An entirely separate building almost as large as the factory itself. There is always
a stock of over two millions of the various brands of lamps, Condor, Ediswan, Mazda,
Osram, Philips and Siemens.
AN AUSTRALIAN TRIUMPH


ELIMINATING THE SECOND-RATE
One outstanding fact emerges from a visit to
this two-storey building which houses so much
that is interesting and fascinating. The testing,
retesting and triple-testing which takes place
at every stage of manufacture . . . the check-
ing and double-checking . . . the immediate
and absolute rejection of any unit which is not
scrupulously accurate . . . surely has no
equal in any other industry with the possible
exception of the production of scientific instru-
ments. All the resources of modern science and
engineering are concentrated to one end—
electric lamps of hair-breadth accuracy , unfail-
ing efficiency and undeviating consistency.
Take one example—at almost every stage of
production it is necessary, obviously, for glass
to be heated to a semi-molten state. During this
heating, and the subsequent cooling-off pro-
cess, certain “strains” may develop in the
fabric of the glass. These “strains” are elimin-
ated by annealing (heating the glass a second
time). Never, in the whole construction of the
lamp, is this precaution omitted.
Take, as a further example, the flange-making
machines those bewildering “miracles in steel ”
into which glass rods pass and perfect lamp-flanges
emerge. Let one flange deviate in the slightest
degree from the rigid standard of exact size
and across comes the automatic arm to throw
the delinquent into the reject bin !
THE FLANGE MAKING MACHINE.
A highly ingenious piece of mechanism that automatically converts glass tubing into
what may be described as the beginning of the lamp the Flange.
As the machine rotates the end of a piece of tubing is heated by a series of gas jets.
When a sufficiently high temperature is reached, a spindle rises and makes the Flange.
This is allowed to cool and then is cut to the correct length by a rotating knife,
then suspended for an instant over aflame to remove any “ strain ” which might have
been introduced into the glass by a preliminary heating, finally the Flange is ejected
into a waiting tray.
At the top is shown the
glass tubing with which
the machine is fed- on
the right is shown the
machine’s finished pro-
duct-the Flange.
Above these completed
Flanges may be seen pass-
ing out of the machine at
the rate of 1,200 per hour.


The machine is automatically
fed with FLANGES,
LEADING-IN WIRES,
STEMS AND TUBES.
NO FLAW CAN "PASS MUSTER"
One could go on quoting instance after
instance of this untiring, fastidious assurance
of perfection. It becomes obvious in that
complex marvel of ingenuity, the Foot-mak-
ing Machine, the machine into which pass
flanges, rods, stem tubes and leading-in wires,
all of which are treated, assembled and
passed on to the annealing oven by automatic
means which obviate the slightest possibility
of the minutest error or flaw!
If you have ever examined an electric lamp
closely, you will have noticed that the actual
filament has wire supports. This wire (which
is made of Molybdenum, and which is passed
through a special machine to ensure perfect
cleanliness) has to be inserted into a molten
glass rod with perfect precision. The
machine which does this (the Mounting
Machine) provides a further instance of
THE MOUNTING MACHINE
Like the Foot Making Machine this machine rotates continuously. On its journey it hangs the filament on to the Leading In
Wires of the “foot,” inserts the filament supports and affixes the filament to them.
THE FOOT MAKING MACHINE
This machine feeds itself with Flanges, Rods, Stem Tubes, and Leading In Wires, and
after automatically performing thirteen operations, delivers the finished foot to a conveyor
which passes slowly through an annealing oven removing any “ strain " that might
have been introduced into the glass.
ABOVE
is seen that portion of the Mounting
Machine that inserts the filament supports
and affixes the filament to them.
ON THE RIGHT
an operative is filling a magazine with
filaments later to be placed in the Mounting
Machine.
and produces the
finished FOOT,
THE MOLYBDENUM CLEANING MACHINE
All the wire used for making the filament supports is passed!
through this machine. The wire is automatically wound
from one end of the machine to the other. It is heated by
electricity to incandescence and on its journey passes over
numerous jets of a reducing gas which have the effect of
thoroughly cleansing and annealing the wire.


THE SPRAYING MILL
sprays the finished feet of the
lamp with a special compound
after they are received from the
Mounting Machine. This com-
pound ensures a complete absence
of air when the lamp is evacuated.
astounding skill. It flattens the nickel ends
of the two leading-in wires and forms
them into a hook on which vacuum “fingers”
(almost uncanny to watch!) place the fila-
ment. But that is not all! The machine
closes the hooks, cuts the Molybdenum sup-
ports to the correct length, bends back the
leading-in wires, blows the filament against
the supports with air, twists the ends of the
supports into eyelets and produces—the
finished and perfected mounting and fila-
ment of the electric lamp!
Once more a strict precaution is taken. There
must be a complete absence of oxygen in the
lamp. Hence that absolutely modern innovation
the spraying of the filament with a special
compound, known as a “ Getter.”
To watch the Sealing Machine moulding the
mounting and the plain bulb into a composite
whole (and burning the brand into the bulb
at the same time), to see the vacuum arm
picking up the “growing” lamp to send it
THE SEALING-IN AND EXHAUSTING
MACHINE
This machine fuses feet and blank bulbs into one, at the
same time burning the brand in indelibly. It then ex-
hausts the bulb and fills it with Nitrogen five times to
ensure perfect cleanliness and finally, in the case of a gas
filled lamp, fills it with Argon.
NO FLAW CAN “PASS MUSTEK ’


on a journey through a circular oven, is
fascinating—but wait!
This still far-from-finished product, perfect
even in its incompletion, is exhausted and
filled with Nitrogen no less than five times
until, at last (in the case of a gas-filled lamp),
it is filled with Argon and sealed oft with a
flame. Little wonder that the high-grade lamp
is absolutely clean and free from oxygen and
moisture!
If yon desire an object lesson in high-speed
dexterity, you would have only to stand be-
side the two girls who, as the photograph
shows, work side by side at the Capping Mill.
Their work consists of placing caps, pre-
viously filled with a special cement, over the
top of the bulb. With almost unbelievable
accuracy they do this—and the two leading-
in wires never fail to pass through the cap
with faultless precision.
The operative who examines the lamps after
they leave the capping mill is one of the most
highly trained in the entire organisation. No
lamp passes her which is not perfect in appear-
ance, and accurate as to cap and the soldering
of leading-in wires. SHE REPRESENTS STILL
ANOTHER SAFEGUARD AGAINST MEDIO-
CRITY.
THE CAPPING MILL
A conveyor from the Sealing In and Exhausting Machine brings the lamps to two
operatives sitting in front of the Capping Mill. Here caps filled with special cement
are affixed and the Leading In Wires soldered. The operative alongside the rack
of lamps examines them for appearance and cap placing.
BRANDING
Here the brand is stamped on to the bottom of each lamp. Later they are burnt in
indelibly by the Sealing In Machine.


THE FIRST TEST
This operative receives the lamps from the Capping
Mill and gives them what is really their first test. Here
they are carefully examined for soldering of the Leading
In Wires, the correct placing of the cap and for ap-
pearance generally.
THE FINAL TEST
(Right)
where an expert examines
all brands minutely for
general appearance.
THE PHOTOMETER
ROOM
Here a check is kept day
by day on the lamps pro-
duced. Australian-made
lamps are subject to a
continuous test against
standard British and Con-
tinental lamps.
TESTING!
But the function of an electric
lamp is to burn , and possibly
the most spectacular of the
tests and trials to which these
lamps are subjected begins at
the Burning Frame. The Tesla
Oosterhuys High Frequency
Test is now applied and a
skilled operator passes the high-
frequency rod over the bulbs.
From the tip of that rod, right
through the glass to the fila-
ment itself a continuous spark
or “arc” passes. The varying
colours of this spark reveal the
purity of the gas in the lamp or
the slightest presence of oxygen
in the bulb. Any fault means
immediate rejection of the
lamp in question. Then the
lamps are lighted for the first
time. One sees the current be-
ing gradually turned on. The
lamps glow. Then, as the full
voltage comes into play, they
emit an almost blinding bril-
liance. These batches of lamps
are burned for defined periods
at a voltage both higher and
lower than that prescribed for
their final use —and at this
stage comes still another search-
ing test of absolute perfection.
PHOTO-METRIC
SCIENCE LENDS A
HAND
Even then the manufacturers
are not satisfied! In the Photo-
meter department of the fac-
tory are certain special standard
lamps of the correct light out-
put —standards are kept for
every type of lamp manufac-
tured. The light output of the
THE FACTORY PHOTOMETERS
a proportion of all lamps are tested for
emission and consumption by these scientific
marvels.


TESTING!
lamps destined for public use
is compared with the light out-
put of the special standard
lamps of the same types. A
Photo-Electric Cell, so marvel-
lous in its functions that its
activities border on the weird,
tells the relentless truth about
every lamp brought under its
influence.
No flaw or shortcoming can escape
the Photometer ! Every lamp must
conform with the highest British
and International Standards. There
is even a Life Test Room where
certain numbers of lamps are burned
until they are destroyed. Lamps
submitted to this ordeal are ex-
amined in the Photometer Depart-
ment after having been burned for
250, 500, 750 and 1,000 hours.
Still more precautions! The
manufacturers do not overlook
the possibility that a flaw, not
immediately apparent, might
develop in a lamp. After a lapse
of six hours, therefore, all
lamps from the factory go to
still another burning frame to
face once more the test of the
high-frequency rod—and even
then , before the finished pro-
ducts go on to be packed at the
rate of 800 lamps an hour,
every individual lamp is in-
spected by an expert. Every
lamp, carefully packed by
hand, goes into containers and
cartons which are manufac-
tured and printed wholly in
Australia. Realising the tre-
mendous volume of the fac-
tory’s output, it can readily be
seen that in the packing depart-
ment alone a considerable con-
tribution is made to Australian
industry.
ALIGHT FOR THE
FIRST TIME
(Right)
This burning frame where
the lamps are first illum-
inated. Photograph shows
the Oosterhuys high
frequency test.
THE LIFE TEST ROOM
where lamps taken from each day’s production are burned for 250, 500, 750 and 1,000 hours.
THE OOSTERHUYS
TEST
(Left)
After an interval of at
least six hours has elapsed
all lamps are once more
tested in case some slow
fault has developed.


AN
ULTRA-MODERN
DEVELOPMENT
The most modern development in the manu-
facture of lamps is the frosting of the bulbs on
the inside. Before this process is carried out
on the machine shown below, every bulb is most
carefully washed and cleansed. Here again
every blank bulb is minutely tested for faults;
skilled women operatives are engaged in this
work.
WASHING
All blank bulbs before
being sent to the Inside
Frosting Machine (or in
the case of clear lamps,
direct to the Sealing In
and Exhausting Machine)
are thoroughly washed.
THE INSIDE FROST-
ING MACHINE
which first sprays the in-
side of the clean bulbs with
a Frosting dressing, this
mechanically treats the
glass by etching and
washes them out with
water. As the Frosting
process leaves the bulb
slightly less mechanic-
ally strong than previous-
ly, they are again auto-
matically washed out with
a strong acid which
restores their strength.
After this process the
bulbs are dried and placed
over a strong light where
a skilled operator
searches for faults which
might have developed.
INSPECTING BLANKS
All blanks, inside frosted and clear, are placed over a strong light
and examined for flaws before being despatched to the Sealing In
Machine.


THE FILAMENT SUPPORTS
are placed by hand into the glass
stud of the foot of the lamp.
We will now deal with lamps of such size
that they must be largely finished by hand. The
photograph at the top of the page gives a
clear glimpse of the machine which “seals in”
these bigger lamps. Below yon see the filament
supports being inserted in the glass, and at the
side is shown the welding of the filament and
the soldering of the leading-in wires to the cap.
Of the endless lengths of pipe-lines running
through the building and conveying no less
than nine different varieties of gas to the
various machines, where town coal gas is used
at the rate of 10,000 cubic feet per hour, of the
engine room in which every power unit is dupli-
cated (so that no delays
can occur), and where
the interesting vacuum
pumps are housed, it is
impossible here to write
in detail. It is equally
impossible to look on
this factory, or to visit
its 20,000 square feet of
store-space, in which a
stock of at least
2,000,000 lamps of all
types are constantly
maintained, without feel-
ing that here is an in-
dustry of which Aus-
tralia should know more
—an industry which
makes light possible for
all Australia.
THE SEALING-IN MACHINE
Here the lamps of larger wattage have their foot and blank bulb fused
into one. The finished product is then passed to the machine which may
be seen alongside where they are exhausted and filled with gas.
SOLDERING
Leading In Wires are
soldered to the cap by hand.
In the case of smaller lamps
this operation is done auto-
matically by the Capping
Mill.
THE FILAMENT
Spot Welded by hand to
the Leading In Wires. This
is one of the processes in the
making of the foot of the
large lamps.


LAMPS-IN A NEW LIGHT
One leaves this house of a myriad lamps with
the unshakeable conviction, driven home to one
by living, inescapable demonstration , that lamps
built in the factory of Electric Lamp Manufac-
turers (Australia) Ltd., i.e., the only Aus-
tralian-made lamps, the lamps whose brands
are now listed, must be the inevitable choice of
every business executive and housewife whose
responsibilities include the ensuring of
economy and favdtless efficiency in electric
lighting. The brands of the lamps manufac-
tured here take on a new significance, they
become something more vital than mere names.
They epitomise all the skill, science and care
one has seen in this “home of light.”
CONDOR OSRAM
EDISWAN PHILIPS
MAZDA SIEMENS
THE PACKING ROOM
Lamps being packed in their cartons at express speed. They are then placed in quantity
boxes and despatched to the Store,
EXHAUSTING BIG LAMPS
This photograph shows a specially trained operative exhausting
those lamps that are too large for even the machine shown on the
previous page. The process shown here is quite a lengthy one,
demanding considerable skill and experience.


YOUR GUARANTEE
The brand mark of a reputable firm is
your only reliable guarantee of quality .
Be sure that the lamps you buy bear
one of these marks.


manufactured in the Australian Factory comply
m raj* in every way with the latest British Standards
j| Institution’s Specification No. 161 (1932) for Tungsten
Filament Electric Lamps, which Specification has
been adopted by the majority of Government Departments,
Municipal Councils, and large buyers in Australia.
fj While fully maintaining the specified life performance of
8.5.1. 161, Australian-made lamps are actually made to the
higher tolerances for lumen efficiencies of the Specification,
and are generally from 5% to 10% above the rated efficiencies.
At the same time closer tolerances are attained.
CJ The policy of Electric Lamp Manufacturers (Australia) Ltd.
is to construct the whole of their products in accordance
with the highest standards of manufacture, and also to en-
sure that they comply with the most modern approved designs,
and, therefore, it has been decided not to manufacture the
old straight filament Vacuum type lamps, but to manufacture
15 and 25 watt in vacuum coiled filament type and all the
other ratings in Gasfilled only. A simple comparison test
will readily show the value of this decision to the lamp user,
as the old straight filament vacuum lamps show a distinctly
yellowish light, as compared with the whiter light of the
Gasfilled lamps.
C] In addition to tests conducted in the factory, lamps are
frequently and regularly sent to Overseas Testing Labora-
tories for the purpose of maintaining careful check and to
ensure that the Australian standard of manufacture is fully
equal to the highest in the world.
CONDOR EDISWAN MAZDA OSRAM PHILIPS SIEMENS


An Invitation
business executives and others who are interested
in this new Australian industry, we will gladly afford
facilities for a full tour of the Plant. It is requested
that application be made to the Manager, Electric Lamp
Manufacturers (Aust.) Ltd,, Hamilton, Newcastle, N.S.W.
Such an inspection will prove most informative and of
the greatest interest.


BLOXHAM & CHAMBERS LTD.
PRINTERS, SYDNEY.
