









f 3 •*,.^ooj




ANALYSIS
THE EARTHY SUBSTANCE
FROM
NEW SOUTH WALES,
CALLED
SYDNEIA OR TERRA AUSTRALIS.
CHARLES HATCHETT, ESQ, F.R.S.
FROM THE
PHILOSOPHICAL TRANSACTIONS.




ANALYSIS, ire.
Read before the ROYAL SOCIETY, February 8, 1798.
§. 1.
The late ingenious Josiah Wedgwood, Esq. F. R. S. published,
in the Philosophical Transactions for the year 1790, an account
of some analytical experiments on a mineral substance from
Sydney Cove, in New South Wales.*
This substance, Mr. Wedgwood describes to be composed of
a fine white sand, a soft white earth, some colourless micaceous
particles, and also some which were black, resembling black
mica, or black lead.
Nitric acid did not appear to act on any part of this earthy
substance; and even a portion on which sulphuric acid had
been boiled to dryness, afforded afterwards, when edulcorated
with water, only a few flocculi, which Mr. Wedgwood con-
ceived to be aluminous earth.
The muriatic acid, during digestion, seemed to act as little
as the two preceding acids; but, upon water being poured in,
to wash out the remaining portion, the liquor instantly became
white as milk, with a fine white curdy substance intermixed;
the concentrated acid having, in the opinion of the author,
Philosophical Transactions, Vol. LXXX. Part 11. page 306.
A 2


extracted something which the simple dilution with water pre-
cipitated.
The remaining part was repeatedly digested with muriatic
acid, and treated with water, as before, till the milky appear-
ance was no longer produced.
The properties of this white precipitate, Mr. Wedgwood states
to be as follows.
Ist. It is only soluble in boiling concentrated muriatic acid.
2dly. ft is precipitated by water, in the form of a white earth;
which may again be dissolved by boiling muriatic acid.
3dly. When nitric acid is mixed with the muriatic solution
of this earth, there is no appearance of a precipitate; not even
when water is added, provided that the nitric acid exceeds, or
nearly approaches, the quantity of muriatic acid.
4thly. The earth is precipitated by the alkalies.
sthly. The muriatic solution does not crystallize by evapo-
ration ; but becomes a butyraceous mass, which soon liquefies
on exposure to the air.
6thly. The butyraceous mass is not corrosive to the taste;
and is even less pungent than the combination of calcareous
earth with the same acid.
ythly. Heat approaching to ignition disengages the acid from
the butyraceous mass, in white fumes, and a white substance
remains.
Bthly. The white precipitated earth is fusible per se , in from
14,2° to 156° of Mr. Wedgwood's thermometer, and it is thus
distinguished from all the other primitive earths.
And, 9thly. This precipitate cannot be reduced to a metallic
state, when exposed to heat with inflammable substances.
From these properties, Mr. Wedgwood says, that although


he cannot absolutely determine whether this substance belongs
to the class of earths, or that of metallic substances, yet he
is inclined to refer it to the former.
Professor Blumenbach, of Gottingen, in his Manual of Na-
tural History, published in 1791, also mentions that he had exa-
mined a portion of this earthy substance, by means of muriatic
acid, after the manner of Mr. Wedgwood, and that he had ob-
tained a slight precipitate by the addition of water.*
In consequence of these experiments, the mineralogists
throughout Europe admitted the white precipitated substance
to be a primitive earth; and we accordingly find, in all the
systematical works on mineralogy published since the above-
mentioned period, that it is arranged as a distinct genus, under
the names of Sydneia , Australa , Terra Australis , and Austral
Sand.
The extreme scarcity of this substance prevented the che-
mists in general from examining more minutely into the nature
of this new primitive earth, till Mr, Klaproth, in the second
volume of his Additions to the Chemical Knowledge of Mineral
Bodies, gave to the public a memoir entitled, A Chemical Exa-
mination of the Austral Sand.'f
In this memoir, Mr. Klaproth says, that he had received from
Mr. Haidinger, of Vienna, two samples of this substance; one
of which had a considerable quantity of black shining particles
intermixed with it, which, although regarded by many as gra-
phite or plumbago, he was inclined to believe to be Eisenglimmer
or micaceous iron ore.
The other contained much less of these black or dark grey
* Handbucb der Naturgeschicbie, p. 567 and 568.
f BeitrUge zur Chemiscben Kenntniss der Miner alkorper.—Zweiter Band, p. 66,


particles, and, as he considered it to be more pure than the
former, he subjected it to the following experiments.
1. It was digested at three different times with concentrated
muriatic acid, in a boiling heat, and the acid was afterwards fil-
trated through paper. The solution was then mixed by degrees
with pure water, which did not however produce any precipi-
tate, even when warmed.
Carbonate of potash caused some flocculi to fall, which, edul-
corated and dried, weighed 3.25 grains.
This precipitate was dissolved in diluted sulphuric acid, and
left a small portion of siliceous earth; after which the solution,
by evaporation, afforded crystals of alum.
2. The residuum of the muriatic solution was mixed with
three times the weight of potash, and exposed to a red heat.
Muriatic acid was then poured on the mass, and the insoluble
gelatinous residuum was edulcorated on a filter; and, after a
red heat, weighed 19.50 grains, which proved to be siliceous
earth.
3. The muriatic solution, with prussiate of potash, afforded a
blue precipitate; the ferruginous part of which was about one
quarter of a grain.
4. The solution was then saturated with carbonate of pot-
ash, and some alumine was precipitated; which, after a red
heat, weighed 8.50 grains, and with sulphuric acid formed
alum.
Siliceous earth, alumine, and iron, appeared therefore to be
the only ingredients of this substance; but as Mr. Klaproth
had no more than thirty grains to examine, he could not ex-
tend his experiments.
From those above related, he is of opinion that the existence


of this primitive earth may be much doubted, and that this
doubt can only be removed in the course of time, by other
analyses.
Mr. Klaproth concludes his memoir by saying, that the
substance examined by him was undoubtedly the genuine
austral sand, as Mr. Haidinger had received it from Sir
Joseph Banks, when he was in London.
Mr. Nicholson, however, in the 9th Number of his Journal
of Natural Philosophy, &c. (p. 410.) published on the Ist of
December, 1797, questions much, whether the substance exa-
mined by Mr. Klaproth was the same as that examined by
Mr. Wedgwood ; and, after having contrasted their experi-
ments, says, “ hence it seems fair to conclude that the two
“ minerals were not the same, however this may have hap-
“ pened; and that the existence of the new fusible earth of
“ Wedgwood stands on the same evidence as before, namely,
“ his experiments, which have not yet been repeated, that I
“ know of.”
Some of Mr. Nicholson's objections to the experiments of
Mr. Klaproth, being founded principally on some difference
in the external characters of the substance examined by him,
and the one examined by Mr. Wedgwood, are such as very
naturally occur; but the following pages will, I believe, prove
that Mr. Klaproth’s experiments were made on that which
might be justly regarded as the Sydneia or austral sand.
In 1796, the Right Hon. Sir Joseph Banks, P. R. S. favoured
me with a specimen of the Sydneia, which had been lately
brought to England; a portion of this I soon after examined,
in a cursory manner, by muriatic acid, but did not obtain any
precipitate when'water was added to the filtrated solution.


Upon mentioning this circumstance, and expressing a desire
to examine this substance with more accuracy, Sir Joseph
Banks, with his usual readiness to promote every scientific
inquiry, not only permitted me to take specimens from diffe-
rent parts of the box which contained the earth already men-
tioned, but (that every doubt might be obviated) gave me about
300 grains which remained of the identical substance examined
by Mr. Wedgwood.
Upon these the following experiments were made; and, to
distinguish them, I shall call the first, No. 1, and that examined
by Mr. Wedgwood, No. 2.
§. 2.
Analysis of the Sydneia,. No. i.
The Sydneia , No. 1, is in masses and lumps, of a pale greyish
white, intermixed with a few particles of white mica, and also
occasionally with some which are of a dark grey, resembling
graphite or plumbago.
It easily crumbles between the fingers, to a powder nearly
impalpable, which has rather an unctuous feel.
Small fragments of vegetable matter are also commonly
found intermixed with it; and the general aspect is that of an
earthy substance which has been deposited by water.
EXPERIMENT 1.
400 Grains were put into a glass matrass, and one quart of
distilled water being added, the whole was boiled to one fourth.
The liquor was then filtrated, and a portion being examined
by the re-agents commonly used, afforded no trace of mattei


in solution. The remainder was then evaporated, without leav-
ing any residuum.
EXPERIMENT 2.
About 200 grains of the earth, rubbed to a fine powder, were
put into a glass retort, into which I poured three ounces of
concentrated pure muriatic acid. The retort was placed in sand,
and the acid was distilled, till the matter in the retort remained
dry. Two ounces of muriatic acid were again poured on it, and
distilled as before, till only one fourth remained. The whole
was tlhen put into a matrass, which was placed in an inclined
position, so that when the earth had subsided, the liquor might
be decanted, without disturbing the sediment.
When it had remained thus for 12 hours, the acid was care-
fully poured into a glass vessel; but, as I observed that it was
not so perfectly transparent as before it had been thus employed,
I suffered it to remain 24 hours, but did not perceive any sedi-
ment. Half of this liquor was diluted with about twelve parts
of distilled water, and, after a few hours, a very small quantity
of a white earth subsided.
This however did not appear to me to be a precipitate caused
by a change in the chemical affinities, but rather an earthy
matter which had been suspended in the concentrated acid,
and afterwards deposited, when the liquor was rendered less
dense by the addition of water. To ascertain this, I poured the
remaining portion of the concentrated liquor on a filter of four
folds: it passed perfectly transparent, and, although diluted
with twenty-four parts of water, it remained unchanged, and
as pellucid as before. I now filtrated the former portion, and
added it to that already mentioned.


It was then evaporated to dryness, and left a pale brownish
mass, which was dissolved again, by digestion, in the smallest
possible quantity of muriatic acid.
Water was added, in a very large proportion, to this solution,
without producing any effect; I then, by prussiate of potash,
precipitated a quantity of iron, which was separated by a filter.
The clear solution was then saturated with lixivium of car-
bonate of potash, and a white precipitate was produced, which
was collected and edulcorated. This, when digested with di-
luted sulphuric acid, was dissolved; and the superfluous acid
being driven off by heat, boiling water was poured on the re-
siduum, and completely dissolved it.
To this solution some drops of lixivium of potash were added,
and, by repeated evaporations, the whole formed crystals of
alum.
From the above experiment it appeared, that the muriatic
acid had only dissolved some alumine and iron; but, in order
to satisfy myself more completely in respect to the component
parts of this substance, I made the following analysis.
Analysis. A. 400 grains were put into a glass retort, which
was then made red-hot during half an hour. Some water came
over, and the earth afterwards weighed 380.80 grains, so that
the loss amounted to 19.20 grains. The greater part of this
loss was occasioned by the dissipation of the water imbibed by
the earth; to which must be added, the loss of weight caused
by the combustion of a small portion of vegetable matter.
B. The 380.80 grains were rubbed to a fine powder, and
being put into a glass retort, 1470 grains of pure concentrated
sulphuric acid were added. The retort was then placed in a
small reverberatory, and the fire was gradually increased, till


the acid was distilled over: it was then poured back on the
matter in the retort, and distilled as before, till a mass nearly
dry remained.
On this, boiling distilled water was repeatedly poured, until
it no longer changed the colour of litmus paper, and was de-
void of taste. The undissolved portion was then dried, and
made red-hot; after which it weighed 281 grains.
C, I now mixed the 281 grains with 300 grains of dry car-
bonate of potash, and exposed the mixture to a strong red heat,
in a siilver crucible, during four hours. The mass was loose,
and off a greyish white: it was softened with water, and, being
put into a retort, sulphuric acid was added to a considerable
excess. The whole was then distilled to dryness, and, when
a sufficient quantity of boiling water had been added, it was
poured on a filter, and the residuum was well washed ; it was
then made red-hot, and afterwards weighed 274.75 grains.
D. The solutions of B and C were added together, and were
much reduced by evaporation. Pure ammoniac was then em-
ployed to saturate the acid, and a copious loose precipitate, of
a pale yellowish colour was produced; which, collected, edul-
corated, and made red-hot, weighed 103.70 grains.
E. The filtrated liquor of D was again evaporated, and car-
bonate of potash being added, a slight precipitation of earthy
matter took place; which, by the test of sulphuric acid, proved
to be some alumine which had not been precipitated in the
former experiment: this weighed 1.20 grain.
F. - The 103.70 grains of D were completely dissolved when
digested with nitric acid, excepting a small residuum of silice-
ous earth, which weighed 0.90 grain.
G. The nitric solution was evaporated to dryness, and a
B 2


second portion of the same acid was added, and in like manner
evaporated. The residuum was then made red-hot, and digested
with diluted nitric acid, which left a considerable portion of red
oxide of iron. The solution was again evaporated, and the re-
siduum, being treated as before, again deposited some oxide of
iron, much less in quantity than the former.
The whole of the oxide was then heated with wax in a por-
celain crucible, was taken up by a magnet, and weighed 26.50
grains.
H. The nitric solution of G was saturated with ammoniac,
and a loose white precipitate was formed; which, edulcorated
and made red-hot, weighed 76 grains.
I. These 7 6 grains were dissolved when digested with diluted
sulphuric acid; and, when the excess of acid had been expelled
by heat,, the saline mass was dissolved in boiling water. To
this solution I added some lixivium of potash, and, by gra-
dual and repeated evaporations, obtained the whole in regular
octoedral crystals of alum.
K. The 274.75 grains of C now alone remained to be exa-
mined. They appeared to consist of siliceous earth, mixed with
the dark grey shining particles already mentioned; but, as I
shall describe, in the following experiments, the process by
which these were separated, I shall now only say that they
amounted to 7.50 grains.
L. The earth with which the abovementioned particles were
mixed weighed 267.25 grains. This earth was white, and arid
to the touch: when melted with two parts of soda, it formed a
colourless glass; and, with four parts of the same it dissolved
in water, and formed a liquor silicum: it was therefore pure
siliceous earth or silica.


The substance here examined was composed therefore of the
following ingredients.
grains.
Pure siliceous earth or silica - \ ' °'^°
[L. 267.25
Alumine - - - - / 1,20
IH. 76
Oxide of iron G. 26.50
Dark grey particles K. 7.50
Water and vegetable matter - A. 19.20
39 8 -55
The foregoing analysis was repeated several times, and al-
ways with similar results; excepting, that as I had taken the
specimens from different parts of a large quantity, I found that
the proportions of the ingredients were not constantly the same:
that of the siliceous earth, for example, was sometimes greater,
and the alumine and iron proportionably less. Some specimens
were also nearly or totally destitute of the dark grey shining
particles; in short, every circumstance was such as might be
expected from a mixed substance, which, from the nature of its
formation, cannot have the ingredients in any fixed proportion.*
As this substance agreed in its general characters, for the
greater part, with that described by Mr. Wedgwood, and as it
was indisputably brought from the same place, there appeared
every reason to believe that the nature of both was the same;
* The description given by Mr. Klaproth convinces me that his experiments
were made on a portion of this substance. Moreover, when my late friend Mr. Hai-
dinger was in London, I gave him some of this earth for his collection; so that,
whether Mr. Klaproth made his experiments on that which had been received by
Mr. Haidinger from Sir Joseph Banks, or from myself, it is not less certain that
he operated on that which might be regarded as the genuine Sydneia.


but, to obviate as much as possible any doubt or objection, I
determined to repeat the experiments, and the analysis, on that
portion which remained of the identical substance examined by
Mr. Wedgwood, and which from that period had been reserved
by Sir Joseph Banks, who kindly favoured me with it for this
purpose.
§• 3-
Analysis of the Sydneia, No. 2.
This substance, as has already been mentioned, consists of
a white transparent quartzose sand, a soft opaque white earth,
some particles of white mica, and a quantity of dark lead-grey
particles, which have a metallic lustre.
The Sydneia, No. 2, appears chiefly to differ from No. 1, by
being more arenaceous, and by a larger proportion of the dark
grey particles. Many experiments, similar to those made on
No. 1, already described, were made on this substance, with
pure concentrated muriatic acid; but, as none of these afforded
any appearance of a precipitate by the means of water, I do not
think it necessary to enter into a circumstantial account of them,
and shall proceed therefore to the analysis.
A. 100 grains were exposed to a red heat, in a glass retort,
and, after half an hour, were found to have lost in weight 2.20
grains.
B. The 97. 80 grains which remained were mixed with 300
grains of dry carbonate of potash, and the mixture was exposed
to a strong red heat, in a crucible of silver, during three hours.
When cold, the mass was softened with water, and was put
into a glass matrass. I then added three ounces of pure con-


centrated muriatic acid, and digested it for two hours in a
strong sand heat. Boiling water was then added, and the
whole being poured on a filter, the residuum was edulcorated,
dried, and made red-hot; it then weighed 85.50 grains.
C. The filtrated solution was evaporated to one fourth, and
pure ammoniac being added, a precipitate was formed, which,
after a red heat, weighed 10.70 grains.
D. One ounce of muriatic acid was poured on the 10.70
grains, in a matrass, which was then heated. The whole of
the 10.70 grains was dissolved, excepting a small portion of
siliceous earth, which weighed 0.30 grain.
E. The muriatic solution was then reduced by evaporation,
to about one fourth ; to which I added a large quantity of dis-
tilled water, which did not however produce any change. I
then gradually added a solution of pure crystallized prussiate of
potash, and heated the liquor till the whole of the iron was pre-
cipitated; after which, ammoniac precipitated a loose white
earth, which, edulcorated and made red-hot, weighed 7.20 grains.
The iron precipitated by the prussiate may therefore be esti-
mated at 3.20 grains.
F. The 7.20 grains of the white earth were digested with
sulphuric acid, and, after the excess of acid had been expelled
by heat, boiling water was poured on the saline residuum.
The solution was then gradually evaporated, with the addition
of a small portion of lixivium of potash, and afforded crystals
of alum, without a trace of any other substance.
G. I now proceeded to examine the 85.50 grains of B.
These appeared to consist of siliceous earth, or fine particles of
quartz, mingled with a considerable quantity of the dark grey
shining particles.


Mr. Wedgwood was of opinion that these were a peculiar
species of plumbago or graphite. Professor Blumenbach, on
the contrary, regards them as molybdaena : and Mr. Klaproth
believes them to be eisenglimmer or micaceous iron ore.
When rubbed between the fingers, they leave a dark grey
stain, and the feel is unctuous, like that of plumbago, or mo-
lybdaena : the traces which they make on paper also resemble
those of the abovementioned substances, but the lustre of the
particles approaches nearer to that of molybdaena.
In order therefore to determine whether or not they consisted
totally or partially of molybdaena, I put the 85.50 grains into
a small glass retort, and added two ounces of concentrated ni-
tric acid. The retort was then placed in a sand heat, and the
distillation was continued, till the matter remained dry. The
acid was then poured back into the retort, and distilled as be-
fore ; but I did not observe that the grey particles had suffered
any change, nor were nitrous fumes produced, as when mo-
lybdaena is thus treated.
To be more certain, however, I digested pure ammoniac on
the residuum; and, having decanted it into a matrass, I eva-
porated it to dryness, without perceiving any vestige of oxide
of molybdaena, or indeed of any other substance.
It was evident therefore that molybdaena was not present;
and, as the general external characters and properties corre-
sponded with those of plumbago, I was inclined to believe that
these were particles of that substance, and not micaceous iion,
as Mr. Klaproth imagined. To determine this, the following
experiment was made.
H. 200 grains of pure nitre in powder were mixed with the
85,50 grains, and the mixture was gradually projected into a


Crucible, made strongly red-hot. A feeble detonation took
place at each projection; and, after a quarter of an hour had
elapsed, the crucible was removed.
When cold, the mass was porous and white, without any ap-
pearance of the dark grey particles. Boiling water was poured
on it, and the whole being put into a matrass, one ounce of
muriatic acid was added, and digested with it in a sand heat.
By evaporation it became gelatinous: it was then emptied on a
filter, and, being well washed, dried, and made red-hot, weighed
75.25 grains.
The appearance of this was that of a white earth, arid to
the touch. When melted with two parts of soda, a colourless
glass was formed; and, with four parts of the same, it was so-
luble in water, and produced liquor silicum; it was therefore
pure siliceous earth.
I. The filtrated liquor was saturated with ammoniac, and,
upon being heated, a few brownish flocculi were precipitated,
which, when collected and dried, weighed 0.40 grain. This pre-
cipitate was dissolved in muriatic acid, and was again precipi-
tated by prussiate of potash, in the state of Prussian blue.
The liquor from which the flocculi of iron had been separated
was then examined, by adding carbonate of potash, and lastly ,
by being evaporated to dryness ; but it no longer afforded any
earthy or metallic substance : so that, by the process of detona-
tion with nitre, the 85.50 grains afforded 75.25 grains of pure
siliceous earth, with 0.40 grain of iron; and, as the dark grey
substance was destroyed, excepting the 0.40 grain of iron above-
mentioned, and as 9.85 grains of the original weight of 85.50
grains were dissipated, there can be no doubt but that this sub-
stance, amounting to 10.25 grains, was carburet of iron or


plumbago; especially as some experiments which I purposely
made, on that from Keswick in Cumberland, were attended
with similar results.
It is also evident, that these particles could not be eisen-
glimmer or micaceous iron, as nitre has little or no effect on
that substance, when projected into a heated crucible.
In a subsequent experiment on the same, the crucible was
removed immediately after the last projection, and I then ob-
served that an effervescence, with a disengagement of carbonic
acid, took place, upon the addition of the muriatic acid, as is
usual when pure plumbago is decomposed by nitre, and that
less of the gelatinous matter was formed by evaporation.
The cause of this difference was evidently the duration of
the red heat; for, in the first instance, the alkali developed by
the decomposition of the nitre had time to unite with the sili-
ceous earth, so as, when dissolved, to form liquor silicum ; but,
in the second experiment, a portion of alkali remained com-
bined with the carbonic acid, produced by the carbon of the
decomposed plumbago.
The produce of 100 grains by this analysis was,
grains.
fD. O.QO
Silica - - \
LH. 75.25
Alumine - - - F. 7.20
Oxide of iron E. 3.20
Graphite or plumbago - I. 10.25
Water A. 2.20
9840
Mr. Wedgwood says, that sulphuric acid cannot dissolve
the precipitated earth, and has but little effect on the mixed


substance, even when distilled to dryness; but, from the pre-
ceding experiments, I had reason to believe that the aluminous
earth and iron would be separated by reiterated distillation; I
therefore repeated the analysis in the following manner.
Second Analysis of the Sydneia, No. 2.
A. 100 grains of the earth were put into a glass retort, upon
which 400 grains of pure concentrated sulphuric acid were
poured. The retort was placed in a small reverberatory, and
the fire was continued till a dry mass remained. 400 grains
of the acid were again poured in, and distilled as before. Upon
the dry mass, boiling water was poured, and the whole was
then emptied on a filter, and edulcorated. The residuum, after
a red heat, weighed 87.75 grains, and consisted of siliceous
earth, mixed with some mica, and with particles of plumbago.
B. The filtrated solution, by ammoniac, afforded a precipi-
tate, which weighed 9.50 grains; and, being examined, as in the
former experiment, yielded 6.50 grains of alumine, and 3 grains
of oxide of iron.
The plumbago was separated from the siliceous matter, in
the manner already described, and amounted to about 10 grains.
By this analysis I obtained,
Silica and mica - - 77-75
Alumine - - - 6 no
Oxide of iron " “ - 3
Plumbago - - - 1Q
97-25
It appears therefore that the Sydneian earth, when treated
with sulphuric acid, is capable of being for the greater part
C 2


decomposed; and Mr. Wedgwood probably did not succeed,
because his process was in some respect different, or that the
distillation was not sufficiently repeated.
I have not thought it necessary to be more circumstantial in
the account of this second analysis, as the operations were si-
milar to those of the former.
§• 4-
These experiments prove, that the earthy substance called
Sydneia or terra australis, consists of siliceous earth, alumine,
oxide of iron, and black lead or graphite.
The presence of the latter appears to be accidental, and it
probably was mixed with the other substances at the time when
they were transported, and deposited, by means of water; for
this appears evidently to have been the case, from the general
characters of this mixed earthy substance.
The quartz and mica, which are so visible, indicate a granitic
origin; and the soft white earth has probably been formed by
a decomposition of feldt spar, such as is to be seen in many
places, and particularly at St. Stephen's, in Cornwall. The gra-
nitic sand which covers the borders of the Mer de Glace, at Cha-
mouni, in Savoy, also much resembles the terra australis, ex-
cepting that the feldt spar is not in a state of decomposition :
in short, the general aspect, and the concur to prove,
that the Sydneia has been formed by the disintegration and de-
composition of granite, or gneiss.
Mr. Wedgwood's experiments are so circumstantial, that
had I only examined the earth last brought to England, I should
have supposed, with Mr. Nicholson, that I had operated on a
different substance; but, as I had an opportunity to examine.


by analysis, a portion of the same earth on which Mr. Wedg-
wood made his experiments, and as I received it from Sir
Joseph Banks, the same gentleman who had furnished Mr.
Wedgwood with it, no suspicion can be entertained about its
identity.
Some of the experiments which I have related, and which
prove that some of the finer earthy particles remained suspended
in the concentrated muriatic acid, and were precipitated when
the acid was diluted with water, appear in some measure to ac-
count for the mistake which has been made, in supposing that
a primitive earth, before unknown, was present; but this alone
will not account for many of the other properties mentioned by
Mr. Wedgwood, such as,
Ist. The repeated and exclusive solubility in the muriatic
acid, and subsequent precipitation by water.
2dly. The butyraceous mass which was formed by evapo-
ration.
And, 3dly. The degree of fusibility of the precipitated earth.
These indeed I can by no means explain, but by supposing
that the acids used by Mr. Wedgwood were impure. This
supposition appears to be corroborated by a passage in Mr.
Wedgwood's paper, where he says, “ here the Prussian lixi-
“ vium, in whatever quantity it was added, occasioned no pre-
i( cipitation at all, (only the usual bluishness arising from the
“ iron always found in the common acids”)* Now if (as it
seems from this expression) Mr. Wedgwood employed the
common acids of the shops, without having previously exa-
mined and purified them, all certainty of analysis must fall,
as the impurity of such acids is well known to every practical
Philosophical Transactions, Vol. LXXX. Part 11. p. 313.


Mr. Hatchett's Analysis , &c.
chemist; but, whether this was the cause, or not, of the effects
described by Mr. Wedgwood, I do not hesitate to assert, that
the mineral which has been examined does not contain any
primitive earth, or substance possessing the properties ascribed
to it, and consequently, that the Sydneian genus, in future,
must be omitted in the mineral system.












SRa
544.^44
h^l


NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
3 1508
02021044


