

AN ANZAC’S
EXPERIENCES
ON GALLIPOLI
FRANCE
BELGIUM
E. WELLS
A Returned Soldier
Sydney:
W. J. ANDERSON
182 Elizabeth Street




AN ANZAC S
EXPERIENCES
ON GALLIPOLI
FRANCE
AND
BELGIUM
E. WELLS
A Returned Soldier
SYDNEY
W. J. ANDERSON, 182 Elizabeth Stree*
19 19


INTRODUCTION
Dear Reader, —The following sketches of
life in the trenches are a faithful account of a
soldier’s life as it really is. Stripped of all
gloss and glamor, the realities of war are truth-
fully portrayed; also the brighter and more
human side of a soldier’s life—the chaff, the
comradeship, the arguments—and running
through all, the golden thread of love, for our
native land—the writer hopes that in these few
pages you will find something to interest and
amuse you and he will not have written in vain.
Yours faithfully,
E. WELLS.


In the Trenches
A scorching hot day on the Peninsula; seven or eight Aus-
tralians are sitting together in a sap. The Turks’ trench is a
bare fifty yards away. Every six or eight yards in our trench
an observer stands, watching through his periscope for the slight-
est movement on the other side. The heat is intense, the trench
is like an oven, and the perspiration runs off the men in streams.
“Could you stop a long one now, Bill?” said the man on his right.
Bill*does not answer. Suddenly he stiffens, his trigger finger
crooks, and he fires. “Got him, by hell!” he shouts. “Good boy,
Bill!” said the man on the left, “I’ve missed the cow twenty
times.” “Yes, said one of the crowd in the sap, “Missed him —
and we ’ll miss the bally Derby and Cup and every other darn
thing if we don’t soon get a move one.” “What do you fancy for
the Cup, Jim?” one man asks. “Why, old seldom, every time,” Jim
replies. ‘ ‘ Spare me days, ’ ’ said another man, ‘* he hasn’t a hope.
Why, I’ll give you five to one that he don’t get a place.” “It’s
a wager,” says Jim; “five to one, in quids.” “Bight oh!” says
the layer of odds, “and I’ll get a bit back of what I dropped on
the cow at Caulfield. Anyone else wants to back him?” “Look
here, you blokes!” said a long fellow from outback, “you can
have all your Derbys and Cups! Wlyit I want is a piece of roast
beef and baked potatoes and caulitiSwer, and plum pudding—and
a. big pint of .” “Gor’s truth! wfliat’s the matter with a
pair of roast ducks and green peas, and a drop of lager,” chips
in another. “Yer can’t beat a nice roast leg of mutton and apple
tart,” from a little chap.. “Tarts!” says Jim, “wait till we
blooming well get to Constantinople and the harem, and you’ll
see me bowling down the street with one on each arm.” “Well,
I’d sooner be bowling down Big Bourke with my best girl, than
any of them Turkey tarts with their trousers on. What do you
say, Jack?” “My oath,” says Jack, “every time Australia will
do me, I’m not fussy.”
AUSTEALIA! A momentary silence falls on the group as
each one’s thoughts flash back to the land of their birth, and
the loved ones at home, in that fragment of time. Crash —a 9in.
armour-piercing shell has come through 6ft. of solid earth and
exploded amongst them. The vagaries of fortune —the only ones
uninjured are two brothers; all the rest are shattered, broken, and
torn; and poor Jim will never see either Derby or Cup again, for
he sleeps his last long sleep on the wind-swept hills of Gallipoli.


A Night Alarm
THE BEACH AT GALLIPOLI.
It is 4 a.m. and a misty morning. The remnant of a battalion
had arrived the night before from Cape Helles, where we had
lost half our strength. The men are sleeping as only soldiers can
sleep, in spite of the increasing war of artillery and the incessant
rifle fire. The inlying pickets, in full- fighting order, are lying in
all sorts of different attitudes, blissfully, indifferent to the tur-
moil in the hills above them.
Suddenly an order comes, quick and sharp: “Stand to!”
Recalled to the realities of existence, we stagger to our feet, rub-
bing our eyes. “What’s up?” is the question on each man’s lips;
but again comes the hoarse voice of command: “Fall in;” —
“Quick march! —“At the double!” And away we go, up a rock-
strewn gully, that bears an unenviable reputation. Shrapnel is
falling all around us, and occasionally a man is hit and goes down.
We do nbt slacken our pace, but stumble and struggle on up the
steep incline, eager to be in before the finish. For the Turks
have made a determined attack on our line, and supports have
been called for. As we draw nearer, louder grows the din of rapid
rifle fire, the ping of the passing bullets mixed with showers of
shrapnel. The thunder of our artillery gives us a feeling of se-
curity, and we dive into the communication trenches. In a few
moments we are in amongst our own men, who have a hot time.
The enemy were retiring, having had enough of it for one night.
A few Turks managed to reach our trenches, but they never re-
turned.
When the sun came out and the mist cleared away, the Turk-
ish dead could be seen thickly strewn ail over No Man’s Land.
It was estimated that our lads had accounted for fully three
thousand of them that night. Abdul was taught a lesson that he
never forgot.
(Cairo-street boy to Australian soldier): “Paper? Buy a
paper?” Good news, Mr. McKenzie. Thirty thousand Austra-
lians killed!”
Two Tommies were heard criticising the Australian soldier.
This is how one described them: —“I, Chum, they be big chaps,
with wristlet watches, and gold in their teeth, and they call the
best friendi
German Sniper, caught in No Man’s Land. “Mercy, kamerad,
mercy. ’ ’
Australian: “I’ll give you mercy, yer s’pose it was
you who busted me pipe this morning.”


A View of France
We landed at Marseilles on a fine morning in the early Spring.
The harbour was crowded with shipping of all nationalities. The
French people gave we xYustralians a hearty welcome, and pro-
vided us with coffee, cigarettes, etc., at every stopping place.
For four long and weary days we passed through smiling fields
and well-kept roads, through large towns and small villages. Ihe
contrast between Egypt and this fair land was remarked by all.
“It’s a beautiful country, and well worth fighting for, was the
general opinion. Armentieres was our last stopping place, and
we settled down to life on French soil—or, rather, sometimes on it,
and sometimes under it. We took over the trenches that we
were to occupy, from the Tommies, and set to work to make our-
selves at home. The German trenches were not far away, and
the first morning after our arrival, Fritz put up a board, with
the following words written on it: “Welcome, Australians! Ad-
vance if you can.” Subsequent events proved that Fritz was a
bit too premature with his challenge, for it was not many days
after that some of our boys went over and bombed him out of his
trenches, and brought a couple of his machine guns back with
them. We have met many times since then, but never again has
Fritz displayed any placards inviting us to come over. He knows
the slouch hats a bit better now than he did at that time. Cham-
pagne was two shillings a bottle when we arrived at Armentieres,
but after the first pay (when we were all millionaires) the demand
for it was so great that it very soon rose to ten shillings. The
boys soon got on good terms with the French population; their
free and easy way, and open-handedness and fondness of children
made them great favourites.
Winter on the Somme
Rain, mud, ice and snow —all churned up togetfier! In places
it is three feet deep, and never less than over our boot tops. We
struggle wearily along through the rain, which has never ceased
since we started our march, twenty-six hours ago. We are only
ten miles from our last camp, and have taken all that time to
cover the distance. The road is crowded with traffic of all des-
criptions, and a wait of two hours is not uncommon when a block
occurs. Over-turned waggons, dead horses, motor bikes and cars
line the road, and amongst these obstacles we drearily pick our
way (when we can move at all). At last we leave the “road” and
turn off, down a gully, for a mile or so; then we come to a halt
and proceed to camp. It is raining harder than ever; everything
is we t —pack wet, overcoat wet, and no blanket; and the wood is
wet. It is about 4 a.m., and there is nothing for it but to walk
about until morning. An issue of rum was served out, and it
warmed us up a bit, but we were very glad to see daylight ap-
pearing. All the old trenches and dugouts were full of mud and
water,”and the boys started to bale them out and dig fresh ones.
They soon got things “ship-shape,” and made themselves as com-
fortable as possible. Timber was scarce, but the Australians had
such a “taking way” with them that they soon got all they wanted.


The Tommies, who Were in charge of the timber dumps, had a
good deal to put up with from our chaps. Some of the hard cases
would put up a couple of stripes on their sleeves, write an order
out for so many duck boards for “Colonel Jones,” or any name
that came handy, and march six men up to the dump. “Here,
Sergeant! Here’s an order from Colonel , and they are wanted
“immediately.” While the Sergeant was arguing with the Aus-
tralian the duck boards would be half-way to our camp —never to
return. We stopped at this place for three months, and had sev-
eral brushes with Fritz during that time. We left there for Ba-
paume, and took that place, and then proceeded on to Bulle-
court.
The Australian
W. H. O.
“THE BRAVEST THAT GOD EVER MADE.”
A DISTINGUISHED BRITISH OFFICER’S OPINION
The skies that arched his land were blue;
His bush-born winds, were warm and sweet;
And yet from earliest hours he knew
The tides of victory and defeat.
.From fierce floods thundering at his birth—
From red droughts ravening while he ploughed—
He learned to fear no foes on earth—
“The bravest thing God ever made,”
The bugles of the Motherland)
Rang ceaselessly across the sea,
To call him and his lean brown band
To shape Imperial destiny.
He -went by—youth’s grave purpose willed,
The goal unknown, the cost unweighed;
The promise of his blood fulfilled —
“The bravest thing God ever made.”
We know—it is our deathless pride—
The splendour of his first fierce blows:
How reckless, glorious, undenied,
He stormed those steel-lined cliffs we know;
And none who saw him scale the height,
Behind his reeking bayonet blade,
Would rob him of his title right—
“ The bravest thing God ever made.”
Bravest, where half a world of men
Are brave beyond all earth’s rewards,
So stoutly none shall charge again
Till the last breaking of the swords.
Wounded or hale, won home from war,
Or yonder by the Lone Pine laid,
Give him his due for evermore—
“The bravest thing God ever made.”


The Real Anzac
There are plenty of slouch-hatted soldiers in town,
Doughty and debonair, stalwart and brown;
Some are from Weymouth, or Salisbury Plain,
Others have “pushed” in the Western Campaign;
Call them “Overseas soldiers,” or down under men,
Declare that each one is as daring as ten;
Call them Cornstalks or Fernleaves,"all out for a light—
But don’t call them Anzacs, for that isn’t right.
The Anzacs! —their ranks are but’ scanty, all told —
Have a separate record illumined in gold.
Their blood on Gallipoli’s ridges they poured,
Their souls with the scars of that struggle are scored;
Not many are left, and not many are sound,
And thousands lie buried in Turkish ground.
These are the Anzacs! The others may claim
Tkeir zeal and their spirit—but never their name.
When We Return
I call to mind the crowd upon the quay,
A surging crowd that cheered us off to war,
A girl who waved a farewell hand to me—
And then the dim receding shore.
It seems a thousand years of nebulous intent.
They called across the seas for martial men,
And knowing their sore needs, we went.
We flinched not on those fields of riven red,
Nor called a halt when duty urged us on;
Content, we did our share. Our honoured dead
Define the fields we have fought and won;
And now returning—broken, bruised and won;
We know we have done our best. We’ve fought our round
And deep within our breast lies that content
Which comes to men when homeward bound.
But while we’ve left behind that seething Hell,
Where men grow mad for lust of alien blood,
We know not whether all at home is well,
Nor if love’s tide remains at flood.
That trusted heart we thought possessed no flaw
May well revolt at sight of you or me,
When crippled, maimed, we step upcin the shore
And seek her eyes upon the quay.
—PESSIMIST,


Anzacs
The children unborn shall acclaim
The standard the Anzacs unfurled,
When they made Australia’s fame
The wonder and pride of the world.
Some of you got the V.C.,
Some the Gallipoli trot;
Some got a grave by the sea,
And all of you got it damned hot
And I see you go strolling through town,
In the faded old hospital blue,
And driving abroad “lying down,”
And, my God! —but I wish I were you.
I envy you beggars I met, r
Prom the dirty old hats on your head
To the rusty old boots on your feet,
I envy you, living or dead.
A Knighthood is fine in its way,
A Peerage brings splendour and fame;
But I would rather have tacked any day
That word to the end of my name.
I count it the greatest reward
That ever a man could attain,
I’d rather be Anzac than lord—
I’d rather be—Anzac than Thane.
There’s a bar to the medal you’ll wear,
There’s a word that will glitter, and glow,
And an honour a KING cannot share,
When you are back in the cities yon know.
The children unborn shall acclaim
The Standard the Anzacs unfurled,
When they made Australasia’s fame
The wonder and pride of the world.


The Great Game
Mud, dusk, and a somewhat limited panorama of Flanders!
Flanders and mud we have come to look upon as one, and look on
them as an essential to the life of a soldier. Dusk we welcome;
it giving us respite and rest for a few brief hours. Out in front,
and behind us, a foggy mist rises from the ground, rising in
weird, fantastic shapes as it strikes the upper air.
A slight breeze rustles the scanty foliage of a shattered tree
to our left. It makes, to our ears, a hideous soul-searching cry
for vengeance. When the star shells flare in mid-air it throws the
tree out into weird relief, making it cast long, ragged shadows on
the ground. We think of the story that tree could tell if it could
only speak. How it has seen the ebb and flow of battle; how nobly
men fought; how they died; how they still die, defiant, to the
end. Pointing with shattered arms to their goal, ever onward,
up, Excelsior! as the old tree still points with the remains of its
shattered trunk. Then it could tell yet another story; how the
little children played beneath its sheltering branches; how they
enjoyed the cool, refreshing shade cast by its branches and thick
foliage. Instead of deep scars on the ground, poppies and daisies
and hundreds of other spring flowers adorned the surrounding
landscape. How the nightingale made the night sweet with his
hopeful melody. The nightingale still gives voice to his song;
but it is more broken than before, and the trills, instead of a
light-hearted hopefulness, take on a haunting mournful sadness,
with a touch of infinite longing for his old domain.
Far up in the sky a silver sheen shows for a moment and
disappears. Suddenly the dark clouds are riven asunder and the
old moon shines out in all her glory, casting a mellow, tender light
over the torn and tortured ground around the trenches. It heartens
us. We see, by this sign, something bright and good, after that
which is before us. Taking advantage of the'light of the moon,
we peer towards our enemy. Big things are afoot to-night, and one
slight slip may mean that some of our comrades will not answer
the next roll-call. But all is well. Intense silence; except, at times,
the spiteful moaning hiss of a sniper’s bullet; sometimes a scream
of agony.
‘‘Everything ready?” the Corporal questions. ‘‘Got the
bombs ready, Tommy?” Tommy, a big, hefty giant, answers
‘‘Yes!” Then, as an afterthought, he adds, ‘‘Corp., guess we’ll
give ’em the king hit to-night.” Hardly are words out of his
mouth than the answer is given by a swishing roar above our
heads. Bang! And what we have been walling for has come.
The second shell comes from half-right, rear. It is an iso-
lated gun “feeling” for the rest of the battery. Another few
moments of silence, then guns all along the line take up the can-
nonade. The air is filled with a hurtling, swishing sound as the
first salvo of shells speed on to their destination. We duck Our


heads with the shock of the first explosion. In and out of the
lesser bursting of the small shells we reeognice the demoralising
roar of the big sixty-pounders. These big shells plough up tons
of earth, spreading death and destruction everywhere.
The roar of our shells give us a feeling of security. We
well know, by past experience, that “Fritz” will be keeping
low. Perhaps he is even down in his dug-outs, some of them a
considerable distance underground. Some of the men, taking a
chance risk a glance over the parapet to enjoy to the full, the sight
of “Fritz’s” discomfort. Those men who have not Tooked over
a fair inkling of how things go by the talk of the boys at
the parapet. As the shells strike the earth sundry ejaculations
are heard. “By hell, they are getting it hot now!” “Strike me
pink, that was a beaut!”
Tommy, catching the spirit of the moment, fixes a grenade
to his rifle, sardonically, salutes it, and releases the trigger. He
mounts the fire step in time to see where his bomb lands. “About
five yards out,” he mutters discontentedly; but, nevertheless, he
seems to be highly pleased. As he is getting the _next grenade
ready, his face creases up into a thousand wrinkles. He breaks
into a broad, good-humoured grin. He sets his rifle at a more
acute angle, kisses the grenade in grim sarcasm, and tires.
Our artillery is working itself into a pitch of fury before
undreamed of, but we are used to the shriek and hiss of the shells
by this, being more at home in action than silence and inaction.
We glory in the red, raw, hiss of the big shells as they hurtle on
their' way to destroy human life. “Out in front” “Fritz” has
suddenly thought of something happening. Being too preoccupied
gloating on “Fritz’s” destruction, we forget that he can retali-
ate. A sudden whiz, bang, thirty yards in front of us, makes us
think more of safety and less of gloating.
The Corporal slides down from the fire-step and yells impeTT-
ously, “Keep in the parapet, boys; they will get the range next
shot.” And with a final injunction to our bomber, Tommy, “Tom-
my, you overgrown cow, cover yourself up, will you?’ r Tommy
expands his broad chest, his lovable, wicked face lights up with a
wicked, scornful smile, but nevertheless he crouches into the
parapet; not for his protection, but as he says “Bookin’ safer;
and being orders, I must.”
We all crouch close together. Somehow, we feel safe at the
thought, and the feel of warm, pulsating human comradeship be-
fore unheard of till the cry of the “War God” brought us to-
gether. “Brothers they were who found their brotherhood that
night, and found it good.”
A swift, sharp hiss, like the letting loose of a giant’s pent-
up fury, a dull thud, and we know the shell we have been waiting
for has arrived. The second intervening between the thud and the
burst cannot be explained. A second when the body is dead; yet
every nerve and every thought twitch and become vivid and real;
a second when the mind works quickly, turning every thought in-
to a confused chaos of trepidation. It is a second that helps the


body to withstand the tehock that will follow. A second specially
made for those in great danger. To be brief, the second be-
tween life and deuth.
Our small world of parapet, paradox and dug-out suddenly
swells like a blister. Then, crash! A stomach-sickening crash, and
the tension is broken. Mind reasserts itself over the body, and
we are suddenly whisked back to the real.
“Who is hurt?” is the silent question asked in every mind.
“Did you get it?” onj man questions of a comrade, who is feel-
ing himself all over. “Dunno,” he answers, wondering if his
answer is true or not. “Give us a look.” After looking and
seeing no sign of a sound, he again asks, “Where do you feel it?”
“Here an’ here, an’ here, an . ” “Hold on, laddie, don't be
silly; that was some lumps of dirt 'it yer.” “Hell! I forgot; thort
I was knocked a treat.” “Well, I dunno what you’ll think when
a lump does ’it yer and knocks yer rotten. Q.uess, you’ll think all
Krupp’s iron foundry suddenly ’it yer under the chin,” the
Good Samaritan mumbles cheerfully, as he moves off to help some
less fortunate comrade.
The Corporal, missing? Tommy asks quickly, “Where’s that
silly cow gone to now?” His words do not speak his innermost
thoughts; his face betrays a look of troubled concern. He does not
mean anything when he calls Tommy a “silly cow.” If anybody
had been listening he would have said, “Where’s that dear old
comrade of mine.” As language such as “dear” and “comrade”
do not sound well in our primeval surroundings, a veneer of slang
is generally used. The worse the name the better the man.
Tommy is soon found underneath some fallen sand bags, and
is none the worse for his imprisonment, and, after a drink of
water, curses the Germans for fully five minutes. “ What are you
swearing at, Tommy. Anyone would think that you had been
half-killed.” “That’s what’s makin’ me swear, to think that i
should get such a ’ell of a fright and not get a wound, so’s I could
get a trip to ’ospital for a while. Ain’t it rotten,” he asks of
anybody in particular. We agree with him. It certainly is a
bit hard.
The little excitement over, we • start to build up onr shat-
tered parapets, preparing for the shrapnel that will follow the
high explosives. We know the high explosive shells are meant
to dislodge us, and once dislodged, then the shrapnel takes a
heavy toll of victims. We build our parapets up, bag for bag,
hand over head, and then settle down to waiting. The hardest of
the lot. The order: “Fix bayonets: First whistle, mount fire step;'
second whistle, charge!” is passed along to us from the com-
manding officer up the line. “Make no noise!” is the final order.
“Make no noise!” No noise in this fearful din. Uncon-
sciously we speak in whispers. Although the order is funny to
an extreme, it has to be obeyed. The order incessantly flits
through the brain, “Make no noise! You feel as if you want
to tell it to everybody, with the result, if a shell makes a sound
a little bit out of the ordinary you jump unknowingly.


A sudden whiping and cracking in the air above ns and we
know the shrapnel shells are coming over. The Corporal gives
the very unnecessary command. “Down! ’’ But we are down
long before the order formed on his lips, for we well know the
result of standing up while shrapnel is whizzing through the air.
One chap went back to hospital with a piece in his head yester-
day.
At last we hear the report, sharp bark of our trench mortars,
followed by a rumbling snarl as they strike the wind. Men
clutch their rifles closer to them. It is a little comfort to feel
the sleek smooth wood-work of the rifle. It is a true friend!
The shells are coming over in hundreds, and we know that every
field-piece from the smallest to the largest, is working overtime.
Again we get the order, “Fix bayonets!” This order is the
height of a soldier’s ambition. What we have all been trained
up to is to take this order. “Fix bayonets!” calmly and as a
matter of course. This is the moment men have waited for
since first enlisting. How many men have tried to picture this
moment when training on the sands of Egypt. It could be fit-
tingly described as the climax of a soldier’s life. What will fol-
low in the next half-hour is what the soldier has been trained
up to; and that, in a nutshell, is to kill, as quickly as possible,
and, at the same time, to be careful of his own life. Is it ’any
wonder men’s hands tremble and shake as they fix the bayonets
to their rifles? Soldiers have been described in the doing of
that act as bloodthirsty; but it is hardly so. Is a prospector,
who, after searching for gold for twelve months, finds his heart’s
desire, greedy? Is a soldier to be described as bloodthirsty when
he cries for vengeance for helpless women and babes, who have
been foully murdered? No! So we fix bayonets and get slight-
ly hot in the head in the doing of it. The heat in the head
gradually develops into an all-consuming flame, scorching and
scaring refinement, until we emerge different men. Supermen!
with the lust to kill; the lust to kill those who have killed
without cause; they who have murdered women, outraged chil-
dren, and slaughtered old men, for lust only—not for any mili-
tary achievement.
The crashing and banging of the shells make us half delirious
and incapable of thinking properly. Someone tries to raise a
laugh, but fails miserably. Every man is listening to the hiss-
ing, moaning wail of the shells, interspersed with demoralising
crashes. It pulsates and throbs through the brain till it takes
on an unearthly scream that seems to say, “Kill or be killed!
Kill or be killed!! Kill or ”
A cry of “Ten men, stretcher-bearers! Ten men, stretcher-
bearers!’*’ helps us to gain control over our wandering thoughts.
Still the cry goes on—“ Ten men, stretcher-bearers! Ten men,
stretcher ”. A sharp hiss, a crash, and we find ourselves
repeating the sentence that will never be finished in this world —
“Ten men, stretcher-bearers! Ten men, stretcher-bearers!”
A shell whizzes just over our heads and fails to explode. “A
dud,” the Corporal jerks out, his voice sounding odd and out of
place. We laugh—a shrill, mirthless laugh that in ordinary


times could never come from men; a laugh full of ironical satire,
sounding unearthly and unreal.
Again the order comes, “Five minutes; no noise! Section
commanders, keep the men in proper alignment!'’
The roar and the din of the shells suddenly abates. From
far behind our lines we hear the sweet music of the church bells,
calling the very old and the very young to early morning mass.
What memories those bells bring back! The time when we went
to church; when we were classed as “good” by the people of the
town; how we used to say our prayers. But all is well; we are
still all right. Instead of prayer we fight—fight for religion!
Prayers are useless when not backed up by a firm resolve. Two
strong arms and spirit are worth a thousand prayers when the
War God is stalking through the land feeding on men’s blood.
Thousands of such thoughts flit and pass through our minds like
so many shalows. At the consoling sound of the bells Tommy
begins to hum a sarcastic djtty——
“Take me over the sea, where the Germans can't snipe at me;
Oh, my! I don’t want to die, I want to go home ”
The Corporal is putting the final words to a much-begrimed
letter of farewell to his loved ones. It has been in his pocket
for months awaiting this moment. “Good-bye, good luck, don't
worry!” he unconsciously murmurs as he writes. “Good-bye,
good luck, don’t worry!” It keeps repeating in our minds.
The Corporal looks strangely wan and worried as he replaces
the letter in his pocket.
Tommy asks of a comrade, ‘ ‘ ’Ave you said ‘ Good-bye, good
luck,’ laddie?” The answer comes brief and to the point,
“N’ope! ain’t going’ to be ‘sloughed’ ter-day.” “How der yer
know?” “Dunno; something seems ter tell me my luck’s in.”
“Then, as if not quite certain, “Hope so, anyway,” “That’s
right, crack hardy. Why, yer might git flowers on yer grave
if yer luck’s in. Yer might. Luck's a fortune!” “Fes;
luck’s a fortune all right,” answers the man, his face twisting
up into a devil-may-care grin.
From a little to our left a signal is given. “Pheet!” —the
signal for use to mount the fire-step. Another minute and we
will be out in that strip of land which has been falsely named
“No Man’s Land!” Another minute before we know our fate!
What a long time it seems—hours, days, years. “Pheet!” We
crawl and slide over the parapet, the Corporal taking the lead
and giving us our pace. “Keep back!” he hisses, through wire.
We advance stealthily, silently, truly; grim men with a grim
duty. Every man keeps in line as though on parade. For a
mile each side of us our comrades are doing the same. Men
stumble into old shell holes, recover themselves and press steadily
on, with never a sound. Much depends on our silence. If we
are heard approaching, before we get anywhere near them —well,
the game is up! The Germans, knowing full well our trenches
will be packed to overflowing, waiting for the moment when we
will need reinforcements, will deal with us, and then turn their
field pieces on to the trenches we have just vacated. We have to
be careful!


Hardly are we on to his barb wire, than we are seen. A
sudden, sharp signal from the enemy’s trench, and then “Swish,
swish, swish!’’ Two men go down with the first stream of lead.
Lucky they are firing high! The next man to go down is our
Corporal. He slaps his hand to his head, half turns in his
stride, and drops. We know he is mortally wounded, but can-
not stop to help him.
Tommy darts ahead into the Corporal’s place, yelling as he
does. “By hell, boys, we want the first dozen we come across
for that!’’ As if for answer bayonets are lowered, gleaming
wicked and sinister in the early morning light. All caution is
thrown to the winds now we know we are seen.
“Eight!’’ Tommy yells, as he breaks into a run. A long
line of evil-looking men, with bodies crouched as if for a spring,
and with bayonets lowered, sweeps after him.
What follows is hidden by a red mist before the eyes. All
you know is that you are amongst the Germans —amongst the
enemy; to kill him; if not to kill him, to be killed yourself.
Ten minutes, maybe an hour, before you regain your normal
senses. No enmity is felt for the dead Germans in the trench.
They fought well; we fought better. A badly wounded German
asks for a drink of water, or something to that effect. He is
given a drink, and then disarmed.
High up in the heavens we hear the droning buzz of an
aeroplane. We look up to see if it is one of ours or “Fritz’s.’’
At last we catch a glimpse of it outlined against the morning sun.
Away up there it looks a mere speck. It is behind our
lines, making towards us, so we surmise it is ours. it is nearly
overhead before we see the red, white and blue emblem on the
under part of its wings.
It is cheering to see it sail along so calmly, sedately. It may
also give our artillery some targets to fire at. We hope so. It
will give us a little respite. The enemy are sure to answer
our guns if they begin to “feel’’ for his batteries. It will re-
lieve the strain on the trenches and may even develop into an
artillery duel.
The ’Jrlane is barely half way over “No Man’s Land” be-
fore the enemy’s “Archie’s” are flinging shells at it. The light
anti-aircraft shells make a musical sound soaring towards the
heavens —like a deep bass and a shrill treble intermingled into
a musical one.
The ’plane dives, rises, slides over, and rights itself. We
marvel how it escapes, but steady eyes and steady nerves are
guiding it on its way. We are not the only ones in danger, and
that fact, somehow, seems to give us a feeling of security. At
last we see one, two, three smoke balls drop from the areoplane.
The men up there watching have discovered an enemy battery
and are giving its position away to our gunners.


Tommy hands around his water bottle. We drink sparingly
by wetting our lips and tongues, and passing it on. We have
not got too much water, and if the enemy keeps up the barrage
much longer somebody will have to attempt to get back to our
second line and get some, and that will mean almost certain
death. After replacing his water bottle, Tommy begins to feel
through his pockets. After a lot of hunting and turning out of
pockets, he reveals the object of his search—a cigarette butt and
some matches. He lights the precious portion of cigarette.
Every man, as if obeying an order, put down his rifle and watches
the owner of the “butt.” We watch him greedily, our mouths
moist with anticipation. He takes a long draw, gulping the
soothing smoke well back into his kings, holding it there as if
loth to part with it.
One of the hungry ones begins to ransack his tunic pockets.
He knows full well there are no cigarettes there, but it is some
consolation to search for one. He» goes through his pockets
slowly, methodically; his hands trembling. He may find a butt;
one never knows. His face suddenly lights up like a man who
has made a startling discovery. We hold our breath as he dis-
engages his hand from his pocket. At last we see what he has
found —a ten shilling note. He looks at it in his hand, this
note; this sign of wealth.
Our faces drop. What can money buy here? What is the
use of money when duty, expectant comrades, expects you to
produce something better, even if it be a cigarette? What can
money buy? Fame? with the loss of honour. Is money to be
a substitute for a cigarette? Is it any wonder one man sneers
wdth scorn, and yet cannot tell why it has affected him so?
Up on the fire step Tommy lounges his feet, moving lazily
to and fro, his eyes half closed. We could kill him for his idle’
content. “Here, Tommy, I’ll give you this half quid for a
draw.” Tom closes his eyes, and leans, back, opening his eyes
again to expel a cloud of smoke from his lungs.
This is a worse torture than shell fire. We smell the taint,
haunting fragrance of the precious weed; it bites deep into our
vitals. “Tommy, I’ll give yer this half quid for a draw,” in
piteous tones from the “moneyed man.”
Tommy takes another draw, then taking the cigarette loving-
ly from between his teeth, straightens up and asks quietly, “Do
yer think I’m after blood money, boy? Stick that half quid
in yer kick, and have ago at this. Give ’em all ago at it, it’s
their’s as much as mine.” And Tommy—big, wicked-looking,
white-hearted Tommy—begins to oil his rifle in preparation for
his next “stunt.”
Tlje artillery have suddenly got tired of what they have
been doing—destroying human life. We sit back for awhile.
Some are drowsing. After the strenuous work of the last few
days Everybody 1 is more or less a little fanciful. One man men-
tions Australia! Several men get up and move about aimlessly.


We do not want to awake the old longing for our native land.
But we have lost our Corporal, and we feel a little bit senti-
mental, so we gather together and talk.
One man takes us back to Australia by his talk of the
last walk he had with his sweetheart. Nobody laughs. We
have all been through the same, if not with a sweetheart, a
mother. Someone asks, “Is she a dinkum tart?” The an-
swer comes, dreary and far away, “Yes, dinkum.” We let it
go at that. We talk of our homes, our hopes, our ambitions.
A young farmer begins to tell us his story. A story of a
greater, silent battle than the' one we are now in. A story of hard-
ships, work and privation. He carries our minds vividly back
to Australia by his talk of the great Australian bush. He
takes our minds away from the blood-soaked trenches and
transplants them on a hill overlooking his homestead.
He musters his sheep for our inspection; shows us his cattle,
his ploughed land. He points out where the great bush tire
swept through his land. The next year a drought. He shows
us the skeletons of his animals. Now, when it is too late, as
if in mockery, long sprouts of grass grow around them. ‘ ‘ Even
the rabbits died that year,” he tells us. We see old Dobbin, the
horse who is getting lazy fat for want of work.
We go to the gully at the back of the house. The sun is
sinking. As it sinks still lower it turns the green of the trees
to darker green, from darker green to a thousand and one
shades of amber. The highest peaks of this, Nature’s own
castle, stand out in vivid relief as the sun dips behind them.
A little way up the gully, a little brown rabbit peeps timidly out
of its burrow. The silence, giving •it courage, it comes out to
feed on the fresh, young undergrowth. From away up on the
hill comes the voice of the lyre bird as he parades himself, full
of vanity and love-making.
As we have had enough of sight-seeing for the time being we
move back to the homestead of tea. As if in reality, we par-
take of the good things—brown bread, cream, cakes and butter.
After tea we sit around the fire. Two little children come to kiss
their father good night. “Good night! 'Nanny; Jack.” “Good
night, dad, and ‘Dawd’ bless you!”
The clock on the mantelpiece strikes the hour of eleven.
Everything is at rest outside. In the big gum by the side of
the house, a native bear cries out. A human, pathetic cry, full
of sympathy and sorrow. A mopoke’s call rings out, dull and
monotonous. A moth batters its wings against the lamp glass.
The attractive things are always dangerous. Soon the place is
in darkness. A mischievous ’possum scampers over the stable
roof; the horses stop their contented munching tor a moment and
then continue.
Away out here on the hills lies rest. ... A cock crows
from the hen roost; the fowls preen their wings. . . . Morn-
ing is breaking, a calm, peaceful morn, heralded in by the
musical lay of the magpie.


Four Australians
“Johnnie, Johnnie! Hi, Johnnie!”
The speaker is a tall, bronzed Australian soldier, fully six
foot high—a typical remnant of 'an original battalion.
He is dressed much the same as ,any Australian soldier wag
in the early days of the Gallipoli campaign. His feet are en-
cased in a pair of heavy military boots, looking none the better
for wear; the nether part of his body in what was once a reason-
ably stylish pair of riding breeches, that, by all appearances,
have seen as much wear as his boots. His left knee protrudes
through a ragged tear, and gives him the appearance of an
overgrown schoolboy who is dressed ready for a run with his
mates. The upper part of his body is covered with something
that by close scrutiny suggests to us as being a tunic —or closely
resembling one. His head is adorned with the famous slouch
hat of the Australian soldier; the sort of hat that the enemy
hates to see; a hat that amongst a London crowd attracts more
attention than the wearer does. It is jammed on his head at a
rakish angle and seems to say to all the world, ‘‘ I am a hat
—a good hat; I have got a master.” The big soldier takes
another gulp of air, drawing it as far back into his lungs to
emit it again in the form of “Johnnie! Hi, Johnnie, come here!”
Down the hill a little way, a small, wiry Indian soldier
suddenly stops short and looks around. Then, as if not quite
catching the meaning of the English words, saunters slowly down
hill. “Hi, Johnniel Come here, will you?” The little soldier
stops again, and, looking up, sees the issuer of the half entreaty,
half command who by this time is beckoning with both head and
hands. His manner has become almost imperious with his
excitement. The solution of the problem, “Hi, Johnnie,”
slowly forming in the Indian’s brain, he solemnly starts to cross
himself, putting a special, distinct emphasis as his lingers touch
his head, left shoulder, right shoulder, then chest. This finished,
he starts to wend his way uphill, his whole appearance smartened
up, in his face the look of an humble, adoring spirit.
As he comes closer to us we see a small, hard-visaged face;
a face that at times betrays a conflict of emotions. Sometimes
it is as if a dark shadow was hiding the finer points of features,
giving it a dog-like, inscrutable expression that could never be
fathomed. His eyes seem to say, ‘‘ I have got heavy burdens
that I will never rid myself of. ’ ’ His mouth twists into a
curious grimace as he briskly salutes.
The Australian soldier, whom we call “Digger” (because
‘ ‘ Digger ’ ’ happens to be any Australian soldier) returns the
salute, and greets the Indian with, “Salaam, Johnnie!”
“Salaam, Johnnie!” The Indian mumbles in naughty boy fashion.
This covential greeting over, the two soldiers, vastly different
in aspect and build, stand and survey each other. The two stand-
ing together give an impression of strength and endurance beyond
description. The Australian, big-boned with unknown strength
lurking behind his bronzed, healthy skin, and eyes that speak


of hate and love, and the mouth that seems to work in con-
junction with the' mind; the mouth and jaw that give a sudden
sharp click when the brain speaks and says, “Do it!” The
Indian, small, almost undersized but not at all badly built, with
small, wiry limbs, that, when moved, show a sea of muscle,
working in perfect unison. His every action betray a certain
determination of character. The precise movement of the head
seems to say, “I will try to do the best of my ability.”
The Australian, breaking the silence, asks abruptly, “John-
nie! —you got curry?” The Indian slowly raises his eyes to
Digger’s face, and wags his head as if not quite certain of his
question. To make his meaning more clear, Digger goes through
the action of passing food to the mouth, ejaculating now and
then, “Curry; you know, curry, Johnnie! Jerry?” Digger’s
actions and his earnest appeals have conveyed to the Indian the
thought of something important. His face wrinkles and break
into a smile —an honest smile —one good to see. He mumbles
“Johnnie, Johnnie!” this being the full extent of his English.
Digger, taking it for granted that “Johnnie, Johnnie!”
means ‘ ‘ yes, ’ ’ and not being far wrong, leads the way down the
hill. They pick their way carefully, slowly, down the lull,
wending and stepping reverently over a little patch of brown
earth that is slightly higher than the surrounding earth, (Some
of the mounds are adorned with rough wooden crosses. Just
simple little things, branches off some shrub, tied in the form
of a cross with pieces of boot laces or string. A simple little
token to the dead. Digger’s dead; Johnnie’s dead. Just com-
rades who have passed out. In British “Tommy” language,
“Gone West.’’ As the Indian passes these little mounds he
makes the sign of the cross on his body. To him they are
dead men —something to be regarded with superstition. To
Digger they are mates still; mates although dead; mates that
are more sacred and honored in death than ever in life.
They half walk, half slide, down the last steep incline.
Straight before them a dark, forbidding hill hides from their
view the Indian encampment. Before ascending the hill Digger
motions to the Indian to stop. He points to the crest of the
hill, and, speaking in a vernacular that life in a foreign country
has helped to cultivate, soliloquised, “Well, e ’ll .and jest to think
old ‘Aller ’ was there waitin’; he’s a shrewd ole cow, though.”
He utters the last few words with a finality that does not need
questioning. The soliloquy is not lost on the Indian. He
mumbles, “Johnnie, Johnnie!” Bigger smiles; he knows John-
nie wants to say, “Quite right! Quite right; he is shrewd.”
They start to ascend the hill; the very same hill that made the
Australian soldier famous; the hill that children yet to come
will try and picture in their minds. When within fifty yards
of the crest they start to crawl on hands and knees for fear of
being spied by some wary-eyed sniper, snugly ensconced in his
layer on some adjoining hill. Once over the hill they are safe,
and they will straighten up to the normal state of walking. It
does not take them long to traverse the slope, and they are soon
on the beach where the Indian encampment is situated. It is
not the sort of military encampment that the reader will con-
jure up. In fact, there is no sign of human habitation what-
ever.


Johnnie now takes the lead, and makes for a sheltered por-
tion of the hill. After walking for five minutes or so Johnnie
turns to Digger and exclaims, “Johnnie!” breaking off into
his own dialect. He points with his hand, as much as to say,
‘ ‘ That is where I live. ’ ’ Digger unconsciously brushes pieces
of dried furze and earth from off his tunic, showing plainly his
nervous excitement at the thought of the meal of curry that will
soon be his. Johnnie claps his hands and calls out something
that Digger does not understand. A strip of sacking that is
painted green and brown to correspond with the surrounding-
landscape is moved aside by an invisible hand. From the dark-
ness of the dug-out another Indian appears and regards his com-
rade’s visitor with displeasure. His eyes rest for a moment on
Digger’s hat, then his face lights up with a smile of delight.
He has recognised the Australian hat and is not this their
dream of the “White Gurkha?” Digger, knowing he has been
judged and not found wanting, gives the greeting, “Balaam,
Johnnie!” “Salaam, Johnnie!” the Indian murmurs with
every evidence of pleasure. “Got curry, Johnnie?” Digger jerks
out. For answer the Indian beckons him inside and procures
an empty bully beef box for him to sit on. This is the seat
of honor. When a “White Gurkha” is not sitting on it, it is
used for keeping foodstuffs in.
The interior of the dug-out is snug and homely, more for
Comfort than style. Arranged on each side of the walls are
sets of four bunks, with odds and ends of equipment, bags and
blankets strewn pell mell on them. Digger sits down content-
edly to wait and gloat on the meal that will soon be ready. A
meal that, to a man who has had nothing but salty bully beef
and biscuits for weeks, takes the form of a banquet. The two
Indians, working in conjunction, soon get the stew ready. Bice,
a little goat’s flesh, and curry powder is what they use. While
it is stewing the Indians arrange themselves one on each side of
Digger.
The three gabble away at each other as If they understood
what the other was saying. The first word is always Johnnie!
It is a little distinction conferred by the Australian soldier on
their dark-skinned comrades. It is a word specially reserved
for speech amongst the two sets of brothers. Johnnie, as the
Indian says it, can mean anything. The Australian version is
“cobber laddie, mate.” Digger talks, his words interspersed
with sundry nods and grimaces. One of the Indians starts to
tell a story. By the woebegone expression, and the dull glow
far back in his eyes, it is something that affects him very much.
From what can be gleaned by his actions a comrade has been
killed lately. He points to the trenches and goes through the
motion of loading a rifle, then he hits himself sharply on the
forehead with his finger. His actions are ludicrous as he tries
to imitate how the last breath was drawn. Digger understands,
and remains silent. They have all lost good comrades. It does
not need words to explain; it needs action to revenge. The
silence is broken by the sizzling sound from the direction of the
curry pot.
Digger grunts his approval at the looked-for sound; its sus-
piciously like “Oh, hell!” The pot is brought over and placed
at Digger’s feet, and a spoon is produced and handed to him,


The two Indians arm themselves with flat pieces of wood,
roughly cut into the shape of a spoon. The three of them start
to eat out of one pot, having dip for dip. O mores! All class
and convention is dropped over that steaming pot. The black
Johnnie is on a level with the white Johnnie. This is why the
Indian claims the Australian for his friend. The Indian is not
made to feel that he is the under dog; he is met on level terms
with a hail fellgw, well met, and appreciates it accordingly,
treating the Australian soldier with an almost childish adoration.
It is embarrassing to a. certain extent, but nevertheless they
cannot be made to act differently towards us.
The meal over, Digger produces some cigarettes and hands
them around. The three comrades then sit back and smoke.
Digger’s eyes are half closed; what with a full stomach and the
mellowing influences of the fragant weed, he does not feel dis-
posed to talk. Talk is needless, as it happens. The friendship
between the three is unexplainable; neither understands a word
the other is saying; yet they are friends. The smell of the
strong curry and tobacco gradually fills the close interioi of the
dug-out anil filters outside. The smell has evidently disturbed
the occupants of an adjoining dug-out. A big, bony figure
makes its way into the dug-out, and then, as if surprised to see
his friends have a visitor, turns to go. He is stopped by Dig-
ger’ “Salaam, Johnnie! Come in!’’
The big Indian turns around and murmurs in laboured but
very <mod English, “ Yass, alright; how are you?” as He grasps
Digger’s hand. “Oh, pretty good,” Digger gasps in surprised
tones. Not being too sure that the Indian can speak English
well, he starts to" question him, speaking simply and omitting
words likelv to make his meaning less clear. “You speak English
talk, Johnnie?” “Yass; a little.” “Where you learn,
Johnnie?” “Me, I learn India. I work one year, two
vear, three year, English officer. He good man; very good
man.” “Oh, you work for English officer, and he learn you
to talk English? Where you live in India, Johnnie?” “1 live
Rampur. R-A-M-P-U-R-,” the Indian spells for Digger’s bene-
fit. Digger, not being well versed in the geography of India,
and not having ever heard anything about it to single it out in
his mind, goes on with his questioning. “You married man,
Johnnie.” The Indian looks at Digger as if not comprehend-
ing. Digger’s large vocabulary of words, remains silent. “You
know, Johnnie, got a ‘tabby’—er—l mean a girl. You know,
missus, Johnnie, jerry?” Johnnie still not understanding
Digger’s large vocabuluary of words, remains silent. “You
know, Johnnie, woman?” ' Digger goes through a series of
actions that are supposed to convey to the Indian the lovable
actions of a wife towards her husband. “You know,” Digger
goes on, and goes through the action of putting his arms around
an imaginary waist and pursing his lips as if about to receive
a kiss.
Digger’s actions have been so ludricous that the three
Indians by this time are enjoying a hearty laugh at Digger’s
expense. His actions have seemingly put his words to shame.
The big Indian seems suddenly to understand what Digger
means. °His face gradually becomes serious, as if making pre-
paration for the words yet to come. “Yass, I got woman.


What you call woman?” “Ah—er, tabbie, girl, tart.” The
three break off into another fit of laughing. Between the gusts
of laughter the big Indian asks if there are different sorts of
women in Australia. Digger tries to explain that' 'they are all
the same sort, only they are given different names. ‘ 4 Why,
you call some 4 tatt,’ some 4 tuppie,’?” splutters the Indian
trying to hold his laugh. ~ T " 4 Oh, I don’t know; some Aire young
and some er —er old,” Digger explains, groping around in the
hope of turning the subject into safer channels. 4 4 What you
call old woman? —tarts?” came thoughtlessly from Digger.
Something has evidently tickled the Indians again. They
jab each other and the tears literally roll down their cheeks.
Digger, still groping around for some means of escape, asks,
44 Johnnie, you got any kids?” The Indian sobers down again,
and their interpreter speaks. “Yass, I got ten, twenty kids.
My uncle what you call farmer; he got nearly hundred kids this
year; before war no good, no kids.” "Digger’s eyes open wide
in astonishment. He voices the answer to his question, 44 He
got nearly hundred kids!” Then, as an afterthought, he asks,
44 Gawd, Johnnie, he go broke; er —-got any money?” 44 Yass,
plenty. He seel ar —ar fifty goats this year. Plenty money.”
Digger, not quite realising for the moment that the Indian had
been speaking of the offspring of the goat, remains silent. At
last, after pondering it over in his mind for a moment, he
chuckles himself purple in the face at the unconscious joke.
Digger, recovering himself, expostulates, 44 N0, no, Johnnie; you
don’t jerry; 1 mean kids—er—er children; you know, nippers,
picaninnies?” The word picaninnie and Digger’s description
of 44 50 high,” conjures up in the Indian’s mind little children.
44 Ah, yass, yass; one, two leetle wan. Beetle wan, so big,”
raising his hand about two feet from the ground. 4 4 Big wan,
he clean boots, Meerat, he send what you call my ar—-ar old
4 tatt’ plenty money. He big gentleman. You got any leetle
wan?” 44 Yes a couple—er—two er —youngsters.” 4 What
you call youngsters?” Digger suddenly remembering that if he
says anything but strict English, answers 4 4 Children. ”
The next thing to attract Digger’s attention is a potato
lying near the fire. Thinking this is a good opportunity of tak-
ing their minds off the subject of women and children, he asks
Johnnie 44 What you call this?” picking up the potato. John-
nie answers something that sounds like 4 4 Mallella. ” 44 What
English call it?” Digger questions. “Pertater,” is the answer.
44 What you call it?” Johnnie queries. 44 0h —er —a —spud/’
44 Why English give two names?” Digger’s answer is, “Oh, I
dunno. ’ ’
The conversation slackens now. Outside they hear the roar
of a bursting shell warning them of night. Digger gets up
and stretches his limbs luxuriously. 44 We11, I’ll have to go,” he
remarks, regretfully. 44 Be down again day. Salaam,
4 Johnnie’!” 44 Salaam, 4 Johnnie’!”
Digger strides out so as to be in his accustomed place in the
trenches before darkness falls. Digger had an enjoyable after-
noon, but it was his last. That night the first stages of >the
Lone Pine .battle were fought, and Digger is peacefully resting
underneath a dark mound of earth now.


DISCIPLINE.
Sergeant-Major to a Private who has missed eleven shots out
of twelve.
“What, eleven misses; good heavens, man, go around the
comer and shoot yourself.”
Hearing a shot around the corner, the Sergeant-Major rushes
around, to be confronted by the bad shot —
“Sorry, sir, another miss,” the Private murmurs.
An Australian, Scotchman, and an Irishman were walking
along a street in Bolougne.
A pretty French girl passed them.
“Oh,” said the Scotchman, “I wish ’t was wee Mary,”
1 ‘ I wish it was Bridget, ’’ said the Irishman.
“Um,” said the Australian, “I wish it was dark,”
Frenchman, to British soldier, as they are parting:
Tommy: “Au Reservoir! Au Reservoir! Mon cher.”
Frenchman: ‘ ‘ Tanks! Tanks! Frendt. ’ ’
Old lady, on her first visit to military hospital: “Well, my
good man, and where did you get wounded.”
Australian: “In Gallipoli, mum.”
Old lady: “But, my good man, how did you get wounded?”
Exasperated Australian: “ ’Ar stung in the foot be a camel.”
Sergeant (instructing squad of Tommies):
“Now, boys, there is one thing I wish to impress on you.
Be very careful not to get into any arguments with civilians.
For instance, if you are in a public house and a civilian gets
quarrelsome and starts arguing, each man should finish his beer
and walk out and leave him. Now, Brown, what would you
do if a civilian came in and insulted you?”
Brown: “Why, I’d drink up his beer and hook it.”
Officer, inspecting first line of resistance: “What soldiers
are in this trench, my man?”
“First Sussex Regiment, sir,”
After going along a little further, he questions again:
“What soldiers are in this trench, my man?”
“What the
’as it got to do with
you?”
“Oh, is this the Australian trench,” the officer said, quite
surprised.


Tommy (to Australian): “That was a rare plucky thing you
did this morning, to bring your mate in under that heavy fire."
Australian: “Yairs, the blasted be had all me b
tobacco with him.’’
RAILWAY STATION IN FRANCE.
(Battalion of Australians going from one front to another.
Australian alighting, to French civilian, on platform):
“Hey! Mushshoor! Where would a bloke get a bottle of
whiskey?”
“Non-compreney! ” (shrugging his sholdiers).
V Whmkey! YOU know!” (making motions as if drinking).
Ah! Whiskey, no bon! no bon, Messieur!”
“Get out, yer cow! I know where there is pond full of bie
green frogs, and I won’t tell you where it is.”
An Australian, in a bar, somewhere in France. Enter
three or four Americans. They order beer all round. After a
while, “Say, Kid, this beer is considerably flat, ain’t it?”
I suppose it is,” said Australia. “It has been waiting:
here three years for you to come and drink it,”
Billjim, in a Tommy Hospital in Blighty.
Doctor adjusting eye-glass: “Haw, my man. Lost your
eye, I see.”
back ” )h> n ° ! IVe left in France ’ to watch my kit till I get
Billjim, with a couple of German prisoners, to Corporal.
Hey! These silly cows are dopy. This one says he
comes from Brunswick, and he don’t know where the Sydney
road is; and this coot says he comes from Heidelberg, and never
heard of the Yarra,”


s'* /
I C / ' 7
SUNDRY VERSE.
WAR.
Shrieking, swirling, stieken grandeur;
Big shells hurtle overhead;
Moaning wails of funeral sadness,
Crying vengeance for the dead.
Sneaking, crawling, creeping gasses,
Nauseating God’s good air;
Like Satan’s ghouls at midnight
Creeping—leaping out their lair.
Whizzing hiss of half-spent bullets;
Bombs explode with hellish crash.
All around the wounded lying
Wrecks of manhood • . . glorified.
Weird sights and strange enchantments;
Stately trees sigh overhead;
Weeping wails of mournful sadness —
Wailing, for heroic dead.
Clinging, sodden, mud-soaked trenches;
Poppies, daisies, growing there;
Cursing, shrieking, maddened manhood;
Yes, my God! they all were there.
Silent, now the battle over;
Silent also are the dead;
Silent breaks the dawn of morrow,
Hark! ... a thrush sings overhead.
GRIM SARCASM.
Bill: “Give us a ‘fag.’ ”
Horace; “Garn, yer bot, yer’ll want flowers on yer grave
yer will. ’ ’
