

AN APPEAL
FOR
IMPROVEMENT OF PSALMODY
(Metrical Versions of Psalms) ;
ADDRESSED TO THE
Free Presbyterian Congregation of Glendonald,
Durham Lead, and Meredith,
BY THE
REV- J. J. STEWART, M-A-,
MINISTER.




AN APPEAL
FOR
IMPROVEMENT OF PSALMODY
(Metrical Versions of Psalms) ;
ADDRESSED TO THE
Free Presbyterian Congregation of Glendonald,
Durham Lead, and Meredith,
BY THE
REV. J. A. STEWART, M.A.,
MINISTER.




PREFACE.
To my People,—
In October of last year, I addressed you in Glendonald and
Durham Lead on the subject of “Improvement of Psalmody.”
Some time lias now elapsed, during which not a single objection
to my proposals has reached me, while expressions of the
opposite nature have. This is gratifying. I trust that it shows
you have as much at heart as I have the furtherance of the great
principles of Divine worship embodied in the Word of God, and
handed down as a precious heritage to us by our forefathers ;
and that you recognise, in the appeal made to you, an earnest
-endeavour, on my part, to carry out these principles with which
you sympathise. In order that everyone concerned may be able
to examine fully the proposals made, and join heartily in the
progress contemplated, I have published my address to you,
-expanding it somewhat for the sake of clearness and completeness.
May the God whom we worship bless His own sanctuary’s
service!
J. J. S.
Gbeswick,
Jjpril, 1893.




AN
Appeal for Improvement of Psalmody
METRICAL VERSIONS
THE idea of change in the services of the sanctuary is dis-
tasteful to not a few faithful people of God. It is so,
however, merely because almost all the changes of recent years
in the various once pure churches have been changes for the
worse. The defenders of the faith, therefore, have shown a
tendency in these times to confine their energies to resisting
proposed alterations by innovators and heretics, rather than them-
selves introduce changes for the better. This policy of defence
is necessary. But if it be pursued exclusively, it is fatal to the
growth of the church that pursues it. Eor, change is the great law
of the Christian life and Christian church, while the principles it
holds are unchanging. We believe in “ Jesus Clrrist, the same
yesterday, and to-day, and for ever ” (Heb. xiii, 8). But Jesus
Christ is perfect, and infinite in His perfections, whereas no single
Christian, and no single church is so. And because we are not
already perfect, we must press forward, “forgetting those things
which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are
before” (Phil, iii, 13). Where, therefore, no changes take place
for the better, bringing the individual and the church into greater
likeness to Christ, it may be more than suspected that the life of
that individual or that church is at best a stagnant pool. It will
soon dry up and disappear from the want of the life-energy of the
Spirit, which ought to flow through it, and continually transform
it, so that all may see it as a living thing, becoming purer and
brighter, till Heaven’s glory is perfectly reflected in it.


It falls to me as a minister to seek that my prayers and my
proclamation of the truth in preaching should show continual
signs of improvement and progress. This is a heavy responsi-
bility lying on my shoulders; and only the promise of the great
Burden-bearer and the command of the great Master-worker an l
Lord of the vineyard, made living and powerful by His Spirit,
could enable me to accept it and discharge it (Ps. lv, 22 ; Matt.
xxviii, 19-20). The private prayers and the public presence of
God’s people are also human instruments whereby this responsi-
bility may be all the better discharged by me. If you pray not
for me, and if you absent yourselves from the house of God, you
cannot expect to find my public prayers and preaching, nor my
private visitations, becoming more beneficial to you.
But in the department of praise, we have a conjoint responsi-
bility. There alone the congregation engages audibly in the
service as well as the minister. And there the minister alone
can make no advance. At the very outset he must carry the
congregation with him. The question then before us is : “ Can
this service of praise be changed for the better ? ” To say that
it cannot, is to say that we are perfect, or that we are determined
to go no farther toward perfection. The one would be a lie ; the
other would be a deliberate resistance to the Spirit of God.
Only one answer, therefore, can be given, viz: That the service
of praise can be changed for the better. We may not be able to
see at the moment how it can be so changed, nor the full extent to
which it may be so changed. But, certain it is, that at every
stage of our individual life and our Church’s history, there ought
to be such a change ; and if we knew how God would have us go
forward, we ought to be ready to follow His call. More par-
ticularly, I shall confine myself at present to “ Can our
Scottish metrical version of the Psalms be improved r”
It is to our shame that such a question has to be asked and
discussed. Our Scottish version is acknowledged by friends and
foes alike to be a noble one ; but friends and foes alike agree in
denying that it is perfect. All translations of the Bible are
imperfect; we only adhere to any translation until we get a
better. Our English prose translation of the Bible will not
easily be displaced, not because it is all that it ought to be, but
because no one worthy to take its place has been produced, in
spite of the attempts made. We should welcome such an one,
if we had it; for, anything that makes God’s Word clearer, and
anything that gives us a better rendering of it, ought to be gladly
received by every faithful Christian. Our prose translation of
the Bible has its merits and its faults. However great its merits,
we shall not cleave to it one moment when another with greater
merits appears. And however great its faults, we shall not
abandon it until one without these faults, and with merits at least
equal to its own, is ready for our acceptance. But whether we


get a worthy new translation or not, we should be glad to see
such a revision of our old translation as would preserve its
excellencies, while purifying it from its defects and mistakes.
Similar remarks apply to the poetical translation of the
Psalms. The Psalms in the original are poetry; and the poetical
translation ought to be better than the prose translation for that
reason, though Hebrew poetry is not like English. But there is
this difference between a new metrical translation of the Psalms
and a new prose translation of the Bible, viz., that we cannot use
in the sanctuary two different prose translations of the Bible,
whereas we can use two or twenty different metrical translations
of tbe Psalms. And it is to the disgrace of our Christian poets
that, we have not twenty versions to choose from, instead of
merely one or two. I speak to not a few who know more than
one language (English and Gaelic). And they know that in
translating from the one to the other, they usually find that the
translation does not do justice to the original. So it is with the
Hebrew and Greek on the one hand, and the English on the other.
Especially is it so with the Word of God in the original, and the
English dress in which w'e have it. Our translation does its best,
but that best is not perfection ; and the beauties of the original
are often hidden from the reader thereby. This might be
remedied to a very great extent in the Psalms by different
poetical versions, each of which would do its own part in bringing
out the inexhaustible riches of the Word of God.
Our present metrical version has lain untouched for nearly
two hundred and fifty years. It was adopted by the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland in the year 1647, and was
itself a great improvement upon the versions which went before
it. But between that date and now has English poetry made no
advance, and has the singing of tunes not also progressed?
What might be sufficient for that generation is not sufficient for
the present, and it is a scandal that, at this hour of the day, I
have to discuss the subject in this fashion at all. It is not only
a scandal, but a sin. All around us, we see innovations and
changes of all sorts in the devotional part of the services, making
it a concert, or worse. To these changes —so far as they are out
of harmony with the Word of God —I am determinedly opposed,
and will combat them, as God by His grace enables me, and as
becomes one who has so vowed before God and man. But have
these things not come as a punishment upon these churches,
partly at least for their neglect of the unrivalled song-book of
praise which they possess in the Word of God ? He will have no
difficulty in answering this question correctly, who knows even
a little of what might be done to explore and expose the beauties
of the Psalms. God has given those up to error who have
despised His truth. Are we never to take warning ? Are our
poverty and paucity not also a punishment in part for our short-


comings in this and other matters ? We have been slumbering
in the matter of praise, as well as in the manner of rendering it.
We have allowed the dust of centuries to thicken on Gfod’s
glorious hymn-book. His own Word endures for ever and is
perfect. But every translation of it, because it passes of
necessity through imperfect hands, cannot endure for ever; and
we ought always to be on the outlook to make it better. Every
imperfection which it has, takes us so far away from the per-
fection of the original; and we ought not to be contented to be
thus kept from the fulness and purity of the truth. In preach-
ing, the minister can do something, and may do much to remove
The dust of ages ; but he cannot do everything, while still the
same old words linger upon the ears, and ever meet the eye, with
all their defects and faults uncorrected.*
But more. While yielding to none in admiration of the
many excellencies of our poetical translation of the Psalms, and
while desiring to see its blemishes removed, and itself kept to
brighten and cheer the worshipping companies of the faithful for
generations to come, I have to point out that its imperfections
do not merely consist in defective or redundant lines, in pro-
nunciation which is out of agreement with the present day, and
such faults, but that with a few exceptions it is all in one metre,
which we call the common metre. Now, those who enjoy poetry
must be aware how monotonous this is. English poetry has
manifold variety in its metres, and it has developed immensely
since our metrical version was adopted. But all the beauty which
arises from this variety is lost to us when we turn to the single
metre version of the Psalms.
Again, this generation especially has witnessed a vast
development of song —sacred and secular. There is an extraor-
dinary variety of tunes, just because there is a corresponding
variety of poetical metres. This circumstance is one reason,
though not the only one uuhappily, of the popularity of un-
inspired hymns. It is largely because they are composed in a
great variety of metres, thereby receiving a great variety of tunes,
that they quickly take the popular fancy. Now, there is a legiti-
mate craving for a diversity in the tuneful expression of our
feelings before G-od in worship; and there is an illegitimate
craving. It is legitimate within the bounds that He has assigned.
* Note. —Here another caution is needed to those who may be fright-
ened at modern scholarship, seeing that it is so much used to destroy the
foundations ot' the faith. Some men of God may even forget themselves, and
imagine that scholarship is itself an evil, instea l of reflecting that the right
■coi’rective is to put sanctified learning over against infidel learning. A great
need in our day is that faithful men of God be set apart to devote themselves
entirely to investigations now conducted by foes of God under the guise of
friends. Thereby these would be defeated on their own ground. Further
enquiries also should be prosecuted bv loyal Christian scholars into the bound-
less domain of truth, which will never be found to contradict itself.


It is illegitimate outside of these bounds. These limits are —the
inspired hymnal as the matter, and the human voice as the instru-
ment of praise. But within these lawful limits, we have done
almost nothing towards improvement. The hymn tunes have
wrought havoc by carrying away many of those who have not
examined the subject closely, whether from misfortune or fault.
Bor instance, we have occasional hearers, who might possibly be with
us altogether, but who cannot, or will not, be induced to study
our principles until they have had some experience of our worship.
They have no objections to sing Psalms, but they are led astray,
• scarcely understanding how, by various influences, among which
is the agreeable diversity of tunes to be found in hymn-books.
Can we do anything to remedy this ? We can.
With the illegitimate craving for sensuous and impure
worship, we ought not to have the slightest sympathy. With the
lawful desire to do our best in the way God has appointed, and
depending on the Spirit He has promised, we ought to have every
sympathy. We ought to regard our exercises as sinful if we
are not doing our best. But there are usually two extreme
classes of people in every congregation in this respect. There is
one class of persons who have no ear for poetiy, nor for singing.
They are, therefore, easily contented with what already exists;
and unless they have the grace of God in their hearts, enabling
them to perceive and acknowledge that they have no taste for
poetry and singing, they are i*eady to resist the slightest proposal
for improvement, because they imagine it will only land them
amongst the many evils which we see in other churches. They
are like persons who are dull of hearing, but who, unfortunately,
will not confess it, and persist in maintaining that something
is wrong with other people’s speech, rather than with their own
ears. Such are one class. We ought to bear with them, if they
are with us ; but we must not let them ovei’bear us. They may
allege that what has contented our forefathers —better men than
we are, they will tell us —may well content us. Apply this to
the every-day affairs of life. Because our fathers were contented
without railway travelling, without the electric telegraph, without
the telephone and the host of modern appliances and conveni-
ences, should we therefore dismiss and discard these things ? The
fact is, the very persons who use such reasoning would be them-
selves the first to use these modern conveniences and all modern
machinery in their trade and profession, if they could make more
money thereby. If they did not, they know they would run the
risk of being stranded in the voyage of life, and starved in the
effort to win their daily bi’ead. Verily, “the children of this
world are in their generation wiser than the children of light ”
(Luke xvi, 8.)..
The other class consists of those who xxxake vocal and in-
strumental music their passionate pursuit, everything being
subordinate to this. They ai’e scai’cely to be seen in our church,


for they find little to gratify them with us ; and hence they go to
other churches, where they find abundance. But could they not
get what ought to be sufficient for them in our own church, if
they be real seekers after truth ? They ought to get this. And
we are not guiltless in letting them go without a legitimate effort
to retain them. One way in which this effort may be made is
seen in our own metrical version as it is. All the Psalms are in
common metre, I have said; but in some instances there is an
additional version. This is a principle I would fain see developed.
If these additional versions already possessed by us are not
legitimate, they ought to be put out of our collection. If they
are rightly there, there ought to be more of them. Can we,
therefore, not obtain additional versions without giving up what
we have ? If we could obtain others, we might thereby reach
something of the variety which is so pleasant and so desirable.
It may be said that we have not yet mastered what we have
already got. But the reply to this is—that additional versions
might not be more difficult, as such an objection assumes, but
more easy to master. And, of course, their introduction into
actual use in the sanctuary would be gradual. Ultimately, they
•would be used as freely, and appreciated as fully, as the old.
To come to a practical result. There are at least two
Presbyterian churches that have advanced already in the
direction indicated. One is the Irish Presbyterian Church,
which has remained wonderfully orthodox, amid much Presby-
terian backsliding elsewhere. The other is the American
United Presbyterian Church, which has gone a good deal farther
in improving its Psalmody than the Irish Presbyterian Church.
One result of this progress is, that in that Church to this day,
as far as I know, not a single uninspired hymn is sung in
worship—neither by congregation, nor by Sabbath school. The
desire for variety, and for development of the Psalms, corres-
ponding to the development in English poetry and English
singing, has been sufficiently gratified by that church’s own
progress in developing the beauties of God’s celestial hymn-
book.
There is before me a copy of the Psalter of this latter
church. I shall give you specimens of its additional versions.
It retains our present version, improved by slight alterations
here and there, to put the metre right, to correct old pronunci-
ations, and such like. I may give examples first of all of its
corrections. In Psalm ex, 4, according to our common metre
version, we read :
“ The Lord Himself hath made an oath,
And will repent Him never,
Of the order of Melchisedec
Thou art a priest for ever.”


Everyone knows, or should know, that in the second and'
fourth lines there is a syllable too many ; and, also, that the
matter cannot be put right in common metre without shifting
the words “ never ” and “ ever ” from the end of the line. This
redundancy of syllables may not offend the ear of one who has
no taste for poetry ; but it is offensive, and justly so, to the ear
of one who is sensitive to correctness in metre. The verse—
as altered by the American Psalter —is :
“ The Lord hath sworn, and from His oath
He never will depart,
Of th’ order of Melchisedec
A priest thou ever art.”
This puts the matter right, simply and well. In the above
instance, there is a syllable too many in the line. Another
instance may be given where there is a syllable too few. This is
a frequent occurrence in our version, where we have such words-
as “salvation,” “ nation,” i.e , words ending in—“ tion.” This
ending we now pronounce “ shon” ; but, when we sing our old
version, we have often to pronounce it “ shi-on,” viz., with two
syllables instead of one. If not pronounced thus, or if no such
device is used, the line lacks a syllable, and cannot be sung. So
with words such as “gracious,” pronounced by us as consisting
of two syllables —“ gra - shus,” but which we often have to sing
with three syllables —“ gra - shi - us.” In our version of Psalm
lxxvii, 55, we have :
“ Tlie nations of Canaan
By His Almighty hand,
Before their face He did expel
Out of their native land.”
There are two syllables awanting in the first line of this verse,
which defect has to be remedied in singing by some such device
as pronouncing “ nations ” with three syllables, instead of two ;
and so also “ Canaan.” The American Psalter has amended
matters thus, clearing up the sense at the same time from the
confusion of two “ theirs
“ The nations which in Canaan dwelt,
He also by His hand,
Before His people’s face, expelled
Beyond their native land.”
The other slight alterations made in this verse, apart from the
correction of the pronunciation and the clearing up of the
meaning, are to improve the poetical rhythm, regarding which)
something must be said after another example of defective
syllables has been given.
In our version of Psalm xcviii, 2, we read:
“ The Lord G-od His salvation
Hath caused to be known;
His justice in the heathen’s sight
He openly hath shown.”


There in the first and second lines a syllable is wanting. We
have to sing “ sal-va-ti-on ” instead of “ sal-va-tion; ” and also
4t caus-ed ” instead of “caused.” Besides, in the original, as you
may see from the prose translation, the word “ God ” does not
occur. It has been put into the metrical version evidently to fill
up the line ; and there is, of course, no error in calling Jehovah
44 the Lord God,” for He is frequently so called in the Old
Testament. This shows a form of poetical licence taken
advantage of by our metrical translators, viz., where they found
the original insufficient by simple translation to make up a
complete verse, they added Scriptural words or phrases, which
were rather implied than expressed in the particular verse which
■they were rendering. This is very remarkably exemplified in the
previous verse we examined (Psalm lxxviii, 55.), where the prose
translation is only : “ He cast out the heathen also before them.”
The metrical version is a great expansion of this thought—in
fact, it is too great; and this is a decided blemish. In the
present verse, the American Psalter has also added a Scriptural
phrase, just as our metrical version added a Scriptural word, to
complete the line.' Moreover, in our metrical version, just as in
our prose translation and throughout the Old Testament generally,
we miss the most precious name of the Saviour, “Jehovah.” The
word “Lord” is used, which is the word superstitiously substi-
tuted by the Jews. In the New Testament, it is true, this word
“ Lord ” has been adopted by Jesus and His apostle 3, as including
both “ Lord ” and “ Jehovah.” But it is only right, and it would
be well, to have before us, also, the original name of the Saviour,
which is above every name. Happily, in the additional versions
introduced by the American church, we have both names used ;
and in the present verse which I am about to quote, occasion has
been taken from the needed alterations to introduce the glorious
■name. The verse then stands as corrected :
“ The great salvation wrought by Him,
Jehovah hath made known ;
His justice in the heathen’s sight
He openly hath shown.”
Further alterations have been made to correct the faultiness
of the metre. The metre is “ iambic,” i.e., consisting of a series
•of accented syllables, each having an unaccented syllable pre-
ceding it, the combination of the unaccented with the accented
forming a “foot,” which is, in this instance, called an “ iambus.”
This alternation of unaccented with accented syllables is rather
roughly managed in some parts of our version. For instance,
syllables which are naturally weak or unaccented, are often
accented; of which there are three examples in the verse already
twice referred to from the seventy-eight Psalm (ver. 55.) The
second line has an accent upon “his;” the third upon “ did ; ”
;and the fourth upon “of.” This has led to the further modifi-


cation of the verse which you noticed in it as quoted from the
American Psalter.
These are specimens of the occasional corrections made, and
the improA r ements effected. Though we need not agree altogether
with every change, yet the result, on the whole, is that our
present version has thereby received new life and new beauty
through its deliverance from many of its defects and mistakes,
and through its being brought more nearly into accordance with
the pure fountain from which it is drawn.
But you will be most interested in the additional versions.
Of these I shall quote some, selecting those which are of well-
known Psalms, that you may readily perceive the faithfulness of
the version and its excellence at the same time, compared with
the version you already know. The following is an additional
version of the 121st Psalm:—
1. “ To the hills I’ll lift mine eyes,
Whence my hopes of succour rise ;
From the Lord comes all my aid,
Who the earth and heaven hath made.
2. He will ever be thy guide,
And thy feet shall never slide ;
God His Israel that keeps,
Never slumbers, never sleeps.
3. God thy keeper still shall stand,
As a shade on thy right hand ;
Neither sun by day shall smite,
Nor the silent moon by night.
4. God shall guard from every ill,
Keep thy soul in safety still;
Both without and in tliy door,
He will keep thee evermore.”
This is a gem of beauty, nearly perfect. Alongside of it,
we place the well-known 130th Psalm :
1. “ From the depths do I invoke Thee,
O Jehovah, give an ear ;
To my voice be Thou attentive,
And my supplications hear.
2. Lord, if Thou should’st mark transgressions,
Who before Thee, Lord, shall stand ?
But with Thee there is forgiveness,
That Thy name may fear command.
3. For Jehovah, lam waiting,
And my hope is in His word ;
In His word of promise given,
Yea, my soul waits for the Lord.
4. For the Lord my soul is waiting,
More than watchers in the night,
More than they for morning watching,
Watching for the morning light.


5. Israel, hope thou in Jehovah,
Mercies great are found with Him;
He, abounding in redemption,
Israel will from sin redeem.”
The richness and emotion of this psalm are finely expressed
in those words just quoted. One psalm more will occur to
everybody as a test, if any one can be a test. Can there be a
better version of the 23rd Psalm than we have ? Perhaps there
cannot. But as we are not seeking to do away with our present
version, hut to keep it and to make it better still, all we look for
is a version at least as good, if we can get it. And we have got
it. Psalm xxiii, in somewhat shorter metre than common metre,
is:
1. “The Lord my Shepherd feeds me,
And I no want shall know;
He in green pastures leads me,
By streams which gently flow.
2. He doth, when ill betides me,
Restore me from distress;
For His name’s sake He guides me
In paths of righteousness.
3. Thy rod and staff shall cheer me,
When passing death’s dark vale;
Thou, Lord, w ilt still be near me,
And I shall fear no ill.
4. My food thou dost appoint me,
Prepared before my foes;
With oil Thou dost annoint me,
My cup of bliss o’erflows.
5. Thy goodness shall not leave me,
• Thy mercy still shall guide,
Till God’s house shall receive me,
For ever to abide.”
And so on I might go. One other example only shall I allude
to, and quote in part. It is the 103rd Psalm, where the grace
and grandeur of the name Jehovah are lost in our version, fine as it
is; but are brought out in an additional version in the American
Psalter. I shall just quote the first stanza and the last four
stanzas of this 103rd Psalm:
1. “O my soul, bless thou Jehovah,
All within me bless His name;
Bless Jehovah, and forget not
All His mercies to proclaim.
13. In the heavens high, Jehovah
Hath for Him prepared a throne,
And throughout His vast dominion
All His works His power shall own.


14. Bless Jehovah, ye His angels,
Spirits that excel in might;
Ye who hear what He commands you,
Ye that do it with delight.
15. Bless and magnify Jehovah,
All ye hosts that do His will;
Ye His servants, ever ready
All His pleasure to fulfil.
16. Bless J ehovah, all His creatures
Ever under His control;
All throughout His vast dominion,
Bless Jehovah, O my soul.”
What I have now brought before you ought to be received
with delight by every listener who loves the praise of God, and
seeks the Spirit’s presence in His worship. You will be charmed
to find that the glories of the book of Psalms cannot be ex-
hausted, but are all the more revealed to us with every additional
version we get, while previous versions are all the better under-
stood and admired when we go back to them. I know not if,
among my hearers, there be any that have an objection to my
present remarks. If there be, I should like to know what that
•objection is. I speak in no controversial mood; and if I have
spoken error, I shall, I trust, be the first to see it and ac-
knowledge it, if pointed out to me. But the matter which I
have brought befoi’e you to-day, I have carefully and prayerfully
considered for many years. It has been a painful time also to
me, to find the people of God asleep on this subject, when so
much has to be done, and when so much has been done by the
enemy stepping in to gratify a legitimate desire in an illegitimate
way. Why have we not in our church such a Psalter as 1 have
quoted from? I advocate notits adoption as it stands; but I
advocate its examination with a view to its adoption or even its
further improvement. And I appeal to you to support me in
this advance and reformation. These versions differ from one
another, and from our present version, not in meaning, but in
form. They are all just so many different ways of expressing
the same identical truth of God as given in His Word, and they
thereby enhance the power of that truth. They also admit of
much greater and pleasanter variety in tunes than our present
Psalter does; and with these versions in addition to our present
one, we should be far better equipped to meet the legitimate
wants of the present day, as distinguished from its illegitimate
cravings. It is still the inspired hymn-book we offer, but that
hymn-book in a form more worthy than before of the God who
gave it, and to whom we seek to render it in praise.
We seek to draw young and old by the Spirit of G-od only,
■whom we humbly supplicate. We seek not to draw them by any
worldly novelties or carnal methods, such as we witness adopted
by impure churches. But we have also to show to young and


and old that we are not standing still in the examination and
display of the excellencies of the Word of God and the praise of
God. * This we can do, so far, by the production of a Psalter
which shall be a vast improvement upon the old, while still
retaining the old within it. Tunes in abundance, indeed, already
exist, which can be used for these additional versions. The various
hymn tunes which we hear everywhere —as far as they are good,
and not trashy, and so far as they are public property' can be
brought into service here; and will admirably suit, in many cases,
these admirable versions of God’s inspired hymns. New tunes
also may be got.
My motto ever is, “Press forward.’ And he will have a
terrible responsibilty, and a no less terrible guilt upon him at the
Great Day, who stands in the way to resist any lawful advance
of the kingdom of Christ and the cause of the Most High. I
pray God that none such be found in our congregation. But I
pray that with one heart and mind we shall seek to promote the
praise of God in our assemblies, and the living to His glory like-
wise in our homes and occupations. And may He who is holy
ever inhabit the praises of us, His Israel! (Ps. xxii, 3.)




