

1/-
An
Alpine
Exursion
JOHN GALE




AN
ALPINE
EXCERSION
NOTES OE A TRII 1 TO THE
MOUNTAINS . .
RIVERS ....
PEAINS and . .
CAVES .....
OF THE AUSTRALIAN ALPS
BY JOHN GALE. J.P.
gI'KAVRKVAV, X.S.W.
ni.Ul'K, CALK, AX 1) CO., l * oiiMOiVKH ’’ PHI NTt X 0 IVOHKS.
1&&


KSAJiT SiIOHTLT
I'nifonn with this Volume;
SIX DAYS ON THE MOUNTAINS
OF COWLEY.
.Being an Account of a Trip in 1875.
KFPrrtLISHKK KV KsT.


CORRECTIONS.
Page 2,line7,for “comparative,”read “comparatively. ’
~ 78, ~ 24, ~ “peace,” ~ •’piec-a.”
„ 84, „ 2, „ “L.” „ •B. ’


AN ALPINE EXCURSION.
NOTES OF A TRIP TO THE
MOUNTAINS, RIVERS, PLAINS AND CAVES
OF THE AUSTRALIAN ALPS.
On the 24th of January, in the year of
grace 1903 —(I am particular in giving the
exact date, for the young people who
formed the bulk of our party intend pre-
serving these records for reference in days
to come) —I left Quean beyan on an excur-
sion which, so far as I am concerned,
extended to February 11th—eighteen days
of mountain climbing, whipping the moun-
tain streams for their wary, dashing trout,
shooting game, brumby hunting, cave
exploring, and whatever else furnished
excitement, contributed to exhilaration of
the spirits, the invigoration of bodily
health and afforded physical exercise. It
was a glorious time, spent with kindred
spirits, on every one of whom the inspira-
tion of Nimyod and of Isaak Walton fell
with all its force. Even the ladies of the
party enthused over the rod and the gun,
and faced with admirable courage the toils


and difficulties of the ever-changing situa-
tion with energy and resolve equal to that
of the hardiest and most experienced of
their gentlemen companions. The details
shall follow.
After a couple of days spent in the com-
parative monotonous and prosaic fashion
of life out Giumderra and Wallaroo way
1 was driven by Mr. Mark Southwell from
Parkwood to the low-level bridge which
spans the Murrumbidgee River below
Uiayarra. There my genial host and
friend, Mr. John McDonald of Urayarrn,
met me with his buggy and pair, and a
four-mile drive brought us to his beautiful
homestead. It was Anniversary Day, and,
of course, a public holiday 7. How that day
was spent at Urayarra—the cricket match
and the hospital ball at night—has been
already reported. The evenings of next
day and the day following were spent in
fishing. Mr. McDonald and lon Tuesday 7
evening rode across to the Cotter River
and fished and fished in many likely spots,
but beyond the landing of a gadopsis
(mountain trout) or two met with no suc-
cess. There are cod and perch in the
Cotter, and trout have been seen and
caught there; but I am afraid the latter
have altogether disappeared from that
stream since the big di ought set in. Of
late years the water of the Cotter River,
formerly as clear as crystal and of low.
cold temperature, has become dark and


inky in colour, with a decidedly gummy
flavour. The continuous dry weather has
caused an undue fall of leaves from the
overhanging gums into the stream, and
the diminished flow of water —scarcely
running when we were there—is insufficient
to carry off the pollution. Hence the
trout, whose habitat is only in the sweetest,
purest streams, have either sickened and
died, or have gone out into the Murrum-
bidgeo or up towards the head of the
Cotter. At any rale wo saw no sign of
them.
On the following afternoon, Messrs.
Joseph and William Webb and myself
fished the Murrumbidgee till after dark
with no better success than the Cotter
expedition had afforded on the previous
evening. What a contrast fishing in the
Murrumbidgee now-a-days presents to the
days of auld lang syne ! Some of us old
residents can look back to the period when
an evening’s fishing in tho big river—aye,
and even in some of its larger tributaries—
was invariably rewarded with a haul of
heavy fish, varying in size from 71b to 201 b
or even more, whose aggregate weight was
enough for a pack-horse to carry. In
these degenerate times—from an angler’s
point of view—a bag of sprats is considered
a good reward foi a night at the river; and
the capture of a seven-pounder or upwards
is tho talk of the day. How do we account
for this ? Well, the fact is, that the Mur


rumbidgee is fast silting up. Every year
the deep holes where the giant cod and the
big black bream lurked during the day are
becoming shallower and shallower. They
are disappearii.g one by one, and in their
place we find long reaches of white sand-
beds over which the water runs scarcely
knee-deep, or rocky streams which furnish
no refuge for the big fellows which years
back used to try the strength of our stoutest
lines. Before the hill country was stocked
with sheep and cattle the character of the
river and its tributaries remained un-
changed. Now, the loosened sandy
soil of the uplands is swept by every
rainfall into the creeks, and thence into
the river itself; and thus its character is
so tranformed that all the fish of any
worth are unable to migrate to the waters
of the Upper Murrumbidgee and its
tributaries.
On Thursday, 29th January, Mr. Mc-
Donald and I in a two-horse buggy, loaded
with tents and hammocks, tucker and
tackle, and all the ninety-arid -nine other
requisites indispensable for a camping-out
of several days duration, and accompanied
by Mr. Cox of Sherwood on horseback,
started for Brindabella, trout-fishing, Of
all the rivers (judging from common re-
port), into which the Fisheries Commis-
sioners have introduced the fry of the
magnificent rainbow and other trout,
hatched from ova impor ted from Canada,


the United States, New Zealand, and else-
where, the success of the experiment has
nowhere been greater than in that paragon
of trout-streams, the Goodradigboe River,
which, with the Murray, the Mumnnbid-
gee, the Snowy, and other rivers of lesser
note, take their rise on ;the tablelands of
the Australian Alps. Our destination was
to the banks of the Goodradigboe. It has
been reported for two or three years- past,
or more, that the rainbow" trout—the only
variety introduced into the last-named
river—have increased rapidly and grown to
large size there, but that they defied all
effort at their capture. Mr,. John Mc-
Laughlin had succeeded some time bacb in
landing one fine fellow about I glbs weight,
but that was the only instance on record
of a trout being taken with a bait in the
Goodradigbee Eiver. A few had been
shot with gun or rifle as they rose to the
surface, by persons in ignorance of the
law against the use of explosives in the
capture of fish, according to the provisions
of the Fisheries Act. It occurred to me
that the people up Brindabella way only
wanted to get an insight into the" art and
mystery of trout- fishing, as distinguished
from the simpler method of fishing for cod
and perch and bream, to enable them to
procure in a legitimate way as many as
they needed for table use and at the same
time to acquire skill in a pastime of intense
charm to young people and old, and both


sexes alike. Indeed, the “gentle art,” as
angling is called, numbers amongst its
most successful followers many of the
gentler sex, from our beloved Queen
Alexandra down to the peasant girl. As
an enthusiastic angler, and in rny boyhood
days a trout-fisher with a reputation on
the trout streams of England and Wales,
I had long yearned to throw a cast of flies
over the streams and pools of the Goodra-
digbee; and I am fain to confess that it
was as much the desire to gratify the ruling
passion as to be also the instructor of
others in the secrets of luring the game
and dashing trout, that tempted rne to face
the rugged mountains of the Snowy Alps
once more. In a series of articles written
some 27 or 28 years ago I described the
topography of this then terra incor/nita.
As a sequel to these papers, and at the
repeated request of several friends I may
yet reprint them ; so that here the task
becomes unnecessary. Suffice it to say
that after a long day’s climb over a road
somewhat improved since my first journey
over it—but still needing, in justice to the
public, a further expenditure by the De-
partment of Eoads and Bridges—of which
I shall have more to say by and by—we
reached the highest peak over which out-
road lay—the top of Brindabella Mountain.
Let me pause for a moment to “ view the
landscape o’er.” What a sublime pano-
rama ! There to the north-west stands


toweling to a height of .5000 feet or more
the inaccessible razor-back crown of Mount
Ooree. and close by his lesser neighbour—
but still a giant, head and shoulders above
the surrounding elevations—Mount Con-
duce. To mo, the others are nameless —
possibly unnamed, most of thorn, on tbo
maps of the county. As far as the eye can
scan, away westwards io the watershed of
the Tumut River, southwards to Kiandra,
eastwards and northwards to the plains of
Yass and Queanbeyau. billows of dark and
frowning mountains—a perfect sea of them,
as it were, an ocean lashed into fury by a
cyclone ; the deep dark valleys and gorges
like the troughs of the sea; the lofty
mountains like the frowning billows, but
lacking their crests, their snowy horse-
manes. One vast scene of wildest gran-
deur, filling the mind with reverential awe
in the contemplation of the Almighty
Power that by some old-time convulsion of
Nature’s forces eons ago produced a chaos
so sublime. How puny, how dwarfed,
man seems and feels amidst surroundings
such as these 1
Now begins the descent. A glance down
into the valley of Brindabella relieves the
eye. For a while the gaze is down upon a
quiet pastoral scone. The fertile valley an
amphitheatre of exquisite beauty. Through
it flows the Gloodradigbee River, its silvery
sheen resplendent in the evening sunlight.
Close by its banks, surrounded by cultiva


tion and grass paddocks—now, forsooth, as
bare of crops and verdure as most other-
parts of this drought-stricken continent—
stands the Brindabella homestead, the pro-
perty of Mr. T. Franklin. Its tall poplars,
even when the house is veiled in twilight,
are a prominent laud-mark. They are an
unerring guide for the traveller to hospit-
able quarters. The grade down this side
of the mountain has of late years •>f>en
considerably improved by two long cut-
tings. These zig-zag considerably, and
from top to bottom can be little less than
four to five miles in length. Here, as well
as on several parts of the road further-
back, the descent is so precipitous that
saplings have to be cut down and chained
to the back of the lightest vehicle to steady
its downward progress. At length the
bottom is reached, the last “drag” is cast
off, and along we bowl over level road,
twice crossing the crystal waters of the
river flowing over its yellow pebbly bed,
through old paddocks, by the graves of
Yenterman and Bower-bank resting quietly
from their toils as the pioneer prospectors
of the old Brindabella goldfields, till we
reach the Franklins’ home. A short call,
and declining with many thanks the hos-
pitality which is pressed upon us, on we
go and in the dusk of, the evening swing
our hammocks and complete our camping
arrangements for the first night out.


Trout-Fishing in the Goodradigbee.
In a clump of sallies on the banks of the
river that night with no canopy ov.:r us
save the starlit sky and umbrageous
foliage—as, after supper, we stretched
ourselves for slumber, the ripple of the
stream close by was a soothing lullaby,
and we were soon enwrapped in balmy
sleep. No sounds were heard to disturb
our repose, beyond the clink-clink of the
hobbles on our tired horses, or the crunch-
ing of the maize and chaff which formed
their evening meal. These rather minis-
tered to than hindered sleep. I was astir
while yet the stars were bright; and
brewed ray pot of morning tea by firelight.
An important duty, more than a natural
desire to make my maiden effort in Aus-
tralian trout - streams to capture their
newly-acclimatised denizens, necessitated
my' being astir thus early-. Letters had
been awaiting me at Brindabella which
required answering by the outgoing mail
at 7 a.m. These replies I wrote (using my
GHadstone-bag as a writing-desk) also by
firelight, and left them for Mr. Cox to take
down to the post-office on horseback.
J ust as the grey dawn crept up over the
high ranges to the oast, I set out, rod and


line in hand for a morning’s fishing. For
a long stretch downwards I found nothing
hut streams so shallow as to afford little
promise of reward for a line cast upon
them. But I fished them all the same,
and by and by, in the first still pool I came
to was encouraged by seeing two or three
fine fish dart away from the shallows and
take refuge under rocks in the deeper
water nearer the banks. Out into the
stream at the head of this pool I waded
knee deep and more, and cast my l line,
with its artificial lures, hither and thither,
sanguine of a rise. The sun was now up
and gilding the tops of the ranges to the
west; winged insects, from the gaudy
dragon-fly down to the tiniest gnat, were
hovering oyer and dipping their wings on
to the surface of the crystal waters. But
not a rise of trout to the natural fly nor an
“offer” to my counterfeits resulted. It
was breakfast-time; back to camp I went
and reported my non-success.
In the midst of breakfast news was
brought to us that our horses had been
tiacked through the gates back along the
road to Urayarra. One of them (“James”;
had proved to be a “rogue” horse who
could open any gate-fastening short of
lock or bolt. A Queanbeyan man “scrub-
bing” at Brimlabella brought the news,
and borrowed a saddle to go in quest of
the missing horses, his being with them.
Nothing now remained but for me lo walk
10


(instead of Mr. Oox to ride) to the post
office with my letters. There I learnt of
certain (loop pools where big trout could be
seen at all hours of •ffio day Iviug in re-
pose, and which had been tempted again
and with divers baits in vain. On
mv way back to camp I had opportunity of
verifying their presence in the pools men-
tioned, and later on their disinclination to
take a bait of any kind under the circum-
stances. As the sun threw his strong
light into the rocky depths, some cf them
a couple of fathoms deep or more, so clear
was the water, so free from mud or silt,
that the smallest pebbles were visible, and
lying motionless or stately swimming
round and round, there they were —big
trout from a foot long to the length of
one’s arm, only rushing temporarily into
hiding when a passing shadow or more
substantial object alarmed them.
Breakfast over, my companions signified
their intention of pitching the tents and
making everything snug in the event of a
possible change of weather, as we had no
intention of shifting camp till the follow-
ing Monday evening, the date fixed for the
advent thus far of the party of which we
formed the vanguard. During this opera-
tion I proceeded alone again to the river.
In the heat of the day the trout were not
rising. This they do only (I learnt later
on) from towards sunset till dark and for
an hour or so just before and after sunrise.
11


Noting where they were, I tried for hours
with all sorts of bait, natural and artificial,
to lure them, but in vain. A sunken fly
or grasshopper, a minnow, a worm, a grub,
were all alike approached by the coveted
prey, at first whilst on the move, only to
be turned from with disdain. It was very
provoking; and I began to wonder whether,
after all, the people who had tried them
many a time before were not right in their
conclusion that the trout of Goodradigbee
knew too much to be gulled by a baited
hook. After dinner and an hmrorso in
our hammocks till the heat of the day was
somewhat abated, we started for a flume
which conducts the water of a race in
course of construction from the western to
the eastern side of the river for the purpose
of irrigating some fine alluvial soil in the
vicinity of Mr. franklin’s homestead.
Here we were told there lurked during the
day, in some eight nr ten feet of water
under the flume, a number of big trout.
It was not long before we could see them ;
but try as we would, no bait could tempt
them then. And so we lingered and toyed
with the cautious fellows till the sun was
low in the horizon. Now I exchanged
again my ground-bait for a cast of artificial
flies —a caddis trailing, a spider a yard
further’ up, and a white moth a yard above
that again. The trout are rising at last.
Big fellows snapping wrth a heavy flop,
and lesser ones throwing themselves a foot
12


or more clean out of the water—most of
them in the stream at the head of the deep
pool, darkening in the fading daylight.
Hither and thither I cast my line wherever
I see a rise, and before long am rewarded
lot ray pains. The lure is successful; the
feathered counterfeits which in the still
waters of the deep translucent pools were
mocked at in broad daylight with disdain,
now in the gloaming and in the rushing
stream achieve their purpose ; a twitch at
rny cast, a jerk with my wrist of the
supple roil held in ray hand, and I am in
contact with my first trout. Ho is tethered.
A dash through the seething waters of the
stream, a somersault into the air, a splash
back again into his own element, a rush
into deep still water —all the time the
straining line paying out and the supple
rod bending like a bow. Is the struggle to
end in a capture or escape ? Ah 1 there he
goes, despite all my skill to keep him wide
of the danger, straight for the submerged
houghs of a fallen tree. He must either
be entangled, to the peril of my delicate
tackle, or checked in his progress by an
undue strain on the paid-out 20 yards of
my silken line. I take the lesser risk and
hold him in restraint. It is only for a
moment. Something gives way ;my rod
flies back with a spring ; the long line is
sweeping slackly down stream; my prey
has escaped! I examine my line; the
leading caddis on the oast is gone; the


plucky foe has not only won the fight; he
has captured my munitions of war. The
excitement, howeve* 1 , compensates for the
loss. It is worth the sport. I snood on
another caddis, and try my luck once more.
Another rise, but I fail to hook the fellow.
It is dark now—too dark to cast a line with
safety, and I and my companions repair to
camp.
The following morning both Mr. Mc-
Donald and I are prostrate with sickness,
caused, no doubt, by drinking during the
heat of the previous day too freely of the
mineralized river-water. 1 try to fish, but
am in too much pain and discomfort,and we
pass the hours in camp. Mr. McDonald
getting worse; I, on the contrary, gradu-
ally recovering. Mrs. Franklin, hearing of
our illness, sent medical comforts to our
relief. I had no need of them, but my
fellow-sufferer partook of the remedies
as prescribed, and managed to tat a hard-
boiled egg now and then during the day.
In the afternoon Mi. Cox and I strolled up
the liver to where the flume crosses ; and
while I tried again, but without success,
both trolling with a minnow and bottom-
fishing with other bait, he went higher up
to examine the fishing-grounds. His re-
port was favourable; he saw some good
pools and streams, and several fine fish.
Mrs. Eeid (daughter of Mr. McDonald)
and her daughters had sent word that they
would meet us at a famous haunt of trout
14


not far from their homestead, a mile or
more from our camp. To this spot Mr.
Cox and I made our way, Mr. McDonald
still feeling too unwell to accompany us.
The ladies were there before us with a
plentiful supply of luscious, ripe fruit for
our refreshment and some fishing-tackle of
their own Down the pathway made by
sheep descending the high embankment to
water we made our way to a narrow, grassy
flat. The river-bank was a shelving rock
running inwards to an angle beneath our
feet, and just the place where great fish
would lurk during the day to repair to the
adjacent streams evening and morning—
their feeding time. Full 14 to 16 feet down
every object on the bottom of the pool was
clearly visible. We saw some small fish,
but no big ones. We tried bottom fishing,
for an hour or more, but tried iu vain. As
the sun neared the hills in the west and the
lengthening shadows dulled the great deep
pool, we saw evidence that the trout were
on the move. Little fellows began to leap
in the stream, and big ones to ripple the
surface of the greater depths as they caught
the evening flies which came within their
reach. This was a signal for changing my
plan of operations. I was soon out upon a
shingley hank, on either side of which
flowed a stream into the now dark pool
beneath. To our agreeable surprise, we
saw Mr. McDonald approaching. Weak as
ho was, he could not resist the desire to
15


join the party. By his daughter and grand-
daughters he was received with affectionate
welcome. Up on the high embankment,
some 20 feet or more above the shingley
strand on which I stood, sat a group of
spectators to witness for the first time the
casting of a fly-line, with its artificial
lures, on the surface of the Goodradigbee
waters. For my own part, the experience
of the previous night inspired mo with
confidence. A few casts on the stream, or
out beyond in the tail of the current, and,
presently I feel a rise; a motion, a strike
and my hook is fast in his jaws.
An angler whose experience is limited to
fishing for cod and perch can form no idea
of the game he has to play when a trout,
especially a three or four-pounder, is fast
on his line, and that line 12 or 15 yards of
fine silk twist, jwith nine or 10 feet of gut
at its extremity, all controlled by a light
supple rod. A cod or perch may straggle
for a minute or more, if a big one ; but
his pluck is all out of him then, and to
land him is a simple operation. Not so the
game and dashing trout. With him it is a
fight for life, and sometimes a long one at
that. If big enough, the expert angler
lets him run out the spaie lino on his reel;
all the time so controlling him as to keep
him away from some treacherous log or
rook. Now, even in a small river like the
Goodradigbee, ho is 20 yards away from
you. With a strength equal to that of a
16


cod ton times his size, he makes for the
stream or rushes to the bottom of the deep
pool below, and minutes pass in the excit-
in'? struggle, the flue line straining, the
tapering rod bending, sometimes to a half-
circle, like the crescent moon. But even
now, after minutes and minutes of skilful
manipulation on the part of the angler and
desperate fighting for life and libeity on
the part of the ensnared trout, the result is
doubtful. While the contest lasts he has
the chance of eluding cap!are. The reader
will have seen as much from the escape of
the trout hooked on the previous day. I
lost 23 per cent, of the fish I played for
longer or shorter time —most of them by the
hook tearing from its hold at the moment
of landing. It is when a tired-out trout is
being drawn to grass, and knows it, that he
makes his last desperate dash for life and
libeity.
I have written the previous paragraph
parenthetically, and now resume the story
of the, capture of the first trout known to
have been taken with a fly in the Goodra-
digbee. W ? hen the group of spectators on
the bank high above mo saw that I had a
fish fast their excitement could scarcely be
restrained. “Well done! well done!
You’ve got him ! you’ve got him !” reached
my ears. With all my attention concen-
trated on the captive, I ventured the reply,
“Not yet; he’s not mine till he’s landed
on these shingles.” It was not long till
17


my quarry showed signs of exhaustion,
and after one futile effort to regain his
liberty, I had him in the shallows, he was
in my hand —he was my lawful prey.
Spontaneously there arose from one of the
party on the heights above: “ Three cheers
for the first trout!” and the response was
hearty and prolonged, with three more for
the victor. Again flew out my line, re-
peated for the third or fourth time, when I
had the good fortune to hook a much finer
specimen. He rose to my fly at the tail of
the stream, and the moment I struck away
he flew making for the still water on the
opposite side of the stream. In vain I
tried to give him line. My reel had fouled
and refused to pay out. Fortunately for
the sport he afforded, finding himself at
the end of bis tether he returned to my
side of the river and dashed into the deep
cavernous hole right beneath where the
party of spectators stood. There in the
light of the setting sun he displayed his
iridescent glories. The primary colours of
the rainbow, from which this species of
trout derives its name, flashed from his
flanks as he threw himself into all sorts of
contortions aud gyrated iu the crystal
depths. Twice or thrice he made for the
stream where, as if he krrew, his power
over the line which held him would
have been doubled. Oh, that my reel
would but run ! There was plenty of sea-
room for him had that been so ; but as it
18


was he had the advantage over me; I
couldn't keep him from the stream, and
there at last he broke ray tackle and
escaped.
I replaced a fly for the one he had taken,
but it was getting dark and as we had a
mile to go to camp, and the way was rough
and scrubby, I wound up ray tackle and
followed my companions. The two eldest
granddaughters of Mr. McDonald accom-
panied our party and prepared and partook
of tea with us One of them went with
her grandfather to the river, and scaled
and cleaned the solitary take of the even-
ing, It was then salted down as a tooth-
some dainty for next morning’s breakfast.
We formed a pleasant party round our
camp-fire that night till it was time to turn
in, and then, Mr. Oox and I, lantern in
hand, having escorted our fair guests to a
safe point whence they could reach their
home, returned to camp and soon were fast
asleep in our ruga and hammocks.
I rose betimes next morning, for Mr.
McDonald was still ailing, and fried the
trout for his breakfast. His appetite had
not recovered enough to relish ordinary
food. By the time the cooking was over,
the tea brewed, and the bread and meat
laid out and sliced, my comrades were astir.
The plate of well-browned outlets of trout
prepared specially for the invalid tempted
him to an enjoyable meal, though, while
19


we pressed him to eat it all—it was about
lib weight—-he prevailed on the other
members of the party to partake at least of
a slice ; and good ana delicious it was pro-
nounced to be.
It was Sunday, and divine service was to
be held at Mr. Franklin’s in the afternoon.
A note of invitation to dinner came to us
just after breakfast, which we accepted ;
and making ourselves as presentable as
circumstances would admit, we repaired to
Brindabella House and spent some hours
in the quiet repose of a Sunday in the far-
off bush. The people came, some of thorn,
from miles around to attend public worship,
and a congregation of upwards of thirty
seemed to enjoy and appreciate the rare
opportunity afforded them. It was over two
years since public worship had been con-
ducted in that neighbourhood. Mr. Cox,
who proves to be a good musician, p-esidod
at the instrument Moody and Sankey's
Sacred Songs and Solos were sung ; the
singing was good—on the part of one
young lady especially, whoso vocal gifts
are far above the ordinary. The entire
service was pleasant and profitable. After
tea we again repaired to camp,
Next morning we were to break up
camp—my cornpaniorrs to return home , I
to remain and join the larger party that
evening on their arrival from Urayarra.
Betimes I rose, prepared a hasty breakfast,
20


packed up my swag, to he left on the road-
side for the coming excursionists to pick
up, and bidding mj 1 hitherto companions,
who were still in their hammocks, nu
reroir, started while the stars were yet in
the sky, to the stream which afforded such
fine sport on the previous Saturday evening.
Here I captured 1113' second trout, but not
before the sin was high and shining
brightly on the river. It was a respectable
fish, and served for dinner for the family
all round at Mr. lieid’s, where I rested
quietly till towards sunset. At that hour
I went, as recommended, to a broad, deep
pool, into which flowed a strong stream
below' the high road to Ooolamon Plains—a
rough day’s journey further on. The fish
were rising well, from yearlings in the
shallows to weighty fellows of several
pounds’ weight in the deeper waters. I
was not long in wetting and running out
my line. The reel, fresh oiled, ran smooth-
ly, and my tackle throughout was in good
trim for any fair work. My hopes rise
high as I feel the first eager snap of a big,
hungry fellow. I strike, but miss him.
Anothi r rise, and the hook is in his jowl.
He is just as fightable as his congeners of
my earlier essaj’s. The description of my
previous struggles with individuals of this
gamest, handsomest, and finest in every
respect of fresh-water fishes the trout
family—will suffice for them all. From a
pound avoirdupois up they all afford excit-
21


ing sport, demand a steady hand, a cool
head, and much experience, to play them
till tired out and land them safe. This
one maintained the reputation of his race,
but at length he was mine. Presently
another rise, and the hook is in the chops
of the second fish. At first, judging by
the measure of resistance he offers, he
seems of average size; but only for a
moment or so; and then the running out
of the reel line and the furious rush into
the deep, dark pool forming an angle in
the opposite bank of the river where he
essays to escape his hamperings, tell me
that I have a big fish to fight once more.
It is a stn ggle similar to that before
described ; but it lasts longer. For fully
ten minutes it is the angler’s skill and the
quality of his tackle opposed to the endur-
ing agility and strength of a heavy fish.
At length he tires; his flounderings in the
stream, his deep plunges into the dark
recesses ot the big pool, show exhausted
energy. I venture, shortening line mean-
while, to bring him into the gravelly
shallow at my feet. I had previously
made tnv wayjfrom the stream to the bank
the better to manage my quarry, I sight
him now in all his glory; and he sights
me. Scenting danger, he makes one more
desperate effort Tor possible escape towards
a log covered with the',green, .slimy weed
(algoe) so abun lant, just n>w .in, all our
rivers. The danger 1 apprehend becomes,


however, but a shortening of the strife.
Away from the log he rushes carrying over
his head and shoulders a thick mantle of
algae. Ho is handicapped, if not blinded,
and at once succumbs. A minute or so
more and I have him at grass. What a
beauty I I lay him on my arm, his tail at
ui} T finger-tips, his head touching my
shoulder. I hang him on a broken twig of
a neighbouring sapling ; and as I continue
my sport, over and anon I glance round
and feast my eyes on his graceful length
and his brilliant hues sparkling in the
slanting rays of the setting sun. Just
then I am joined by one of the young
ladies from Mr. Reid’s. “ Would you like
to handle a fellow like that on this line,
Miss Lottie ? ” “ Yes; but I could never
hold him.” “Well; see; I have another.
Come and at least enjoy the sport of play-
ing him a while on the line.” She takes
the bending rod, and carefully heeding my
caution not to give him any slack, plays
him with admirable judgment for a novice
and enjoys the fun. I take the rod from
her hand, and presently a fine fish of Igdbs
weight lies at her feet. My take was
eight that evening—not a bad hour’s work.
Two huge fellows—one of which had a
shoulder, as I took a glance at him, as
thick as a man’s thigh —escaped me, the
larger one breaking my tackle.
Just as I was landing my last fish a
cavalcade of buggies, sulkies, horsemen,


and a bike-rider, came dashing down the
hill, and through a gap in a log fence
drove into an old paddock. It was the
party of excursionists whom I was to join.
They will I hope (the ladies especially)
pardon the liberty I take in mentioning
their names; but I cannot otherwise so
well proceed with my narrative. “ Ladies
first”; Mrs. Harcourt (Gininderra), and
the Misses May and Bertha MoOlung
(Murrumbatemau), Mr. Wm. McClung
(father of the two young ladies), Mr. A.
0. Wood (Lass Courier), Messrs. A. J. and
M. McDonald (Urayarra), Barclay Haley
(Lower Lachlan), G. Harcourt (Gininderra),
A. Falliok and myself from Queanbeyau.
I repaired to the camp with my catch,
and the sight of the beauties I had cap-
tured—especially the big fellow—filled the
whole party with delighted surprise. Alt'.
Fallick had gone to the river close by to
troll with salted shiimp (which he had
brought with him from Queanbeyau) as
bait. Three good fish rewarded his pains.
The party had finished supper, and the
ladies were about to ascend the hill to
partake of Mrs, Reid’s hospitality for the
night. I guided them in the dusk to their
quarters, taking with me the big fish as a
present to Mrs. Reid, leaving the others to
be prepared for the camp breakfast next
morning.
I was up at dawn and again at the river
for a short time (for the party wore to make


an early start for Peppercorn), but had to
be at camp before the fish were fairly on
the rise, so came away without a capture.
All were up at the camp, and breakfast
laid on the bare ground which in ordinary
seasons would have been carpeted with
verdure. On a big dish were piled up
cutlets of fried trout, brown and tempting;
sizzling in the frying-pan over the red
coals was another panful. Never did a
camping party fall in with richer viands—a
mure epicurean feast. There was enough
for all and to spare. As for the champion
trout, we afterwards heard that he fur-
nished a square meal for nine hearty
eaters !


To the Tablelands.
It took but little time, amongst so many
■willing hands to wash up the breakfast
utensils, pack them and the tucker away,
harness the horses, hitch them to the traps,
take our seats, and once more we face
another series of steep acclivities with their
inevitable descending pinches. We had 18
miles of this work that day. When we
were not ascending or descending hills wo
were threading our way (after we had five
times crossed the river since descending
Brindabe'la Mountain) along the tortuous
course of the Coolamon Creek. Thirteen
times—often twice or thrice within 100
yards or so—we had to cross that stream
over boulders of huge size and other
impedimenta which taxed to the full
the staunchness of our horses—some
of which had not been used to the
mountains. When we reached Diamond
Gull)' it was lunch-time, and wo had made
only nine miles’ progress. Three hours’
rest give our norses fresh strength and
energy, and on we go till early in the
evening we arrive at Little Peppercorn,
(at the head of Long Plain) the station of
26


Mr. McDonald, or, rather, McDonald Bro-
thers, Mr. John McDonild of UVayarra
having retired from the more active pursuits
of his earlier days and entrusted his fine
station properties to the management of his
sons. Nothing worth recording happened
during the day’s travel, beyond the shoot-
ing of a couple of black snakes, and a
heterogeneous bag of game. We plucked
their feathers whilst in mid - day camp ;
and after tea at Peppercorn the ladies of
our party prepared the birds for a stew for
next morning’s breakfast. Wo found Mr.
Will McDonald in charge at Peppercorn.
He had been apprised of our coming, and
had run in some f i esh horses for our future
use. Besides this, he had brewed a 12
gallon cask of excellent horehound beer-
more welcome to us as we alighted from
our vehicles than the best of billy-tea.
Fresh bread, boiled corned mutton, fresh
ditto roasted, with appropriate condiments
were there without stint— and we were just
in the r ight fettle to do the viands suhstan-
tantial justice. Tired out with the day's
toil over the mountains, and with a sense
of relief that we were now on the table-
lands, and that there would be no more
climbing, at least for daj's to come, the
ladies retired for the night to quarters pre-
pared for them under the roof, the gentle-
men to two large tents pitched for their
convenience.


Our Trip to the Caves.
The programme mapped out for the
morrow was, an early start to Yarrango-
billy, so as to reach the caves in time to
explore at least one of the principal ones
that evening The savoury soup prepared
on the previous evening, and which formed
one of our breakfast dishes, was relished by
everyone, and merited praise was meted
out to the cooks. After the matutinal meal
we were soon “ all aboard”—those of us to
whom seats in the buggies or sulkies were
allotted; throe gentlemen were on horse-
back ; one on his bike. I shall have some-
thing to say of that bike-rider later on.
Through half a mile of bush, where a couple
of brumbies wore seen and given chase to
for a while, over the tussucky plains, the
vehicles heading the swamps and creeks,
the horsemen and bike-rider making a bee-
line for the common destination to a dis-
tant fringe of sallies. In the earlier part
of our trip we crossed the Murrumbidgee
within sight of its source on 1 /ong Plain —
a tiny rivulet, with a scarcely-running
stream; not the strong current it is up
there when its many tributary springs are
in full flow as when King Drought vacates
his throne. We are running through the
28


“ snow-leases” now for miles ami miles;
and our party is separated, van and rear,
by a mile of space. Our buggy-is in the
iear; ahead we see a couple of waggons
(we are now on the surveyed road leading
from Yass, via Uiayarra, to the Tumut-
Kiandra road), one of them apparently'
bogged. Buggy and sulkies, and horsemen
and bike had all passed the drays. One was
down to its bed in a boggy creek ; no one
was with them ; but tucker-box and other
kit lay 7 on one side of the bogged dray,
and on the other side a swag. We had
passed it as had the other’s, when something
struck me that the straps on that swag
were very like those on mine. My com-
panion, who was driving, at my request
pulled up. I alighted and went back to
examine. Behold, the' swag was mine; it
had fallen unnoticed from the leading
buggy 7 —a buck-board behind which it
had been roped with other loading, and
one after another, seeing it close to the
bogged dray, had failed to recognise it and
concluded that it belonged to the teams.
So did we first along, till the peculiar straps
which held it together awoke my suspi-
cions. It was a close shave that, up in the
regions where the nights are so cold, of
losing my 7 comfortable rugs and wraps.
A few more miles are traversed, without
incident worth recording, if I may except
the picking up of a kerosene tin which had
evidently been doing duty as a camp kettle,
29


and in it a couple of two-quart cans which
had seen much service in the brew ing of
many a quart or so of “ billy tea ” This
find had been dropped from a buggy or
waggonette ahead of us, and rightly guess-
ing the value of the articles to the ownei s,
we carried them with us till we overtook a
hawker’s van, whose occupants claimed
the lost property. A few pence would
have purchased the lot in any country
town; but their value out there, fai from
any market which could have replaced
them, was not to be reckoned in money.
To have discovered later on that they had lost
their onlj - means of preparing “the cup
which cheers,” would have meant a depri-
vation which only a bushman or traveller
halting for his midday meal or turning out
his horses for the night, fir fr om the busy
haunts of men, could sufficiently estimate.
The thanks oxp.essed by the travelling
hawkers were no mere formality.
On the main road from Tumut to Kian-
dra, at a point known in the old digging-
days as Twelve-mile, we halted for lunch,
while one of our party went on a few miles
farther to the Caves to bespeak sufficient
accommodation for us. We were soon on
the road again, and after three or four
miles over the first good road traversed by
us since we crossed the Murrumbidgee
River at Urayarra were at the point where
a finger post indicated, at a turn-off down
a deep gorge, “To the Caves.”
30


Our route thence was along a well-made,
but much too narrow road, for there was
scarcely room enough for two vehicles to
pass, and an attempt to accomplish the
feat with anything but quiet, tractable
horses would have been attended with risk.
The attention of the Department of Roads
and Bridges should be drawn to this defect,
for as the traffic of visitors further in-
creases, as it is steadily doing, there will be
mischief some day, which a cutting of
some two or three feet off the embankment,
which means a widening of the track by
some four or six feet, would prevent. As
it is, one travels a narrow, tortuous mad
whose sharp turns need a constant outlook
and careful driving.
The timber not only here, but through
much of the country we had previously
travelled, is abundant, of the finest quality
for building purposes, and at some future
time will prove a valuable asset to the
State. The time is not far distant when,
on the Tumut side of this country at least,
where good roads lead to the railways, the
saw-milling industry will be a prominent
feature. The supply, if not inex-
haustible, will be equal to the briskest
demands for generations to come, even if
Gadara should be fortunate enough to be
the selected site of the future capital of
Federated Australia.
Some two or three miles along the Cave
Road brings the traveller by an abrupt
31


turn m view of the Cave House. He is
now on the great gorge of the Yarrango-
billy River. Up the steep acclivity on its
eastern slope are the three principal caves
—“The Castle,” the “Glory-hole,” and
the “Jersey.” Downwards at a depth of
several hundred feet of a rook-strewn,
scrubby surface, where a foothold is some-
times not easily secured, shines in still
pools or ripples over a bed of gravel or
stone —but not nearly so free from sand or
silt as the Goodradigbee—the Yarrangobilly
River, lesser in volume than the first-
named, but still a considerable stream.
The features of the opposite side are the
same; so that the gorge forms a Y-shaped
angle. A bird’s-eye view from the eleva-
tion where one gets the first glance at the
river, reveals bold and rugged mountain
scenery stretching away as far as eye can
scan, the great deep, serpentine chasm of
the river - channel being its giandest
feature.


The Caves House.
The Caves House is most picturesquely
situated at the head of a ravine or great
fissure running from the higher levels down
to the river bed. Bold, precipitous cliffs,
towering to a height of 200 feet or more,
define the contracted entrance. A few
chains up this valley stands the care-taker’s
residence, a cosy, comfortable dwelling,
which has been added to from time to time
for the accommodation of visitors. Its
verandahs look out on a patch of fertile,
well-watered garden ground, where vege-
tables, fruit, and flowers flourish in defiance
of the severest drought conditions. This
garden is backed by an unscalable wall
of limestone rook as high as those which
foi m the entrance to the ravine The ac-
commodation afforded bv the old structure
with its numerous additions being still
unequal to demand, the Government has
recently erected a spacious dormitory on
the rising ground behind. Brood wooden
steps lead up to this addition. The struc-
ture, though of rusticated weatherboard,
has some pretensions to architectural
beauty. Up a flight of concrete steps,
one reaches a spacious verandah. At one
end of this is a roomy apartment which
33


can be used as a dining hall, concert-room ,
or place of general rendezvous for other
social purposes. A hall entrance leads to
a corridor which gives access to some
fourteen sleeping apartments, each fur-
nished with a single bed and all toilet
necessaries. These bedrooms are well
lighted and well ventilated. At the ex-
treme ends of the corridor are bath-rooms
—one for ladies’ and another for gentlemen’s
use. But even all this extra accommo-
dation proves insufficient. “Shakedowns”
have to be occasionally resorted to, and on
the occasion of our visit the caretaker’s
resources were severely taxed to find
quarters for all his guests. Farther up the
glen—at its extreme end, in fact, are
situated the stable, coach-house, and other
out-houses.
But after all is said as to the public
accommodation at the Oaves House, it is
far from faultless. The water- system is
sadly defective. A one-inch service is all
that supplies stables, bath-rooms, lavatories,
kitchen, laundry, and every other depart-
ment of the extensive establishment; and
as the supply is by gravitation, annoyance
and inconvenience are of constant occur-
rence. When the standpipes at the stables
are in use, the bath taps refuse to act; and
so, when these are running, the kitchen
taps are empty. An amusing instance of
the inconvenience thus occasioned occurred
to one of our party. He had gone into the
34


gentlemen’s bathroom, unwittingly made
all his preparations for a refreshing shower-
bath, turned on the tap, and, lo 1 a rush of
air instead of water 1 The predicament
was awkward. In vain he called on the
attendant to turn on the. water; till the
flow from the stand pipe up at the stables
was turned off, he must bide his time in
patience. There is an abundant supply of
water, but till there is at least a three-inch
main with minor reticulations the annoy-
ance, disappointment, and inconvenience
of the entire establishment, officials,
domestics, visitors and all, must be grinned
at and borne with.
There is a thrice-a-week mail-service at
the Oaves House, with telephone connection
with Tumut, which is a matter of great
convenience to tourists and the public
generally.
The tariff of charges fixed by the Govern-
ment is reasonable in the extreme, while
the attention of the caretaker, his wife and
other attendants to visitors is such as to
afford comfort and satisfaction to all.
35


The Caves.
As soon as our horses were cared for, our
traps disposed of, our quarters allotted, and
a bath or a wash indulged in, preparations
were made for a visit to one of the caves
that afternoon.
Our party, consisting of twelve, was
at the Oaves House augmented by the ar-
rival of two young ladies from the Tumut
side, viz., Miss Lena Lampe and Miss Linda
Franklin, niece of Mr. Thos. Franklin,
our host of the Bnndabella estate.
They were aunt and niece respectively,
these two young maidens, and by their
accomplishments proved an appreciable
acquisition to our number.
We were each provided by the caretaker,
Mr. Bradley (who is also postmaster, tele-
phonist, and special constable, all for the
extravagant salary of £IOO per annum,
out of which £2O is deducted for rent, his
only other “perk” being what profit he can
make out of his visitors at 1/6 per meal
and ditto per bed) with candle and candle-
stick so contrived, by means of an inverted
cone and socket-spring like a coach lamp,
as to burn in any position without the
possibility of one’s clothes being greased
36


or of danger from the flame. The care-
taker was also our guide and expositor.
We chose to visit that afternoon the Castle
Cave, as being the remotest of the three
principal ones. Leaving the main road
after a short walk, our way led along a
rough and narrow footpath running half-
way up the steep and rugged descent to
the river before described. It was not a
too-secure path to ti averse in broad day-
light, and so uneven as to necessitate
careful walking. For about five or six
furlongs we pursued our way, when a
sudden turn to the right brought us to the
vestibule of the Glory-Hole Cave, which
will be more particularly noted in the order
in which it was visited. Leaving this
point, a difficult pathway, hewn partly out
of the solid rock, leads down to a deep
gulch bridged over with lough rubble
masonry. A tolerably easy path for a few
hundred yards further brings us to Castle
Cave. This, though the second cave in the
order of discover y, being our first object
of investigation, for the reason already
assigned, we prepare to enter as soon as
all hands have reached the tryst. A small
porch, a dark cavern shut off by means of
an iron gate securely locked, and with
certain cautions and notices bearing the
Eoyal Arms and the regal initials V.E.
placarded about the entrance, are all that
meet the eye. One begins to wonder how
so dreary a cavern came to be discovered
37


as the entrance to such a series of intricate
passages, vaulted chambers, and lofty
domes, enriched beyond description by the
master hand of Nature after a fashion
which relegates Art at its best into the
littleness of a mere tyro. Upon inquiry
we were given to understand that both
Castle Cave and Jersey Cave —the most
recently 7 found —were discovered and opened
out by 7 Mr. Bradley, the present caretaker.
This gentleman is an enthusiast in caves
and cave lore. “ Don’t you find this daily
guide-duty and reiteration of description
become sometimes stale, flat, and unprofit-
able ?” The question was a very 7 natural
one; but the answer revealed the enthu-
siast, the lover of Nature’s sublime handi-
work. “I find my work no drudgery.
Everjtime I enter these caves, especially
with visitors who appreciate what they see,
I seem to love them more and more, and to
discover richer beauties and loftier grandeur
than before.” These are not the exact
words in which our plain-spoken guide
expressed himself, but they correctly con-
vey the sentiments he uttered. We spent
a couple of hours at least in feasting our
eyes on the beautiful, the sublime, the
awe-inspiring revelations of that Castle
Cave, penetrating to its utmost length ;
and then retracing our steps found our-
selves once more in broad daylight at the
cave’s mouth.


Ilouce some of the party returned to
their quarters at the Caves House, myself
and Alf. Callick, md in hand, descending
to the river bemath the footpath, a re-
putedly fine trout-stream, to beguile the
evening hours in our favourite pastime.
We were fairly successful,half-a-dozentrout
rewarding our exertions, and though we
were warned by Mr. Bradley not to stay
too late as the track was anything but safe
to strangers after dark, heedless of the
warning we stayed as long as we dared,
fascinated with our sport, then making our
way up to the footpath, with scarcely light
enough to distinguish the beaten track or
distinctly detect its obstacles, we cautiously
and safely made our way to our quarters.
We were informed by Mr. Biadley that
evening that a visitor (a doctor) had a few
days before caught nineteen trout in a
single day whilst at the Caves. “ Did he
lose none?” “Not a single fish that he
hooked. You see, he had an attendant
with him carrying a landing- net with
which all his fish were landed from the
shallows.” It was well,. I thought, to be
the doctor with his gillie; single-handed
would he have done better than we p
On our return to the Caves House we
found our party patiently awaiting our
arrival for dinner. The repast over, the
rest of the evening was spent in singing
and music, the ladies accompanying them


selves as they sang, and playing for those
of the gentlemen who indulged the party
with examples of their vocal attainments.
These musical items were interspersed with
story, conversation, and whatever else con-
tributed to while away the evening hours.
Our instrumentalists, vocalists, and ren-
conteurs afforded such charming entertain-
ment that it was near midnight before any
of us thought of repose.
Next morning, having been advised
overnight that at nine o’clock (by special
arrangement) we were to start on further
cave-exploration, I hurried to the river to
follow my favourite sport, as before men-
tioned. Besides successful fishing, I had
some other and unexpected excitement. I
was casting my trail of flies over a stream
when I noticed a solitary sheep descending
the range on the opposite side of the river.
It seemed hunted and soared, and was
making to a clump of bushes immediately
opposite to where I stood. Looking about
twenty yards higher up the range, I saw
the cause of the poor brute’s alarm. It
had been out out from its companions by a
dingo—a pure-bred yellow fellow with a
brush like a fox’s. Quietly I watched his
manoeuvring. He was just yarding that
poor jumbuck for his breakfast, and by his
expertness in this work convinced me that
it was not the first sheep he had made a
hearty meal off. So far as that intended
victim was concerned, I was resolved to
40


frustrate his knavish tricks. Neither
dingo nor jumbuck saw me, so intent was
the one on his quarry and the other on
effecting, if possible, his escape. Thus
when the sneaking yellow thief was within
ten or twelve yards of his trembling prey,
a “ Sool him ! ” from my ambush scared
him up the hill again at double-quick, but
with aver and anon a furtive glance over
his shoulder to make sure I was not in
pursuit. That wasn’t the only object of
interest which rewarded my morning’s
exclusion. I had a splendid view of a
male lyre-bird gambolling near to me on a
bare rock. He had come down from the
higher ground and was making towards
cover nearer the river. When he gained
the rock he paused in his progress, and
pirouetted in the exuberance of his joy,
bounding with long springy strides, his
gorgeous tail trailing train-like behind
him. I have seen the lyre-bird before,
and shot a specimen when escaping in
alarm ; but this Was the only opportunity
I ever had of witnessing the graceful
action of this shy bird undisturbed in his
lonely haunts. “ Things we see when we
haven’t a gun ! ” A dingo’s brush, a scalp
worth a guinea, and a lyre-bird’s tail in its
best plumage would probably have been
mine that morning had I carried a breech-
loader instead of a rod.
The morning sun was gilding the peaks
above me —a signal for making my way
41


back to my companions. I took my bear-
ings and cast about for an easy ascent.
Presently I found myself on a well-beaten
path leading up a spur of the range.
Below me was a structure by the side of a
slabbed-in tank of deep, clear water. It
was the famous spring of tepid mineralised
water which forms one of the attractions
of Yarrangobilly. Later on in the day I
followed the example of most visitors and
enjoyed a plunge into its invigorating
depths.
My party were just sitting down to
breakfast when I reached the Oaves House.
Fried trout, the result of last night’s
angling, was one of the viands which
composed the meal. Breakfast over,
candles were again served out, and our
guide leading, we were soon en route for
Glory-hole Cave, along the track we had
traversed the night previous.
I have already spoken of the vestibule
of this cave with the peculiar but not
inappropriate name. Here Ist me describe
it, though the best attempts in this direc-
tion must, I feel, fall short of presenting
a faithful portraiture. The photographer’s
camera can’t even do it. An abrupt turn,
as I said a while back, brings the visitor-
face to face with a portico of colossal pro-
portions. It looks like the entrance to
some gigantean ogre’s den. There is first
of all a dome of vast proportions. Its base
or ground floor cover's near ly half an acre;


its vaulted roof is sixty feet or more above
the spectator. Through this roof, to the
right, there is a mail'hole of such propor-
tions that one’s fancy pictures it to have
been hewn out for the passage of the
fabled giants of old. Down through this
aperture into the shadows of the great
vestibule gleam the rays of the morning
sun, and up through it may be seen the
treetops, shrubs, and herbage of the
familiar bush. There is nothing that can
be said to be beautiful in this view ; all is
grandeur, sublimity. In the days to come,
when this popular tourist resort shall, with
the increase of population and of the
facilities for travel, be visited by hundreds
where it now attracts but tens, the great
floor may be cleared of its fragmentary
rock and converted into a grassy lawn with
its seats and lounges, its cool fountains of
whispering waters, its band stand, its
refectory, and whatever else contributes to
personal comfort and luxurious ease. One
can even imagine a hydraulic lift working
up and down the great manhole as a means
of access to and egress from Glory-hole
Cave, thus shortening and facilitating the
journey between it and Jersey Cave and
dispensing with the circuitous footpath of
these primitive days.
Like the other oaves, an iron gate burs
the entrance to the passages and vaults of
Glory-hole. There it is to the left. It is
unlocked; our candles are once more in
43


requisition ; they are lighted and again we
are in the bowels of the mountains. Glory-
hole is known as “ the old cave,” and for
many years was the only known cave in
the locality. In bygone days, before it
was taken under Government control, it
suffered much from acts of vandalism.
There are traces of where stalactite and
stalagmite have been torn away by ruth-
less hands, and much of the interior is
disfigured by names, initials, dates, and
residences of the vandal perpetrators.
Fortunately the by-laws now in force pro-
hibit under heavy penalties the repetition of
these or other outrages.
Although Glory-hole is historically the
oldest of the Yarrangobilly Caves, like the
more recent ones it owes its best attractions,
its newest features to the enterprise of Mr.
Bradley. There is a point in this cave
which was once its terminus. Here, some
few years ago, this gentleman found an old
slush-lamp hung up. It still hangs where
it was found. It had been used by early
explorers, and left there when they no
longer needed its flickering glimmer to aid
their inspection. There was a small fissure
at this terminus, suggesting an extension
of the oaves. Mr. Bradley opened out this
barrier with a result that has greatly added
to the wonders and loveliness of Glory-
hole.
We spend a couple of hours in Glory-hole,
entranced with its wonders, its beauties, its
44


grandeur, its glories, and its stupendous
proportions—all in keeping with the vast-
ness of its mighty vestibule, whither we
retrace our steps, and thence repair to Jer-
sey Cave. Here we devote another two or
three hours to inspection, charmed, bewil-
dered. amazed at all that met our eye. At
the extreme end of this cave we pause.
Our inspection is over. It is suggested that
we try the acoustic properties of the great
chamber we are now standing in. Several
songs and recitations are given, and the
reverberations are grand. One of our party
(a pressman) recites the well-known lines,
“The Pen and the Press,” and as it
would bo hard to find aught more appropri-
ate to the occasion we quote it:—
Young genius went forth by the mountains and streams
Entranced by the power of his own pleasant dreams,
Till the silent, the wayward, the wandering thing,
Found a plume that had fallen from a passing bird’s
wing.
Eejoicing and proud, like a boy at his play,
He bore his new prize to his dwelling away;
He gazed for a while at its beauties, and then
He cut it, and shaped it, and called it a Pen :
But its magical use he discovered not yet,
Till he dipped its white lips in a fountain of jet;
And, oh, what a wondrous thing it became !
It spoke to the world in a language of flame!
Its master wrote on like a being inspired,
Till the hearts of the millions were melted and fired.
It came as a boon and a blessing to men—
The peaceful, the pure, and the conquering. Pen I
Young Genius went forth on his rambles once more,
The vast, sunless caverns of earth to explore ;
He searched the rude rock, and with rapture he found
A substance unknown, which he brought to the ground ;
He fused it with tire and rejoiced in the change,
As he melted the ore into characters strange;
Till his thoughts and his efforts were crowned with
success,
And an engine uprose, and he called it a Press.
45


The Pen and the Press ! blest alliance ! combined
To soften the heart and enlighten the mind ;
For that to the treasures of knowledge gave birth,
And this sent them forth to the ends of the earth.
Their battles for truth were mighty indeed ;
The rod of the tyrant was snapped like a reed;
They were made to exalt us, to teach, and to bless —
Those invincible brothers, The Pen and the Press !
The National Anthem having been sung,
after “Auld Lang Syne,” and (as a compli-
ment to Mr. Bradley for his courteous
attention and other kindly services) the old
refrain “ For He’s a Jolly Good Yellow,”
our cave explorations and investigations
were over.
No attempt to give a detailed description
of the Yarrangobilly Caves could possibly
convey any adequate idea of their charms.
They must be seen to be understood and
appreciated. Memory may dwell on the
kaleidoscopic pictures which enchanted it,
but pen or pencil, the lens of the photo-
grapher, all alike fail to delineate them,
and form poor substitutes for a personal
inspection. Each cave has its own indi-
viduality of character. It is altogether
unlike its neighbours. One marvels at
this, seeing that the same natural forces
have been at work to form them, the same
material composes them, and that they
date from the same era. Geologists account
for cave formations by the fracture and
dislocation consequent on the upheaval of
rook strata by water or other natural force.
That is where they occur in stratified rocks.
In limestone rooks, such as these at Yar-
46


raugobilly, they tell us the eroding power
of water is increased when it contains
chemical agents which have the power of
dissolving the substance of the rook and so
causing it to be carried off in solution by
the water. The calcareous incrustations
lining these great caverns give them an
indescribably gorgeous appearance. In
some oases the deposit is pure white with a
richness and transparency that cannot be
imagined ; sometimes it is coloured—amber,
steel-gray, rich red, deep brown, almost
approaching to blackness—these varied
colourings being attributable to the mineral
composition of the superincumbent strata
through which the rain-water percolates,
forming the pendant stalactites which hang
from the roofs like icicles, or the stalag-
mites which rise from the floors to meet
them, till in some oases they have united
and form slender or massive pillars and
columns as if to support the vast roofs
above them. The fantastic, graceful and
arbitrary forms these incrustations assume
are a feature which arrests attention and
gives rise to many speculations in the in-
quisitive mind. It is not to be wondered
at, that seen with the aid of the searching
magnesium light, the shapes, forms, and
colourings suggest such definitions as are
conveyed by the terms, Cleopatra’s Needle,
Noah’s Ark, The Queen’s Boudoir, Tho
Garden, Solomon’s Temple, The Old Curi-
osity Shop, or such resemblances as tho
47


bust of Sir Henry Parkee, and an endless
variety of other formations suggesting
familiar objects and names. Here, are
rich draperies hanging in graceful folds as
if fresh from the loom; there, a cascade
pouring down its seething sheets of troubled
water; yonder, a display of snowv fleeces
as if fresh shorn from the squatter’s
flocks; in another direction the scintillating
treasures surpass those of a jeweller’s shop
with its flashing diamonds, its blushing
rubies, its many-hued opals. Look where
one will, it is beauty, lustre, grandeur,
blended in chaotic caprice. Reader, to
understand it all, to appreciate these mar-
vels, go, visit the caves. Nothing short of
this will give you an adequate idea of their
charms, their enchantment.
The perambulation of the ascending and
descending passages of the caves has been
rendered comparatively easy' by means of
concrete steps, iron ladders and hand-rails.
For the protection of the treasures they
contain wire-netting fences in the passages,
and sometimes arches them over.
Such caves as these are the open book of
the earlier chapters of Earth’s history,
revelations of the agencies which gave it
its shape, heaved up fls mountains, scooped
out its valleys, spread out its undulating
plains, its great sandy, sea-like deserts, its
rolling prairies. One is carried back by the
contemplation of them to the period when
the earth was void and without form;
48


when chaos and darkness brooded on the
face of the deep; when the Voice of
Creative Energy gathered the waters into
seas, and commanded the dry land to
appear in its multiform presence; when
the swirling waters rushing into the depths
of Ocean hollowed out these vast chambers
as one feature of its irresistible force.
Geological investigations in some in-
stances have, by the breaking up of the
floors of calcareous and caves of other
rock formation, resulted in another dis-
covery. Not only is their origin scientific-
ally accounted for, but their history is
revealed. Osseous remains have been
found under the floors remains of animals
belonging to bygone periods, as well as of
those still familiar to us. They are of
both herbivorous and carnivorous beasts,
birds, and reptiles; and from the fact that
many of them have a gnawed and broken-
up appearance is deduced the inference
that the carnivorous animals dragged their
prey into these caves and devoured them
there. Of course the remains are all
fossilised. To some extent these investi-
gations have been pursued in the caves of
Australia, with the remarkable result that
whereas in other countries the discovered
remains include that of extinct fauna, in
Australia they are limited to the marsupial
genera only.
It is to be hoped that further geological
49


investigations for the purposes of fresh
discoveries in natural history will not be
permitted here to an extent that would
mutilate and disfigure our wonderful stal-
actite caves.
50


Pleasant Nights in Camp.
At the Oaves we were not only joined by
the addition to our number already named.
We met there another party composed of
other member of the Lampe family and a
few friends. It included Mr. and Mrs.
Theo, Lampe (of Talbingo), Miss Lampe,
some younger members of the family, Miss
Watson, Miss Bridle, and Mr. Small. It
had been arranged that the two parties
should amalgamate and spend a couple of
nights at Mr. Lampe’s camp, some ten or
twelve miles from Yarrangobilly. Leaving
the Caves we made for that destination.
We were there before sunset, in good time
to make all things snug and taut before
night set in. Mr. Lampe, who had
some 10,000 sheep depasturing in the
locality, had brought his party there a
night or two before, and had fixed up every
convenience for his own family and his
lady friends. After supper, all hands—
numbering no less than twenty-eight souls
—gathered around the blazing camp fire
and whiled away the time till nearly mid-
night in pleasant conversation, relieved by
singing, recitations, readings and games.
Next morning, according to programme,
our section of this agreeable society started
51


on to Kiandra, having accepted an invita-
tion from Mr. Marks, the manager, to
inspect the operations of gold-dredging on
the Eucumbene. In a subsequent chapter
I shall more particularly refer to this trip.
The night of our return from Kiandra to
Mr. Lampe’s camp was spent on the same
lines as the first night. But we had become
better acquainted and all reserve having
disappeared, the social pleasures of our
second night in camp were more enjoyable
still. Again the midnight hour was close
at hand when “good-nights” were ex-
changed and all were quickly wrapped in
slumber.
52


Kiandra and the Gold Dredge.
On the morning following our first night at
Mr. Lampe’s camp we breakfasted early,
and made a start for Kiandra—old, aurif-
erous Kiandra of the sixties of last cen-
tury, on which is now written, so far as its
treasures of alluvial gold are concerned,
Ichabod, Two or three miles across the
undulating plains, and we are again on the
Tumut-Kiandra road. Our progress is
now therefore easy and pleasant enough,
except for the clouds of dust which our
cavalcade raises. Presently we come upon
the snow-posts placed at convenient dis-
tances alongside the high road for the
guidance of travellers when the snows of
the Alpine winter —invariably the case for
some months of the year—obliterate all
traces of the highway. Mile after mile of
this prst-marked way are traversed, a
goodly portion of it over open plains com-
manding an extensive landscape view,
until we are within less than a mile of the
old township, not yet visible by reason of
an intervening elevation. Down to our
left is the Eucumbeae, the principal tribu-
tary hereabouts of the Snowy River.
Floating upon the surface of a large sheet


of water many acres in extent, known as
the Mill Pool, we notice the familiar
structure of a dredge of big propoitions.
Teams hauling loads of firewood to great
stacks of the game here and there alongside
the banks of the great pool may be accepted
as evidence of many months’ work for the
dredge in the bed of that broad expanse of
water. The pulsations of the engine, the
thud of the machinery, the rush of the
wash-dirt along the great flume leading
from the structure, the agitation of the
waters as the washed deposit leaps out into
the river bed from whence it was but a few
minutes since lifted in the great scoops,
present altogether a scene of busy indus-
try. At a point where the main road
crosses a small stream, and in sight of a
great iron syphon a foot in diameter, a
mile or more of which comes creeping
down over the elevation already mentioned
and leads on to the banks of the Buoum-
beue, furnishing an immense hydraulic
power for sluicing and other processes :
here, where the leakage from the great
syphon irrigates a flat, green as an emerald
in sweet and toothsome herbage such as
some of our horses hadn’t tasted for many
a dreary month, we hobble out our wearied
nags, and go afoot down along the water
course, passing some mining operations
without staying to watch them just now,
and following a turn in the rough, uneven
footpath, are on a sandy strand, in open
54


view of the dredge. We are seen, and a
primitive-looking punt oasts off from the
side of the moored goldfinder, approaches
us, its captain and crew in the person of
Mr. Mark (brother of the manager, who
happens to be away on business) steps
ashore and mutual introductions follow.
The flat-bottomed craft, we are told, will
carry only three and the oarsman; so trip
after trip is made till our party of thirteen
are all safely on the deck of the dredge.
We inspect with deep interest the entire
process. A fine engine of 16-horse power,
kept in admirable order, lifts an endless
chain of big iron scoops, each of which
brings up from the bed of the river at any
depth (regulated by means of beautifully
contrived machinery) about ocwt. of wash-
dirt. This is carried to the head of an
elevated flume, into which it is pitched
immediately behind a powerful stream of
water which, descenditrg upon it, segregates
the mass—weeds, roots, soil, great boulders
and smaller stones and gravel being carried
along the flume by the combined force of
the stream and gravitation—till at last it is
cast out into the river bed again. The
construction of this flume is ingenious, and
admirably adapted to win most of the gold
thus brought up and treated. “ Hippies ”
(battens of wood) run transversely, with
little spaces between them, from side to
side of the flume. The precious metal,
separated by the action of the water, is


sooner or later arrested by these, the lighter
deposit being carried down the flume and
thrown out as already explained. Imme-
diately under the ripples is placed cocoa-
nut-fibre matting which affords a lodgment
for the coarser gold; what passes through
this matting is caught in a sub-layer of
fine blanketing. Thus very little gold is
lost. Once a week the ripples are removed,
the gold extracted from both matting and
blanketing, and all is then replaced for
another week’s operations. This dredge
has been at work on the Eucumbene for
about four years, and its average earnings
spread over that period are 40ozs. per week.
Sometimes as much as 70ozs. are won in a
week; at other times not 30ozs. But the
company who own the concern are very
well satisfied with results, which pay a
handsome dividend; and there is work
enough up the river to its source (which
has been tested and said to be all payable
ground) to last for many years to come.
The machinery of the dredge is so contrived
that it can work at any depth and any
breadth. The scoops were bringing up
wash dirt from a depth of sixteen feet when
we were there, and had not then reached
the bedrock.
As soon as were put ashore, we proceeded
to watch the hydraulic operations at the
adjacent creek’s mouth. A short distance
up, a four-inch branch pipe conveyed
water by means of a hydrant from the
56


main syphon to a convenient position for
operations. Prom a nozzle guided by the
hand a jet of water was directed against
the creek’s bed or banks at the will of the
operator. The force of this jet may be
imagined when we explain that not only
soil, but boulders of 801 b or 1001 b weight
were, when even struck at a distance of
twenty yards, rolled down the channel
with iiresistible force. All the washdirt
thus loosened was carried hy the force of
the stream to where the main pipe rose
vertically some ten or twelve feet into a
flume. There was an opening at the angle
formed at the point where the horizontal
and vertical met in the bed of the creek.
By a well-known law of hydrodynamics
not only does the superior force of the
greater volume of water in the syphon suck
up the water flowing by ordinary gravita-
tion down the creek, but all the gold-bear-
ing material it brings down with it. The
wash-dirt thus loosened by the hydrant
and carried down-stream is rushed up
through the main and whatever gold it
contains is caught in the ripples of the
flume and finally lodged in the matting
and blanketing as before explained. The
same syndicate, which have large mining
areas thereabouts, own both the dredge
and this appliance also. I did not ascertain
the average winnings of the hydraulic
appliances.
It was now approaching lunch-time,.and
57


as we had, by wire from Yarrangobilly.
ordered.this repast for 2.p.m., we repaired
to the township to find mine host Byatt of
the Alpine Hotel, for the purpose of ob-
taining the refreshment we so much needed.
The Kiandra of to-day is a contrast to
the Kiandra of 1860. Now, a neat little
country town with a population apparently
of 200 or 300, it was in its palmiest days a
great aggregation of canvas tents and rude
wood and iron structures, housing a popu-
lation of 16,000! There, down a hollow
leading from the main street to the river
below—a flat of very few acres in extent,
but whose broken and irregular surface
gives indications of its Paving been turned
topsy-turvy many times over in quest of
its auriferous wealth, is pointed out as the
alluvial diggings from which untold thou-
sands worth of gold had been won. It is
to this particular spot lohabod is appli-
cable. Elsewhere round about gold is still
being sought, outside the operations of the
dredging and sluicing syndicate. One man
showed me a pretty nugget of one ounce
which he had that morning unearthed ; and
there is yet gold enough being recovered to
give trade and commerce and to employ
many a handicraftsman in the little town
of Kiandra.
The scenery around Kiandra is bold and
picturesque, and the great elevations of
open country in close proximity, devoid of
58


forest or other obstacles, are admirably
adapted for the tobogganing and other
enow sports in which both residents and
visitors indulge during the severe winters
of its climate.
We were in a sorry plight when we
reached our quarters at the Alpine Hotel.
Splashed from head to foot, some of us,
with mud and silt from the ilume at the
dredge; dust-covered, all of us, the result
of our eighteen miles' drive from camp ; a
bath and a grooming were a matter of
necessity prior to sitting down to luneh.
And such a lunch ! Ample in quantity,
appetising in quality, displayed and served
with a taste and skill equal to anything
one might expect to find in the best metro-
politan hotels or restaurants. Wo were
hungry; our appetites had been sharpened
by a'ong morning’s travel; and how we
enjoyed that meal, how we relished course
after course, how, after putting away no
end of substantial, we lingered over the
sweets and fruits which ended that splendid
refection, was enough to have stamped us
in the eyes of host and waiters alike as the
veriest set of gourmands that ever raided
the Village on the Alps. If anybody
visiting Kiandra wants the best of every-
thing—comfortable quarters, a good table,
capital and courteous attention, he’ll find
all these at mine host Byatt’s.
When we returned that evening to camp,
59


it was not without regret that our pleasant
party was so soon to break up—-we were
all homeward bound, carrying with us,
however, pleasant recollections of a good
time spent away up in the ozone-laden at-
mosphere, amidst the boldest and most
expansive scenery to be found, perhaps, on
the vast Australian Continent, and in a
veritable wonderland. The close of our
second night’s gathering around the camp
fire was at hand ; wearied physically, but
refreshed and quickened in mind and
spirits, we laid us down in our tents to
sleep.
60


Homeward Bound.
In the gray dawn of the morning pre-
parations wore made for breakfast and
departure. Some were taking down the
tents; others packing the swags; others,
again, out on the plains or scouring the
timbered uplands mustering the horses.
It was a busy scene, for as our friends
from the Tumut side had before them a
long journey, a start betimes was impera-
tive. They are the first to leave. A great
covered waggonette drawn by four horses,
a sulky or two, and two or three horsemen
and horsewomen, compose the cavalcade.
Farewells are said, and up over the rising
ground westward they go, like an oriental
caravan, till they are lost to view. Our
preparations for departure are not yet
complete, nor have we finished breakfast.
In the midst of this repast our attention is
drawn to the flight of a flock of gang-
gangs—a slate-coloured species of cockatoo
with scarlet crest, found only in the
mountains west of the Murrnmbidgee—
which alight in the trees across the nook
of plain where we are camped. With only
two or three cartridges in his pocket, Alf.
Fallick goes in quest of the game. Shot
61


after shot reverberates in the timber, and
still the birds remain. Mr. Wood starts
off with more ammunition, and presently
the firing is renewed. We count eleven
shots, and then the firing ceases. A little
lapse of time and the young sportsman,
with his journalistic gillie, appear laden
with the game -fifteen birds for eleven
shots, are laid at our feet—-plump, fleshy
fellows with breasts on them like wonga
pigeons.
One of our horses is missing. Hill and
dale, plain and timber are scoured for
miles around in a vain search. The hours
pass; again and again the searchers return
unsuccessful. By and by, at about 11 a.m.,
one of the men in charge of Mr. Lampe’s
sheep comes down to our camp with the
news that the missing horse, the cause of
so much anxiety and labour, is comfortably
resting himself within 300 yards of us !
It is lunch-time now, and instead of halt-
ing on our way back to Peppercorn for
this meal, we boil the billy again, spread
out the cloth, open the tucker box, and eat
and drink with a merry heart. We have
lost the morning, it is true; but there is
ample time for a leisurely drive to our next
destination, where a day’s spell is deter-
mined on to rest our horses before again
facing the mountains homeward.
62


A Wild Horse Drive
Is organised as one of the recreations of
the day. Fresh saddle horses from the
station are got in for the use of the drivers,
and the plan of operations is determined
on. The horsemen are to go up the range
out back, driving some of the station horses
before them. L'hese are to be decoys; the
“brumbies” will herd with them, for they
are neighbours living on friendly terms.
While the horsemen are away on their
quest, several of us on foot take possession
of a gully—the only means of escape open
to the trapped wild ’uns once they are
brought into an angle formed by two wings
of fence where there are open slip-rails
leading into a small paddock and yard.
There we are placed in extended order.
We wait half an hour or so, and then the
cracking of stock-whips, the reverberation
of the horsemen’s shouts, and the thunder-
ing of horses’ hoof s down the range are a
signal to us that the search has been suc-
cessful, the brumbies are being driven
towards the trap. On, on they come,
nearer and nearer. Hut what has hap-
pened ? The sounds of galloping horses
are heard in two directions. A troop is
evidently making for the wings under
63


pressure of the pursuing drivers, whose
vociferous shoutings and ringing whips
reveal their close proximity. But a mob
of horses are also tearing down a gully to
our rear. They are in sight, and are not
followed by riders. Ah ! they are a con-
tingent of the decoys broken away from
the main mob, and are making for the
home paddocks. Will they spoil the game ?
Wait; listen. No; there are the drivers
and the objects of their pursuit; they are
in view now—tearing on and on towards
the wings of the trap, Closer the coi don
is drawing in, the few station horses still
with the brumbies leading and tractably
making for the slip-rails. Behind them,
hard pressed by the riders, are four or five
wild brutes whose actions proclaim them
outlaws. Mistrustful, they drop farther
into the roar, and regard with suspicion the
opening into which the leaders are entering
with confidence and familiarity. They are
cut off by the drivers from all hope of
escape by means of the wing of fence
running up the hill. Their only chance for
liberty is by rushing along that loading to
where the footmen are stationed to check
their progress and, if possible, head them
back to the slip-rails. This the scared
brumbies attempt, and make a desperate
rush for liberty. It is an exciting mo-
ment, and the excitement is shared by the
ladies who are onlookers fiom the higher
ground above and behind. Straight on at
64


a furious gallop the brumbies tear, right
towards the footmen who block their only
chance of escape. In vain do our shouts
and gesticulations check their progress.
The wildest colts of statiou-bied horses
would have turned under the intimida-
tion. Not so these untamed steeds of the
plains and hills. On thev come, ears laid
back, nostrils distended, manes and tails
flying in the wind. A magnificent picture!
A great brown horse, a model in all his
points, is evidently their lender; a piebald,
and two or three bays with him emulate
his prowess. They are evidently bent on
running their opponents down. Seeing
this, those most in peril at the last moment
briskly jump aside, and the brumbies
escape! The horsemen make an unsuc-
cessful effort to follow them. The game is
over. Those brumbies are still roaming
the timbered ranges and open plains of
Peppercorn.
65


A Grave and Its Story.
Whilst at Peppercorn some of our party
paid a visit to a lonely grave out on the
plain about half a mile fkna the'homestead.
Neat posts and wires enclosed a little
rhound, at its head stood an undressed
slab of limestone. It was not a bad sub-
stitute in form and dimensions for the
ordinary headstone. Rudely, but legibly
cut into its face Fere the words “ FnAunts
Dutcs,”' surmofttvted bv across. ’■ TJiat was
all ; neither the sleepers age ii'or. the date,
of his death was given. .But, neverthe-
less, that lonely grave has its story—a
blending of the Said, the humorous and the
grotesque. It has never been recorded,
but it may be appropriately narrated here.
I think it was somewhere towards the
close of the eighties of the bygone century,
when in my official capacity as one of Her
late Majesty’s Coroners, it was reported to
me that the dead body of a man bad been
found out on the open plain at Peppeicoru.
My district is bounded in that direction by
the Murrumbidgee River, and consequently
it became my province and duty to inquire
into the matter. How that inquiry was
66


held, I narrated, at their request, to my
companions after tea as follows :
It was winter, and the snow lay on the
table lands. It was doubtful it 1 could
reach the locality. Consequently I sent a
message to Kinndia directing an official
inquiry by one of the local magistrates,
but: neither from Cooma not Tumut could
Kiandra be called. The lines were snowed
up between those points and the idesti-
nation of my message. Nothing remained
but to go myself
Accompanied by a police-officer I set out
on a Saturday, driving to Uravarra, thence
proceeding un horseback through rain
and -now .1 seventy Hides' journey
from AfueauWyan, most -.of iit Over.;lke
mountains we have been climlaug-u-mtho-e
days a rougher track. We arrived, at
Biindabella just after the mail which had
preceded us. That was our first day’s
stage. From what I had ascertained, there
would be no criminal developments -from
the inquiry ; so I determined to summon a
jury for the following day, Sunday. As
the law then stood the proceeding was
illegal, Sunday being dies non juridicus, as
the statutes have it, that is, a day on which
no judicial act can be performed, and in
the event of a criminal issue such proceed-
ings would be void, and the indictment
quashed. An amended Coroners Act
makes an inquest held on Sunday legal


now, as for many reasons it always should
have been.
As a preliminary X sent the constable
after tea on to Mr. Beid’s (then an hotel)
to warn a jury of five to be at Peppercorn,
17 or 18 miles further on, at 2 p.m.
He returned with the remark, “ It’s no
good, sir; the men about the diggings have
all cleared out.”
“ How is that ?” I inquired.
“Did you notice that boy leaving the
post-office when we arrived?” asked the
constable. “ Well, when he got to Reid’s
he told the people there that a constable
and a gentleman with him had arrived at
Franklin’s just as he was leaving. The
miners had heard of the finding of the dead
body, and lightly concluded it was the
Coroner who had arrived to hold an in-
quest, and to avoid serving on the jury
they had all left their homes, so the land-
lord told me, and not a man could I find.”
“Never mind, constable; we’ll catch
them in the morning; for they’ll come
home to their beds to-night, and we’ll be
there before they are up.”
So before daylight we were again in the
saddle, accompanied by Mr. T. Franklin as
a guide, and were at Reid's before the
landlord was out of bed. Calling him up,
we asked him to show us to the miners’
camp.
68


“ It’s no use going there,' 1 replied Mr.
Keid, “for they said they wouldn’t return
till all danger of their being summoned on
the jurv was past,”
“Are there none of them about?” I in-
quired.
“There are three or four some little
distance away that mightn’t have heard of
your anival.”
“ Very well, then,” said I, taking from
my valise three summonses duly filled in,
all but the names of the parties ou whom
they were to be served, and bearing my
signature. “ Here are summones which
you will oblige me by serving on any three
of those men you may judge to be best
able to take the journey, after filling in
their names; and tell them from me that
failing to attend, a fine of £5 will be the
consequence. I need five j urors; Mr.
Franklin will serve as one, and I am told
there is another farther on whom I shall
summons to complete the number.”
Upon this, we went on our way. Some
few miles further on we turned off our
road to pick up the fifth juryman. He
demurred at first, but the penal conse-
quences of neglecting or refusing to obey
the mandate of the Coroner operated to
extort from him a promise to follow as
soon as possible.
We were passing through country white
69


with snow, and in due time arrived at our
destination —the very house we are now in.
But I see it has been altered somewhat:
and the old building outside, now a mere
ruin, was then in fairly good order. To
our surprise, the place was deserted—not
only was there no living person about, but
not even the corpse which was to be the
subject of inquiry.
The warmth of the morning sun had
been thawing the snow which was fast
disappearing.
Looking around me for some signs that
would account for the absence of both the
living and the dead, whom we naturally
expected to find on our arrival, I noted
something that awoke my suspicions. In
the angle formed by the two structures
there were some newly-adzed chips, ap-
parently from hardwood slabs, and some
fragments of a gin case which bad evi-
dently been split up into laths. There
were numerous foot-prints in the fast-
disappearing snow around thechips andalso
over against a gap which had been made
in the wall of the old building out there,
by the removal of two slabs. Further
inspection of the surroundings led to the
discovery of light wheel tracks going out
towards where the grave is which you have
seen.
Consulting with my companions, we
came to the conclusion that a rough
Y-shaped coffin had been improvised with
70


the aid of the two-slabs; that the corpse
had been laid therein and secured by the
strips of gin-case ; and that the rude shell
and its gruesome contents had been hurried
away for burial.
Subsequent events proved that our con-
jecture was true.
Both my horse and that ridden by the
constable were not so fresh as Mr. Frank-
lin’s, having travelled the steep grades all
the way from Urayarra. I therefore asked
Mr. Franklin to mount his horse and
follow the wheel tracks.
He had not long disappeared over the
falling ground outside the timber to the
back, before we saw him returning in com-
pany with half a dozen men on foot, one of
whom was wheeling a hand-cart, another
carrying a billycan with a rope attached to
it, and another with an old spade on his
shoulder whose blade was worn down to a
stump about four inches. With the excep-
tion of one of the party, they appeared to
be ordinary bushmen, and one of them I
knew—George Southwell, manager of Mr.
F. Campbell’s station at Ooolamon.
“ What have you been doing?” I asked.
“ Burying the dead body, Sir,” was the
answer I received, accompanied by a mili-
tary salute, from the spokesman of the
party—the man who differed in appearance
from the ordinary bushmen with him.
“ By whose authority have you buried a
71


body in charge of the Coroner ?” I asked ;
and “ Who are you ?"
“ lam the senior-constable from Kian-
dra, Sir; and have been sent by the local
magistrate to bury the dead body found
here on Thursday.”
‘‘Did he get a message from me, the
Queanbeyan Coroner ?"
“No, sir; bethought you could never
come on account of the snow ; and he did
not care for the journey himself ”
“Well; you see I am here, and as the
the men summoned to serve as jurors on
the inquest I have come to hold will be
here at two o’clock, I will trouble you to
go and bring the body hack.”
“ It can’t be done, sir.”
“ What do you mean ? How did you
bury him ?”
“ Well, sir; we made a shell out of a
couple of slabs. We put the body in and
fastened it down with strips split from an
old case,”
“ You say the body can’t be brought
back. Surely the tools you dug the grave
with can remove the earth. I suppose the
grave is but a shallow one. and you can
have no difficulty in lifting out the shell.”
“We didn’t dig a grave at all, sir. We
took the body to a prospecting shaft, and
dropped it in head fir st, and then filled in
the shaft with boulders.”
72


‘ Well; remove the boulders, aind bring
m the body.”
“It can’t be dune in a "whole day, sir; if
it can be done at all.”
The senior-constable was evidently losing
bis temper, and I was not in the least de-
gree inclined to give way. It was near
mid-day now, and as we had eaten nothing
since breakfast before break of day, I said,
jocularly :
“ Constable, I see you are a Scotchman.
I don’t know how it is with you and your
fellow-countrymen ; but I am an English-
man, and like all my fellow-countrymen
am in the best of tempers after I have had
a good square meal. Let us get something
to eat before we further diSouss the subject.
I sup pose there’s food of some sort about
h ere.”
“ There’s nothing to eat in the house,”
(This from George Southwell.) “But Ihave
brought a loaf of bread with me, and
there’s tea and sugar inside.”
“ Very well, then; we’ll boil the billy
before further argument.”
The billy was boiled, and from the loaf
of dry bread and a bill) of tea—not much
amongst nine men—we appeased our hun-
ger.
“ Well, constable”—this to the officer
from Kiandra—“ are you in better temper
now ? l am.”
“ I had not lost my temper, sir; but I
73


was, and still am, convinced, that it is im-
possible to carry out your order. The
coffin sank into deep water and mud, and
there are loads of big stones on that; it is
filled with them to the level of the surface.”
“ Perhaps we can avoid the trouble the
recovery of the body would seem to involve,”
I remark. “ While you have been eating,
I have been thinking as well as eating.
We must have a jury of at least five. You
are six. Southwell, you must stand aside;
that leaves five. You know an inquest
must be held super visum corporis in
plain English, the jurors must have seen
the body the subject of the inquiry. Did
you five men see the body and identify it as
that of Francis Dunn to-day ?”
The constable : “ Yes, sir ; all of us.”
“So far, so good. I will take the risk
of not having myself seen it; though I
think in law the Ooroner should also view
the body. Now, lam going to impannel
you five men as a jury ; and we shall have
to dispense with the services of the men
who have been summoned, and will be here
presently.”
“ But you can’t swear me in,” objects the
Kiandra constable.
“ You will have either to be sworn in
and serve on the jury ; or if it takes you a
week to do it, bring that body before me
and the jury summoned. But why cannot
I swear you in ?
74


“lam an officer of the police.” To the
constable who came with me : “ Loughlin,
a constable can’t serve on a jury, can he ?
“ Don’t be a fool, ,” replied his
brother officer! “I have served on many a
jury since I wore the uniform.”
“ I am not here to discuss that point,” I
interject. “ Even if you were all the police
in New South Wales, with the Inspector-
General thrown in, I shall insist on you
serving on the jury. That or, bring
me the body. All I want to know from
you, Constable, is this: Are you a good
and lawful subject of Her Majesty Queen
Victoria ?
“ I trust so,” is the reply, with a mili-
tary sail te.
“ Very well; let us proceed to business.
An improvised court room is piepared
under the iron roof of the verandah; there
were reasons affecting our personal com-
fort why it was not expedient to sit indoors.
The five men, including the senior-con-
stable from Eiandra, are sworn in ; the
evidence is taken down; and upon it a find-
ing recorded, “ Death from natural causes.”
gummed up, the evidence disclosed that
the deceased was an old servant of Mr,
John McDmald of Urayarra, and at the
time of his decease hut-keeper at Mr. Mc-
Donald’s Peppercorn Station. He was very
aged and infirm. He was last seen alive
about a fortnight before the date of the in


quest. On the Thursday before the inquiry,
Mr. George Southwell tiad occasion to be at
Peppercorn, and noticed the old man on his
hands and knees on the rising ground over
the creek yonder in front of the house. His
face was towards that big white gum with
the hollow in its butt, and at that time it
formed the corner of a bough sheepyard.
On approaching the old man he found
he was quite dead, lying there divested of
his coat and hat. His two faithful cattle-
dogs were by his side, and the coat and hat
midway between the body and the creek.
Southwell tracked the movements of the
old man. He had left his hut and crossed
the creek where the mud and water were
nearly to his hips. A heavy stick he had
used in walking was still standing in the
mud and rushes where he had struggled up
the bank of the creek. His progress from
that point had been made on his bauds and
knees, and in that posture he died. There
were no marks of violence on the body-
no evidence, to show tnat anyone had
been near the- place. The finding of the
jury was the oply reasonable conclusion
they cpuld arrive at.
It was stated during the inquiry that
Dunn, was believed to be possessed of a
considerable hoard of money—that he was
of miserly disposition, and the opinion was
expressed that, having a premonition of his
approaching death, and having, secreted his
money possibly in the hollow of the old
76


white gum, he was making towards his
hidden wealth when death overtook him.
I directed a careful aearchof that hollow,
and of the interior of the hut. At the
former place nothing was found. Under
the rugs on his bunk—there in that corner
—was found wrapped in a dirt}' piece of
newspaper, a five pound note, a copper
penny, and in a little wash-leather bag a
cmcifix and something that appeared like a
relic. There was also a sealed envelope
containing the deceased man’s last will and
testament, bequeathing ‘ his horses, cattle,
chattels and money” to the sons of his em-
ployer. share and share alike. That money,
beyond the five-pound note and the penny-
piece, has never yet been discovered, though
thefire-place has been torn down and rebuilt,
and the place all round searched and search-
ed again. The current opinion is, there is
an undiscovered plant somewhere abouts.
A touching incident or two connected
with the inquest should be narrated here.
While the inquiry was proceeding, poor
old Dunn’s two cattle dogs lay alongside
the dead man’s hat and coat, in view of
us all. It was all that remained to them
of the master they had so faithfully served.
There were no fences over yonder then.
While the dogs kept watch, down from the
rising ground behind them came a troop of
wild horses, which were much more plenti-
ful hereabouts in those days. The troop
was led by a big coal-black entire. They
77


saw the dogs and the clothes, and cautiously
approached with heads erect and the well-
known snorts of horses in alarm. They
were too near, in the dogs’ judgment, for
the safety of the clothes they were guard-
ing. A fierce growl and a rapid rush
scared the troop, the dogs continuing the
pursuit back over the rising ground whence
the horses had come. Then presently came
back the faithful guardians of property
their master would need no longer, and
again lay down to protect it.
It was sunset when we prepared to get
away to our respective quarters for the
night. “ What shall we do with the dogs ?
They will only starve where they are; for
there is nothing hereabouts foi them to
eat.” This question elicited the proposi-
tion that it would be an act of mercy to
poison them. We all concurred. South-
well said there was a phial of strychnine
in the hut. A crust of the loaf we had
eaten of was still left. It was bioken into
two pieces; a bait inserted into each peace.
These were taken across the creek and
thrown to the poor hungry brutes who
greedily swallowed them.
We didn’t wait to see the result; but
before we could have proceeded far, doubt-
less those two dogs were as dead as the
master they had served so faithfully.
It was a lonely death, a grotesque in-
quest, and altogether a story replete with
incident, humorous and tragic.
78


Further Partings.
The break-up of our party at its greatest
strength began when, at Mr. Lampe’s
camp away on the plains, the Tumut con-
tingent took their departure, leaving the
Queanbeyan ami Yass division in active
preparation to follow suit. Now, at Pep-
percorn, there are to be other leave takings.
Our genial host and organiser of the ex-
cursion, Mr. A. J. McDonald, and Mr.
George Harcourt, who is spending some
time in the mountains, are about to go to
a distant station—Dobb’s Hole, if my
memory serves me right. Breakfast is
over—a right royal meal composed of a
delicious stew of the gang-gangs shot by
Alf. Pallick, with other meats and sub-
stantials as accompaniments; the swags
■re again snugly packed; the horses are
harnessed to the traps; the saddled horses
are ready for mounting. But leave-takings
are deferred. One of our party, as spokes-
man, addresses Mr. McDonald on behalf
of his grateful guests. The host is cor-
dially thanked for his splendid hospitality,
his excellent generalship, and all else that
on his part contributed to make the outing,
extending over so many days, a never-to-
be-forgotten time. It was, said the speaker
79


(and he voiced the opinion of the entire
party), a season of unalloyed happiness;
not a cloud had cast its shadow over the
party, not a regratable incident had marred
the excursion ; and—with a twinkle in his
eye, he added—it was the devout wish of
them all that one result of the days and
nights they had spent so pleasantly and so
profitably, especially while the Talbingo
ladies were with them, would be the ex-
pediting of the period when their splendid
host would realise the complement of all
his manly qualities by forswearing his
bachelerdom. The ladies of the party,
too, came in for a meed of praise. Their
presence had shed lustre on the entire
affair; their skill in the culinary art had
added a lot to the enjoyment of the daily
meals, and their pluck and endurance in
the hardships and toils they had experi-
enced, were worthy of all gratitude and
admiration. Mr. McDonald’s reply was
characteristic in its modesty, but none the
less sincere. And when this formality was
over, good-byes and handshakingsfollowed,
and there were partings again.
We were reduced to ten in number now,
three ladies and seven gentlemen ; eight in
four vehicles, one on his bike, and one on
horseback. At the foot of Diamond Hill
we turned out our horses and spelled them
for a couple of hours, and partook of lunch.
Early in the evening we were at Reid’s
where the ladies and three of the gentlemen
80


remained for the night, while Messrs. Wood,
McOlung, Oadden, and Palliok went on to
Franklin’s, a couple of miles further. Lea-
ving the rest of the party, I prepared to
visit the river below for another hour’s
fishing, when to my mortification I remem-
bered that mv only oast of flies had been
carried ou by the party in advance. A boy
was despatched on horseback to bring it
back. He returned unsuccessful with the
disappointing intelligence that Alf. Palliok
had gone down on the river and the others
knew nothing of the tackle. I was prepa-
ring, rod in hand, to hurry on foot to
Franklin’s in hope of getting my flies and
fishing there, when, to my agreeable sur-
prise, Alf. was seen scorching along on his
bike with my tackle-bag in his hand.
What a relief! Again he retraced his steps,
and I, coatless and hatless, for the sun was
down and the evening was overcast, hurried
to my favourite stream. The fish rose well
and I was not long in landing three beau-
ties. But it threatened raiu—for the first
time during our excursion. Presently it
came down in torrents ; I was wet to the
skin—too uncomfortably wet to pursue my
sport any further ; so, leaving my tackle
under a sapling, I trudged up the hill to
the camp, with my three handsome trout,
amidst thunder, lightning, and rain. The
storm, however, soon passed; but it was
too late to revisit the river that night.
Next morning I was up betimes and at
81


the river again long before sunrise ; but it
was still muggy and thundery. The fish
were not rising; anyone, not knowing to
the contrary, would have concluded there
were none in the river. All my efforts to
lure them were fruitless, so, winding up
my tackle, I rejoined our party; and after
breakfast we were again on the load.
Our friends who had passed the night at
Franklin’s, we saw by the tracks of buggy
and bike when we got there, had gone on
before us. dressing the limpid Ooodradig-
bee for the fifth and last time since we came
to its vicinity we prepared to face the steep
gradients of Briudabella Mountain once
more. At its foot 1 noticed the tracks of
the bike leaving the main road for a bridle
path up a gully to the right. Then, I
concluded, Alt'. Pallick had ventured to
take the nearer route—impracticable for
vehicles—a lonely track of four or five
miles along the almost precipitous side of
the mountain, and altogether unknown to
him, but which would, if he didn’t miss his
way, bring him out on to the main road
near the mountain top. For us, it was a
tough climb, for it was quite enough for
our horses to draw the empty vehicles on
such a sultry morning ; for the bike-rider
it must have been a still tougher task, for
he had to push his bike before him or hump
it on his shoulder most of the way up. I
was a little anxious about Alf. (who is, I
should have said before, my grandson) for
82


it wag a loag, dangerous (to a cyclist) and
solitary path ho had ventured on, and it was
with undisguised relief that I at length saw
the track of his wheel come out on to the
road again.
We got as far as Blundell’s (Condors)
before we diew off for lunch, and there wo
got some fodder for our horses and spelled
for a couple of hours. Mr. Blundell has a
magnificent farm in between the towering
mountains. He had scarcely felt the evil
effects of the culminating year of the pro-
tracted drought. His crops of cereals at.d
hay had been good; the boughs of his
orchard tiees were even then bending low
with fruit of all kinds; theoodlin moth had
not reached him ; in his garden were veget-
ables of all descriptions of the finest qual-
ity. It is almost needless to say that a
dessert of ripe and mellow fruit was an ad-
dition, on that occasion, to our always
plenteous and varied repasts.
Urayaira was now only seven miles far-
ther on. Two of the gentlemen—Messrs.
Wood and MoOlung—who had preceded us
along the road, intended to make Murrura-
hateman at a late hour that evening, and
they had previously given us to understand
that they would leave Urayarra at I p.m.
Mr. McClung’s two daughters, who were
staying at Urayarra on a visit, were, toge-
ther with Mrs. Haroourt, travelling with
us We were reduced to six at our Brind-
abella camp, and we left that stage in three
83


vehicles thus;—Mr. Morton McDonald and
Mrs. Harcnurt, Mr. Haley and Miss L.
MeClung, myself and Miss McClung. The
latter ladies had promised to take leave of
their father at Urayarra, and so we pushed
on with the intention of being there in
good time. It was, however, 3.15 p.m.,
before we arrived, and to their disappoint-
ment their father and his companion had
started on theirfurther homeward way. My
grandson and Tom Cadden (who was still at
Franklin’s when we passed, and had over
taken us on the road down the mountains)
had also made tracks for Queanbeyan, so
that now the dispersion of the party was
all but complete. It was so on the follow-
ing morning, when, leaving Mrs. Harcourt
and my male fellow travellers at Urayarra,
I took a seat on the mail-cart for my home
at Queanbeyan.
84


The Home of the "Yahoo."
Swift, in his introduction to the travels of
Gulliver, speaks of a tribe of animals with
certain human attributes, passions and
vices. The work mentioned is, we “know,
fiction-—satire. But is there in reality
(as in fiction) such a creature Out in
the fastnesses of the big mountains and
deep, scrub-tangled gullies West of the
Upper Murrumbidgee, a strange, shy, and
wild creature is said to have been seen on
several occasions. It is spoken of some-
times as the “hairy man,” sometimes as
the “ yahoo.” For thirty years past, or
more, it h is occasionally made its appears
Slice n. those regions, according to common
repon, XI these reports were not so well
authenticated, so abundantly confirmed, as
1 shall proceed to show, one might reason-
ably set them down to superstition or the
exaggerations of imagination under the
excitement of fear. If the evidence before
ns is worthy of credence, then the creature
leferred to does exist, and is, in all proba-
bility, a quadrumanoua animal, from its
description. I had hesitated to refer to
the stary of the yahoo here; but on fuller
consideration I arrive at the conclusion,
85


that not only because it is readable matter,
but because the allegations I am about to
narrate ought to be known in the interests
of natural science and the zoology of Aus-
tralia. My informants the gentlemen
who (amongst others whose unsupported
statements might be taken cum grano salis )
aver they have seen this wild, mysterious
creature are not ignorant persons or
superstitiously inclined ; they aie strong-
minded, experienced, and educated men.
The subject of the existence and various
apparitions of the “hairy man” of the
Upper Murrumbidgee settlers a generation
ago, the “ Yahoo” of the presrnt genera-
tion, was the topic of conversation at the
camp formed by Messrs. McDonald, senior,
Oox, and myself, as mentioned in the
earlier passages of this narrative. Mr.
Cox was relating what had befallen him
when camped alone in the ranges of 3rin-
dabella about two years ago on a shooting
expedition. He was, ho said, enjoying his
billy of tea in the afternoon, when his
attention was drawn to an enraged cry,
between a howl and a yell, in the thick
scrub of a gully close by. He instantly
seized his rifle and looked in the direction
whence the sounds proceeded. There he
saw a huge animal in an erect posture
tearing through the undergrowth, and in a
moment it was out of sight before he could
bring his rifle to his shoulder. He dis-
tinctly heard the crashing of the under-
86


growth in its flight, and he followed niter
it. Its speed was greater than that of its
pursuer; but as it fled its howling and
yelling continued. That it was no creation
of an excited imagination—[and from what
1 know of Mr. Oox, he is not a likely
subject of wild hallucinations; but, on the
contrary, a remarkably cool, intrepid fellow,
too well enlightened and educated to mag-
nify a simple fact into a chimera] —is con-
firmed by this, that in his pursuit he met
several wallabies tearing up the gully in
such alarm that, though passing close by,
they took not the least notice of him.
These were followed presently by a herd of
cattle similarly scared. Further pursuit
was vain, for the thing had now gone
beyond sight and sound.
The sceptical may reasonably object that
this account in detail of what they might
consider the fabled Yahoo, needs corrobo-
ration. Pity it is that Mr. Oox had no one
with him to confirm his testimony. Let
the objection be accepted in this instance ;
but it certainty will not apply to the story
that follows.
There are no better known, more re-
spected, or reliable men in these parts than
the Messrs. Webb of Urayarra. There
are three brothers, Messrs. George G.,
Joseph, and William Webb. They are
natives of the district, and now elderly
gentleman—sober-minded, matter-of-fact,
and well-informed. Yet if any one of
87


them had had the experience that betel Mm
Cox, his story of the Yahoo would have
been equally discredited by the sceptical.
It is quite another matter, though, when
■two of the Messrs. Webb (the brothers
Joseph and William V are still with us to
tell the story of their adventure in com-
pany with this strange beast.
They were out in the ranges preparing
to camp for the nteht. Down the side of
a range to the eastward, and with only a
narrow gully separating them • from the
object which attracted their attention, they
first heard a deep gutters! bellowing and
then a crashing of the scrub. Next
moment a thing appeared walking erect,
though they saw only its head and shoul-
ders. It was hirsute, so much of the
creature as was visible,' and its head was
set so deep between its shoulders that it
was scarcely perceptible. It was approach-
ing towards their camp. Now it was in
full view, and was of the stature of a man,
moving with long strides and a ho.ivy
tramp. It was challenged: ‘'Who are
you? speak, or we’ll hie.” Not an intel-
ligible word came in response; only the
gutters! hollowing. Aim was taken ; the
crack of a rifle rang out along the gully ;
but the thing, if hit, was not disabled; for
at the sound of the shot it tamed and fled.
The two gentlemen, filled with amusement
and curiosity, but not alarm, went to where
they had seen and shot at this formidable-
88


looking creature, and sought for its tracks
in verification of what had happened.
There were its footprints, long, like a
man’s, but with longer, spreading toes;
there were its stride*, also much longer
than those of a man ; and there were the
broken twigs and disordered scrub through
which it had come and gone. They saw
no blood or other evidence of their shot
having taken effect.
Let these two instances suffice. The
gentlemen concerned are all still in our
midst to confirm what is recorded. So
much for the Yahoo and its home. Some
day a shot may bring down a specimen of
this strange and rare creature. Till then,
let the stories of the Yahoo be regarded as
fiction or fact, as scepticism or belief may
elect.
89


Tourist Routs to Yarrangobilly.
I have extended this account far beyond
anything I had intended or imagined when
I sat down to write—more at the solicita-
tions of members of the party, than for
the information of the general reader;
though I am gratified to learn on all hands
that the narrative has been-read with eager
interest as it has been given in instalments;
and I have evidence that the publication
will rot be without its benefits to a large
section of the community,
Thus, on his recent visit to his electorate,
the Hon. E. W. O'Sullivan, State Minister
for Public Works, who had been reading
those papers, sought my opinion as to the
practicability and other advantages of the
route we had travelled as a tourist route to
Yarrangobilly.
He knew that T had been more than once
through the lofty mountain ranges west of
the Murrurabidgee to the table lands of
Monaro; he had road years before my
“ Six Days on the Mountains of Powley ”
(published m 1875), and was familiar with
its details; he was aware of my knowledge
of the proposed > - oute via Qudgenby and
the country boyond, and of the present
best-known route to the Yarrangobilly
90


Caves, viti Cooma. I had no hesitation in
repeating t" the honourable gentleman,
what I had often and often averred beforo ;
That for economy of construction— much
of this road being already fairly travers-
able; for the grandeur and wide extent of
its scenery ; its splendid trout streams and
shooting grounds; it is incomparably
superior to all others Then, in point of
directness and nearness of access, it has a
decided advantage. Hy making Quoan-
beyan the train terminus of the tourist
route, a saving of 70 miles of railway
travelling is effected over the journey via
Cooma. while the road distance is very
little farther. The character of the road,
toe, from a tourist’s stand point, is all in
its favour. It is not a plain macadamised
toad, almost devoid of grandeur and mag-
nificence of scenery, like that from Cooma
to Yarrangobilly, that the tourist cares
for; the realisation of the advantages he
seeks involves mountain-climbing and other
arduous exertion, which is amply repaid,
in the sublimity and vast expanse of
scenery presented to the eye along the
route I advocate. But in further advocacy
may be mentioned the advantage of passing
through or being within touch of the vast
region of cave country on the plains which
constitute the northern fringe of the table-
lands of Monaro. As pointed out in the
papers written by me in 1875 there have
been long discovered on Coolamon Plains
91


far more extensive caves than those of
Yarrangobilly; and if not so beautiful,
still charming enough to repay inspection,
and it is evident the whole region for miles
and miles around is honoy-eombed with
subterranean caves which in course of time
will be opened out, with possibly' more
magnificent results than those which so
excite the wonder and admiration of the
visitors to Yarrangobilly, and thus furnish
additional attractions to the tourist. Then,
again, where is the need of visiting the
Snowy and other streams of far Monaro
for the sport of trout-fishing, involving as
it does a train journey to Cooma and a
long day’s travel added to that, when, the
angler can leave Sydney by the 8.50 p.m.
train, and be fishing in the Goodradigbee
at sunset next day 1 Add to these argu-
ments the saving in travelling expenses of
the route from Queanbeyan, and what
refutation can there be f
It was gratifying to hear the Minister
say', after listening eagerly to my opinions
and arguments, that he would at once send
an officer from his department to report on
the road, and upon official confirmation of
my statement, he would do what in him
lay to make Queanbeyan a train terminus
for tourists to Yarrangobilly, and as funds
became available put those portions of the
road which needed attention into a satis-
factory state of repair for tourists and
other travellers.
92


Conclusion.
I cannot conclude, lengthy as this ac-
count has been, without brief reference to
two or thioe matters which ought to have
found place in preceding passages.
In the first place, there remains some-
thing further to be said about the stocking
of the barren mountain streams which
h tve their sources on the Australian Alps
with trout. Taking them in the order of
the oxpei iment, the Cotter River comes
first under notice. Trout, of the English
spotted and Loch Levon varieties were
placed in this stream (and others on the
eastern side of the Murrumbidgee River)
in the rear 1888, by Mr. F. Campbell, J.P.,
of Yarralumla and myself. It was the
first attempt of the kind in New South
Wales. We brought about 300 yearlings
from the Ballarat Acclimatisation Society’s
hatcheries and nurseries on the banks of
Lake Wiuduuree. After a while the pro-
geny of these fish were seen and occasion-
ally caught in the Cotter, but from the
lower reaches of the river they have of late
years almost totally disappeared, owing it
is said to the pollution of the water in its
low state by the decaying gum leaves
swept down into the river channel. It is
93


reported, however, that trout of holh
varieties, as well as of the rainbow kind, are
numerous at and near the head of the
Cotter. It that bo so, when normal con-
ditions obtain once more, doubtless the
Cotter will rank amongst our finest trout
streams.
The introduction of rainbow trout (the
only variety hatched and distributed of
late years by the N.S.W. Department of
Fisheries) into the Goodradigboe River is
of more recent date. It is only three or
four years ago that the first consignment
of trout fry of only six or eight weeks old
was received by Mr. Campbell and en
trusted by him to the late Mr. W. Mc-
Laughlin who conveyed them to the
Goodradigbee. Other consignments have
followed, Mr. W. Reid receiving several
cans of fry and placing them in the upper
portions of this river. That in so short a
time these fish should have so multiplied
and grown to large weights is highly
gratifying as well as surprising. It is
indisputable evidence of the eminent fitness
of the Goodradigbee as a trout stream.
The Yarrangobilly is a smaller stream
than the Goodradigbee and not equal to it
as a habitat for trout in many respects,
but it has had several consignments placed
in it by the Fisheries Commissioners,
through Mr. Bradley the caretaker. Their
first introduction, so that gentleman told
94


me, took place about four years ago, and
they have thriven so well that not only are
they numerous, but many of them fine
specimens, i saw one of fully four pounds
weight, and I had the unique experience of
hooking two fine fellows at one cast of my
flies. They were strong fish and 1 feared I
should never laud them both —a fear that
was presently realised, for one of them
broke away, but I secured the other.
In the Eucumbene, already mentioned,
trout have been very numerous and affor-
ded good sport to the Kiaudraites close to
town ; but since the dredging operations
they are bring killed in considerable num-
bers, much to the regret of the local
anglers. Of couise they are in the smaller
tributaries, and from these, after the dredge
has completed its work, the Eucumbene
will again be stocked.
Speaking of these smaller tributaries, it
is gratifying to know that in the most in-
considerable streams, the Condore Creek
and a small creek at Brindabella, trout are
now to be found.
Evidently this fine table fish and finer
sportsman’s fish has come to stay in our
Southern waters west of the Murrumbidgee
as well as in those on the eastern side.
■ 1 promised, I find in the earlier chapters,
to have something more to say of the
bicycle as a means of locomotion over the
roads to the Yarrangobilly Caves. Some
95


two or three year® ago a party of cyclists
left Qmanbeyau ami made the distance »y
way «f Naas and the Upper Cotter in two
days with perfect case, and arrived at the
caves early enough to give an afternoon’s
inspection to them. I suppose they must
have done a lot of pushing and carrying
their wheels, as oar cyoiist did his. If so they
had their work cut out. If it was a toil
to horsemen and those of our party who
rode in buggies and sulkies to do so much
climbing on foot, leading their horses and
vehicles; by how much more was it an
arduous and toilsome trip to the young
bike-rider who must have shouldered and
pushed his wheel possibly fully sixty or
seventy miles of the two hundred miles we
traversed to and from the Caves and
Kiamlra.
Taken altogether, our Alpine Excursion
was. the reader will admit, as fine a recre-
ation as one could desire, inrigoratiug to
both mind and body ; enriching the former
with a wide range of useful knowledge ;
storing up in the memory scenes, incidents,
and associations, which will serve for the
pleasant reflections of a lifetime. It was
an education in the most pi action! sense of
the word ; and its recounting here should
stimulate, and indeed has already stimula-
ted, other parties to emulate en-enterprise so
richly rewarded.
96
