

rVioVQ-i t
AN ACCOUNT
OF THE
DIOCESE OF NEWCASTLE, NEW SOUTH WALES,
CUBING THE
LAST FIVE YE AXIS;
WITH AN APPEAL FOR FURTHER AID.
■*W'
lonSon:
J. WHITAKER, 41 PALL MALL.
MAY ALSO BE HAD AT THE OFFICE OF THE SOCIETY FOB THE PROPAGATION OF
THE GOSPEL, 79 PALL HALL.
1853.


lanUon Special Committee.
The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of
Winchester.
The Rt. Hon. the Earl of Harrowbv,
39 Grosvenor Square.
The Yen. Archdeacon Hoare, Godstone,
The Rev. Dr. Tatiiam, Master of St.
John’s College, Cambridge.
The Hon. & Rev. R. W. Sackville W t est,
Withyliam, East Grinstead.
Joshda Watson, PisQ., Clapton.
Rev. Dr. Russell, Devonshire Square,
Bishopsgate.
The Rt. Hon. Spencer Walpole, M.P.,
16 Old Square, Lincoln’s Inn.
Rev. Edward Coleridge, Eton, Windsor.
Rev. William Selwyn, Canon of Ely.
W. F. Beadon, Esq., 9 Stratford Place.
W. Strahan, Esq., 34 Hill Street.
Sir Stephen Glynne, Bart., M.P., Athe-
meum, Pall Mall.
Rev. H. Howarth, 15, Grosvenor Street.
Rev. C.E.Kennaway, Campden, Gloucester.
Lt. Col. Short, 1 Albert Ter. Knightsbridge.
Rev, Francis J. Martin, Trinity College,
Cambridge.
Richard Clarke, Esq., 17 Kensington Sq.
Rev. James Atlay, St. John's College,
Cambridge.
Rev. J. V. Povah, 16 Tavistock Square.
Rev. T. Bowdler, 7 Whitehall.
Rev. S. Smith, Camberwell.
Rev. George Currey, Charterhouse.
Charles Blandy, Esq., Reading.
G. Engstkom, Esq., Beddington, Croydon.
J. Boodle, Jun., Esq,, Southampton.
J. R. Kenyon, Esq., 11 New Square, Lin-
coln’s Inn.
Major Moorsom, Croydon.
Rev. James Gray, Dibdin, Southampton.
Rev. J. M. Rodwkll, 7 Whitehall.
Rev, O. Walford, Charterhouse.
Rev. H. W. Phillott, Staunton-on-Wye.
Rev. F. Poynder, Bridewell Hospital,
Blackfriars.
G. Tyrrell, Esq., Fordbrook, Acton.
E. Tyrrell, Esq., Hinde Street, Manchester
Square.
T. Tyrrell, Esq., Guildhall.
Henry Hoare, Esq., 14 New Street, Spring
Gardens.
Edwin Palmer, Esq., Balliol College.
Rev. Arthur M. Hoare, Calbourn.
REV. WILLIAM HENRY HOARE, Oakfield, Ckawlev,
Secretary and Commissary for the Diocese with the Society for the Propagation
of the Gospel.


* str/fr
S-6 7-rr
DIOCESE OF NEWCASTLE,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
URGENT APPEAL FOR FURTHER ASSISTANCE.
In the last Appeal for the Diocese of Newcastle, in 1851, a full
statement was made of the various plans which were then in
operation, under the direction of its Bishop. Since that time,
it has pleased God to remove the venerable Bishop Broughton
from the metropolitan see of Sydney, and thereby to cast a
temporary cloud over the churches in those parts. It is, however,
consolatory to remember that this prelate, by whom (at the great
personal sacrifice of the fourth part of his own episcopal income)
the Diocese of Newcastle was originally founded, lived to see it
presided over by a Bishop, whose sound judgment and indefa-
tigable zeal have earned him the respect and confidence of all.
Many have heard the honourable testimony borne by Bishop
Broughton, when, on a late public occasion, in answer to an
address presented to him by the Newcastle Committee, he ex-
pressed his high sense of Bishop Tyrrell’s abilities, and having
referred to his appointment as joint Missionary Bishop, with the
Bishop of New Zealand, by their right reverend brethren hold-
ing their Church Synod at Sydney, he emphatically remarked,
that “whenever any difference of opinion arose in their dis-
cussions, the person to whom they all looked, to secure cordial
unanimity, was Bishop Tyrrell.”


The objects to which the last appeal referred were —
1. The employment and support of a body of faithful and
laborious Clergy.
3. The education of the rising generation in sound Christian
principles, and the furnishing a gradation of instruction on
that basis, suited to the wants of various classes of the com-
munity.
3. The erection and completion of churches.
4. The provision and supply of the Holy Scriptures, the
Liturgy of our Church, and other books and tracts, partly
religious and partly secular.
5. Missionary operations among the heathen races in Aus-
tralia and the adjacent islands.
Almost at the very time that this appeal was being prepared
in London, the Bishop, at the opening meeting of the New-
castle Church Society, (then recently established) was thus im-
pressing the same topic from the pulpit:—
“As it is the office of the Christian Church to preserve the word of
God, as it is the great privilege of her members to possess that word, as
it is the duty of her ministers to preach it, diligent care should be
taken that, in every branch of Christ’s universal Church, the word of
God is taught and read, and preached and spread. There should be—•
“ 1. Schools, in which the word may be taught.
“ 3. Bibles, in which the word may be read.
‘‘ 3. Churches, in which the word may be heard.
“ 4. Ministers, who may preach the word.
“ 5. Missionaries, who may spread it over the world.”
If it be asked why the charges of these several objects should
not be borne on the spot, and by the people amongst whom
they arise ?it should be considered that the people are not yet
able to provide for themselves; for, added to the usual diffi-
culties, we have in Newcastle a poor and agricultural population,
with few r large cities, and not many large proprietors—the whole
scattered over an enormous extent of country, and occupying an
4
FIRST FIVE YEARS OF


area which is said to he larger than any other colonial Diocese.
As the Bishop describes it in a recent letter, “ There is in my
Diocese no affluent centre, no metropolis, no seat of govern-
ment—these are all at Sydney, and my Diocese is to the Sydney
Diocese what Wales is to England, or Bethnal Green to
London! ”
The cases where aid might reasonably be refused, are either
where no want can be proved to exist, or else where the objects
of our aid are backward to help themselves, and would only
abuse the kindness extended to them. But where the contrary
is the case, as in this comparatively needy Diocese, in which,
nevertheless, the local efforts show a large annual increase, and
the wealthier and independent districts contribute'to the support
of those which are dependent solely upon voluntary exertions—
surely here it is our duty not suddenly to withdraw our support
and the benefit of our example, but rather, according to the pre-
cept of the Apostle, to “provoke unto love and unto good works.”
We cannot, therefore, be surprised at the result of the Bishop’s
experience, when he assures us, “ I cannot expect contributions
from my own Laity, unless I set before them the encouragement
of fresh grants from home j” and again, “ I cannot possibly
succeed without the stimulus of such grants and collections from
England.”
And now to return briefly to the objects before enumerated,
and which we shall enlarge upon only so far as may be neces-
sary to introduce the Appeal, now made by the Bishop, for the
renewed exertions of his Committee and friends. And to begin—
1, with Education. It is but due to the kindness of those
Friends who, two years ago, so liberally aided in the proposed
supply and erection of two superior schools—one a Grammar
School at Newcastle, and the other a Commercial and Grammar
School at Maitland, in the same Diocese—to make this a promi-
nent feature in our Report. And it will be satisfactory to hear
that, in consequence of the very handsome subscriptions elicited
on that occasion, two schools of the description required are now
open, and Head Masters have gone out from England—the Rev.


W. H. Savigny, of Worcester College, Oxford, and Mr. (now the
Rev.) J. W. Colyer, of the Edinburgh Episcopal Training Col-
lege. The Bishop thus writes :
“Your venerable Society (the Society for promoting Christian
Knowledge) will be gratified to hear, that the generous grant which
they made to my Diocese for the establishment of Grammar Schools, has
produced even more good than I ventured to expect from it. The sum
of £9OO thus granted has already led to additional contributions to the
amount of £3,100; £l,lOO, through my kind friends in England, the
members of the Newcastle Committee, and £l,OOO from the members
of our Church in Newcastle and Maitland, in this Colony. Nor is this
the only good which has been effected; the members of our Church, in
these the most important districts of my Diocese, have been thus
convinced, that their Bishop has been for many months, unknown
to them, anxiously trying to provide superior education for their
children; and the happy result has been a great increase of confidence
in me, and of attachment to their Church .... Your Society has
therefore not only aided me in providing the Schools, but has been
mainly instrumental in obtaining for our beloved Church the character
of a wise and thoughtful parent; and in rallying round her feelings of
attachment and gratitude, so desirable and necessary to promote in
future her more extended usefulness.”*
May we not unite in thankfulness to God for this measure of
success, and take courage to proceed in fresh efforts, so far as
our Sister Church in the Colonies may appear still to rely upon
our help at home ?
3. Next, on the subject of Books. A depot has been estab-
lished in the Diocese, for Bibles, Prayer-books, religious and
other works; and the demand for these is most encouraging.
An order was received last year upon the Christian Knowledge
Society, amounting to £4OO for religious books; and a similar
order for scientific and miscellaneous works, to be selected by
the Bishop’s friends. It will be observed that this .£BOO is
obtained entirely by the sale of the books to purchasers in the
Colony. And orders to the same if not larger amount, seem
likely to be continued annually. Through the liberality of the
* Letter to the Rev. T. B. Murray, January 31, 1853.


London publishers, in furnishing the stock at trade prices,
the sale in Australia may be expected ultimately to realise
a profit, available to other Church purposes in the Colony. It
need scarcely be remarked, what evidence these facts afford of
the increasing desire of knowledge which exists among the Colo-
nists, no less than of the successful efforts which the Bishop is
making to give that knowledge a right direction.
3. The Missionary department may next be mentioned. In
the last printed Report of the Newcastle Church Society we
find the following : —“ During the early part of the year, there
was collected in this Diocese two hundred pounds towards the
purchase of the mission ship, for the use of the Australasian
Board of Missions; and we have lately voted from the funds of our
Society twenty-five guineas for the support of the Mission to
the Isles of the Western Pacific. During the voyage of the
Missionary Bishops,* no opportunity was lost of preaching the
Gospel to the natives in some of the Islands, through the
Samoan teachers, as interpreters, and of beginning a kindly
intercourse with other Islands, where the missionary or teacher
had never before set foot. And the hope is expressed, that this
Diocese may be ever willing to afford some yearly contribution
in money, and if possible some devoted men as missionaries;
not only among the poor heathen of the Western Isles, but also
those of their own land ?”
We reserve for the last place, and perhaps for convenience
we may class them together,
4. Churches and Clergy. There were, in 1848, seventeen
districts under pastoral superintendence, and there are now
twenty-eight; so that under the present Bishop, and in the last
five years, there have been brought under the teaching of the
Church eleven new districts; and in each of these, in the language
of our last appeal, “The work assigned to each pastor, in order to
supply in any adequate degree the spiritual necessities of his
isolated and distant stations, requires the union of devoted zeal
* See Colonial Church Chronicle for December 1852, and June 1858, “Melan-
esian Missions;” and an extract from the “Gospel Missionary,” appended to this
report.


with physical strength and health. The climate is magnificent,
but the work is great.”
But how is this band of faithful labourers to be maintained ?
The seventeen in 1848 were maintained out of a small grant from
the Colonial Legislature, which, small as it is, is not unlikely at
any time to be withdrawn. It must, of course, in any case be to-
tally inadequate to the support of more than the original number
of clergy. The remaining number of eleven, and all who may in
future be added, are dependent absolutely on the guarantee of
the Bishop himself. And how then can the Bishop meet this
great pecuniary responsibility? We draw attention to this
question, as it shows, in the strongest light, the present urgent
need of assistance. The Bishop, besides a small sum of <=6200, (the
interest of what he has been able to invest out of our Newcastle
Special Fund), and any assistance he may obtain from the usual
liberality of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, has
literally nothing to depend on but his own influence with his
people, in impressing upon them the duty of maintaining their
ministers; and what little he can, with much self-denial, afford
out of the scanty revenues of his own see. To show the full
extent of the responsibility thus incurred, and what difficulty
there must be in meeting it, we will here refer to the Bishop's
own statement in letters recently received :
“I find myself responsible, in the year 1853, for clergymen’s
stipends in my eleven new districts to the amount of £lOOO. To every
clergyman settled in a new district I guarantee a certain annual pay-
ment, at the least £150; they are thus dependent not on their flocks,
but on the Church represented by their Bishop. Also before I send
a clergyman to such a district, I require from two or three of the
principal residents, a written guarantee that they will annually pay
£lOO into the Clergy Fund of the Newcastle Church Society, while I
make up the remainder of the Clergyman’s stipend from other sources.
“ When I first came to the Diocese in January 1848, the members
of our Church were strongly opposed to any attempt to induce them to
contribute for the support of their ministers. As an example of this:—
when Mr. M'Connell was appointed to the Clarence River, chiefly on
the strength of a grant from the Society for the Propagation of the


Gospel, the late Bishop of Sydney, before he sent him, agreed that the
people there should contribute annually £lOO towards his support.
He resided and laboured faithfully among them for five years, and they
never contributed one shilling towards his maintenance! A similar
case occurred with Mr. M'Gregor, at Brisbane, Moreton Bay. The
former of these gentlemen died shortly after I landed in the Colony;
and the latter was most unfortunately drowned, while bathing in the
River Brisbane. From the beginning of my Episcopate, I resolved to
make every effort in my power to bring about a change of sentiment
on this important subject. Clear explanations, gentle persuasion,
consistent firmness, have been all employed for five years, and I am
rejoiced to say with the happiest result. The districts of Clarence
River, and Moreton Bay, began cheerfully to support their own minis-
ters ; and the Society’s grant thus became available' for the formation
of four new districts:—lpswich, Darling Downs, the Liverpool Plains,
and Wollombi, —districts extending from North to South, along the
Western side of my Diocese: and now, again, the same grant is aiding
me in forming four additional districts beyond the former four to the
North and West, where the population has been rapidly increasing:—
the districts of the Burnett and Wide Bay, Warialda, Cassilis, and the
Macdonald River. Whatever deficiency of income occurs I endeavour
to make up from other sources, as especially by contributions from the
older settled districts, and from what I can spare of my own Episcopal
income. And to show the increased spirit of liberality in my Diocese,
I may observe that, among the local contributions, in 1851, I received
from the Clergy Fund of our Church Society, £276; in 1853, I
received upwards of £700; in 1853, I hope to receive upwards of
£lOOO. And this £lOOO, with £3OO which I derive from the portion
of the Newcastle Special Fund, invested by me, and £4OO which I am
enabled, with much self-denial and strict economy, to make available
for my Diocese, out of my own limited income, will make up £l6OO,
which I have stated is the amount for which I am responsible this
year for clergymen’s stipends.”
It will now be better understood under what circumstances
the present appeal is made. In a letter to his committee,
December, 1852, the Bishop informs us, that the original grant
of the Legislature for “ religious worship,” out of which the
above-mentioned older districts have been hitherto supplied, “ no


person expects will ever be increased.” If this is the case, it
can afford no aid in the support of Ministers in the newly-formed
districts, for in truth the whole amount available for the Diocese
was exhausted, i. e. appropriated to existing districts, before the
Bishop came to the colony. And hence there is no aid from
Government towards the formation of new districts. And with
regard to schools, similar difficulties may be expected to arise,
in securing permanent support to schools of a distinctive
Church character. And thus, as regards schools no less than
churches, there is a necessity for some measures, which may
have the effect of giving greater permanency to both. The
plan to which the Bishop proposes to have recourse, is that of
endowing, with a small annual income, some few—perhaps ten
or twelve of the churches, and the greater part of the existing
Church schools, of which there are at present 34. He invites his
friends of the London Special Committee for Newcastle Dio-
cese to renew their efforts to raise a fund by fresh annual sub-
scriptions for this purpose, during the years 1854, 5,6, 7.
And the money so raised he proposes to apply to the endowment
of churches and schools.
And there are surely not wanting arguments why we should
respond to this call. There is, first, the importance of giving to
the Church’s work that character of stability and permanency
which it ought to have.
“ It was on this principle,” writes the Bishop, that “ when I came
to my Diocese, in 1848, I resolved to invest permanently such a
portion of the Newcastle Special Fund, as would bring in the annual
sum of £2OO. This I effected notwithstanding the numerous claims
and expectations, which I was obliged in consequence to disappoint,
and the diminished outlay and show, which attended the coming of the
new Bishop. But who would not rather lay one stone in the founda-
tion of a lasting building, than erect an entire Crystal Palace, to be the
wonder of a single year, and then to vanish away.”*
And again in a Letter to the Rev. Ernest Hawkins :f —
* Letter to Christian Knowledge Society, January, 1853.
January 15, 1853.


“ This plan of providing some endowment, however small, in lieu
of a grant for current expenditure alone, would be surely a wise pro-
ceeding, as far as it could be carried out; and if lam the first Colonial
Bishop that has expressed his willingness to forego all present aid, for
the sake of securing great permanent benefit to my Diocese, —your
Society, I am convinced, will not discourage ‘ such forward-looking
thoughts.’ It is this sound permanent good that I desire to accom-
plish for my Diocese, however limited and unnoticed it may seem to
be. To obtain an endowment of £5O, may seem a trifling thing to
effect in one whole year; but it would suffice to settle permanently one
district in each year ; and in a few years how great would be the
strength which would accrue to the Church.”
The character of the schools forms another ground why we
should assist in their continued support. They are now well
supplied with books and apparatus; “ the acquirements and
character of the Masters has been much raised, and the Clergy
of my Diocese,” the Bishop says, " have become most diligent
in the superintendence of their respective schools. The happy
result has been, that our Church schools are now much valued;
parents will make a considerable sacrifice to obtain a place
in them for their children, in preference to National Schools.”
The following to the Christian Knowledge Society gives addi-
tional force to the appeal:—
Copy of Letter to Rev. T. B. Murray, Secretary to the Society
for Promoting Christian Knowledge.
“ With respect to endowment for Missionaries, I have written to the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, and will request my Com-
missary, the Rev. W. H. Hoare, to show you a copy of that appeal,
that you may communicate to your standing Committee any portion of
it which you may deem of sufficient interest and importance.
“ With respect to the increase and permanent endowment of our
Church Schools, what I earnestly desire to obtain is this, —the means
of establishing and permanently endowing two such schools every year.
Should I be able to accomplish this, at the end of five years we should
have ten schools permanently established; which would give so much
strength to the Church, and so much confidence to her members, that


the whole of our primary schools might be continued and saved, and
become by degrees permanently endowed as the ten above-mentioned.
This is the object which I have so much at heart, and would do or
suffer anything to accomplish.
“ It is important also to observe, that these schools would become
centres, from which the Church could minister to all around, and nur-
series for the future Missionary Clergy of the Diocese. Their masters
might be catechists, or candidates for Orders, or young Deacons ; and
in many parts of my diocese the Master of such school might conduct,
with the greatest benefit, three services each Sunday, when the Clergy-
man of the District was away.
“ I have lately visited the river Manning. It runs from West to
East, and is 62 miles from the nearest town to the South (Stroud),
and 60 miles from the nearest town to the North (Port Mac-
quarie.) It is in the district of Port Macquarie, and the Clergyman
visits it once a quarter, when he remains there two Sundays. When
I was there, I had service at Bungay at eleven o’clock; then rode on
horseback eleven miles down the river to Taree, for service at three in
the afternoon; and then was rowed in a boat five miles lower down the
river, to Cundle, for service at 7 p.m. These three services I have
directed the Clergyman of the district to continue, whenever he visits
the Manning ; and a superior Schoolmaster might, with infinite advan-
tage to the Settlers, and with the greatest benefit to the Church, hold
these three services every Sunday, when the Clergyman is not there.
The Residents in four such other places have already earnestly intreated
me to provide them with such a school and Sunday services; and I
purpose doing so at once, relying on the generous aid of your Society.
“ As I much desire that the plan I have proposed of small annual
endowments for Schools, as well as for Churches, should commence
from this year—the first in the second period of five years of my
Episcopate —I will continue in some way or other to meet the expenses
of such a provision for this present year 1853, if your venerable Society
would generously assist me by a grant for 1854 and the three following
years. The Special Committee of the Newcastle Diocese will do their
best to collect contributions in furtherance of the same object. And
if your Society (considering the importance of the end to be obtained
in tbe present state of the Church in this Colony and Diocese, and
being not unwilling to encourage this attempt to promote efficiently


for the future, at the certain risk of much increased anxiety and respon-
sibility for the present), should receive my appeal with favour, and
grant to my Diocese £SOO, for 1854, and the three following years, I
will engage that two schools shall he permanently endowed during
each year, investing the grant in any way, and in any name, which
your Society may he pleased to recommend.
“ I remain, my dear Sir, sincerely and faithfully yours,
“ W. NEWCASTLE.
“ The Rev. T. B. Murray, &c. &c.”
In whatever way the Societies may be disposed to meet these
requests, the members of the London Special Committee for New-
castle Diocese are ready, for their own part, and earnestly
desirous of urging their friends, to come forward on the present
occasion. And, whether for the endowment of Schools, or for
the general purposes of the Diocese, they would wish to leave
the distribution of whatever sums they may be the means of col-
lecting, entirely to the discretion of the Bishop; heartily wishing
him success in this his new endeavour for the benefit of the
people committed to his charge. With our past success, or
rather with God’s blessing on our past labours for the supply of
Clergy, may we not say, that the satisfaction of making this
effort as complete as the former, either by donations or sub-
scriptions, for a definite period, will be worth any additional
pains, or even any sacrifice, which it may cost us to carry on
the work to maturity? When w r e see what the Bishop is
himself sacrificing, and is still prepared to sacrifice, out of the
slender emoluments of his see—under what peculiar circum-
stances the appeal is made for some few endowments, which, by
being permanent, may stimulate the continuous voluntary
contributions of the Church in the Diocese —and how ready
to assist to the utmost of their power the people themselves are,
as evinced by the growing amount of the Church Society’s funds,
the activity shown in the purchase and procuring of Bibles and
other religious books, and by the readiness of parents to receive
a good Church education for their children; —when we find


how needful the assistance of friends in England is felt to he in
stimulating local efforts; —and lastly, when we regard the good-
will already manifested in the cause by our great Church Socie-
ties at home; —a case presents itself so worthy of sympathy and in-
terest, that we feel persuaded, few Churchmen will turn from it,
without in some way testifying their approval and good wishes to
the cause for which we plead.
Extract referred to at page 7.
We give the following interesting scene , as described by the
Bishop : —
“We landed at Mari, the island in which a boat’s crew had lately
been killed. Here the Bishop of New Zealand had visited before, and
had in a previous year been entrusted with the care of three of the
youths, who returned to the island in 1850. Native teachers also,
from the Samoan Islands, had been for some few years engaged as
missionaries on this part of the island; as soon therefore as we ob-
tained information that the teachers were alive, all risk was over.
The two teachers came to meet us, and by the time our ship’s boat
came near the shore, about 300 natives had collected. Our boat would
not pass over the coral reefs, so we got into one of the canoes, and as
many as could find room for a hand on the canoe, drew it, sometimes swim-
ing sometimes jumping from reef to reef, safely to shore. Such a clat-
tering and noisy joy you never heard. Every man, woman, and child
presses forward to receive and return a most hearty shake of the hand.
We then proceed to the teachers’ house, walking in a long winding line
singly along the narrow path, through cocoa-nut-trees, and shrubs of
the most luxuriant foliage. We reach the teachers’ house, and sit
down on a bench outside, while the natives form a circle round us, and
seat themselves on the ground. Every eye is upon us—we are engaged
in making inquiries of the teachers, and through them speaking to the
principal men a word now and then. There they sat for more than two
hours, quiet, gentle as little children, delighted with merely watching
us, and each one pleased beyond expression as my eye rested for a moment
on him. While I was surveying and studying the countenances before
me, we announce, through the teachers, that there will be service in
the chapel at sunset. At the appointed time we leave the teachers’
house, and three boys immediately begin to march before us, striking
one stick upon another, keeping time together, which answers for the
church-going bell. We enter the chapel—a large oblong building some


90 feet by 30—about 400 are collected there, and (mark you!) every
knee is bent during the prayer, every voice joins in the responses, and
with heart and mouth every one assists in singing the hymns of praise
to God, and a volume of hearty joyous sounds is produced, which is
perfectly thrilling. I must pass over the rest of that evening, merely
stating that as we sat in the large room of the teachers’ house, every
part of the floor was occupied by natives sitting there, who seemed
unable to quit us, or take their eyes off us, till we told them they must
really go to their houses, and we to our rest.
“ The next morning, after a night’s rest on the hard floor, we walked
to the other side of the island—a distance of about fifteen miles ; —many
accompanied us, and happy did he think himself who could get a plaid,
or a glove, or anything belonging to us to carry. It would take a
volume to describe all that took place on that day, the numbers that
were collected—about 500—their wild joy, the Evening Service : and
then after the service, as we sat outside the teachers’ house, about 300
came in long procession, one by one, each bearing some present, a yam
or two, or some Indian corn, or cocoa-nuts, literally filling the whole
front court with their heaped gifts, and each one thinking he was amply
repaid by the two Bishops thanking them in their native Mari language,
and exchanging with them a hearty shake of the hand. The next
morning there was school for an hour before breakfast, and about 300
attended, great huge men, perfect Titans in form and height, with
women and children all shouting together their spelling lessons of b-a
ba, b-e be, b-o bo, &c., then repealing their Catechism, and joining
in one of their simple hymns. Then came the selection of those
youths whom we were to take away in the Mission ship to New Zealand
for a year.”—See Gospel Missionary, vol. ii. p. 143, &c.
Subscriptions and Donations payable, as usual, to Me. Fayerman,
at the Office of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel,
79, Pall Mall; at Messrs, Hoare’s, 37, Fleet Street; to the
Hon. Secretary, or other Members of the Newcastle Committee.


16
