









An Architectural Survey of Goulburn and District
"Riversdale"... Goulburn... form the south... late 1830's .
A brief survey of the architectural development
in Goulburn and the surrounding district from
the time of the first squatters in the 1820's
till the present day.
Donals M. Coleman
Architecture IV
University of Sydney
September 1960.




FOREWARD
Goulburn is an Inland city of New South Wales, situated in
the Southern Highlands of the Great Dividing Range, 130 miles by road
and slightly more by railway from Sydney. Its temperate and equable
climate is ensured by it being 2,074 feet above sea level. Goulburn is
a great distributing centre. It is on the main southern railway line
from Sydney to Melbourne and is the junction for the Canberra, Cooma,
Bombala, Crookwell and Taralga Lines. Before the railway it was the
centre of a wide stagecoach network. Today it is the centre of a
fertile district famous for its cattle, sheep, potatoes and fruit. It
has important secondary industries producing textiles, boots, flour,
soap, cordials and condiments; all of which had early origins to
supply the surrounding landowners. Goulburn has the largest stock share
market in the Commonwealth and also it is the leading country wool-
selling centre.
For a city of such respectable antiquity, Goulburn has lost
most of its old colonial architecture. Although many of the old
buildings are still standing they have lost their identity under suc-
cessive waves of alterations and remodelling with their attendant
evils of stucco, rough-cast, paint and cantilever awnings. The vast
commercial expansion of Goulburn in the 70's and 80's of last century,
which was the most inartistic period of the Victorian period, did
much to remove the initial architecture of Goulburn.
Therefore it is Indeed complex to trace the architectural
development of Goulburn. Styles varied according to the builder's
and patron's homeland - his economic position and the materials
available. Because of the lack of published information and the time
involved in making sketches and measured drawings, together with in-
convenience caused to the occupants of such buildings, it has only
been possible to obtain a photographic account of the buildings.




EARLY HISTORY OF TOWN & DISTRICT
Within a decade of the landing at Sydney Cove of Governor
Arthur Phillip and the convicts, youthful explorers had pressed into
the Southern Highlands. A party including ex-convict John Wilson
and Collins in 1798 had travelled past Mittagong and up the upper
reaches of the Wollondilly River near Towrang which is 8 miles from
Goulburn. They climbed Mt. Towrang and saw fine open country ex-
tending southward for a great distance. However, Governor King for-
bade entry into this area and it became forgotten whilst the Cow-
pastures area was developed. It was re-discovered 20 years later
by Surveyor James Meehan and Hamilton Hume (1818). Goulburn's actual
site was first crossed by Surveyor John Oxley on October 25, 1820,
when he led a party travelling from Bathurst in the Central West to
Lake Bathurst, which is south of Goulburn. Governor Macquarie had
passed within a mile of Goulburn two days prior to Oxley t Macquarie
called the country Argyle after his own native country in Scotland.
He also ratified Meehan’s naming of the town site as Goulburn after
Henry Goulburn who was at that time Secretary of State for War and
the Colonies, in the British Government.
The first settlement of Goulburn township appears to have
been made in 1824. Lands Department records reveal that the original
plan for Goulburn resulted from a proposal to settle discharged sol-
diers from the New South Wales Royal Veteran Companies. These allot-
ments were planned on the bend of the Wollondilly River just above its
junction with Mulwaree Ponds. It is around this area where the orig-
inal township grew up. However, in 1829, the Assistant Surveyor
Elliott, marked a more extensive site for the town which was approved
by Governor Darling, but in June 1832 Governor Bourke, on inspection,
disproved of the site and selected a new site to the south west of it.
It was this area that came pivotal centre of the original town centre
before it was moved further south by the railway to its present site.
Today there are quite a few old stone buildings left in this area to




MAP OF GOULBURN AND DISTRICT
MAP OF
GOULBURN




bear witness of the original township.
Surveyor Govett prepared the plan and Surveyor Hoddle marked
it on the ground. The new area was notified as the "Town of Goulburn"
in the Government Gazette of March 27, 1833. It was bounded by Sloane,
Clinton, Bourke and Goldsmith Streets, with a reserve for public . -
recreation along the Wollondilly and signed "T.L. Mitchell, February
18, 1833". On the south west of Montague Street between Sloane and
A uburn Streets was marked the Court House and gaol and on the opposite
side the market place.
Most of the outlying stations were settled before either the
old or new towns were laid out and built. No "encourage production"
grants of land were made to the pioneer settlers by the Government
during the twenties. Pioneer pastoralists and farmers settled with
their flocks and herds on the Goulburn Plains and the opening of the
thirties saw a growing production with Goulburn as the government and
commercial centre, which it remained over the new era which dawned, in
1833 when gangs of convicts were sent to the area to construct the
great south road over which the produce of the plains was to be
conveyed to Sydney.
Goulburn in its earliest days was a garrison town with a
detachment of the regiment on duty in the colony stationed at Towrang.
The main southern road was constructed by an ironed gang which, with
its guards and flogger, was for at least 13 years quartered at Towrang.
The site of the Towrang Stockade can still be traced. It lies between
the main road and the river, near the turn-off to Towrang. One large
stone cell, partly excavated out of the rock and partly built up with
solid masonry stood on the river frontage of the stockade. This was
said to be the powder magazine. It was recorded as standing in 1941,
but I made an examination of the supposed site and could only find
a few piles of rubble. A small cemetery with three headstones is on
the nearby river flat. From 1833 to the Towrang Stockade was the
main penal establishment in the Southern District. During this period
there were hardly less than 250 prisoners at Towrang.




Gothic Revival entrance canopy to the
Station Master's Residence.
Wall bracing detail... Immigrant Barracks.
Probably the barn of Caroline Chisholms Immigrant Barracks...1848
The Railway Station as it appears today.
RAILWAY STATION.
Etching of Railway Station in 1882.... the foundation stone was laid on 12/5/1868
In 1929 the City Council petitioned the Government for a new station... the Gov.
refused... but in lieu they offered to hang a few pictures in the ladies waiting room.




Evidence of the convicts ' work can be seen in the remains
of the partly overgrown old great south road which was designed by
Surveyor Mitchell. Crude and efficient stone culverts can be seen
along the old roadway. The largest however is over the Towrang Creek.
It is a beautiful piece of masonry in excellent preservation, although
parts of the parapet have been removed. The keystone bears the date
1839. Local authorities are convinced that David Lennox designed the
bridge at Towrang as he designed a bridge at Black Bob's Creek on the
great southern road and he was more than likely responsible for this
one. A characteristic feature of the convicts' stonework on the bridge
and culverts is the placing of arrows on the corner stones, as seen in
the accompanying photograph. Apparently the road was not built well
enough to handle the large amount of traffic' that used it, because
during the wet winter of 1836 the road was so bad that all communica-
tion between Sydney and Goulburn was suspended as there were more than
130 drays bogged up to their axles on the great south road
Evidence of the rapld growth of Goulburn is seen in David
Waugh's diary and of Goulburn he says: "There was only one house
eighteen months' ago and now (21/7/1837) I am sure there are 300 in-
habitants, and brick houses are rising like mushrooms".
James Backhouse in his diary entitled *A narrative of a
Visit to the Australian Colonies" says of Goulburn and district in
October, 1836: "We passed a few small huts, forming the village of
Towrang, before reaching Goulburn or Strathallen, at the junction of
the Mulwaree Ponds and Wollondilly River. The old towm of Goulburn
consisted of a Court House of slabs, covered with bark, a lock-up
house, a few huts occupied by mounted police and constables, a cottage
of roughly cut timber and a small inn, affording tolerable accommo-
dation for such a place, as well as a better house or two at a short
distance.
the new township, about a mile distant, a few
scattered buildings of brick and others of wood, had been erected.




Typical convict built culvert... Great South Road.
Corner stones of Lennox's Bridge.
Typical convict built culvert... Great South Road... Towrang
Typical convict built culvert... Great South Road... Towrang
Convict built bridge of stone on the former Great Southern Road
near Towrang Stockade. The keystone is dated 1839 and its
designer is thought to be David Lennox.
Close up detail of arrow marks on corner stones.
Typical convict bult culvert... Great South Road... Towrang.




Like other places of this kind , in remote situations, it was pretty
fully occupied by stockmen and others of the lower order; victims
of immorality, the scourge of this class
The foundations of the town were laid by the convicts in
bridge and road building; in building some of the town's early
buildings and helping lay the foundations of the district's agricul-
tural prosperity by working on the farms.
Caroline Chisholm was responsible for the assistance given
to Free Immigrants in the humbler walks of life, who upon their
arrival in the colony wished employment in the Goulburn area. The
first Immigration barracks stood in Clifford Street and one account
states that they were in use in 1841. Another barracks was built in
1848 and the barn of this building is still standing in Clifford
Street. The new settlers to the district would use the barracks as
temporary shelter until suitable employment was found for them. The
building that remains is constructed of rough random rubble and is
typical of much of the convict stone work in the district. The roof
was originally thatched and there is evidence of some adjoining
building on the north side. However, today the building serves as
a garage to the Presbyterian Manse.
DEVELOPMENT & PROGRESS
Dr. Lang described Goulburn in 1847 as -"... beyond all
comparison the finest in the Southern Interior of New South Wales,
and the buildings are of much more substantial character as well of
much finer appearance, than of most inland colonial towns".
He went on to say: "It is a busy place for its size... There
is an extensive steam and flour mill, with an engine of 14 horse-
power and a brewery on a large scale, also carrying a steam engine".
Coach and mail services were soon widespread in the district.
In 1838 a Journey from Goulburn to Campbelltown took 16 days, but in




GIBBS AND SHALLARD'S MAP OF GOULBURN - 1882




1845 this had been reduced to 29 hours. Local coachmen had to
face serious competition when Cobb and Company appeared on the
road in the late fifties.
Gold was discovered in the Goulburn District in 1851 and
at first the town shared in the boom. People flocked to Goulburn
and the stores did wonderful trade. However, the discovery of
plentiful gold at Bathurst soon left the town deserted. This,
coupled with the depression, left the town at a standstill.
Goulburn was created a City by Royal Letters Patent in
1863, securing the distinction of being the last town in the British
Empire to be created a city in that way. Goulburn was subsequently
proclaimed a city under the Crown Lands Act on March 20, 1885, although
that action was apparently unnecessary.
The building of a railway between Sydney and Goulburn was
advocated in 1846. A private company began the building of the
railway, but it transferred its interest to the Government in 1854.
The railway was completed and opened on 27th May, 1869, by the Gov-
ernor. For some years Goulburn remained the terminus of the Southern
Line and profited accordingly. The Station is a symmetrical design
in the classic manner. It is built of brick and sandstone and has a
central colonnade of three arches. It is set in a small square off
Sloane Street.
Goulburn was slow to have electricity because of pressure
from the Gas Company who used to stack the Council meetings. However,
by the end of 1914 Goulburn Streets were lit by electric light in-
stead of gas. Today Goulburn is a prosperous country town and
commercial interests have never been better.
EARLY HOUSING
The development of housing followed much the same pattern
In Goulburn as In early Sydney. The first houses were slab huts
with a bark roof. Undressed natural timber was used throughout.
After the town became established they began to use stone.




Bristowe Lodge... home of Dr. Hancock in 1896.
Stone built Gothic Revival house in Chantry Street
note... squared coursed random rubble walls.
Simple Georgian brick terrace in Goldsmith Street.
Primitive roof construction of slab hut.
Typical of early settler's hut... the remains of a slab & bark hut on the Pomeroy Road.
The two storeyed terrace of the 1880's
The two storeyed terrace of the 1850's - 1860's




Rubble was used in to dressed stone because of its
availability. Window jambs, door jambs, and chimneys were made of
brick because of their better surface qualities and ease of handling.
The early houses consisted of long single storey terraces, each
house had a window each side of a front door and the house consisted
of a central hall with two rooms off each side. Verandahs were not
common on the early terraces. The thick rubble walls offered good
Insulation against the intense cold in the winters and the strong
summer sun.
A fine blue-stone house is to be seen in Goldsmith Street.
The delicately carved timber fascia board casts a contrasting shadow
on the rough stonework. Large monolithic pieces of free stone frame
the door and the shuttered windows. The door is placed centrally with
a window each side and it is crowned with a hipped roof. In the early
Goulburn tradition it is verandahless.
Victorian terraces soon appeared in the 80's and they
carried all the marks of their city counterparts. There is a sur-
prising variety of wrought iron in Goulburn as it was imported from
Sydney and Melbourne and even made locally. These two storeyed ter-
races were necessary to cone with Goulburn's rapidly expanding popul-
ation due to her increasing Industry and for the staff of the railway
workshops.
Goulburn's population remained stationary until the Calif-
ornian Bungalow era. Again another period of rapid development
fostered a large number of this type of housing. Today there is no
boom in private home building due to the efforts of the Housing Com-
mission in meeting the demand. Some of the historic and architectur-
ally interesting homes in Goulburn are as follows:-
"LANSDOWNE HOUSE"
This Is the most Interesting group of buildings In Goulburn
with Its homestead and great convict built barns of stone with their
remarkable solid cedar stalls and feed boxes. The property was one
of the first Crown Grants In the district. It was promised to Jonas




Window detail of bluestone terrace.
Window detail of bluestone cottage.
Doorway detail of bluestone cottage.
A good example of an early single storeyed bluestone terrace of three units... Goldsmith St.
Facia board detail of blue stone cottage.
A simple but dignified bluestone cottage in Goldsmith St.




Balcony detail of Bourke St., terrace.
3 storeyed Sloane Street terrace.
A typical row of early Colonial terraces in Clifford Street.
Note the similarity to the verandahless examples in Tasmania
A terrace of Maisonette units in Bourke Street... probably built during boom of early 1880's.
Delicate cast iron patterns as applied to 1890 terraces... Bourke St.
Victoriania in Sloane Street.




Elegant Georgian Dairy Farmers Cottage on outskirts of Goulburn... note grace of canopy fretwork.
The remaining portion of Tirranna No. 2 built by the
second generation of the Gibsons... Tirranna No. 3 stands
nearby; built from components of the older 'Tirrannas.'
OLD TIRRANNA . GOULBURN . N.S.W.
Sketch of the original Tirranna... by Hardy Wilson 1921.




KILMARNOCK... 1825(?)
One of hte earliest residences in Goulburn... it
appeared on Dixons Map of the "Old Township" in
1829. It is situated on a picturesque bend of the Wollondilly to the south west of the present
township.... it sits on the top of a hill which
slopes gently down to the river.
Looking out from main doorway... note the
wall an ceiling construction... small battons
upon which the plaster was applied.
The doorway conception is typical of the
period... i.e. the half sidelights.
Kilmarnock... 1825... as it appeared in the early 1950's before it fell into total disrepair
Kilmarnnock... as it appears in 1960.




Bradley on 3rd May, 1825, and was granted on 8th March, 18 31.
Thus Lansdowne was settled before the old township of Goulburn was
lard out and built. During the land boom of the 80's the Lansdowne
estate was cut up for home sites.
The homestead has the traditional bell roof with a veran-
dah around three sides. It is constructed out of weatherboards and
the small shuttered windows are not noticeable because of the use
of lattice-work between the verandah posts. This gives an interest-
ing of light and shade and is most noticeable around the front
door which faces west.
The convict built barns are the best feature of this group.
They have been built of rubble which is common to all convict work in
the Goulburn district. Local authorities claim this to be the best
example of this type of stonework in the district. Over the heads of
the windows and doorways are richly carved decorative panels out of
solid cedar. The barge board is of a lacey design and it produces
interesting shadow effects on the textured walls. The feed troughs
and chaff shoots from the loft above are all of solid cedar. It was
the custom to build the stables as good as the house.
On this property there stands the ruin of what is called the
"Synagogue". It was built as a summer house originally by N.C. Phillips
and later the property was purchased by a Jewish storekeeper Emanuel
who was said to use it as a place of worship. It is built of brick,
but has been rendered over. Today this unusually designed building is
a picturesque ruin surrounded by briar bushes.
"RIVERSDALE"
Situated on the outskirts of the original township at North
Goulburn this is one of the best preserved Colonial homes in Australia
as far as the original architectural form is concerned. In the early
days Matthew Healy had an inn near the Junction of the Mulwaree and
Wollondilly Rivers, but the dates of this vary from 1829 to 1831. It
was an excellent halting place for bullock teams and Healy prospered.




"LANSDOWNE"
Jonas Bradley's grant ... 3/5/1825.
Doors to the Coach-house.
Door to loft in barn.
Detail of cedar door-head.
The Convict built barns at "Lansdowne"... the finest example of convict stonework in the district.
"Lansdowne"... the coach-house from the south-west




Lansdowne "toll house"
"Lansdowne"... the 'Summer House'... used later as Jewish Synagogue.
"Lansdowne"... the homestead from the south-west.
Lansdowne... shadow patterns of lattice-work
Lansdowne... the front-door.




The barn behind Riversdale can be identified as this inn and it has
been referred to as the first stone building erected in Goulburn.
However, in 1845 Matt. Healy left to open a hotel in Sydney and his
business was taken over by Benjamin Gould. Which of them built the
house is not clear but it was definitely designed as an inn. It was
used as a school in 1852 and in the early 70's it was bought by Mr.
Edward Twynam, the District Surveyor, and has been the home of his
family ever since.
Riversdale is built around a three sided court. The hipped
roof has the typical bell cast roof and is similar to Ho me. Farm,
Camden. The original shingle roof covering has been replaced by
corrugated iron. Pacing south the front facade has a deep stone paved
verandah of fine bays with a small room at each end. One of these was
altered between 1920 and 1935, giving a nasty skillion effect to the
roof in that corner. The west front has a similar verandah but there
is a picket fence along the verandah with double gates between the
centre bay which is smaller than the others. These gates allowed the
vans to roll up and roll the casks into the capacious cellar. The east
front is a curious elevation with its small verandah off the lounge
room, which is independent of the main structure. It is supported on
Irregularly spaced hardwood columns and the valence board is similar
to that on the south and west fronts. There are skylights in the
roof in front of the French windows. Part of the east
elevation is two storeyed. The servants’ quarters are situated immed-
iately above the kitchen.
An unusual feature of Riversdale is the repitition of a curved
motif in the verandah costs, and both doorways to the entrance porch
complete with fan and sidelights. The south and west verandahs are
supported by delicate flat cedar pilaster columns with unusual inter-
lacing lattice work. The doors are eight panel, double moulded solid
cedar about 3’0" wide. The side doors on the south verandah are
French windows and are shuttered. It is interesting to note that these
doors are not placed symmetrically to each other about a central axis




Detail of the internal doorway into the entrance hall.
RIVERSDALE . GOULBURN . N.S.W
"Riversdale" by Hardy Wilson 1921




"Riversdale"... the main entrance door... note: inner door is a
duplicate of main door.
RIVERSDALE . GOULBURN . N.S.W.




"Riversdale"... as it appears in 1960... note alteration to roof on extreme right of picture.
Small windows on west side.
Detail of Verandah posts .
"Riversdale"... the verandah colonnade... looking towards the east & garden gates.
"Riversdale"... detail of main door's fanlight.




"St Clair"... column detail.
"St Clair" cottage... Sloane Street... 1840's.
"Riversdale"... east elevation from garden... note addition on extreme left & double storey or right.
The old mounted police barracks behind "Riversdale"
The oldest building in Goulburn... Matt Healy's inn or the left... and the
mounted police barracks on the right... behind "Riversdale".
"Riversdale"... the eastern verandah... note skylights above doors.




but they are placed centrally in the rooms they serve. However,
this is not disturbing due to the verandah’s depth.
The house appears to be still furnished with the original
furniture and its internal handling of space is magnificent with
its spacious entrance hall with the entrance door mirrored in the
rear door to the entrance hall. The ceilings are very high and the
French windows run the full height of the wall.
"ST CLAIR COTTAGE"
This fine building in Sloane Street is one of the few
remaining examples of early colonial architecture in Goulburn. The
title of the building is under the "Old System" and from these documents
James Sinclair, architect and builder, bought allotment 8 of Section 20
for £24 in 1843. In 1847 he mortgaged the property to By. Gardiner
and in the deed he was described as "hath erected and is now erecting
numerous cottages". One of these was "Ardgowan" in Cowper Street
and is similar in detailing to "St. Clair" although it has a more
commanding site. In the forties "St. Clair" and "Ardgowan" were the
homes respectively of Bull and Woodward, pioneer storekeepers of
Goulburn. "St. Clair" was sold in 1852 for £660, in 1876 for £1,230
and £6OO in 1900.
Today the building is a guest house and has thus lost some
of its former dignity. The street facade which faces east is in its
original condition. The slender doric type columns are particularly
elegant. The doorway is not centrally placed in the facade and the
column treatment is handled particularly skilfully. The building
butts up against an adjoining projecting building so if the doorway
was placed centrally the illusion of it being placed near the pro-
jecting building would be apparent. On each side of the doorway is
grouped a pair of columns then a single column and then another
pair. The east end column is replaced by a pilaster against the
wall of the projecting adjoining building.




"St. Clair"... Sloane St.,... the verandah colonnade facing east.
ST CLAIR COTTAGE , GOULBURN , N.S.W.




"CARRAWARRA"
The date of erection of this fine Italinate mansion in
Bradley Street cannot be determined. In the 80’s it was the home
of A.B. Chisholm. However, in 1888 the Kings College, a private
secondary school, was established there. In 1890 it had 22 boarders
and 30 day boys. In 1915 the Government bought "Carrawarra" and
conducted it as a hostel for girls attending the High School. This
ran at a loss and was closed, but today it houses the Women’s Tech-
nical College.
It is a stately two storeyed building set in spacious
gardens and it has a verandah around the north and part of the west
sides. The main entrance is on the east side under the verandah
return. A notable feature is the bay window on the north facade
which is only on the lower storey. The verandah bells out around
this bay window in the best colonial tradition. Constructionally
the verandah is light as it is supported by cast iron columns at
approximately 12 feet centres. A 4” x 4" bearer spans from the top
of these columns to the wall plate which is bolted to the wall. Only
one cross piece ties the bearers together and the galvanised iron
spans between these bearers.
The Italinate influence is seen in the bracket mouldings
supporting the eaves. These brackets are carefully placed so as to
fit in with the regular window spacing. The windows have a heavy but
identical treatment for both the head and sill. The chimneys are
also in the Italinate manner. The south elevation has not been con-
ceived with the same idea of balance as the other elevations and
also lacks the same window treatment. This is because of its un-
important aspect on the site.




"Carrawarra": verandah on the north side.
POST AND TELEGRAPH OFFICES.
A sketch of the Post Office in 1882 .
"Carrawarra"... Bradley Street... this grand home was that of the last A.B. Chisholm.
"Carrawarra"... detail of simple window treatment.
"Ardgowan"... Yass Rd... build by Sinclair the builder of "St Clair".




THE COURT HOUSE
The first Court House was built in the old township in
1836. It was a wooden or slab structure and was pulled down in 1869.
Tenders for a new Court House in the new town were ad-
vertised by the Colonial Architect on the 12th February, 1847.
Its building occupied three years and its cost totalled
£2,379/19/4. Today part of this building still stands, but it
butts into the adjacent Police Station, It is the present office
of the Lands Department.
The present Court House was opened by the Chief Justice,
Sir Frederick Darley, on 14th October, 188?, The Colonial Architect,
Mr. T. Barnett, was the architect, and the contractor was David Jones
of Bathurst. The contract price was £24,593.
The Court House was part of an original scheme by the
Colonial Architect in 1880. Of the Public Office Building group
only the Post Office was erected to the original design. This was
rather fortunate as the heavy Florentine Renaissance lines of the
Court House shown in this scheme were not carried out. The present
design is a much more refined and elegant example of the Florentine
Renaissance style. The north facade is particularly striking with
its semi-circular arched colonnade, which is stopped at each end by
a low pediment containing the New South Wales crest modelled in fine
sandstone. Centrally placed is the semi-circular entrance arch
with a pediment which leads the eye up to the magnificently propor-
tioned dome that sits on a high drum in the manner of Florence
Cathedral.
Internally the effect is quite striking as one enters
the large central public hall with the dome above with its great
suspended feeling. The dome is approximately 70 feet high. The
central public hall, with a communication gallery around, divides
the two court rooms - the civil and the criminal courts. Each court




THE GOULBURN COURT-HOUSE 1880.
Wrought iron gates to front colonnade.
Pediment... east end of north facade.
Internal view of corner-stone
on parapet - note brace in stone.
Entrance Porch & Dome from north.
The north facade facing the old market square... now a park.




room is approximately 50 feet by 30 feet and is provided with a
public gallery reached by a grand flight of stone steps each side
of the curved pendentives supporting the dome. On the southern
side of the court rooms is a corridor leads to the different
offices - male and female witness rooms, Jury rooms, (over night
accommodation and recreation court), barrister’s, attorney's, Crown
Solicitor’s and Sheriff's rooms. Two small cells are found at the
rear of the Court House Independent of the main structure. The
prisoners enter a tunnel and pass through a large underground
cellar before they come up in the middle of the Court room in the
iron barred cage of the prisoner’s dock.
Constructionally the Court House is quite interesting.
Local builders are amazed at how the early builders lifted the
huge pieces of carved sandstone into place on the dome’s drum and
over the pediments. Some nieces have been estimated to weigh up
to 80 tons. The internal dome is a concrete shell about 2'0" thick
and the external dome is a timber space frame with a central tension
member and it is clad externally with copper and crowned with a crowm.
This is one of the most imposing country court houses that
I have seen and it is unfortunate that it is not sited in a better
position. It faces the old market square on the site of the old towm
goal. It was customary in early civic planning to have the goal
facing the town square. Barnett’s original plan was to demolish the
buildings on the corner of Auburn and Montague Streets, so opening
up a vista of the Court House from the main street of the City. At
present it is too easily passed by unnoticed.




THE GOULBURN COURT-HOUSE 1880
Skylight to underground cells
Underground passage from cells to court.
Circular window on drum of dome.
Chimney... morque & woolstore in background
View from northern entrance gates.
Detail of parapet from the dome.
Detail of the dome from the parapet.




THE POLICE STATION
Few records exist for the first slab built Police Station
and lock-up at North Goulburn. There were barracks for the Mounted
Police behind "Riversdale" from about 1627. A watch house and
stocks were built in the new town by 1841.
The present Police Station was built in 1888. It is a
cold heavy building with an uninteresting east facade to Sloane
Street. Window shapes are badly handled in proportion to the main
mass of the building. Having half of the 1849 Court House butting
into the Police Station is very unsatisfactory.
THE GOULBURN REFORMATORY.
The first gaol in Goulburn was of rubble stone construc-
tion built in 1827. It was so badly built that within a few-years a
second one had to be built of slab and log construction. In the
early 1840’s a gaol was built on the -present Court House site. It
had a surrounding 20 foot wall with two sentry towers and it must
have dominated the centre of the town. The main building was three
storeys high and was 150 feet long and 40 feet wide. There was a
capacity for 110 prisoners. Many executions took place on the
scaffold which faces Goulburn's main street.
The present reformatory was built in 1883. The con-
tractor was Frederick Timm and Architect was James Barnett, the
Colonial Architect. It cost £61,000 and has been added to and
improved over the years. Its huge ugly pile is a prominent feature
of the North Goulburn skyline.




Court House... Standard detail for cell windows.
Court House... heay stonework in pediment over entrance.
Court House... balcony detail in assembly hall between courts.
Entrance to the Goulburn Reformatory... 1883 .
Goulburn Police Station... Sloane Street... 1888.
The Goulburn Fire Station... 1880.
The Old Court House... Sloane Street... 1849.




ST SAVIOUR'S ANGLICAN CATHEDRAL.
The first building to stand upon this site was a brick church
with a square tower and erected in 1848.
The Diocese of Goulburn was formed in 1863, but it was not
possible to begin building the Cathedral until 15th January, 1874,
when the foundation stone was laid. The Cathedral was dedicated and
licensed on 29th April, 1884. It has a cruciform plan consisting of
a chancel, nave and trancepts, all with side aisles. Edmund Blackett
was the architect and after his death the supervision was carried
on by his sons I. and C. Blackett. The style is gothic of the English
"Decorated" period. The bulk of the building is of local Bundanoon
sandstone, but the pillars are of Pyrmont freestone.
Internally east to west the cathedral measures 150 feet,
width of the nave and aisles is feet, length of the trancepts
north to south is 96 feet and the width of the trancepts if 54 feet.
The richly designed High Altar was designed by Jones and
Willis of Exeter and is a memorial to Bishop Barlow the third Bishop
of Goulburn. The font stands under the north western arch of the
nave and is of Caen stone. It is square with canted angles and in
each angle is a niche containing an image of one of the Evangelists.
The four sides consist of sculptured panels representing the Baptism
of our Lord, our Lord blessing the children, the baptism of the
centurion and the baptism of the eunuch. The pulpit is also of Caen
stone supported on five marble pillars. The central figure is that
of Christ and the niche to the right contains the figure of Elijah
and on the left are Noses, St. Paul and St. Peter. The architect
and sculptor for both the font and pulpit were respectively Chartwin
and John Roddis.
Much of the earlier stained glass in the cathedral must be
considered as inferior. However, the east window and the clearstory
windows are quite good. Of the nave windows, those on the north contain




ST SAVIOURS ANGLICAN CATHEDRAL GOULBURN.
Side-door... near the northern transcept.
A northern upper nave window
The Old St Saviours as it was in 1848.
Delicate stone-work executed in stonework at side door.
THE ANGLICAN CATHEDRAL AT GOULBURN.
The complete design for St.Saviour's Cathral as intended by
Edmund Blackett.... this etching appeared in the "Sydney Mail"
on the 8th November 1879.




St Saviours... plain finnials surmounting buttrisses.
St. Saviours... the High Chair.
St Saviours... northern trancept from Church St.
St. Saviours... the nave piers looking east.
St. Saviours... the south transcept... note the stump of the tower to the east of the transcept.
St. Saviours... the east... sanctuary... as seen from Bourke Street.




representations of the parables of our Lord and those on the south
depict the miracles. The clearstory windows in the nave and trancepts
are reserved for the saints of the English Church; those in the chan-
cel for the New Testament Saints; those in the north trancept are
Old Testament subjects; those in the south New Testament. The mural
tablets in the Cathedral with a few exceptions are of inferior design
and workmanship.
The Cathedral's bell is hung on the stump of the tower.
It was cast in 1858 for the old St. Saviour's Church by George
Wears and Co. at their Whitechapel foundry. It weighs 11 cwt.
However, the Cathedral is still unfinished as it lacks a
floor (brick on edge at present), vestries, a tower, and a spire.
The original building cost £25,000 in 1874 and it is estimated that
it would cost £50,000 to complete today.
Adjoining the Cathedral is the Church Hall, a fine stone buil-
ding built in 1874; Edmund Blackett was the Architect and R.B. Turner
the builder. To the north stands the Cathedral rectory designed in
1916 by local architect E.C. Manfred. To the south west are the
diocesan offices, administrative block and library, built in 1923
from designs by Burcham Clamp and MacKellar.
"BISHOPTHORPE."
The finest private residence in Goulburn was old "Bishop-
thorpe", built by Bishop Thomas in 1870. It is a large two-storeyed
house built of blue stone and originally had a shingled roof. In
1912 it was destroyed by fire and only the stone walls remained.
However, it was purchased by the Community of the Ascension and
restored to its former beauty by Louis R. Williams of Melbourne in
1922. The stables have been converted into a chapel linked to the
main house by a stone wall enclosing a courtyard. It has a commanding
v i ew from hill top site, overlooking Goulburn and the wandering
Wollondilly River.




"Bishopthrope"... note chapel in foreground.
"Bishopthorpe"... view from the north west.
Sandstone detail from Goldsmith Street Methodist Church.
Roman Catholic Cathedral of St Peter & St Paul : Goulburn.
"Kirkdale"... disused chapel on Canberra road.
Goldsmith Street Methodist Church.
Gate post detail at "Kirkdale".




SCHOOL BUILDINGS.
The Bourke Street Public School dates from 1868 when the
central block with the tower were bought for £2,000 from the Grammar
School by the Council of Education. The school was opened by Sir
Henry Parkes on 6th August, 1868. The group has been frequently
added to as schooling requirements increased. The original tower
block is in a simple Georgian style, but later additions show Italinate
influences. Subsequent additions and alterations have spoilt the
North Goulburn school which was first built in 1877, The Victorian
influence can be seen in the resulting design. However, the original
weather shed still remains with its thatched roof and vertical weather-
board construction. Schools were established in South Goulburn in
1881 and Eastgrove in 1887.
There have been many private and denominational schools in
Goulburn, but their buildings have been swallowed up in the develop-
ment of the city as they went defunct. The Presbyterian Ladles
College and St. Patrick’s College are the only two remaining de-
nominational schools.
THE GENERAL HOSPITAL.
The first hospital was established in Goulburn in 1834.
It was known as the Convict Hospital and was to obviate the malin-
gering of convicts who were originally sent upwards of 200 miles to
Liverpool Hospital.
Goulburn ' s second hospital was in Sloane Street, but it
was sold and the proceeds used to build a new hospital in Goldsmith
Street. It was decided to offer £5O for a competitive design for a
new hospital to cost £6,000. However, the competitive designs were
rejected and E.C. Manfred was commissioned to draw up plans. The
new building was completed in 1880 and the contract price was




"Hurstville College"... one of Goulburn's early private schools.
The weather shed at North Goulburn Public School... 1877... one of the few remaining thatched roofs.
The North Goulburn Public School... 1877.
View of weathershed from the north west.




The old brick kilns at Eastgrove.
Kenmore Hotel... built by Patrick Confoy 1892.
Pumping Station on the Wollondilly... boiler dated 1883.
Hearth detail... old kilns at Eastgrove.
Convent on the outskirts of Goulburn.
Bourke Street Public School... built in 1868... verandah was added in 1897.
St Patricks College... Goulburn.




£6,946/11/0. Architect's fees were £l8O. A new Pathology-
building and morgue were added in 1915. A children's ward was
completed in 1938 and a second block to the Nurses' Home in 1939.
Any architectural merits of the old building have been lost due
to the frequent additions as the community has grown.
BRADLEY'S BREWERY
Situated on the banks of the Mulwaree Ponds to the South
east of the township the brewery was established in 1836 by William
Bradley of Lansdowne, as a brewery, malt house and a flour mill.
Various owners continued brewing here until 1920 when Tooth and Coy.
bought it. In the 80‘s there were five breweries in operation in
Goulburn to meet the demand.
This is one of the most delightful groups of functional
architecture that I have seen. It is admirably sited on the lush
wlllowlined banks of the Mulwaree Ponds. A distinctive feature
of the group is the brick, whitewashed and battlemented tower which
rises from the plain and simple mass to give the whole group a whim-
sical character. The simple rectangular white-washed mill bulding
is three storeys high and it is separated from the long low workmen's
quarters by an open courtyard where the carriers 1 drays would con-
gregate. Simple gable roofs and solid chimneys makes the group sit
well on the ground in the true Georgian manner.
THE ARGYLE BREWERY
This brewery was established by Edward Kennedy a native of
Sacramento, U.S.A., in the year 1882 in Clifford Street.
Only part of the building remains today and it is believed
to be the home of Kennedy. He was also said to be a builder-
contractor and the building shown was said to have been built in his
spare time. It is an unusual building and would be unique. It has
been built incorporating features of most of the early design schools,
although an Itallnate flavour predominates in the detailing and the




BRADLEY'S "LANSDOWNE"
BREWERY 1836
Date stone of the Mill Building
End view of Mill showing hoist arrangement.
Massing of the towers & chimneys.
Bradley's Brewery : 1836... general view... workmans quarters
on the left foreground; centre, the three storeyed mill building
and to the right the rising tower of the brewery propper.
-fU su k) IU«/ Sc>u4U
The mill and store buildings from the south west.
General view of group from the Mulwaree Ponds to the S.-E .




roof design is Victorian.
The dominant feature of the design is the crudely designed
verandah that over-rides the footpath. Much of the stonework is
crudely carved and unfinished. Timber beams span between the
columns supporting the stone balaustrading. When compared to
a similarly conceived building, such as the old inn in the main
street of Campbelltown, the Goulburn counterpart seems heavy and
unco-ordinated.




The Argyle Brewery: balcony detail.
COMMERCIAL HOTEL, BELMORE SQUARE.
James Simons, Proprietor.
from Gibbs & Shallard... 1882
The Argyle Brewery: Clifford Streed...... in operation in the 1880's.
The Argyle Brewery... the crudely carved column base.
W. Conolly's Flour Mill... moved here to site of "Old Municipal Baths" in 1908.




The General Hospital... established in 1834... above building in Goldsmith St., built in 1880.
The Kenmore Road Bridge... the east iron
pylons with bracing between... it shows
the trend to building bridges out of
ferrous metals... it was built 1883/4
at a cost of £8,326/5/-
The Railway Viaduct... across the Mulwaree Ponds...
the lower pylons were used when the track was single... the
viaduct was built at the turn of the century.
The Kenmore Railway Bridge... across the Wollondilly River.
The Marsden Road Bridge... across the Wollondilly River.
The Kenmore Road Bridge... across the Wollondilly River.




The B.&W. archway Market St... 1845
Bull & Woodward... leading storekeepers 1840-70
The remains of a fence erected by
Mayor Davis arount the Market Square in 1868.
Town Hall - balcony detail.
The Masonic Temple Bourke St., 1928-1890
The A.N.Z. Bank... built in the 1890's.
Town Hall... Queen Anne Style... built in 1887 by Wilkie... E.C. Manfred arch.
The A.N.Z. Bank... north west view... note gable.




A.M.P. detail of light on main facade.
A.M.P.... Main door detail.
The Australian Arms Hotel in the 1890's.
The Australian Mutual Provident Society... Auburn Street.
Simplified restraint of detailing on a town house... Church St.




Auburn Street... looking north in the 1890's.
Rogers early store in the 1880's.
Rogers Store today... 1960.
Rogers' Central Chambers... Montague Street.
Rogers' Montague Street Storehouse.




Early Shopfront... Clinton Street.
Cast iron detail... Bourke Street.
Cast iron detail... Clifford St.
Cast iron at corners on Bandstand.
Superbly elegant Bandstand in Belmore Square.
Fountain in Belmore Square.
Old gas light... reminiscent of the days
when Goulburn's streets were lit by such.
The tower at Kenmore Mental Home.
Shows the vast area covered by Kenmore Mental Home.




BUTLER BROS.,
Merchant Tailors , Mercers , Hosiers, &c., Auburn Street.
from Gibbs & Shallard's Map of 1882.
WILLIAM DAVIES & CO.,
Importers of British, Foreign, and American Merchandise, Drapers, Grocers, Ironmongers, &. Opposite New Post Office Buildings, Goulburn.
from Gibbs & Shallard's Map of 1882.
The remains of a typical row of shops of the 1850's.
OWEN FURNER & SONS,
Wholesale and Retail Grocers, Drapers, Ironmongers, Produce and Timber Merchants, Furniture Warehousemen.
from Gibbs & Shallard's Map of 1882.




W. S. FOXALL,
Bookseller, Stationer, and Music Seller, Auburn Street, Goulburn.
from Gibbs & Shallard's Map of 1882.
W. LANES
Cash Drapery, Millinery, Clothing, and General Outfitting Establishment, Belmore Square, Goulburn.
from Gay & Shallard's Map of 1882.
Auburn Street in the 1890's... note load of bark on left... all building space has been covered by shops.
A. M. HUNT & CO.,
Import Grocers, Provision Merchants, Tea Dealers. Jam, Sauce, and Baking Powder Manufacturers.
from Gay & Shallard's Map of 1882.




“ARGUS” OFFICE,
Market Street, Belmore Square.
WOOD & COMPANY,
Root Manufacturers, Tanners and Curriers, Auburn Street. Hides and Bark
purchased for Cash.
W. T. WOOD,
The Goulburn Boot Palace, Piano and Organ Warehouse, Auburn Street.
W. KINGSELL (KINGSELL'S BUILDINGS),
Tinware, Wholesale and Retail. Plumber and Galvanized Iron Worker.
Auburn Street.
GILLESPIE’S BOOT FACTORY.
Retail Establishment, Auburn Street, opposite Belmore Square.
C. ROGERS,
The Great Furnishing Arcade, Auburn Street, Goulburn.
These are typical of the buildings of the 1870's-80's in Goulburn
as represented in Gibbs & Shallard's Map of 1882.




FINLAY & CO.,
Auctioneers, Land, Stock, and Station Agents, Belmore Square.
from Gibbs & Shallard's Map of 1882.
COMMERCIAL BANK.
from Gibbs & Shallards Map of 1882.
AUSTRALIAN JOINT STOCK BANK.
from Gibbs & Shallard's Map of 1882.
COX & WORRALL,
Excelsior Steam Flour Mills, Clinton Street, Goulburn. Awarded First Prize for
Flour, Goulburn Agricultural Show, 1882. Cash buyers of Wheat in any
quantity , and delivery taken at any Railway Station.
from Gibbs & Shallards Map of 1882.
CLARKE & TAIT,
Storekeepers, Clifford and Cowper Streets. The Cheapest Store in the City.
from Gibbs & Shallards Map of 1882.
WILLIAM CONOLLY,
Argyle Steam Flour Mills. Highest Cash Purchaser of Wheat in any quantities.
from Gibbs & Shallard's Map of 1882.




Small villages were formed around the large mansions of the
early pastoralists' estates in the Goulburn district. These little
communities were reasonably self contained as they had their own
schools, fresh vegetables and meat, and some of the larger estab-
lishments that grew wheat, had their own flour mills. Convict
labour was plentiful as the grant of land was always accompanied
with a certain number of Government Servants. Thus many of the
early homesteads were built by the convicts and also the "convicts’
barracks" of yesterday are used as some of the barns of today.
Seven such country homes were visited and photographed
extensively and their history traced as far as possible.
"REEVESDALE."
This building is in the grant of James -Richard Styles and
the grant of 2,000 acres was,made in 1823, but he was in possession
some years earlier. Here, in 1820, he built a square stone house
which is famous for its curious blank wall in the west side, decorated
with dummy windows and doors. Similar treatment is carried through
the upper storey of the west wall of the stables. The stables are
indeed finely built and the timber beams, joists and stalls are all
of teak. Today the stables have been converted into a shearing shed.
The house has fallen into disrepair, but the present owner,
Brigadier Hurst, is having the place renovated. Originally there
were several small outbuildings which were connected to the main
building by covered ways. They fell into disrepair and had to be
demolished; as also were the glass houses which were once full
of flowers.
In the house the hall is small with a steep stairway
leading to three large bedrooms, intercommunicated and with rounded
corners. There is a large ballroom which is built over a barn
in the south side of the house. The ground floor consists of the
barn and a huge kitchen. Apparently the dining room was in one of
the outbuildings connected by a covered way.




The old Inverary gaol on "Reevesdale"... now a fodder store.
"Reevesdale"... dummy door on the west facade.
"Reevesdale"... teak rafter construction of barn...
now used as a small shearing shed.
"REEVESDALE" BUNGONIA... granted to J.R. Styles 1823... view of house from S-W.
"Reevesdale"... view of house from east west... note barn in distance.




An old barn at Bungonia... its construction is typcal of local buildings of the 1820's & 1830's.
The famous "Collector" Hotel on the Canberra Road.
Two houses at Collector... typical of many roadside houses
of the 19th century in the district.




Most of the original furniture which was brought from
England is in the old vicarage in Bungonia, a few miles distant.
Today Bungonia is a small village with a few yellow stone cottages
around the village church. The village did not prosper as ex-
pected. Today the vicarage is closed up and in a state of disrepair.
"INVERARY PARK"
This homestead is situated about a mile and a half from
"Reevesdale" on the crest of a steadily rising hill. Dr. Reid a
surgeon who had served at the Battle of Trafalgar was in occupation
in 1824 and with four convicts to help him he built the magnificent
homestead with its 2'6" thick walls.
David Broadhead a farmer from Yorkshire, England, took
possession in 1853, and today it is the home of his grandson.
The building with its 14 rooms, flagstone verandahs and blue gum
columns, its spiral staircase and cedar beams, is in the same con-
dition as it was when built by the convicts. The only changes to be
made have been the replacement of the original shingle roof by gal-
vanised iron and the Introduction of electricity and modern appliances
It is built around the three sides of a court.
The surrounding land is no longer covered with rippling
acres of wheat, but sheep have moved in and shearing sheds and
mustering yards have sprung up around the old homestead.
"KIPPILAW"
James Chisholm was granted 1,250 acres, near Ereadalbane,
which he named "Kippilaw" after a part of the Buccleugh Estate on
the site of a Roman Fortress about 7 miles from Melrose in Scotland
where his wife was born. He settled there in 1826, but the grant
was not dated till 15th October, 1831. The Chisholm family has
lived here ever since.
The house consists of four wings around a courtyard, con-
vict built of stone, with lofty rooms and tall windows. All the




The Parsonage at Bungonia... dates from the 1820's when Bungonia was flourishing because it
was on the main bullock tracks south. It seems to
be a spontaneous design utilising local materials as
much as possible. The small roof dormers placed very
high in the roof... chimneys are massive.
Bungonia Parsonage... unusual design
of entrance doors.
Bungonia Parsonage... view from north... note the unusual
roofline and the crude gable end.
"Inverary Park"... 1824.... built by four ocnvicts on the crest of a steadily rising hill.
"Inverary Park"... the kitchen court which faces south
a custom brought out from England by the early settlers.




woodwork is of cedar and beautifully finished. The front door
faces east. The east elevation has a verandah which returns each
end and also shades the two, floor to celling, windows on either
side of the door. A characteristic feature of the roof, now covered
in galvanised iron, is the two triangular ventilation dormers on
the east side of the hipped roof; this repeats the motif formed on
the north and south ends of the roof by carrying the ridge piece
past the junction with the hipped section and thus creating a tri-
angular piece.
The verandah furniture is interesting. There is a crudely
made chair and table carved out of an old tree trunk. The
in the front door is unusual for this period as are the Tudor nests
each side of the entrance door and both are probably later additions.
An avenue of oaks leads to the house and an enormouns "deodar" is the
pride of the family. The garden is famous in the district because it
has been designed in the Italian manner. Terraces and pools lead up
to the house which is on the top of a gently rising hill.
Of the outbuildings the stables are the most interesting.
They are built of the same squared stone of the house and today are
used as garages. Two circular headed doors are symmetrically placed
on either side of the gabled loft with its upper loading door and
pulley. They are situated in the far side of the courtyard at
the back of the house
"SPRINGFIELD"
The original grant to William Pitt Faithfull was 640 acres
on 12th October, 1827, and it was officially granted on 18th February,
1837, However, this was to increase to 21,000 acres at a time when it
included Invarlochy Estate,
The house is in the centre of a large group of buildings and
is surrounded by vast gardens which contain a swimming pool. The
older part of the house was begun in the early thirties and it flanks,
the third side of the usual three-sided court. Two rooms in this




"Kippilaw"... the Tudor chimney pot flanking the entrance steps.
"Kippilaw"... view along verandah... note the
primitive verandah furniture.
"Kippilaw"... 1826... view of the east facade from the lower garden terrace.
"Kippilaw"... the kitchen court which faces the west.
note... the absence of windows in the west wall.
"Kippilaw"... building flanking the east side of kitchen court.
note... the dinner bell placed high up central gable.
"Kippilaw"... some of the finest stables in the district...
they form the fourth side of the kitchen court.




old section still have their original wallpaper. The present house
was probably built in the late 60’s. It is of brick construction
and it butts against the older building.
There is a flavour of the Florentine Renaissance in
the bulk of the main building with its tower, hipped roofs, and
semi-circular headed windows. However, the south and west wings
have a gabled roof in the best Victorian manner with a pierced
barge board.
Extensive renovations were carried out on the building
in the 1950’s and the original shingle roof was replaced with mar-
seille pattern tiles.
The numerous outbuildings of "Springfield" are worthy of
note. The shearing shed is a Gothic design of great merit. Fine
and well preserved sandstone mouldings crown the pointed arches
above the doors and windows. There are old cells used to house the
convicts and the old flour mill is interesting. The underground
silos are unusual as they are deep cut out of solid rock in
the shape of a seltzer bottle. They could be hermetically sealed
and were in use when the area used to produce wheat probably in
the 1840's.
"WOLLOGORANG"
The earliest mention of " Wo1logorang" Station is in the diary
of Major Mitchell who stayed there early in August, 1828. The orig-
inal grant was made to Robert Campbell but early in the 1840's it
was purchased by Captain Henry Edenborough. He built the house
during the 1840’s, but sold to the Chisholms in 1854.
It is a massive building facing north. The lower storey
windows are from floor to celling and are shuttered as are the smaller
upper storey windows. The centre five windows are on a slight wall
projection which adds Interest to this otherwise rectangular facade.
The front door and fanlight show Colonial Georgian characteristics.




The Pelican Inn from the south east.
%IU feJic'hys I Hits - •• ■ iihua-Uri 4 *v\'Us
fovv-. 41a e Wl . . W *k>u<u pkolo.
srsM oul'-boildipsjjs. ■ •• as’if* i*as also a frkli#V\.
Old "Springfield"... the main entrance.
An interesting feature here is the external
staircase linking the living to the
sleeping quarters... there are several
examples of this practice in the district.
"Springfield"... granted 12/10/1827... the new homestead of the 1860's viewed from the north... old wing on the right.
"Springfield"... an early workmans house of symmetrical design.
"Springfield"... the new homestead from the north east.
the external appearance was altered slightly
during renovations in the early 1950's.
"Springfield"... the garden porch facing the north.




VIEWS OF "SPRINGFIELD"
Gothic Revival... the gable end of the
wool shed.
Interesting use of a naturally formed
piece of timber as a bracket... in
the old flour mill of the 1840's.
Pointed window in the machinery shed.
Window to Convicts Quarters... steel bars set in timber framing.
Ceiling construction in the old Convict's Quarters.
Machinery shed... note Gothic Revival characteristics.
External stairway to loft above convicts quarters.
The Gothic Revival wool shed situated near the house.




However, on closer examination of the door it is noticed that there
is a groove running down the centre and it appears to give the
Illusion of there being a pair of three panelled doors; the door
knob and knocker are placed centrally.
The two storeyed building is built around a three sided
court and is on the shores of the Wollorgorang Lagoon. The Kitchen
and servants* quarters open off this court. An Interesting feature
of the north facade is the fact that there is no verandah. However,
there is sandstone flagging laid Immediately adjacent to the French
windows and it has holes drilled in it in the appropriate places for
verandah posts. By examination of where the verandah would butt against
the wall it seems likely that originally there was a verandah on this
main facade.
Outbuildings built with the house are all of a distinctive
design with their tall and solid chimneys and their hipped roofs
that make them hug the ground, so well.
"WINDERADEEN"
The first owner was Captain T. Murray of the Coldstream Guards.
The house was nearing completion in 1837 and it replaced the old
timber homestead on the edge of Lake George. Part of the estate was
taken for the town of Collector, a corruption of the native name
"Kaligda". Here by the roadside stands the Collector Hotel, which
is a very old stone building, inhere Constable Nelson was shot dead by
bushranger John Dunn in I865. Sir Terrence A. Murray, the father of
Sir Hubert and Sir Gilbert Murray resided at Winderadeen many years,
but today it is owned by Mr. Sandy Armstrong, M.L.A.
The house itself is plain Georgian and it is only single
storeyed. It has big rooms and wide verandahs and it has been
designed for comfort. The eastern elevation is particularly simple
and dignified with its wide sweeping verandah with the skylights
above the French windows. The plan, as is usual, has been built
around the three sided courtyard.




"Winderadeen" from the south through oak drive.
"Wollogorang"... front door... note the
central groove which makes there appear
to be two doors but this is confused
by the door's knocker and door handle.
"Wollogorang"... built in 1840's... the north facade facing the lagoon... broad lawns sweep down to the lagoon.
"Wollogorang"... Lagoon elevation from the north east.
"Wollogorang"... the kitchen court facing south in Engligh tradition.
"Wollogorang"... simple Georgean lines of workman's quarters.




"WINDERADEEN" HOMESTEAD 1837
Summer House on terraced creek bank.
Shutter floor to ceiling windows to verandah.
Eastern verandah... note skylights.
The fanlight above the main door on the east side.
The court which faces the west.
The simple dignified eastern varandahed front.
View of house from Summer House... from the north east.
The eastern facade.




"Wlnderadeen" is noted for its trees and a wind-break
of 750 Norfolk Fines follows the drive up to the house. Around
the house there are American evergreen oaks, Norwegian Spruce, con-
trasting with silver birch and magnolias. A quaint little summer
house nestles in the terraced garden on the creek bank just above
the boat-house.
A gothic touch is seen in the old convict quarters as
it has pointed windows which shows that it must have been built
at a later date than the house.
"Wlnderadeen" is one of the most unified and complete
designs of any period around Goulburn and it is in an excellent
state of.
"POMEROY"
The house was built by Lt. Thomas Woore In the early 1840's
It is on a commanding site overlooking the Wollondilly River.
Lt. Woore was famous for his surveying in 1847 of a railway between
Sydney and Goulburn and also the line to Bathurst, also in 1866 he
proposed a scheme for supplying water from the Warragamba River to
Sydney - however, the present system follows the route of his
proposed canal.
Originally "Pomeroy" was only one storey high but a second
was added, combined with dormer windows and other Victorian effects
nearly a generation later. It has thick stone walls that are white-
washed over. Today it has lost much of its former garden which was
known for its beautiful trees and walks which led down to the river.
Natural trees have been preserved as much as possible.




"POMEROY" HOMESTEAD early 1840's
- situated on a commanding hill site overlooking the Wollondilly River.
The Flemish Gothic character of the newer eastern facade.
The original single storeyed wing facing the south.
The kitchen wing... viewed from the north west... walls are constructed of small stones & white washed.




CONCLUSION
Because of the isolation of much of the buildings in the
country a good deal of the original threads of early Australian
architecture can be traced. Too much prosperity in a district
does not help to preserve this as the more prosperous neighbour
has the urge to renovate his dwelling and thus lose the original
character it may have had. This is particularly evident in the
Bungonia area, which has never prospered any more than it did in
the early 1830's, when it overshadowed Goulburn: today the more
durable part of the town of 1830 remains. However, in Goulburn
they seem more loathe to pull down their old buildings than are
their city brothers so much of the heritage remains, even though
it may be disguised with brewery patterned tiles and stucco.




GOULBURN TO-DAY.
The building and commercial side of Goulburn has recently
received a "shot in the arm" with the building of several
large wool stores by the cleaning companies. Goulburn is to
become on of the major wool selling centres of the state.
The War Memorial... built on Rocky Hill overlooking
the town by the citizens in 1923 costing £4,000
H.C. Manfred architect... H.I. Ibbotson contractor.
The pretentious design of the new "Lilac Hall".
Doctors' Consulting Rooms are grouped together in centre of the city.
The large scale use of curtain walling & prefabricatd panelling in
the cities has had its effect on Goulburn... the disastrous result is seen
in Radio Station's 2GN new office building.






