

Peru
PAMS
gox I
AN ACT
So. 2, WOO.
To PROVIDE FOR CLERKS WHO SHALL BE SUPERANNUATED OR
Incapacitated and for the Widows and Families of Clerks
DECEASED.
BE it enacted by the Bishop the Clergy and the Laity of the
Church of England within the Diocese of Melbourne in
Victoria duly met in Assembly according to law as follows:
1. The Acts mentioned in the Schedule hereto marked A shall Repeal of Acts,
be repealed except as to every operation effected by or act done
under or as to any right obligation or liability already acquired
incurred accruing or accrued under the said Acts.
2. This Act shall be called and may be cited as The Clergy Name of Act.
Provident Fund Act and shall come into operation on the first
day of January 1901.
8. There shall be established a Provident Fund for the Diocese object of Act.
of Melbourne hereinafter called “ the said Fund” to provide
allowances for Clerks superannuated or incapacitated and for the
widows and families of Clerks deceased.
4 All existing rights in the Superannuation Fund constituted Rights
° rill 7 , , conserved.
by Act No. 8 1882 Hereinafter called Ihe Superannuation luma
are hereby conserved and made a first charge on the said Fund
Provided that the Board may discharge any claim on the said
Fund so long as they are satisfied that the Fund is amply
sufficient to meet all rights hereby made a first charge on the
said Fund.
5, The said Fund shall be under the management and Management of
Fund by Board.
control of a Board of Directors hereinafter called “the Board”
consisting of the Bishop and three Clerks and three Laymen


elected by the Church Assembly The Bishop if present shall be
chairman In his absence the Board shall elect a chairman
Provided that no business shall be done at any Board meeting
unless four members of the Board at the least shall be present
Quorum. and take part in the proceedings at such meeting.
Appointment 6. The first members of the Board shall be appointed by the
Bishop-in-Council and shall hold office until the ordinary
Session of the Assembly in 1901 when they shall all retire but
shall be eligible for election and the Assembly shall thereupon
elect by ballot three Clerks and three Laymen in lieu of the
retiring Directors.
retirement of 7. Before the Annual Session of 1902 the Board shall deter-
members of , , . .
Board. mine by lot winch two of' its members shall retire in the year
1902 and which two shall retire in the year 1908 All subse-
quent retirements shall be in the order of election.
How vacancies
In the event of any member of the Board dying or resign-
ing when the Church Assembly is not in session it shall be lawful
for the Board to fill the vacancy by appointing a Clerk or
Layman as the case may be who shall retain office so long only
as the vacating Director would have retained the same if no
vacancy had occurred.
Powers of Board 9. The Board shall have the power to make investments on
regarding— security of
investments, (a) First mortgages on real property in Australia
( b ) Australian Government debentures
(c) Municipal debentures
(d) Debentures of the Melbourne Harbour Trust or Mel-
bourne and Metropolitan Board of Works
(«) Mortgage Bonds under the Savings Bank Act
Fixed Deposits, And may place moneys on temporary or Fixed Deposit with the
Bank for the time being of the said Fund and shall decide upon
Payments, and pay all allowances fix times and places for meetings of
Meetings, c. Board p a y a n reasonable expenses incurred in conducting
the business of the Board and generally manage and superintend
all the affairs of the said Fund.


10. All investments of the said Fund shall be made in the Trustee of
tuna.
name of the Church of England Trusts Corporation for the
Diocese of Melbourne.
11. The said Fund shall consist of of what the
(a) The Superannuation Fund subject to all claims and
consist. 1
liabilities affecting the same
(b) The present Capitalised Superannuation Fund as soon
as all claims thereon arising under Part V. Patronage
Act No. 1 1878 have been satisfied
(c) The interest of the Diocese in the Clergy Widow and
Orphans’ Fund as soon as all claims thereon shall
have been satisfied
(rf) Subscriptions from Clerks offertories bequests and
donations of real and personal property.
The said Fund shall also be entitled to receive from the Diocese
when the income of St. James’ Church Lands is sufficient
to provide for payment of the same a sum of £240 per annum
as from the Ist day of January 1901 such annual sum to accrue
as a debt due to the said Fund and bearing simple interest from
such last-mentioned date at the rate of 4 per cent, per annum
until sufficient income from the said lands is available to pay the
said annual sum and interest on the accrued debt.
12 Special offertories on behalf of the said Fund shall special
r . , offertories.
be made at all services throughout the Diocese on the fourth
Sunday after Easter in every year Provided that it shall be
lawful for the Bishop to appoint some other Sunday in special
cases for the offertories to be made and the Incumbent or
officiating minister shall within one month certify the
amount of such collections to the Registrar of the Diocese
and such amount shall be payable to the Board by the Church-
wardens or persons to whom the custody of the Church Funds
in the Parish or District is ordinarily committed as money due
to the Board And the Churchwardens or persons as aforesaid
shall forthwith forward to the Treasurer of the said Fund the full
amount of such offertories without any deduction.
13. Every Clerk hereafter licensed by the Bishop shall Compulsory
J ..... ~ „ . , subscription.
subscribe to the said Fund within six months after the date
of his license and every such license shall accordingly contain
a provision to this effect.


14. Any Clerk licensed before the-passing of this Act may at
any time before the first day of July 1902 become a subscriber to
the said Fund as hereinafter provided.
Present clergy
may subscribe.
15. The annual subscription to be paid to the said Fund in
respect of each Clerk subscribing for the full benefits shall be
according to his age at entry as per Schedule B hereto but the
amount to be paid by each individual shall except as hereinafter
provided be determined by the Board in accordance with the
principles set forth in Schedule C Subscriptions shall be paid
by half-yearly instalments on the 80th June and 81st December
Amounts not paid within one month shall be chargeable with
interest at the rate of 8 per cent, per annum.
Amount of
subscription.
16. Any Clerk whose age exceeds 40 years licensed by the
Bishop may become a subscriber to the said Fund on terms
based upon actuarial tables to be approved of from time to time
by the Bishop-in-Council.
Clerks whose
ages exceed 40.
17. The yearly stipend of every Clerk who is a subscriber to
the said Fund shall be liable to the deduction of the necessary
subscription which shall be held to be a first charge upon the
said stipend and shall be deducted by the Trustees or Church-
wardens or Guardians or the Registrar of the Diocese as the
case may be and shall be by them or him forwarded to the
Board.
Subscription
first charge on
stipend.
Ten years’ 18. No Clerk shall be entitled to participate in the benefits of
precedTbeneflts the said Fund nor shall his widow and family so participate unless
ten years’ subscription shall have been paid by such Clerk prior
to his retirement or decease but in case of his prior death if he
be married his subscriptions shall be returned to his widow or
children.
what shall 19. When any subscriber shall attain the age of 70 years or
allowance from shall before attaining that age produce to the Board a certificate of
two legally-qualified medical practitioners approved by the Board
that he is permanently incapacitated for duty he shall be entitled
to an allowance from the said Fund of £5 a year for every year of
subscription Provided that such allowance shall not exceed
£l5O per annum subject however to the provisions of Section 29


Provided also that no allowance shall be made to any Clerk
who shall refuse to surrender all emoluments derivable from the
exercise of ministerial functions except as hereinafter provided.
20. Application for superannuation allowance may be made to
the Board by the Clerk or Trustees or Churchwardens or allowance.
Guardians of the Parish or Parochial District in which such
Clerk then ministers and on the necessary proof of age or
incapacity being given such Clerk shall be declared by the Board
superannuated and when any Clerk shall with the approval of the
Bishop have been declared superannuated his cure shall by
virtue of such declaration thereupon become vacant.
21. Any Clerk superannuated on the ground of incapacity Anowance may
prior to the age of 70 years subsequently becoming capable for
duty and being reappointed to a cure of souls the allowance under
this Act shall be suspended as long as such cure is held In any
subsequent allowances under the terms of this Act the period
during which benefit was derived from this Act shall not count
as time of subscription.
22. The Bishop may at any time call upon any Clerk super- superannuated
annuated under this Act on the ground of incapacity prior to the reappointed,
age of 70 years to submit himself to two medical practitioners
approved by the Board for examination and if in their judgment he
is fit for duty may appoint him to a cure the stipend of which is at
least 50 per cent, more than his allowance The allowance under
this Act shall be suspended as long as such cure is held In any
subsequent allowances under the terms of this Act the period
during which benefit was derived from this Act shall not count as
time of subscription.
23. On the application of a Clerk who has been superannuated Bishop may
L L ... assign duty to
on the ground of age the Bishop may assign suitable clerical duty superannuated
to such Clerk provided that during the performance of duty a
reduction be made in his allowance equivalent to 50 per cent, of
his receipts from such duty This arrangement to be terminable
at the Bishop’s discretion.
24. Any Clerk superannuated under this Act who has a wife Rights of wife
or children or both their rights if any to allowances in case of superannuated
his decease shall be kept alive by the deduction from his 01erk '
allowance of two pounds a year.


25. If any Clerk who is a subscriber to the said Fund shall
become a widower and shall marry again neither his widow nor
their children shall be entitled to any allowance under the
provisions of this Act unless he shall after such marriage pay in
addition to his previous subscription an annual sum equal to 25
per cent, of such subscription if the second wife shall be not more
than five years his junior or if she shall be more than five years
his junior an annual sum equal to 60 per cent, of the amount of
his original subscription.
Second marriage
of subscribing
Clerk.
26. The widow of every Clerk whose claims shall have
matured under this Act shall be entitled to an allowance of
£2 10s. per annum for each year of her husband’s subscription
provided that her allowance shall not exceed £5O per annum
Such allowance shall cease and determine upon her marrying
again.
Allowance to
widow.
Allowance to
children.
27. The mother or other person acting as the guardian of
children of a deceased subscribing Clerk whose claims shall have
matured as aforesaid shall receive an annual allowance of £8 for
each surviving child till such child has attained the age of sixteen
years.
28. All allowances under the terms of this Act shall be payable
quarterly but not in advance.
Allowances to
be quarterly.
29. The Board shall cause an investigation to be made into
the affairs of the said Fund as at June 30th 1908 and at the
end of every period of three years thereafter All allowances
payable out of the said Fund may as the result of such investi-
gation be increased or decreased on the recommendation of the
Board by resolution of the Church Assembly.
Investigation of
affairs of Fund.
Return of 80. If any Clerk resign his cure or be deprived thereof he shall
subscriptions. entitled to the return of the full amount paid by him to the said
Fund without interest Provided any subscribing Clerk who
shall not have been deprived of his cure by sentence of any
Ecclesiastical Court may continue to be a subscriber and shall
be entitled to participate in the benefits of the said Fund on
nonresident™ 8 payment of the full Schedule rates although he may be no longer
subscribe. a resident in the said Diocese.


31. The acceptance of permanent duty in any Diocese by a Forfeiture of
Clerk receiving an allowance from the said Fund shall be held to
forfeit such allowance save as by this Act provided.
32. A statement of receipts and expenditure on account of the Accounts to be
said Fund during the preceding financial year and a statement of Assembly
assets and liabilities of the said Fund at the close of the year shall
be laid before the Assembly in each annual session and shall with
lists of donors and subscribers be published in the annual
statistics of the Diocese.
83. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the amalgamation Amalgamation
of the said Fund with any similar Fund that may be hereafter
established by Provincial or General Synods of Australia and
Tasmania.
34. Clerks who are not beneficiaries under the Patronage Act clerks who
or the Superannuation Fund or the Clergy Widow and Orphans’ ‘beneficiaries.
Fund shall receive the proportion of offertories and donations
according to Schedule C in aid of premiums on life assurance
provided—
(1) That the sum shall not exceed half the amount of the
premium paid.
(2) That the policy shall be held by the Board in trust as
it may be determined.
(8) In the event of any beneficiary under this clause ceasing
to hold the Bishop’s license one half of the total sum
paid by the Board on account of such beneficiary shall
be returned to the Board on the surrender of the policy
by the Board.


SCHEDULE A.
No. of Act.
Date of Act.
Title of Act.
Act No. 8 1882 Passed Sept. 14th 1882
Assented to Sept. 18th 1882
Act No. 8 1888 Passed Sept. 27th 1888
Assented to Sept. 28th 1888
Act No. 5 1887 Passed Oct. 4th 1887
Assented to Oct. 10th 1887
Act No. 1 1889 Passed Sept. 24th 1889
Assented to Oct. Ist 1889
An Act to provide for
Clerks who shall be
superannuated or per-
manently incapacitated
An Act to amend the Act
of the Church Assembly
No. 3 1882 relating to
the Superannuation of
Clerks
An Act to amend the Act
of the Church Assembly
No. 3 1882
An Act to repeal Sec. 15
of Act No. 8 1882
known as the Super-
annuation Act and to
substitute another sec-
tion in lieu thereof
SCHEDULE B
Annual Subscription.
£lB 4 0
Age at Entry.
15 6 0
18 0 0
21 16 0
SCHEDULE C.
To ascertain the amount to be paid by each subscribing Clerk
in any year the difference between the total amount of subscrip-
tions due in that year and the total offertories and donations
excepting such donation as may by the donor be made to capital
for the year will be divided by the number of full benefits
subscribed for during that year and the number of Clerks
referred to in Section 34.
[Passed October 9th 1900. —Assented to October Xlth 1900.]
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon, Printers, Melbourne.
