

?
. . * ' '
AN ADDRESS
DELIVERED BEFORE
THE UNIVERSITY UNION
THE HON. MR. JUSTICE WINDEYER, LL.D.,
FELLOW OF THE SENATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.
�b6ius :
S. T. LEIGH & CO., PRINTERS, 155 CLARENCE STREET.


I


AN ADDRESS
DELIVERED BEFORE
THE UNIVERSITY UNION
THE HON. MR. JUSTICE WINDEYER, LL.D,
FELLOW OF THE SENATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.
S. T. LEIGH & CO., PRINTERS, 155 CLARENCE STREET.
MDCCCXCV.




THE triumph of mind over matter, the progress of science,
a knowledge of the laws of physicial nature, are frequently
spoken of as the distinctive characteristics of the age. They are
supposed to be as much the constituent elements as they are the
signs of the superiority of the present over the past. At once, a
cause and an effect, they are often regarded as above all things
desirable as means the most efficacious to attain the greatest of
ends. A result of progress in education and thought, they are
often looked upon as the highest development of such progress?
the great outgrowth of the human mind which will overshadow
the domain of thought to the exclusion of mental developments
productive of less material advantages. By those who join in the
cry of the superiority of this age, as shown in the application of
the mind towards the production of material results, there is also
too generally a depreciation of the value of abstract thought. With
this school of thinkers all that fails to result in the production
of material wealth, convenience and enjoyment is regarded as
unworthy the attention of man. Poetry and the science of mind,
philology, the philosophic study of history and social science, are
by these declaimers upon this phase of the superiority of the
present over the past, placed much upon the same level as alchemy,
witchcraft, and astrology?fit indeed for the idle speculations of
dreamers, but of no practical utility to mankind.
Mankind by these superficial observers seems to be devoting
itself entirely to the subjugation of material nature and the
investigations of its physical laws. This is not unnatural. The
great strides made by the twin giants, Science and Art, during the
present age have left their traces deeply printed in the sands of
time, visible alike to the philosophic and to the careless observer.
Everywhere we see the great forces of nature subjected to the will
and direction of man, the visionary dream of the poet become the
commonplace fact of every-day life, the speculation of the
philosopher realised as the learning of a ten-year-old infant in our
public schools. Puck has put his girdle round the earth in forty
seconds, and men cease to recognise in the every-day fact of the
electric telegraph the wild dream of a poet?s fancy. The thunder
cloud has yielded up its awful mystery, the forked lightning that
blasts the everlasting mountain top has become the tool of
mankind, and upon innumerable wires across pathless desert
wilds and beneath vast seas, themselves yielding up the secrets of
their ocean caves, flash the messages of peace, of commerce and
the history of the world. The message from the counting house
or the whisper of the lover may he delivered to the listening ear
miles away with no confidant to the secret but a vibrant
membrane, and years after death the phonograph may recall to us
the sound of a voice that is still, and the intonations of a speaker
or of a singer upon which listening audiences in past times hung


enthralled. The sun paints our portraits, innumerable stars
hitherto unknown to science print their tiny points of light upon
the photographic chart of the heavens. The mighty barriers of
nature themselves give way to the invading forces of man?s
necessities and convenience. Through the giant cliffs of the Alps,
aforetime the impregnable barrier of commerce between Sunny
Italy and the northern nations of Europe, man drives his way as
through a wall, or over their snowclad heights where the genius of
a Hannibal or a Napoleon upon the mountaineers? track with
difficulty forced a passage, the travelling bagman from Manchester
or Birmingham on his mission of commerce, or the delicate belle
of Paris or London in search of rest, health or pleasure, is borne
in ease and comfort by the iron horse down frightful steeps where
the patient mule at one time with careful steps hardly found his
way. Seas are united by the piercing of isthmuses, which since
historic time have been the impassable obstacles to the water-borne
commerce of the world : and across the mighty continent of
America with a rapidity astonishing to the nations of the
earth, man lays his iron road where the bison and the Red
Indian a few short years ago were the sole lords of the forest and
the plain.
Throughout the world we witness the triumphs of Watt,
Faraday, Brunei, Stephenson, Erickson, and others over the secrets
and forces of nature. Engineering difficulties are estimated not
by the aspect of the obstacles to be surmounted, however gigantic,
but by the rule of three. Give him the requirements of commerce
and the capital at command and your engineer shall inform you
simply of the time required for the performance of his work.
Give him a fulcrum of capital on which to rest his lever and
your man of science shall remove mountains, bridge oceans and
unite the far off nations of the earth.
With this class of observers the material results of the
world?s advance in scientific knowledge are regarded as the
only proofs of the world?s emancipation from the tyranny
of ignorance. They are the visible triumphant arches under
which human intellect in its victorious progress has dragged
the superstition of the past in which all speculation was sinful, all
superior knowledge heresy or magic. The world naturally sees in
the scientific discoveries of the day its most manifest tokens of
deliverance from that dark bondage of blind credulity, childish
legend, and countless miracles which for ages enslaved and stunted
the human mind. Standing on the Antipodes the most
uneducated of the day can proudly flaunt the flag of scientific
victory in the face of divines, who regarded the growing belief in
the existence of the Antipodes as the development of a new
heresy, springing out of an unholy scepticism as to the inspiration
of St. Paul, who having declared that men live upon the face of
the earth, it was clearly impossible for them to live upon more
faces than one or upon its back. The earth being spoken of as a
tabernacle, it was quite certain that its form was a parallelogram.


twice as long from east to west as from north to south. Such
views of nature would now raise a smile among the most illiterate.
Their clearly perceived and recognised absurdity is the measure
of our advance in knowledge. The earnest student of natural
philosophy who sees the reign of law stereotyped for all time upon
the face of nature by the Great Architect of the universe, who
knows that the whole solar system is flying through space jn some
mighty curve as yet undefined by science, and who witji reverent
admiration is working to understand the laws which govern the
rolling of the spheres, no longer dreads the Inquisition?s wrath for
declining to believe that the earth is the centre of the universe,
because in the grand but figurative language of the psalmist it is
written that ? the sun runneth about from one end of heaven to
the other,? and that ? the foundations of the earth are so firmly
fixed that they cannot be moved.? The light of a brighter day
than those of old enjoyed has broken through the mists of
ignorance, which, like ? a face cloth to the face, clung to the dead
earth and enables him to discern with clearer vision the real
horizon bounds of the spiritual eye, beyond which human
intellect cannot travel. The only heresy he knows is disloyalty to
the God of Truth, the only doubt he fears is that want of faith to
the cause of truth which shall make him hesitate to adopt any
conclusions to which earnest thought and investigation lead,
because opposed to tradition and preconceived opinion.
But this satisfaction in the material and objective results of
human progress, albeit the pride of triumph over the dominion of
ignorance, has its own accompanying danger. It is the danger
that follows upon the exclusive contemplation of any one object?
the erection of the graven image which, no less in the nineteenth
century than of old at the foot of Sinai, is the besetting sin of
the human race, with the exhibition of the same dogmatism and
intolerance of unorthodox views of scientific questions that
scientists so frequently denounce as accompanying the profession
of beliefs in religion. The old foe has but a new face. Man
still bows down to the work of his own hands: and if he is proud
of his superiority over the gross image-worship of pagan super-
stition, he, too, often substitutes some creature valuable, indeed,
as a help to his progress for the ultimate end of intellectual and
spiritual life.
Individually we do this by living for our work and business
instead of simply by them?by making success in our work the
great end of our existence, to the exclusion of higher and nobler
calls of duty. The idolatrous image-worshipper of science is the
Mr. Gradgrind of fiction. Scientific facts are the idols of
his adoration. Physical law, statistics and blue book returns are
the magical processes for exorcising the evil spirits of wonder,
imagination and subjective thought. With him the positive
teaching of science relegates to the nursery, with giants and fairies,
all speculations upon the moral and physical nature of man ; all
arguments in favour of a future existence founded upon the


longing aspirations of the soul and a belief in the ideal: ? the
earnest expectation of the creature that waiteth for the mani-
festation of the sons of God.? The sympathy of man with man,
the power of ideas, the convictions of a faith, or belief in a
principle, as influences controlling, or which ought to control, the
actions of mankind, are idle sentimentalisms to be banished from
an enlightened world. The enthusiasm of humanity is but the
rhapsody of a dreamer. The law of supply and demand, the
cynicism which ? knows the price of everything and the value of
nothing,? and an exact system of exchange on a discriminating
barter of self-interests, are the ? mint, anise and cumin ? to be
tithed, whilst the weightier matters of the law, ? Justice and
Mercy and Faith ? are passed over and forgotten. The melan-
choly, hopeless creed of the materialist is the logical sequence of
such teaching.
The desire to make the facts and conclusions of knowledge
the most prominent part of education, or, in other words, the
cry for the practically useful, which is sometimes raised by
would-be educational reformers, is a development of this tendency.
We are told that too much time is wasted in the study of subjects
which have no practical utility in the business of life, that it is
altogether a mistake to suppose that the object of education is to
teach men how to think, that it rather consists in the informing
the young of the results of knowledge. To such a length has
this been carried, that we have even seen it suggested that in a
model system of education, book-keeping and land-surveying
should be substitutes for the study of pure mathematics. Cocker-
Pinnock?s Catechism and a sixpenny treatise of Weale are to
supplant Euclid and Colenso. Far different to the proposed
object of these reformers?the enlightenment of mankind would
be the inevitable end. Blind, unquestioning credulity and un-
intelligent acceptance of things as facts communicated as such,
on the part of the taught, and an intolerant absolutism on the
part of the teaching class, would, as the natural consequence of
such teaching, end in the stand-still of thought and the enslaving
of the unfortunate victims of cram by those who hold the keys of
knowledge. The priestly caste of Egypt, which kept the secrets
of learning and science to itself, and simply communicated to the
people as much knowledge as enabled them like animated tools
to carry out the orders of their task-masters, was the natural
result of such a system.
Every lover of his kind, every believer in the power of
education to raise the mass of mankind to a social state of
improvement and enlightenment which shall give free scope to
the development of all that is possible under the highest con-
ditions of Christian ethics, will look with suspicion upon a system,
the tendency of which is to make one class the sole masters and
dispensers of knowledge, and another dependent on the bounty
of those who keep to themselves the power of discovering the
Unknown.


The object of education is the development of the whole
moral and intellectual man.
In physical, as in mental training, the object of the
gymnastics is not to train a man as a powerful assistant to a
blacksmith, or as an athletic coal-heaver, but to give robustness
to his constitution, to fit his whole physical nature for the
contest of life. The object of education is not the training of
doctors or lawyers, or book-keepers or skilful craftsmen, but the
general training of the mind to enable it to have successfully
grafted upon it, as a vigorous stock, the special knowledge of any
one of these. The mind grows not bv the passive reception of
facts, but by the process of exertion in independent action.
Take away all interest in the why and the how, and the mere
demonstration of phenomena becomes a bore to a vigorous and
healthy mind. ? Did the Almighty,? says Lessing, ? holding in
His right hand Truth, and in His left Search after Truth, deign to
tender me the one I might prefer ; in all humility, but without
hesitation, I should request Search after Truth.?
We degrade the high functions of knowledge when we
encourage the idea that its chief aim is some business in life,
rather than its capacity to promote social, moral, and spiritual
growth. The greatest benefactors of their race, engaged in the
various callings of life, have been so, not through, but in spite of,
their special occupations. They have been those who have
scorned to rest satisfied with the facts and thumb-rules of their
work, and who have insisted upon searching into the principles
upon which they rest; who have refused to allow their minds to
be degraded by the exclusive pursuit of their business for the
practical purpose of money-making, and who have remembered
that they still owed duties to society as citizens and to themselves
as men. Hunter in physiology, Bentham in jurisprudence, are
recognised as the giants of medicine and law long after the
pygmies of ephemeral professional success have been lost sight of
and forgotten.
Of all contemptible characters none is so miserable as the
self-made slave of his business, who refuses to take his share of
social duties, and who, wrapping his talent in a napkin of safe
respectability, excuses his selfishness with the plea that the
world can get on without his help. Better, my young brothers,
to rest satisfied with a more moderate share of what is commonly
known as success in life, than to make your pile at the price of
stunting your moral and intellectual growth, by the abandonment
of your duties as spiritual beings Time will come when, as
amongst the Athenians of old, public opinion shall regard those
who take no active interest in the affairs of mankind, not simply
as men without occupation, free from the cares of life, but
altogether as useless creatures, the unprofitable servants of their
Divine Master.
An exact appreciation, however, of the object of education
does not in any way imply a depreciation of the true value of


physical science as part of mental training. Its cultivation of
habits of exact observation, of patient and minute examination,
and the lessons which it teaches of the necessity of making sure
of every step in a process of inductive reasoning, combine to give
it great importance in a perfect scheme of education. Much less
will the philosopher underestimate the immense value to the
world of the practical results of science in helping on the
progress of mankind. Every discovery which ministers to the
social comfort of the people, to our health, convenience, or even
luxury, by bringing the refinements of life within reach of
the many; every improvement in the mechanical arts, replacing
sheer strength by contrivance and skill, and promoting intercourse
between the nations of the world, is a round in the ladder of
human progress, reaching from earth up to heaven.
Let us only beware whilst climbing?
? Upon the great world?s altar stairs,
That slope through darkness up to God. ?
That we rest not too long upon a single step, that we
? Never conclude, but raising hand and heart
Thither where eyes, that cannot reach yet yearn
For all hope, all sustainment, all reward
Their upmost up and on.?
The upward gaze only can preserve the strongest intellectual
nerve from the film of giddiness which follows upon the too
constant contemplation of things on earth.
Remarkable as the present age is for the progress made in the
study of physical science, and its great acquisitions of the
objective results of knowledge, it is equally true that the spirit
of the age is pre-eminently subjective; that its activity of mind
is no less shown in abstract speculation than in the prosecution
of physical science. The metaphysical and poetic go hand in
hand with the positive and scientific. This is the historical as
well as the natural development of the human mind. It is as
true of to-day as it was true of the most brilliant period of Greek
civilisation, when the versatile genius of the polished Athenian
produced alike the most glorious triumphs of art, the grandest
imaginings of poetry, the most profound and abstract speculations
in philosophy.
The architectural adornments of Athens, the ruins of which
lie whitening in the sun like the gigantic bones of a race that has
passed away, were raised in their beauty by the people who
listened with rapture to the plays of the tragedians, and hung upon
the lips of the philosophers. The revival of letters produced
Raphael and Michael Angelo in art; Shakespere and Dante in
poetry ; Bacon, Galileo, and Spinosa in philosophy. Now, as
then, never so brilliant an array of intellect adorned any period of
the world?s history as has adorned the latter half of the nineteenth
century. Never was every department of human thought so well
represented by great thinkers ; never more boldness of thought in


philosophy, more victorious research in science. The expanse of
nature traversed by man?s exploration in science is no more vast
than the spiritual depths plumbed in philosophic soundings for the
true. To take great names only :?Carlyle, Emerson, and Compte
in prose; Shelley, Tennyson, and Browning in poetry, have
vindicated the claim of the age to be regarded as pre-eminently
subjective in its spirit; whilst Faraday, Darwin, Helmholtz,
Pasteur, and I might almost say countless others in every branch of
science, have pushed discovery in the physical world beyond the
most advanced outposts of knowledge occupied in previous times,
and have opened up ever-widening fields of investigation in the
study of the material universe. Other periods of the world?s
history may have seen, at rare intervals, gigantic intellects in some
special department of thought, but none have seen thought in its
highest forms so widely distributed over so vast a range of enquiry.
To the superficial observer only does the present age appear solely
intent on the pursuit of the objective results of science. Its really
remarkable and peculiar characteristic is that the most highly
abstract turn of thought is co-existing with the most positively
scientific.
Thus, the most exacting demand for scientific accuracy of
proof is the outcome of the thinking of the day, as well as the
most spiritual aspirations of the soul, The age is as much an age
of poetry as it is an age of science; it is the era of ideas and
principles. This is shown in a variety of ways. Perhaps the
most peculiar mode of the expression of the subjectivity of
popular thought in the present day appears in the constant
reference we see to what is termed the spirit of the age, and in
the incessant examination of its aims and objects. This is seen
not merely in philosophical disquisitions, but in the most
ephemeral of popular writings; magazines, reviews, and daily
newspapers have teemed with articles of this character. Never
did any previous period in the world?s history so constantly submit
itself to self-examination, so frequently compare itself to other
times, to see how far it resembles or differs from them. Mental
vivisection is the delight of the public mind.
The nineteenth century, indeed, seems in much of our
current literature to be regarded as if no eighteen centuries had
preceded it, and it has at all events this source of self-laudation?
that it can confidently assert that no previous century has so
incessantly spoken and written of itself as an object of thought.
Its peculiarities, its excellences, and its defects are canvassed and
examined in every possible light. The journalist philosopher
thinks he has settled an ancient regime in politics, or a school of
philosophy by announcing, as the climax of all argument, that the
object of his denunciation is opposed to the genius of the nine-
teenth century, whilst Jones, his disciple of the breakfast table,
goes to business on the knifeboard of his omnibus, after the
perusal of his able editor?s arguments, regarding him as the
apostle of a new era, and himself (Jones) as peculiarly a develop-


ftient of the nineteenth century, on the clearest principles of the
Darwinian theory.
Probably the writer who has done most to direct the march
of the human mind during the present age, who has infused his
spirit into the era, giving it the turn for self-examination and
subjective thought, to which I have alluded as prevailing in all
classes of our literature, is Thomas Carlyle. The earnest spirit of
enquiry aroused by him has pervaded the whole English mind ;
and when, in time to come, the historian relates that the nine-
teenth century witnessed amongst the British race a revival from
the spiritual lethargy and materialism of the eighteenth century,
and a new birth of earnest enquiry into the nature and destiny of
man, he will doubtless see in Thomas Carlyle?s writings the
prophet-like power of genius which was the awakening voice. To
use a phrase of his own : ?his was the ? mission ? to make every
individual, no less than the century itself, enquire what work
there was for him and it to do. He, above all in prose, may be
taken as typical of the subjective thinking of the day. What am
I ? Why here ? Whence and whither tending ? are the profound
questions which he, like conscience itself, is ever ringing in
our ears.
To his mind, man as man and his spiritual life are the all-
absorbing subjects of interest. Physical science, theories of
government, and the best devised schemes of representation are
with him of no value, save as they tend to the production, not of
wealth, commerce, and power, but to the growth of intellectual
and spiritual life. His watchword is duty; his message, find
it quickly and do it with all thy might. Words that deceive,
forms that hide realities, formulas of belief that destroy the
conviction consequent upon enquiry, and crush our spiritual
liberty, are the shams against which he has cried aloud in the
hearing of the age. In the grandest liberty of scientific research
he urges man to enquire into his own nature, and proclaims as the
inevitable result of such enquiry, the most profound conviction in
the existence of an all-wise and beneficent God. Want of earnest-
ness in belief, mere believing that you believe, are as sins against
truth, the object of his denunciation. Against scientific creeds,
laws of nature, and similar substitutions of secondary causes as
final resting places for belief of the spiritual man, he puts us upon
our guard. At the risk of being tedious, I cannot refrain from
citing an eloquent passage from ? Sartor Resartus ? bearing upon
this subject:?
??But it is not the deepest law of nature that she should be
constant,? cries an illuminated class. ?ls not the machine of the
universe fixed to move by inalterable rules ? ? Probable enough, good
friend ; nay, I, too, must believe that the God whom ancient men inspired
assert to be ? without variableness or shadow of turning ? does indeed
never change ; that nature, that the universe, which no one whom it so
pleases can be prevented from calling a machine, does move by the most
inalterable rules. And now, of you too, I make the old enquiry?What
those same inalterable rules, forming the complete statute book of nature,


may possibly be ? They stand written in the works of science, say you,
in the accumulated records of man?s experience? Was man with his
experience present at the Creation, then, to see how it all went on ? Have
any deepest scientific individuals yet dived down to the foundations of the
universe and gauged everything there? Did the Maker take them into
His counsel that they read the ground-plan of the incomprehensible All ?
and can they say ? this stands therein, and no more than this ?? Alas ! not
in anywise. These scientific men have been nowhere but where we also
are ; have seen some handbreadths deeper than we see into the deep that
is infinite, without bottom as without shore.
? System of Nature ! To the wisest man, wide as his vision, nature
remains of quite infinite depth, of quite infinite expansion,' and all
experience thereof limits itself to some few computed centuries and
measured square miles. The course of nature?s phases on this our little
fraction of a planet is partially known to us ; but who knows what deeper
courses these depend on?-what infinitely larger cycle of courses our little
epicycle revolves upon ? To the minnow every cranny and pebble and
quality and accident of its little native creek may have become familiar ;
but does the minnow understand the ocean tides and periodic currents, the
trade-winds and monsoons and moon-eclipses by all which the condition
of its little creek is regulated, and may from time to time (unmiraculously
be quite overset and reversed ? Such a minnow is man, his creek
this planet Earth, his ocean the immeasurable All, his monsoons and
periodic currents the mysterious course of Providence through Aeons of
Aeons.?
In poetry the subjective spirit of the age is no less remarkable.
It is not too much to say that Tennyson is the grandest
subjective poet that England has produced. Shakspeare, in
many passages, shows his sovereign genius in dealing with this
phase of thought, and in Hamlet, the culminating triumph of
his powers, we have the grandest play that the world has seen,
founded entirely on subjective speculation. Throughout his
works, however, he is not so uniformly and pre-eminently
subjective as the author of ?In Memoriam.? This poem is
peculiarly the production of a modern subjective thinker, and
contains the most profound and subtle analysis of the human
mind as affected by the passion of grief that has ever been
written. On the mental phenomena exhibited in connection
with sorrow he builds the grandest speculations upon the
immortality of man?
? ? I hold it truth with him who sings
To one clear harp in divers tones,
That men may rise on stepping stones
Of their dead selves to higher things.?
The instinctive belief in a future state which rejects the materialist
suggestions of science is the argument on which he founds his
philosophic faith :
?The wish that of the living whole
No life may fail beyond the grave
Derives it not from what we have
The likest God within the Soul.?
His writings breathe everywhere the same intense conviction
that we are ? not wholly brain magnetic mockeries,? not ? only
cunning casts in clay,? the same Divine faith


? that somehow good
Will be the final goal of ill
To pangs of Nature, sins of will
Defects of doubt and taints of blood.
That nothing walks with aimless feet,
That not one life shall be destroyed
Or cast as rubbish to the void
When God hath made the pile complete.
The turn of thought that marks the vast difference between the
subjective speculations of Tennyson or Browning, and the des-
criptive word-painting of Scott, Southey, or Byron, is not only the
distinguishing feature of later poetry, but is shown in the modern
novel as compared with the romance of our forefathers. The
best authors of the day, who rise above the level of mere
sensational writing, aim at the analysis of character, and in the
form of a tale discuss the problems of social life, and propound
the deepest questions of morality.
But it is not alone in the writings of philosophers, poets,
novelists, and journalists that we see this spirit of self-laudation
and the growth of moral principles and convictions fostered by
the habit. We see it in the workings of social science, in
legislation, and in the intercourse of mankind throughout the
world. By the study, not of physical science, but of spiritual
truth, will the world see the monstrous gulphs between class
and class bridged over and filled up by human sympathy.
It is already devising schemes for the better remuneration of
labour, founded on the recognition of the right of the labourer to
a share of the profits created by his labour; and of the fact
that the wage which merely enables a labourer to live is no more
a share of the profits than the forage given to a horse is a share
of the profits of an omnibus company. It points out to employer
and employed that not by hostile antagonism are the interests of
either protected, but rather by the clear, unselfish recognition of
their mutual dependence on each other. Thus we have the
growing advocacy of partnerships between Labour and Capital,
as well as co-operative associations, tending to promote the self-
respect and high moral qualities springing from the sense of
responsibility. The doctrine that might makes right is being
sapped to the foundation. Justice is more ostensibly the ground-
work of our legislation. The abolition of slavery, of State religions,
of Test and Corporation Acts and Catholic Emancipation are
the leglislative products of the reflective thinking; of the era.
Toleration itself is becoming stigmatised as a thing of the past,
to be replaced by the recognition of the right to the enjoyment of
any opinion not inconsistent with the social compact. A wider
extension of political rights, the growing recognition that woman
in right of her womanhood and her subjection to the laws of her
country has a right to a voice in their making, that the ultimate
perfection of the human race cannot be attained so long as the
half with whom the responsibility of motherhood depends, is in


any way prevented from developing its highest intellectual, social
and political capacity. A more general distribution of property,
by gradual legislation in favour of the equal rights of children
and the abolition of entail, and the promulgation of the view that
all property is held as a trust for the benefit of mankind and not
for the indulgence of idle and selfish gratification, are certainly as
strongly marked tendencies of the age, as undoubtedly they are
theories, the investigation of which is not in a way dependent
upon the progress of physical science.
Freethought, no longer under an ecclesiastical ban, and
muttering, like Galileo, ? and yet it moves,? after an enforced
recantation of his great heresy in the truth, boldly proclaims its
new perception of the true to the ears of sympathetic thousands,
whether the preacher be John Ward or Robert Elsmere, whilst
the nobler teachings which come of the spiritual growth of
these later days are evidenced in the demand of a standard
of morals which shall be as high for men as for women. Ths
Dioscouri of the popular novel enforce in prose no less than
Tennyson in song that it is the ideal of a noble and manly life
? To lead sweet lives in purest chastity;
To love one maiden only?to cleave to her
And worship her by years of noble deeds
Until they win her ; for indeed I know
Of no more noble master under Heaven
Than is the maiden passion for a maid.
Not only to keep down the base in man,
But teach high thoughts and amiable words
And courtliness, and the desire of fame
And love of truth, and all that makes a man. ?
Whilst these developments are taking place within individual
peoples, the same principles are operating in wider circles between
nations themselves. International policy no longer is avowedly
selfish. National antipathies are dying out as the brotherhood of
man is more clearly recognised. The military despot himself no
longer makes conquest and national aggrandisement the ostensible
object of his ambition. His professed ideas are peace, the
recognition and freedom of nationalities. The united opinion of
the civilised world is being brought to bear upon national conduct,
as that of society upon the individual man. The two great
divisions of the Anglo-Saxon race ?the English and American?
have set a noble example to the world in the arbitration at Geneva
and Paris of the method by which national differences may be
settled. Who can doubt that this tendency will progress
? Till the War-drum throbs no longer, and the battle-flags are furled,
In the Parliament of man, the federation of the world !
When the common sense of most shall hold a fretful world in awe,
And the kindly earth shall slumber, lapped in universal law. ?
The phase of subjective thinking exhibited in popular
literature may not be the highest development of the spirit that
directs modern thought, but it is no less truly an index hand of
the dial which, in a rude way, announces the complex working of


the inner machinery. The popular diffusion of knowledge in its
rougher forms is ever concurrent with the philosophic pursuit of
its abstruse problems. Thus knowledge begets knowledge. The
mass of mankind reap the general results of the philosopher?s toil
in the laboratory and study. The profound thinker is sustained
and strengthened in his course of investigations by the atmosphere
of knowledge which he himself assists to create. It were hard to
say which most helps the other ?the one who leads thought, or
he whose appreciative judgment makes the spirit of investigation
grow by what it feeds on. The subjective thinking of men like
Carlyle, Emerson, Compte, in different lines of thought, is ever
urging on the human race to the investigation of itself, whilst the
general effect of their teaching diffused amongst mankind will
cause the appearance of more advanced thinkers to head the
march to the human mind. As the popular platform of thought
widens, more exalted the chair of the philosopher. In the words
of Aristotle:?
'Aei jUkTiav fj apXV V TCOV /SeXriovcciv dp^o/ievcov
Every elevation of the subject is the elevation of the ruler.
The philosophic study of history and of politics, whilst it will at
times make the thinker regard almost with contempt the rough
conceptions of liberty held by the multitude, and makes him
shrink, it may be, from the still rougher workings of the political
machine, constantly teaches the same lesson.
Only by the general diffusion of the spirit of liberty on the
human mind can the more philosophic conceptions of the thinker
expect realisation in more perfect systems of government. Only
by the general spread of political education can the abstract
schemes of representation thought out by Mill and Hare become
possible in practice.
Upon you, my young brothers, who have had the priceless
advantage of a liberal education will, in a large measure, rest the
responsibility of maintaining the respect of the masses for higher
education. If the result of your University training is to show
that, with the educated Athenian of old, you consider that the
man who takes no interest in public affairs is not only an idle but
a useless man ; if it proves that, whilst determined to regard the
settled constitution of your country as a sacred thing to be held
inviolate against the assaults of the rash in the hour of tumult and
excitement, you seek to advance no selfish class-interests, but are
sympathetic with those who are legitimately struggling to improve
the conditions of their existence, you will do noble service to the
cause of higher education and to your country. But if, regardless
of your duty, you wrap your talent in a napkin, and, in self-satisfied
contempt for the misguided efforts of your imperfectly educated
fellow citizens, you make no effort to assist in the working of our
institutions, you will do a grievous wrong by helping to deprive
higher education of that dignity in the eyes of the masses which
should give it power and influence in the councils of the country.


Knowledge, like virtue, is to be pursued not for the hope of
reward but for its own sake ; and the reward will come more
surely in proportion as it is less consciously the object of our aim.
Discoveries in physical science, as truths in religion, are revealed
to the earnest abstract thinker. They are the rewards which come
when least sought for. They are the result of allowing free scope
to the exercise of our reason unbiassed by prejudice, uncramped
by the desire of proving a theory or of establishing a system.
The established truth of a scientific fact is great and irrefragable,
because it will submit to the test of rational examination. It would
at once sink to the level of a superstition in magic were men
warned from any process of testing its alleged truths by the light
of reason. Would that mankind would thus learn to look from
Nature up to Nature?s God. Alas ! that while the sentiment is so
frequently on the lips of theologians as an empty phrase, men are
so often deterred from reading this, the grandest lesson to be
learned from physical science. If there is a growing idolatry of
science, -if there is a tendency to the exclusive cultivation of its
positive teaching, with a sneering disregard for speculation upon
the moral and spiritual nature of man, tending to a disbelief in the
physically unseen, it is owing to a distrust in the means appointed
by the Creator for the support of truth.
The true must in its nature be essentially the same in morals
as in physics. Ultimately it can be supported by no different
means. If our moral and intellectual faculties, used with earnest-
ness, are the instruments given us for discovery, why give them
scope in the examination of matter, and hamper them when
searching for the true in the investigation of spiritual life ?
Science should be the hand-maid, not the enemy, of religion.
And if science is undermining the religious convictions of the
world, it is because the scientific mind, whilst it finds that earnest
research is the certain mode of establishing the truth in questions
relating to matter, is yet constantly reminded that the same system
of investigation is not permitted in questions relating to our
intellectual and moral nature. Why assume that in spiritual truth
alone is the absolute discovered, whilst in every other department
of knowledge progress in discovery is the clearly recognised order
of Providence? Why believe that spiritual truth has been
condemned to the absolute certainty, the absolute completion
which would be the paralysis of any study, and that here alone
evolution has no place ? A thinker will soon learn to look with
contempt on subjects, to the investigation of which he is not
allowed to bring to bear the reasoning faculties, the use of which
has been blessed with the revelation of the most wonderful secrets
of God?s material world. And the conclusion is too soon adopted
that the foundations of the morally true cannot rest on so secure
a basis as the facts of the physical if they will not submit to the
same tests of constant research and examination.
Thus intellect is driven from the ranks of those amongst whom
should be found the deepest and most advanced thinkers, or is


kept under a suspicious watch as a traitorous spirit, whilst the
triumphs of science are converted from the victories of the God of
truth into the successful rebellion of unholy intellectual pride.
Moral and spiritual growth is thus arrested, whilst science is ever
advancing. Were this stoppage final or possible, it would argue
the mortality of the soul. A constant growth in perceptions of the
true is the infinity of spiritual life, as certainly as cessation of
the growth of the bodily tissues is the death of the animal.
Bodily life consists in physical, spiritual life in mental action. By
energy in action alone are we conscious of our existence : deprive
us of that and annihilation follows. Thus the study of physics,
rightly understood, helps research in the investigations of mental
science. As in the material world we seek the discovery of the
laws governing the systems of the universe, in subjective thought
and the investigation ofmentrd phenomena we examine the nature
of our spiritual being and our relations to a first great cause. The
age would indeed have little to boast o' in the way of superiority
over the past, if its intellect were not directing itself as much to
such investigations as to the pursuit of physical science. The
ultimate object of science is not the production of steam engines,
electric telegraphs, meat refrigeration, or phonographs, but the
development of man as man. The highest subject on which the
human intellect can exercise itself is the nature and mission of
the spiritual being for whom all arts and sciences exist. In an
advancing era of human progress, this, the greatest occupation
of the mind, must ever attract the noblest among the intellects
of the day. ? The proper study of mankind is man ? is the
epigrammatic deduction consequent upon the fact, assured alike
by the revelations vouchsafed to philosophic observation and a
Divine insight into our spiritual nature, announcing that the
Kingdom of God is within us. In ancient times, when the
object of government in the working of enlightened democracy
was to fit every man for the duties of citizenship, more
attention was paid to that view of the useful in education
which regards the development of our faculties and the
formation of our intellectual and moral characters with a view
to our competency to discharge our duties as citizens, and to
undertake the high functions of government as its real object,
rather than that which regards it as useful because it fits us for
some special occupation of advantage to ourselves. Then the
educated citizen kept to himself the cultivation of knowledge
tending to intellectual superiority, and left to slaves the drudgery
of labour as incompatible with the active duties of a citizen. In
more modern times, when the organisation of society was for the
benefit of a few, knowledge was kept as the privilege of a class,
and by them only such an amount was permitted to the masses
as should be useful in making them minister to the power,
idleness, and ease of their masters. Hence the application of the
lower meaning to the word ? useful ? is a legacy from the times
when the mass of mankind were told to content themselves


with the manual occupations, or Banausic arts, leaving to an
educated oligarchy the exclusive enjoyment of the higher duties
of life. It has been reserved for the present age to witness, as a
growing phase of the highest Christianity, the recognition of the
dignity of all labour, and the compatibility of intellectual
culture with the practice of occupations before deemed unworthy
of educated men.
Some occupations, which, involving the possession of more
general culture for their successful prosecution, have been
designated as the liberal professions, may be followed as much
in the spirit of a trade as any occupation of the hard-handed
sons of toil. They cease to be dignified in proportion as they
are pursued solely for the sake of gain, to the exclusion of
higher aims. The humblest work in the hierarchy of labour
need not degrade the man. It only becomes dangerous as
degrading when occupying the attention to the exclusion of all
higher aspirations, or when it unfits the mind for superior
teaching.
The more gifted man, by nature capable of higher work,
struggles for such work as demands the exertion of the higher
faculties. In proportion as he is able to appropriate to himself
knowledge useful in spiritual development will he rise in mental
superiority and win a wider sphere of action. It is only by the
cultivation of the useless and impractical, in the sense of the
scientific enthusiast, that the labourer or mechanic can become
fit for dealing with the highest problems that can engage the
attention of man : whether they be in the government of his
fellow-men, and in advancing the destinies of his race, or in
enlarging the bounds of knowledge in scientific or speculative
research. No sensible person expects everyone to be a profound
scholar or great abstract thinker; but no believer in man as
capable of infinite progress will think that the knowledge of
abstract truth is to be confined to a class, and not rendered
accessible to him who, whatever his occupation, finds that in his
hands more abstract learning will be useful to his kind.
It would be a curious enquiry whether those who, with all
the advantages of high cultivation, affect to despise and depreciate
in the eyes of the multitude the learning which they themselves
would not give up are the most unselfish in the political views
and most sympathetic with the great heart of the people, or those
who urge upon them the so-called useless education, and tell
them that the mere results of knowledge and the business of a
trade should not be the sole objects of their ambition to acquire.
Query whether the language depreciatory of abstract learning,
which we sometimes hear from public men who ought to know
better, is not a disguised form of telling the masses not to trouble
themselves about things beyond their reach, whilst among educated
equals it would take the bolder form of the obsolete creed, that
it is dangerous to educate the poor above their station in life.
{Such depreciation of learning ca.n only lead to the encourage-


ment of a self-sufficiency on the part of the half-educated,
dangerous to progress and to contempt for knowledge in its
highest forms. Too often in the history of the world has it proved
that class interests and selfish aims have influenced men in their
theories of the fit in education, not to make the suggested enquiry
some test of the soundness of views advanced with regard to this
the most powerful of all influences upon the lives and destinies of
men.
If it is true as we have been told by Mr. Froude that
? few have the courage to follow the counsels of perfection,? that
few have strength to combine learning with working, that the mass
of mankind cannot unite intellectual culture with the grinding
occupations of life, why should such an ideal be withdrawn from
the aspiration of the masses ? Christianity should be given up as
an impossible Utopia, because its highest development in the
world seems but a far-off dream for the realisation of the future.
Few, indeed, have strength of moral pinion sufficient to float in
the pure atmosphere of divine life, where right is done because it
is right, without hope of reward, or fear of punishment. We still
teach the noble altruism of Christianity, though the day is far off
when there shall be no church, and no temple, but the whole
earth shall be one great congregation worshipping the Right, the
Good, and the True. ? Take no thought what ye shall eat, or
what ye shall drink, or wherewithal ye shall be clothed. Your
Heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of these things.
Behold the lilies of the field ; they toil not, neither do they spin,
yet I say unto you that even Solomon in all his glory was not
arrayed like one of these,? were words spoken not to a few, not
to a select circle of philosophers, but to the human race existing
through all time. The infinite progress of our kind towards
moral perfection is alone possible when each individual can feel
that he, too, in his generation, however humble his sphere, can
help the blessed advent of that Kingdom for which all are taught
to pray. In vain we place before us in our daily prayer the ideal
of infinite perfection in the accordance of all human will with the
order of heavenly life, if that contemplation of perfection may
not, in some measure, reflect upon every one of us.
That Kingdom will come, and that Will will be done, only
when, by the striving of every human soul after perfection in
harmony with all physical and moral laws, the whole race of man-
kind reaches an intellectual and spiritual standard at present
attainable but in the aspirations of a few?
? Men, my brothers, men, the workers, ever reaping something new,
That which they have done but earnest of the things that they shall do?
is the creed and faith alike of the earnest statesman and of the
Christian teacher.


?h


;
?
?
.
?
.
? ?
.
?
