

Hit Hppeal to tbe Chivalry
of Wouiiq flDen.
EEP down in the hearts of all young men
before they are corrupted by the sin of
sensuality, there is an honest and noble
feeling of chivalry towards women. The
debauchee puts on a veneer of polite-
ness, and exhibits a sham chivalry to
those women whom he dare not insult.
allude to that. But, for the noblest of
I do not here
purposes, I appeal to the real chivalrous feeling that
exists in the hearts of young men towards girlhood,
maidenhood, womanhood.
When you are tempted to this sin, consider its effect
not only on your own body and soul, but upon the body
and soul of the other concerned in it. If she be
already fallen, in the name of God I plead with you
not to give her another thrust down towards hell In
the name of God I plead with you not to further soil
her soul, and place one more barrier in the way of the
prodigals return to virtue and happiness. Think of
her mother, young man, whose heart in some distant
home, perhaps, is breaking because of her child’s fall,
and because she does not return where she would find
forgiveness and love awaiting her. Notwithstanding
her fallen condition, is that noble sense of chivalry so
dead within you, that, now that she has fallen, you will
trample her still further into the mire? Spurn the
thought! and mindful of the agony that would fill your
own mother’s heart if one of her daughters were
similarly placed, instead of sinning speak to her of
home and of GOD, and for pity’s sake give her at least


a sum large enough to satisfy a day’s hunger or to
start her back to her mother’s arms.
Are you tempted to sin with one who is yet unfallen?
Surely you will not, if you consider what are the pos-
sible and not unlikely consequences to her. Woman’s
nature is finer, more acute, more susceptible than
man’s, and it is often the first sad fall that produces
the abandonment of despair, and ultimately the cry—
Once I was pure as the snow, but I fell.
Fell like the snowflakes from heaven to hell;
Fell to be trampled as filth on the street.
Fell to be scoffed, to be spit on and beat.
Pleading-, cursing, dreading to die.
Selling my soul to whoever would buy.
Surely, young man, you are not so lost to the chivalry
of manhood as to be the first cause of such a condition
as that, ending, as it often does, in a hospital ward,
where the betrayed and outcast young woman, one
mass of physical corruption, loathsome alike to the
smell and sight, and hardly recognisable as a human
being, dies, and without ceremony is hurried in a deal
coffin to a pauper’s grave. Unless you are already
utterly corrupted, you would sooner be hungry, home-
less, and trampled upon yourself than to sink a pure
girl to such an awful condition, robbing her of all the
bloom of her young life, robbing her of the joys of a
pure love and courtship, and of the married love of
some honest fellow who would bless her the whole of
her days.
Yes; when you are tempted to this sin, consider the
certain and the possible consequences to the other one
concerned; and for her sake no less than your own, de-
termine that with God’S help you will keep yourself
pure.
[Copies of “The Choice ,, or “True Manliness,” may be
obtained by post from the Hon. Secretary, White Cross
Leagme, 56 Elizabeth Street, or Box 1280 G.P.0., Sydney,
for 2d. posted.]
