

A T TEMP T
REST O R E
THE
S U P REM E WORSHIP
G O D
The
Father Almighty.
Ti ~worJhip ft'know not what j s—But the hour cmeth and now is,
tuhtn the true worjhippers Jhall worjhip /fo; Father in fpirit and
in Truth For ' the Father Jeeketbfuch to worfhip him.
John iv. 22, 23*
TVe have Mofes, the Prophets and ApoJUes, and'the Wards if
Chrijl himfel/i and if vie will not hear them, we Jhall be more
inexcusable than the Jews. Newton*
No Article of the Chrijlian Faith, delivered in the Holy Scriptures ,
is difagreeable to right Reafon *
Without the Liberty of human Actions, there can be no Religion.
Clarke;
Faith rnujl he founded upon Reafon, or it muft be fanatical Cre-
dulity. There is no Medium. Jortin.
Written for the Ufe of poor Christians*
By GEORGE WILLIAMS, a Livery Servant.
Printed for T<_Becket and P. A. De Hont, in the Strand.
MDCCLXIV.


ADVERTISEMENT.
To Unitarian Chriftians ol all Denominations*
MY dear Brethren in Chrift ! The Author of this lit-
tle Traft begs leave juft to put you in mind, that
if ever a Reformation be accompliflied, it muft be begun by
you. Superftition, Enthufiafm, and Irreligion, are fpread
far and wide } but a true Chriftian Church, as fettled by
Chrift and his Apoftles, is rarely to be found. To reftorc
the Worihip of the One true God, and the pure Religion
of our Lord and Matter Jefus Chrift, is a glorious Work,
and, if properly conduced, will entitle* the Undertakers of
it to peculiar Honours from God and Man. Therefore let
nothing difcourage you; the Times are favourable in feveral
Refpefls: Let your Light fhine before Men, and glorify
your Father who is in Heaven ; and I pray God to be your
Guide and Condu&or.


To all Christians in General;
AS the Subje£l of this little.Tra£l is a Point of the high-
eft Importance poflible,.,np lefsthan to reftore the
Worfhjp of the one True'God of the Univeffe; ft. there-
fore befpeaks your molt ferious" Confideration. ' If you pro-
ofs any Religion, can it be indifferent to you, whether it
be true, orfalfe, whether it be of God or of Men; whether
you worlhip the Father Almighty, or a God of human In-
vention ? 1 have fet before you the Words of God, and
hope you will pay a proper Regard to them ; and beg that
you will lay afide your Prejudices, and let not Authority,
Learning, or Numbers, hinder you from making a fincere
Enquiry after the Truth, a Truth of infinite and eternal
Moment to every- individual Chriftian. If you believe the
Bible to be a divine Revelation from God, let it be your
Rule of Faith and Practice ; and not negle£l it, to follow the
Inventions of Fallible , or wicked Men : For Kings have
erred. Councils have erred, and Churches have erred, but
the Word of God is infallibly true. Efteem the Bible your
greateft Treafute upon Earth, and thank God for the Li-
berty we of this nation enjoy; two of the greateft Bleflings
God can beftow, while we live in this World.
If any Perfon lhall think it worth while to write an an-
fwertothis little traft; I beg leave to put him in Mind,
that unlefs he can produce Texts of Scripture more nu-
merous and more plain in Defence of the Church Do&rine,
(and I am certain he cannot produce one plain Text) there
is no other pofliblc way of confuting it;
The Method the Learned Athanafians have taken, is to
pervert and darken the Holy Scriptures, and with Sophiftry
and Art to defend what cannot be defended; I appeal to
their Writings for the Truth of this. But what is this but
fighting againft God, and throwing Dull in our Eyes, and
finking themfelves below their Level to which they can
never rife again ?
Believe me, I have no other Motive than the Glory of
God,- the advancement of the True Chriftian Religion,
and the Good of Mankind ; and if any Exprelfion fhould be
thought Uncharitable, lay it to my Zeal for the Caufe ; For
I can (I thank God) fay from the Bottom of my Soul, that
I am in Love and Charity with all Men.
B 2 It


jv To all Christians in General,
It will be obje&ed, why fliould we hearken to fuch an il-
literate Perfon when we have a Multitude of Learned
Teachers ? I have no Inclination to detraft frpm the Cha-
racters of learned Men', many of whom have employed their
Talents for the Advancement of true Religion. But let the
Apoftle Paul’s Obfervation be duly confide red, when the
Gofpel 'was firft preached to the Jews and' Heathens,
i Cor. I, ver. 26, 27.— ver. 29. Ye fee your Calling
Brethren, how that not many wife Men after the Flefh, not
many mighty, not many noble are called. Rut God hath
chofen the foolifli Things of the World to confound the
Wife ; and God hath chofen the weak Things; of the
World, to confound the Things which are mighty, —— —
Tliat no Rleflj flioijld glory iq his Prefenpe,


A T T E M E T,
&c.
THE Queftion is, whether God the ' Father Almighty
be the One God of Chriftians, and to be worfhipped
through Jefus Chrift our Saviour and Mediator;
which Worihip the Bible commands, and Rcafon con-
firms ? ’
Or whether the three divine Father, Son, and’
Holy Ghoft, are to be worfhipped as the one fupreme God,
according to the Articles and Liturgy of the Church of
England ?
If men would,lay afide their Prejudice, ‘Cuftom and Bi-
gotry, Reafon and common Senfe would determine the
Truth of' this Queftion in a Moment! But.as this cannot
be expedled, let us try what the Word of God will do.
In order to'prove that God, the Father Almighty, is
the only true God, J will feletft a few plain Texts out of the
New Teftament.
Mat. i r,' 25 *• I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven
and Ear(h,
16, 16. Chrift the Son of the living God,
Mark 12, 29. The firft of all the Commandments is.
Hear, O Ifrael, the Lord our God is One
Lord.
12, 32. There is One God, and there is none other
- but He.
Luke 6, 12. Jefus continued all night in prayer to God.
g, 20. The Chrift of God,
John 17, 3. That they might know Thee the only true
God, ‘and (that they might know) Jefus Chrift
whom Thou haft fent.
3, 16. God fo loved the world, that be gave his only,
begotten Son.
* Thefe are the Words of Chrift himfelf; and one Word of
his, has 'mftre Weight and Force with me, than all that has been,
or can beJaid,by all the Athanafians upon the face of the Earth.
John


John 8, 42. I proceeded forth and came from God ; neither
came I of myfelf, but He fent me, ver. 54. My
Father, of whom ye fay that he is your God.
14, 1, 2. Ye believe in God, believe alfo in me. In
my Fathers houfe, bfc,
j 7, 5. And -now, O Father, glorify thou me with
thine own lelf, with the glory which I had
with thee before the world was.
~ 20, 17. • I afeend unto my Father andtoyour Father,\
and to my God , and your God-
* Mat. 6, 9- Our Father who art in heaven-——for thine
is the kingdom, .the power and the glory for
ever. Amen. ' .
Luke 4, 8. Thou (halt worjhip the Fjord thy God, arid Him
onlyi halt thou ferve.
John 15, 16. That whatever ye fliall a(k of the Father
in my name, he may give it you.
iCor.B , 4 —6. There is none other God, but One. —For
though there be that are called Gods many and
Lords; many ; to US there is but One God,
(viz.;) the Father, of whom are all things, and
we, in him ; and one Lord, Jefus Chrift, by
whom are ajl things, and we by him.
1 Cor, 3, 23. And ye are Chrift’s, and Oh rift is God’s.
5, 3. The head of every man, is Chrift ; and the
head of the woman, is the man; and the head
of Chrift, is God.
15, 24—28. When he fliall have delivered up the
kingdorii to God, even the Father——then fliall
the Son alfo himfelfbe fubje£l unto Him that
put all things under him, that God may be all
in all.■ ’ ■ ~ ■ , ■
2 Cor. 11, 31. The God and Father of our Lord Jefus
Chrift, which is blefled for ever more,
1 Tim. I, 17. The Only wife God.
2, 5. For there is One God\ and one Mediator be-,
tween God and men, the man Chrift Jefus.
James 2, 19. Thou believeft that there is One God, (or
that God is one) thou doft well,
r John 4, 15. Whofoever lhall confefs that Jefus is the
• The Lord’s Prayer only would determine the P<jint in Que-
ftion, if men were not blinded with Prejudice, arid Party-
Syjlcms,
Son


Mat', v. t5. vi. 6. xviii. ig. xsvi. 63. Mark i, 24,
V. 7. xiv. 61. xvi. ig. Luke i. 32, ii. 53. viii. 28.
xxu. 6g. John i. 18, 29. vi. 45, 46. xiii. 3. xxxi. 32.
xvi. 27, 28. Afts ii. 32, 33, 36. iii. 13, 15. iv. 24.
v. 31. vii. 55. x. 38. Rom. i. 1, 7, 16. ii. 16. v, 8;
vi. 11, 23. viii. 39. xv. 6. Rom- xv. 30. xvi. 27.
1 Cor. i. 3. 4. 2 Cor. i. 2, 3. G«/. i. 1, 3, 4. •£/&//". i. 2,
3, 17. Ephef. iii. 9. v, 20- P&7. i. 2. iv. 19, 20. Cs/. i. 3.
iii. 17. 1 The/ iii. 11. v. 9. 2 The/, i. i, 2. 5. 8. ii. 16.
iii. 3. 1 57aj. 5. 2. iii. 3. vi. 15, 16. zf». i. 1, 2.
7V/. i. 4. ii. io, II, 13. Hi. 4, 6. Philemon iii. #/£. i. 1, 2,
i. 6, 9. ix. 14, 24. x. 7, 12, xii. 22, 23, 24. xiii. 20.
1 A/, i. 3; v 10. 2/’//. 5. 17. i iv. 2, 3. iv. 9, 10.
v. 4, 9, 10, 11, 12. 2 iii. g - Jude i. 4, 20, 21.
Rev. i. 1, 2, 5, 6, 8. iii. 1.2, 14. iv. 8, 9, 10, 11. v. 9,
10. vii. 10, 17. x. 6.' xi. 16, 17. xv. 3, 4. &c.
* Mat. vii. 21. x. 40. xi. 27. xii. 50. xvi. 27. xx. 23.
xxvi. 29, 42, 53. Mark i. 11. ix. 37. Luke xxii. 39. John vi. 37,
38, 39, 40. vii. 16, 17. viii. 28, 29, 49, 50, 34* x. 25.
3 Z >
-Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in
God.
I Tim. I. ix. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, in-
vifible ; f the only wife God, be honour and glory
for eyer and ever. Amen.
Texts to prove that Chrifl is inferior to God.
Mat. ig, 17. There is none Good, but Onej that is God..
27, 46. My God, my God, why haft thou forfaken
me!
28, 18. All power is given unto me in heaven and
earth.
Mark 13, 32. But of that day and hour knoweth no man,
no not the Angels which are in Heaven, neither,
the Son, but the Father.
Luke 10, 16. He that defpifeth Me, defpifeth him that
fent me.
John 6, 57. As the living Father hath fent me, and / live
by the Father: fo, £sV.
* 10, 29. My Father which gave them,, (the flieep) is-
greater than All. ,
Thefe
•}■ Strong Proofs of Scripture thefe 1 Chriftians ought to efleem
■ ' them as Demonftration ; they are indifputable Fails I


Thefe are plain Texts, not poflible to be miftaken with-
out Prejudice, fupported by learned Sophiftry ; they are
founded upon the exprefs Authority of God, the folemn De-
termination of our bleffed Lord and Saviour, and the In-
fpiration of the Holy Spirit.
In Oppofition to thefe Texts, and to every Text in the
Bible ; in Oppofition to God, to Chrift, and to the Holy
Spirit; and alfo in Oppofition toßeafon and common Senfe,
the learned Defenders of the Church Do£lrine have ad-
vanced and maintained as follows ;
i ft. Article. There is but one living and true God.
And in Unity of this Godhead, there be Three Perfons, of
one Subftancc, Power and Eternity, j the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghoft.
Preface M trinity Sunday. O Lord, (Holy Father) Al-
mighty, everlafting God: who art one God, one Lord ;
Not One only Perfon, but Three Perfons in One Sub-
ftance. For that which we believe of the Glory of the
Father, the fame we believe of the Son and of the Holy
Ghoft, without any Difference'or Inequality.
Part of the Athanafum Creed. Whoever will be faved, be-
fore all Things it is neceflary that we hold the Catholic
Faith ; which Faith, except every one do keep whole and
undefiled, without Doubt he Ihall perilh everlaftingly.——
And the Catholic Faith is this; That we worlhip.pne God
in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity.. But the Godhead of
the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghoft, is all one j
the Glory equal, the Majefty co-eternal, (s’c. ——And yet
they are not three Gods, but one God. -And in this
Trinity none is afore, or after other; none is greater or
lefs than another.——He therefore that will be faved, muft
32, 33, 34, 3;, 36, 37. xi. 41, 42. xii. 49, 50. xiii. 3.
31, 32. xlv. 10, |6, 24. xiv. 31. xv. 9, 10, ij. xvii. 1,
2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, it, 18, a.i, 22,-23, 24, zs. XX, .21.
ABs ii. 22, 24, 34, 35. Rem. i. 3, 4* viii. 32, 34. x. 9.
xv. 6.- 1 Cor, xv, 15. 2 Cor. xiii. 4. Gal. iv. 4, 14, Ephef.
v. 2. Phil. ii. 5. 11. Col. i. 3, 13, 15, 19, 20. Heb.'x,
3, tfc. v. 5,7, 8,9, 10. vii. 25, 26. yiii. 1, .2. ix. it,
14, 24. x. 7. 12. 2, 23, 24., 1 Pet. i, 21,. ii..j. iii- 22,
2 Pet. u 17. Jude iv. Rev. ii. 26, 27. iii. .21. xix. 13, 15.


thus think of the Trinity,——This is the Catholic Faith }
which except a Man believe faithfully, he cannot be faved*.
Book of Common Prayer. [
N. B. The Ccitholic Faith it may be; but th e Chri/lian
Faith it certainly is not, if the Bible is true*
The following Paflages are taken from the Writings of
fome eminent Defenders of the Athanafian Do&rine :
“ The Word and the Spirit are God.——The Word
Perfon, when applied to the Son and Holy Ghoft, does not
fignify a diftinft intelligent Agent from the Father.
The .Scriptures do teach, that the Word, or divine Nature
of our Lord Jefus Chrift, is the very God.- The Holy
Ghoft is one and the fame Being with the felf-exiflent God , or is
the very God .. —Chrift had an human Soul before his ap-
pearance in the Flefli.
[iV. B. Chrift had no human Souli even in the Flefh j his
Divinity fupplying the Place of it.]
A Trinity of Somewhat!, which together conftitute the
whole Divine Nature or Eflence; each of which Some-
whats is really diftinft,— —and yet each of them is The
One felf-exiftent being. Dr. Bennbt. -
Of him as HE is Father ; through him as HE is Son j to
him as HE is the Holy Ghoft.-: Knight. .
Demonftrate then that there can be. but One all-perfe£l
Being. Dr. Brown.
• Note—The following Paflages plainly fliew the Incon-
fiftency of our Church Worfhip; and in what Manner Ihe con-
tradicts herfelf:
Cel. iS after Trinity, To follow Thee the Only God, through
Jefus Chrift our Lord.
Nicene Creed. I believe in one God, the Father Almighty.
I Te Deum. We praife thee, O God, -the Father everlafting;
To thee all Angels -cry, Holy—Lord God of Sabaoth.—
Apoftles Creed, I believe in God the Father Almighty.—-
jithanafian Creed. He fitteth on the right hand of the Father,
God Almighty.——
General Ahfolution. Almighty God, the Father of our Lord
Jefus Chrift.
Book of Common Prayer.
C Chrift


Chrift is the one Supreme God *, Supreme’ in the ftri£fc
Senfe; God in the famd Senfe* and in as high a Senfe, as
th 6 Father himfelf.
Why not Two Ferforis infinitely perfeft in ALL other
other Refpefls, as well as, idc '.
One God IN Three Perfons, Three Perforis, every one
Truly God, and all but one God
No one Perfon is one God, exclufively of the other'
{wo Perfons. One God f means no body knows what.
‘ To pray to Chrift to pray for Us, is near akin to the
Romifli Doflrine of praying l to Saints and Angels.
'• Dr. Waterland.
That this (worlhipping the Father as the one Supreme
God, and the Son as Mediator only) is the reviving the
Doftrine of Daemons.— -——Mayo.
When the Word God is ufed fingly and alone, it then
denotes the whole Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghoft >Dr. M‘Donnel.
To thefe few, ten Thoufand more might be added in
Defence of the Athanafian, or Church Doflrine, and all
equally falfe. : —'Come, out of her my People, that ye be
not Partakers of her Sins, and that ye receive not of her
Plagues.. . JLev. xviii. 4. • ; •
My dear Cbriftians ! I have fet before you the Word of
God, the Words of Chrift and his Apoftles, on one Side;
and the Words of our Church, of Athanafius, and his
Difciples, on the other Side; you cannot but fee that they
are direflly oppofite and contrary. Truth can be but on
one Side; therefore which Side will you chufe? If the
Lord
• Two fupreme Gods is a Contradiflion in Terms,
f Future Ages will beaftonilhed that there was a Time in
the Chrillian World, when Men of Senfe and Learning could
rot agree among themfelves, what they meant by One God ;
juft as if a long Controverfy was.continued for feveral Ages
about the true Idea of one Man, or Angel,
J It would exceed the Bounds of this fmall trafl, to fet be-
fore you the many Paflages wherein the learned Defenders of
this Doflrine have contradifled and confuted themfelves : There-
fore one Inftance muft fuffice. They are the Words of, Dr.
M'Donnel, the laft Defender of this Doflrine, I hope, <vi~.
The Father is peculiarly called God, as well upon the Account of
his being the Father of our Lordjefus Chriji, as upon his being the
SOURCE, or Fountain , from whence the Divinity of the other Two
Perfons eternally fiows.
Sincere Chriftian’s Anfwer to the Appeal, l£c. P. 132.


Lord be God, Terve him ; Jf the Church, or Athanafiu*,
ferve them. I infill that-you give your Vote according to
Evidence. I infill upon it for your, Sakes, and therefore
I charge it upon your Souls, as' you hope to obtain Mercy
from God the Father through the Merits of Jefus Chriil
our Lord, and by the San£lification of the Holy Gholl, that
you declare which Side you will adhere to.
In order to.fpur you on, I fhall fet before you fomc of
the Evils of the Athanafian Creed and Dodlrine. viz.
ift. It deftroys the Unity of God, which is the firft
Principle of all Religion, Natural and Revealed; —and
it alfo deftroys the Trinity, by making the Three Divine
Perfons one individual Being.
ad. {t makes our Lord and Saviour Jefus Chrift a mere
Man, and deftroys the Mediator and the Sandtifier.
3d. * It fets up the Worlhip of a God that has no
Exiftence; and therefore is Idolatry j a direct Breach of the
firft Commandment.
4th. It is a Breach of the two great Commandments,
the Love of God and of our Neighbour.
sth. It is unchriftian and uncharitable, in damning all
Mankind ; for who can keep it whole and undefiled that
cannot underftand it ?
6th. It is a Contradidlion to Scripture, Reafon, and
common Scnfe, and alfo to itfclf.
The Athanafian Creed is faid to be proved by fufficient
Warrant from Scripture ; but the Church has not told us
where.—lt affirms, That if you will be faved, you'mull
believe it all, or be damned eternally. The Scripture on
the contrary declares; This is the Word of Faith which we
preach, that if thou {halt confefs with thy Mouth the Lord
Jefus, and fliail believe in thy Heart that God hath raifed
him from the dead, thou lhalt b e-faved. Romans x. 9. Sec
alfo John i. 4, 15. and v. 1, &c. This Creed affirms, that
Father, Son, and Holy Ghoft are three equal Gods, and
C 2 altogether
* Aik a Church of England Man what he worihips, he will
readily anfwer, God.—Bid him read the Articles of his Church,
Athanafian Creed, &c. and then afk him again, he will anfwer —
I cannot tell ; I worlhip as the Church does, and (he mull be
right. This I know to be fadt; and is it not a Shame, and does
it not call aloud for Redrefs :


altogether make the One Supreme God. The Scripture
every where declares that the FATHER only is the. Supreme
God, the Son an inferior God, and the Holy Ghoft no God
at all.
The Holy Scriptures plainly declare in above forty places,
that God fent his Son ; but according to this Do&rine it
runs thus; Father, Son and Holy Ghoft fent the Son.:—
Our Saviour fays, my Father is greater than I ; and of my-
felf I can do nothing, &c. The Athanafians fay, they are
both equally fupreme, IBc. — that is, they give Chrift the
Lye. Again, the Defenders of this Do£lrine declare,
that our Saviour fuffered in his Body only; but this is falfe ;
and alfo greatly degrades and undervalues the Sufferings and
Propitiation of our Blefled Saviour: For his Divinity being
united to his Body, (like as our. Souls are joined to our Bo-
dies) mull fuffer with it. St. Peter tells us, that Chrift has
fuffered for us in the Flejh.<—Put to death in the Flejh. i Peter
iv. i.—ili, iB. And St. John, Becaufethau wajl fain , and
hafl redeemed us to God by thy Blood- —Rev. v. 9.
This Athanafian Herefy, this abominable Relick of Po-
pery, was broached by Athanafius, about fourteen Hun-
dred Years ago, at the Time when? the Church began to
turn Idolatrous in worfhipping Saints, &c. and the Creed
built upon it, is fluffed with Damnation , Blafphemy, Contra-
diSiion, and Abfurdity. It certainly has a natural Ten-
dency to deftroy the true Spirit of Cbriftianity, for People
to meet together in Church, and in .a folemn Manner pro-
nounce a Sentence of Damnation upon one another for fpe-
culative opinions without an exprefs Warrant from the Word'
of God. It is really a lhamefu! Thing that the Governors
of this Proteftant Church have not long ago banifhed this
Anti-Chriftian Creed from the public Service: But as they
have negle&ed their Chriftian Duty in this Refpeft, it is to
be hoped that the difinterefted Laitv will treat fuch a mon -
ftrous Idol with that contempt and indignation it juftly de-
ferves; by which means it will, D a gon dike, tumble before
the Word of God.
I think that the Father, Son, and Holy-Ghoft, have al-
ways been allowed to be three Perfons; Dr. Bennet calls
them a Trinity of Some%vhats, by which it is plain that he
knew neither Father, Son, nor Holy-Ghoft. Now is it
not very hard, that any Man fliould be eternally damned for
affirming that two and’one make three? -—-If Athana-
fms, or his perpetual Defender, Dr. Waterland, had took.it
into their Heads that two and two made five, and called it
a Myftery, with a “ Damn you all eternally, if you do not
” believe


“ believe it,” it had been Orthodoxy; and who could pre-
fume to deny a Do&rine, fupported by their Authority ? It
is plain both are equally abfurd; from whence it evidently
appears, that learned Men are capable of maintaining the
grolfeft Contradictions, under the Ipecious Pretence of a
facred Myftery.
• Confider, would you give up Chrift, your Lord and
Mafter, your Saviour, Mediator, &c. a Perfon of fuch high
Dignity, next to God Almighty ; would you, I fay, give up
Chrift for Athanafius, who was not only a fallible, but a
turbulent and feditious Mortal.—Was Athanafius crucified,
for you ? or were you baptized into the" Name of Athana-
fius that you follow his DoCtrine, and defpifeand rejeCl that
of Chrift ? '•
The Learned have defended this Church Doflrine of
three Perfons and one God, with all their Art and Sophiftry
for above fourteen hundred Years, in oppofition to the Bible
from one End to the other, without one Text to fupport
it. This is the Myftery of Iniquity, it is Anti-Chrift with
ten thoufand Witnefiei. You have the Bible, and it is al-
moft impoffible for-your Teachers to deceive you, if you
did not deceive yourfelves: But when Men are difpofed to
deceive themfelves, there is no Advice upon Earth that can
hinder them ; it is as eafy as to fleep, when we are inclined
to it. —r— In wordly Affairs, I am fure you would not
fuffer yourfelves to be fo impofed upon.
' I halve confidered this Church DoCfrine for above twenty
Years, as wellas lam able; T have read the moft diftin-
guiftied Defenders of it: Believe me, they have not one
Text of Scripture; not an Argument but has been over-
thrown; not an ObjeClion but has been anfwered over and
over again. Their Caufe js gone for ever.
The Divine Trinity according to ChriJ) .
Mat. 12, 28. 7c aft out Devils by the Spirit of God.^
28. 18, 19. All Power is given unto me in Heaven and
Earth. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father *, and
of the Son, and of the Holy-Ghoji . ,
John
* In thetiame of the Father; as Creator and Lord .of all things:
In the name-of the Son as Redeemer and Mediator : And in the
name of the Holy-Ghoft as the SanClifier of all hearts. :


John 14. r 6, 17. And / will pray the Father , and he Hi all
give you the Spirit of Truth.
Dofirine of the Trinity according to St. Paul, f
f
I : Cor. 12. 4,5, 6. There are diverfitics of Gifts but
the fame Spirit And there are dif-
ferences of Adminiftrations, but the fame Lord,
And there are diverfitics of Operations, but it is
the fame God , which worketh all in all.
Ephef. 1. 17. That the God of our Lord Jefus Chrijl , the
Father of. Glory, may give unto you the Spirit
of Wifdom and Revelation.
4. 4,5, 6, There is one. Spirit, one Lord, one
God, and Father of all, who is above All.
According to St. John,
1 John 4. 2, 3. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: every
Spirit, that confefleth that Jefus Chrijl is come
in the Fleftj, is of God.
4. 13, 14. Becaufe he hath given us of his Spirit :
and we have feen and do teftify, that the Father
■ fent the Son to be the Saviour of the World. .
'S’ 5> 6. He that believeth that Jefus is the Son of
God: And it is the Spirit % that beareth Wit-
nefs, becaufe the Spirit is truth.
N. B. Let the Church fpeak her Doflrinc in plain Words
of Scripture, if flie can.
Thus I have plainly fet before you the Scripture Doftrine
of the ever-bleffed Trinity, as exprefsly delivered by Chrift
and
4 Hear the fame St. Paul, Gal. i. 8, 9. But though we, or
an Angel from Heaven, preach any other golpel unto you, than
that which we have preached unto you, let him be accurfed, &c.
Note, Thefe Texts with thofe above, are the whole Scripture
Do&i ine of the Trinity.
. .% Mat. iii. 16, 17. Luke 1. 3;. , John xv. 26. A3s ii. 23.
vii. SS’ *• 3 8 - Rom ’ '• '< 3i 4 fS> 6 -„ 9» xj-
xv. 15, 16. " xvlii. 19, 30. 1 Cor. vi. 11. xii. 3. 2 Cor. i.
21, 22. iii. 3. xiii. 14. Gal. iv. 6. Ephef. ii. 18. xxi. 22.
2 The/, ii. 13,14. 2 Tim. i. 7, 8. Tit. iii. 4,5, 6. Heb.
ii. 3, 4. ix. H* 1 Rel ’ i* 2 - lit- 18. iv, 14. Jude xx. 21
Rev. 5. 4. S* ,9»


and his Apoftles. You may eafily compare.it .with the Athar
nafian fcheme, cftablifhed by Church Authority. Upon
the Companion, you readily perceive a clear, rational, and
Confident Senfe on one Side, and grofs Abfurdities.and Con-
tradictions on the other., It muft be left to your determina-
tion, whether you will adhere to Scripture and Reafon; or
whether you will fuffer yourfelves to be impofed upon by
Sounds without Meaning, by DoClrines firll broached by
fallible and contentious Mortals, and IHII fupported by hu-
man Authority ?
If we attentively confider the prophetic Parts of the New
Teflament, we Ihall find that an Apoftacy, or falling-off
from the Faith once delivered to the Saints, was foretold by
the facred Writers; and therefore the Corruptions intro-
duced into the Chriftian Church, are fo far from being an
Argument againft the'Truth of Chriftianity, that they
flrongly confirm it. See i Tm. 4. 1. —2. Thef. 2. 9, 10,
u, 12. 2 Pet. 2. 1. and at large in the Book of Re-
velation.
Becaufe I would not hide any Thing from you, I will
fet before you the Texts that feem to differ from the Doc-
trine I contend for, viz. 1 John 5. 7. For there are Three that
hear record *in Heaven; the Father, the TFord, and the Holy -
Ghojl: andthefe Three are One,. Not one and the fame Per-
fon or Being; but one and the fame Teftimony, Ob-
ferve firft. That this Text is not to.be found in any Greek
Copy before the Art of Printing: 2ly, The learned Go-
vernors of our Church have been called, upon to prove it to
he St. John’s, but have not been able. 3dly, Some learned
Perfons, who profeffed the Belief of the Athanafian Doc-
trine, have been obliged by the Force of Evidence to give
it up as fpurious, viz. Mr. La Croze of Berlin, Dr. Wall,
Father Simon, and Dr. Randolph. And laftly, the Senfe
of St John is better without it: If the Words And—in
Earth, in the next Verfe be left out, for they are not found
‘in the Greek. ' _ ■
Phil. 2. 6. TFho being in the form of God, thought it not Rob-
bery to be Equal f with God. If thefe Words were true,
they
* Record, orWitncfs in Heaven can be of no Ufe to us upon
Earth. And the making the Three Witneffes One Witneft,
knocks the whole on the Head.
■f It is very Surprizing the l earned fhould infif} upon the pre-
fenr Reading, becaufe.two fupreme Gods is impoffible'; it is a
contradiction.


they Would prove that there are two equal Gods. -But
the Words fliould be rendered thus: Who being in the forni
of God, yet did not covet to be honoured as a God %. *
Read the nth Verfe of this Chapter, and then tell me.
Can the Supreme God, or a God equal to him, be raifed to
higher Dignity ? ,
23. That all men fliould honour the Son, even as they
honour the Father. Not with equal Honour, Chrift himfelf
honouring the Father, asgreater than himfelf. • Buttheßea-
fon is given in the fame Verfe : He that honoureth not the
Son, honoureth not the Father which hath font him.
John 10. 30. I and my Father are One, Not one Perfon
or Being j but one in confent, in Will, and Agreement, as
God and Chrift and his Apoftles were one. See John Chap.
17. 11, 21, 22. —I—Hear 1 —Hear what the fame St. John fays:
Who is a Liar, but he that denieth that Jefus is the Chrift?
he is Anti-Chrift, that denieth the Father and the Son.
John 2, 22.
I know but of one Text in the Old Teftament, that is
like to miflead you, and that is, Ifaiah 9. 6.' The mighty God. ,
the everlajiing Father. It fhould have been tranflated,
A mighty God, the Father of the Age to come, that is,
the Gofpel Age. It is but reading the Beginning of the
Verfe, and we find the Supremacy of the Father and Infe-
riority of the Son exprefled in the ftrongeft Terms; Unto us
a Child is born, unto us a Son is given. Remarkable it is,
that Chrift’s coming into the World is fo conftantly repre-
fented in the Old and New Teftament by the Word given ,
in order to fet forth the Supreme Authority of Almighty God
who gave or fent his Son.
I Challenge all the Athanafians upon the Face of the
Earth, learned and unlearned, to produce one plain Text of
Scripture to prove that the Father, Son, and Holy-Ghoft
are the one God, or to be worfhiped as the one God of
Chriftians. But the learned § defenders of this Do&rine do
not pretend to fay it is found in the Bible; only that fuch
and fuch Premifes drawn from Titles and Attributes, infer
the Doftrine they contend for, viz. three Perfons being one.
God, which is fairly owned to be confequential only. But
a Dotftrine of fuch an important Nature cannot pollibly be
judged
J Sherlock, late Bilhop of London, takes the Senfe to be—-
•was nst fond, or tenacious of , did not greedily retain, but emptied him-
felf. ■ . His Lordfhip was an Athanafian.
$ Smalridge, Waterland, &c.


( *7 )
judged by any unprejudiced Chriftians to depend Upon’con-
fequential Dedudlions, which in nrimberlefs Cafes are very'
fallacious, but mUft have been delivered in the plainest
Terms, and frequently inculcated, as we find it actually
done by Chrift arid his Apoftles, with refpeft to the funda-
mental Conditions of the Gofpfil Covenant. They are in-
deed fo clearly and frequently fet forth, that it is almoft im-
poflible for fincere Perfons to make a dangerous Mi flake.'
———They being determined fo defend this abfurd Doc-
trine at any fate, are driven to maintain* that the Word*
God, taken abfolutely, figriifies Father, Son, and Holy*
Ghoft and that God when he is called the Father, or our
Father, ftridlly means Father, Son, and Holy-Ghoft; fo
that, when we ufe the Lord’s Prayer, We muft, according
to this Senfe, interpret oUr Father, as figriifying Father*
Son, and Hply-Ghoft. Nothing can be morefalfe, or more
grofs Peryerfion of 'Scripture than this Interpretation, it
being evident even to Demoriftratiori, that the Word, God*
in Scripture always denotes One Perfon, and when ab-
folutely taken, it always fignifies the Father; and to in*
ferpret the Father, of our Father, as Father, Son, and
Holy Ghoft, only proves the terrible Diftrefs of learned
Men to fupport their baffled Caufe, ’ in Oppofition’ to the!
cleareft Didlatfes of Reafon and common Senfe,' and to
the plaineft Declarations of the Word of God. It is
high time that the unlearned Chriftians fhould be called
upon to give their Judgment in this important Caufe, that
the Pride of learned Sophiftfy may be confounded by the
bright Evidence of Scripture ; which Perfons unacquainted
With the fubtle inventions of learned Men, will readily re*
ceive, when it is fairly laid before them in its original Purity*
and native Simplicity. •
Chfiftiaris juftly blame the Jews for denying Jcfiis to be,
the Chrift, or Mefliah: But that part of the ChriftianWorld
which feems determined to fupport the Athanafian Doc-
trine and Worlhip, little confider that this has proved one
great impediment to the converfion of the Jews; it being
jnot confident with their belief of the Old Teftament to
acknowledge two Perfons as equally fupreme with the one
God, fo powerfully and plainly inculcated 1 by Mofes and the
Prophets. If the New Teftament contained any fuch Doc-
trine, it would be an unanfwerable Argument that it never
came from that God, who has in the moft folemn manner
revealed himfelf not only to be one Being, but one Perfon;
The firft and great Commandment, Thou (halt have no
D other


other Gods but Me , is abfolutely incapable of any othcf
Senfe. It is really Matter of ferious Lamentation, that
Chriftianity fhould fufFer under the Imputation of teaching
a t?o£lrirte which has no Foundation in the NewTefta-
ment, and which has done infinite Mifchief, by putting an
effeftual Stop to the Convcrfion of the Jewifh People to the
Chriftian Faith.
. Again, the Church of England very juftly blames the
Church of Rome, for her monftrous Dottrines and Super-
ftitions 5 and yet fhe herfelf holds feme almoft as bad. Ta
mention a few; The Athanafian Creed very much refem-
bles the violent Spirit of Antichrift and Popery, in order to
fupport grofs Nonfenfe and palpable Contradidbons. Again,
in the Vifitation of the lick in our Common Prayer Book,
the Prieft fays, I abfolve thee from all thy Sins. Was there
ever any thing more Popifli ? Again ; Article the ninth,
Every Perfox born into this World deferveth Cod’s Wrath and
Damnation. If any thing in this World is innocent, it is the
Child that is juft born; lam furc that our blefled Saviour
thought foC Again Works done before the Grace of Cbrt/l, &c.
We doubt not but they have the Nature of fm: that is, the
good Works of Papans are undoubtedly ftnful. What
Virtue can poflibly be hateful to God ? Again, Article
if * - r That God has predeftinated the Happinefs of a par-
ticular Number of Perfons, called the Eledl, before the
foundation of the World* This Article contains a Do&rine,
if purfued through all the Confequences naturally arifing
from it r deftrwStive of God’s righteous Government of the
Moral World, and. renders » Judgment to come abfolutely
unjuft.——Let us pray to God to remove thefe Humbling
left they turn into MiH-ftones.
Jeremiah v. 31- The Prophets prophefy ft 1 fly, and the
Pncfts bear rule by .their Means, and the People love to have
it fo; and what wm ye do in the end thereof I
The Beginning of a Reformation was a glorious Thing;.
but in the Name of God’, why was it not compleated F
What matters it in point of Truth to have reje&ed the un-
intelligible Dofirines of Rome, if Men frill continue fond of
unintelligible Notions ? What matters it in point of Virtue
and real Geodnefs, to have departed from the fuperjiitious
Profiteer of Rome, if Men will ftill be fond of fuperjiitious:
Profiteer ? What matters it in point of Religion, to deleft
the.
. * Articles of Religion thefe may be; bat of the Cbrijitu”.
Religion they cannot be.


the Violences and Perjecutions of Rome, if Men will dill con-
tinue Lovers of Violence and Contention ?
But may we nut aik, why is not the Reformation com-
pleated ? Do we want Materials ? No : Do we want Li-
berty ? No: Do we ’want the Royal Confent ? I will
venture to fay, no: For we have a religious King, whofe
family were all Lovers of Liberty; and certain it is, that,
the late King and Queen worftiipped the Father Almighty,
according to Scripture.——When an A 6l of Parliament is
made, and it happens that there is a Claufe defedlive, it is fet
right the next feflxon; But in a Matter of eternal moment,
we go on in Error and Darknefs, Darknefs that, may be felt
yet having the Light of the Gofpel (hining in our Eyes.
As the Unity of God is a Point of the utmod Importance,
I mud beg you to confider a few more Texts of Holy Scrip-
ture,
lam He, and there is no God with Me. I kill and I
make alive.——Who is a confirming Fire, even a jealous
God.——For what God is there in Heaven or in Earth,
that can do according to thy Works, and according to thy
Might ? Hear, O Ifrael, the Lord our God, is One
Lord.-- -—.I, event, am He; and there is no God with
pie. —Thou (halt have no other Gods before me. .
The IVords of Mo fee.
Thou art the Lord God, even Thou only. 2 Kings xix. 19,
Thou, even Thou, art Lord alone. Nehmu ix. 6.—Thou
art Great,—Thou art God alone.—O Lord God of Hods,
who is a ftrong God like unto thee. —Who is a great God,
and a King above all Gods. David.—- 1 am the Lord, the Fird
and the Lad, I am HE. —To whom will you liken Me, and
make Me equal, and compare Me.— l am God, and there is
none eye. Ifa. The only True and Living God, the everlading
King, zt whofe Wratn the Earth doth tremble, He. Jeremiah .
Jefus anfwered, if 1 honour myfelf, my Honour is nothing:
it is my Father that honoureth me, of whom ye fay that
HE is your God. There is one Spirit, one Lord,
one God and Father of all, who is above ALL.——What-
foever ye do in Word or Deed, do all in the Name
of the Lord Jefus, giving Thanks to God the Father
by him.-- —-The Father of our Lord Jefus Chrid, of
whom the whole Family in Heaven and in Earth is named.
To God only wife, be Glory through Jefus Chrid.—The
four and twenty Elders fall down before him that fat upon
the Throne, and wodhip him that liveth for ever and ever,
faying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and
Honour, and Power j for thou had created all Things, and
for thy pleafure they are and were created,—Blcffing, Ho-
D 2 nour.


nour, Glory, and Power, be unto him that fitteth upon the,
Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. Amen. :
You fee, I can exprefs the Dodlrine I would have you
believe in plain Word? of Holy Scripture ; in the Word?'
<jf Mofes and the Prophets, in the Word? of Chrift and his
Apoftles: But I defy all the learned Supporters of the
Church to bring any Scripture at aii for theirs,
They have a better Support, and I am willing they Ihould
have it; for I envy them not, They have Church Power,
and Authority, Creeds, and Councils, and Convocations,
Popery, Bigotry, and Superflition: And deeply concerned
I am that you hayefo few Opportunities of being inftrufted
in the grand and fundamental Point of all Religion, the Uni-
ty of God, and the right Worlhip we are commanded to
pay him by the exprefs Determinations of Chrift and his A-
poftles. The Misfortune is, you have been always too apt
to take every thing for granted that is eftabliflied by public
Authority, and even to be zealous for human Inventions,
when enforced by learned Men. But it is your Right and
Duty to rejeft the greateft Authority upon Earth, when it
Hands ■in Competition with the Will of the Almighty, as
revealed in his holy Word.--—-He that hath Ears to hear,
let him hear!
• The Doctrine of the divine Trinity , as /el forth in Holy
Scripture. ■ —Of the One God and Father of all who is above
all.
* There is One only living and true God : Exiftihg of
himfelf, by the Neceflity of his own Nature: abfol utely In-
dependent
• The Con Iteration of his Eternity arid Infinity, -his knowledge
and his ‘ Wtfdom , neceflarijy commands our higheft Admiration,
The Senfe of his Omniprefence forces a perpetual awful Regard to-
wards him. His Supreme Authority,■ as being the Creator*’Pre-
fer-ver, and abfolute Governor of all Things, obliges us to pay him
all pottibleffononr and Veneration, Adoration and WorJhip\ and his
Unity requires that it be paid to Him alone. His Power and Juf-
tice, demand our Fear. His; Mercy ■ and Placahlenefs, encourage
Our Hope. -.. His Qoodne/s neceflarily excites our Love. His Vera-
city and wchangeahlenefs fecure.our Truft ip him. The Senfe of
our having received our Being and all our Powers from him, makes
it infinitely reafonable that we.lho’uld employ our whole f tings and
all our faculties ip hit Service. The Cqnfcigafnefs. of our conti-
nual


dependent; Eternal, Omniprefent, Unchangeable, Incor-
ruptible ; without Body, Parts, or Paffions ; of infinite
Power, Knowledge, and Wifdptn ; of . perfect Liberty and
Freedom of Will; of infinite Goodnefs, Juftice, r and Truth ;
The God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great'God,
Mighty, and Terrible; that fruftrateththetokens of Lyars,
ana maketh Diviners mad : The high and lofty One, inha-
biting Eternity, whofe Name is Holy: Who is the King
Eternal, immortal, invifiblc, the only wife God ; whole
glorious Name is exalted above all Blefling and Praife:' The
Maker and Lord of all Things, himfelf derived from none,
made of none, begotten of none, proceeding from ! none‘:
By whom all Creatures material and immaterial, * vifible and
invifible, animate’and inanimate, rational and irrational,■
mortal and immortal, in Heaven and in'Earth were made;
by whom the Land and Waters; the Air and Sun and Stars,
the Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens, and all Things that
are therein ; Plants, and Beafts, and Men ; Angels and
Arch-Angels; were created out of nothing: From whom the
Spirit of Truth, the Comforter and Sanftifief of all holy
Men, proceedeth or is fent forth : ,Of whom laftly the Son
himfelf, the Saviour and Redeemer of the World, in an in-
effable manner, before all Ages was begotten. ■>'This is the
fupreme Father and Lord of all, who dwelleth in Light
inacceflable; whofe Majefty ho Thought can comprehend ;
whofe Glory no Eye can behold ; whofe Power no ftfength
can refill; from whofe Prefence no fwiftnefs can flee; whofe
Knowledge ho Secrecy can conceal itfelf from; whofe Jtifj
tice no Art can evade; whofe Goodnefs ho creature but
partakes of. This is the God of the Univerfe, whom' even
the Heathen World has always acknowledged. * This is the
God of Abraham, Ifaae , and Jacob ; the God who brought
the Children of Ifrael out of the Land 'of Egypt \ theGodahd
Father
nual Dependences pon him, both for ourPrefefvation and the
Supply of every thing we want, obliges us to conftant Prayer, &c,
Chriilians have moll ftiamefully departed from the Worlhip of
this infinite Being, the Supreme God and Father bf the'Uniyerfe,
to worlhip they know not what; which ■ is 'certainly Idolatry;
and the Defenders of Church Worlhip have employed all their
Art and Learning to eclipfe the Glory of the One God and Fa-
ther of All, by putting too Perfons, confefledly Subordinate,’
upon an Equality with him in folemn Adis of- Adoration. ■ —. —.
This muft end in Shame and Confulion of Face,—-For what-
foever a Man foweth, that lhall he alfo reap.


Father of our Lord Jefus Chrift; of whom, and through
whom, and to whom are all things ; to whom be Glory and
Dominion for ever.
To this God and Father of all, is to be dircdlcd that abfo-
Jute and fupreme Worlhip, by which he is acknowledged to
be alone, the Maker and Judge of all ; by whofe incompre-
benfible Power the World was created ; by whofe unerring
Providence the Univerfe is governed ; by whofe fupreme Au-
thority our Lord was fentforth to redeem us; by whofe
good Pleafure the holy Spirit is given to fan&ify us; to whofe
Glory every tongue now confeffcs that Jefus is the Lord: —•
To him we are to. pray for the Remiffion of our Sins; and
that our Repentance may be accepted, through the power-
ful InterceiSon of Chrift our great High-Prieft; and that
our Hearts may be renewed by the Infpiration of his Holy
Spirit: And to Him we are to give continual Thanks for
his Original and undeferved Goodnefs in fending bis Son at
firft to be the Saviour of the World, and to be unto us X
Propitiation through Faith in his Blood ; and ; for the canti-
nuation of that Goodnefs, in affording us the perpetual Af-
fiftance of the Holy-Ghoft. Now to the King Eternal, im-
mortal, • Invifible, the only Wife God, be Glory through
Jefus Chrift, for ever.. Amen. ,
Of the Son, ,
. With the Firft and Supreme Caufe or Father of all Things,
there has exifted from the Beginning, a Second divine Per-
fon, who is his Word or Son. This Divine Perfon, who. after
and by bis Incarnation became our Lord and Saviour Jefus
Chrift, had a Being in the Bofom of his Father, and was
Partaker of his Father’s Glory. In the Beginning was the Word',
and the Word was with God, t. e. was with the Father; and,
the Word was God, that is, was Partaker of his Father’s
Glory, of his Divine Power and Authority in Creating and
Governing tho World. • Thofame Scriptures declare, that
he, by the Appointment of the Father, is our Saviour, Me-
diator, Interceffof and Judge; that having been in the Form
of God, he emptied himfelf sf that Glory, and willingly took
Upon him the Form of a Servant; and died to make our Re-
pentance available; and now fits at the right Hand of God,
to intercecd for us; and governs the whole Church, ac-
cording to the Will of bis Father; and fearches and tries
the Hearts of Men at prefent, and will finally judge them
according to their Works.———That we offer-up all ou»
Prayers in his Name; (whatfoever, fays be, Jt Jball afk thi
Father


Patter in my name, he will give it you, John xv. 16.) that
we rely upon his Merits, depend upon his InterceiHon, obey;
him as pur Lord, love him as our Saviour, fear him as our
Judge.—Worthy is the Lamb that was flain, - to' receive’
Power, and Riches, and Wifdom,and Strength, and Honour,;
and Glory, and BlefHng: and every Creature—heard I fay-
ing, Blelnng, and Honour, and Glory, and Power be unto'
him that fitteth on the Throne, and to the Lamb for evef
and even Unto him that loved us, and waflied us front
our fins in his own blood, and has made us Kings and
Priefts unto God and his Father, to him be Glory and Domi-
nion for evermore.
Of the Holy Spirit.
Cdnccirnirig the Holy Ghoft the Scripture declares, that
he is a divine Perfon, proceeding, or being fent forth from’
the Father ; and in other Places he is called the Spirit of the
Son, and faid to be fent forth from him.' Into the Manner
of his Derivation, we ought not to • prefume to enquire,
but to be content with what the Scripture reveals to us, of
his being in a Angular Manner, in a Manner which we
Cannot prefume to undcrftand or explain, the Spirit of God;
that we acknowledge him to be the divine Infpirer of the
Prophets, both of the Old and New Teftament; and the
immediate Worker of all thofe figns and Wonders in Proof
of the Chriftian Difpenfation ; that he is alfo the Sanflifier
Of all Hearts, and the immediate Diftributer of all the Gifts
of God, for the Edification of his Church; that therefore
ivc receive and believe his Teftimonjv as delivered in the
infpired Writings; obey his good Motions; be felicitous
io obtain his Gifts and Graces; and infinitely careful not
to grieve and quench and drive him from us, left we be
found to do deipite unto the Spirit of Grace, which is in
Scripture reprefented as a more unpardonable Fault thaii
offending againft the Perfon of our Saviour himfelf; " oi ; ;
Clark's Sermon, V.6th.
N. B. The Text the Learned bring to prove the Holy Spirit
God, is AftsV. 3, 4. —lf you compare ;it with Verfe ptij of
(Chap, zt, a Spirit or an Angel may be proved God : The Ar-
gument is exaftly alike. But whether the Holy Ghoft be a God
or not, it no Way alter* the Worfhip I contend for which is
the Point in queftion..
Readers,


Readers ! I hope by this time you have Impartially cort-*
fidered the Point in' queftion; and if you have found the
Dodtrine I,have endeavoured to fupport, to be but true, -
embrace.it; and let the World fee. that you worlhip the
only true God,- and glorify your Father who is in Heaven*
But if you will ftill continue to worlhip Three Perfons and
one God, 1 mult alk you this one plain Queftion : What
will you do for a Mediator and a Sanliifier ? for they can be
no Part of the Deity ; as is very evident to your common
Senfe. '
.My dear Chriftians! Faith without Works is dead. *
Not every one that faith unto me. Lord, Lord, flxalj enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven : but he that doth the tVill of
my Father , who is in Heaven.—‘—Give me Leave to advife
you to attend the public Worlhip of Almighty God, ac-
cording to our Lord's direction. Whatfoever ye lhall alk
the Father in my Name, he may give it you.—“—For ob-
ftinate difobedicnce againft the True God, is like, ferving a
falfe one ; and obeying God partially, or ferving him only
after our own way, or humour, is the fame thing as not
ferving him at all. . . , . j
Therefore be fure to omit the Athanafian Creed ; have
nothing to do with that damning Herefy. Omit , alfo two;
expreffions in the Nicine Creed, viz. Being of one Suhjlanct
with the Father ;, ami,-— IVho with the Father and the Son toge-
theris worshippedand glorified: but, I. rather think, you had
better omit the whole Creed ; for one good Creed is fuffi-
cient, and I think the Apoftles Creed a very good one ; if
the Words, He defended into Hell , were left out, it would
be better. •—You Ihould alfo omit the third and fourth
Petitions of the Litany ;■ the firft is addrefled to the Father
Almighty, and the fccond to bur Saviour as Mediator;
both very right: But the third, to the Holy Ghoft, is
; wrong, becaufe the Holy Ghoft is no where in Scripture
called cither God or Lord, nor fo much as one Prayer.is put
up to him. The fourth is put up to the Three Perfons
and one God, like the Athanafian Creed ; and therefore
falfe t there is no fuchi Being as a Trinity of Gods in one.
You Ihould alfo'be careful to omit the Doxology* j be-
caufc
r* N. B. The- prefent (Church) Doxology-is. that iof Pope
Damajus, about 400, Years after Chriff. If you. have greater
Regard fir Chrift than the Pope, it would be better to ,ufe a
Scripture Doxology.—-See Rev. v. 13. vii. 10. Rom. xvi. 25.
1 Pet. iv. 11. Jude xxiv. 23. 1 Tim. i. 17. Phil. iv. zo.


cattfe Ih tlie beginning It was not lb, and therefore falfe.—•
All the prayers and colleds, which end thus, Who liveth and
reigneth with thee and the Holy-Ghoji ever one God, World with-
out End, be furtf you never repeat, nor fay Amen to it, be-
caufe that is giving your confent (0 a lye.
You would do right to frequent the Lord’s Supper; the
Feaft of Love and Charity, and the very badge of a Chris-
tian: The generality of Chriftiarts lhamefully negledl it*
♦Chrift ftill calls us to become his difciples; and that we
Acknowledge him for our Lord and Mailer. Why will we
deprive ourfelves Of the greateft Benefits ? And let not the '
Notion of unworthy Receiving fright you; for not receiving
at all is as great a Crime as unworthy Receiving. Do you
think yourfelves unfit to receive the Lord’s Supper here on
Earth and can you think yourfelves worthy to partake of the
Supper of the Lamb in Heaven ?—I think you cannot. With
regard to receiving, I will give you one plain Rule,- where r
by you may judge yourfelves. If after receiving you be-
come better Chriftiansj you maiy be allured that you re-
ceived worthily.
■ Love God above all Things, more then the Mifer loves his
Gold, and endeavour to live In Univerfal Obedience to all his
Commandments: And acknowledge him to be what he IS,
for that is the greateft Offering you can make him. Do all the
Good you can, and pra&ice the hew Commandment our
bleffed Saviour has left us, for without love we cannot be
Chriftians f. It behoves thofe who repeat and defend the
Athanafian Creed, to confider fcrioufly what they are doing*
the Language of it is £OU Ell etetttalty-
But you cannot be Chriftians, if your really mean what you
fay; and if you do not, why do you fay it ?■' —Hear the
Words of our bleffed Lord, who was all Meeknefs and
Love: Come unto me and I will refreih you, Learn of
tne, for lam meek' and lowly in Heart.-—-He that keepeth
my Commandments, he it is that loveth me, and I and my
Father will love him, and will come unto him and make our
abode with him. ■ * Bleffed ate the Meek, blelled are the
Merciful, bleffed are they which are persecuted, (not they
Which perfecute) Love one another, as I have loved you:
Love even your Enemies, &c. This Was his conftant Speech
and Dodlrine.——-—He has commanded us to call no Man
our Father upon Earth; for one is your Father which is in
Heaven: Neither be ye called Matters; for one is your
E Mailer,
* Be fare to remember him as being what he IS, that is,
Meffiah the Chrift,
f He that loves not hit Brother, knows not God, for God
is Love.


Matter, evenChrift.— But we call our Rulers, Father?,
and Athanattus our Matter; denying the God that made us,
and the Lord that bought us. How true are our Lord’s.,
Words even at this Day.: Ye know neither me, nor my Fa-
ther! • .
•If you meet with a difficult Text,of Scripture, have no-
thing to do with it; there are plain ones enough to teach
you your Duty, and to guide you to Life Eternal.—-
The picking out fcraps of Scripture to found a Do&rine-
upon, rs a very dangerous Error: And the Athanafian Doc-
trine is a Demonftration of the Truth of this Remark; for
its Defenders pick-out a few Texts, and thofe they are de-
termined Avail overthrow Thoufands of plain ones that are
dire&ly again!! them.' But this is throwing Duft in our
Eyes that we may not fee the Truth. But, as I faid before,
they could not deceive us, if we did not deceive ourfelves;
God has put.it in our Power to confute them, he has given
us the Bible, by which we may be wifer than out Teachers.
Pay a due Regard to your Patters, and follow them, as
far as they follow Chrift, and no further.-— ; Avoid fol-
lowing thofe, wliofe principal Tenets are: That Man is by
Nature half. Devil, half Beaji: and that Reafon is of the'
Devil, Sic. They have made God a Liar; for he has
faid that all he made was very Good; that is, perfect in its
kind. Their Glory is'toget the Fame of mending us : ..
There is one and one only certain Mark or Sign of having'
the Spirit of God, and that is, being a good Chriftian.
Thou flialt not follow a Multitude to do Evil, neither be
partaker of other Mens fins, keep thyfelf pur?.
God Almighty has, put it in our Power to be as happy as
we will; without Limit and without End; not only happy
ten thoufand Years hence, but happy Eternally. Let us,
therefore, go on. to perfection ; God has given us all the
Affiftance we can defire : He has given his Son to fave us,
and his Holy Spirit to direCi and guide us; we havq it in our
Power to grow better, if we will; and if we will not, he
will certainly punifl* us: If this will not roufe us to the
Chriftian Life, what will?— God Almighty has.done
his Part;. and he will not fave us, whether we will, or no.
The Ignorance of great Numbers of People in matters of
•Religion, is very furpriving. As the Condition of many
i« wretched and miferable in the prefent Life, this among
other powerful Conilderations Ihould forcibly oblige them to
fecure a Portion in the Kingdom of Heaven, which will
make them ample Amends for all the Hardfhips of this mor-
tal Life. Though they endure Poverty and Diftrefs here-,,
yet it is in their Power to be rich in Faith, and Heirs of a
glorious Inheritance in' the World to come. But it is a la-
mentable Cafe for them to be poor and miferable in this pre-
fent


lent Life, , and' to have no well-grounded Hopes of HappLnef?
hereafter; which,will be their wretched State, {f they refufe
inftruflion, defpife advice, and hate to be reformed; if they
live, as if there was no God, no Heaven, no Hell, no Re-
furre£lion, no Judgment to come. -—Amazing! an
eternal Crown offered, in the Place of Poverty arid Diftrefs;.
Pleafures eternal,, and Happinefs without end, yet defpifed,
neglected, and contemned! With refpedt to that. Part of
the Poor, who are good and well-dilpoled Chriftians, of
whom I hope there is a conftderable Number, if thefc would
by gentle Means, endeavour, by Reading and Advice, to
draw their thoughtlefs Neighbours to a Love of Virtue and
Religion; it would be a glorious Work*. As to Pallors,
Matters, and Parents, I would advife them in the Words
of the Prophet, Ezek. 33. 8- “ When 1 fay unto the Wick-
“ cd, O wicked Man, thou {halt furely die; if thou doeft
**■ not fpeak to warn’the Wicked from his ways, that wick-
“ ed Man fhalldic in his Iniquity, but his Blood will I re-
“ quire at thine Hand.”
With regard to the Decrees of God, which the Learned
have made much noife about; this only is certain: That no
good Man will be unrewarded 5 and no wicked Man un-
punilhed.
Chriftian Readers! I have put a few Hints together for
your Ufe and Benefit:. I have been as brief as I could, that
it may come cheap to you: if you fee Truth in what 1 have
wrote, and defire further Information, 1 would advife you
to read Dr. Clark’s Scripture Do&rine of the Trinity, a
Book founded upon twelve hundred and fifty Texts of the
New Teftament i a Book that has never been anfwered, nor
1 think ever can.
The lower Houle of Convocation, indeed, would have
anfwered it, by pulling its Author in pieces; but thank God,
they had it not in their Power.. But I would recommend?
the Appeal f as cheaper than Dr. Clark’s Book, and more
level to your Capacities. Endeavour to gain an impartial
Love of Truth; And beware that ye take not Abfurdities
and Contradidions for Myfteries: Myftery I know you are
very fond of, it is a darling Thing with you: But God does
not require us to believe what we cannot Underftand. He
E 2 re-
* But exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, led
any of you be hardened through the Deceitfulnefs of Sin,
Heb. 3. 13. ~
•, f Appeal to the common Senfe of all Chriftian People, a
Pamphlet printed for Millar. It is written by a learned Divine
of the.eftablilhed Church.


requires us to believe that he IS ; and that he is a Rewarder
of rhem that diligently Seek him. ———> He alfo requires us
tb believe in bis Sori Jefas Chrift whotn he has Sent to
favc us; and in bis Holy-Spirit, whom he has fent to
fanftify us: Notto feek into the Männer how they pro-
ceeded from him ; we are ignorant of the Männer of almoft
every Thing that exifts ; neither is the Knowledge of it
necefiary.^—r-You that are fo fond of Myftery, why do not
you throw up your Riafm and the Bibi r, and turn Papifls?
There you will find Myftery and Miracle enoiigh: Thcre
you may buy Grace by the Pennyworths ; Sin on without
Fear of Damnation, and go to Heaven for a Piece of Monty.
Therc you may eat your Saviour at a MouthfuJ, fecure him
all to yourfelf 5 and yet thoufands Ihall eat him at the fame
Time as well as yourfelf; What Sinncr wpuld not be
P.apifl ? .
Upon the Whole, if the Bible be true; if the Gofpel of
Chrift our Saviour-be truej thenthe Doörine I contcnd
for, is true; for it is found there.———»-If thcre is any
thing of Importance in Religion, it is the Belief and Wor-
Ihip of God the Fatber Almighty through Chrift.——lf
there is any thing of eternal Moment, it is the Living in
Obedience to the Commands of this fupreme God and Fa-
ther of all.———lf it be wifc to confult our own Happinefs }
If Eternitybe of morc Importance than-Time; If the Fa-*
vour 'of God be betfer than the Friendihip of Men ; If Love
pnd Charity be better than Zeal and Fury in a bad caufe : If
it be wife to employ our Thoughts and Time about Things
pf the utmoft Importance, and in fearch of the greateft
Truth ? then is true Chriftian Religion our trueft Wifdom,
Therefore let uaendeavourto attain to a manly, rational, and
true Religion, fuch as God has fet before us in his holy
Word, having Reafon, the Candle of the Lord to light us tp
underftand it. ———For this amazing Privilcge, and for
our Being and well Being, and for all we hope for, let u»
öfter up to tfiat Suprcme, Infinite, and Glorious Being, the
One God and Father of the Univerfe, all. Tfiankfgiving,
Honour, and Praife through Jefus Chrift bur Saviour for
ever and ever. :Amen.
If you Believe thefe Things, I<ive ns if you did believe
them.
Having mentioned Athanafius fo often, I am willing you
ibould know bis true Charabler, by a learned Bifliöp, Dr.
Clayton.
Athanafius was a young, forward, petulant Deacoft in
the Church of of an ambitious Spirit, with a
Talent fitted for Difputation. And as he cpuld have no
Jlppes


Hopes of getting into that Biflioprick, unlefs he coQld'drivc
Arius out of Alexandria, who was the , principal Prefbyter in
that Church, next the Bilhop; this he effected, by foment-
ing a Difpute about the Trinity, between Arius and the
Bilhop j on which Account, having got Arius- excommuni-
cated, he had him then banilhcd.i This done, and the
old Bilhop Alexander dying, Athanafius,' though then only
about 27 or 28 Years of Age, by the Affiftance of a Set of
murdering Afcetics, forced himfelf at once into that high
Arch-bilhdpriclc, without ever palling through any of the
intermediate Degrees. And having gotten himfelf illegally
confecrated, contrary to all the Rules and Canons of the
Church, he prevailed on the Emperor Conftantiru the Great,
to confirm him therein, by the Power of Bribes, that were
given to one of the Emperor’s Favourites. And no fooner
was he thoroughly eftablifhed in it, than he began to fliew
the Audacity and Violence of bis Difpofition; not {paring
even Conf anting himfelf, but flew in the Emperor’s Face*
And, when Conjiantint was dead; treated his Son and Sue-
celTor ConJiantiuH with more Contempt and Infolcnce, than
could have been borne from an Equal, And when he was
difpoflefled of his Biflioprick for other Irregularities, by a
numerous Council of Bifhops, regularly fummoned and af-
lembled, he forced his way into that See again, more than
once or twice, over the murdered Bodies of his Antagohifts;
and waded, into his Cathedral, through Seas of Blood.——
But it may be alked. Why Ihould all this recommend
Jiim to the See of Rome ? The Anfwer is, Becaufe this was
all done by the Connivance, and with the Concurrence of
that See: Athanafius, while he treated all the Relief Man-
kind, and his own Royal Matter, with the utmoft Info-
Jence, having paid a furvile Court to the. Papal Chair.---
Irifomuch that in the Book of the Canon Law, the fir ft Pre-
cedent that is, or can be produced, in fupport of the Papal
Supremacy, is this Inftance of the fervile Submiflion that'
was paid by Athanafius to Pope Julius.' And therefore, I
fliould apprehend, that all PrtUfanis, who, have renounced
the Supremacy of the Pope, and the Independency of thd
Church upon the State, ought to be for obliterating the
Name of Athanafius out of their Liturgy, into which it was
Probably inferted only with a view of recommending his po-
litical Principles, under the {belter and influence of his re-
ligious Dodlrinc, -
Such was Saint Athanafius!
Some QUERIES. / .
ift. What does the Church worfliip ? Or, in other
Words-' - —The Church in her fir A Article, Afhanafian
Creed,


Creed; &c. having made the one Supreme' God,’ a Compo-
fitioh of Father, Son, and Holy-Ghoft: Query, When
we pray to God the Father Almighty; through Jefus
Chrift; what does the Church mean by the Words God and
Chrijl*?
• 2d. Whether we, the lower Clafs of Chriftians, have
not as good a Right to enquire into the Senfe of Scripture
and the Explication of any Dodtrine, as the High and
Learned ?
3d. Whereas the Holy Scriptures were the Rule of Faith
and Manners to Chriftians for the firft three hundred Years
after Chrift: Whether it be not fafer and better.to follow
them now, than to follow human Inventions;?,
4th. Whether the Affirming that three individual intelli-
gent Agents, are but one individual intelligent Agent t, be
pot a Contradi&ion in Terms ? -
sth. Whether the Orthodox by making Chrift, fome-
times the fupreme God, or equal to him, or a Part of him,
or a meer Man, juft as it. ferves their Turn ; be not true
Hocus-Pocus in Divinity; or fomething worfe?
6th. Whether the Founding the Chriftian Religion upon
human Authority, does not nearly refe'mble the guilt of the
Scribes and Pbatifecs, whom our Saviour feverely rebuked
for teaching for Dodtrines the Commandments of Men ?
7th. Whether it be not mocking of God to pray for the
Converfion of Jews, Turks, &c. When the Church re-
quires the Belief of Do&rines diredlly contrary to Scripturc-
Reafon and common Senfe, and which Dodtrines are one
grand Obftacle to their Converfion ?
Bth. Whether, if Chrift be the Supreme, or equal to the
fupreme God, or a meer Man; He can be the Mediator
and Intcrceflbrof the World?
* We have a Right to demand an Anfwer to this firft Query.
And let it be anfwered either Way, we (hould unite in requiring
Redrefs, We the, lower Clafs of Chriftians may be.juftly looked
upon as the Defence of the Nation ; and as the Governors of our
Church have refufed to reform; let us apply to the King and
Parliament ; we have a Right to be heard in all Things reafon-
able, but more efpecially in a Matter of Truth, and of eternal
Moment. But if we ftiould be refufed, we have it ftill in our
own' Power to pluck down this Popilh Idol the Athanafian Creed,
by Ihewing our Contempt of it, by going out of the Church
when it is read. -
f Dr. Waterland,


gth. Whether the Church of Rome has not as good Proof
of her Doflrine of Tranfubftantiation.*, as the Church of-
England has that Ghrift is the fupreme’ God ? Our Sa-'
viour fays. Take eat, this is my Body ; that-is, a Bit of Bread-'
is the Body of Chrift : And Chrift fays. He that-bath feen
me, hath feen the Father; that is, The Body .of Chrift;
is the Father Almighty, according to the Defenders of our-
Church Do&rine. ■ '
ioth. Whether the Ufe of abfurd, and-unintelligible
Terms, be honouring God, and doing Service to Religion?
nth. Whether the Litany-worfhip of three Perfons and
one God, be not at lead to worihip God under a falfe Cha-
rafter, or a too near Approach to the Crime of Idolatry,, as
fuch Beingexifts in the Univerfe?
12th. Whether thofe learned Gentlemen, that fubfcribe*
to Articles they do not believe: and damn that differ;
from them, be not more fond of Bread and Fifli,;than
Truth and real Religion ? .
13th. Whether the' Athanafian Creed can poffibly be'
thought a Chriftian Preparation for the Sacrament of the
Lord’s Supper ?
14th. Whereas there are in the New Teftament only,
above five hundred-plain Texts that prove that, God the Fa-
ther is the only fupreme God of the Univerfe; and whereas
there arc a few Texts brought in order to fupport the Church
Doftrine of this Trinity. Query, Whether the five hun-
dred Texts ought to be fet afide, and five or f»x doubtful
ones allowed to determine the Point ? • . ■>
!sth. Whether thofe that reprefent the Deity under the
Figure of a ‘Triangle , be not guilty of the breach of the fe-
cond Commandment?- —As Doftor Bennet, &e. &c.
j6th. When^bur.Pallors in the Pulpit are preaching upon
the Unity, the Attributes of God: Whether they
ofipht not tohgli us, what they mean by the Word God: and
if by mean the Trinity: whether they are
not advancing a Do&rine that has a natural Tendency to
rob God'Ahnighty of his Supremacy ? And alfo whether
we have not reafon to complain for being impofed upon in
a Point of the higheftlmportance ?
17th. Where is the Holy-Ghoftf dire&ly called God or
Lord in the Bible ? And where is he invocated, or fo much
as a finglc Petition put up to him ? 18th.
* Tranfubftantiation is certainly very abfurd. But yet God
can make Bread Flelh ; but he cannot make Three Gne, and One
Three, becaufe it is a Contradiction.
f That the Holy-Ghofl is inferior to both Father and Son it it
plain < becaufe he is Jent by Both.


1 iBth< Where do the Scriptures fay any thing of the Sub-*
fiance or Effence of. God ? And where do they affirm the >
Father and Son to be co-eflemia], co-equalj ( co-eternal and
Confubflantial ?, i
i. 19th. Jf: none can be faved but thofe’ that believe the A-
thanafian Doflriheof the Trinity : Query*, What is become
of St. Peter, St/John, and St. Paul, and all Chriftians for
the firft three hundred Years after Chfift, .for'.it- is; certairt 1
from their Writings they knew nothing of this Do&rine ?
‘ 20th. Our Blefied Saviour has told us, thaYHe came intd*
the World tp;fpeak the,Truth,; and to teach us the Will
of his Father .who is in Heaven; if fo. Query, *How came«
he not to tell us that the three Per fans are the one God, and to it
worjhipped as the one Gods' , nor fuffer his Difciples to inform?
us of it What! He that laid down his .Life to fave us,
and yet fuffer us to perifti eternally. Amazing !, •
1 A plainAnfwento the above Query is particularly defired.;
atft. Becaufe the Father,*. Son;. and ..Holy-Ghoft are
fometimes mentioned together; as concerned'in bringing
about the Salvation of Men; therefore the Athanafians will
have it, that the Three Perf-.ns are the one God. Query,'
Whether,, by the feme Way of Arguing, God may jiot : be
proved'to be nine Perfons? viz. Rev. 1.,4. Grace be ta you
and Peace from] him which is, and which was, and which is-la-
come:, and from the. /even Spirits ’ which are before his Throne j,
andfrom Jefus .Cbriji who isrthe faithful IVitnefs. ———Then
if th v Father,.Ghrijl, and the /even Spirits be equally Divine ;
-the Worfhip will run thus: O holy, bleffed, :and. glorious
Ninity! nine Perfons and one God, have Mercy upon
us, &c.- This Worlhip may Ue proved ■* as ;plain from
the New Teftaroent; As O holy, bleffed and glorious Tri-
nity;! three Perfons and one God, &c,.
•, 22d. What is CbrifHan,Religion ?
t 23d. Whether rit be noc-belter to put a Stop to what is
called Propagating'the Gofpel in foreign Parts , til] fuch time as.
the Reformers return toGofpel-Worfhip? .
- 24th. Whether.itbe not the Duty .of Unitarians to?
apply to King and, parliament to get the Liturgy altered ac-
cording to tholS T ewTellament; and if that cannot be ob-
tained, then,-: whether they have not a Right to fet up a
Church of theiriown, on gofpel Principles ?■
. May the One Supreme God and Father of all, give a;B!eflV
ing to thif and all other fincere Attempts to reftore His true
Tpiritual WoifliipJ~as cxprefsly cllablilhed by Chrift and. his
Apofllcs!
(f—__ —— ... . —‘ * ■ -
♦ See Defence of an Appeal, &c. page 416
F I N I 3.


