

D==(^)3)
AN ADDRESS
TO THE
**> \
CHARLES BADHAM, D.D.
SYDNEY:
GIBBS, SHALLABD, AND CO., PEINTEBS AND PUBLISHEES, PITT 6TEEET,
NEXT THE UNION BANK.
' ft


•
• ' : ■ .
‘ •■ • ’■■-
'■ 'V ..
.-.f.
'■: - *
> ' .
■ " .5‘ , "
■ .‘M*' • -'•*. ' -
■•'■''• . '
*■'' W- . , - :*■ '
' ■' J, - ' . ■ ' " ;■
'*• ... '
_.. .. * '‘ . . . V 5"4


AN ADDRESS
TO THE
CHARLES BADHAM, D.D.
SYDNEY:
GIBBS, SHALLAED, AND CO., PEINTEES AND PDBLISHEES, PITT STEEET,
NEXT THE UNION BANK.
1875-


■ ¥.
«
-■ '
r.|,-
■‘h-
• ■
■ '**-■
._
i.
■ * ■*
# " *■■
■'. n ■¥' '■'
:' iJ.-' ;
.
• ■ •' ' ' *
• S*' ‘ ' •
.'■■ t
' f
■»
♦
'' '1^
'• ,''\. ■ ' t .', ■•' '■
k>
■» :, •'•'.• -,x.
'•'■’■• •' ' •■-ii.' '
t, ■
'f ■
■ #
* . . •)
.» ‘
" 1
■ -i
* f
1:. ■‘'- ■ .^'
V
" *
M '
■’• .V
•1-
i<a Hfe:-.
«'
Sir' '
...
• r'**
JMt
*
.:3
I--
1 ■*,■ ,
; ', -#•
*
'v
’ V .
• 1
f
*
0 ■
■
%
■k ■ \ '■
■ Jk ■ ■ .' i,;- - •
r'
•
V
#■
:#
■.» - , .
'
■. ■■'
■ .
-
;■
'
t
, m ' ■
P-.
■f-
♦
■
y'
' * i
'
>1*'
• • . " ■ /
. k ;• , -V.
1 «
■ ; -\ ■■ .
V
rf-:
, ’' V -' i
. . ■* '
" • ; ' - ■ ;v
»
»
* ' -■ .:' ■ -•
■ llMf
•ifti
, 1


ADDRESS
Ladies and Gentlemen, —You little know how much that
simple commencement appears to me fraught with terror and dis-
may ; a terror and dismay which are increased tenfold by what I
see before me. I am not accustomed to quail before audiences,
nor indeed do I now feel my heart sinking within me through the
ordinary causes which produce that disagreeable sensation. It is
not because I am unprepared but because I am prepared too well,
that I look upon this large concourse with the utmost trepidation.
Shall I confess it to you, for at present I am speaking in riddles,
not only I never expected to say ladies and gentlemen, but I never
expected to encounter an audience which has almost swelled to the
dimensions of a public meeting. I thought that I should be pro-
vided with the easiest chair of a commodious apartment, and that
I should be surrounded with a few friends of my own sex who
would be willing to listen to some desultory observations of mine
with more or less interest as suited them, but certainly not with
that eagerness which is the most dangerous humour for an audience
be in, for as sure as digestion waits on appetite, so sure is
criticism the inevitable follower of eager attention. lam still
withholding my confession, because it is expedient that before you
leai-n what I have done, you should know how I was brought to
do it. When I was invited to deliver an address before this society,
I was in the midst of all manner of occupations. I am not
alluding to my ordinary duties, but to the preparations which I had
to make for a future labour of no ordinary kind. These bursaries,
in which the members of the society, as University men, must
needs take the same interest as I do, are not things to be managed
by sleight of hand. The preparation for their establishment com-
pelled me to make certain geographical studies, to ascertain local
peculiarities, to consult with leading persons in the North, and
South, and West, and to plan a winter campaign in the Riverina,
and the outlines of a September raid upon New England ; and in
the midst of all this I was to deliver a discourse upon a perfectly
different subject! But believing that it would be more of a family
gathering of the sons of Alma Mater, and not feeling sure that I
should have sufficient time to think over the heads of a suitable dis-
course, I took refuge where others had done before me. I took
refuge in scribbling. It is not always easy to think, but a man
can always write; and (I cannot conceal it) I wrote my address.


A.S when a man has a sweet little box in the countiy, and has pre-
pared a dinner for six homely neighbours, if the train brings him
down an unexpected shoal of distinguished guests he must straight-
way extemporise a tent on his front lawn, with any material that
comes to his hand, so I am building up at this moment this
pavilion of shreds and patches to welcome you all; but to welcome
you to what 1 To this poor manuscript fare, which 1 hold in my
hand, not as intended for you, not as worthy of you, but as all
which I had by me when you honoured me with this unexpected
visit.
Like a great historical personage who was much embarrassed
as to his mode of proceeding with a famous debating society, I have
besought my conscience thrice, that it would not put me on this
work of interfering with this mimic Parliament of yours ; but
when I remembered that I was invited to do so, and when I
thought who the persons were that invited me, it became at last
impossible to resist any longer; and here I am, though for what
purpose I am here, and what possible service I can render you, I
am up to this moment unable to discover. I know very well
that I have to deliver an Address, because those are the very
terms of the invitation, but it seems almost necessary that an
address should be upon some topic; I know there are exceptions
to this rule, and that some men have become such perfect masters
of language that they can speak about nothing; but lam content
to rank myself with that inferior class of men, who, even when
they have something to say, find it very difficult to embody that
something in the forms of speech. Let any one of you put him-
self into this position and ask himself, how would he behave in it;
I suppose he would congratulate the society upon its formation,
and augur for it a happy continuance, and endeavour to speak very
rapturously of the good which it is likely to do if it works upon
sound principles and steadily pursues its proper aim. Well, all
this I am thankful to say I can do with perfect sincerity, and
with a warmth of heart which I must beg you to accept in place
of eloquent periods and exquisitely finished laudations.
I rejoice to see the members of our University combining as
such, whatever the purpose of their combination may be; every
bond which knits the students together—every pursuit in which
the students of former times have fellowship with the students of
to-day, are signs of that natural sympathy and union of spirit which
is a guarantee of the strength and permanence of the body which
it pervades. If this were a combination only for some common
pastime, it would deserve to be welcomed as a proof of this public
spirit; but an association for the purpose of intellectual culture,
as it is a means of a closer union than any club for the promotion
of bodily strength and skill, so is it more appropriate to an institu-


tion whose sole business is to guide and train the intellect by the
discipline of thought and reason. We were lately told by a
person whose position entitles him to every respect, that students
were apt to neglect the claims of bodily health, and more than one
species of exercise was recommended to us with a view to the
pi’eservation of that blessing; but I hope no one so far misunder-
stood the meaning of this advice, as to suppose that it implies any
depreciation of hard intellectual labour.
One of the noblest passages in Jeremy Taylor is that in
which, speaking of the education of the young, he contrasts the
parents of old times who rejoiced to see their youth striking the
lion with his hunting spear, or doing battle with some other lord
of the forest, or bruised and battered with the fierce contentions
of the wrestling ground, with those parents of the present day,
who are proud to see their offspring pale with study and worn
with deep research. How unlike the shallow prattle of your
small modern wits, who think that nothing is manly save that
which is muscular; who know nothing of the dogged courage
which refuses to be beaten by some intricate problem, or, to speak
with Plato, which never faints till it has tracked the question, like
some wily and mischievous beast, into its inmost lair, and dragged
it into the light of day. It is manly not to shrink from this
mental fatigue which is so different from mere plodding. The
latter is certainly injurious to the health of the body, but it is
quite as certainly injurious to that of the mind; whereas intellectual
efforts need never be carried so far as to undermine the vigour of
the frame, and they are absolutely necessary to that mental vigour
which is the privilege of man. The [>erson who invented that
charming anecdote about Dean Gaisford, which was ado[)ted by the
Governor to illustrate some remarks which he made before the
University, seems to have fallen into the vulgar error of confounding
the scholar with the pedant or the hireling—the scholar who makes
his mind to undergo labours by which its strength is developed, with
the pedant who plods for mere ostentation, that he may be quoted as
an authority because he knows what others do not care to know ;
or the hireling, who measures learning by the pelf which it will
bring in. Such objects may be suited to the ambition of the
pedant or the hireling ; and the toil which they impose upon them-
selves is as low as the ambition which prompts it. But there
are other pedantries, besides that which apes scholarship, and
other hirelings besides those who plod through books for the sake
of money. For instance, there are political pedants, who never
aspire beyond the repetition of hackneyed phrases; and political
hirelings who woi’k by the piece or by the journey; and even
in the sporting world there are men who give themselves
to the pursuit for no generous aims; and if I were to ask
one of these latter pedants what were the advantages of sport, he


would no doubt tell me first, that it would help me into the
society of the great, from whence I could look down upon all non-
sporting men ; secondly, that it would enable me to read the
pedigrees of horses with great interest; and thirdly, that it some-
times led to considerable emoluments upon the turf. And as we
may presume that his Excellency would look upon such reasons
for sport with disapprobation, so have we a right to look upon
similar reasons for learning and intellectual labour as wholly
unworthy of us and inapplicable to us. But enough of this.
T have assumed that the object of this Debating Society,
inasmuch as it is composed of University men, is the im-
provement of the mind. It is true that not all members
of all debating societies view the matter in this light; there
are some, no doubt, who wish to acquire a certain glibness
of speech, without caring about the quality of the speech
which they employ. Now, Ido not deny that, in some cases, it is
a very good thing to overcome natural timidity by practice, or as
the Greeks call it fxeXirr} ; and the best or rather the
only one that is worthy of the name, is what Thucydides calls
jueAlrrj juLtra kivSvvojv- To call up the right word from the
depths of your consciousness, or indeed to have any internal
consciousness at all, while you are standing up to be looked
at by an innumerable throng of faces, is a power which scarcely
comes by nature, even to those whom nature intended for
])ublic speakers. But of the men who undergo this ordeal and
acquire this artificial courage, how many become fluent where
fluency is a sore burden to others, so sore a burden as to provoke
the homicidal part of our nature; and just as when a promising
boy has by study initiated himself in the principles of the squirt,
we inconsiderately wish that that useful implement had never
been invented, so the hateful and unabashed readiness of
talkers have nothing to say, tempts us, though very unjustly,
to regard all meetings for the exercise of dis])utation as con-
spiracies against sweet and wholesome silence. Sometimes while
listening to performers on musical instruments we are tempted to
wish that the ingenious Jubal had died in infancy; and after
hearing certain fluent speakers we are sorry that they ever found
means of getting over their original diffidence, supposing always
that there was ever such a stage in their lives.
A friend of mine is constructing a Model Republic in case
New South Wales should ever need one; and being a Gradu-
ate in Arts, he has of course put the University at the head
of all things, and subordinated the House of Legislature to
it; and this is one of his provisions : There is to be universal
suffrage, of course; but after the representatives have been
chosen, they will have to undergo an examination by the Syiney
University Senate, and they will be drafted into three chsses.


according to tlieir proficiency. First-class members will have
a right of voting and speaking; second-class, of voting but
certainly not of speaking ; and those who fall into the third-
class will form the chorus of the House, whose province it
will be, when told off" into strophe and antistrophe, to do the
Loud cheering and Oh! oh ! business, and all such inarticulate
expressions of public opinion. This will in some degree
modify the evil which may arise from excessive facility
of speech, derived from improper use of debating societies.
But an Academical Society like yours, will, I trust, be something
better than a mere palestra of the tongue ; you will never lose
sight of the excellent order according to which the tongue (let the
profane ears of punsters be absent 1) is but the lictor of those
first consuls, the brain and the heart. You will value the
opportunity of exercise, because it releases you from the
trammels of inexperience, and enables you to do justice to the
researches and the reflections which call for utterance within you.
If so, you will be led to see the great importance of making
a wise choice of subjects for discussion. Those who wish to train
themselves to the art of unravelling an intricate question, and
expressing it with clearness, will naturally avoid subjects which
do not demand much reasoning power or the balancing of many
details, —they will especially avoid questions which have been
recently debated on in another place, and chewed over again by those
lordly ruminators who repose in unrefuted majesty in the fields of
journalism. There can be little left for the exercise of perspicacity
and ingenuity in the tailings which remain after so many rockings
and washings of these professional gold-finders. Besides, the subjects
themselves often owe their apparent greatness to their excessive near-
ness to the spectator. With the whole realms of ancient and modern
history before us, why should we narrow down our souls to the
consideration whether Sir A. B. was justified in sending for Sir
C. D., and make battle-fields out of these little heaps of litter
which, in less than a year’, will be swept into the darkest and most
forgotten corner of colonial history. But, if even the subjects
wei’e of ever so much importance, how difficult it must be, in fol-
lowing others who have discussed them before, not to copy their
language as well as their arguments ; but whoever does this defeats
his own purpose and aim, which is, to express his own thoughts or
the thoughts which he has made his own in words chosen and
adapted by himself. It is scarcely necessary to remind you that
no man who copies the phrases of a debate or of a leading article,
nay, no man who studies such matters to the exclusion of good
English writers, can ever hope to attain to anything like purity of
language. I need scarcely remind you of such barbarisms as
available and reliable. When it is good English to say that a
stick is leanable, or a chair is sitahle, but not till then are you


likely to tolerate such a phrase as “ reliable evidence." Until that
time, it would be as well to put up with the old-fashioned trust-
worthy. When a gentleman wishes to say that certain materials
were turned to account, but prefers to tell us that they were
availed of, you would doubtless like to ask him, seeing that I avail
myself is a reflective verb, whether he means that the materials
availed themselves of themselves without the intervention of an
intelligent agent. When you hear a man speaking of trivial
offences or trivial expenses, you are Latinists enough to laugh at
his confusion between trivial and triffng ; or when he speaks of
eliminating the good from the bad, or tells you that “ but for the
Chinese a great deal of gold would have remained unearthed,"
you may smile at the ambition which has caused him in one case
to confound the choice parts with the refuse, and, in the other, the
earth with the open air. But what are we to do with that large
number of words which, without being ungrammatical, are none
the less foreign to the language ? Old Dryden growls, in the
surliest and most sterling English, at those of his time who, in
place of telling you, ‘‘ You are in the right," must fetch over a
compliment from France, and tell you that “ You have reason:"
“which is all one,” says glorious John, “as if they should say tome
you are not a beast.” What would he have said, nay, what would
Macaulay have said, to ‘■’■postal" and “governmental," and “ util-
ising," and “ regretable," and such other French commodities 1 It
is difficult, in some cases, to determine whether it is silly ambition
or absurd attempts at compression, which lead to many of these
innovations. No doubt the former is answerable for the banish-
ment of such plebeian words as because and before and eating and
drinking ; for now a man must take his umbrella owing to the fact
that it rains, he must brush his hat previous to going out, and he
must partake of a glass of wine. But I will not fatigue you with
a recital of the ravages made by the unlettered in this stately park
of the English language; the genteel promenaders therein are
also guilty of strewing it with the broken bottles and the greasy
fragments of newspapers as the record of their day’s diversion.
A Bight Beverend Prelate who passed for a great orator in
his day, informs us that somebody “ was given the king’s
daughter in marriage,” that the little boys did not say to Elijah
‘Go up, bald-head !” but “Go up, hair-cropped !” and because we
say indulgence and effulgence, he thinks himself justified in
calling the act of divulging a divulgence ; following, I suppose, the
reasoning of the philosophical youth who asked: if Satrapes is
the Greek for a satrap, why should not Ratrapes be the Greek for
a rat-trap 1
I will not presume to direct the studies of the gentlemen
here present; but if I could lay hold of one of the younger
members of this society and withdraw him into some corner where


I might ofFei’ him a little private advice, I should beseech him,
above all things, to take care that he learnt not only to speak, but
to speak English. I should say to him, “ The best means of learning
good English is to confine yourself to good English models; and
the best mode of acquiring readiness in English composition is that
which the University provides for you. Translate the good authors
of other languages, and never be satisfied till the translation reads
as much as possible like an original; try to be clear and simple
before you attempt to be flowery, or impassioned, or sublime ; do
not study any man’s style for the purpose of imitating that style;
believe that nothing but clearness of thought can give you clear-
ness of diction; do not attempt to divide a subject, according to
some arbitrary framework, but think it over till it resolves itself
into its own natural parts, —the knowledge of the relation of the
parts to the whole is method, and method will teach you to
arrange every part in its natural order ; and when things are in
their natural order they illustrate and explain each other.” If I
found my pupil contented with the plan traced out for him, well
and good ; but if he had a soul above such ordinary things as purity
of diction and clearness of argument, and aspired to gay and
brilliant effects, it would be necessary to adapt one’s style some-
what to his humour, and to introduce a few touches of fancy into
the remainder of the lecture. “The history of language, sir, is
faithfully reflected in the history of the old alphabets ; the first
species of writing was nothing more than a series of pictures ; it
represented nothing but the immediate objects of sense. But when
men found that they needed to convey something more than visible
objects were capable of pourtraying, such as inward feeling or
metaphysical notions, the old picture alphabet gradually ripened
into an alphabet of sounds, or some new contrivance was adopted
for that purpose. In the same manirer, the language of a civilized
people is more* picturesque in its early stages, speaks more to the
fancy, and deals more largely in metaphor. But, as it grows with
the growth of the people’s mind, and has to deal more and moi-e in
abstractions, it seeks less the aid of imagery, and makes a freer use
of arbitrary symbols of thought.” Now, there is no doubt a very
great charm in figurative language, because it places objects more
vividly before the mind’s eye; at the same time there is greater
convenience and greater rapidity of communication in the exchange
of those intellectual counters which stand for the more complex
results of our mental operations. But people often, in this rapid
interchange, take these counters as a matter of course, without
pondering their exact value, and the result is vagueness and con-
fusion, and a belief in phrases, instead of an appreciation of things.
The great masters of language, while they strive at once to quicken
the minds which they undertake to teach, and to convey the thing
taught in all its completeness, employ both these properties of


language, and, in their highest passages, they contrive so to blenl
them together, so to play at once the part of painters and of log-
cians, that while they give the fancy some palpable reality b
dwell on, they enable the imagination to expand into wider regiors
of thought. Poetry is, as Milton defines it, simple, sensuous, pai-
sionate; eloquence admits the sensuous element, but does n»t
suffer it to predominate over the logical; in mere declamation tie
sensuous entirely disappears; it offers nothing but vehement gene-
ralities, because it is unreal, is no true reflex of a mind possess<d
mainly by one thought, and therefore does not represent the reil
conditions of such a mind alternating between general notiois
and particular images, now thinking in the abstract, and now reil-
ising its own thoughts through the intervention of the'fancy, >y
presenting to itself a particular image. When Macbeth is male
to say—
“Will all great Neptune’s ocean wash this blood
Clean from my hand ? No ; this my hand will rather
The multitudinous seas incarnadine
Making the green one red ”
we are bidden to observe the contrast between the vague grandair
of the first expression and the definite strength of the second, as
illustrating the difference between the Latin and Anglo-Sa>on
elements of our language. But it is wrong to look upon this * a
mere trick of words. Our language, indeed, as is well known, oves
its more vivid words, that is those which address themselves to ;he
senses, to one source, and the more artificial words to anotlnr;
but the contrast is not intended as a contrast of the words as sich,
but as a contrast of the states of mind of which those words arefche
natural embodiment. I quote the following passage from Jeremy
Taylor to shew another instance of this contrast which oceurs
between two single words, but the whole passage is so noble fhat
I dare not mutilate it, and indeed when looked at 'closely it will
be found to contain more than one example of the thing in ques-
tion : —“ But if we could, from the battlements of Heaven, espy
how many poor men and women at this time lie fainting and dying
for want of bread; how many young men are hewn down by the
sword of war; how many orphans are now weeping beside the
graves of their parents, by whose life they were enabled to eat;
how many mariners and passengers are at this present in a storm
and shriek out because their keel dashes against a rock, or bulges
under them ; how many there are that weep with want, or are
mad with oppression, or are desperate from a too quick sense
of constant infelicity : in all reason we should be glad to be out of
the noise and <participation of these evils.”
When Burke is describing the sufferings of the fugitives from
the Carnatic, and speaks of the many hundreds who perished by
famine in the granary of India, he adds :—“ I was going to awaken


your compassion to this unfortunate part of our fellow-subjects,
by detailing to you some of the circumstances of this plague of
hunger. Of all the evils which beset and waylay the life of man,
this eomes the nearest to our heart, and is that wherein the proud-
est of us all feels himself to be nothing more than he is. But I
find myself unable to manage it with decorum; its details are of
a species of horror so nauseous and disgusting, they are so degra-
ding to the sufferers and to the hearers, that I think it better to
throw a pall over this hideous object, and to leave it to your
general conceptions.” Here he awakens the curiosity of the in-
ward sense, but refuses to gratify it by any distinct image; our
mental eye knows that there is something beneath that pall too
hideous to look upon, and a stronger effect is produced than if by
glutting it with horrors he had impelled the mind to disenthral
itself by refusing to entertain any thought at all of the thing
described.
I wish I could remember or lay my hands upon that remark-
able commencement of a sermon by John Henry Newman, in
which he observes that when the mind is called to the contempla-
tion of some terrible calamity, it will often seem benumbed and
incapable of taking in the description offered to it, till the mention
of some little incident connected with the event brings the whole
scene in all its reality before us. Here again we see the operation
of this painter within us—to speak with Plato—which by pre-
senting some single image gives life and meaning to the whole con-
ception. I will not tire you with further illustrations, but I will
only exhort you, if you desire to emulate these great heroes of speech,
to husband and keep ready in your memory, and to combine
in judicious proportions, these two elements—the sensuous and
the metaphysical. It will only need a brilliant fancy, a rich mine
of observation, a temperate judgment, a subtle wit, and profound
reflection. Do not imagine lam laughing at you, lam laughing
at the hopeless difficulties into which my own enthusiasm has
betrayed me. Let us take it in another way—you want to know
something about metaphors, and apostrophes, and accumulations,
and climax—where to find them, and how to use them 1 My answmr
is, —Don’t find them at all, but let them come when they like.
Not that you must always admit them when they do come ; for
they are seductive looking things, and may persuade you to
employ them at times when they will give you more plague than
profit. For example, if you wish to fly a metaphorical kite, take
care that the backbone is suflficiently substantial to bear the
strain, and yet that the whole framework is not so heavy as to be
incapable of soaring. You don’t like my figure, so I will put it
in another way. Let your comet’s tail be as long and as fiery as
you can make it, but let it have a nucleus, lest when the telescope
of the critic is directed light upon its centre, he should declare it


to be all incandescent gas. For language, again, has its three
temperatures, and three conditions corresponding to them ; when
I say the day is fine, I give you a cold and solid statement, but
the moment I import anything of a wish, or a passion, or a sym-
pathy with nature into the thought, and say,—
“ Sweet day—so calm, so soft, so bright—
The bridal of the earth and sky—”
you perceive that the language has reached the melting mood;
that it has acquired warmth and mobility. Intensify the
fervour by fixing your imagination on the everlasting day,
such as glows in the pages of some inspired seer, and you
see that the language is expanded and rarefied, as though it
were striving to transcend the bounds of matter. Now, what-
ever other people may do, my young friend, never become so
gaseous but that you shall leave some solid residuum, lest the
vulgar, who are somewhat given to materialism, and judge of the
reality of a thing by its solidity, should tax you as an unsubstan-
tial talker.”
But, while I am thus giving instructions to some imaginary
novice, you are waiting to hear something addressed to yourselves,
—but here the old difficulty returns •, for what can a man say,
when he possesses no more information than his hearers, and when
he addresses those whom it would be impertinent to advise ? You
see the blunder that has been committed, and the embarrassment
to which it leads. You wanted not a speech, but an address :
when a man has to make an ordinary speech, he has to communi-
cate some thought of his own, which his hearers may adopt or
not, as they think fit; but when a man is called upon to make an
address, his business is to divine the thoughts which are already
present in the minds of the assembly—to interpret to every mem-
ber the sentiments of all the rest—to speak not only to all, but
for all, so that every one may at once recognize his own sentiment,
and find that it is in harmony with the sentiment of others. But,
if it is difficult to present one’s own thoughts in such a way as to
make them acceptable to the minds of others, it is far more diffi-
cult to set before a number of intelligent men such a transcript of
their own ideas as they shall be willing to recognize as true, and
to ratify as adequately expressed. But, alas! it is too late to attempt
this now, for indeed, it is probable that there is but one thought
remaining in the whole of this audience—“Oh, that he would
make an effort at a decent peroration, and let us depart in
peace !” lam not good at perorations, but lam quite willing
to let you depart, after I have performed the solemn ceremony of
inaugurating this Society. Gentlemen, there are two kinds of
augurs known to the English language, with a slight difference in
the spelling; an augur is a kind of prophet, and an auger also an
instrument for making holes, or, more briefly,,a bore. Having suffi-


ciently performed the functions of the latter, I will now assume
the office of the former, and, without telling you by what signs
this insight is acquired, I will present you with the augury of
your future career. As a body you will not influence, in any per-
ceptible degree, the legislation of the country ; you will not seek
to attract the public eye to the results of your deliberations ; but,
in after years, when men shall remark the great change that has
come over the tone of our Legislative Assembly, and shall ask,
Why is there no longer the same slip-shod English, the same
vapid iteration of ill-stated and confused argument 1 Why is
there so much more of that candour which strives to occupy the
point of view from which an opponent is speaking, and of that
courtesy which strives to refute without insulting or degrading
the holders of opposite opinions'? Why are there such broader
views, and so much more exalted a sense of the high duties of
legislation 1 Some man, who has quietly observed the course of
events from the watch-tower upon Grose’s Farm, will step in, as
the interpreter, and say, —“ The men who have produced these
changes were old students of ours, who learnt those principles
with us, and perfected them by practice in the University Debating
Society.”
Gibbs, Shallard, and Co., Printers, 108 Pitt Street.






