

An Appreciation of
Professor Sir T. W.
Edge worth David
Being an address delivered by the Rev. D.
J. Flockhart, M.A., in St. John's Presbyterian
Church, Wahroonga, Sunday, 2nd September,
" . . . . Know ye not that there is a prince
and a great man fallen this day in Israel."
2 Sam. 111. 38.
During the week past there went out
through the gateway we call "Death," to
"explore the farther reaches of the ocean of
life, one of the world's great men, a princely
character, a nation builder, who lived
amongst us, humbly walking the paths of
simplicity, and gently treading the ways of
service—Professor Sir T. W. Edgeworth
David. I count it amongst the greatest pri-
vileges to have been one of the three
thousand students who passed through his
classes. He was more than a Professor oc-
cupying a chair related to a particular
science. He was an exemplar and teacher
of Life. It was not an unusual thing in the
Lecture Room for him to start away at a
tangent from the Science subject prescribed
for the hour to remark upon some of the
more important aspects of the greater
problems—industrial, economic, social or
political—of the State, the Commonwealth,
or the world. In those ex temporare utter-
ances he touched the heights of oratory, il-
lumined our minds, stirred our souls, and re-
vealed to us the moral and spiritual reali-
ties upon which his soul anchored. None


could fail to catch the inspiration which
proceeded from a personality like his,
vibrant with loyalty to the sovereign things
of Righteousness.
I was a student in Arts, required (accord-
ing to the Regulations) to qualify in one
Science Subject, and consequently for a year
attended the Lectures in Geology, etc. It
was an invaluable year. And indispensable
to one's equipment for the Ministry of the
Church: for there is in truth a very inti-
mate relation between Geology and Theolo-
gy which I did not understand at the time.
What mattered supremely however, was
that I was brought under the influence of a
creative personality whose impact upon me
gave wing to aspirations which were strug-
gling within me for freedom and for power.
He was a living flame kindling an enthusiasm
for Truth and Right in others whose souls
were like little candles waiting his quicken-
ing power.
Much is accomplished by the Professor or
Teacher who succeeds in imparting to the
students under him (1) A point of view from
which to approach Reality; (2) An un-
quenchable longing for Truth and interest
in investigation, and (3) a passion for Life
to be found along the road of Service to
mankind.
What point of view, it may be asked, did
one get in the Geology Lecture Room? It
was this. That the work of creation has pro-
ceeded gradually through the ages and is
still proceeding. God is the tireless worker,
"who slumbers not, neither is weary." The
story of His sleepless activity is written
everywhere, in any section of the surface
of the earth that may be submitted to exam-
ination. There it is unmistakably embedded,
that all may see and read. No Science cart


speak with greater authority than Geology
upon the question of the antiquity of man,
and in the light that it sheds upon the ages
through which we have struggled upward,
the Chronological Scheme of Archbishop
Ussher who suggested 4004 B.C. as the date
of creation becomes untenable.
Petrified remains and fossil forms in re-
lation to the matrix in which they are found
speak authoritatively about age. The scien-
tific viewpoint nowadays, of course, is bound
up with the hypothesis of Evolution. Sup-
posing that the Darwinian Theory that the
history of an organism will show that a
marvellous complexity has evolved out of
a few simple or primitive types, supposing
that this Theory be accepted, is it not mere-
ly a description of God's method of working
out His purposes in creation ? It does not
solve all problems in heaven and in earth.
It does not bridge the gulf between the in-
organic and the organic. It does not tell us
whence, or how, or why Life and Conscious-
ness came. It does not destroy, or appease,
or make of none effect the longing for a
Creator or Evolver, or God. It does how-
ever, tell us something of God's modus
operandi in creation —His manner of work-
ing.
Certain practical results of an economic
value have proceeded from the study of
Geology: upon those I do not here touch.
It will be recognised by all that the well
informed and experienced Geologist can be,
and is, of considerable assistance in guiding
explorations which search for the earth's
wealth in oils, minerals, metals, etc. One of
the Professor's early services to New South
Wales was of almost incalculable economic
benefit to the State His first big job, in
fact, was the survey of coal-bearing strata


in the Lower Hunter region and this result-
ed in the discovery of the Greta Coal Seam.
Not only did the Professor provide us
with an approach to Reality, but he was
ever in the van in the search for the Truth
about it. I cannot recall an excursion for
the purposes of Geology in which he was
not always ahead of the students, "setting
the pace" as it were —an indication of inde-
fatigable energy and unflagging keenness.
His researches carried him from the Equa-
tor to the Pole, and he gloried in them, and
in the power and the goodness of God. He
believed that every step he took and every
stone he turned brought him nearer to the
Creator and the morning glory. And his in-
terest in discovery, in truth, he passed on
to others. When the Doctorate of Science
was conferred upon him a little over a year
ago by the Senate of the University of Syd-
ney, he said in making acknowledgment of
the honour, "... One thing I will stand
to, and that is, that all who earnestly pursue
truth will find glory and loveliness in this
universe, and in human hearts : a glory and
loveliness that manifest the beneficent work-
ing of an Unseen Power."
The quest for Truth! We are all commit-
ted to it, inasmuch as we have been en-
dued with minds to think, to reason, to en-
quire. Deep within me a conviction burns,
if I may say it in parenthesis—that in the
moment in which the Church shows herself
to be afraid of Truth, howsoever and from
whatsoever source it may arise, in that
moment, her doom is pronounced. Whatso-
ever things may chance to be shaken will
surely be only the things that invite shak-
ing—the infirmities which with the march
of time necessarily fall, to leave what re-
mains the more securely established, and,


the more attractive in its truth and beauty.
The Eternal cannot be shaken. There is
(need it be said?) much we do not know.
We follow on to know. The Unknown sum-
mons us to adventure and to conquest, and
we can go forward confidently, in the name
of God,
. . . For behind the dim unknown
Standeth God, within the shadow, keeping
watch above His own."
Professor Sir Edgeworth David was a
Knight of God. Honoured by the King for
his services of merit, he possessed in him-
self the Knightly virtues, too rarely met with
nowadays—courtliness of manner, and
chivalry of conduct: and clad in the pan-
oply of heaven he went forth to make con-
quests for God and Humanity.
Above and beyond all, he taught us the
master things of Life. Is not Life the chief
business of living? Indeed, our only busin-
ess ? His passionate moral enthusiasm and
great aspiring virtues sent us from the class-
room better men. He kept us near to the
great imperatives of Honour and Duty,
Truth and Service. He was the son of a
Church of England Rector. Doubtless the
early years in the Rectory saw the founda-
tions of his character well and truly laid,
and in later years some great souls with
whom he made contact helped with the
building of the superstructure. Not least
among these was the dear companion of his
earthly way, to whom in public he paid
grateful tribute for the love that inspired
him and endured with him. To Lady David,
who is honoured amongst us for her own
distinctive life and work, and to her son and
daughters, we extend our sincerest sym-
pathy.
When a year or two ago the Professor


underwent an operation I visited him in
hospital, and amongst other things we talk-
ed of his map of the Geological formations
of Australia which had just been published.
He was greatly pleased that the printing had
been accomplished in the Commonwealth :
at one stage he had feared that it might not
be possible, for there had been much diffi-
culty in obtaining materials for one colour
upon which his heart was set. I found that
he knew a great deal about colour, as about
most things, and, as he went on talking, he
recalled that when a student he had attend-
ed lectures given by Ruskin. Who, I wonder,
could be with Ruskin and not catch some of
his moral enthusiasm? The young Knight
in the making caught it, to hold and to im-
part.
But he did not depend on secondary
sources only. He went direct to the Fount
of Power. Behind his radiant life was a
hidden relation with God. His soul enshrin-
ed an altar. There he worshipped and there
he gathered the dynamic which made his
life amongst men to be an inspiration. In
February last, on the occasion of the in-
auguration of Founders' Day at Knox
Grammar School, he told the boys that on
many occasions when he had been in dire
straits he had put up a fervent prayer, and
a way had been opened to win through. And
he went on to counsel them "Do not rely
only on yourselves. Do your best to meet
whatever situation arises, but remember
that man is only a weak creature if he has
not the help of a great Power outside him-
self." He was speaking out of a deep per-
sonal experience. Honours were showered
upon him by King and State and Halls of
Learning, but with them all he walked
humbly and softly in the presence of God.


He was not of those "who forsake the
assembling of themselves together."
Frequently in recent years, when he was
able, he worshipped with us in the congre-
gation of St. John's. He liked to find a
place quietly and reverently in the back
pew, or that next to it, and silently and
humbly to move away when the service was
concluded.
"His life was gentle, and the elements so
mixed in him,
That nature might stand up and say to
all the world,
This was a man !"
In closing this tribute from a former
student let me not content myself with mere
platitudes, such as, his influence abides, and
his work will be carried forward (either by
its own momentum or by others). What he
wrought, beyond doubt, will be woven into
the texture of the expanding 0f
human Knowledge. It has been, and will
yet be. That is true. But what has become
of the harpist now that the harp upon which
he made sweet music has been broken and
its strings are silent? What of him? Is he
annihilated with the instrument which he
was wont to use? There is little comfort
methinks in the thought that we shall live
for ever in what is contributed by us to the
world's thought and life : or, in the idea
that we shall live on in the continuing race.
What is the immortality of the race to the
individual? It is not the race (an abstrac-
tion) one loves, but living, breathing men
and women. It is not the race which en-
riches us but the men and women, the stal-
warts, who have climbed the Hill Difficulty
before us, or who have planted their feet
beside our own and helped us along life's
way. I think there can be no immortality


for the race, if there be no immortality for
the individual. • I think that it is vain to
speak of God as the conserver of good if
He is not thereby the conserver of the per-
sonalities which make goodness to flourish
amongst men. The dear Professor who dis-
cerned the beneficence of God in the natural
world around him, who knew what it was
to commune with God, and who drew from
the inexhaustible stores of divine Power,
could not but believe in personal perman-
ence. And it is our faith that he lives where
he always lived — in God. Does somebody
say: But he is invisible? Invisible! Was he
ever anything but invisible? Aren't we all
invisible? Who has ever seen his real self?
or the person of another? We are substan-
tially spiritual and are as invisible as God.
Our bodies, our outward forms, are but
symbols of our personal presence —or, means
of communicating with an outward and
material world. The harp may be destroyed
but the harpist remains, and he shall yet
make diviner music on some grander in-
strument.
The Professor, ever seeking to find and
to interpret that Something which is be-
yond the ranges of time and knowledge,
has gone forward in search of new disclos-
ures. Whither he has gone, we cannot see —
but we know the way he has taken, and we
can follow after him. His path is as the
shining light that shineth more and more
unto the perfect Day.
[Reprinted from "The N.S.W. Presbyterian," 26th
September. 1934. and distributed from St. John's
Presbyterian Church, Wahroonga.l
John Andrew & Co
