

AN APPEAL
TO
PATRIOTISM.
THE
LAND QUESTION.
ALIENATION
THE VERY RICH AND THE VERY POOR.
LEASING POLICY,
JUSTICE TO ALL;
WITH
A Practical Method of Introducing into Queensland
£13,000,000.
By J. W. THOMPSON.
Brisbane:
PRINTED BY J. H. REYNOLDS, ELIZABETH STREET.
MDCCCLXXXIII.




DEAR SIR
While soliciting the favour of a perusal J
leg to state that 7 000 copies have been printed for
gratuitous distribution, and that upon receiving a
remittance in postage stamps to cover the transit,
six copies will be forwarded to gou for circulation.
MU letters to be addressed to
J H. REYNOLDS, Printer,
ELIZABETH STREET, BRISBANE.


AN APPEAL
TO
PATRIOTISM.
THE
LAND QUESTION.
.................■...-••...••...••.-.••...••...-wj
ALIENATION
THE VERY RICH mo THE VERY POOR.
LEASING POLICY,
JUSTICE TO ALL;
WITH
A Practical Method of Introducing into Queensland
£13,000,000.
By J. W. THOMPSON.
Brisbane:
PRINTED BY J. H. REYNOLDS, ELIZABETH STREET
MDCCCLXXXIII.




NON-ALIENATION
OF THE
CROWN LANDS.
INTRODUCTION.
TO obtain perfect work a machine must possess a special fitness for
the work to be performed, for a mechanical or national law is im-
perfect unless it adapts itself to whatever incident may arise, violence
excepted. To produce this article the workman must make himself
acquainted with the nature and properties of the materials he has to use
to perform the work required. If this is correct, we cannot expect to
produce an equitable land scheme, unless the principle has for its basis
the nature of man in connection with the properties of the land. I
take this for my ground-work, because I believe it to be a simple and
practical method of conveying to the reader the various features con-
nected with the land question.
Man in Eelation to the Land.
The land is definite so far as relates to its character of fixedness.
Man is indefinite in consequence of his frailties, a circumstance which
necessitates a land law to insure quiet possession to the utilizer.
Also, the knowledge that man is the created agent, with a physical
organisation adapted to produce from the earth’s surface every necessary,
both for his existence and gratification,—that he could not exist, unless
he exercised these functions, must convey to every mind the conviction
that labor and land are inseparable; that being similarly born, in equity
we all have an equal right to the free use of the earth for the satisfaction
of our wants. The ruler of the universe thus proclaims that the co-heir
ship of all to the soil is consistent with the highest state of civilisation,
and consequently that no basis of procedure can be just unless the occu-
piers and non-occupiers are mutually benefited.
That the Imperial Parliament acknowledges the above truths is proven
by the land of the colony being free to all, subject only to laws
which we, the people, make through our representatives. The


land is, in fact, the people’s capital entrusted to their guardians, the
government, for the collectior and expenditure of the proceeds arising
from such capital for the people’s benefit. This being the case, all
are interested in the management of this capital, they being joint
proprietors.
I know that first principles are not attractive to the general reader,
especially in this age of dash, the platform of which is expediency,—a
policy that is well exemplified by the workman who scamps his work ;
gaining for the time, but entailing future trouble. To perform honest
work you must learn the use of your tools, and first principles represent
the tools of the legislator.
Now the question for consideration is this, are the requirements, in
relation to first principles, supplied by the Crown parting with the fee
simple of the land. This question can but be answered in the negative,
because experience has proven that alienation is directly opposed to
such teaching, for first principles, in relation to the earth’s surface,
indicate that, by the law of the Creator, the source of all wealth and
happiness is to be found in the union of labour with land and not in
the union of money with land as too many now suppose. An analysis
proves that money and land means the more money the more land, not
always to utilize in its extended sense, but ultimately to retail to others,
and thus a greed is created, the reverse of good to a community. Why
work in opposition to nature’s law, according to which wealth is the
result of the combination of nature (land) and intelligence (labour),
the man who waits to profit by the increased value of unutilized land,
is seeking to gain wealth produced through the exertions of others.
That labour and land means the land free to all who desire to utilize
it, with the simple and equitable condition that the occupier contributes
annually to the state a small percentage of its value, not for the land,
but as a contribution to the Government which insures to him, his heirs,
and assigns quiet possession of said land.
The writer appeals to the legislators of Australia not to pooh-pooh
a scheme which refers to a national question of the first mag: itude, and
is therefore, worthy of the necessary study to enable them to judge the
subject (the leasing principle) fairly on its merits. While asking for
simple justice, it is to be hoped that no one will believe that I desire to
be uncomplimentary, for I know that many have studied the history
of Europe with the special object of gaining the knowledge of what
to adopt and what to avoid while assisting to establish equitable laws
in a now country ; and the land being the primary feature, land in re-
lation to man their principal study. They have learned from their
researches that it is impossible to establish a sound foundation for
a country’s welfare unless the crown act as the only ground landlord.
But, although, up to the present time the party who have studied the
subject feel themselves too weak to successfully oppose the influence
of capital, yet I trust that they will deem that the time has now ar-
rived for them to act in accordance with their convictions.


This pamphlet is written and issued to assist them in educating the
people to the knowledge that the Crown in parting with the fee simple of
the land is acting in opposition to the rights of man ; and also, that the
alienation of the land means the creation of a landed aristocracy, an evil
which Great Britain and Ireland is suffering from, and will also give
to capital the opportunity to possess land without making an adequate
return to the State, thus forcing the principal portion of the revenue
to be derived from the comparatively poor of the country. I trust
also, that I shall convince the reader, that the leasehold estate recom-
mended and the estate designated by the word “ freehold” are identical
in value for the purposes of a security, but that in respect to justice,
they are the antipodes of each other, for the leasing policy insures
to the people a proper distribution of their heritage, the land,
by providing that the occupier and non-occupier mutually
share the pecuniary advantages arising therefrom. The very reverse of
this justice is proven to be the case in respect to our present system of
alienation, and the sooner the people awake to this knowledge and
create a public opinion that will cause the change of tenure the better
for themselves and their posterity.
Firstly,—The basis of the plan suggested to take the place of granting
the fee simple of the land is,
Ist, that fixity of tenure insures a security for improvements;
2nd, that the value of the land held by an individual is
expressed by the rent he pays to the community ;
3rd, that the rent defined meets and satisfies the position of all
being joint proprietors of the land.
Secondly.—For the purpose of redemption after the leasing
policy is established, freeholders may, if they so desire, receive
from the Crown the capital value of their land, and an inde-
feasible lease with a covenant tor rent representing five per cent,
on said capital value.
In respect to the second suggestion I am aware that at the first
glance the proposal to obtain from capitalists so large an amount as,
probably thirteen millions, may appear outrageously extravagant, but
the writer can, with confidence, assure those who honour him by a
perusal of his arguments that they will find the scheme thoroughly
feasible and practicable, and one which will recommend itself to capital-
ists, and at the same time be acceptable to, at least seventy-five per cent,
of the real property owners in the colony, if not all. I therefore ask all
who have this pamphlet brought to their notice not to jump to any
conclusion on the matter until they have given careful consideration to
the proposals and arguments adduced from the beginning to the end. I
must, however, premise that my only motive is the present and future
good“of Queensland, and that I have endeavoured to exercise all care to
avoid offending any party, for the subject, although a political one, is not a


party one, but one that appeals to the common sense of a whole people.
It is thirty years since I received the first impression of the evij of
granting the fee simple of the crown lands, and more than twenty years
since I first wrote condemning said policy, and every year to the
present time Australian history has proven the unsatisfactory character
ot a policy which renders the wisest and most painstaking powerless
when opposed to those who prefer their own aggrandisement to the
public good. But in the hope that the reader will better understand
the social and political features of the question of Leasing v. Alienation
after reading this pamphlet, I will conclude this introduction by
simply soliciting that favor.
Alienation of the Crown Lands of the Colonies, Great Britain and
Ireland—an Example.
The Courier of twenty years ago published a series of letters advo-
cating that the land in the colony of Queensland, in justice to the
people, should not be sold but leased, and showing that alienation
was killing the goose for the golden egg, and preparing trouble for the
future. At the present time the value of the principle referred to is by
force of circumstances compelling attention, and therefore the following
comments will be opportune :
Intelligent Australians who are honest and earnest in the work of
assisting to establish equitable laws for governing the colonies must
perceive that the present unsatisfactory political condition of Great
Britain, Ireland, and America arises from the alienation of the land, or,
in other words, disposing of the people’s birthright to the few without
proriding compensation to the many in the shape of a continuous
annual income from the land to meet the expenses of the State, and
thus relieve those the least able to pay from the burden of taxation.
Also, the alienation of the land means creating a landed aristocracy—a
circumstance to be condemned, or one fails to understand the past and
present history of Europe. It seems strange that such a severe lesson
as Europe is experiencing is not accepted by our colonists as a guide to
insure a better future for Australia ; for the accumulation of wealth,
which seems to be the governing principle of the day, is not prosperity
in a national sense, for national prosperity in a matured country is
indicated by freedom from a pauper element, a result not to be at-
tained in Queensland if the Colony continues to work on the basis of
selling the crown lands.
No politician can study the subject of the alienation of the public
lands without recognising that the maiden soil, the people’s heritage, ia
not a fair article of traffic, irrespective of an annual return to the State.
Population alone increases the value of the land, therefore in equity
population is entitled to some benefit from the increment profit, which
can only be effected by the Crown being the ground landlord of the
territory, and the revenue from the land to be applied to relieve the
people from indirect taxation; the only system by which the people’s


heritage can be satisfactorily administered. Knowing this to be the
truth, and not acting in accordance with it, is inexcusable.
In the early days of New South Wales, the then government sold
the land with the view of attracting population—a system which,
although wrong in principle, was probably demanded by circumstances.
But as certain as the sun rises, if you work on a wrong principle evil
will accrue, and in this case if selling the land population it
also created a habit of thought, and consequently to continue the alien-
ation of the lands long after the population were numerous enough to
dispense with so pernicious a forcing system. It is true that our
sufferage is liberal and the people masters of the position ; then it may
be asked, Why don’t the people agitate for the reform which I say is
necessary for our wellbeing? Simply from the circumstance that the
majority are under the impression that it does not matter to them who
gets the land, their chances being so very small; and as to land at a
distance they are led to believe that they can have no possible interest
in that. Also in relation to such questions as the one under consider-
ation the people are not impressed with the nature of their importance,
for even in this educational age the schools throughout the world are
silent on the subject that the poorest person in a country has a direct
claim upon the benefits derived from the land, outside the fact that to
live he must eat, and to eat he must work. But even if a majority
were learned on the question, the fact of knowing will not command
honesty of action. For example, Americans with universal suffrage are
nowhere when pitted against the power of wealth and position worked
to pollute the political atmosphere.
In Victoria, after a long struggle, they have a land-tax, but one fails
to perceive that the people are relieved from the breakfast table and
clothing taxes. Indeed, those who suppose thafc a land-tax fulfils the
conditions of the leasing principle, will, by a little study, find that as a
substitute it is a very poor one.
Many may believe that Australia is committed to the policy of alien-
nation,'"and that it is too late to attempt a reform But, surely, Queens-
land, with only about two per cent, of her lands alienated, does not
come within the meaning of that category, and in respect to any colony
that has alienated a large percentage of its land, this circumstance is no
valid reason that it must sacrifice the balance.
Without a doubt gold has been the great factor to attract people to
Australia, and not the question of selling or leasing of the Crown lands.
This opinion is endorsed in some degree by Messrs. Morris and Rankin’s
report to the Sydney Legislature, which, according to press report,
implies that the alienation policy leads to the wholesale alienation of the
public estate, creates large freeholds, but utterly fails to settle a bond
fide industrial class of small freeholders in the colony. They strongly
recommend that the public lands should in future be leased instead of
sold.


It is difficult to convince really worthy colonists that the land laws
that are causing so much trouble in Great Britain and Ireland will not,
ot necessity, produce trouble in Australia, and that the money received'
trom the sale of the land was deceptive as relates to sound progress.
But it is gradually dawning upon the most conservative that if
we retain the present, land policy, it is not far-fetched to prophesy
that what colonists took for progress was, although unpremeditated the
working of a principle that made a class masters of the country; and
Lord Cranbrook’s remark to the Conversatives of Westminister on
another question yet, applies with force to the question of selling the
Crown lands. His lordship said, “ Take care that you do not”give
cause to your prosterity to curse the inheritance you bequeath to them.’?
Therefore, I say to my fellow-colonists you must study this question
ot selling the Crown lands, and politically act in accordance with your
convictions or you will fail in your duty; for if my opinion on this ques-
tion is right, think what a bitter legacy of trouble the alienating system
is entailing on posterity. Indeed, no Christian community possessing
the knowledge of the wrong (and to wilfully blind the eyes to passing
events is contemptible) can retain such a system.
I believe, only three Queensland legislators have publicly stated
that it would be well for the colony not to sell one inch of its territory
namely, Mr. Lilley (now Sir Charles) and Mr. Ferguson the member
for Rockhampton ; and Mr. Pugh,* who in May, 1865, said :“ He wished
that all Crown lands were leased instead of alienated. (Oh !■ and
laughter.) Hon. members might laugh, but if they thought on the
subject they would find there was little to laugh at. The leases might
be made heritable, and would be as good as freeholds to the holders,
for they might be made interminable, while the revenue derived by the
country would be magnificent. The Colonial Treasurer would scarcely
know what to do with it. Customs dues and other taxes might be
be swept awrny, and instead of borrowing we might be able to lend.”
If my memory serves me, Mr Pugh’s concluding remark is borne out
by an estimate published about that time—namely that the ground
rents of three counties in England exceeded the revenue required for
the business of the country, implying that had the State retained the
lands no other source of revenue would be needed. No doubt the
library of the parliament can verify the statement; however, no one
can doubt but that the ground rents in Queensland would in a few years
represent millions. J
Englishmen and a Scotchman cannot stand alone in respect to
agitating this national question, a question which it is believed applies
to the wrongs of Ireland, and if so, we may reasonably expect that
Irishmen in Australia who condemn the land policy of their mother-
country, and who desire (as all unquestionably do) a better future for
* I am informed that other Queenslanders have publicly spoken in favor of the
leasing principle besides the gentlemen I refer to.


the land of their adoption than has been experienced by the land of
+1 ■ will uDon tracing that the alienation of the land
MbWi a load in trying to abolish the sy—
ST the colonies. Throughout the -rH land d a ending
'mss? the -a
impression beyond its value. Yet if people would but think they
would find the word freehold, in practice, a phantom m >et, o p
with the adage that every man’s house is his wurtle.bot. P ,* ld
“ y d h f„"valh even from a
cursory glance, not to
“le a to”;:r li “so gi^the opportunity L land
"d a P S before permitting the land to be
fide settler, and, fuither, facility for land monopoly.
stances alone are sufficient to condemn the system of alienation.
Now in respect to leasing the land, the following basis for a land law
will show how desirable such a policy must be.
Basis for a Land Policy.
The following clauses do not refer to existing leases—although in re-
spectto the tenant, the suggested land law improve his
tenure for it provides the privilege for his obtaining a lease
Action to with 1 indefeasible right to five square miles of
country :
Clause 1 To work the Act, a land board to be established tor t e
Southern districts, and also a land board for the Northern districts.
2. All leases to be granted in perpetuity f °‘’areas not exceedmg 3,200
acres, subject to the land (but not improvements) being assessed y
ten years.
3 The disposal of the leases to be by auction, and 5 per ant on e
capital value P (defined by the highest bidder) to £or the
ten years. -
4 Assessments for rent to have no reference to improvements erected
on the land, but at all times to represent five: per cent. °n the
capital value of the. land, valuations to be subject to aibitrat .
5. No restrictions to the letting or selling, mortgaging or bequeathing
of the lessee’s interest in the property.
6. The Real Property Act to be amended to deal with the leasing of
the Crown lands.
7 \nv lease granted for an area exceeding 3,200 acres tc . have i a
covenant to the effect that when settlement demands more room, then the
excess of 3,200 acres is to be resumed by the C rown.


8. Where land is situated in the unsettled districts, or fifty miles from
radway communication, these leases to be exempted from assessment for
the first twenty years.
9 The sale of leases every three months, but upon application to the
land board, said board to direct a special sale to be held, but such
special sales to be reasonably well advertised.
10. All rents to be paid in advance.
Leases granted without Competition.
, U - T he land boards to appoint officers to select blocks of country
suitable for agricultural pursuits, and suitable for agricultural and
pastoral conjomed—to have the same surveyed in convenient areas for
selection. The land board to have the said land valued at per acre and
o per cent, on the capital value of the land to be the rent for the first ten
years-
-12. Any person or persons desirous to select land for occupation can do
so by applying to the land board or any agent appointed by the board
for the purpose of assisting them to do so.
13. The payment of a year’s rent entitles the selector to immediate
possession. And an indefeasible lease to be granted for the land, pro-
vided that on or before two years from taking possession he, by his
work, prove his bona jides as a settler, or forfeit his right to said land.
14. The land boards to have power to value land for pastoral pursuits
by the mile or miles, as circumstances demand, care to be exercised in re-
spect to the necessity that may arise for closer settlement.
(Note). The valuation of pastoral country to be valued so as to <nve
fair opportunity for successful operations. °
Method of collecting the Land Revenue.
. 15- Payment to be received at all post-offices in the colony when in
time for remittance to the Treasury, as follows The months of January
and June for names A to M, and February and July, names N to Z.
16. The Government to resume possession of any land, and improve-
ments thereon, on which two years’payments remain unpaid; pro\ided
that due notice has been given to the selector or assigns by not less than
four notices by post, and by advertising three times in the Government
Gazette , the leading journal in the colony, and the local papers, if anv
where the land is situated.
1 1 . No land shall be taken up in the name of a minor; and any
person or persons obtaining leases in perpetuity in excess of 3,200 acres
shall forfeit the said land, with all improvements thereon, to the Crown, *


18. The land boards to appoint in the several districts officers capable
to instruct and personally to show intending occupiers the Crown lands
open for selection. Fee to be paid by the applicant, £1 per day.
The compiler of the above “ Basis for a Comprehensive National Land
Scheme” claims the following advantages over every other Land Act: —
1. The contributions of the people maintain a government, and an
important feature of the expenditure is to insure to land owners quiet
possession. Yet absentee proprietors are according to the alienation
principle exempt from having to pay what the general community have
to pay, viz., taxes on what they consume, their clothing, <fcc., this
inequality is removed by the leasing policy, a policy that demands an
annual return from the land.
2. It gives every encouragement for labour and capital to come to the
colony, for the reason that it gives the right to go upon the land without
any delay whatever, and a special privilege to men of small means of
having all their money to work the land, without in any shape restrict-
ing the legitimate working of capital to any reasonable extent.
3. It establishes a system of contributing to the State which is equable
and perfect, because it is self-imposed ; equitable by being rateable and
inexpensive in collection, for all having to pay are interested in paying,
the result being that owners of land and the revenue are equally bene-
fited.
4. It sweeps away unworkable restrictions, and lessens the chance of
corruption.
5. Appointing officers to take would-be occupiers on the land will save
many from ruin. Immigrants hitherto when they land have received
more discouragement than encouragement by delays and difficulties in
finding land, which has eaten up a good portion of their money and great
waste of time, or tended to make the immigrant leave the colony. This
state of things the Government are bound to prevent.
6. It will insure the distribution of the land to increased numbers, and
thus produce a peace army.
Having explained the moral and political features of the question, I
will now proceed to give further proof that for a country to dispose of its
land is an evil, by simple details, describing the advantages attached
pecuniarily to the leasing principle.
Alienation of the Land.
The demerits of the alienation policy were forcibly brought to my
notice when I arrived in the colony. My first object was to have a house
of my own. and consequently I purchased land. Yes, I had the
land by parting with all my money, and many times did I stamp on the


ground remarking with emphasis, “ confound the situation, why in the
name of common sense could I not pay to the country five per cent, on
the capital value, and have security of tenure equal to a freehold. Why
do the legislators handicap the people by taking from them their means
to utilise the land.” That killing the goose for the golden egg, and act-
ing the part of a spendthrift by living on capital instead of income,
and of necessity preparing trouble for the future of the country, is a
policy that is properly described as suicidal.
The Leasing Policy.
The writer is aware that even under the leasing principle, the land,
especially in the towns, will be taken up with the view of obtaining
a profit before it is occupied by an improve)' of the land, but of necessity
such transactions will be very limited, because of the undoubted
check the assessments will have upon such transactions. However,
the leasing policy gives increased opportunities to would-be settlers on
conditions morally and politically sound. Also the leasing principle
admits of the land being had at a less cost to the settler, and at the
same time greatly to the advantage of the State. In judging the
question of costs, the reader must bear in mind that if the alienation
policy is continued, it is probable that the time is not far distant when
a land-tax will be enforced. According to the leasing principle sug-
gested, the lessee will have comparatively all his capital to work with,
and valuing the said capital at 5 per cent, the land will be a gift, if his
present contributions by way of Customs dues represent an equivalent to
the rent to be paid, and in every case the lessee gains the value of the
relief from taxation ; and even supposing that the Customs duties on
commodities were retained for a time after a Leasing Act was estab-
lished, even then the people would be gainers by the change of tenure.
Tenure.
The change of tenure from freehold to leasehold (according to my
suggestions) is only in name, for the covenants of the leases proposed
retain freedom to deal with real property in the same degree as a freehold.
Therefore, an indefeasible lease is as valuable as a freehold to the holder
for the purposes of a security.
Increment Profit.
i
In relation to the policy of increment profit, at the time I bought the
land referred to as an example, I was not so well up in political
economy as at present, therefore my feelings at that time, although to
the point, were purely selfish. It never struck me then, as it fails to
strike millions now, that the people, heirs in common in respect to the
land, and the chief factor in the increased value of the land, can in
justice demand that in addition to the first rent, one-twentieth of the
increased value shall also be devoted to paying the expenses of the


State. By those means the people would get their heritage equitably
distributed. These truths clearly prove the equity of an assessment.
Agricultural Leasing v. Freehold.
Alienation Policy.—A medium sized farm, say 200 acres, at 20s. per
acre, capital sunk £2OO (money probably worth to the owner ten per
cent.) which sum, at fixed deposit; represents £lO per annum, so that
the rent is £lO per annum; —in addition to which probably the owner
has to pay an equal amount by way of Customs dues, and, as I before
remarked, probably a land tax.
The Leasing Policy.—ln the case quoted of a farm of 200 acres
at 20s. per acre, rent £lO per annum for the first ten years; at the
termination of said time, the greater the increase of value the richer
will be the lessee, for he is only called upon to contribute one twentieth
of the increased value, so that if a lessee has to pay £1 extra rent per
annum, the said lessee is an actual gainer of £l9 per annum, besides
enjoying the increase in value during the ten years to run, and the
freedom from indirect taxation except probably that on wines and spirits ;
and, supposing, as I before inferred, that for a few years the rents
proved to be insufficient to entirely remove Customs duties on com-
modities, we can all understand that the growth of rents would be very
rapid, and would soon meet the desired end. In fact, look at the
question of leasing the lands from any point of view (provided the
inquirer is not mentally blinded by profits made), the result will
be found to be vastly in favour of the leasing policy, and will lead to the
knowledge that the alienation of the earth’s surface is a crime, for it is
a germ that produces revolution in the character of retribution, while
the leasing of the land is a blessing, for the reason that it is based
on a principle which is morally and politically sound.
My readers will naturally conclude that my comments are incom-
plete unless I furnish for consideration an approximate estimate of
the revenue to be derived from ground-rents, provided the leasing prin-
ciple form a part of the laws of Queensland. The idea is reasonable, and
I would submit that an approximate valuation, provided the basis acted
upon was acceptable to common sense, would be useful although
it may be no more than a probability. If we calculate the
capital value of the area that has been alienated, we shall be
able to form a good idea as to the probable rental the treasury
would receive at the present time if the leasing policy was in
force, and also a reasonable basis upon which future revenue could be
estimated. By this line of action we have a basis which enables
us to deal with the question of the Crown resuming the lands alienated,
a question I did not at the present time intend to discuss, for the reason
that it appeared to me wiser to confine legislation, so as to insure that no
more land be sold, but leased; for if there is any force in my arguments,
it is fair to suppose that as soon as the leasing policy was adopted, free-


holders would soon perceive that if their freeholds were converted
into leaseholds, they would benefit the community without sustaining
any pecuniary loss, and consequently they would cheerfully support
a Bill to effect the proposed conversion. However, believing that the
policy of resuming the land alienated would be a great good to the
country, I am induced to suggest the following basis in conjunction with
my proposed leasing clauses.
A basis for Resuming the Land Alienated.
As soon as practicable after the passing of the proposed Leasing Act,
the following clauses to form a new Bill.
1. —Alienated land to be resumed by the Crown, but resumption
not to be compulsatory.
2. —Freeholders may, if they so desire, receive from the Crown the
capital value of their land and an indefeasible lease, with a
covenant for rent, representing five per cent, on said capital
value.
3. —Alienated land (but not improvements) to be valued by the
Crown, subject to arbitration.
4. —Applications for change of tenure to be received at the Land
Board of the district.
5. —Change of tenure to be settled twelve months after application
or at such time as the governor-in-Council, may appoint.
6. —After ascertaining the amount required to meet payment for
the resumed land, provide the purchase money by floating a
loan.
The business is easy and simple. Example:—“A” transfers his free-
hold to the Crown, the Crown pays “ A” the price agreed upon ia cash,
and grants to “A" an indefeasible lease for said property, having cove-
nants to insure all the freedom of a freehold. And the equity of the
transaction is proven by the circumstance, that the Crown and the seller
of the land are both gainers by the change of tenure.
The Crown, willl be the gainer because the revenue from ground
rents will be easy and inexpensive to collect, the tenure will be
altered without cost or pressure, and an increasing revenue will be
derived from the per centage on increment profit. The five per cent,
on capital value, also, as a rental, will more than meet the interest
on loan, by, say one per cent. This one per cent, with the in-
creased rental from increment profit, and also another one per
cent, to be taken from the five per cent, rentals of leaseholds, granted
under the Leasing Act, will together form a sinking fund for the
liquidation of loan or loans.


The seller will also be the gainer, because a new country is of
necessity a community of workers, and necessarily money to work
with a primary object. Therefore, in relation to Queensland, it
may fairly be estimated that at least seventy-five per cent, of the
freeholders would readily give five per cent, for money. That,
by the proposed change, their security over their land is not altered
in value, that they are relieved from paying taxes on commodities, and
safe from a land tax, with the undoubted good arising from the intro-
duction of capital, are circumstances that prove beyond doubt
that sellers would be gainers by the proposed change of tenure ; and I
would further observe that the people would not fail to see that ordi-
nary justice would demand from those who had not changed their tenure
a land tax commensurate with the benefits they would enjoy through the
remission of indirect taxation consequent on the adoption of the leasing
principle. In fact simply as a matter of business, irrespective of the
future happiness of Queensland, the change of tenure recommends itself.
By way of introducing the estimated value of the land, alienated, &c.>
it is as well to observe that in respect to the Crown resuming said land,
it is not proposed to borrow at any one time, more money than sufficient
to meet engagements. The following detailed plan is suggested as a
mode of operation.
Alienated Land.
In valuing the alienated land, we have data to work upon, which
will enable us to produce an estimate of its present value that cannot
be far from the mark. The data alluded to, are furnished in the annual
report of the Under Secretary for Public Lands, in which will be found
amongst other useful statistics, a return of all lands granted in fee simple
since the first sale of 43 allotments in the year 1842, and also showing
the total purchase money. The last report, the writer has the means of
obtaining, is only up to the 31st of December, 1881. But this will be
sufficiently near for the purpose, and we can at once proceed to produce
an estimate of the capital value of all the land alienated, basing the
calculations upon the purchase money. The official returns deal with
the land under two heads; firstly, Town lands, and secondly, Country
and suburban lands, and the total purchase money, with my estimate of
increment value added, is as follows:
Town Lands.
Total purchase money of Town lands alienated up
to the year 1871, inclusive ... ... £296,075
Estimated increment value at 400 per cent. ... 1,184,300
Total purchase money of Town lands, alienated
from 1872 to 1881 inclusive ... ... 162,180
Estimated increment value at 200 per cent. ... 324,360
Total value of all Town lands up to December,
1881 ... ... ... ... £1,966,916


Country and Suburban Lands.
Total purchase money of all Country and Subur-
ban lands alienated up to the year 1881 in-
clusive ... ... ... ... £3,498,061
Estimated increment value at 200 per cent. ... 6,996,122
Total value of all land alienated up to December,
1881 ... £12,461,098
An estimate of the value of land sold during the years
1882-3, based on the report referred to.
Town Lands ... ... ... ... £60,000
Estimated increment value ten per cent. ... 6,000
Country and Suburban lands ... ... 400,000
Estimated increment value five per cent. ... 20,000
Grand total ... ... ... £12,947,098
A cursory glance at the above figures will show the reader the method
adopted to arrive at the present value of the land alienated ; and no
doubt, the result would prove tolerably correct if put to the test. But
readers who reside in the Metropolis may consider the increment value
stated to fall short of the increased value of the land, an opinion founded
on the value of land in or near the great centres of trade, and there-
fore. it is as well to state, that what are treated as town lands represent
all the Towns throughout the colony ; so that my estimate of a fivefold
increase up to 1871 ; and a threefold increase for the last ten
yeai’S in my opinion fully represents the increment value. In
respect to country lands 20s. per acre was the price up to
1868, and from 68 to 1876, the price was 155., 10s. and ss.
per acre; and from 1877 to the present time, the price is fixed
by proclamation, ranging from 7s. 6d. to 40s. per acre; and the
reader must bear in mind that increment profit will not apply to all
country lands, therefore, an estimate founded on a threefold increase
fairly represents the increment value; and ten and 5 per cent, profit on
the last eighteen months’ business, speaks for itself. However, let us
suppose that it will require thirteen millions sterling to resume all the
land that has been granted in fee-simple, and the leasing
principle in operation; then our revenue from the land at
five per cent, on capital value would be £650,000. This is a revenue that
grows with the growth of the Colony, and when it is considered that
the area of Queensland is about 678,600 square miles, of which less
than two per cent has been alienated, the mind fails to grasp the
enormous revenue that might be obtained in the near future by the
leasing policy, and so equably would the system work, that every six-
pence of the rent would be self imposed and without doubt cheerfully
paid, for all having to pay would be interested in paying. How-
ever’ paradoxical it may appear, the people would contribute less, and


the State receive more in the shape of revenue than under the present
system of indirect taxation. For example : —lt is patent that taxes of
which individually each is pecunairy interested in avoiding payment,
must of necessity require a protective staff and also the cause
of a larger per centage being deducted from the receipts, than a
system of taxation that requires no protective staff. And
for further example, we will consider the duty on an universal article
of consumption, viz: Tea. If grocers and other tradesmen who
deal in dutiable goods, were to give to their customers a memo as
follows, it would be somewhat educational : —Memo Bought of t A.B. one
lb. of tea 2s. 6d., viz. tea Is. lid., duty 6d. and in consequence of the
duty one penny, 2s. fid. The extra penny being for bonded store rent,
interest on duty paid, extra cartage &c. &c. Understanding this fair
explanation the reader cannot fail to see the advantage to the commun-
ity of a direct annual payment from the land to meet the expenses of
the state.
Sinking Fund.
Before submitting to the reader a plan for the liquidation of the
proposed loan or loans referred to, it is as well to remark that con-
sidering, that at the present time there is a staff employed which
conducts the leasing business of the country, and that the increase of
this staff to meet the work were the whole of the lands leased, would
not I presume exceed the present cost of collecting the duty on com-
modities, 1 see no reason for taking the cost of collecting, <kc., in relation
to the proposed land policy into further consideration. Nor have I
provided for the cost of floating the said loans, because it is an
uncertain quantity, which can be easily met by adding say an extra
years contribution to said fund., and extending the duratian of loan
one year.
Proposed Basis fur Sinking Fund.
Capital value of the land resumed, say ... £13,000,000
Rental five percent, on same ... ...£650,000
Interest on thirteen millions at four per cent. £520,000
Difiei’ence ... . ... ... £130,000
This sum would be placed to the sinking fund, and invested at say four
per cent., and I propose to add to said sum, one per cent, of the rental
derived from the lands leased, viz. from land disposed of by the Crown
under the leasing Act. There is a difficulty in valuing this item,
because it is impossible to say what portion of the newly leased area will
be town lands, and what portion is likely to be country and suburban
lands. But from the statistics for the year 1831, we can find the
actual area together with the purchase money of all lands alienated
during said year, and we may safely take these figures as likely to


represent the value of the lands that may be leased during the year
succeeding the one in which the alienated lands were resumed. On
turning to the statistics mentioned, we find that the total area of all
lands alienated in the year 1881 was 795,853 acres, and the total
purchase money of same amounted to £387,832, and assuming this sum
to represent the probable value of the lands that will be leased, we
should at a rental of five per cent, have a further addition to revenue
of, say £19,391 which as I before stated, I apply as follows, £3878 to
sinking fund and £15,513 to general revenue. Now we can see what
probable amount could be placed to the sinking fund at the end of the
year succeeding the one in which the proposals were adopted, viz :
Difference between interest on loans and the ground
rents received ... ... ... ... £130,000
Amount passed to the credit of the fund from the
leases referred to ... .. ... 3,878
£133,878
This amount to be invested at say four per cent.
interest ... ... ... ... 5,355
£139,233
It requires no great amount of penetration to see, that with the annual
additions to the revenue derived from new leases that will be continu-
ally granted, together with the increment profit, interest, and compound
interest added, that the sinking fund would in a comparatively short
time assume proportions large enough to pay off the whole of the amount
borrowed, and the entire ground rents then conld be devoted to general
revenue purposes, which, without question, would meet all demands on
the treasury.
In regard to our ability to borrow so large a sum as thirteen millions
sterling, I would submit that capitalists seeking investments require
three considerations, i.e. Firstly, good security; secondly, good pros-
pect of receiving interest regularly; and lastly, satisfactory provision
for returning the money borrowed. All these circumstances are as far
as possible provided for, the money being borrowed for the specific
purpose of acquiring unquestionable securities. It may be thought that
the security proposed is already pledged, but this does not effect the
position, because the loan in question is for creating an income outside
our present resources, in fact a new security in spirit; and the interest
would be equally sure, because every leaseholder would be interested in
paying, and the sinking fund would meet the last consideration,
especially as the money would be borrowed in detail. Therefore, there
is not the slightest doubt in my mind, that if the object to which the
loan was devoted was properly represented in the London money
market, the money wanted would be readily subscribed.


In conclusion I take it for granted that legislators generally are fully
aware of the political fact, that the land is the most important of all
subjects of legislation, indeed the foundation or basis of all legis-
lation, for as we deal legislatively with the land (land being the
chief source from which man produces the necessaries of life) depends
content or discontent. The alienation policy has proven worse than
a mistake, and at the present time the highest intelligence is being
exercised to find an antidote to moderate the disease, a perfect cure in
the home country seeming to be impossible; a lesson pointing to
Queensland’s future unless we adopt the leasing policy. A policy that
I trust I have shown would insure the present and future welfare of the
Colony, and as a last remark against the selling of the Crown lands.
I remind the reader that he must not shut his eyes to the truth, that
the working of the Australian land laws has proven, that justice and
political purity cannot co-exist with the alienation policy, a policy
that possesses the germ of temptation. This being the position
ordinary intelligence and common honesty of purpose point to the
necessity for a change of land tenure, and show that to continue acting
on the Australian land policy, viz., of present profit at the expense of
future contentment, is a moral wrong; and Queensland, the youngest of
the group, would do well to take the lead in another direction, and prove
to the world that we do not legislate as though after our grand children
would come chaos. It is safe to prophesy that the credit of founding a
basis for a happy future for Queensland will be awarded by the civilized
world, to the Parliament that adopts the leasing policy. That the
said policy may be adopted by the new Parliament is the prayer of the
writer.
J. W. T.
REYNOLDS, MACHINE PRINTER, ELIZABETH STREET, BRISBANE.


QUEEN INSURANCE COMPANY.
ESTABLISHED 1857.
CAPITAL - £2,000,00Q l
LIFE BRANCH:-— Large Bonuses.—Premiums Low. EIRE BRANCH Risks
accepted at Lowest Rates.
FUNDS:
Capital Paid up ‘W£180.035
Reserves 388,054
Life Accumulation Fund... 354,006
Annuity Fund ' £1t,531
Annual Income .. 663,213
The Company has paid in satisfaction of claims £3,474,376.
QUEENSLAND BRANCH—Queen Street Brisbane.
- U“ JAMES THOMSON, Local Manager.
N. B. —Active Agents wanted.
BY SPECIAL APPOINTMENT
TO HIS EXCELLENCY.
JOHN HffCNAB,
COACH-BUILDER,
GEORGE STREET, BRISBANE.
EVERY DESCRIPTION OF CARRIAGE MADE TO ORDER,
leyniras! neatly exeented at the lament remunerative privet
METROPOLITAN
Printing and Publishing Office,
(OPPOSITE THEATRE ROYALJ,
ELIZABETH STREET, BRISBANE.
i§MM S
PROPRIETOR


AUSTRALIAN WIDOWS’ FUND LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY,
LIMITED.
OFFICES : Melbourne, Brisbane, Sydney, Adelaide and Launceston.
Queensland Offices :
219 Q/TTEZEIsr STREET, BRISBANE.
CONDUCTED ON MUTUAL PRINCIPLES.
Board of Directors :
Thomas Finney, J.P., Chairman. | John Petrie, J.P, | John Fenwick, J.P.
Solicitor : J. B. Baxter Bruce.
Bankers : Queensland National Bank Limited,
WILLIAM DRAPER, Resident Secretary.
J. B. ELLIS,
51 Q/CTEEEISr STREET,
BRISBANE.
EXLEY & GODFREYSQN,
(Late W. POTTS),
TAILOBS,
111 QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE, Opposite ‘ Courier’ Office.
GENTLEMEN desiring a First-class and Fashionable Garment can rely on se-
curing it at the above establishment. Prices strictly moderate. Instructions
for self-measurement and patterns forwarded on application,
BRISRAHE PICTURE FRAME WORKS,
c. Knri®HTS 9
GILDER,
O.X7.EEIIT STB GET, BBISB &.TTB,
Next to the London Chartered Bank.
Prints, Drawings, and Needlework framed in the best style. Old Frames repaired
and regilt. Estimates given for framing Show Cards, &c.
THE TRADE SUPPLIED AT LOWEST PRICES.


®ltc Brisbane pmrmaoj,
48 QUEEN STREET
9
Direct Importers of
Drugs, Druggists’ Sundries, Perfumery, &c.
W E i« e^. ln Stock a large assortment of Patent Medicines, Perfumery,
. -Loilet Requisites, Surgical Appliances, Chemical Apparatus, &c.; also a
Choice Assortment of Perfumery Cases, Smelling Pottles. Hair-Brushes, &c.,
suitable for presents. ’ ’
Allau & Hanbury’s Tonga for Neural-
gia
Allen & Hanbury’s Pectoral Fruit
Pastilles
Allan & Hanbury’s Tasteless Castor
Oil
Wyeth & Son's Compressed Tablets
Squires’ Dialysed Iron
Bravais’ Dialysed Iron
Boudault’s Pepsine
Boudault’s Pepsine Lozenges
Morson’s Pepsine Lozenges
Osborne’s Golden Ear-drops
Ferris & Co.’s Anodyne Amyl. Colloid
Richardson & Co.’s Specialities
Price’s Golden Oil
Bertraud Freres’ Rose Water
Macassar and Macassarine Oils
Nerwich’s Arna Rosa Tooth Paste
Bobare’s Aurcoline
Eno’s Solution of Roses
Eno’s Phosporised Iron and Quinine
Sainsbury’s Lavender Water
Perk’s Lavender Water
Ilannay’s Rodeletia
Ashton & Parson’s Authoxanthum
Ashton & Parson’s Matricaria Powders
Pepper’s Quinine and Iron Tonic
Pepper’s Sulpholine Lotion
Pepper’s Taraxacum and Podophyllin
Mwmym Kept in Stacks
THE
DISPENSING DEPARTMENT
Is distinct from the rest of the Establisement, and is replete with a Well-assorted
Stock of Drugs of the Purest Quality,
Prescriptions and Family Receipts Dispensed with the greatest Care and Accuracy
©:
£>J i [rX?S S
in\i J s*v\ J 8
DISPENSING CHEMISTS.


MANUFACTURERS of Cabin Pilot Bread, and every descrip-
tion of Plain and Fancy Biscuits.
IMPORTERS of Wedding and Christening Cake Ornaments,
every description of Fancy Confectionery,
Chocolates, Bon Bons, Cosaques, &c.
Baker’s Requisites.
Of all descriptions supplied.
Queensland Surprise
and Swag Jewel.
PACKETS.
F. W. W. & Co. beg to call particular attention to the
varied assortment of
SUBPRISE PACKETS
Manufactured by them, which from the weight of sweets
and quality of the Prizes they contain are not to be
equalled by any imported.
PRICE LISTS ON APPLICATION
AT THE
STEAM BISCUIT FACTORY,
MAK, Y STREET,


AUGUST MEMO.
FROM
ALFRED SHAW & CO.
We have pleasure in stating that our new building is completed for the
Implement and Machinery Department, and would request a personal inspec-
tion by any of our country friends visiting town. The building is situated at
the corner of Creek and Adelaide Streets, and has a frontage of seventy-four
feet to the former and one hundred and thirty-two feet to the latter, giving
ample capacity for showing our large stock of
Horizontal, Vertical, and Portable Steam Engines
Yankee Gang and Sulky Ploughs
Wood Working Machinery of all kinds, Saw Benches
English Colonial and Yankee Ploughs, Harrows, and Scarifiers
Com Shelters, Corn Mills, Corn Crackers
Domestic Flour Mills with dresser
Buggies, Waggons, Carriages, etc.
Root Pulpers and Slicers
Horse Hay Rakes
One and Two Horse Mowing Machines
Reapers, Twine Binders, Harvesters
Weighing Machines and Weighbridges
Belting, Packing, Sheet Rubber Insertion and Mill Supplies
Portable Forges, Black smiths’ Drilling Machines
Pumps, Windmills, Earth Scoops, and Dam-making Ploughs.
And a large variety of Implements and Machines too numerous
to particularize.
REYNOLDS, PRINTER, BRISBANE.
