

AN ACCOUNT OF SOME EXPERIMENTS IN THE
ACCLIMATISATION OF TWO SPECIES OF
AUSTRALIAN FRESHWATER PERCH
Reprinted from Report of the Austration Association for [?]
of Science. Melbourne Meeting, 1913. Vol. X. . .
[ISSUED DECEMBER, 1913.]
SECTION D.
BY DAVID G. STEAD, F.L.S
By Authority
ALBERT J.MULLETT,GOVERNMENT PRINTER,MELBOURNE
1913.




PROCEEDINGS OF SECTION D.
4—AN ACCOUNT OF SOME EXPERIMENTS IN THE
ACCLIMATISATION OF TWO SPECIES OF AUSTRALIAN
FRESHWATER PERCH.
Reprinted from Report of the Australasian Association for the Advancei\erQf>f y
Science. Melbourne Meeting, 1913. Vol. XI V.
By David G. Stead, F.L.S., Superintendent of Fishery Investigation,
New South Wales State Fisheries Department.
Introduction.
In the following paper, a brief account is given of three experi-
ments in connexion with the transferral of two species of Fresh-water
Perch, indigenous to Australia, to waters in which they did not previously
exist. The two species dealt with were the Mountain or Macquarie
Perch, Macquaria australasica Cuv. and Yah, and the Australian Bass
or Eastern “ Fresh-water ” Perch, Percalates fluviatilis htead.
The Mountain or Macquarie Perch is a very variable species
occurring in considerable abundance in the waters of the great Murray
River system. A small variety of it (usually of a dark colour) is also
found inhabiting a number of our east-flowing streams, such as t e
Shoalhaven River, the Hawkesbury River, the Hunter River, and
their tributaries, and probably a number of the others farther north.
In the western rivers of New South Wales it penetrates far up into the
highlands—in the Murrumbidgee and its feeders for instance, being
found within a few miles of their respective sources. The fish attains
exceptionally, a weight of as much as 5 lbs., and is often taken at
between 2 and 3 lbs. Its flesh is of fine flavour and consistency, and is
very white, and altogether it is a very estimable fish.
As a sporting fish, the mountain or Macquarie perch may hardly
compare with the Australian bass, but it is very highly valued by anglers
and riverside residents familiar it, as its capture forms a pleasant
alternative to the pursuit of the rainbow trout (in a , e
west-flowing waters of the southern tableland of New South Wales),
and the Australian bass (in eastern streams). This perch is usually
taken by rod and line, with a worm or other live bait.
In shape it is somewhat “ thick set ” and high in the body, with
large scales and large eyes, a rounded tail, and a very snub nose.
The mouth is relatively small, and the upper profile of the head is
usually excavate or concave ; this, with the high body, giving o e
fish the “ roach-back ” shape, often spoken of.
The mountain or Macquarie perch varies m coloration from a
dark silvery (or even occasionally a somewhat whitish appearance)
to a dark brownish-black, according to the nature of the waters in which
it is found. In certain lowland waters like the Kyalite or Edwards
River, a very common, noticeable feature of the fish is its white ins,
from which comes a familiar name of white-eyed perch. This feature
is not seldom to be seen in examples from other localities also.
15510.


The Ahstealian Bass, or Basteeh “ Feesh-watee” P*»oh. i*
that fine food—and game-fish which is found inhabiting many of t
east-flowing rivers of eastern Australia. It is particularly abundan
in the eastdlowing rivers of New South Wales, as well as those flowing
Lakes in Victoria, As a sporting fish rt - consrdered
bv very many to be second to none in Australia. Certainly it is a tine
fish a game fighter, and of great edible value. It is akepossessedof
an elegant shape, and, apart from its importance as a food fish,
fish to make the heart of its captor glad indeed.
The Australian bass attains, exceptionally, a weight of as much
as 6* lbs.. but, ordinarily, one of 3 lbs. in weight may be looked upon
as a large fish.
Of recent years this fish has been very greatly sought after by
riverside folk, and city anglers, alike; and special measures:fo
future preservation have of late been instituted by the New South Wales
State Department of Fisheries.
Though a permanent denizen of fresh water—in which it spawns
the Australian bass occurring in the lower reaches of the rivers are
often found to take to the normally saltwater portions of a number of
the rivers during heavy freshets ; returning again as soon as the water
conditions are favorable. .
As I have elsewhere pointed out, this perch has been confused in
the past with the estuary perch, a fish from which it differs greatly,
both P in habits and conformation. The estuary perch is a less active
fish more “slab-sided,” of greater depth, having the upper profile of
fhp'head excavate (this giving even a more “ roach-backed appearance
than in the Macquarie perch, before referred to), and possessing a sma ler
and leslforked q tail. though the estuary perch « able to penetrate
far up into the rivers, as also does the sea mullet, like the latter
has to come to the salt-water to spawn, while the Australian bass, as
before mentioned, spawns in its home waters. The egg of the estuary
perch, it may also be mentioned, is freely floating or P while that
of the Australian bass is smaller, and is demersal and attached.
The Australian bass is captured usually by rod and line, using a
living bait, or else artificial flies or spinning baits of many designs
In of nature, the fish subsists upon aquatic insects insects that
111 into the water from the air, frogs, small fishes (including its own
kind) small reptiles, prawns or shrimps—and, in fact almost any living
thins in the waters, according to circumstances and locality. Where
the river banks are in anything like their natural condition, however,
the principal food consists of insects. Sometimes mistakes are ma e,
however apart from those induced by anglers As a case in point I
may mention that the stomach of an Australian bass taken by me n


Hunter Elver, at Oakhampton, contained a small P^ ce of wood fr
the gunwale of a pulling-boat. This was painted a bright blue on th
one side and the fish had probably mistaken it for an insect.
Having given the reader a general idea of the two species of perch
under special consideration in this paper, it will be well to-paw> on to
an account of their attempted acclimatisation in waters outside their
original habitat.
I.-INTRODUCTION OF THE MOUNTAIN,OR MACQUARIE,PERCH
INTO THE SNOWY RIVER
For a good many years past the section of the Snowy River (and
Wflorsf running through the southern corner of the btate ot iNew
South Wales has been justly renowned for its trout, which for so ong
have become’firmly established in its glorious, sparkling, upland waters.
Large numbers the European brown, or
f fl rio var ausonii), and the Californian rainbow trout (Salmo indeus
notably the latter—are taken annually out of the waters of this section
of the southern tableland, by the many visitors and residents alike
It has long been thought, and at times informally suggested to
me hat" would be a goo'd thing if anglers had the opportunity of
"re
every probability that a percoid fish once established might add larg 7
to the P food supply of residents, while proving an additional attract o
to visitors The question was t What fish would be suitable ? The
onlv percoid fish naturally occurring in any numbers m the upland
Manaro streams-such as the upper waters of the
r=;:,S ss.
° ffet Durm* h FSary S T9l2’Mr. Alfred F. Bose, of Cooma (who has
being carried out.


Accordingly, during the same month, I repaired to Cooma, equipped
with the necessary nets, transport cans, &c., Mr. Dawson accompanying.
The operations for the capture of the perch were carried out at Tarsus,
some miles (down the Murrumbidgee) from Cooma, and about 5 miles
from Bunyan Railway Station. At this point the Murrumbidgee
leaves its rugged gorges in the mountains, and begins to meander about
on the upland plain, only to enter the rugged country again later on.
Owing to a sudden downpour on several parts of the watershed of
the Upper Murrumbidgee just before my arrival, the water was very
turbid ; and was loaded with decomposing debris— principally sheep
and rabbit droppings. This had contaminated the water to such an
extent as to render it almost unfit for fish life ; and, consequently,
considerable difficulty was experienced in keeping the fish alive as
thev were captured. This was all the more noticeable when it is
considered that the mountain or Macquarie perch is—with good water—
a very hardy fish. .
Altogether 414 perch, ranging from 3 to 9 inches in length, were
placed (in two consignments) in the waters of the Snowy River by
Mr A F Rose and myself. The first consignment, consisting of 205
perch 3 to 8 inches in length, was put in at Coolamatong Crossing, some
miles above Dalgety, on Sunday afternoon, 25th February. The second
consignment, comprising 209 perch, from 3 to 9 inches in length was
put in the river at Hickey’s Crossing—a short distance below Buckley s
Crossing (Dalgety)—two days later. A few of the perch were
sexually mature, others would, if surviving, become so at the end of
1912, and most of the remainder at the end of the present year.
Both consignments were carried in 8-gallon trout cans, as rapidly
as possible, by speedy motor-car. Under the circumstances, i.e.,
considering the badness of the water, I am doubtful whether I could
have been nearly so successful with any other form of conveyance.
Perhaps I need not be regarded as too optimistic when I say that
great results may reasonably be expected from the introduction of this
fine food and sporting fish into the Snowy River. As regards the natural
conditions it appears to me that no river is more suitable for the
mountain perch, and it should fill a place in these waters which is at
present practically unoccupied. Ever since my first introduction to
the waters of the Snowy, I have seen that what might be called a
“ natural vacancy ” existed, which apparently could be filled only by
a fish of the perch family, and in the mountain perch we have a fish
that is already adapted *by nature to our mountain streams, and is
therefore particularly suitable for the waters into which it has been
put. If only a moderate number of those planted survive, and are
able to reproduce, it should not be many years before the fish is firmly
established. It will then add largely to the attractiveness of the
Snowy to the growing stream of angling tourists, and, in addition,
will supply local residents with a very fine food fish, which, as regards


edible value, is, I think, generally considered to be far m excess of
the trout, though the trout is, beyond compare, its superior as a
6 fish.
ga There will, perhaps, be some who may fear that the introduction
of this fish will be detrimental to the trout so firmly established in these
waters ; but I may say, unreservedly, that there is no real ground for
any fears in this direction. The mountam perch and the rainbow trout
occupy practicably two separate spheres of activity in our streams ,
even if they may, perhaps, eat a few of each other when they ge
opportunity. That the mountain perch is not a natural enemy
of the rainbow trout is amply borne witness to by the fact that the
latter has been able to so firmly establish itself in waters such as the
Upper Murrumbidgee, Umeralla, &c., in which the mountam perch
already naturallv existed in such large numbers.
Quite apart from any special steps that may be taken by the State
Fisheries Department, having for their object the protection and con-
servation of the mountain or Macquarie perch in its new surroundings,
it is earnestly to be hoped that, should the fish succeed, all anglers who
fish this river for the next few years will do their utmost to assist
in its acclimatisation by returning to the stream all or any fish of th
species which may be captured in any part of the Snowy River above
the falls There will be no excuse for any one on the plea of want o
knowledge, as the fish is nothing like a trout, and no perch of any kind
have ever been caught in these waters.
II.-INTRODUCTION OF AUSTALIAN BASS INTO TEH WATERS
OF FIJI.
Late in the year 1910 the Colonial Secretary of Fiji, the Honorable
Evre Hutson, C.M.G., wrote me on the question of fish acclimatisation,
asking, principally, for an opinion as to whether rainbow trout would
be likely to prosper in the rivers of Fiji. At my request a number
river observations were made, and temperatures were taken ; and
upon receiving these I formed the opinion that, as far as they went
the indications were not altogether favorable to the acclimatisation of
any species of trout. The main objection, of course, was that the
general temperature was too high. I suggested, however, that our
common eastern fresh-water perch-the Australian bass-seemed to
be the most suitable form to experiment with, as the conditions seemed
very favorable for the permanent acclimatisation of that fine ga
fish In due course, Mr. Hutson, on behalf of the Fijian Government,
approached the Chief Secretary of the State of New South Wales, and
an arrangement was come to under which a number of the fish were
to be obtained by the State Fisheries Department of New South Wales
and forwarded to Fiji. . A ... f 10*
On the 6th May, 1912, a consignment consisting of 135 Austral a
bass was despatched by the s.s. Makura , in the care of an assistant.


These ranged from 3 inches to 5 inches in length. They were conveyed
in 20 trout cans, of 8 gallons capacity, each about half full, and
2 box tanks, on rockers, each containing about 8 gallons of water.
Through the kindness and personal interest of the master of the
Mahura, Captain Gibb, it was possible to have the whole consignment
placed upon the captain’s balcony—the best position on the ship,
notwithstanding some difficulties that were experienced during the
voyage to Fiji.
All the fishes were captured under my personal direction, in the
Nepean River, immediately below the weir, at Penrith. As captured,
they were placed in a large basket, through which was a regular and
moderately strong flow of water. I mention these details, because
it is the “ small ” things in live fish handling and transport which are
of the greatest importance, and I am of opinion that the great care
taken of the fish both at the time of capture and while they were
awaiting transport was one of the most important factors in leading
the experiment to a successful issue. I have found that the wildest
of river fishes—even trout —will settle down easily to confinement in a
covered basket-ware receptacle. In this connexion I may mention
that I have had as many as 150 Australian bass from 3 to 8 inches long
in a basket 40 inches long, 26 inches broad, and 20 inches high, immersed
to a depth of about 12 inches in the water, for several days, in a moderate
current, and the fishes were, apparently, as fresh as when they were
put in. Probably twice that number could have been kept in the basket
under the circumstances.
During the voyage to Fiji—which was made via Auckland —the
canvas jackets of the cans were kept constantly wetted with
fresh water (when not splashed by the spray; which not
seldom happened, notwithstanding the favorable position on the
steamer) so as to keep the temperature of the water down.
Occasionally, also, to assist in the aeration of the water, the
assistant who accompanied the consignment drew off part of the
water and squirted it back again with a large brass
There was, of course, a good deal of surface splashing of the water at
times during transit, and that had the effect of aerating the water
very considerably. At my wish, no food was given during the voyage,
as I wished to reduce the danger of the fouling of the water to a
minimum.
Upon arrival at Fiji 109 out of the 135 sent were alive, which,
under the circumstances, may be considered as exceedingly satisfactory.
Of these, 58 were taken to the Sigatoka River (by Government steamer
and native bearers), where, at Nadarivatu, at an elevation of
2,400 feet, 56 fishes were placed alive. The exact location where
the fishes were put is a kind of backwater, into and out of which the
waters strains through a growth of “reeds.” Mr. Hutson had
originally mentioned this spot to me, and it was agreed that it seemed a


Date.
Time.
Tem-
perature.
Remarks.
6/5/12 |
12 noon ..
56°
Left Sydney
6 p.m.
58°
7/5/12
12 noon till 11 p.m.
57°
8/5/12
7 a.m. ,, 11 p.m.
56°
' Salt spray flying over ship.
7 a.m, ,, 12 noon
57°
9/5/12 |
(
4 p.m. „ 11 p.m.
7 a.m. ..
56°
54°
10/5/12/
12 noon ..
52°
11 p.m. ..
50°-52°
f
7 a.m. ..
50°-52°
At Auckland
11/5/12 j
12 noon ..
53°-54° '
then till 11 p.m. ..
54°
12/6/12 |
7 a.m. till 12 noon
54°
11 p.m. ..
58°
/
7 a.m. ..
60°
Temperature of ship’s water 72°
13/5/12 J
12 p.m. ..
5 p.m. till 11 p.m.
64°
66°
V
5 a.m
70°
At Fiji
14/5/12J
12 noon
4 p.m. ..
74°
74°
15/6/12
12 noon ..
74°
66°
At Nadarivatu
16/5/12 |
6 a.m. ..
64°
suitable place, Mr. Russell, Magistrate, of Nadarivatu, and another
Fiji Government officer, Mr. Hunter, as well as Mr. D. T. Stewart,
of the Colonial Secretary’s Office, Fiji, were witness to the placing of
this section of the Australian bass in the Sigatoka River. Fifty-one
Australian bass were sent away to the Navua River, and it is understood
that these all arrived at their destination safely. From a report of
the Colonial Secretary, Fiji, dated 11th July, 1912, it is gathered that
subsequent to the introduction of the fishes in the Navua River there
had been a good deal of wet weather in the mountains. This, perhaps,
was a little unfortunate, as it was very desirable for the Australian
bass to be able to keep together as much as possible for some time at
least after their introduction. The reports received from the Sigatoka
River were stated to be satisfactory.
Temperature of Water in Cans during Voyage.
The following temperature records taken on the journey from
Sydney to Fiji will be of interest: —
The temperature of the water of the Sigatoka River at the time of
placing the Australian bass therein was 64° F., which was very suitable
for the species.


Though the consignment is not a large one, it is hoped that a number
of the fishes sent may survive to propagate their species in their new
environment. From what I have learnt of the waters in which the
fishes have been placed, I would say that they seem eminently suited
to the species. In introducing a new form like this to waters foreign
to its original habitat, it seems only fair to it that the first consignment
should be supplemented by others for at least two or three years.
The successful landing of such a large percentage of those sent
was intensely gratifying, and there can now be no doubt that with still
better arrangements it would be possible to carry this fine fish for very
long periods. In the case of an extended voyage, however, I would
recommend very careful feeding during transit.
III.-FIRST TRANSFER OF AUSTRALIAN BASS FROM EASTERN TO
WESTERS WATERS OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
For many years the introduction of the above-mentioned magni-
ficent food and game fish into our western waters has been talked of,
but no move in the direction of carrying out such work has ever been
made.
There are many places which are personally known to me in
which there is every reason to believe this fish would flourish. lam
thinking mostly of rivers like the Macquarie and other streams, which
usually consist of long chains of splendid waterholes, with short “ ripples ”
in between —-at least on the portions of such rivers which exist on the
western slope, properly so called. For very apparent natural (physio-
graphical) reasons, the Australian bass has not hitherto found its way
into these waters.
While the consignment for Fiji was being obtained, it occurred to
me that the time appeared to be most propitious for the carrying out
of the first step toward an extensive introduction of this fish to some
of the feeders of the great Murray drainage area. The Minister having
given his approval, the first transplanting of the Australian bass from
the eastern into the western waters was quickly consummated.
On Tuesday, 7th May, 1912, I took a consignment of 60 fine fishes
(ranging from 4 to 9 inches in length) from Penrith to Wellington.
The fish were all liberated in excellent condition in a splendid “ hole ”
on the course of the Bell River, not far from its junction with the
Macquarie River.
The Bell River runs through Wellington, and a little lower down
joins the Macquarie. Notwithstanding the serious dryness of the
season, the Bell River was still running nicely. On its sinuous course
through the town is a fine deep waterhole of very considerable extent,
very “ snaggy,” and of such a nature as to offer the fish good natural
protection. This was the place chosen for the bass.


The water conditions being so good, it occurred to me that it would
be an additional advantage in assisting to preserve the fish if they were
placed where they would be to some extent “ under the eyes ” of those
townspeople who would be likely to assist. For their better protec-
tion, a short section of the Bell River, about the vicinity where the fish
were liberated, has been closed against all fishing.
It is worthy of mention, for record purposes, that the bass were
conveyed in 10 cans, 6 in each, and that the temperature of the
water varied from about 56° to 58° (The Nepean River water at the
Penrith weir during the previous few days had varied from 58° to 62°,)
On the following day I started from Penrith with 133 fish, ranging
from 3 to 1\ inches, for Rylstone ; the object being to plant the fish
in a fine lagoon about 600 yards long, situated on the course of the
river at “ Rawden ” Station, about 5 miles (by road) from Rylstone.
Upon arrival at Rylstone Railway Station the fish were all right;
biit, as the morning was very sharp, misty, and frosty, I felt a little
anxious about the journey to “ Rawden,” as I knew there would be a
sudden and considerable fall in the temperature of the water in the cans.
Mr. J. T. Cox, of Rawden, was in waiting with a buggy and a fast horse,
and we started off with the fish (which had been in 8 cans) in 4
cans. Two of the wettest of the cans were covered with a buggy rug
to keep the keen air away from them, and the remaining two had to be
left exposed. The jacket of one of these, it is interesting to note, was
very nearly dry, consequently the water in the can was protected to
some extent from the air. The other was very wet, and became very
cold. When turned out into the river every fish was alive, and those
in all but the last can were very lively. About one-third of the fish in
the fourth can, however, were partly benumbed with the cold, and lay
on their sides when placed in the lagoon. Care was taken to see that
they did not become fouled with the water-plants, and in a few minutes
we (Mr. Cox and myself) had the great satisfaction of seeing all the fish
come round and swim away.
All the above details are given, because it is just these little things
which have to be attended to and which make all the difference between
success and failure in fish transport. ?
This second stage of the first essay at acclimatisation of Australia’s
finest indigenous fresh-water game fish formed a particularly severe
test.
In the first section (those that I took to Bell River at Wellington)
there were 6 only in each can, on a cool all-day trip, when there was
little alteration in the temperature. In the second section there were
about 17 in each can, on an all-night trip, and as many as 33 to
35 per can during the 5-mile drive, with a rapidly-falling water
temperature.
It was decidedly gratifying, therefore, that 193 bass should be taken
away and introduced into new waters without the loss of a single fish.
15510. b


Great care was exercised throughout the whole operations, and no
one was allowed to so much as touch a fish with the hands. The mode
of keeping the fish while in captivity in the Nepean was also largely
responsible for the success. There have not been wanting in the past
years many who, whenever the question of the transportation of the
Australian bass into western waters was put forward, urged that it
would be very difficult, and that at least great loss would be
experienced. Such has not been our experience, because common sense
methods have been used.
Though we will, naturally, not look for big results for some time,
there appears to be every reason to consider that the bass will prosper
in their new home, notwithstanding the many and diverse enemies
which they—as in their present natural habitat —will have to contend
with. It is hoped that further consignments will be placed in other
portions of the Cudgegong and other Macquarie River feeders, as well
as some of the many other suitable western waters at an early date.
As in the case of the Bell River, it was considered advisable to
•close a small portion of the river here to fishing to give the fishes a
better chance of surviving.
By Authority: Albert J. Mtjllett, Government Printer, Melbourne.




