













AN
ACCOUNT
OF THE
Mutinous Seizure of the Bounty.
WITH THE SUCCEEDING
HARDSHIPS OF THE CREW,
To which are added,
Secret Anecdotes of the Otaheitean Females.
LONDON:
Printed for Bentley and Co. No. 22, Fetter Lane ; and fold by
H. D. SYMONDS, Paternofter Row.




REFERENCE
TO THE PRINCIPAL INCIDENTS.
Page
Seizure of Lieutenant Bligh - " 1X
Singular Exclamations of the Pirates - - - - 16
Effects of Conference on Chriflian, the Leader • *7
Departure of the Boat from the Side of the Ship - - l 3
Arrival of the Crew at Xofoa - ~
Treacherous Behaviour of the Natives of Tofoa 3 2
Stoning to Death of John Noiton “ 23
Difinal Situation of the Crew
The Captain’s Reduction of each Man’s final! Allowance 43
Fortunate Landing on the Ifland Direction 44
Spirited Conduct of Lieutenant Bligh - - - 55
Singular Act of Carelefsnefs in one of the Crew - - 56
The Boat again configned to the open Sea 59
Arrival on the Coaft of Timor 62
at Coupang, the refidence of a Dutch Governor - 65
Secret Anecdotes of the Otaheitean Females - - - 7°




ACCOUNT
OF THE
Mutiny on Board the Bounty.
THE Bounty armed fhip failed from England
in the autumn of 1787, on a voyage to the Society
Iflands, for bread-fruit trees, intended for the Weft
India Settlements ; in which climate, it was the opi-
nion of Sir Jofeph Banks, they might be fuccefs-
fully cultivated, and prove a convenient fucceda-
neum for other provifions in times of fcarcity.
After a profperous voyage, they arrived at their
place of deftination, and employed five months,
and about three weeks in collecting 1015 fine bread-
fruit plants, and many other natural productions of
the country, in aflateofhighprefervation: thus laden,
they departed from Otaheite on the 4th of April,
1789.
B


But before we proceed to relate one of the mott
unparalleled a£ls of mutiny, that perhaps was ever
heard of, or recorded, it may not be improper to
prefent the reader with a lift of the fliip’s crew dil-
tinguittiing thofe who adhered to their Commander,
and thofe who headed and compofed the confpir
racy j the fecrefy of which reminds us of Sem~
pronius-
“ Confpiracies no fooner flionld be form’d than executed !•’
PIRATES.
Fletcher Chrittian, Matter’s Mate
Peter Haywood
Edward Young
George Stewart,
Midlhipmen
Charles Churchill, Matter at Arms
John Mills, Gunner’s Mate
James Morrifon, Boatfwain’s Mate
Thomas Burkitt, Able Seaman
Matthew Quintal
John Sumner
John Millward
William M’Koy
Henry Hillbrant
Michael Byrne
William Mufprat
Alexander Smith
John Williams


Thomas Ellifon
Ifaac Martin
Richard Skinner
Matthew Thompfoti
William Brown
Jofeph Coleman
Charles Norman
Thomas M'lntotti
tn the whole 25 j being the mott able of the crew.
CRE W, remaining with Mr. Bligh,
John Fryer, Matter
Thomas Ledward, Afting Surgeon
David Nelfon, Botanift
Willian Peckover, Gunner
William Cole, Boatfwain
William Purcell, Carpenter
William Elphinfton, Mailer’s Mate,
Thomas Hayward
John Hal let
Midlhipmen
John Norton
Peter Linkletter
arter Mafters
Lawrence Lebogue, Sailmaker
John Smith
Thomas Hall
C °° ks
Qeorge Simpfon, Quarter Matter’s Mate
Robert Tinkler, a Boy
B 2


Robert Lamb, Butcher
Mr. Samuel, Clerk.
The Bounty anchored at one of the Friendly
Illands (Annamooka) on the 24th of the fame
month j and failed on the 27th, afcerhaving procur-
ed a fupply of wood and water. Bur, owing to light
winds, they were not clear of the iflands on the
evening of the 28th : at night, the Captain directed
his courfe toward Tofoa. Juft before dawn of day,
however, on the following morning, Lieutenant
Bligh was rouzed from deep, in his cabin, by the
fudden entrance of Chriftian, the mafter’s mate j
Churchill, the mafter at arms; Mills, the gunner’s
mate; andßurket, a common failor. They inftantly
feized their commander; and under the immediate
and horrid menaces ofinftant death in cafe of outcry
or refiftance, they tied his hands behind his back
with a cord. But this alarming fituation had little
influence on the natural courage of Mr. Bligh ; he
called loud enough for afliftance to alarm every one
on board. His efforts, however, proved fruitlefs,
as the plan was too well concerted to be overthrown
by any common endeavour : befides, the four de-
fperadoes who furrounded the Captain, three others,
without, ftood guard at the door; and all the of-
ficers, not in the fecret, and who happened to be off
duty, were confined in a fimilar manner. Chriftian,
the leader, held in his hand a cutlafs; the others
were armed w'ith mufquets and bayonets.


Without allowing Mr. Bligh time Tor collect'd
reflection, he was taken from his bed, and hurried on
deck, dedicate of every covering except his (hirtj
his hands, all the time, ciofely, and indeed painfully
confined with the cords, with which they had previ-
ously prevented the podlbility of his making that re-
fi(lance of which they knew him capable. If
words, indeed, could have procured febmiffion, the
Captain was by no means deficient in exertions of
that kind ; but his interrogatories and threats were
anl vered by new affurances of inftant death, in cafe
he did not defid.
Mr. Samuel, the clerk, by feme means or other,
obtained leave to go on deck} as did the boatfwain
and carpenter ; when the fird objedl that met their
fight, was their Commander Handing abaft the
mizen mad, his hands dill confined to his back, and
under a drong guard ot the confpirators. The other
officers and gentlemen, over whom watch was kept,
of nccefllty continued in their cabins.
In this dace of things, the Pirates ordered the
boatfwain, on pain of death in cafe of rcfufal, to
hoid out the Launch; and he, feeing no likelihood
of affairs taking a different turn, reluflantiy obey-
ed: when Mr. Hayward, Mr. Haller, and Mr.
Samuel, were ordered to occupy it. This pro-
ceeding again called up the refentment of Lieute-
nant Bligh ; feme he threatened, and others he en-
deavoured to convince: but to no purpofe did he


exert his voice— 1 “ Hold your tongue* or die 1” wa§
all ihe anf er returned to his menaces and his foli-
citations. At length, finding that the Captain was
not to be eafily reftrained, Chriftian catched up a
bayonet, inftead of the cutlafs he before held, and
drawing the cords of his hands mod unmercifully
tight, made ferious indications of ufmg his weapon*
while the furrounding mifcreants flood to fecond
their inglorious leader, their bayonets fixed, and
their pieces ready to dilcharge. The Captain, thus
awed, opportunity was embraced to lend many of
the people into the boat: from which imagining,
that thefe were the devoted companions of his
future deftiny, he boldly made another effort to re-
claim and conciliate* but the attempt only produced
a repetition of the mod impudent threats againd
the life of a man, to whom many of them owed in-
finite obligations.
The officers under confinement were next brought
from their cabins, and compelled to hurry precipi-
tately into the boat * the Captain, all the while,
being kept by himfelf, abaft the mizen-mad, under
the drift watch of Chriftian, who held his bayonet
ready, in cafe of any attempt at refiftance. In this
fuuacion of affairs, the pirates, by order of their
mafter, each received a dram, to encourage them>
no doubt, in the arduous moment of reparation
from the companions of their voyage. But, not-
w ithftanding, Ifaac Martin, one of the guard placed


over Captain Bligh, contrived fecretly to communi-
cate to that gentleman his with toaffift in liberating
him; probably impelled by the intrepid manner in
which his commander behaved, though defencelefsi
often reproaching the Unrounding banditti with
their perfidy, and daring them to difeharge their
loaded pieces at him. The repentance of this man,
however, was foon difeovered; and when he law
that his fmglc exertions would prove of no effeft,
he bravely retired to the boat-, but he was fhortly
after compelled to return, and again refume his
ftation.
Chriftian, after fome little hefitation, determined
to commit the carpenter to the boar, and to retain
the mates for his own purpofe. No one now re-
mained on board except the mutineers and Captain
Bligh; on which Chriftian addrefted him as follows
•— f Come, Sir, your officers and men are in the
boat; you muft go with them: refiftance will occa-
fion your inftant death !’ After this fpeecb, they
feized him by the cords that bound his hands; and,
while fome contributed their help to pufh him into
the boat, others, who were armed, hovered over
him, as if fearful that his wonted fuperiority required
but the fmalleft accident to difconcert their deteftablc
defigns.
The cord, with which Captain Bligh’s hands
had been {ecured, was loofened fhortly after he
quitted the ftiip. Lofing all hopes of regaining


the Bounty, he now defined that fome arms might
be thrown over: but his rcqueft was treated with
ridicule i ‘ You know,’ faid they, * where you
are eming 1 you will have no occafion for arms.’
After they were veered aftern, however, fome one,
more compaffionate than the reft, flung four cutlaf-
fes into the boat, a few pieces of pork, and fome
cloaths. It muft here be recorded, that Joleph
Coleman, the armourer, and M‘(ntofh and Norman,
the two carpenter’s mates, had no inclination to
follow the adventitious fate of their abandoned fhip-
mates ; and in order to prove, publicly, their de-
teftation of the meafures purfued, they called to
the boat’s crew to witnefs their reluftance.
During thefe tranfadtions, the Captain obferved,
that the Pirates were not devoid of apprehenfions
for their future welfare ; fome were fearful that the
boat would reach a place of fafety, and one,
when the carpenter removed his cheft from thefhip,
cried, ‘ Damn my eyes ! but he will have another
veftel in a month !’ But if fome betrayed indica-
tions of fear, others, again, fhewed fymptoms of in-
fenfjbility i and rejoiced at the feemingly helplefs
ftate of the boat, which was by much too fmall for
the people it was deftined to contain.
The conduit cf the Leader, at this moment, is
worthy particular notice : Captain Bligh, although
hoarfe with continued exertion, ever fince his firft:
feizure, coolly reproached him for his mai kcd ingra-


titude; alking him, if he imagined his prefent
conduct was a juft return for the many adts of kind-
nefs which he had experienced. Chriftian felt the
confcientious force of this queftion ; he appeared
fenfibly agitated ; and after feme little time, anfwer-
ed— f That —Captain Bligh—that is the thing !
lam in hell! lam in hell !’
Luckily, thofe feamen who had been deftined
for the boat, collected without much oppofition, be-
fore they left the Bounty, twine, canvas, lines, fails,
cordage, and a calk, containing 28 gallons of
water. The clerk, alfo, fecured about ifolbs. of
bread, and a little rum and wine; a quadrant, and
a compafs; the Captain’s journals and commiftion,
and fome other ftup-papers of importance. In at-
tempting to procure fome other articles, he was
hurried away with the charitable falutation of
t — n your eyes, you are well off to keep what
you have got !* All Mr. Bligh’s furveys and draw-
ings were unfortunately left behind.
The mutinous crew, as if delighting in the con-
templation of their own cruelty, adtually kept the
devoted boat aftern, where it had been veered by a
rope, that they might triumph over, ridicule, and
infuit their officers and companions, at a time when
it was reafonably to be expelled that their deftruc-
tion was Inevitable ; and, in the midft of this inde-
cent, horrid merriment, was the boat configned to
C


the ocean. The goodnefs of the caufe of thcfe un-
happy fufferers, however, faintly cheered their (pi-
nts ; and Captain Bligh, more than anyone, con-
fcious of his rettitude, good conduft, and zeal, ani-
mated the crew as well by example as exhortation.
With little, or no wind, they rowed with all their
(Irength towards Tofoa, which bore N. E. about ten
leagues, in order to procure fome bread-fruit and
wa ter. The Bounty, while in fight, (leered to the W.
N. W. but it was conje&ured that their true deftina-
tion was for Otaheite *; the fafcinating women of
which
« We judged it would be here acceptable, to give fome ac-
count of the people of this country; particularly noticing
thfir amorous propenfities.
“ While our people were on fliore, fays Captain Wallis, fe-
veral young women were permitted to crofs the river, who,
though they were not averfe to the granting of perfonal fa-
vours, knew the value of them too well not to ftipulate for a
confideration s the price, indeed, was not great, yet it was
fuch as opr men were not always able to pay, and under this
tcmp ation they ftole nails and other iron from the fliip. The
nails that we brought for traffic, were not always in their
reach, and therefore they drew feveral out of different parts
of the veffel, particularly thofe that fattened the cleats to the
{hip's fide.
(( T he inhabitants of this ittand arc a ftnut well-made, ac-
tive, and comely people. The ftature of the men, in general,
is from five feet feven to five feet ten inches, though a few in-
dividuals are taller, and a few fliorter ; that of the women
from five feet to five feet fix. The complexion of the men is
tawney, but thofe that go upon the water are much redder
than thofe who live on ffiore. Their hair in general is blask,


which place, had engaged the affedtions of fome of
the Pirates. The females of this ifland may be
termed beautiful; nor do their converfation nor
C 2 their
but in fome it is brown, in fome red, and in others flaxen,
which is remarkable, becaufe the hair of all other natives of
Alia, Africa, and America, is black, without a Angle excep-
tion. It is generally tied up, eicher in one bunch, in the
middle of the head, or in two, one on each flde, but fome
wear it loofe, and it then curls very flrongly; in the children
ot both fexes it is generally flaxen. They have no combs, yet
the;r hair is very neatly drefled, and thofe who had combs
from us, made good ufe of them. It is a univerfal cuftom to
anoint the head with cocoa-nut oil, iu which a root has been
leraped that fmells fomething like rofes. The women are all
handlome, and fome of them extremely beautiful. L’haftity
does no: feem to be conlidered as a virtue among them, for
they not only readily and openly trafficked with our people
for perfonal favours, but were brought down by their fathers
and brothers for that purpofe: they were, however, confcious
of the value of beauty, and the fue of the nail that was de-
manded for the enjoyment of the lady, was always in propor-
tion to her charms. The men who came down to the fide of
the river, at the fame time that they prefented the girl, (hew-
ed a flick of the fize of the nail that was to be her price, and if
our people agreed, the girl was fent over to them, for the
men were not permitted to crofs the river. This com-
merce was carried on a confiderable time before the officers
difeovered it for while fome draggled a little way to receive
the lady, the others kept a look-out. When 1 (Captain Wal-
lis) was acquainted with it, I no longer wondered that the
fhip was in danger of being pulled to pieces tor the nails and
iron that held her together, which I had before puzzled myfelf
to account for in vain, the whole (hip’s cbmpany having daily
as much frefh provifion and fruit as they could eat. Both men
aud women are not only decently but gracefully clothed, in a
kind of white cloth, that is made of the bark of a (hrub, and


their manners tend, in the fmallcft degree, to dimmifti
the powerful effed of their perfonal attractions : fen-
ftble*, penetrating, and even delicate, with inclina-
tions
very much refembles coarfe China paper. 1 heir dre.s conffts
of two pieces of this cloth : one ot them, a hole having beei
made in the middle to put the head through, hangs down from
the (houlders to the mid-leg before and behind ; another piece
which is between four a d five ) ards long, «nd about a e
yard broad, they wrap round the body in a %eiy ea > ■ *
This cl th is not woven, but is made, like paper, o
cerated fibres of an inner bark, fpread out and beaten toge-
ther. Their ornaments are feathers, flow as, pieces
(hells, and pearls : the pearls are worn chiefly by the women,
from whom 1 purchafed a: out two dozen of a mah lize .
they w ere of a good colour, but were all Ipa ed by boring.
Mr. Furneauxfaw feveral in his excurfion to the weft, b t he
could purchafe none with any thing he had to offer. o -
i'eived it was here a univerlal cuftom both for men an.i women
to have the hinder part of their thighs and loins marked very
thick with black lines in various forms 1 htfe marks wet
made by ftriking the teeth of an mftrumer.t, fomewhat like a
comb, juft through the (kin, and rubbine into the punttuies a
kind of pafte made of foot and oil, which leaves an mdc-
lible ftain. Hawkefworth’s Voyages, Vol. 1.
* “ On the 14th July, 1767, the gunner being on Ihore to
trade, perceived an old woman on the other fide of the river,
weeping bitterly ; when (lie law that (lie had drawn his atten-
tion upon her, (he lent a young man, who flood by her, over
the river to him, with a branch of the plantain tree in his
hand When he came up, he made a long fpeech, and then
laid down his bough at the gunner’s feet: after this he wen
back and brought < ver the old woman, another man at
fame hue bringing ever two large fat hogs. Ihe woman
looked round upon our people with great attention, fixing her
eyes fometimes upon one, and fometimes upon another, and
at laft burft into tears. The young man who brought her over


tions unfettered by refinement, their influence over
the human mind-when unendowed by virtue ; un-
fortified by philofophy; or unimproved by educa-
tion-can afford little fubjeft for furpnle. l-.xdu-
five of thefe confiderations, the civility, or perhaps
cunning, of the chiefs of the illand, in offering pof-
fcffions°to thofe who would remain with them, com-
pleted that ruinous work of reduction w <n >• ev-ir
cean blandilhments of the women had fo fuccefs.u y
be-un i the one pointed out the means 01 essence
without the fatigue of labour , the other, the moft
cxquifite fenfoal gratifications, dwelled of of
thofe deftruftive confequences which refult from
fimilar purfuits in the countries of Europe*. t
IS,
• • mncern anti aftonilhmcnr,
t:, at Utt are down -bl*
and the two young men, who endeavoured to fuppor her £
peared to be nearly in the h-- reUions . P The
b ' y Xbelud con,fort her. =nd
gunner did all m b ,s p reC ov«r«d her recolleflion, flic
when (he had in fome n . hsm ant ] gaV e him her
3Sagss»Sr
r»nt Ug tivholly devoid of <il<lllxl*
.. It is certain that none of our people contrafled the vene-


IS, however, rather fmgular, that the authors of a
ticfign, conceived in fo unanimous and determined
a manner, fhould be polfe/Ted of fufficient delibe-
ration, to defer their purpofe till after the departure
or the drip; for although, in previous cafes of de-
fection at this place, the chiefs have been obliged to
deliver
real ciiPeafe here, and therefore, as they had free commerce
with great numbers of the women, there is the greateft pro.
a i ity that it was not then known in that country. Jt was
iowever, found here by Captain Cook, in the Endeavour"
• n as no miopean vefi'el is known to have vilited this ifland
e-fore Captain Cook’s arrival, but the Dolphin, and the
oudeule and Etoil, commanded by M. Bougainville, the re-
proach of having contaminated with that dreadful peft, a race
o appy people, to whom its miferies had been till then un-
nem n, mull be due either to him or to me, to England or to
.ranee ; and ! think myfelf happy to be able to exculpate my-
kit and my country beyond the poflibility of doubt.
It is well known that the Purge n on board his Majeftv’a
ups keeps a lift of the perfons who are Pick on beard, Ppeci-
>ing t eit diPeaPes, and the times when they came under his
care, and when they were diPcharged. Jt happened that I was
once at t ic pay-table on board a Blip, when Peveral Pailors ob-
I . u° J t ! iepayment ° f the lur S eon > alled >g, that although
he had diPcharged them Prom the lift, and reported them to
be cured, jet their cure was incomplete. From this time it
has been my conftant pradice when the Purgeon reported a
man to be cured, who had been upon the Pick lift, to call the
man before me, and alk him whether the report was true : if
he a Hedged that any Pymptoms of his complaint remained’ I
continued him upon the lift : if not, I required him, as a
confirmation of the furgeon’s report to fign the book, which
was always done in my prefence. A copy of the fick lift on
board the Dolphin, during this voyage figned by every man in
my pretence, when he was diPcharged well, in confirmation of


deliver up the culprits, fuck a confeqnence was not
to be apprehended, where the mutineers formed the
ftrongeft party, and where they would mod affuredly
have been countenanced by the natives. But the
mode adopted, was, no doubt, adjudged to be the
cafieftof accomplilhment, and the molt confident with
their feelings; for, however clearly it appears that
the lives of Captain Bligh and his affociates were
confidered as objects of little confequence, it fnould
feem that they were unwilling to be guilty of po~
fitive murder, by purfuing their intentions while at
Otaheite. But it would be idle to wafte more room
on vague conje&ure, when a fhort time may
develope the true motives of the whole of this un-
common tranladfion.
It
the furgeon’s report, written in my own hand, and confirmed
by my affidavit, I have depofited in the Admiralty ; by which
it appears, that the laft man on board the (hip, in her voyage
outward, who was upon the fick lift for the venereal difeafc, ex-
cept one who was fent to England in the Store-fliip, was dif-
charged cured, and figned the book on the 27th of Dec. 1766,
near fix months before our arrival at Otaheite, which was on
the 19th of June 1767 ; and that the firft man who was upon
the fick lift for that dileafe, in our return home, was entered
on the 26th of February 1768, fix months after we left the
ifland, which was on the 26th of July 1767 ; fo that the (hip's
company was entirely free fourteen months within one day f
the middle of which time we fpent at Otaheite ; and the man
who was firft entered as a venereal patient, on our return
home, was known to have contracted the difeafe at the Cape
of Good Hope, where we then lay. Ibid. Wallis’s Voy, 314.


It muff afford read pleafure to every one, in con-
fidering that the conduct of Captain Bligh ws by
no means reprehenfible; but, on the contrary, highly
praife-worthy. He had traverfed thcfe Teas twice
before ; he had ferved under Captains Cook and
Clerke, and had adopted their regulations and man-
ner, as far as experience warranted ;in particular,
with regard to the health of the crew, and in cafe
they fhould find a difficulty in palling Endeavour
Straits. The plants, too, were in the moll excellent
prefervation ; the objedl of the voyage was more
than half completed ; and every thing bade fair for
a profperous conclufion. The principal of the
gang was treated by Mr. Bligh as a friend jhe re-
ceived from him profeffional inftrudlions, and on
that fcore alone, as he had made great progrefs, his
efleem was heightened into confidence. On the
fame footing of intimacy, alfo, was the next villain
in rank, Haywood, one of the midfhipmen.
But let us, for awhile, quit this part of our
fubjedt, and return to Mr. Bligh and his miferablc
companions, who were now traverfing a vaft ocean,
with no other guide, than what the Captain’s former
obfervation afforded ; and with no other prcvifion,
than 1501 b. of bread, 16 pieces of pork, weighing
about 321 b. 6 quarts of rum, 6 bottles of wine,
28 gallons of water, and four empty barrccoes.
After the day had clofed, on the 28th of April,
1789, the boat reached the N, W. part of Tofoa,


in lat. 19 deg. 41 min. S. with the affiftance of a
flight eafterly breeze which fprang up, and enabled
it to fail. But a great darknefs prevailing* and the
ihore being rocky, dangerous, and devoid of a place
of anchorage, the boat was kept for that night
under the lee of the ifland with oars. In this lun-
ation, the Captain allowed each perfon half a pint
of grog, when thofe not on watch retired to reft
with as much compofure as their dreadful Hate
would admit of j or perhaps more, for Mr. Bligh
himfelf mentions their fortitude on this, and on the
fucceeding oecaflons, yet more trying, in a manner
truly flattering, and which certainly contributed, in
a great degree, to their final deliverance.
On the following morning, the, furf ran high on
the fliorei but as there was, more than a probability
that the provifions in the boat would prove ina-*
dequate to the emergency, Mr. Samuel, the clerk,
with fome others, were with difficulty landed at a
ftony cave, where the grapnel was dropped within
30 yards of the rocks; and, indeed, this was the only
paflage they could find to penetrate Into the country,
where was no appearance of inhabitants : fo that
the people returned, having only procured; a very
few gallons of Handing water, colleded from holes in
the ground. The Captain, therefore, taking this ill
fuccefs into confederation, allowed a very frugal
meal for this day’s dinner —a Angle morfcl of bread*
D


and a glafs of wine ! After this (lender repad, the
boat was rowed along fhore, in the hope of difco*
vering more favourable fymptoms $ and at lad they
efpied on the fummit of high precipices, feveral co-*
coa-nut trees to obtain which, however dam
gerous, the people climbed the rocks, and gathered
about twenty of the nuts, which were conveyed to
the boat by means of ropes. One of thefe, at night,
was didributed to each man, after returning to the
cave, where they reded much after the lame manner
as before.
It was the intention of Captain Bligh to have put
to fea, the next day, if the weather had proved mo-"
derate j but as this was not the cafe, he recruited the
fpirits of his people with a morfel of bread, and a
fpoonful of rum, intending himfelf, with the Clerk,
the Botanid, and fome of the men, to explore the
country. Over the precipices fronting the fea, the
natives had contrived long vines, to permit their
defccnti and by means of thefe it was, that the gen-
tlemen, after climbing, were enabled to begin their
cxcurfion ; in the courfe of which they obferved only
a few empty huts, which had been recently inha-.
bitedj and an ill cultivated plantain walk. But if
they found little food for the body, they obferved
an objecd which drongly excited their curiofity.
After pading the huts, they came to a gully,
leading to a mountain, near a formidable volcano,
which, from the dreary fituation of the adjacent


Country, and the (late of the lava, appeared, even
during the rainy feafon, to be always burning. It is
fituated on the higheft mountain in the ifland, and
pre fen ted a grand, though terrific appearance. With
three fmall bunches of plantain, and ten gallons of
water, biir Weary travellers, full of diftreffing con-
templations, and anxious fears, returned about noon,
to their companions* who had employed the time iri
ihffiing round the boat —and with fimilar fuccefs.
An indifpofition in the head attacked Mr. Bligh*
When he arrived at the precipice; and it was not
without great care, and judicious affifcarice* that he
reached the boat in fafety.
The barrennefs of the land, and fcarcity of fifh
in the Tea at this place, induced thefe unfortunate
people to confider themfelves on the moft miferable
fpot which the whole world could produce : but as a
hope of the lead imaginable fupply of provifion,
where there was a bare poffibility of fuccefs, was
much preferable to failing, where there was a cer-
tainty of none, Captain Bligh ftill perfifted in
making one more trial: for this purpofe another
courfe was chofen, but after many efforts, the party
returned, tired and faint, not having procured the
leaf!; article. In proportion, however, as difficulties
increafed, did Captain Bligh renew his endeavours.
The people, owing to the want of room, flept very
uncomfortably in the boat} he therefore determined
D 2


to feleft a few of them, who were bed Timed to the
undertaking, to fleep on Ihore this night in a cave
fituated about 150 yards from the water fide* at the
head of the cave, from which there was no other
way into the country than that by which Mr. Samuel
firft proceeded on their landing. When arrived at
' the cave, the party Tupped on a boiled plantain each,
and a quarter of a pint of grog; and having fe-
cured the only pafs at which they could be furprifed,
thofe not on watch retired to red, before a good
fire, which they had kindled to keep off, as much as
poffible, the files and mufquitoes.
The fucceeding day was in Tome meafure pro-
ductive of new hopes. Early in the morning, by
purfuing a different route, Tome of the natives were
difeovered ; two of the men even accompanied the
party back to the cove, carrying two cocoa-nut Ihells
of water ; and. To highly were they pleafed with
their reception, that they returned, and informed
their countrymen of the adventure. In confequence
of this, by noon, upwards of thirty of the natives ar-
rived, with bread-fruit, plantains, and water j for
which they received a few trifling articles, fuch as
buttons and beads. But, notwithdanding this frefii
fupply, the Captain would only allow each man an
ounce of pork, a quarter of a bread-fruit, and half
a pint of water for dinner.
An important confideration now occupied the
■mind of Captain Bligh : from this day’s obfervation


he Was Convinced, that the ifland* however ftei'ilc, or
apparently defolate, was yet inhabited; and it was
poffible, too, the natives might be numerous: he
alfo knew that the fagacity with which the people of
this part of the globe were endued, with the great
probability of their having before Teen Europeans;
would lead them to enquire for the (hip; and, fear-
ing that, if he told the truth, they would difcover
that a want of power mull have occafioned the ac-
cident, he very properly determined to give our*
that they had been fhipwrecked; in this tale he in-
truded all his men, fearing that a variation in the
affigned caufe might produce a total difbelief, and
be attended with confequcnces of a difagreeable, if
not of a dangerous nature*
The event fully juflified the Captain’s expeda-
tions, and proved the wifdom of this precaution j
the enquiries were made, and the anfwers given ap-
peared to receive credit j though the account of their
misfortune feemed rather to excite furprize, than to
occafion any fentiments of pity.
Still, however, they continued their friendly in-
tercourfe; and in the afternoon of the firfl of May,
brought a frcfh fupply of bread-fruit, plantains, and
cocoa-nuts, (though but little water) which the
Captain paid for in the fame manner as before. Yet
thefe fupplies were brought fo fparingly, that little
increafe of provifions was made to the general flock,
notwithftanding the prudent condud of the Cap-


tain (who never loft fight of his grand object) hi
delivering, at night, to each man, only one quartet
of a bread-fruit and a cocoa-nut.
The next morning the crew, encouraged by this
afliftance they had already received; and infpirited
by the hopes of finally obtaining as much provifiori
as would be requifite to enable them to purfue their
voyage, exhibited, on their countenances, more
fymptoms of cheerfulnefs and refignation than they
had difplayed, fince their departure from the fhip.
But, like the deceitful gleams of funfhine, which
frequently precede a dreadful ftorm* this fhort-lived
tranquillity was deftroyed by the tranfaflions of the
day. The uncertainty of procuring water from the
natives, had induced the Captain to fend a party
into the mountains* to get what they could find j
for which purpofe they Were provided with empty
Cocoa-nut ftlells. Irt the abfence of thefe men, the
natives came down to the boat, in cncreafed num-
bers, accompanied by one of their chiefs, called
Maccaakavow; who was foon after followed by ano-
ther chief, named Eefowj and a young man* Called
Nagecte; the latter of whom recognized the Cap-
tain, whom he had feen at Annamooka, and promifed
to accompany him the next day to Tongataboo,
where two others of the natives, whom the Captain
had formerly known, then refided.
But, notwithftanding the endeavotiis of Captain
Bligh, to Conciliate the friendlhip of the chiefs* (who


knew he had been with Captain Cook, after whom,
as after Captain Clerk, they made frequent enquiries)
they foon betrayed fome fymptoms, which gave
rife to the moll ferious apprehenfions, They firlt
attempted to haul the boat on Ihore, but were in-
duced, by the threats of the Captain toEcfow, to de-
fill; their numbers, however, continued to incrcafc,
and the frequent knocking together of Hones, which
they held in each hand —the ufual fignalof attack—-
fufficiendy demonftrated their treacherous defigns.
The lituation of the Captain and his fmail party,
was now truly deplorable*, furrounded by their per-
fidious enemies, they plainly perceived the impof-
fibility of reaching their boat, without fighting their
way through them ; and this they were little able to
do, fince two out of their four cutlafles were in the
boat, and the few fpears which they had juft bought
of the natives, were wholly infufficient tor the pur-
pofe of defence. The Captain therefore determined
to wait for a more favourable opportunity, and in
the mean time concealed his fufpicions from the
chiefs, to whom he diftributed a part of the bread-
fruit which he had bought, and on which, and cocoa-
nuts, he and his men made their dinner *, though
they were obliged to ftand the whole time —wifely
refilling the felicitations of the natives to be fcated,
as that pollute would have been more favourable
for the accomplilhment of their perfidious projects.
When this uncomfortable repaft was finilhed, the


provifions which remained on (here, together with
three gallons of water, which the foraging party had
collected, were by degrees conveyed to the boat.
The Captain’s vigilance, during this time, was di-
rected to the motions of the natives, whofe numbers
were continually increafing; while the frequency of
their confultations indicated their determination to
attack him; he therefore fent orders to the matter to
favour their approach to the boat, by bringing her
clofe to the fhore.
The time now approached, that was to decide the
fate of this fmall but determined band : The fun,
having nearly completed his daily courfc, was about
to retire into the bofom of the ocean, when the Cap-
tain gave the word of command j each man imme-
diately took up his deftined load, and, with flow
fteps, and a refolute countenance, advanced to the
boat. The chiefs, feeing their victims preparing to
efcape, approached the Captain, and afked him whe-
ther it was not his intention to pafs the night on
fiiore; and on receiving an anfwer in the negative,
though accompanied by aflurances of returning the
next day, to renew their commercial intercourfe, and
to proceed, if the weather would permit, to Tonga-
taboo, according to the engagement made with Na-
geete, they exprefled their indignation, and Maccaa-
kavow exclaimed— tc tfhen we will kill you!”
This was the fignal of preparation, and that of
attack fpeedily followed; as the Captain walked


down the beach accompanied by Nageete, whom he
held by the hand, his cars were fainted by the ominous
found of Hones knocking together. The whole
party, however, contrived to get into the boat,
before the attack begun ; but one man—John Nor-
ton, Quarter-maHer —imprudently quitting it, for
the purpofe of puihing her off, was attacked by a
party of about two hundred natives, who fpeedily
Honed him to death. Repeated vollies of Hones
were likewife fent into the boat, and greatly an-
noyed all who were in her; while many of the
Indians, feizing the Hern rope, would have certainly
pulled her on Hiore but for the Captain, who cut it
afunder with a knife, which providentially he had in
his pocket.
Having thus cleared themfelves from the Hiore,
they plied their oars, and pulling towards the open
fea, flattered themfelves with the idea of hav-
ing efcaped the danger which threatened them.
But tnis pleaflng hope was fpeedily dcHroyed; as
twelve of the natives, filling their canoes with Hones,
purfued them with great velocity, and by paddling
round them without elding (which from the hca-
vinefs of the Englifh boat, which was crouded with
lumber, they were enabled to do) they renewed the
attack with fuch dexterity and fuccefs, as to difable
the greateH part of the crew; nor could they be in-
duced to defiH, till attracted by the lure of fome
E


cloaths which the Captain fagaciouffy threw into the
fca for that purpofe; and before they had colle&ed
them all, night came on, and made them retire to
the (bore.
The conduT of thefe Indians mud afford ample
fubjedt for reffeftion to the philofophic mind ; un-
polilhed, untutored, unrefined, they knew no laws
but thofc which nature gave ; and, confidering her
gift of perfonal ftrength, as the fure mark of pre-
eminence, they thought themfelves auchorifed to,
exert it, whenever opportunity offered; and to derive
from it every advantage it could poflibly afford. —
But do perfidy and murder, it may be afked, refult
from thedidffates of nature? —Revenge, indeed, may
be natural to the human mind, as it is, in feme mea-
fure, connected with the laws of fclf-prefervation ;
but unprovoked barbarity may be thought to pro-
ceed only from a mind depraved by education, or
corrupted by example ! But it is our province to
purfue the ftrait path of facf, and not to wander in
the labyrinths of fpeculation.
Captain Bligh, rightly judging of the general dif-
pofition of the Indians, from the rude fpecimen he
had recently experienced, was fenfible, that if he vi-
fitedany of the neighbouringiffands, he had no reafon
to cxpedl a more favourable reception. He there-
fore held a confutation with his men on the courfe
it would be prudent to purfue; when a refolution was,
imanimouffy adopted, which nothing but the moft


defpcrate fituatioh could have juft 1 Bed or infpired.'
This was to fail to the ifiand of Timor, (where
there was a Dutch fettlemenc) at the diftance of
twelve hundred leagues, without hopes of any other
relief than what they might chance to find at New
Holland. It mu ft be recollected, too, that they
undertook to perform this arduous talk, in a boat,
only twenty-three feet in length, deeply laden with
eighteen men ; without a chart, and with nothing
but the Captain’s recollection, and a book of La-
titudes and Longitudes, to direct their courfe in a
fea where the navigation is impcrfeCtly known.
As their ftock of provifions only c®nfifted of one
hundred and fifty pounds of bread, twenty-eight
gallons of water, twenty pounds of pork, three bot-
tles of wine, five quarts of rum, and a few cocoa-nuts-
and bread-fruit; they entered into a folemn en-
gagement to content themfelves with one ounce of
bread, and a quarter of a pint of water, each man,
per diem.
In this fituation, they bore away under a reefed-
lug forefail, about eight o’clock in the evening of
the fecond of May, 1789. The wind at this time
blew frelh from the N. E. and at day-break, on
the third of May, the gale encreafed, and in a few
hours it blew fo violent, that the fail of the boat was
becalmed between the feas, and the water dafhed over
the ftern. It was now found neceftary to lighten
E 2


her by throwing every ufelefs article overboard*
which alfo rendered it eafier to bale out the water.
But an objefl of ftill greater importance was the ne-
ceffity of keeping the bread dry; for if it once got
wet, they mud inevitably have been ftarved. This,
however, they fortunately accompliihed, by fecuring
it in the Carpenter’s cheft.
Though all on board were extremely wet and cold,
they only received a quarter of a bread-fruit, each
perfon, for dinner—and that fcarcely eatable—to-
gether with onetea-fpoonful of rum; as the Captain
was refolved to make the provifions lad;eight weeks,
however fmall the daily proportion might be.
Their diftance from Tofoa, at noon, was fuppofed
to be between eighty and ninety miles; and they
fleered a W. N. W. courfe, in order to gain a fight
of the iflands called Feejee. The wind ftill continued
to blow with fuch violence, from N. E. to E. S. E.
that they could only keep the boat before t*he fea,
while their utmoft exertions were requifite to prevent
her from finking. The only refrefliment they re-
ceived to enable themtofupport thisexcefs of fatigue,
was the fame fcanty proportion of rum which had
been allowed them in the morning; yet even this
gave them warmth and fpirits, and encouraged them
to bear with patience and refignation the hardlhips
they were doomed to experience. The wind did not
abate till the 7 enfuing evening; but in the interim
they had deferied feveral iflands, bearing from theS,


found by the W. to N. W. by N. thofe to the fouth*
which were nearefl, being about four leagues diflant
from them, at noon, on the 4th of May. They then
fleered to the N* W. by W. between the iflands j
and in the evening difcovered three more, the weft-
crnmofl of which bore N. W. i-half W. feven
leagues; when they fleered to the fouthward of
them a W. N.W. courfe for the night, which being
fair, they pafled with much more comfort than the
preceding, when their limbs were fo benumbed with
the cold, that when they awoke, they could fcarcely
ufe them.
It is necefTary to obferve, that Captain Bligh
adopted the moil proper mode of infpiring his men
with the requifite degree of fortitude and refigna-
tion, by the regular performance of prayers ; what
fource of hope fo pure and copious, as a firm reli-
ance on the goodnefs of Providence! Supplications
to the Deity, virtuoufly enforced, are feldom difre-
garded.
Having got a log-line marked, and having prac-
tifed in counting feconds, they were now enabled to
keep a more accurate account of their run, than they
had hitherto done. The day after their departure at
noon, they confidered their courfe and diflance from
Tofoa to be WN W 1 -half W. 86 miles; their la-
titude 19 deg. 27 min.S. From that time to the next
day at noon, they made 95 miles, in a N 72 deg.
W courfe. The third day, courfe, N W by W


1-haifW, difiance 94 miles ; longitude, from To-
foa, 4 deg. 29 min. W.
In the evening of the fifth of May, they difco-
vered two iflands, one bearing W by S, fix leagues,
and the other NWby N eight leagues On the
following morning they likewife defcried ftveral
other iflands, from SS E to the W. and round to
NEby E; At noon they had made 84 miles fined
the preceding day.
Though the fertile appearance of the iflands they
dlCovered, invited them to land, yet, as they had no
arms, the danger of meeting with natives as inhol-
p.itable and ferocious as thofe they had quitted,
deterred them from accepting the flattering invita-
tion. Thus they were firidlly compelled to obferve
the engagement they had entered into, by confining
themfelves to the ftipulated portion of provifions,
which, for the prefent, they law no probability of
augmenting- On the sth of May, indeed, they
booked a fifh, but the joy this fortunate occurrence
crave Tife to, was fpeedily damped by the exertions
of the captive, which regained him his liberty, ere
thev could hold him into the boat.
in the following evening, when they were
a'-out mid-way between the fouthernmoft and
r •hernmoft iflands, which lay twelve leagues from
( ’ other, they fell in with a coral bank, where
1 e were only four feet water; and, on the feventh,
difeovered three other fmall iflands; one, to the


N N W, the other to the N E of the land in the
well, which they had before defcried, and which ap-
peared to be of confiderable extent, interfperfed with
hills and valleys, decorated with woods, and (kirted
by rocks of an extraordinary height. Being carried
in very near to the (bore by a lee current, they per-
ceived two large failing canoes purfuing them with
great velocity but as the Captain had every reafon
to believe that thefe were theFeejee iflands, and that
the inhabitants were not more charitably difpofed
towards him than thofe of the Friendly Elands, he
thought it prudent to decline any kind of inter-
courfe with them, and therefore ordered the men to
ply their oars with as much force as their weak Hate
would admit of. One of the canoes, however,
gained upon them confiderably, and in the afternoon
came within two miles of them, when they were
fortunately releafed froip their fears, by feeing them
give up the chace.
Nothing particular occurred from the 7th to the
12th of May, when, in the afternoon, they law on
the water a fpecies of fruit known by the botanill,
Mr. Nelfon, to be the Barr ingloria of Forfter \ and
as they faw' the fame on the enluing morning,
together with fome men of war birds , they were
induced to believe that land could not be far diftanr.
Their fufpicions were accordingly verified on the
14th, when they difeovered fix iflands, one of which
at no«n bore N. W. by N. four a fecond W.


eight leagues, and the four other from S. i-half E.
to S. W. by S, the neared of them three leagues
from the boat; whofe courfe and diftance, from the
fifth at noon, had been as follows—To the fixth at
noon; N. 56 W,; 79 miles; latitude and longitude
from Tofoa, the firft 16 deg, 29 min. S. the lad 6
deg. 46 min.'W.—To the feventh; N. 62 deg. W.
62 miles; longitude from Tofoa, 7 deg. 42 min. W.
-—To the eighth, N. 75 deg. W.; 64 miles; long.
8 deg. 45 min, W. lat. 15 deg. 47 min. S.—To the
ninth, N. 67 deg. W.; 78 miles; lat. 15 deg. 17
min. S.; long. 10 deg. W.—To the tenth, N. 71
deg. W.; 102 miles; lat. 14 deg. 50 min. S. ; long.
10 deg. 39 min. W.—To the eleventh, W. by N. j
89 miles; lat. 14 deg. 33 min. S.; long. 13 deg.
9 min. W.—To the twelfth, W. by N.; 79 miles j
lat. 14 deg. 17 min. S.; long. 14 deg. 28 min. W.
-—To the thirteenth, N. 63deg. W.; 89 miles; lat,
13 deg. 29 min. S,; long. 15 deg. 49 min. W.—
To the fourteenth, at noon, N. 63 deg. W.; 89
miles; lat. 13 deg. 29 min. S.; long, from Tofoa,
15 deg. 49 min. W.
The dangers and harddiips they experienced,
during this tedious navigation, are more eafily con-
ceived than exprefled : the boat was fo fmall, that,
in order to allow one half of the crew to deep at full
length, the other half were obliged to fit up; and,
independent of the inconvenience arifmg from deep-
ing without any covering, in nights that were ex-


tremely cold, they were continually foaked with
rain : the Tea, too, during moll of the time, was fo
rough, from the violence of the winds, that it fre-
quently ran over the Hern, and kept them in immi-
nent danger of finking. Their limbs were fo much
cramped by their confined fituation, joined to the
cold and wet, that they were almoft deprived of the
ufe of them j while fome were alfo afflicted with
moll violent pains in their bowels. Their provi-
lions were likewile dillributed in more fcanty pro-
portions, each man having only one twenty-fifth of
a pound of bread, (weighed, by a pillol-ball which
the Captain had in his pocket, in Ihells made of
cocoa-nuts) with a quarter of a pint of water, three
times a days (except when the heavy rains enabled
them to quench their thirfb) with, occafionally, a
mouthful of pork, and a tea-fpoonful of rum. The
prudent condudl of the Captain, however, enabled
them to bear their misfortunes like men ; topreferve
them, in fome meafure, from the effefts of the cold,
he made them Hrip, when wet with rain, and foak
their cloaths in fait* water, which proved very bene-
ficial: nor was he lefs attentive to the amufement
of their minds than to the prefervation of their bo-
dies j in the fhort intervals of fair weather, he gave
them accounts of his former voyages, and particu-
larly deferibed to them the fituation of New Guinea,
and New Holland, that in cafe of his own death
F


they might be able to find their way to Timor, of
which at prefent they were totally ignorant.
In addition to the iflands* difcovered on the four-
teenth, another was defcried the next day, bearing
W. N. W. five leagues diflant; and at the fame
time they faw feveral gannets, boobies, and men of
war birds. Thefe iflands had never before been
difcovered, though, from their vicinity to the T\ew
Hebrides, they may juftly be confidered as apart of
the fame group. They lie between the latitude of
13 deg. 16 min. S. and 14 deg. 10 m. S. their longi-
tude from 167 deg. 17 min. E. to 168 deg. 34 min.
E. from Greenwich. They appeared fertile, and the
fmoke, which afcended in different parts, proved
them to be inhabited; but the crew were unable
to derive any advantage from this grateful profpeft;
the fear of deflruftion fubduing the dcfire of relief,
they purfued their courfe, only fleering more to the
fouth, in order to avoid the inhofpitable coaft of
New Guinea.
The weather continued very bad for fome days,
dark and gloomy, with frequent fforms of thunder
and lightning: and the rain was fo inceffant, that
the boat was, at times, in danger of being filled with
it. The nights, too, were fo dark, that not a ftar
could be feen to fleer by. The crew, exhaufled by
’ fuch conflant exertions and hardfhips, began to be
clamorous for an increafe of allowance, in the article
of provifionj but they were fpeedlly filenced. by


the authority of the Captain, who pofitively refufed
a compliance which he well knew would be attended
with fatal confequcnces.
And, indeed, he had occafion to put their obe-
dience to a fevere trial; for, on the twenty-fourth of
May, when the violence of the wind had abated, and
the weather was fair, he embraced the opportunity
to determine with precifion the quantity of bread
that was left, which according to the portions they
had hitherto difiributed, was found fufficient to lad
twenty-nine days. But though there was firong
reafons for believing that they would reach Timor
within that time, yet as there was a poffibility that
they might be obliged to extend their voyage to
Java, the Captain deemed it prudent to manage
the provifion fo as to make it lafl fix weeks, the re-
quifite time for gaining that place. This was apro-
pofition, which, in the prefent fituation of the crew,
it leemed impracticable to enforce : the Captain,
however, exerted his utmoft eloquence in demon-
flrating the necefiity of the meafure; and his efforts
proved lo fuccefsful, that what bethought would be
rejected as impoffible, was adopted with alacrity; and
inftcad of three portions per diem, each perfon con-
tented himfelf with two.
The Captain’s determination was to make New
Holland to the fouthward of Endeavour Straits,
with the view to preferve fuch a fituation as to render
E 2


a foutherly wind afair wind} and thereby be enabled
to range the reefs until an opening fhould be found
into fmooth water, and the opportunity of obtaining
refrefhments accelerated.
Duringthis time theirdaily courfe and diftance had
been as follows To the fifteenth at noon, courfe N.
82 deg. W. diftance 101 miles} lat. 13 deg. 33 min.
S. longitude made from Tofoa 19 deg. 27 min. W.
—■To°the fifteenth, W. S. W. 100 miles •, lat. by
account, 14 deg. 11 min. S. and long, made; at
deg. 3 min. W.—To the feventeenth, W. S. W.
106 miles; lat. 14 deg. 52 min. S. long. 22 deg. 45
m i n . W. —To the eighteenth, N. 81 deg. W. 100
miles} lat. 14 deg. 37 min. S. long. 24 deg. 30 min.
■W. To the nineteenth, S. 88 deg. W. 75 miles 5
lat. 14 deg. 49 min. S. long. 25 deg. 46 W.—To the
twentieth, N. 78 deg. W. 99 miles} lat. 14 deg. 29
min. S.long. 27 deg. 25 min. W.—To the twenty-
firft, N. 85 deg. W. 130 miles; lat. 14 deg. 17 min.
S.long 29 deg. 38 min. W.—To the twenty-fecond,
N. 74 deg-W- 116 miles; lat. 13 deg. 44 min- S.
long. 31 deg. 32 min. W.—To the twenty-third, N.
8 4 .°deg. W. 114 miles; lat. 13 deg. 33 min. S.
long. 33 deg. 28 min. W.—To the twenty-fourth,
N. 89 deg. W. 108 miles; lat. 13 deg. 32 min. S.
long. 35 deg. 19 mm. W.
On the twenty-fifth, they had the fatisfaclion to


fee feveral noddies and boobies *, which never dray
far from land; and the next day they had the dill
greater fatisfadion of catching one of the former,
which was divided into eighteen portions, and didri-
buted for dinner; and although it had no other faucc
than the Tea-water, it was eaten with avidity, bones
and all. At noon, too, they had the good fortune to
catch a booby, which was divided in the fame man-
ner; (the blood being given to three of the crew
who were mod reduced) and on which they made
a dipper comparatively luxurious. In order to
prevent any complaint of partiality in the didribu-
tion of thefe precious morfels, rccourfe was had to
that mode of divifion which is only known to fea-
men, and which they term—“ Who jhall have this?"
Xt is thus performed —One perfon turns his bade
to the obje6t that is divided into pieces, and an-
other pointing feparately to the different portions,
exclaims c Who Ihall have this ?’to which the firft
anfwers by naming one of the competitors. So that
each man has an equal chance of obtaining the bed
portion.
Providence, at this time, appeared to have been
* A. Noddy is a bird about the fize of a Pigeon, and a Booby
about the fize of a Duck ; they have both of them received
their names from failors, who gave them thefe appellations as
expreffive of their ftupidity in fuffering themfelves to be caught
by the hand, on the mails and yards of (hips.


careful to reward their fortitude and patience, by
means of relief as extraordinary as the circumftance
which gave nfe to the want of it. Another booby
was caught in the morning of the twenty-fixth, which
afforded them a dinneras comfortable as their fupper
of the preceding night. The pleafure however they
experienced on this occafion was interrupted, by the
exceflive heat of the fun, which, now the weather
was ferene, had become fo intolerable, as to render
life a burden. Yet the capture of two more boobies
(in whofe ftomachs were feveral flying-fifh and fmall
cuttlefilh, all of which were deemed excellent food)
roufed them, in fome degree, from this ft ate of
languor and defpondency; and the fight of a quan-
tity of drift-wood, and an encreafed number of
birds, effedually reftored their drooping fpirits.
The Captain was now convinced that the reefs of
New-Holland could not be far diftant; and he de-
termined to make that coaft without delays the
direction of which, from his recollection, he confi-
dered to be N. W. and therefore with the wind to
the Southward of Eaft he well knew he fhould be
able to fleer clear of all dangers.
The fight of a gannet in the evening of
the twenty-feventh, and the fixed pofition of
the clouds, in the Weft, confirmed the Captain
in this belief; and the hopes of a fpeedy fupply in-
fpired the crew with greater cheerfulnefs than they
had hitherto experienced ; they fondly anticipated


the treat they fhould meet with, and, after fo long
a fait, engaged, with extafy, the ideal feaft.
Ac one o’clock the enfuing day, the man at
the helm was furprized with the found of
breakers, which were clofe under the lee of the
boat, on which they immediately hauled on a
wind to the N. N. E. and, in a few minutes, they
could neither be feen nor heard, dhe certainty of
being now in the vicinity of the coaft of New-
Holland, where they knew refrcfhments might be
found, infpirited the crew, who, at day-break, again
fleering for the reefs, came in fight of them, and
plainly perceived the fmoothnefs of the watei
within them. But their filiation was now rendered
extremely perilous by their fails being employed,
and the great fwell of the fea towards the reefs,
which endangered their being driven among the
breakers. While, however, the Captain was confi-
dering, whether he fhould attempt to pufh through
them, they very fortunately difcovered an opening
or break in the reef, at the diftance of a mile, and
at the fame time an ifland within it bearing W.
i-half N. This paffage they entered, and found it
about four hundred yards wide, with every ap-
pearance of deep water. It is fituate in 12 deg.
51 rnin. fouth latitude; they then bore away to the
N. W. and at noon on the twenty-eighth found their
latitude was 12 deg. 46 min. louth j and the ifland
firfl feen, which the Captain named the ifland Di-


reßion, bor6 W. S. W. about five leagues. As they
advanced within the reefs, they foon obtained a
diftindt view of the coaft j and in their way to the
fhore, fell in with a point of a reef, (connected with
that towards the fea) from which the ifiand Direction
bore S. three or four leagues. Four miles to the
W. by N. lay two more iflands, the firft of which
proved to be a mere heap of ftones; they therefore
dire&ed their courfe to the fetond, which lay conti-
guous, and towards the main, where, on the N. W.
fide they found a bay and a fine Tandy point to
land at* All their paft cares now appeared to be
configned to oblivion, as they regaled themfclves
with'the pleafing and long wiffied for profpeft of a
comfortable meal, and undifturbed repofe. It was
late in the evening before they landed, fo that they
had only fufficient time to reconnoitre, and to
difeover fome oyfters on the rocks. As they
found no reafon to dread any interruption during the
night, it was fettled that half of them fhould deep
affiore, and the other half in the boat.
The fun, on the fucceeding morn, prefentedto thefe
unhappy wanderers, a more cheerful afpeft, than he
had yet difplayed fince their departure from the
inhofpitable fhore of Tofoa. Though their fuf-
■ferings had rendered them extremely weak j yet,
fupported as they were, by mental fortitude, fuffi-
cient flrength remained to enable them to furmount
ihofc difficulties which they had ftill to encounter in


their voyage to Timor. The chief fymptoms of
difeafe which prevailed among them, were a giddinefs
of the head, great weaknefs of the joints, and a
violent tenefmus, having had no evacuation by ftool
fince they left the fhip, but none of thefc appeared
to be dangerous j and they had now the profped of
procuring fuch reft and refreftiment as were neceflary
to re-eftablifti their health.
The Captain perceiving there were no figns of in-
habitants in the neighbourhood of the coaft, fent
out foraging parties, who returned in high fpirits,
having found great plenty of oyfters and frefh
water. The Captain, in the mean time, had made
a fire, by means of a magnifying glafs; and he was
alfo fo fortunate as to find Tome brimftone and a
tinder box, together with a copper-pot, which had
been thrown into the boat with other things j he was
therefore enabled, by mixing the oyfters, with bread
and a fmall portion of pork, to prepare a ftew by no
means unfavoury, and on which an appetite, un-
whetted by long fading, might even have contrived
to make a comfortable dinner. Of this each man
had a full pint.
On examining the ftaie of the boat, which they
haftened to put in order, left any hidden occurrence
might neceffitate them to refume their voyage, they
found additional reafon for returning thanks to Pro-
vidence i for one of the gudgeons of the rudder had
G


come out during the night; an accident which, had
•it happened at lea, would probably have proved the
caufe of their deftrudlion, fmcc it would have ren-
dered it impofllble to manage the boat with that
nicety which thole heavy feas required. Here for-
tunately it was ipeedily remedied by the application
of a large ftaple, which they found in the boar.
The oyfters, being large and well flavoured, af-
forded them confiderable refrefhment i but it is
remarkable, they adhered fo fail to the rocks, that
in order to fave time they were obliged to open them
where they grew. Another circumftance equally
fortunate was the difcovery of lome wiie-grals, a
fure fign of great moifture in the loil, wmch en-
counged them to dig for water, which they Ipeedily
found, and accordingly formed a well ; ihaliow in-
deed, but fufficiently deep for their purpofe, fmce it
filled as fall as they emptied; whence it is probable
that there was a fpring beneath. Its flotation is
about two hundred yards to the S. E. ot a point in
the S. W part of the ifland.
The courfe and diftance made by the boat, from
the twenty-fourth of May, to their arrival on this
ifland, were as follow :—To the twenty fifth at noon ;
courfe S. 85 degrees W- diftance 112 miles; lat. 13
deg. 41 min. S, longitude, by account from Tofoa,
37 deg. 13 min-W. —To the twenty-fixth, N. 82
deg. W. 109 miles; latitude 13 deg. 26 min. S. long.
39 deg. qmin.W. and their long, from Tofoa to their


paflfage through the reef, 41 degrees 19 min. W.—*
From the twenty-feventh to the twenty-eighth at
noon, their courfe was N. 66 degrees W. dillance
iB milesi the latitude of the ifland 12 degrees 39
min. S.
The day after their arrival on the ifland, it was
named, by the Captain, Restoration Island j not
only on account of the day—the twenty-ninth of
May—but in allufion to the benefits they had de-
rived from it. The ifland is about two miles in cir-
cumference, confifling chiefly of rocks and ftones,
thinly covered with a Tandy foil that is barely luflT
cient to give nourifhment to the fmali trees which
afford it a partial embellifhment; of thele the chief
are the manchineal, the purow, and the palm: the tops
of the laft they cut down, and the internal part of
them proving grateful to the tafle, made an excellent
addition to their mefs. They alfo found three forts
of food, which being induced to tafle, by feeing the
birds feed on them, proved both palaceable and
wholeforne. One of them grew on a diminutive
fpecics of vine, in flze and fubftance it refcmbled a
goofeberry, but in tafle it was infinitely fweeter; the
fkin was a pale red, flreaked downwards with yellow ;
the fecond grew in cluflerson bufhes, and was much
like the elder-berry ; and the third, in tafle, fize, and
colour, flrongly refcmbled a large floe. There were
plenty of birds on the ifland, of various forts; among
G 2


them the parrot and wild pigeon ; but the want of
fire-arms rendered it impoflible to profit by them.
There were alfo bees and lizards, with ants, who
made their nefis in the bufbes, covered with a web
that preferved them from the rain. The traces of
the kangaroo were very vifible, which had probably
been brought from the main, by the natives, for the
purpofe of breeding, and rendering a fupply more
certain, by the greater facility of taking them.
They alfo faw evident figns of cccafional inha-
bitants j fuch as fire-places and wig warns; together
with a pointed ftick three feet in length, with a flit
in the end, fuch as the natives of Van Diemen’s Land
life for flinging flones.
The Ihore is extremely rocky in every part, except
that on which they landed, where they found fcveral
pieces of pumice ftone. The neighbouring main
wore a fterile appearance, and a lofty cape fhewed
the direction of the coaft to the N. W. about feven
leagues; and three or four leagues to the N. were two
fmall iflands. The trunk of a large tree which lay
on the beach, afforded the ftrongeft grounds for be-
lieving that the northerly winds always blew a very
heavy fea in upon the ifland.
The Captain was determined to ftay no longer at
this place than was abfolutely requifite for the pur-
pofes of reft and refrdhment; and he had the fatis-
faflion to find that two nights comfortable repofc
had effcdled a vifible alteration in the health of his


crew. The day after his arrival he found a diminu-
tion in his fmall (lock of pork, which now amounted
only to two pounds ; and, in order to remove every
inducement to pilfer, he fpared the whole for their
dinner on the thirtieth. At length, having filled all
the water-calks, which contained nearly fixty gal-
lons, and put what few oyllcrs they could colledl in
the boat, the Captain prepared for failing, having on
board fufficicnt bread to laft thirty-eight days, at
the rate of two twenty-fifths of a pound, for each
perfon, per diem. On the afternoon of the thirtieth
of May, when on the point of embarking, about
twenty natives made their appearance on theoppofite
fhore, armed with a fpear and lance. They made
figns for them to approach, but as they perceived the
heads of many others on the top of the hill, who
were probably lying in ambulh, they thought it pru-
dent to haften their departure. They accordingly
failed; and fleering as near to the (bore as they could,
they had a full fight of the natives, who appeared to
be black, with Ihort bulky hair, and quite naked.
Having a ftrong tide in their favour, they got a-
breaft of the Cape above-mentioned by eight o’clock;
and not feeing any land without it, they concluded
that the coafl: inclined to the N.W, and W. N.W.
but in this they were miftaken, as before midnight
they met with low land to the N. E. and, at three in
the morning, finding thcmfclvcs embayed, they were
obliged to Hand back to the fouthward.


At day-break, on the 31ft of May, they were fur-
prized to find the whole face of the country totally
changed; inftead of a coafi; agreeably interfered
with hills and vales, and occafionally decked with
pleafing woods, a continued fiiore of fand tired and
difgufted the eye with its barren famenefs; no ver-
dure appeared, to relieve the fterile feene, but all
was brown and gloomy. Faffing through the chan-
nel between fome final! iflands to the N.E. and the
main land, they faw two parties of Indians, running
towards them, with green boughs in their hands,
which they waved in token of friendffiip. But
though the Captain was anxious to have fome inter-
courfe with thefe people, who were armed in the
fame manner as thole he had before feen, bethought
the danger too great to be incurred without evident
neceffity, and therefore continued his courfe till
eight in the morning, when he landed on an ifland
to the N. W. At this place, the crew, who had hi-
therto obferved the utmolt order and propriety of
conduct, began to evince a fpirit of mutiny, which,
if it had not been timely checked, mull have been
attended with the moft fatal confluences. Two
parties being ordered out in fearch of fuppiies, many
of the men, weak and fatigued, expreffed a reludU
ance to comply, and fome actually declared that
they would rather go without a dinner than be at
the pains of fecking it. One, in particular, behaved
with great infolence to the Captain, openly refufing


to acknowledge his fuperiority •, but Captain Psligh,
on this trying occafion, fuccefsfully exerted that
good fenfe and fortitude, which fo eminently diftin-
guifhed his conduct during the whole courfc of this
arduous enterprife ; feizing a cutlafs, he commanded
the mutineer to take another, and immediately
prove, like a man, that equality he was fo ready to
affert. The failor, however, intimidated at the re-
folute countenance of his commander, had recourfe
to fupplication ; and by returning to his duty, ob-
tained the forgivenefs he alked.
From the higheft part of this ifland, which the
Captain named Sunday Ifland, no more of the main
land could be Teen than from the beach; as it only
extended fiom S. i-half E. four miles, to W. by N.
about four leagues. A fmail key N. W. by N.
however, was perceptible, which, as it lay farther
from the land, than the ifland they were on, the
Captain deemed a more fecure refting-place for the
night. After making a good dinner on fome oy-
fters, clams, and fmail beans—a fpecies of the doli-
chos—which they found on the ifland, together with
plenty of rain-water, they failed for the Key, where
they meant to fleep. They accordingly reached it
about dark; but found it fo furrounded with rocks,
that it was dangerous to approach it, for which rea-
fon they came to a grapnel for the night.
At day-break, however, (on the firft of June)
they got on fliore, and tracked the boat into a fafe


place; and, Simulated by the flattering veftiges of
turtle, and the fight of an immenfc number of nod-
dies, the Captain refolved to remain on this fpot till
the enfuing morn. Here the botanift, Mr. Nelfon,
was attacked with a violent heat in his bowels , a
dimnefsof fight, exceflive thirft and debility, occa-
fioned by the extreme heat of the fun, during an
excurfion he made in fearch of fupplies. The fmall
quantity of wine which the Captain had carefully
preferved, now proved of great utility, as after
taking fome bread foaked in it, and repofing himfclf,
naked, in the fhade, he began to recover. The
boatfwain and carpenter, alfo, with fome others,
complained of ficknefs and head-ach; which pro-
ceeded chiefly from having eaten immoderately of
raw-beans and berries, which they found when fent
to forage.
As it was evident, from the remains of an old
wig-wam, and the backs of two turtle, that the na-
tives fometimes referred to this place, it was thought
prudent to make their fire in the thicker, that they
might not be difeovered in the night. But this re-
gulation, which had been wifely adopted by the
Captain, proved of little avail; fince, one of the
crew, in his abfence, infilling on having a fire fe-
parate from his comrades, the flames caught the
furrounding grafs, and fpread with luch rapidity,
that the whole ifland was prefently in a blaze. For-
tunately, however, the deprivation of reft was the


only misfortune they experienced from the obiti-
nacy and imprudence of this man. The party dif-
patched during the night, in fearch of turtle, return-
ed at three in the morning, wholly unfuccefsful.
But the bird party were more fortunate j they
caught twelve noddies, and would certainly have
taken a much greater number, but for the folly of
one man, who, leaving his companions, diffurbed
the birds, though not till he had eaten nine, which
he caught himfelf, (as he afterwards acknow-
ledged).
At dawn of day they left this ifland, whofe lati-
tude is 11 deg. 47 min. S,; having another fmall
ifland between it and the main, at the diftancc of
three leagues, to the W. by N. i-4th N. and pro-
ceeded to the northward. Before they failed, the
Captain tied fome buttons, and pieces of iron, to a
tree, as an agreeable prize for any of the natives
who might vifit the place : but though his intention
was evidently laudable, a little reflection might have
convinced him that the gratification of this gene-
rous impulfe would probably be productive of very
different effects from thofe which he expected, as it
would certainly lead to the promotion of difeord, if
not to the effufion of blood. Were a party of Mex-
icans to be driven on the Britifh coaff, and to leave
fufpended on a tree, as marks of gratitude for the
flicker it afforded them, fome mafly lumps of filver
H


and gold, (not more precious to us than iron and
brafs to the rude natives of New Holland) could
it be fuppofed that, when difeovered by a troop of
ruftics, the glittering fpoil would experience an
equal and a peaceable divifion ? No! inftead of
friendly congratulations on their mutual acquifition,
each individual would be tempted to aflert the fu-
periority of his claim, difputes would inevitably
arife, and the conteft be finally terminated by the
fanguinary decifions of flrength. Nature’s boun-
teous hand has provided the inhabitants of every
clime with all that is neccfiary for their welfare and
felicity; every objeft foreign from thefe, is an article
of luxury; the introduction of which leads to unhap-
plnefs, by the creation of new wants. The man
whofatisfies the wants of nature is a friend; but he
who raifes wants, which nature difowns, is furely the
worft of foes!
When they had run fomewhat more than five
miles to the northward, the fea became fuddenly
rough, which they aferibed to an open channel to
the ocean through the reefs; they then met with a
large (hoal, on which were two Tandy keys, between
which and two others, four miles to the weft, they
kept on to the northward. Several other keys were
perceived in the courfe of the day, which being co-
vered with wood, formed a pleafing contrail with
the brown and fierile appearance of the main. The
northernmoft point of the latter Hoped towards the


&a, and to the fouthward of it was a hill,, flat at the
top, which from thence he denominated Pudding an
Hilly as he named two others to the northward the
Paps. Here was a fmall trad of country, lefs
barren in appearance, than the reft of the coaft, the
eaftern part of which formed a cape, whence the
coaft inclines to the N. W. by N.
On the fecond of June, at noon, they were thirty
miles diftant from the ifland where they laft flept,
and which they called the Lagoon IJlandy having
fteered a N. i-halfW. courfej latitude n deg. 18
min. S. They continued their courfe at about
three leagues diftance from the main land, between
a number of fmall iflands, (on one of which they
landed, but were unable to meet with any kind of
provifion) till the afternoon of the third, when they
came to a rock, having the appearance of an ifland,
which they found to be that difcovered by Cap-
tain Cook, and named Booby IJlandy from the quan-
tity of boobies which refort thither; they likewife
faw a fmall key dole to the weft part of the coaft,
which they called Shoal Cafe. Here they quitted
the rocks and ftioals of the north part of New Hol-
land ; and at eight in the evening, once more com-
mitted themfelves to the open fca, after having been
fix days on the coaft. But, encouraged by the
dangers they had efcaped, they exprefled no appre-
henflons of thofe they were to encounter j the hope
H 2


of reaching, in a few days, a land of fafety, Tup-
ported their courage, and rendered their minds much
Wronger than their bodies.
The greateft inconvenience they now experienced
was from the extreme roughnefs of the Tea, which
made it neceffary to bale the water out of the boat
without intermiffion, and kept every body in it con-
tinually wet. This affeCted them all molt fenfibly;
the furgeon, in particular, and an old Teaman, named
Lebogue, difplayed the ftrongeft fymptoms of a ra-
pid decay, when they had been at Tea four or five
days; and the reft experienced that irrefiftible dif-
pofition to fteep, which generally indicates the ap-
proaching victory of deceafe over exhaufted nature.
The only relief that could be afforded, was a fpoon-
ful or two of wine to thofe who were moft affeCled ;
till in the afternoon of the eighth, they were fo fortu-
nate as to catch a fmall dolphin, which fupplied a
portion of three ounces to each man. Still, however,
the unfavourable fymptoms hourly increafed, ag-
gravated by exceffive debility, fwollen legs, death-
like countenances, and weaknefs of the mental fa-
culties. Though the Captain fupported his fpirits
with uncommon refolution, and really felt left in-
difpofed than the generality of his men, the boat-
Iwain told him, with great fimplicity, that he looked
worfe than all of them j a compliment, at fuch a
conjuncture, certainly not very encouraging.


On the eleventh, at noon, the Captain having
made his observation, found every reafon to believe
that they had pafled the eaftern part of the meridian
of Timor— which afforded infinite
fatisfadion to rhefe wretched wanderers ; and the
fight of numbers of gannets, boobies, and other
birds, in the courfe of the afternoon, fortunately con-
firmed them in the pleaflng hope of a fpeedy termi-
nation to their mifery.
The courfe and diflance they had made from the
third of June to this time, were as follow. To the
fourth at noon j courfe, S. 8i W.; diflance in
miles; lat. 10 deg. 48 min. S. long, by account
from Shoal Cape, 1 deg. 45 min. W.—To the fifth,
W. i-4thN,; 108 miles; lat. 10 deg. 45 min.S.
long. 3 deg. 35 min. W.—To the flxth; N. 77 deg.
W.; 117 miles; lat. 10 deg. 19 min. S.; long. 5
deg. 31m. W.—To the feventh; N. 57 deg. W. ; 88
miles; lat. 9 deg. 31 min.S. long. 6 deg. 46 min.
W.—To the eighth; W. N. W. i-4th W.; 106
miles; lat. 8 deg. 45 min.S. long. 8 deg. 23 min.
W.—To the ninth; S. 76 deg. W.; 107 miles %
lat. 9 deg, 9 min. S. long. 10 deg. 8 min. W.—To
the tenth, W, i-halfS.; ill miles; lat. 9 deg. 16
min.S; long. i2deg. 1 min. W.—To the eleventh;
S. 77 deg. W.; 109 miles; lat. 9 deg. 41 min.S.
long. 13 deg. 49 min. W.
The flattering fymptoms of approaching land,
far from proving fallacious, were fpeedily verified;


for, on the morning of the twelfth of June, between
the hours of two and three, the long-looked for
objeft of their ardent vows, the goal of their defines,
the propitious coaft of Timor, prefented itfelf to
their view. No longer now was heard the fullen
murmur of complaint; Hope’s vivifying ray bright-
ened the languid eye, crimfon’d o’er the pallid cheek,
and cheered the drooping heart, of ficknefs. The
hope they now experienced, was not that diftant
hope which raifes but the tranfient glow, and mocks
the wretch it flatters j but a rational fentiment, con-
firmed by wifdom, and whofe nearnefs of accom-
plifhment proved the folidity of its bafis.
At day-break, the land bearing from S. W. by S,
from five to fix miles diflant to N. E. by N. up-
wards of fix leagues, they fleered along fhore to the
S. S. W. in feard! of the Dutch fettlement, But
though the land exhibited frequent marks of culti-
vation, they were fearful to approach it, as they
could perceive no figns of European habitations j
they therefore continued their courfe till night, when
they lay to, and refumed it in the morning. At
two o’clock in the afternoon of the thirteenth, after
pafling through a breaking Tea, not without great
danger, they difeovered an ample found, near the
entrance of which, on the eaftfide, (upwards of two
miles in breadth,) they came to a grapnel, in a fmalj
bay, with a iandy bottom, where they perceived a
hut, a dog, and fome cattle. The S. W. point of


the entrance of the found bore W. i-half S. one
league •, the S. E. point three fourths of a mile ; and
the idand Roti (which they had fird fecn at ten in
the morning) from S. by W. i~4th W. to S. W,
1-4 W. about five leagues.
This found, from its fituation and extent, is ad-
mirably formed for the reception of (hipping •, and,
though a reef of rocks, about two cables length
from the fhore, which are only to be feen at low
water, and fome very high breakers on the oppofite
fide, prefent a formidable appearance of danger,
there is fufficient room, and a fafe channel, for the
larged veflels.
The gunner and boatfwain being fent to the hut,
foon returned, accompanied by five Indians, who
gave them to underdand that the governor of the
Dutch fettlement refided at a place called Coupang,
which was at fome didance to the N. E.; whither
one of them confented to condutd them.
Thefe natives were of a dark tawny colour, with
long black hair. Their drefs confided of a fquarc
piece of cloth, which they wore round their hips,
with a large knife duck in the folds of it; a hand-
kerchief tied round their hands; and a bag fuf-
pended from their (boulders, for the purpofe of car-
rying the beetle, which they condantly chewed.
They brought to the boat fome pieces of dried
turtle, and foipe ears of Indian corn ; but the for-
mer were fb hard as not to be eatable till foaked


in water; the latter, however, proved a grateful
treat: and they offered to bring feme other food, but
the Captain, eager to depart, took his Indian pilot
on board, and failed before five in the afternoon,
keeping clofe in on the eaft fhore. The wind falling
with the day, they had recourfe to their oars, but
their flrength proving inadequate to any effectual
exertion, they came to a grapnel at ten at night j
and the water being extremely fmooth, enjoyed the
falutary comfort of a found Deep for three hours :
they kept in the fame diretflion till they again came
to the open fea, where they found that the land to
the weflward, which they had palled, was an ifland,
called by their Indian pilot, Pulo Samow. The
northern entrance of this channel is near two miles
wide.
The report of two guns, at no great diflance, now
proved the mod: agreeable founds which had ever
flricken their ears; and their eyes were foon after
regaled with a treat equally pleafant; in the fight of
two fquare-rigged veffels, and a cutter, lying at an-
chor to the eaflward. Being thus on the point of
accomplifhing their arduous enterprize, and termi-
nating all their hardfhips, they felt themfelves en-
dowed with unufual flrength, and applying to their
oars till the approach of day, came to a grapnel, op-
pofire to a fmall fort and town, which, as they learned
from the pilot, was Ccupang. Having hoifted a
flgnal of difirefs, they were hailed by a foldier, who


told them to land ; a requeft which the Captain in-
Eantly complied with. On his debarkation, he was
received by a crowd of Indians, whom he
O
was agreeably furprifed to find an EnglHh Tailor.
This man immediately condufted him to the houfe
of his captain, whofe name was Spikerman, and
whofe veffd was one of thofe which lay in the road.
Captain Spikerman being informed of their fituation,
defired the crew might immediately land, and repair
to his houfe, where he gave orders for their recep-
tion, while he went to the Governor, Mr. William
Adrian Van Efte—who then lay dangeroufly ill—to
know at what hour he would receive Captain
Bligh.
It was with extreme difficulty that the crew
reached the houfe of Captain Spikerman, where
they found a breakfaft of tea, with bread and butter,
prepared for them. It would be difficult for the hu-
man imagination to conceive a more extraordinary
group than thefe miferable objects now exhibited to
the inhabitants of Timor; nor is it fcarcely poffible
for the pen or pencil to convey an adequate idea of
the horrid fpedtacle now prefented to their view.
But for the tears of gladnefs which flowed, in co-
pious ftreams from the funk eye, each individual
would have reprefented a perfect perfonification of
wretchednefs and famine: worn to the very bones,
with limbs full of fores, and tattered garments, they
I


infpired every fpe&ator with fentiments of pity, min-
gled with horror and aftonifhment.
The governor’s anxiety for their relief, overcoming
his concern for his own health, he appointed a very
early interview with Captain Bligh ; and in the re-
ception he afforded him, difplayed that innate good-
nefs of heart, which is the firft gift, and nobleft or-
nament of human nature. Equally polite and be-
nevolent, he poffelfed the difficult art of bellowing-
favours without hurting the feelings of thole who
received them. After affuring Captain Bligh that
every accommodation which the place could afford,
Jhould be immediately provided for himfelf and his,
men, he fet before him an elegant repaft, which,
though the Governor knew to be neceffary for the
gratification of his appetite, he only requeued him
to partake of in compliance with the cuftom of the
country.
When the Captain left this generous and worthy
man, he returned to Captain Spikerman, whom he
found equally attentive, humane, and beneficent:
in his abfence, every kind of relief had been admi-
niftered to his men ; the town furgeon, Mr. Max,
had dreffed their fores, and they had been provided
with many ufeful articles of drefs.
A houfe —the only one in the town unoccupied—
was now given to the Captain for his own refidence ;
but finding it fufficiently capacious, he refolved tp
have all his men under the fame roof with himfelf


Cf this determination he accordingly informed the
Governor, who immediately Tent beds, and ail other
neceflary furniture.
Here they remained till the twentieth of Auguft,
vrhen they left Coupang, in a fchooner which the
Captain had purchafed, with the afliftance of Mr.
Timotheus Wanjor, fon-in-law to the Governor,
who {applied him with money, and every thing his
fituation required. During his refidence at this
place, all his men had recovered their health and
ftrength, except the botanift, Mr. Nelfon, who died
on the twentieth of July.
Coupang is fituated in lodeg. i<2 min. S. lati-
tude, and 124 degrees, 41 min. E. longitude.
On the 6th of September, they came in fight of
Java *, whence they continued their courfe to the
weft through the ftraits of Madura; and arrived fafe
at Batavia on the firft of October. Here they fepa-
rated; the Captain and two of his men embarking
for Europe in the Vlyet packer, which failed on the,
fixteeth of Odtober, and the reft remaining at Bata-
via* to come home by the fleet which was to fail
foon after. The packet arrived at the Cape of Good
Hope on the 16th of December; left it on the fe-
cond of January, and, on the fourteenth of March
Captain Bligh landed at Portfmouth.
Poji tot naufragia y portum . Elaving thus brought
our bold and fuccef&ful adventurers to a fafe har-
I 1


hour; feme few reflections naturally occur. The
recital of miraculous efcapes from extraordinary
dangers, is never intended for the mere gratification
of curiofity; but to promote fome important ob-
ject of general utility—either by teaching how to
avoid, or by ffiewing how to efcape, perils of a fimi-
lar nature. Thofe to which Captain Bligh and his
party were here expofed by the mutiny of his crew,
no human wifdom could forefee, nor policy prevent;
but the exemplary conduCt and fortitude of that
officer affords a moll ufeful leffon to others. When
we confider, that from his departure from Tofoa, to
his arrival on the coaft of Timor, forty-one days
had been paffed, by eighteen men, in an open boat,
with fuch a quantity of provifions, as, according to
the ufual allowance of Teamen, would only have
tailed five \ and, that, during that time, they had
run more than twelve hundred leagues, without
lofing a Tingle man ; we cannot with-hoid our admi-
ration, nor forbear to bellow the higheft encomiums
on that excellent management, and heroic refolu-
tion, which gave fuccefs to a projeCl apparently im-
practicable.
Had not the Captain refilled the folicitations of
his men, and perfevered in his determination to en-
force the agreement formed at their departure from
Tofoa, concerning the dillribution of provifions;
they muff inevitably have perilhed by famine:


whereas, on their arrival at Timor, they had fuf-
ficient left to proceed to Java, where they were cer-
tain of meeting with fupplies.
The crew, alfo, are deferving of praife for their
ftrid obfervance of difcipline, at a time when their
fituation, by diminifhing the fear of punilhment,
and augmenting the hope of impunity, eftablifhed
an apparent equality between them and their Com-
mander.
Such dangers, thus efcaped, muft fully imprefs
our minds with the convidion, that no fituation,
however bad, can juftify defpair : and this refledion
fhouid teach thofe whom chance, or choice, has di-
reded to the adoption of a naval life, to repofe im-
plicit confidence in that all-bounteous Being, whofe
paternal hand is ever ftretched forth to the aid of
fuch as place their truft in him, whether to guide the
midnight wanderer o’er the tracklefs defart, or to
lieer in fafety the courageous Tailor through the
threatening billows.


SECRET ANECDOTES
OF THE
OTAHEITEAN FEMALES.
AS we have been induced to afcribe the piratical
conduct of the Mutineers to the fafcinating charms
of the female inhabitants of Otaheite, we think it
neceffary, (in order to prove that there is no
abfurdity in the fuppofition) to offer to our readers
fome authentic anecdotes reflecting them. Thefe,
we apprehend, will be fufficient to convince fuch as
are of opinion, that a flate of pure nature is wholly
deftitute of attractions, and better calculated to
excite difguft, than to create defires, that their fen-
timents are rather the offsprings of prejudice than
of reafon. Rosseau and Raynal, the grand ad-
vocates of Nature , have, indeed, been fdgmatifed as


Brutes, for defending a miftrefs they adored j even
the avowed excellence of their private characters
proved inadequate to lecure thel'e philofophic wri-
ters from the imputation of hypocrify, and of vi-
cious intentions.
We mean not to enter on a topic which would
inevitably lead us into fuc’n an ample field of inve-
ftigation as would the difcuffion of the fupcriority of
man in a ftate of nature, over man in a (bate of re-
finement we only with to offer 4 Angle remark;
and that rather as a Quere, than a fettled opinion.—
Would not the expreflion of a doubt that man is
born good , be deemed an impious reflection on the
juftice of the Deity ? And if this be admitted, may
we not conclude, That they who, (uninfluenced by-
education, unawed by example) purfue the pure
dictates of nature, are more virtuous than the mem-
bers of a polifhed fociety ? But, be that as it may,
there can be no doubt that the mode of living in
Otaheite is well adapted to make the molt powerful
impreflions on vulgar and illiterate minds, who
deem exemption from toil, and fenfual
the primary objeCts of human purfuits.
tc What the Otaheiteans feel they have never been
taught either to difguife or fupprefs, and having
habits of thinking which perpetually recal the
paft, and anticipate the future, they are affeCted by


all the changes of the patting hour, and refieft the
colour of the time, however frequently it may vary ;
they have no projed which is to be purfued from day
to day, the fubjeCt of unremitted anxiety and foli-
citutif, that firft rufhes into the mind when they
awake in the morning, and is laft difmiffed when
they fieep at night. Yet if we admit that they are
upon the whole happier than we, we mutt: admit
that the child is happier than the man, and that we.
are lofers by the perfection of our nature, the in-
creaie of our knowledge, and the enlargement of
our views.”
Havvkefworth’s Voyages, Vol. 11. page 355.
<c On the 29th April, 1769, not very early in the
forenoon, Mr. Bank’s went to pay his court to
Oberea, [the Queen] and was told that the was frill
afleep under the awning of her canoe: thither there-
fore he went, intending to call her up, a liberty
which he thought he might take, without any dan-
ger of giving offence: bur, upon looking into her
chamber, to his great aftonifhment, he found her in
bed with a handfome young fellow about five and
twenty, whofe name was Obadee: he retreated with
fome hafte and confufion, but was foon made to un-
derfcand, that lucK amours gave no occafion to fcan-
-4 CJ
dal, and that Obadee was univerfaily known to have
been feledfed by her as the objeCt of her private
favours.”
Kawkefworth’a Voyages, V. 11. page 358,


ff Friday, the iaih of May, was diflinguifhed by
a vifit from fome ladies whom wc had never fecn be-
fore, and who introduced themfelves with fome An-
gular ceremonies. Mr. Banks was trading in his
boat at the gate of the fort as ufual, in company with
Tootahah, who had that morning paid him a vifit,
and fome other of the natives j between nine and ten
o’cldck, a double canoe came to the landing place,
under the awning of which fat a man and two
women : the Indians that were about Mr. Banks,
made figns that he fhould go out to meet them,
which he hafted to do ; but by the time he could get
out of the boat, they had advanced within ten yards
of him : they then flopped, and made figns that he
fhould do fo too, laying down about a dozen young
plantain trees, and fome other fmall plants : he com-
plied, and the people having made a lane between
them, the man, who appeared to be a fervant,
brought fix of them to Mr Banks by one of each at
a time, palling and re-pafiing fix times, and always
pronouncing a fhort fentence when he delivered them.
Tupia, who flood by Mr. Banks, acled as his
mailer of the ceremonies, and receiving the branches
as they were brought, laid them down in the boat.
When this was done, another man brought a large
bundle of cloth, which having opened, he fpread
piece by piece upon the ground, in the fpace be-
tween Mr. Banks and his vifitors j there were nine
K


pieces, and having laid three pieces one upon an-
other, the foremoft of the women, who Teemed to be
the principal, and who was called Oorattooa, flap-
ped upon them, and taking up her garments ail
round her to the waift, turned about, with great
compofure and deliberation, and with an air of per-
fect innocence and fimplicity, three times; when this
was done, The dropped the veil, and fleppmg off the
cloth, three more pieces were laid on, and The re-
peated the ceremony, then flopping off as before *
the lad three were laid on, and the ceremony was re-
peated in the fame manner the third time. Imme-
diately after this the cloth was rolled up, and given
to Mr. Banks as a prefent from the lady, who with
her friend, came up and Tainted him. lie mace
fuch prefents to them both, as he thought would be
acceptable, and after having ftaid about an hour.
they went away.”
Hawkefwprth’s Voyages, V. 11. page 382*
« On the 14th, which -was Sunday,! diredled that
divine fervice fho'uld be performed at the fort ; we
were defirous that Tome of the principal Indians
fhouid be prefent, but when the hour came, mod of
them were returned home. Mr. Banks, however,
croffed the river, and brought back 1 übourai Ta-
mide, and his wife Tomio, hoping that it would give
occafion to Tome inquiries on their part, and Tome
indruftion on ours: having feated them, he placed


himfelf between them, and during the whole fervice,
they very attentively obferved his behaviour, and
very exadly imitated it ; (landing, fitting, or kneel-
ing, as they faw him do ; they were confeious that
we were employed about fomcwhat lenous and im-
portant, as appeared by their calling to the Indians
without the fort to be filcntj yet when the fervice
was over, neither of them afked any queflions, nor
would they attend to any attempt that was made to
explain what had been done.
“ Such were our Matins; our Indians thought fit
to perform Vefpers of a very different kind. A
young man, near fix feet high, performed the rites of
Venus with a little girl about eleven or twelve years
cf age, before feveral of our people, and a great
number of the natives, without the lead lenfe of its
being indecent or improper, but, as appealed, in
perfect conformity to the cuftom of the place.
Among the fpeftators were feveral women of fupe-
rior rank, particularly Oberea, who may properly be
faid to h ivc affifted at the ceremony ; for they gave
inftruflions to the girl how to perform her pait,
which, young as fhe was, fhe did not feem to
(land in need of.
“ This accident is not mentioned as an cbjed of
idle curiofity, but as it deferves confideration in de-
termining a queftion which has been long debated in
philofophy; Whether the (hame attending certain
actions, which are allowed on all fides to be in them-


felves innocent, is implanted in Nature, or fuperin-
duced by cuftom ? If it has its origin in cuftom, :
will, perhaps, be found difficult to trace that cuftom,
however general, to its fource ; if in inftinft, it will
be equally difficult to difcover from what caufe it is
fubdued, or at leaft over-ruled among thefe people,
in whole manners not the leaft; trace of it is to be
found,”
Hawkefvvorth’b Voyages, V* 11, page . v:>.








