

hG>G
AN ADDRESS
SPECIAL GENERAL MEETING
THE CHURCH SOCIETY,
DFLIVEBED BY
ST. JAMES’ SCHOOL EOOM,
ON WEDNESDAY, APRIL 15th, 1868.
Tlie Big'lit Bonoralale the Earl of Selxnore,
IN' THE CHAIR.
.IOSEPH COOK & CO., "CHURCHMAN’' OFFICE, 370, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.




f\ njF
The following Address was delivered by the Lord Bishop of
Sydney,- at a Special General Meeting of the Church Society,
held in St. James’s School-room, on Wednesday, April 15th,
the Right Honorable the Earl of Belmore in the Chair.
It is now re-printed and published for the purpose of affording
information concerning the work of the .Church, and will be
found useful by Collectors and other friends of the Society:—
I think it is necessary to observe that this meeting is not the
Annual meeting of the Church Society, which can only be held
during the session of Synod, but a special general meeting,
called for the purpose of giving information to the friends and
subscribers in order that the state of the Society may be known,
and efforts made for the purpose of obtaining funds.
Few persons care to support a cause of which they have only a
general and superficial knowledge ; and it has been my object,
as many of you are aware, on these occasions, to bring before
you such a view of the Church’s work as may satisfy you that
what you contribute is well expended, and that you are justified
ill endeavouring to obtain increased funds for the extension of
the society’s work. One of our friends has proposed to raise
£3OO in the parish, to be given to three distinct districts, of
which the circumstances shall be known to the subscribers. It
is a proposal I shall be very glad to see carried out. It is
founded on a knowledge of human nature. Our interest is
called forth by particulars. We have all some green sunny
spots on which memory loves to dwell. The day, the individual,
the scene, the words, and acts, all give interest to our recollec-
tion, and serve to impel us to any course which love, or
gratitude, or duty ma.v require. Now, I much wish to give a
reality to some of the work of the society, that so it may not be
the name of a place or a person which you remember, but scenes
and results arising out of the operations which the clergy and
catechists connected with the Church Societv are carrying on.
To do this I must enter into particulars. And here my diffi-
culty is where to begin j on the coast, or 300 miles away in the
interior. I may perhaps connect the eastern coast with the
western interior by a short narrative. Years ago a family from


Dublin emigrated to this colony. One member of it was a
clergyman, and settled in the district of Illawarra, and became
the respected incumbent of Kiama. Amongst the other sons
was one who for his intelligence, good conduct, and eyident
desire to be useful, was observed and recommended to Moore
College. Having finished his course there with much credit, he
was ordained, and though much desired by a congregation in
the neighbourhood of Sydney, where he had occasionally acted
as a catechist, he cheerfully obeyed the call which was given to
him to carry on a kind of missionary work in the district of the
Lachlan River. From the eastern coast and from all his friends
he goes to the western interior. Thirteen miles from Forbes,
on the Lachlan, a parsonage had been built —chiefly by the
liberal aid of one man—a squatter, Mr. Strickland. A room in
the parsonage was sufficiently large to serve as a place of wor-
ship, and was arranged and used for that purpose. Forbes,
which had at one time been a large and prosperous gold-field,
had seen its palmy days pass by. A large Church had been
built, but was in debt. One clergyman had been obliged to
leave because his stipend was much in arrear, though the
miners, when they found this, did kindly ofiTer to give him a
benefit at the theatre if he would remain. The position of
Church affairs was not very promising. Our friend, however,
in whom I wish to interest you was in no wise daunted by the
prospect before him, and when, a year after his settlement, I
went to see him I found that matters were much improved, the
debt diminished, and the clergyman’s stipend paid. The
Church Society contributes fIOO per annum towards the stipend,
and besides helping to build the church did, on two occasions,
given £SO towards the liquidation of the debt j the vestry was a
prophet’s chamber, and the parsonage still served as a residence
and a church. But it soon became evident that more ought to
be done. Forbes, which is on the Lachlan, is comparatively
high up in the river’s course—for more than 200 miles it flows
towards the Murrumbidgee, and, with the exception of the last
forty miles, passes through my diocese. There are stations
of course down the river, and a good deal of traffic, and a small
township here and there springs up as the centre of a squatting
district, and of the few trade# which find subsistence in the
bush. On the last occasion of my visit it was evident that the
town of Forbes and the immediate neighbourhood, with a portion
of the river still higher up, and a township called Canowindra,
were quite sufficient for one clergyman, and that a second ought
to be employed on the Lachlan and its small townships and ex-
tensive stations. And now the character of my friend appears.
The town and the surrounding district were of course the most
attractive. There was the stated regular work, some society,
lectures to be given and heard, and all the social interests and
advantages to be found in such a locality. Whatever they were
he surrendered them. He gave up to an unknown successor the
fruit of his labour, and devoted himself to that missionary work


which had to be done by some one, and which no one could do so
well as he. Still more, in order to secure a stipend for his suc-
cessor, he gave up £SO of the Church Society’s grant and
surrendered it to Forbes. At Christmas last the second clergy-
man was appointed, who receiving £IOO per annum from the
Church Society, and the rent of a house, and £2OO per annum
from his parishioners, has settled down as the clergyman of
Forbes, and is carrying on his work with success. [A
letter was here read, giving an account of efforts made
to build a Church at Condobolin.] In the meantime the
mission down the Lachlan Eiver goes on. Lefore leaving the
west, I will mention a few circumstances connected with another
part of the same district. Parallel to Forbes and lying to
the south of it and so much on the border of the diocese
of Goulburn, that I believe some of the rushes —the ten-
mile and the twelve-mile rush —are in that diocese, is the gold-
field of Grenfell. The English admiral, whose name was long
famous in South American waters, gave his name through
the unhappy murder of his son, a most estimable Government
officer, to this Western gold field. A clergyman in the diocese
of Goulburn, the Eev. W. H. Pownall, ministered to the miners
and induced them to build a church. At Christmas last a clergy-
man was sent there, who also takejj charge of a township called
Cowra, thirty miles from Grenfell, and on the Lachlan, but
much higher up than Forbes. This portion of the Western
district is thus fairly provided for. There is a vast unoccupied
territory beyond —occupied indeed by flocks and herds, rarely, if
ever, visited by the spiritual shepherd, but the ground we have
taken up we are able to maintain. sin the Abyssinian ex-
pedition, the progress may not have been rapid, but the hold of
the country is firm. We are invading an enemy’s territory,
wffiere Satan’s seat is, and so far as we have gone we hold our
positions. And here I will observe that were it not for two
institutions nothing of this kind could have been done. I refer
to the Church Society and to Moore College. That the Church
of England in those regions is not dead and her portion of the
population left wholly without the ordinances of religion, or de-
pendent for them upon other denominations, is due to the
Church Society, which has not undertaken the impossible task
of supplying the means of grace to those regions, but the far
better work of encouraging self-help—helping others to help
themselves. The timely aid, the encouraging promise, the hope
of help sustaining the incipient enterprise, the knowledge that
there are those ‘down in Sydney’ who are willing to assist them
up the country—all this has a marvellous effect in giving vigour
and earnestness to the efforts made in those remote regions ; and
when to these advantages is added the scriptural ordinance of
Diocesan Episcopacy by which it becomes one man’s duty and
delight to encourage, and set forward all such efforts, and by
his presence and influence to cheer on those who are w'arring
against evil, one can see how certainly with the Divine


blessing these efforts must succeed. But then it must be re-
membered that if men are not forthcoming nothing can be done.
“ Money,” says the wise preacher, “ answereth all things and
yet it takes much more than money to provide and prepare suit-
able men for the ministry. I have left no means untried by
which clergymen may be obtained. There are at present seventy-
six clergymen in this diocese licensed to a cure of souls. Of these
two-thirds, or fifty, have entered the diocese since the com-
mencement of my episcopate. Of these again twenty are from
England, sixteen from Moore College, and fourteen from this or
other colonies. In the same period forty clergymen have dis-
appeared from the clergy list, and as each succeeding year of my
absence from England diminishes my ability to fill up vacancies
by men from home, it is obvious that, without a supply in the
colony itself, it would be impossible that the demand for ad-
ditional clergy could be met. By the wise and liberal provision
made by Mr. Thomas Moore, and suggested by Sir W. Burton,
this can now bo done. Young men, of suitable character and
attainments, after spending two years at Moore College, are or-
dained. If the sixteen clergymen now in my diocese, who have
been students at Moore College, had to be obtained from Eng-
land, the cost would have been considerable, probably £2OOO.
To obtain sixteen clergymen permanently it would have been
necessary to get twenty-four; for I have found that, for one
reason or another, nearly one-third of those obtained from Eng-
land have ceased to officiate —their own and their wives’ sickness,
death, and other causes occasioning this loss —while in the
present state of the Church at home it Avould hardly have heen
possible to obtain them at all. lam as anxious as any one can
be to connect the education of the future clergy of this colony
with the University. But except in a very few cases, this has
not hitherto been possible. Our wants have been too pressing,
and the men have not been able to afford the cost and time
necessary for the University course. The suggestion which was
thrown out in the public prints by “ a Fellow of St. Paul s, of a
three years’ course for our students at Moore College, or a two
years’ course at St. Paul’s and one at Moore College, will I trust,
in time be adopted. The latter is already the rule. That is, a
student passed at St. Paul’s is only required to spend one year
at Moore College. I return to my description of what is being
done, and I will ask you to pass on to the coast district of
Illawarra. In going to Wollongong, after having crossed the
sandstone ranges, with their unvarying gum tree and scrub,
you come upon rich green myrtaceous foliage, with tall cabbage-
tree palm and the tree fern, indicating the presence of a
deep black soil, in which all beauteous plants and shrubs lux-
uriantly grow. This land is tempting to the agriculturist, and
having of late years been thrown open to the free selector, is
very fully occupied. The sides of the mountain are being clear-
ed. In the inner recesses, on the summit, and over the west
side towards Berrima and Sutton Forest, colonies of settlers are


placed on the land, extending from the neighbourhood of the
GoulburnEailway, where it passes the mountain, to the Shoalhaven
River, a distance of thirty miles from north to south. This is a
kind of middle territory between the sea and the western side
of the mountains. Hitlierto no provision has been made
for this middle district. From Berrima on the one side, and
from Dapto on the coast, the clergymen stationed at these two
placeshave given their assistance in providing schools and an occa-
sional service. The school-rooms are places where Divine service
is held, and have been assisted by the Church Society, and one
of the schoolmasters occasionally reads the service. But a
considerable portion of this district could not be so reached.
From a point behind Jamberoo to the Shoalhaven River there
is a considerable population for which the clergyman at
Shoalhaven makes the following appeal:—
Numba, Shoalhaven, 9th March, 1868.
The Secretary of the Church Society for the Diocese of Sydney.
Rev. and dear Sir, —I beg to renew niy application for a grant of £75, or
such lesser sum as the society may think fit to appropriate towards the
stipend of Mr. John O’Connor the Church of England Catechist of Broughton
Creek. Mr. O’Connor visits and preaches through the whole district, from
the Shoalhaven River, on the south, to Gerringong and the north bank
of the Kangaroo River on the north. He preaches regularly to eight
different congregations, numbering from thirty to a hundred persons, and
gives religious instruction in seven Public schools with average attendances
of from twentyto fifty children. A minister having charge of all the country
from Shoalhaven to the borders of the Diocese of Sydney cannot sufficiently
attend to the duties at present performed by Mr. O’Connor, so that unless
he be maint.iined the greater part of the large and increasing population
north of the Shoalhaven River will soon be lost to the Church of England.
On the Ist of April, 1887, the Lord Bishop of Sydney wrote to mo “As
regards Cambewarra and the district on that side, if you can raise £75 per
annum from thence, so as to incl.ide Kangaroo Mountain, I think the
Church Society would give another £75, and another catechist might be
obtained.”
The knowledge that the movement had the approval of his Lordship
encouraged the people—most of whom are small farmers, in poor circum-
stances—to do their utmost, and they hav3 remitted to the Church Society
£33 6s. Bd. 01 account of the stipend of the catechist, for the four months
of last year that he laboured amongst them.
There is, however, no certainty, that they can permanently maintain
their contributions to more than £75 per annum, which, as the Catechist is
a married man with four children, would be insufficient for his support.
As the residents from the Kangaroo River, Broughton Creek, and Cam-
bewarra, whom I have had opportunity of questioning, speak with high
appreciation of Mr. O'Connor’s services, and as there is more rich land
unimproved within that district that in any other part of Illawarra, there
is every prospect that if the members of our Church are kept together,
they will, in a few years, be able to support a minister of our Church
without any addition to the annual aid at present applied for; but if
they are not kept together they will naturally attach themselves to other
denominations.
Upon these grounds I beg to recommend this application for assistance,
to the favourable consideration'of the society,>nd to subscribe myself
your most obedient servant,
RoBEnT S. Willis,
Church of England Clergyman at Shoalhaven.


Ihe Church Society gives £SO per annum to the Catechist,
and would, I am sure, readily increase this to £75 if the means
are supplied. The Catechist sends me an aecount of his en-
gagements. The people subscribe £75 per annum towards his
maintenance. I judge from that the work is efficiently carried
on. My attention was direeted to him in a very different part
of this colony. At Dubbo, the Western point of the diocese, at
which confirmations are held, four members of one family
came many miles to be confirmed. On conversing with the
eldest son, I found that this somewhat unusual occurence of
grown up men in the bush coming to confirmation was owing
to the influence of the catechist, who having been detained
by bad weather at a station, so well employed his time, and so
deeply impressed the people with the importance of Divine
Truth that they had been led to embrace the opportunity of
dedicating themselves afresh to God. When, consequently,
he was named to me as a catechist, I could not but feel that
this incident was a strong recommendation in his favour —an
impression which has been strengthened by his works in the
district, and by the account I had received from the clergy-
man wl)o had known him and his family at home. Surely
it is a great mercy that the scattered members of our flock
should be thus sought out. This is in aecordance with the
primitive practice when Ananias was sent to Saul, and Aquila
and Priscilla took Apollos and taught him a more perfect way.
Those who were scattered abroad by persecution went every-
where preaching the Word. I reverence the authority and
order of the Church, but I know nothing contrary to the
employment of readers and catechists. On the contrary.
Burn, in his “Ecclesiastical Law” (vol. 3, p. 452,) says, —
“In this kingdom in churches and ehapels, where there is
only a very small endowment, and no elcrgyman would take
upon himself the charge of the cure thereof, it has been useful
to admit readers to the end that Divine service at such places
might not altogether be neglected.” They were required to sub-
seribe to certain injunctions, and were only to read in
poorer parishes, destitute of incumbents : “ and they were to give
place, upon convenient warning, if any learned minister should
be placed there.” The Scripture Readers Societies, of whieh
archbishops and bishops are patrons, and the practice of the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, may well vindicate
this valuable body of men from the charge of being disorderly
and irregular. They are simply pioneers, helps in times of
difficulty and places of necessity, and to give room to the learned
ministers w henever the liberality of the laity will supply a suffici-
ent endowment for a clergyman. Their value is recognised
by the people at large. And I trust that neither men nor means
will ever be wanting, for it is from these readers that some of
the most valuable clergymen are obtained. I will illustrate their
work by one or two instances. One of the first grantsmade by the
Church Society was towards the erection of a church and school


in the district at the time under the charge of Dr. Steel of St.
Peter’s Cook’s Eiver. It is no longer in charge of the incum-
bent of St. Peter’s. Owing to the liberality of one of the mem-
bers of one of the most- liberal of families the Church in the
district of Canterbury has been called into existence ; and Lord’s
Forest is under the ministei’ial charge of the Rev. Percy J.
Smith. In conjunction with Lord’s Forest, two other places
are cared for and placed under the charge of a catechist, and I
have recently been asked to subscribe to the erection of two
school-churches —one at Rocky Point, and another at Saltpan
Creek. I will pass to another district —the Western Rail-
way. It will be remembered that on a recent occasion
some alarm and excitement were occasioned by an alleged
Fenian demonstration, by the navvies employed at the
Zigzag at Lithgow Valley. The affair was much misrepre-
sented and exaggerated, and a statement was put forth in
contradiction, signed by three gentlemen employed under the
principal contractor. In the letter signed by these gentlemen
there is a very gratifying statement as to the religious services
conducted on the railway line, and the schools attended by the
children. The facts are highly creditable to those gentle-
men who, in conjunction with their brother officials, and
by subscriptions from the railway men, have built two
schools, and have in part maintained the ordinances of re-
ligion in them on Sundays. But when the history of this
movement is fully known, it will be found that a catechist paid
through the Church Society is the agent, and that a congrega-
tion in Sydney —that of St. Barnabas’s —supplies the half of his
stipend. This evidence of a peaceable state of things amongst
men who have been supposed to be disturbers of the peace is
thus due, in some measure, to the operation of the Church
Society. .And here I bear my willing testimony to
the assistance we have received from St. Barnabas’ congregation.
If their means have sometimes been so fully occupied at home
that they could not spare us much, they have given men, and
valuable men, and latterly they have done well in the way of
means also. Nearly all our readers have been connected with
that congregation, and are proving their worth, some of them as
clergymen by their work. I cannot detain you by entering
into similar details with respect to other portions of this diocese.
I have selected these as specimens of the work which is going on in
other portions of the colony equally important, and to me equally
interesting, because : —lst. These are the means by which souls
are to be saved. We desire by all means to save some, and we feel
that these means are Divinely appointed and will be accepted and
blessed. 2nd. Thus our beloved Church is extending its influence,
maintaining its usefulness, and proving its vitality. 3rd. Thus
we believe that large blessings will be brought to the land in
which we live. On the 28th of this month we are to have a
thanksgiving day for the preservation of the life and restoration
to health of Prince Alfred. lam grateful to his Excelleucy and


the Executire Council for this opportunity of acknowledging
the goodness of Almighty God in that marvellous preservation
of our beloved Prince from violent death, and of offering up our
prayers as a united people that the life so preserved may be
prolonged, useful, and happy. The 28th is also the day on
■which, as the almanacs inform us. Captain Cook ai’rived in
1770 ; nearly ninety-eight years ago he discovered this Austral
land. I have heard a remark from one who did not much care
to leave old England, that it was a pity Cook discovered Aus-
tralia. Ido not agree with that. I think it is a great and free,
and will, I trust, be a glorious country. I believe that the
Church of England may do much to make it such. I am anxious
that while my life is prolonged, and as far as my influence ex-
tends, our Church should be Christ’s handmaid for scattering
the blessings of the Gospel "widely, freely, end continually
throughout the land. That her ministers should be men of
God, devoted to their sacred calling, having no meaner ends in
view than the glory of God and the salvation of men. That they
should carry with them an open Bible, a Book of Common Prayer
whose doctrines are in harmony with the Divine word, and that
in the education of the young, in the comforting of the sick and
afflicted and in all good works they should be forward, diligent
and decided. I believe a church so manned will be a most
important agent in the great work of raising this countrj'
to a high moral, social, and political position. These are
my aspirations. But I must descend to speak of our wants.
It is a somewhat mundane subject; nevertheless, we cannot
build without a foundation, and the highest elevation is reached
by digging deep. I fear there can be no question concerning
many parts of this colony that as they become older and more
settled they are becoming poorer, ft is evident that agriculture
does not pay, and that the smaller farmers are every year sink-
ing lower.. As the people become poorer, it is necessary that the
Society should become richer —that the means placed at its dis-
posal should be increased. As the clergy who have Government
stipends pass away, and their parishes are deprived of Govern-
ment aid, this Society is the only external source from which
assistance can be obtained. I have no doubt that the Synod
will see the necessity of making some regulations on this subject,
or at least some declaration that parishes receiving Government
aid should contribute in proportion to that aid to the Church
Society. There are parishes receiving aid from public sources
which do not contribute one-tenth of their income to the Church
Society, while there are others which give back more than they
receive. In a well-regulated community these inequali-
ties ought not to be. We want a more systematic
arrangement for forming new auxiliaries and visiting old
ones. A proposal for carrying out this object is at pre-
sent before the committee. It proceeds from one of the clergy
who has had considerable experience in the management
of associations in connection with a religious society, and who


will, I hope, render valuable aid in giving effeet to his own sug-
gestion. The particular wants, or the applications on the part
of localities are sufficiently numerous to justify the committee
in making an urgent appeal to the Church of Christ for aid; but
at the last meeting of the committee all applicants were informed
that we had no funds. We could barely meet existing de-
mands ; and, indeed, when all engagements are met we shall be
considerably in debt. To-day we have laid the first stone of a
new church at the Glebe. Years ago the Church Society had
£l5O entrusted to it for that church. The original sum has
long since been spent, and must now be supplied. Last year,
when at Grenfell, I promised to ask the Society for aid towards
building a new church. That church is built and in use, but
not paid for, and they have reminded me of my promise,
which it will cost the Church Society £3O to redeem. At
Lane Cove a new church is to be built, and they will
ask us to give £SO. At Pitt Water something of the same
kind is to be done. The floods have swept away the church at
Sackville Beach, on the Ilawkesbury, and they naturally look to
the Church Society for assistance, and I should be sorry indeed,
if they looked in vain. From the neighbourhood of Tambaroora,
beyond Sofala, an application came modest but urgent, and the
£2O asked could not be given. The same thing must, I fear, be
said to my friend on the Lachlan. The church at Condobolin
can get no help from us unless the funds are replenished. And
what shall I say about the parsonages which are required in
different parts of the colony ? The subject is a very large one,
and I would that some one person would take it up with the
same vigour and success that Dr. Guthrie displayed on behalf
of the manses of the Free Cliurch of Scotland. Since I last
addressed you much has been done. What I then described as
commenced has been completed. The church at Bockley is
opened. That at Yetholme would have been on Easter Tuesday
but for the sad and dangerous illness of the excellent clergyman.
The new church at Oheron I am to open, if not prevented by
the same cause. The new church at George’s Plains is opened,
and a new ecclesiastical district has been formed, and a clergy-
man placed in it at the cost to the Church Society of £IOO per
annum. At Forbes and at Grenfell clergymen have
been placed ; a curate is provided by the people of
Mudgee, and a catechist for the gold fields in that
neighbourhood, will have one-half his stipend provided by
the district. The Bogan Biver district has been twice visited,
and I trust in Septeinber next to be able to place a clergyman
at Fort Bourke. I had made arrangements with the late la-
mented Bishop of Grafton for a clergyman to take a portion of
the Castlereagh river lying in the proposed new diocese of
Bathurst, but that hope has for the present been laid aside,
buried in the grave of that remarkable and devoted brother.
Ills loss to the Cliurch in his diocese, and to every one who
knew and loved him, is indeed a great and severe one. May


& \ S Ui O 12
€)( 7 t
the good Lord raise up a suitable successor, and comfort and
sustain the widow and the fatherless so sorely bereft. lam in
communication with the authorities at home on the subject of
the Bathurst Bishopric, and expect that an appointment will be
made in the course of a few months. I hope it may be so, but
the £6OOO, which is all that we at present can raise, must be
doubled at least before I can hope that a bishop will be sent.
I was about to ask my friends in Sydney to help when the
Church Society’s wants, the Cathedral, and the Alfred Hospital
Fund, all put in their claims. I consider that the friends to
the movement may justly look to Sydney for some aid, if it were
only for the relief which the appointment would afford to
their bishop, and the additional time which he would
thereby be enabled to devote to them. I trust that
when I am in a position to make an appeal to
you it will not be made in vain. In thus endeavouring to
place before you the present condition of the church in con-
nection with the Church Society, I have confined myself
strictly to the matter in hand. There are many other subjects
of interest to us—the Cathedral, the Synod, Moore College
in its relation to St. Paul’s, the King’s School, upon which I
might have engaged your attention. I trust, however, that I
have said enough to you to show that a good use is being made
of the money entrusted to the committee, and that there is
ample room for the employment of larger funds. We
must not only maintain our ground in the colony,
but push on towards the Adelaide border, filling up the out-
lines which have already been traced out amongst us. Hitherto
what we have effected is initial and missionary. It requires
to be filled in, and tlie only hand that can do this is that of the
settled pastor —of one who by continued residence and frequent
visiting, shall know tlie condition of his own people, the wants of
the whole community, and understand how they are to be sup-
plied. I pray God that such men may be raised up amongst us
in sufficient numbers, that the Lord of the harvest may call and
send forth His labourers into the harvest and make them skilful
patient and successful in the great art of winning souls to Christ.
This is the purpose for which the Church exists, and we liave
a wide field and noble opportunities. We are, lam grateful to
Almighty God in being able to say it, at peace amongst ourselves,
we have confidence in each other, the Synod of the Church will
I trust greatly help us, we have, lam sure, but one desire, and
that is to do our Master’s work in His own way, and are not, I
trust, presumptuous in hoping that He will accept and bless our
labours in the promotion of Ilis own gracious designs towards a
fallen world, out of which He brings many sons to glory.
Joseph Cook & Co., Printers, 370, George-street, Sydney.
