

AN APPEAL
FROM THE UNJUST DECISION
OF THE
VERY REV. VICAR GENERAL MURPHY
TO
HIS GRACE THE ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY.
BY W. A. DUNCAN, ESQ.,
PROPRIETOR AND [LATE] EDITOR OF THE AUSTRALASIAN CHRONICLE.
PRINTED CONFIDENTIALLY FOR PRIVATE USE.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY DANIEL LOVETT WELCH,
At the Atlas Printing-office, opposite the Post-office, George-street.
1843.




TO HIS GRACE THE ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY.
Sydney, March, 1843.
My Dear Lord Archbishop,
After four years incessant and not ineffectual labour
in the cause of religion and good order in this colony, 1 have
been ejected by brute force, at the command of your Vicar-
general, from the office of Editor of the “ Australasian
Chronicle,” to which I was nominated by your Grace in
1839. In doing this, Mr. Murphy has publicly loaded me
with the epithets of “Firebrand,” “Sower of Dissension,”
“ Dictator in Politics and Polemics,” “Paid Employe,” and
other offensive terms, in return for my exact compliance, to
the best of my judgment, with the duties imposed upon me,
and with your Grace’s written instructions, transmitted to me
from time to time from England. In your Grace’s letters I
possessed ample materials for self-defence, and even for re-
taliation, if 1 were so disposed; but I reflected that, to ex-
hibit the difference between your noble sentiments and the
undignified notions of the Vicar-general, would only be a new
subject of scandal and disunion, and that such a publication
would in some measure be a breach of that confidence with
which you have so long honoured me. I have accordingly re-
frained from publishing a single line in reply to the gross
injuries lavished upon me, accompanied as they have been by
the grossest outrages upon my pecuniary rights, and the des-
titution impending over my family in consequence.
Upon a calm review of every public step 1 have taken, and
of every article of any importance 1 have written since your
Grace’s departure, 1 am not conscious of one step that 1 would
wish to have retraced, or of one article which ought to have
been cancelled. 1 shall endeavour to place complete files of
the Chronicle in your Grace’s hands, and though there arc doubt-
less some articles among so many that require an explanation
of the views and circumstances under which they were pub-
lished, I think I may safely leave them in your hands to
speak for themselves. My Lord, 1 can fearlessly point to the
Chronicle and say, —“ Confingant tale aliquid inimici.”
But a very few days elapsed after your Grace’s departure,
ere 1 discovered that that open and generous confidence which
a 2


had previously existed with such beneficial results between
the head of the Catholic Church and the director of the
Catholic press had terminated. There was a mystery and an
offensive hauteur about your representative which at once put
an end to all familiarity, and drove me to a reliance upon my
own judgment, which, fortified by occasional admonitions from
your Grace, has been my sole guide throughout a career,
during which I have effected an amount of good, the retro-
spect of which surprises and delights me in the midst of my
present persecution and misfortune.
The first occasion on which the Vicar-general and I came
into collision was with reference to the course which it was
your Grace’s desire I should pursue immediately after your
departure. At his earnest request I abandoned that course;
and though I attribute his determination more to cowardice
than sagacity, I am not now prepared to say that, under all
the circumstances, he was wrong in this matter. On the ar-
rival of Judge Burton, however, and subsequently on the
occasion of a dinner given to him, I wrote some severe
articles upon that gentleman’s political and religious career.
Those articles gave mortal offence to Mr. Murphy, who (as
well as Mr. R. Therry) several times attempted to have them
suppressed. For those articles (written certainly in defiance
of the Vicar-general) I am proud to say I have your Grace’s
warm and grateful approbation, as well as the approbation of
my own conscience.
The Vicar-general accuses me of “ sowing dissension” in
the Catholic body. In this charge there is not one syllable of
truth. The first dissension that took place among the Catholics
of Sydney arose out of the over-zealous and outrageous en-
thusiasm of some friends of the Rev. J. J. Therry, at the time
he visited this colony. I certainly felt it my duty to be a
little cool in this matter, when 1 heard people talking of
“ roasting an ox on the Race-course ” in his honour; and
when the same parties were heard imprecating curses on your
Grace and Dr. Ullathorne, who they alleged had deprived
them of this old favorite. My coolness in tliis affair made me
some private enemies among the “ old hands,” as they are
called, who only wanted a convenient opportunity of display-
ing this feeling. This opportunity occurred at a subsequent
period, as will appear.
Shortly after your Grace’s arrival in England you were
assailed in most of the Sydney papers, in consequence of some
remarks about the persecution formerly endured by Catholic
prisoners, made in your speech at the Catholic Institute, in


London. It was my duty to defend your Grace from those
attacks, and I did so with becoming zeal; but here again your
Vicar-general interfered ; attempted to reduce me to silence ;
declared, in my hearing, that you seemed to have lost your
reason; and—taking probably their tone from him—not one
of the clergy, excepting the Rev. Mr. Brady, assisted me with
a single fact to bear out your assertions! If in this instance
I succeeded triumphantly in re-establishing your Grace’s cha-
racter in this colony, it was, I can truly say, in defiance of
your Vicar-general, and in the midst of a disgraceful and pro-
voking lukewarmness, communicated by him to those whose
duty it surely was to furnish me with weapons.
In all the efforts I have made in behalf of religion, by pub-
lishing pamphlets, catechisms* prayer-books, a directory, sacred
music, &c., by which efforts I have wasted my slender means,
and involved myself in difficulties, I can say most truly that
Mr. Murphy has not only not patronized me, but has inva-
riably thrown cold water, if not something worse, on every
good work of the kind. Nor has that opposition to every
thing good been restricted to my efforts. The orphan school,
founded by Dean Brady, the various churches founded by
your Grace, the expiring Institute, and every Catholic school
in the colony, will attest the utter want of zeal and Catholic
spirit displayed by the Very Rev. Vicar-general.*
* The public accounts of the colony, laid before the Legislature in 1842, pre-
sent a falling off in the affairs of the Catholic body shameful and distressing to
contemplate, and which it is impossible to attribute to any cause but that of
neglect at head quarters.
Amount paid in aid of the building of churches and minister’s dwellings, sums
to an equal amount having been raised by private subscription :
Church of England (total) £6,186 7 8
Presbyterian 2,363 0 0
Wesleyan 1,709 10 6
Roman Catholic 1,577 8 4
Let us examine these figures in accordance with the late census, in which it is
to he remembered the Catholics are considerably Mwrfer-estimated.
73,727 members of the Church of England con-
tribute for the building of churches £6,186 7 8
13,153 Presbyterians contribute 2,363 0 0
3,236 Weslcyans contribute 1,709 10 6
35,690 Catholics contribute 1,577 8 4
Or, in other words, it would appear as if the members of the Church of Eng-
land had on an average, within the year, contributed Is. Bd. each to the building
of churches ; the Presbyterians, 2s. o|d. each ; the Wesleyans, 10s. 6fd. each ;
and the Catholics only lO Jd. each.
Thus have £3423, voted for the Catholic Church, been actually refused by the
local head of that church, and therefore put back into the treasury to be applied
this year for other purposes !
I felt it ray duty to make a few remarks on this falling away, at the time these


The first open rupture between me and the small but active
portion of the Sydney Catholics who are opposed to me, arose
out of my support of the Sydney Corporation Bill—a truly
liberal measure in comparison with that formerly introduced,
in which there are no exclusive clauses, and throughout the
discussion on which the Governor behaved with the most per-
fect liberality. The emancipists particularly ought to have
received this measure with pride and gratitude to the giver
as well as to your Grace and to me. But from personal pique
against the Governor, Mr. Wentworth (who had been out-
witted by his Excellency in a land-sharking business at New
Zealand) opposed the bill, and carried with him into that op-
position the heads of the self-styled “ Patriotic Association,”
who had recently joined Mr. Macarthur on the subject of the
Franchise, abandoning all their former principles. Among
these patriots, I found myself opposed by a few Catholics, in
particular by Messrs. Michael Gannon and John Coyle, the
former of whom, in his evidence before the Legislative
Council, insisted on a £SO franchise ! At a public meeting in
the School of Arts this Gannon asserted a falsehood respecting
me, involving in some degree the character of your Grace’s
archiepiscopal seminary, which I, with some warmth, rebutted,
and afterwards proved to the satisfaction of the whole colony
to be false. This led to much ill-feeling on the part of about
a dozen persons, wdio took Gannon’s side ; and an abortive at-
tempt was shortly after made to stop the publication of the
Chronicle, by carrying off the key of my room, with some
portions of the printing-press. But what part did Mr. Mur-
phy take in this affair ? Why, my Lord, at the St. Patrick’s
Society, on the Sunday following the meeting alluded to, he
took occasion to pay a very high compliment to Messrs. Gannon
and Coyle by name, which was understood by every one pre-
sent to be an espousal of their most infamous cause against
me ! It is notorious, that Mr. Murphy and some of the clergy
have been in the constant habit of dining and visiting with
this Coyle and others, who had sworn to oust me from the
Chronicle.
Some considerable time previous to this 1 had, as a
matter of news, transferred to the columns of the Chronicle,
from the Tablet, a controversy between Mr. Lucas and Mr.
papers were published. In these, however, there was not a single allusion to
Mr. Murphy, nor one line of a personal nature. Yet the Vicar-general's councillor,
the Rev. Mr. Brennan, made a speech three days after, at St, Patrick’s Society,
in which he said, he thought “ the Catholics were too liberal to some people ”
meaning me!


O’Connell on the subject of the Repeal of the Irish Union,
as it would affect the Catholic body in England and the colo-
nies. Among other remarks, Mr. Lucas stated, very tempe-
rately, that if the Union were repealed, the Catholics in the
colonies would suffer, in consequence of their losing the sup-
port of the Irish members in Parliament. I expressed, inci-
dentally, my concurrence with Mr. Lucas on the subject, and
thanked him in the name of the colonial Catholics for the in-
terest he was beginning to display in their cause. This unex-
pectedly produced a violent letter in favour of Repeal, from
the Rev. M. Brennan; upon which lat once determined to
write nothing more on the subject either pro or con, which
determination I have kept. The quarrel on the Corporation
Bill afforded, however, an opportunity of reviving the subject:
and a repeal association was formed for the very purpose of
annoying me—the chairman, secretary, and treasurer of which
were notoriously opposed to me, and at which I was denounced
in no very smooth terms, and the downfall of the Chronicle
was predicted. The thing, however, ended in smoke, to the
evident chagrin of the Vicar-general and his adviser Mr.
Brennan, between whom and myself there happened, a little
before this, an unimportant private misunderstanding, which he
made a great handle of in his indefatigable gossipings from
house to house. During all this time the body of the people
were entirely with me, although there is no doubt that my
determination not to report the Repeal meetings made me a
number of enemies among the recent arrivals, whose minds
are full of the subject, and who were ignorant of the personal
hatred that directed the movement against me.
I can assure your Grace, that I bore the grossest insults and
the most atrocious calumnies, published against me in the
Herald, Examiner, Australian, and Observer by unprincipled
Catholics for the most part in perfect silence. A few indig-
nant expressions indeed did escape me, and these I understand
have been magnified into a great crime by the Vicar-general,
while whole columns of lies published against me by his
friends in adverse papers have been passed over by him
without the slightest rebuke.* - On the contrary they have
* The following extracts will give some idea of the spirit that actuated the
Vicar-generaTs friends against me.—From a letter of a Catholic Elector: —
“ I would remind the writer in the Chronicle, of Dean Swift’s words. It ap ears
that in the Dean’s time, there were some degraded Priests and others who had
left the Roman, and joined the English communion; the conduct of the new
converts was such, that the Dean did not consider them the most desirable of
acquisitions. He accordingly requested that in future, when the Pope should
weed his garden, he would not throw the weeds over the wall into theirs. I


been formally sanctioned by the unclerkly feasts and libations
to which I have been compelled to allude.
This controversy was in some degree put an end to by a
public testimonial, consisting of a splendid gold watch, which
was presented to me in October last, (the second memorial
of the kind I have received since your Grace’s departure.)
would make the same request of the Scotch Kirk, for one of the last we had from
it, has given a great deal of dissatisfaction by the heresies he has broached, and
the schisms he has caused in our political society.”—Observer of February B th,
1843.
Mr. Timothy Maher. —(Assessors’ Court, Macquarie Ward.) —“ In the
afternoon, Mr. Maher appeared to make some objection to Mr. Duncan’s being
enrolled in the Citizen list, but the Court would not entertain such objection.”—
Herald, October, 8, 1842.
“ Yesterday, Mr. Maher again appeared, to object to the enrolment of Mr.
Duncan, editor of the Australasian Chronicle, on the ground that Mr. Duncan
was in receipt of a salary from the shareholders of the Australasian Chronicle,
and had no more right to a vote for tne premises in George-street than any
other servant employed on the establishment. The Court maintained its former
decision, on the ground that Mr. Duncan had established his claim as a share-
holder in the Chronicle.”—lbid
Mr. John Coyle. —(From the Examiner.) —“ Had the Chronicle taken that
side of the question which you, Sir, have done (from the day that the Bill was
first introduced into the Council); had the wishes of its constituents been con-
sulted, which were pretty clearly evinced, both on this occasion and on many
others, it would not have forfeited the good will and support of a very large pro-
portion of the community. It is to be hoped, however, that the proprietors will
immediately take measures to place it on a sound and permanent footing, —to
ensure that it shall properly represent its constituents; or, that their support
shall be transfered to one of the liberal journals already established. * * *
“ There is an old fable, in which a viper having been restored to vigour by the
mistaken kindness of some individual, in placing it near a fire, upon recovery,
wounded its benefactors. The moral of the fable may be found in Mr. Duncan's
conduct.
“ I am, Sir, yours respectfully,
“JOHN COYLE.”
Mr. Thomas Smith. —(From the Examiner.) —“ Mr. Duncan admits himself
that he has not subscribed anything towards the paper, although he may have
been presented with a share or shares —and I presume that Mr. Duncan would
hardly venture upon this ground to vote for his own election. Mr. Duncan’s
supporters will therefore I suspect, turn out to be like honest Falstaff’s ‘ men in
buckram.’
“ The plain truth of the matter appears to be this : Mr, Duncan is in posses-
sion of an appointment, which he is resolved not to resign. * * * *. * *
The determination of Mr. Duncan irresistably reminds me, of the conduct of the
servant whose master said to him, “ If you persist in this conduct we must part.”
‘ By no means,’ said the rascal, ‘if you do not know when you have a good
servant, I know when I have a good situation,’ and thereupon declined to go.
“ I am, Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
“THOMAS SMITH.”
It is but justice to the community to state that, during these squabbles, I
received innumerable letters of au opposite character from all parts of the
Colonv.


But here again the enmity of the Vicar-general shewed itself,
every effort having been made by him and his partizans to
prevent the Clergy and respectable Catholics from subscribing.
Upon receiving a copy of the New Act of Parliament,
together with your Grace’s instructions to “ watch over the
elections with lynx eyes,” and to take care that none of those
who had been guilty of certain misdeeds should “be of our
councils.” I determined to use every possible means to have
no candidates supported but those pledged to liberal measures
and perfect religious equality. The strong representations I
made on these subjects have, as the whole colony knows,
caused a considerable number of the candidates so to pledge
themselves. The power of the Chronicle was never so great,
its character was never so high, and its permanent prospects
were never so good, as at the unfortunate moment when Mr.
11. Therry made an inglorious, and I must say, an unprincipled
coalition with Mr. James Macarthur, by means of which the
latter will infallibly sit for Cumberland, and the former,
probably may not sit for Camden. With my declared princi-
ples, and with your Grace’s instructions that “ no such men be
of our councils,” I could not approve of this coalition. I
would rather have put my hand into the fire than become a
party to it. At the same time, I gave all the support to Mr.
Therry that I could give under the circumstances. I admitted
all communications in his favour—though I could not go with
him to the extent that he fancied I should, and that I would
have cheerfully gone if he had hoisted his own colours instead
of Macarthur’s. The Catholics were at first indignant at this
coalition, and so determined were they to keep Mr. Macarthur
out of Cumberland, that the Rev. Mr. Gould at one time most
earnestly requested me to stand for that county in opposition
to him; and the Rev Dean O’Reilly offered, in his own
words, “to lose a month’s sleep” to put me in for the West-
moreland district in opposition to Mr. Macalister, Mr. James
Macarthur’s nominee. Mr. Therry however, regardless of my
private remonstrances, persevered in puffing his friend and
patron, and the consequence is that all the leading Catholics
of Cumberland are now, I believe, upon Mr. Macarthur’s
committees! I could not help expressing some moderate
degree of indignation at all this. Mr. Therry fancied that my
expressed opinions might injure his cause in Camden, and
from a threat held out to me indirectly from him, I have reason
to believe that the acts which followed were not wholly done
without his knowledge and concurrence.
The first intimation I received of the storm that was pre-
paring was in the following terms:


Sydney, 20th February, 1843.
Sir,
You are aware that we have sunk considerable suras of money, and are
responsible to a large amount, for the establishing and supporting of the
Australasian Chronicle, and that we have not received a penny on the pound in
return, and from the present prospects of the paper we have no well founded
expectations of being in any way indemnified for our losses. As a last resort,
and with a view to prevent further losses, and to secure some return for our
capital, we have resolved to try what a change in the editorship may effect.
We therefore give you this notice that we no longer require your services as
editor. We have had sufficient experience to know of your adherence to a self-
willed line of writing, and you have often asserted that you will not change from
that preconceived line in editing our paper. We then consider it loss of time to
try to reason you out of this notion; therefore the shortest and safest way is to
part as friends, without any useless and perhaps irritating discussion on the
subject. We thank you for your laborious industry in editing the Chronicle,
and wish you success in whatever avocations you may hereafter embrace. You
shall be paid as usual for the present week, but on condition that you imme-
diately give up all the papers, books, &c., belonging to the office, and that you
cease to edit the paper on the receipt of this letter.
We have the full concurrence and approbation of our respected Vicar-general
in coming to these our fixed resolutions, for the protection and preservation of
our own just rights, and of those of the shareholders of the Chronicle, whose
trustees and representatives we are.
THOS. SMIDMORE,
THOMAS B. COVENY,
R. MURPHY,
JOHN MURRAY.
W. A. Duncan, Esq., &c., &c.
To this extraordinary production I made the following
reply:— ,
Chronicle Office, 20th February, 1843.
Gentlemen,
In reply to your letter of this morning, I would premise by
saying that I fully concur in your sentiment that for us the “ safest way is to
part as friends,” if part we must; but lam constrained to add that I doubt very
much if the abrupt termination to our connexion which you propose, without
even a day’s notice, and unaccompanied by any equitable proposition whatever,
is calculated to produce friendly feelings—l doubt even if you yourselves can
think so.
To come, however, to the subject, I dispute not the right of the proprietors, or
a competent majority of them, to change their editor; but I would remind you
that even were I to admit the competence of four proprietors to act thus, my
engagements have not been from week to week, but for years and periods of
years, and therefore, whatever may have been your intentions, I can with
difficulty regard the offer of “ a week’s salary” as any thing other than a
gratuitous insult. Besides, I have undertaken engagements such as house rent,
&c., with the clear understanding that I was to receive a certain salary (.€4OO
per annum) from this office at least till the first of August next—to which under-
standing each and all of you were parties.
I would remind you, too, because you appear to have forgotten that I also am
a proprietor of the Australasian Chronicle, and “ have sunk considerable sums of
money” in its establishment.
That you are “ trustees for the shareholders” I deny. lam the sole trustee
according to the deed of copartnership.
“ The concurrence and approbation of our respected Vicar-general” which you
boast of, would weigh very strongly with me were it in accordance with the
eternal principles of justice, and equity between man and man, which in this case


it is not. Besides, my editorship of the Chronicle can boast “ the concurrence
and approbation” of a much higher authority than he—his Grace the Archbishop
of Sydney—who has often, and very recently too, expressed this approbation in
the most condescending, kind, and flattering terms. To this higher tribunal the
Vicar-general is answerable for any ecclesiastical influence he may bring to bear
on this matter. Is the Vicar-general aware that you charge him with an illegal
interference with my pecuniary rights ?
From these premises you will infer that before putting you in possession of
this property, and before resigning the editorship, I request to be paid for my
shares in the copartnership—amounting to £2OO more or less paid up capital—
together with my salary up to the Ist of August, Having no unfriendly
feelings to gratify, I will take bills at convenient dates for the amount. I have
I conceive an equitable claim for a very large sum for the performance of extra
editorial duties, but in the event of a friendly adjustment of the affair I will
waive this, and I have no objection to leave the determination of the sum due to
me as editor and proprietor (upon your admitting my claims as above) to the
decision of arbitrators mutually chosen.
It is to be understood that I make these propositions “ without prejudice” in
case of the failure of an amicable arrangement.
I shall continue in the mean time to bring out the publication, and as nothing
but justice and equity is wished for on my part, I hope, for the sake of our
common principles, that no physical force will be a second time brought to bear
on these unfortunate disputes.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
W. A. DUNCAN.
Messrs. Thos. Smidmore, Thos. B. Coveny, 1
R. Murphy, and John Murray. J
At the same time I wrote the following letter to the Vicar-
general :
Elizabeth-street South, 20th February, 1843.
Very Rev. and Dear Sir,
I have this day received a letter signed by
Messrs. T. Smidmore, T. B. Coveny, R. Murphy, and John Murray, containing
propositions which affect my personal property and pecuniary rights to the
amount of some hundreds of pounds. For these propositions they say, “We
have the full concurrence and approbation of our respected Vicar-general.” I
cannot, however, believe that this is strictly correct, or that you as the local
head of the church in this colony would voluntarily make that church a party in
an equity suit, or expose yourself individually to annoyance in matters which in
their present form are strictly and exclusively pecuniary. Will you have the
kindness to favour me with an answer on this subject.
I am,
Very Reverend and Dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
W. A. DUNCAN,
The Very Reverend the Vicar-general.
The following is Mr. Murphy’s reply:—
St. Mary’s Presbytery, February, 22, 1843.
My Dear Sir,
Actuated solely by a sense of duty and a conviction of the
absolute necessity of the case, I have been obliged to sanction the resolution of
the Proprietors of the Chronicle, as regarding a change of Editors. They would


have come to this resolution several months back, were it not for my interference.
This measure I have considered advisable, both for the success of the paper and
for the interests of the Proprietors and Shareholders.
I am, my dear Sir,
Yours, very faithfully,
F. MURPHY.
To W. A. Duncan, Esq., &c., &c.
The dishonesty of this last production will hereafter appear
manifest. On the morning of the 22nd February, I proceeded
to my office as usual, when I was prevented from entering by
two hired ruffians, and I found that my overseer (who refused
to be a party to this violence) was discharged—my room , ivhere
all my private papers lay , broken into—and my letter box
broken open and emptied of whatever it may have contained.
I regret to add that the Rev. John M‘Encroe was found
installed in the chair thus violently and illegally wrested from
me, and that he introduced himself to his readers next morning
with the following letter which 1 then saw for the first time,
but which had evidently been the real cause of all this scandal
and outrage. Indeed Messrs. Coveny and Murray expressed
their deep regret that they could not refuse to attach their
names to the letter addressed to me by the Vicar-general’s
command.
To the Proprietors of the Australasian Chronicle.
Gentlemen,
I am directed by the Vicar-general to make you the following
communication. The Chronicle was established to defend Catholic principles, to
refute calumny and misrepresentation, and to promote a good understanding
among all classes of the community. It was never intended to he a political fire-
brand, or a rock of dissension especially among Catholics, or liberal Protestants.
We are grieved to find that it has failed in some instances to attain the desirable
end of its publication, and that it has been the means of sowing discord among
numbers of the same communion. If the paper were not so closely identified
with the Catholic clergy, and the large body of Christians entrusted to their
spiritual care, we might not feel ourselves so imperatively called on to express
our disapprobation of the line of political writing adopted of late by the Editor.
It matters little to us what may be his individual feelings or bias regarding any
of the candidates for the New Legislative Council, but we cannot bear to be
identified with him in some of his political notions, as we have been to our great
annoyance, or to be held up to the gaze of the Jealous eye, with which we have
been viewed by some of the candidates and their numerous friends ; we wish to
stand well with persons of every creed and honest public opinion—we arc anxious
to concede to others what we claim for ourselves, “ freedom of thought and
action; ” we wish well to all men of liberal and enlightened views—we desire
not to be active partisans of any—we want no Dictatorship in politics or polemics,
and we feel it high time to give public expression to these our sentiments, and
to dissever ourselves in the eye of the public from the imprudent and injudicious
conduct of Mr. Duncan in this matter; we consider his zeal to have led him
beyond that “ sobriety ” of opinion so much recommended in holy writ, and
that instead of serving the cause he has undertaken to defend, he is seriously
injuring the same. This is the opinion of every Catholic clergyman with whom
we have conversed on this subject.


Before publishing this “ declaration, ” forced on us by the position we hold in
reference to the “ Chronicle, ” we deem it fit and just to submit the same
to your consideration, that you may induce your Editor, your paid employee, for
whose published opinions you are responsible in the eye of the public and the law,
to adopt a more cautious and judicious course in his editorial capacity. If he do
not take this sincere and friendly advice, there is no alternative left us but to
declare that the “ Chronicle ” has ceased to be the accredited organ of Catholic
opinions, for no paper can be considered as such that has lost the sanction and
countenance of the Catholic clergy.
As this step may be productive of serious pecuniary loss to you, who have so
generously advanced large sums towards its support, we hope that the good sense
of Mr. Duncan will induce him to pause before he forces us to put our conscien-
tious resolution into effect. Should he persevere in his obstinate course, we will
do our duty, and you will have to risque the consequences, or find an editor in
whose prudence and judgement we can place confidence.
It may be here remarked, that on the eve of the departure of our revered
Prelate, he wrote a letter expressing his fears and anxiety regarding the in-
cautious and over zealous temper of Mr. Duncan, and wishing him to be ad-
monished on this head. The time has arrived when this admonition becomes a
duty, and we trust it will be received in the same good feeling with which it is
given, and that it will he productive of the desired effect.—l remain, gentlemen,
with due respect, your obedient and humble servant,
J. M'ENCROE.
The animus of this letter appears to me so bad throughout
—the personal hatred so undisguised —that I should hardly
think it necessary to do more than deny the insinuations and
vague charges it contains, and refer your Grace to the files of
the Chronicle for proof of their falsehood ; but as this mode of
defence would take up more time than perhaps your Grace
can at present devote to such an investigation, I shall briefly
notice the leading counts of my indictment. I must first ob-
serve, however, that there is much falsehood and disinge-
nuity in Mr. Murphy’s letter to me, in which he says, that he
had merely given a constrained “ sanction ” to a resolution
of the proprietors of the Chronicle for my removal, whereas
no such resolution existed, or was contemplated, till he issued
his command on the subject; and even then, no regular meet-
ing of the proprietors was ever held for the purpose. My re-
moval was effected by a scandalous combination of ecclesias-
tical influence and brute force, both alike contrary to honour,
justice, and equity.
The Vicar-general sets out by insinuating that the Chronicle
had become “ a political firebrand, or a rock of dissension,
especially among Catholics or liberal Protestants.” To this
I can only give a positive and indignant denial, and call for
proof. The only dissension existing was grounded on personal
enmity against me ; and Mr. Murphy, instead of suppressing,
fomented that dissension. This is known to every person in
Sydney : my enemies publicly and constantly boasted of it.


The Vicar-general goes on to say that the Chronicle has
“ failed in some instances to attain the desirable end of its
publication,” namely, “to defend Catholic principles, to re-
fute calumny, &c.” Now I do most respectfully appeal to
your Grace if this charge of your Vicar-general is not unkind,
ungenerous, unjust, false ! What principle of religion lias
been assailed that I have not triumphantly defended ? what
calumny has been put forth that I have not refuted ? what
misrepresentation that 1 have not corrected ?—aye, often con-
trary to the lukewarm advice of the Vicar-general himself.
My Lord, having spent the last four years in constantly de-
fending the Catholic religion from calumny and misrepre-
sentation—having put one adversary after another to silence
or shame, often at the expence of comfort, sleep, and health,
and with a zeal, tact, and efficacy, that has commanded the
respect of our bitterest enemies, 1 own that this charge of the
Vicar-general appears to me little short of diabolical, and that
I can hardly meet it with patience. But surely, my Lord, it
requires no answer.
The Vicar-general says, “ It matters little to us what may
be his [Mr. Duncan’s] individual feelings or bias, regarding
any of the candidates for the New Legislative Council, but we
cannot bear to be identified with him in some of his political
notions.” My “political notions” on the Franchise, and on
popular rights generally, are exactly those of your Grace.
With respect to my “ feelings or bias” regarding particular
candidates, they have entirely arisen out of my honest efforts
in the cause of civil and religious liberty; and even if in any
case they were wrong, I think some credit should have been
given for my motives—some allowance made for unavoidable
and unforeseen contingencies. Why did not the Vicar-general
and his partizans write their own sentiments upon these sub-
jects? they knew the Chronicle was open to them. But no;
the Vicar-general never furnished, to the best of my recol-
lection, a single paragraph for the paper, or a single hint or
suggestion upon any political subject whatever ! How was I
to divine what were' exactly his “ political notions ?” Or was
I to stop the press every day till I should ascertain them ?
The Vicar-general says, “we wish to stand well with per-
sons of every creed and honest public opinion.” Who says
otherwise? Ido not; but I venture boldly to affirm that I
stand better with persons of all creeds than any other Catholic
in the Colony, your Grace alone excepted. Mr. Murphy
never had, nor is he ever likely to have the standing among
liberal Protestants that 1 have. The liberal Protestants are to


a man enraged and disgusted with the ungrateful treatment I
have received at his hands. It is not by giving permission to
Catholic councillors and Catholic ladies to attend the service of
the Protestant church that*a Catholic priest will ever conciliate
Protestants or gain their esteem, but rather by a manly ad-
herence to principle and a bold and unflinching assertion of
right. Will any one dare to affirm that the Catholics of this
colony have now a worse “ standing” than they had in the
days of Agnes Byrne, the Gazette, the Monitor, and the Syd-
ney Standard ?—at the time when a Catholic clergyman was
afraid to travel by steam between Sydney and Parramatta ?
And who have done the most to bring about this favourable
change—my enemies, or I ?
Mr. Murphy says, “we want no dictatorship in politics or
polemics.” This appears to me to be absolute nonsense. If
it mean anything it must mean, “we want no Chronicle.”
No newspaper can exist for a single month that does not
“ dictate in politics or polemics.” The Chronicle was always
intended to take the lead —to be in fact “dictator”' on the
liberal side, and it kept that position while it remained in my
hands. Alas ! how' fallen its position now !
The Vicar-general submits this declaration to a few of the
proprietors of the Chronicle, in order that they might induce
their editor—their “ paid employee ” (for it seems among other
bad qualities I belong to the feminine gender) for whose pub-
lished opinions they are “ responsible in the eye of the public
and of the law to adopt a more cautious and judicious course,
&c.” Mr. Timothy Maher, the constant visitor of the Police-
office, responsible for my opinions ! and my opinions to be
regulated by Mr. Councillor Smidmore, who walked in pro-
cession the other day to St. James’s, where he virtually and
publicly abjured his faith in the presence of the Lord Bishop
of Australia ! Such men dictate opinions to me!—no, my
Lord; perish my right hand first, and perish the thought.
The noblest stand I have ever made in my life has been on
occasions when I have risked my all to protect the Chronicle
from contamination with the crude opinions of these unenlight-
ened and unprincipled men; and though I have at last fallen
in the contest, I am proud to think that nearly the whole com-
munity are of one mind, that my fall has been no ignoble one.
“ We hope the good sense of Mr. Duncan will induce him
to pause before he forces us to put our conscientious reso-
lutions into effect.” What miserable hypocrisy ! The Vicar-
general never intended that “ the good sense of Mr. Duncan”
should be put to the test: his owm letter to me proves it. The
whole proceeding and his conduct throughout demonstrate it.


I never knew of the existence of this mandate till the day after
my expulsion, by hired ruffians, from the Chronicle office.
With regard to the letter said to have been written by your
Grace, I know nothing; but this I think I may safely assert,
that the “ admonition” intended in that letter was not to be
applied in Mr. Murphy’s way, namely, by breaking into my
private room, by breaking open my letter-box, and by employ-
ing ruffians to turn me out of my own house, and deprive
me of access to my own property. Whatever may be the
tenor of your Grace’s letter, I am quite sure it contains no
instruction or admonition of this kind, and indeed nothing to
which I myself would not be the first to subscribe.
Finally,' Mr. Murphy asserts that all the clergy to whom
he has spoken agree with him in disapproving of my politics.
This is not correct: I have it under the hand of two of the
clergy that they were spoken to, and dissented from Mr. Mur-
phy’s proceeding. I have before me a letter of my successor,
the Ilev. Mr. M‘Encroe himself, written a few days previous
to my expulsion, in which he expresses diametrically opposite
sentiments; and I have letters from the llev. Deans Brady
and O’Reilly, in which they complain that they were not con-
sulted, the former in the most indignant terms.
My Lord, it is now for your Grace to say whether 1 have
been treated according to my deserts, or whether, as I believe,
I have been shamefully robbed of my reputation as a Catholic
and a public writer, as well as despoiled of my hard-earned
property. Certain it is that my prospects in life have been
suddenly blasted, my plans upset, and that the only hope I
have of at once regaining my position in this colony rests with
your Grace. NVhatever may be your determination, I shall
receive it without a murmur. If I can still be useful to the
Catholics of this community and to your Grace, I am content
to renew my labours in any practical way that may pointed
out. If not, it is only necessary to say so, and my claims shall
be all withdrawn at once and for ever. Though I believe and
feel that the people of this colony would not overpay my past
services were they to erect a statue in my honour, I am fully
sensible that in the eyes of God and religion I merit but to
end my days in obscurity and penitence, and though I pretend
not to have piety enough to prefer the latter fortune, I have
faith enough to believe it the better of the two.
I have the honour to be,
My dear Lord Archbishop,
Your Grace’s faithful and devoted servant,
W. A. DUNCAN.
