

PAPERS FOR WAR TIME. No. 12
Answer to Bemhardi
D. S. CAIRNS, D.D.
Price Twopence
HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE BOMBAY




PAPERS FOR WAR TIME. No. 12
AN ANSWER TO
BERNHARD!
D. S. CAIRNS, D.D.
HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE BOMBAY
1914


EXPLANATORY NOTE
Great Britain is engaged in a war from which, as we believe,
there was offered to our nation no honourable way of escape.
The desire of all who love their country is to serve it in the
hour of its need, and so to live and labour that those who have
fallen in its service may not have died in vain. While this
may suffice to make immediate duty clear, the war remains
in the deepest sense a challenge to Christian thought. The
present bitter struggle between nations which for centuries
have borne the Christian name indicates some deep-seated
failure to understand the principles of Christ and to apply
them to human affairs.
This series of papers embodies an attempt to reach, by
common thought, discussion and prayer, a truer understanding
of the meaning of Christianity and of the mission of the
Church to the individual, to society and to the world.
Those who are promoting the issue of these papers are
drawn from different political parties and different Christian
bodies. They believe that the truth they seek can be attained
only by providing for a measure of diversity in expression.
Therefore they do not accept responsibility for the opinions
•of any paper taken alone. But in spirit they are united, for
they are one in the conviction that in Christ and in His
Gospel lies the hope of redemption and health for society
and for national life.


AN ANSWER TO BERNHARDI
Few names have been more frequently quoted among
us of late than that of General von Bernhardi. His
volume Germany and the next War is generally taken
among us as an exposition of the inner mind of Germany.
The writer of this tract can only say that after many
years of acquaintance with religious and philanthropic
circles in Germany, it is his belief that most of their leading
minds are quite unacquainted with it, and that, if they
were, they would repudiate its ideas with indignation.
But it is unfortunately also true that it does represent
the party in Germany which is now in the ascendant, so
far as we can learn its mind from its press and its public
actions, and that this party is heartily supported by the
nation. For a full understanding of how this came to be,
it is better to wait than to attempt premature explanation.
What is Bernhardi’s central thought ? It is that war
is, and always will be, a necessity, and that it is our duty
and wisdom to recognize this, and give it its due place
and honour in all our thoughts.
Now the view that war is a necessity is unfortunately
held by many good Christians and Idealists, but it is held
with a difference. They believe that war is a consequence
of human sin, and they tacitly assume that sin will
always endure in God’s world. But they hold that sin
need not have been, and so they are able to condemn war,
just as they condemn every form of evil. It is man’s
doing and not God’s purpose.
Bernhardi is more logical and more uncompromising.


He holds that war is not contingent upon what men may
or may not wish to do; that it is part of the ground-plan
of the universe, and therefore part of God’s purpose
for men. Germany’s true wisdom lies in recognizing this,
and in not being foolishly squeamish about it. Her true
teacher here is £ the incomparable Frederick ’, whose
supreme glory it was to recognize the facts of the universe,
who through that veracious recognition and masterful
handling of the facts has made Prussia great, and who,
if Germany will follow £ the Friederician tradition ’, will
make Germany greater still. Hence she must organize
herself more efficiently for war, to this end determine
her economic, educational, and religious policy on more
purely militarist lines, and so attain that actual hegemony
of the world to which the superior quality of her civiliza-
tion rightfully entitles her.
This is the central thought of the volume, and there-
fore the real answer to Bernhardi must start with his
principle of the necessity and glory of war. We shall
first of all examine this as Bernhardi puts it, then
consider more briefly that view of its necessity which is
less revolting to intellect and to conscience, and which
is held by many Christians, and shall finally endeavour
to indicate that fuller Christian view which is essential to
any complete answer. What, then, are Bernhardi’s
reasons for believing that war is an eternal necessity
of human life ? We must distinguish, to begin with,
between his practical and his philosophical grounds.
THE INFLUENCE OF FREDERICK THE GREAT
His whole discussion of the matter leaves on the mind
the impression that his convictions have been determined
by considerations which are not philosophical. He is
a Junker first and a philosopher second. £ The incom-
parable Frederick ’ and not Plato or Hegel is his real


master. War has made Germany great, and more war
will make her greater still ; this is the reiterated burden
of the volume. When he passes from this sure and
massive conviction to the philosophical and religious
grounds for it he at once becomes wavering and self-
contradictory. For himself he prefers an idealistic
philosophy, but he is eager to show that any good and
consistent materialist ought to hold the same conclusion.
As for Christianity, is it not fundamentally a religion
of combat, and did not Christ say ‘ I came not to send
peace on earth, but a sword ’ ? How much he really
understands or cares about Christianity may be seen
from the motto from Nietzsche which, I understand,
appeared on the front page of the German edition:
4 War and courage have achieved more great things than
the love of our neighbour. It is not your sympathy,
but your bravery, which has hitherto saved the ship-
wrecked of existence. “What is good? ” you ask. To
be brave is good.’
We must therefore distinguish between the Junker
and the thinker. The Junker may be reminded that,
when all is said, 4 the Friederician tradition ’ may be
a very inadequate guide through the unknown ages that
lie before humanity, that nations as well as men may
secure immediate and striking successes by courses which,
if persisted in, may lead in the long run to colossal
disaster, and outlawry from the commonwealth of
nations, and that One who knew what was in God as well
as in man once said, 4 They that take the sword shall
perish by the sword.’
To do Bernhardi justice, he recognizes that something
beyond the practical argument is necessary, and so we
find him seeking to ground the policy of 4 the incom-
parable Frederick ’, and his own convictions, in the
cosmic order by the use of the argument of the 4 biological
necessity ’of war. 4 Blood and iron ’ are in the nature of


things. The fundamental law of all life is the struggle
for existence, and the survival of the fittest for that
struggle. Morality is a secondary result of that conflict,
something which grows up within the separate States.
It is the result of a concordat between their citizens which
experience shows to be necessary if the States are to be
efficient in the universal struggle and so to survive.
But it has no rightful place in the relations of States
with each other, because there is no Super-state to
enforce it. Man, as such, has no rights. It is hard to see
how, even if there were such an authority, it could enforce
an international morality without suspending the struggle
which, on Bernhardi’s view, is the fundamental law.
‘Strife’, he would say with Heraclitus, ‘is the father of
all things,’ including morality. All the virtues, on this
view, become simply means to national existence and
greatness, to the possession of ice-free harbours and
gold mines, provinces rich in coal and iron, over-sea
markets and so forth. This is plainly materialism of
a very elementary kind. The strange thing is that the
writer does not seem to see this, and uses idealistic,
religious, and even Christian language with the most
edifying fervour.
NATURE OR SPIRIT
But the fact remains that the core of his argument is
that the all-determining thing in the universe is nature
and not spirit, biological and not moral necessity.
Any complete answer to Bernhardi would thus demand
a critical analysis of materialism, which would carry us
far beyond the limits of this paper. But a theory may
be refuted not only by examining its premisses and by
showing its inner inconsistencies and its inadequacy to
explain the facts, but also by showing that it leads to
consequences so revolting to the conscience of mankind.


and so glaringly absurd in themselves, that the theory
becomes itself incredible. This service to humanity
Bernhardi certainly has done.
THE THEORY IN PRACTICE
Let us see how his theory works out in its results.
Within the nations men owe to one another justice,
mercy, and truth, but cross the frontiers of the State and
you owe nothing to any alien. He has no rights that
you need recognize. The dawn is still beautiful, and the
stars glorious in their courses, human life in its pathos
and mystery, its laughter and its tears is the same in
essence though the Rhine lies behind you ; the glory of
art and song and the grandeur of science are the same.
But there is one great exception. The moral law has
disappeared. The alien has no rights as against you,
and you have none as against him. You are now abso-
lutely free to do what you like to him, provided you do
not injure your country. You will, of course, be unwise in
your own interest if you go too far. But you owe no
duty to him or his country or humanity. The Rhine
has made all the difference. So in foreign policy the
statesman may lie without stint, break all his oaths, and
use any rapacity or violence. Nay, if he hesitates to do so
when his country’s gain requires it, he is wronging his
fellow citizens. To humanity, as such, he owes nothing
at all. In fact, its interests are best conserved by each
State doing the best for itself that it knows and can.
This is his sole concession to the idea of a common human
interest. Any conscious pursuit of such an ideal interest
of all by the will of each is out of the question. He finds
room for such a dream only in a foot-note. *lt belongs ’,
he says, ‘to the wide domain of Utopias.’ We may
answer, with a modern writer, that his own conception
belongs to the wide domain of Hell.
Anything more repulsive than Bernhardi’s outlook


upon the future of the world, or the reign of suspicion,
violence, and fear that would result from his principles,
it would be hard to conceive. It must seem a mere
madhouse to any one who has caught from Christ some
glimpse of pity, magnanimity, and truth. The fundamental
law is struggle. Struggle means war. Therefore war is
of God. Therefore it is good. Let us grasp the nettle
boldly. Strong races will accept the law, will glory in it,
and will arm not only for defensive but for aggressive war.
War is ‘ God’s dreadful medicine 5 for human slackness
and selfishness. It is a school for all the heroic virtues.
The love of peace is a sign of national decay.
What are we to think of all this ? We have now had
rather more than three months of war. It is rarely,
indeed, that any volume has had so sudden and so
tremendous an illustration of its principles. We have
seen how Bernhardi and his comrades of the German
Staff conceive of the practice of war. We may frankly
admit that they have given us an illustration of its
nobler side in the courage and self-devotion that they
have shown without stint for the Fatherland. If war
were only a matter of enduring hardship and of laying
down one’s life for the fatherland, we might admit much
that he says of it. The real trouble is that it is so much
besides. It is not simply that you have to do all that
you can to maim or slay the bodies of your antagonists
and to crush their spirits; it is that you have to inflict
such unimaginable misery and wrong on those who cannot
resist, and who are to the combatants as nearly ten to
one, Most of us are surer than ever that war is essentially
a brutal thing, because of what, through these hundred
days, we have heard and read. We seem to have been
living in an epidemic of madness, shot through with
gleams of light and reason. We have all been a little
abnormal, and some of us not a little. What is it that
above all has poisoned the brain and inflamed the heart ?


It has been what we have learned of the fate of the old
men and women and children in time of war. We do
not need to go to the innumerable accounts of unauthor-
ized outrage here. It is quite enough to take things
which no one denies, and which are understood to be
approved and instigated by the militarism for which
Bernhardi speaks. They are, therefore, on his own
showing, part of the Divine necessity of war. A man
and his wife are sitting peacefully talking together in
Antwerp in the quiet of an autumn night. No formal
investment or warning of bombardment has been given.
A Zeppelin sails in in the darkness, drops its bomb
beside them, and all that is left of them is a falling
drizzle of flesh and blood. Beside them hundreds are
maimed or slain. Again, in a great French city, far
from the battle-field, a little girl is playing beside her
nurse. A ‘ Dove 5 sails in overhead, there is a loud
explosion, and what remains is a dead woman and a little
wailing heap of crippled humanity. The doer of this
deed, a strong and bold youth, sails away in triumph to
receive military honours and the plaudits of an admiring
people. Had that people been in its senses it would
have hanged him, and repented in anguish and tears the
deed that had stained the honour of a great nation.
But on Bernhardi’s theory and presumably, seeing that
he is a member of the General Staff, his practice, these
acts of warfare were part of the counsel of God. He is
welcome to his God. Atheism be a much cleaner
and nobler thing than religion of this type. Every
human being who is not out of his senses with fear or
pride knows that such things are wicked and shameful.
All the sophisms about there being no morality as between
nations are snapped like burnt thread in the blaze of
righteous anger that springs up in every uncorrupted
human conscience against such deeds done to any people
under heaven. If our country is going to do such things


and make us complicit in them, then we shall renounce
our country and seek admission to some nobler State.
But it may be said, though Bernhardi cannot say it,
that such things are no essential part of fair warfare.
Why should they not be such, if they are effective ?
On his theory they are not wrong. Nothing is wrong if
done in war to men, women, or children of another nation.
They have no rights and no guardian. Torture, burning
alive, extermination are all legitimate, if only they are
effective for their further purpose of national aggrandize-
ment. If the theory is true, we must carry it through.
Again, take espionage. No man can deny that this is
an essential element in all warfare. All nations practise
it. The spy is as essential an element in war as the
hero in the trenches. Yet who can deny that there is
something morally revolting in.the conduct of one who
comes to a foreign land, enters into kindly relations with
its citizens, is hospitably welcomed to their homes and
friendships, and who is all the time using this human
trustfulness and kindness with the view of bringing on
the land in which he dwells all the horrors of an alien
invasion ? Are ignominies like these an essential part
of human life ? Is any noble nation really proud of its
spies any more than of its hangmen ? Yet on Bernhardi’s
principles this is a mere foolish prejudice. Hospitality
to the stranger is a criminal folly, and he who takes
advantage of it is a wise and noble patriot.
MORAL LAW UNIVERSAL OR ELSE ILLUSORY
Is there any need to pursue the argument further ?
There is something behind all this instinctive human
horror and scorn for the many moral enormities of
warfare. The human conscience is clean against Bern-
hardi’s view that as between States there is no morality.
In fact, his own conscience is oddly at strife with his


theory, for he is quite unreserved in his condemnation
of other peoples for acting with treachery and violence
in the international sphere. The ice becomes very thin
for Bernhardi when he is speaking of the misdeeds of
England towards other lands. He cannot have it both
ways. Either there is a universal law of Right, or there is
none at all. In fact, the whole contention is preposterous.
Morality has no frontiers. That which is right on one
side of the English Channel or the Rhine cannot be
wrong for the same man on the other. We owe justice,
mercy, and truth to all men everywhere, or we do not
owe them to any man anywhere ; we do not owe them
even to our own fellow countrymen. For nothing can be
more certain than that if a nation acts with deceit and
violence towards other nations, and if it gains success
in its aims thereby, the contagion will spread through
all its own people, and the whole national life will go
down at last in anarchy and shame. So was it with great
Rome, and so has it always been with all predatory races.
In their development there always comes a time when
the unreasoning and instinctive patriotic morality of their
youth moves up to a higher and broader plane, or else
lapses into moral disintegration and outward ruin.
Bernhardi’s philosophy of war, then, leads to conse-
quences which revolt the conscience and common sense of
men, when we simply take it as it stands, without raising
the deepest question of all*
BERNHARDI FORGETS GOD
But let us at last raise that supreme question. Bern-
hardi says that there can be no moral obligation save to
those within the State, for there is nothing higher than
the State. He has forgotten God. If there exist ‘ One
whom we describe least imperfectly when we call Him
Personal ’, we cannot but ascribe to Him the noblest


character of Personality, Justice, Mercy, and Truth ; and
if this be true of Him who is the only enduring Reality
and Power, He must have something to say in this debate.
The acknowledgement of God of itself at once universalizes
human rights. He must deal righteously with all men,
so there must be a moral order of the world ; and if there
be such an order, then the whole of Bernhardi’s book is
a madman’s dream, from which soon or late there must
be an appalling awakening, an awakening to the reality
of the Righteous God.
Moreover, He must have a purpose and an end towards
which human history in all its myriad paths is con-
verging, and in the service of which all men and all
nations alike find their only true destiny. If God lives,
then it is absolutely clear that the greatness of any
nation can lie only in the manner in which it has con-
tributed to the attainment of His purpose. ‘ Things are
what they are, and the consequences of them will be what
they will be. Why, then, should we seek to be deceived ? ’
Everything turns, therefore, on how we must conceive of
that purpose and end.
Bernhardi finds the clue to that purpose in Nature.
This is the radical error behind the many errors of his
volume. If there be a living God, a purpose and an end
in the cosmos, the real clue must be found in the climax
and not in the proem. To take ‘ biological neces-
sity ’ as the clue to human life is to commit the same
kind of error as if we took the opening scenes of Hamlet
and endeavoured to explain the whole drama in terms
of our interpretation of them. Why, we cannot fully
understand them unless we go back on them from the
revealing climax. So it is the faith of Christians that
they alone can understand human life in all its riches who
view it in the light of the Kingdom of God. They believe
that the purpose of Nature is to produce a being higher
than herself, the very nature of whose moral life shows


that he belongs to a greater Order, who judges himself,
whether he will or no, by standards higher than those
of the brute struggle for existence, through which his soul,
by long ancestral paths, has come by ideals which reveal
that he is fundamentally not natural but spiritual, that he is
made for the Kingdom of God. They believe that the true
clue to the whole vast cosmos is found in the Cross and
Resurrection of the Christ, in which is disclosed the very
nature of that Kingdom. If, then, we are to think of God
in terms of the Cross and the Resurrection, it is totally
inconceivable that He could ever have decreed that war
should be a necessary and enduring element in human life.
To maintain the contrary is definitely and plainly to range
oneself on the side of Anti-Christ.
IS WAR PERMANENTLY NECESSARY?
The only possible course for a Christian, therefore, is
to hold that war is always due to some aberration from
the will of Almighty Love, by one or both parties to
that war. Christian thought to-day, where it is coherent,
takes this form.
But Christians differ as to whether war will ever be
eliminated from human life. Many say that it can be
abolished only when sin is destroyed, and as they believe
that sin can never be destroyed they hold to the perma-
nence of war. There is in these despairing conclusions the
gravest peril lest they shall simply play into the hands of
men like Bernhardi and the militarists. If you believe that
any evil is inevitable, all experience shows that you have
taken a long step towards making it inevitable. The ages,
for instance, when men thought it impossible to win the
whole world for God were not and could not be missionary
ages. What was the result ? The Church simply played
into the hands of the clear-headed cynical exploiters of
the non-Christian races, because it did not believe enough


in God, or in man, or in the Gospel. One consequence
was the entanglement of Christendom in African slavery.
So is it to-day. Trace the impotence of the Christian
Churches regarding war to its roots, and it will be found
to be due to the same want of faith.
There are two answers to this despairing temper. The
first is radical and may be put as a question. By what
right do we say that sin is a necessary and eternal element
in God’s world, and that the Almighty must in the end
of the day accept the defeat of His Kingdom in the world
that He has made ? If, however, this elementary range of
faith is not possible to us, and if we accept the existence
of sin as an enduring element in human life, it does not by
any means follow that warfare must be permanent. There
is not one single great crusade for human progress that
might not have been paralysed at the outset by such
want of faith. The securing of world-peace may seem
to be so hard as to dismay the stoutest heart, but is it
any harder than was the extirpation of, say, polygamy
or slavery ? Yet this has been accomplished in all the
progressive races of mankind. Is this cancer more
radically established in the tissues of the social organism
than were those ? What would have become of the
human race if men of the Spirit had acquiesced in these
barbarous customs on the plea that so long as lust and
avarice were so deeply rooted in human nature it was
hopeless to attempt to remove their social expression ?
Doubtless both polygamy and slavery had their Bern-
hardis who endeavoured to consecrate their enormities
as 11 biological necessities ’, and therefore as the ordinance
of God. And doubtless, too, they found their best allies
in those who had so little faith in God that they despaired
of their fellow men.
How are such great advances in human life won ?
Many forces work together to the common end. Econo-
mic factors have their own great part to play, and


these are every day becoming stronger in the cause
of peace. But history shows, also, that taken alone
these can never prevail. There must be a change of
heart. Men must come to feel that there is something
contemptible, cheap and dreary about the ideals of the
past in comparison with the new ideals that are being
born. Great causes are won by the power they show
of capturing the nobler and more powerful minds in
the coming generation. Time and mortality do the
rest. That is what is needed to-day. The leading minds
and the common consciousness need to be disillusioned
about war, to be made to feel that there is more than
a taint of madness in it all, that there is something
ignominious and brutal in its very essence.
But we need more than that if we are truly to complete
our answer to militarism. There is a nobler element in it,
and we must find a ‘ moral equivalent for war ’. There
is no complete ‘ answer to Bernhardi ’ until this be
found. His book is not wholly base. Narrow and sordid
as are his thoughts of his people’s destiny, cynical and
envious as are his judgements of all other nations, con-
fused and shallow as is his philosophy, there are in his
strange book gleams of nobility, too. He loves his father-
land well, if not wisely, and in her interest he preaches
unremitting endurance, toil, and sacrifice. We cannot
really answer him until we have met him here, and dealt
with his strength as well as with his weakness. Such men
are impervious to any purely economic gospel. They have
an instinct that they are standing for something that all
the economic demonstrations of the profitableness of peace
will never satisfy.
THE ANSWER
Has the Christian Church to-day no great message to
proclaim to all the nations, which will preserve all that
is really noble in patriotism and in sacrifice for the


fatherland ? Is it not rather an essential if half-forgotten
part of her message that there is a world-wide Kingdom
of God, too great and rich for any one nation to express
in its completeness, but needing them all, with all
their racial differences and historical individualities, for its
attainment, a real and not simply an ideal commonwealth
of all mankind, slowly working out its vast destinies not
in a tame cosmopolitanism, but in a true international
life, rich in its very antagonisms because held together
in a deeper unity in God ? Many things, as the Prime
Minister recently said, which seemed Utopian a year ago
are not Utopian to-day, because we see now as we did
not then the inevitable alternative. It has been truly
said that the task of statesmanship now is to turn the
Balance of Power into a Concert of Europe. The phrase
marks the transition from racial separatism to a con-
structive and united labour for a common end. Only
absorption in this end can ever supply the ‘ moral equiva-
lent for war ’. There is an opportunity here for Chris-
tianity that never in all its centuries it has had before of
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God.
If the spirit of prophecy were to awaken among us
again, it would preach to us not only of Doom but of
Hope. It would proclaim to men that the life they have
been living is hardly life at all, that the life that they
may have is as much above what they are having as their
life is above that of the savage, and that they are living in
a world of riches, natural and human and Divine, which
they have hardly begun to discover or to use. It would
tell us that to win those hidden riches we need all the
nations and all the races. And it will tell us too, as it
has always been its mission to do, that the leader of our
full human salvation is Christ, that only He can mediate
between man and man who mediates between man and
God.


PAPERS FOR WAR TIME
Published under the auspices of a Group drawn from
various Christian bodies and political parties, the editor-
in-chief of the series being the Rev. W. Tempi.e, M.A.
Already Published,
1. CHRISTIANITY AND WAR. By the Rev. W.
Temple, M.A.
1. ARE WE WORTH FIGHTING FOR? By the
Rev. Rich Ann Roberts.
8. THE WOMAN’S PART. By Mrs. Luke Paget.
4. BROTHERS ALL: THE WAR AND THE
RACE QUESTION. By Edwyn Bevan, M.A.
5. THE DECISIVE HOUR: IS IT LOST ? By
J. H. Oldham, M.A.
0. ACTIVE SERVICE; THE SHARE OF THE
NON-COMBATANT. BytheRev.W.R.M A LTBY.
7. THE WAR SPIRIT IN OUR NATIONAL
LIFE. By the Rev. A. Herbert Gray, M.A.
S. CHRISTIAN CONDUCT IN WAR TIME. By
W. H. Moberly, M.A.
9. THE WITNESS OF THE CHURCH IN THE
PRESENT CRISIS. By X.
11. LOVE CAME DOWN AT CHRISTMAS. By
George Hare Leonard, M.A.
Published on Dec. 28.
10. THE REAL WAR. By the Rev. W.E. Orchard,
D.D.
12. AN ANSWER TO BERNHARD!. By the
Rev. Professor D. S. Cairns, D.D.
Ready on Jan. 11.
PATRIOTISM. By the Rev. Percy Dearmer, D.D.
SPENDING IN WAR TIME. By Professor E. J.
Urwick, M.A.
Two papers will be issued each fortnight.
OXFORD ! HORACE HART, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERBITT
