

C.Et-iaioo£ PAN«.
“ TfiU IT TO THE CHÜHCH.”
AN APPEAL
THE BISHOP
TO THE
CHÜRCH.
BY THE REY. FRANCIS HALES.
co*.,, fEldfiounie:
say tliat copy is not correct; one of the principal paragraphs,
relating to the desecration of the Clmrch, häviug been
omitted, as well as an amusing and instructive pencil note in
that of the Biahop attached to sorae of the names, to the


MELBOURNE:
PBIKTSD AT THE 11 ARGUS ” OFFICE, COLLINS STREET, EAST.


f toib 3
AN APPEAL,
7 i
INTRODUCTION.
The Statement contained in the following pages, is iriade
at the request of many of my friends, who desired that the
real causes for rny cornpulsory removal might be put upon
record, for the sake of my own vindication, and the informa-
tion and guidance of the members of our Church, when they
shall be called upon to regulate her present disorders by the
acts of their legislation.
In preparing this Pamphlet for publication, I determined,
as far as possible, to avoid every matter likely to draw the
attention for a moment from the great questions of ecclesias-
tical freedom, and ecclesiastical rights; and to rest my plea
upon common and momentous, rather than personal and
paltry grounds. For this reason I withhold all those papers
on subjects connected with this affair, which, though import-
ant enongh to myself and friends, would fatigue the eye of
the uninterested reader, and weary myself in their Compila-
tion, as well as increase expense.
Mr, Chambers’ petition against me is transcribed from the
copy sent by that gentleman himself, though I am sorry to
say that copy is not correct; one of the principal paragraphe,
relating to the desecration of the Church, häving been
omitted, as well as an amusing and instructive pencil note in
that of the Bishop attached to aorae of the names, to the


effect, that the wivcs signed for their husbands, because they
knew they would do so themselves if at home. The name
of Mr. Hicks is on Mr. Haies’ copy, though not on that of the
Bishop, and is repudiated by himself.
At first it was intended to print the minutes of evidence.
taken by Mr. A’ßeckett on the occasions of my two trials,
and for that purpose I wrote, on the 6th September, to the
Bishop for a copy, which reached me on the Öth October, when
my time for preparing them was very much reduced. Upon
considering their contents, I foand so many half-sentences,
such want of apparent Connection between many of those
that were perfect, as well as grave omissions in evidence, that
they could not but be a mass of confusion to any one attempt-
ing to gain Information by their perusal. Whether they were
imperfectly transcribed, or that the fault was originally
inherent, I cannot say; however, instead of correcting their
defects, I shall state my own case, relying upon the testimony
of the numbers before whom it was conducted.
The papers I have inserted are in full, and those only
which are absolutely necessary to the elucidation of the sub-
ject in hand.
I may here mention, that there were originally four trus-
tees to the Church—that one having resigned, and the
other having left the colony, there were only two remaining
on whose account the Bishop’s “sense of justice” caused my
expulsion;—that these two are Dr. Martin and Mr D. C.
M'Arthur ; —that Mr. M'Arthur never attended the Church,
though in fine weather said to spend his Sundays in Heidel-
berg;—that Dr. Martin’s very rare attendance has frequently
been objected to Mr. Haies, when urging persons to go to
church ; that neither were comrpunicants, though the Act
required it; —and that they would not give the parish the
opportunity of electing two trustees to fill the original
number.


Bishop’s Court, August 18th, 1853.
My dear Mr. Hales-*-
Hercwith you will receive copies of tlie judgments of myself and my two
assessors, tlie Dean and the Deputy Registrar, upon the several charges against
you, which were the subjects of inquiry on the third and eleventh instant
respectively.
From these judgments you willperceive. that we concur in regarding you as
having, by your virtual dcnial of their authority as to the site of the parsonagte,
occasioned the dissension between yourself and the Trustees, which induced the
latter to tender their resignation; and as having also, by your language and
conduct, engendered and fostered a bad feeling towards them in the parish.
Hence you must he considered as responsible for the consequences of that dis-
sension between them and their friends on the one band, and yourself and their
fellow parishioners on the other.
I am quite willing to believe that you did not, in the first instance, intend
actually to oppose tlie authority of the Trustees; but it is evident that you did
not pay the attention which you ought to their known wish in the matter;
and that afterwards, when they authoritatively interposed, instead of yielding
you persisted, and encouraged others to persist in acting directly in Opposition
to them.
Again, with respect to the language which you used concerning their conduct
and that of their friends, I do not suppose that you were actuated by any per-
sonal ill will towards them, but that you really thought they actcd in an arro-
gant and domineering manner. But even if this were so. the course which you
adopted was calculated to aggravate, instead of remedying the evil, and was
altogether unbecoming a minister of the Gospel. Its natural effect was, to set
one dass of your parishioners against another, and to stir up passions which
you were bound, as a servant of the meek and lowly Jesus, not to encourage,
but to reprove —not to inflame, but, by all the means in your power, to allay
and extinguish. It is no excuse for you to say, that you endeavored to conci-
liate the opposing parties as long as possible. You ought neyer to have
assumed, as it is plain that you have, the character of an agitator.
linder these. circumstances I am compelled, by a sense of justice to the
Trustees, to remove you from a Situation wherein, through your own fault, you
have ceased tobe what every parochial minister ought always to aim at being,
the Pastor of the whole flock committed to his Charge.
My determination to remove you is not affected by the memorial in your
favor, signed by so many of the parishioners. First, because the feeling of any
number of persons does not alter the nature of the facts, and cannot release me
from the Obligation of doing what I consider tobe due to those against
whom you have offended; and secondly, because that memorial. although con-
clusive evidence of the side which the bulk of the people have taken in the dis-
pute, is no proof, in my opinion, of the real attachment of the people to
yourself, or of the value which they set upon your ministerial labors among
them.
Although, however, I am under the necessity of removing you from Heidel-
T)erg, there is no reason why you should not, if you are enabled, by the grace of
God, to learn wisdom from your past experience become an useful laborer in
sotne other part of the Lord’s vineyard ; and I shall therefore be willing, on my
part, to appoint you to another Situation, whereyou may, by-giving “attendance
to reading, to exhortation, and to doctrine,” enjoy peace in your own soul, and
make your profiting to appear Unto all men.
As to the time of your leaving your present post, I desire as far as possible to
consult your own wishes.
I have thought of naming the Ist October as the the day on which, if you do
not previously resign, I shall formally revoke your license ; but I would tiefer it
for a few weeks longer, if you request me to do so.
With the most sincere desire for your future happiness and usefulness in tha
Lord’s Service,
I remain,
.My dear Mr. Haies,
Your faithful brother in Christ,
C. MELBOURNE.


P.S. —In assigniug the reasous of my determination to remove you from
Heidelberg, I have not noticed the impropriety of your conduct in occupyiug
the Church for so long a time with your family, and receiving friends to tea in
the Church, and allowing workmen to sleep in the vestry ; because, although
I consider you to have acted very wrongly herein, particularly after the opiniou
which I had previously expressed to you upon the subject, yet it is not in con-
sequence of this, but simply on accouut of your conduct towards the 1 rustees,
that I feel it necessary for you to leave your present Situation.
C. M.
Melbourne, August 23rd, 1853.
My deab Mb. Hax.es—
Lest the expression which I have used in my letter, delivered to you this
afternoon, respecting the memorial of the parishioners in your favor, should be
misunderstood by any of those who signed that memorial, I would explain, that
I do not mean to express any doubt of their feeling at the time all that they
have said in it, bat only that their feeling was ( temporary, produced by the
excitemcnt of the occasicn, and is therefore no criterion of their real affection
towards yourself, or their value for your ministry.
I remain,
Your faithful brother in the Lord,
C. MELBOURNE.
■ I begin witli this letter in order at once to place tbo issne
prorainently before the reader.
I next Bubjoin the Bishop’s summons upon the complaint
of the Trustees, and the judgment founded upon the evidence
that summons produced.
Bishop’s Court, Melbourne,
30th July, 1853.
Reverend and dear Sir —
It is very painful forme to hear any complaints alleged agpinst a Clergyman
ofthis Diocese, but where those complaints assume a definite form, and are of a
serious nature, I think that it is due to him, as well as essential to the well-
bcing of the Church, that they should be thoroughly investigated.
Hence, when a few days ago the Trustees ofthe Church at Warringal (Heid-
elberg), of which you are the Minister, wrote and tendered to me their resigna-
tion,°assigning as the cause, that “great individual discourtesy, and a total
want of recognition of the powers vested in them as Trustees, had been shown
by you, in your having caused tobe erected a Parsonage-house on a portion of
the Church land, in direct Opposition to their formal protestation against its
boing placed thereon,” I replied that, instead of accepting their resignation, I
feit it my duty to call upon them to substantiate the charges which they had
alleged against you.
I have accordingly requested them to meet me on Wednesday next, the 3rd
August, at 11 o’clock in the forenoon, at Heidelberg, with any witnesses whom
they may wish to bring forward in support of their charge ; and I would now
request that you will attend there at the same time, and bring with you any
witnesses whom you may wish tobe examined in your defence.
It is my desire to act in this very painful matter with the strictest impar-
tiality, and, without respect of persons, to do that which shall be just before
God, and which shall be most conducive to His glory, and the welfare of this
Church. The Dean and the Deputy Rcgistrar will be present as my
assessors.
The specific charge which the Trustees have undertaken to against
you, is, “ That you have treated them, the Trustees of the Church, with great
discourtesy, and have shown a total want of recognition of the powers vested in


them as Trustees, in your having caused tobe erected (or been a party to the
erection of) a Parsonage-house on a portion of the Cburch Land, in direct Op-
position to their formal protest agaiust its heilig placcd thereon.”
I am,
Reverend and dear Sir,
Your faithful brother in tbe Lord,
C. MELBOURNE.
Copy of Judgment upon Complaint of Trustees against the Reverend
, Francis Haies.
The Trustees of the Parish Church of Warringal, commonly called Heidel-
berg, tendered their resignation of their Office to the Lord Bishop ou the löth
day of July last, by a letter in which they stated as their reasous for tendering
such resignation—“ That he (the Reverend F. Haies) had treated them, the
Trustees of the Church, with great discourtesy, and shown towards them a
total want of recognition of the powers vested' in the Trustees, inhis having
caused to he erected (or been a party to the erection of) a Parsonage house on a
portion of the Church laud in direct Opposition to their formal Protest against
its being placed thereon.”
On the receipt of this communication from the Trustees, the Lord Bishop
caused au Investigation tobe made into the matters complained of, which
investigation took place pursuant to notice given previously to all parties
interested, at the Parish Church, Heidelberg, on Welnesday, the Srd day of
August instant, when the Trustees and the Reverend Francis Haies, with a
large number of the parishioners, being present, such investigation was con-
ducted by the Lord Bishop, assisted by the Yery Reverend the Dean of Mel-
bourne and the Deputy Rcgistrar, who, after hearing the evidence then adduced,
have agreed to the following judgment: —
Ist. That the site of the Parsonage was selectcd without regard to the wisheS
of the Trustees, and a Parsonage house erected thereupon in direct Opposition
to their expressed wish, and regardless of a formal protest by them against such
erection, and herein “ The authority of the Trustees was wrongfully dis-
regarded.” ....
2nd. That the Reverend Francis Haies mfluenced the Parsonage Building
Committee in selccting such site contrary to the known wishes of the Trus-
tees, and encouraged individual members of the committee to persevere in
crecting the Parsonage on such site, notwithstanding the formal protest of the
Trustees against such erection.
Srd. That the Reverend Francis Haies was therefore virtually a party to the
erection of a Parsonage-house on a portion of the Church land, in direct Oppo-
sition to the formal protest of the Trustees against its being placcd thereon,
thereby showing, as alleged by the Trustees, “ a total want of recognition O' th a
powers vested in them.*
4th. That no evidence was adduced of any personal discourtesy being shown
by the Reverend Francis Haies towards the Trustees, beyond that involved in
the disregard of their expressed wish as to the selection of a site for the
Parsonage.
/Sipmed) C. MELBOURNE.
H. B. MACARTNEY, Dean.
THOS. T. a’BECKETT, Dep. Reg.
From these documents, it appears that the Charge made
against me by the Trustees was, that I was discourteous in
not recognising their powers, and by “ being a party to the
erection of a parsonage on a portion of the land, opposed to
their wish and protest, and that I was found guiltythe dis-
courtesy being expressly limited to my connection with the
erection of the parsonage. Of this I shall say no more, than


that I did not consider, tili the Government expressed tlieir
opinion on tlie subject, wliich I received about the last day of
August, that the Trustees of the Church were also Trustees
for the Parsonage. The Bishop presumed only that it was
so, and asked Mr, A’ßeckett for counsel, whose vagueness, as
appears by the following note, decided nothing :
Bishop’s Court, July 20th, 1853.
My dear Mr. Hales—
I was just going tosend you the accompanying letter when your note
reached me. It will explain the state of matters at the present time.
Mr. A’Beckett showed me some time ago a rough draught of bis opinion,
which appeared to me to decide nothing. He was to revise it and send me a
fair copy; but he has not done so, and I have not written to ask for it because I
feit that the question must come before the Government. I cannot imagme
what authority Mr. Perry could have for bis Statement, but he may be
correct.
I am,
Your faithful brother in the Lord,
C. MELBOURNE.
Had I been aware of what is enunciated in the corre-
epondence I have mentioned, I should not have hesitated at
once to have acknowledged their powers to their utmost
satisfaction, as I have invariably in matters pertaining to the
Church of which they were Trustees, though often I could not
help mentally being a dissentient. I was cleared from the
charge of being personally discourteous. My discourtesy to
theih was discourtesy to the Trustees of the parsonage ; but
as I did not then believe in their existence, the discourtesy
dwindles down to a mistake. The rest of the question is
utterly worthless, for all depends upon th e discourtesy, even
the value of the protest, which was only made when the
foundations of the parsonage were just completed.
On the 3rd of August a trial was held to enter into this
momentous question. The Bishop was assisted by the Dean
and the Deputy Registrar as his assessors ; and in front were
crowded an assemblage of about two hundred, principally
men—a vast number for Heidelberg, especially on a working
day, and in a busy season—lookiug with curiosity and amazo-
ment upon the solemn absurdity enacted. “The farmer left
his plough, the gardener his spade, and the mechanic his
tools ; a money getting people for a day forgot their wages;


• • #
an unimpressible people were impressed ; a sober peoplo
excited,” at the news that tbeir clergyman was tobe tried,
and that the Trustees of his Church were his accusers.
Something weighty tuey expected. Some terrible crime
indistinctly snggested itself to their minds.
As the trial proceeded, unfulfilled surmises awakened sur-
prise, which passed into a burst of manly indignation, that
for a time interrupted the proceedings, tili with good taste
the more excited retired to give vent to their foelings Out-
side the church, and waited there patiently and perseveyingly
tili the tedious enquiry was ended.
I may mention, without entering more minutely upon so
silly an enquiry, as to whether I preferred one site to
another and influenced the building committee, that it was
proved distinctly by Mr. L. Wadeson, that the onus of selec-
tion lay upon himself; that for upwards of three months the
Trustees might have built the house as they pleased, had
they not preferred allowing the subscription, which was
made in January, to lie uselessin thehandsof the Treasurer
tili the end of April. On the same occasion a petition for
my removal from the parish, instituted by one Mr. H.
Chambers, an attorney, who had lately come to reside in the
place, was read by the Bishop amid mingled intimations of
indignation and ridicule.
The Trustees were ashamed of it, and entirely disowned
it, Mr. M'Arthur in particular; and in the Bishop’s letter of
thn öth of August, which was a second summons to answer
the charges of the petition, he insists upon my “ observing
particularly that the Trustees are not in any way parties to
those charges or imputations.” From all this, coupled with
the decision that a sense of justice to the Trustees compelled
my removal, one would be naturally led to infer that it was
not in any way affected by this' petition, but rested solely
upon the merits of the first judgment—that is, that I disre-
garded their powers through ignorance, which neither they,
the Bishop, nor Mr. A’ßeckett could enlighten, tili the
matter was settled by the opinion of the Attorney-General.


For that weiglity cause I was dcemecl unworthy of my post,
my character was tobe degraded, were it possible, and all
the consequent evils of being driven contumeliously from my
parisb was tobe borne by myself and family. But in refer-
ence to the Bishop’s decision, dated August Bth, it appears
that this is not the only cause; my language and conduct are
also alleged ; I am accused of “ fostering a bad. feeling to-
wards them in the parishu” This accusation is not contained
in their Charge ; it Is found in the petition.
The llth of August was appointed for my second trial
upon the charges of Mr. Chambers’ petition. Mr. Haies’
case this day was very ably conducted by Mr. Bennett, shewn
by the clear manner in which the evidence was brought out.
Subjoined are copies of the summons and the judgment upon
the evidence.
Bishop’s Court, Melbourne, August sth, 1853.
My deae Me. Hales —
In accordance with your wish I have appointed eleven o’clock on Thursday
next, the llth inst., for entering upon an enquiry into the subject-mattcr of a
“ Statement and requisition” addressed to me by certain of the inhabitants of
Heidelberg; but in Order to save time, and prevent the discussion of irrelevant
subjects, I would mention distinctly the object of the enquiry; viz., to give you
an opportunity of defending yourself against the charges or imputations which
are made against you in that document. *
You will observe particularly that the Trustees are not in any way parties
to those charges or imputations, and therefore the feelings of the panshioners
in respect to them, whether favorable or otherwise, have nothing to do with the
matter, nor can their conduct be brought forward in evidence, except so far as
may be necessary for your justification.
The charges against you may, I think, be briefly expressed in the two follow-
ing propositions, viz.: (1.) That you have caused, or been a party to the dese-
cration of the Church, by authorizing its occupation by workmen, and its use
as a dwelling, and for other unauthorized purposes ; and (2.) That a bad feeling
has of late been engendered in the parish by your proceedings, which have been
in direct Opposition to the whole of the members of the Church therein (a few,
perhaps, excepted), and in defiance of the expressed views of those who have
contributed at least four-fifths of the amount required towards the support of
the Church and the stipend.
I propose to open the enquiry at eleven o’clock, a. m., precisely; and as I
must leave Heidelberg to return home not later than four o’clock, I trust that
you will endeavor to prevent any unnecessary prolixity in the proceedings. If
you wish to do so, you can employ any friend—not as a Professional man —to
conduct your defence, or to examine the witnesses for you; but whatsoever part
you assign to him, you must leave to him entirely.
I am, my dear Mr. Haies,
Your faithful brother in the Lord,
C. MELBOURNE.


Copy of Judgincut upon Memorial of certain Parishioners contra the Rev,
Francis Haies.
A memorial was on the Ist day of August instant presented to the Lord
Bishop hy several members of the Church of England, Parishioners of War-
ringal, commonly called Heidelberg, complaining of the conduct of the Rev.
Francis Haies, the incumbent thereof, in the following particulars :
Ist. That the Reverend Mr. Haies has caused, or becn a party to the dese-
cration of the Church, by authorizing its occupation by workmen, and its use
as a dwelling, and for other unauthorized purposes.
2nd. That a bad feeling has of late been engendered in the parish by his
proceedings, which have been in direct Opposition to the whole ofthe members
of the Church therein (a few perhaps, excepted), and in defiance of the
pressed wish of those who have contributed at least fouYfifths of the amount
required towards the support of the Church, and the stipend.,
The Lord Bishop informed the Reverend Mr. Haies of the receipt of this
memorial, on the ocCasion of the Investigation of certain complaints made
against bim by the Trustees of the Church, and he in the presence of a largfe
number of the parishioners having requested an investigation into such
charges, and the parishioners having joined in such request, an investigation
took place at the Parish Church of Heidelberg, pursuant to notice, on the 1 Ith
day ot August, when the Reverend Mr. Haies, assisted by Mr. Bennett as his
friend and adviser. and the memorialists being represented by Mr. Hugh John
Chambers being present, togethcr with a large number of the parishioners, the
investigation was conducted by the Lord Bishop, assisted by the Yery Reverend
the Dean of Melbourne, and the Deputy Registrar, who, after hearing the evi-
dence adduced, and duly considering the samc, have concurred in the following
judgment: —
Ist. That the Rev. Mr. Haies did use the Church as a dwelling for himself
and family, not merely as a refuge, when driven from his tent by
the inclemency of the weather, but tor sleeping, taking his meals, and occa-
sionally entertaining his friends therein, for a period of two or three weeks ;
and that he did also authorize the use of the impewed portion of the Church
by workmen employed in building the parsonage, and the use by them of the
vestry as a sleeping-room ; and that he persevered therein in Opposition to the
declarcd wish of the Trustees.
2nd. That a bad feeling has of late been engendered and fostered in the
parish by the proceedings of the Reverend Mr. Haies, he having, according to
his own admission, freely expressed his opinion to individuals in the parish, that
the “ gentry” (meaning thereby the Trustees of the Church, and their imme-
diate friends) wished to exercise an unduc authority (“ to ride rough-shod,”
according to the Reverend Mr. Haies’ own expression) over their fellow parish-
ioners, and that he thereby placed himself and many of the parishioners in
Opposition to those who have contributed a very large proportion of the funds
that have been raised towards the support of the Church and the Minister ; we,
however, consider that the evidence adduced, and the statements made in a
Petition nuracrously signed by parishioners favorahie to the Reverend Mr.
Haies, disprove the allegation that his proceedings were in direct Opposition to
the whole of the Church at Heidelberg, a few perhaps excepted.
3rd. We are of opinion, upon a full consideration of all the evidence, and
the statements made by the Reverend Mr. Haies, that he, by his continuous
occupation of and mode of occupying the Church, and his allowing workmen
to sleep therein, did not shew a due reverence for the sanctity of the building.
That by reason of his Opposition to the known wishes of the Trustees, and
the encouragement he has given to an Opposition to them by the Building
Committee, and that by reason of his dissemination among the parishioners of
his opinion that there was a desirc on the part of one dass of the parishioners
to exercise undue authority over another dass, the Reverend Mr. Haies is
responsible for the dissensiou that has arisen hetween himself and the Trustees,
and for the breach of harmony hetween the parishioners. which exists in the
parish, and was so painfully evident on the occasion of the investigation upon
which this judgment is founded.
(Signed) C. MELBOURNE.
H. B. MACARTNEY. Dean. . .
THOS. T. a’BECKETT. Def. Reg:


Mr. Chambers, in canvassing for.names to bis petition, was
accompanied by a Mr. Aikin, wlio professes tobe a Preshy-
teriau; though, with very singulär feclings of consistent pro-
priety, he deserts the Services of lils own Church to attend
those of the Church of England, as he confesses in his tes-
timony before the Bishop. Subjoined is a letter from another
member of the Presbyterian Church, with correcter notions of
propriety, with more consistency, gentlemanly feeling, and
Christian spirit, whose worth is so well known, and that of
his amiable family, that his good report I shall not injure by
any awkward attempts of mine to eularge it:—
Chelsworth, Ist August, 1853
Mv Dear Mr Hales.—
Having been informed, that an inquiry is tobe instituted into the
cause of some unfortunate differences betwixt yourself, and the Trustee
of the Heidelberg Episcopalian Church; and that a general meeting is
tobe held for that purpose, I take the present opportunity of assuring
you, that my only reason for not attending the meeting is, that, as I
belong to the Scotch Church, my doing so would be, I conceive, out of place.
I have been informed also that some of your hcarers have left your congre-
gation in consequence of those unhappy dilferences (myself and family amongst
the number). To this report I beg to give a most unqualitied contradiction ; for
you are aware that wc are, and always have been, members of the Church
of Scotland, and attended the English Church only pro tempore and until a
minister of our own denomination was within reach. In consequence of a
Presbyterian clergyman being now settled at Heidelberg, we attend the
Scotch Church, from that cause alone. Any reason of dissatisfaction
betwixt the Trustees and yourself, seems to me of so very trißing a nature,
that it would never influence my conduct in any shape; and I should regret
very much indecd, that what appears of so little consequence, should be fanned
into a cause of disunion, and thus prove injurious to the interests of the
Church. I beg to assure you, that should we from any circumstance be
deprived of a minister of our own denomination at Heidelberg, we should
esteem ourselves both f'ortunate and happy in enjoying the benefit of your
ministrations ; and I feel convinced that, although in your parish there may
be dissentients, the general feeling is that of satisfaction amongst the Episco-
palians at being under your ministry. I should, my dear sir, feel that I was
failing in my duty did I not embrace the present opportunity of testifying that
from my own personal experience and knowledge I can bear witness to your
unwearied kindness, zeal, and Christian conduct in the discharge of your duty
as a pastor.
I most sincerely trust that any disputes may be healed up, that all differ-
ences may be explained, and that you may long be a benefit and blessing to
Heidelberg and to this neighborhood.
Accept my wärmest wishes for the welfare of yourself and family, and
believe me tobe, my dear Mr. Haies,
Your most sincere Eriend,
P. STEVENSON.
Mr. Stevenson reads largely, thinks much, and has
therefore a cultivated understanding, able to estimate matters
at their real value, and his opinion is, any reason of dissat-
isfaction betwixt the Trustees and yourself seems to me of


to very trißing a nature These last words are particularly
marked by Mr. Stephenson himself.
Mr. Stevenson had every opportunity for forming a cor-
rect judgment. He has been always resident, knows all the
parties, and witlj one of the Trustees is a close acquaintance
both by habitation, and in society. There were more of the
usual and strong ties of the world to join him in sympathy
with the Trustee I have mentioned than with myself, whom
he has known only as the attached Minister of another
Church; while a mueh longer acquaintance, the mutual
attraction of wealth, proximity of property, neighborly
offices, the intercourse of business or society, tended to draw
him to pronounce in favor of Mr. M'Arthur’s view. But
he has calmly looked on, and decided. that the “ reason of
dissatisfaction is of a very trifling nature.” I must now
return to the document, so faraous, in the Latin sense of the
word, in Heidelberg, It was th'ree weeks before the list of
names was closed. Messrs. Chambers and Aikin were as
active, as if bent on some good and honorable work, Mr.
Chambers was accompanied by all the eclat of wealth, —by
the influence of the Trustees, conferred by their estates,
wealth, raagistracies, position of landlords, or of large em-
ployers of Labor, and the result of their great toils was
twenty-nine signatures.
The people had the acuteness of common sense, and the
justice of manliness ; and the petition passed through the
parish amid rejection, indignation, and scorn.
When it had been produced at the first trial on the 3rd
of August, my friends said, “ We must get np a counter-
petition,” I attempted to dissuade them from their design;
but they determined to carry it out; and such was the
eagerness with which every one lent a hand to circulate
it through the place, that on the 1 Ith of August, the
day for my second trial, to answer the charges of Mr.
Chambers’ petition, the counter-petition was presented to
the Bishop with two hundred and eight signatures.
The following are the petitions referred to :


To the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Melbourne.
The Statement and Requisition of us, the Undersigned Residcnts in the'
Township of Warringal and District of Heidelberg.
Respectfully sheweth—
That we have heard with regret, that the Trustees of the Heidelberg Church
have resigned or contemplate resigning thcir office of Trustees.
That the conduct of the Trustees hitherto, in securing the erection of the
building and promoting the Interests of the Church, and involving themselves
in certain liabilities in advanciug those objects, merits our highest approbation
and thanks; and we feel that the withdrawal of their Support would be highly
injurious to the proper observance of religion in the neighborhood.
That we deplore the bad feeling which has of late been engendered in this
district; in consequence of the proceedings of the Minister, which have not only
been at variance with the wishes of the Trustees, but in direct Opposition to the
whole of the members of the Church in this parish (a few perhaps excepted),
and in defiance of the expressed views of those who have contributed at least
four-fifths of the amount required towards the support of the Church and the
stipend.* ~
That numerous other circumstances might be mentioned, justifyiug this
expi-ession of our disapprobation of the conduct pursued by the Minister, and
confirming our assurance that the Christian fellowship and cordiality which
has heretofore prevailed amongst all classes in the neighborhood cannot be
maintained, and that the interests of the Church will materially suffer, so long
as the present Minister of the Church of England remains in that capacity
amongst the community.
Such being our sentiments, we beg that your Lordship will take the matter
into your careful consideration, assuring your Lordship of our readiness at all
times to promote the interests of true religion in this district, and liberally
to contribute towards the maintenance thereof; and trusting that your Lord-
ship will refmin from accepting the resignation of the Trustees, and that you
will request them to withdraw the same, and further, that your Lordship will
see the necessity of making a complete change in the ministerial arrangements
of the parish.
And most respectfully requesting your Lordship’s speedy dctcrmination upon.
this subject of vital moment to us,
We remain, my Lord,
Your Lordship’s most obedient faithful servants,
[Here follow twenty-nine signatures.]
V
To the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Melbourne.
May it plcase your Lordship—
We, the undersigned inhabitants of Heidelberg and its viqinity, members of
the Established Church of England, have heard with deep regret that a
Memorial has been presented to your Lordship, calling for an Investigation
into the character and conduct of the Rev. F. Haies; the principal allegation
of which is—“ That bad feelings have been engenddred in consequence of the
recent proceedings of the Minister, which have been in direct Opposition to the
whole of the members of the Church in this parish, (a few perhaps excepted,)”
and concluding with an expression of the Memorialists’ assurance —“ That the
Christian fellowship and cordiality which has heretofore prevailed, cannot bc
maintainedand that the interests of the Church will materially suffer, so long
as the present Minister of the Church of England remains in that capacity
amongst the community.”
My Lord, in reply, we beg most respectfully to assure your Lordship, that
we know of no proceedings of the Rev. Mr. Haies, that would in any way, or
even in the least way justify our forsaking our atteudance upon his ministry, or
of slackening our zeal for the true interests of the Church; and we feel con-
vinced, my Lord, though there may bc a few dissentients, that the general
feeling is one of satisfaction in being under the ministry of the Rev. Mr. Haies.
* A paragraph relative to the desecration of the Church, ia herc omitted in
the copy scut to me.


We consider, my Lord, that we sliould be wanting in duty, did vre not
embrace tlie opportunity of testifying, from our ovm personal experience and
knovvledge. tö the unwearied klndness, zeal and Christian conduct, displayed by
the Rev. j\Jr. Haies in the discharge of his duties as Christian Pastor, and we
hntnbly pray that it may please God long to continue him in his carcer of
Christian usefulness in this parish
We are, my Lord,
Your Lordship’s most obedient and faithfnl servants,
[Here follow two hundred and eight signatures.]
Before entering upon the subject of this day’s accusation,
I have a few remarks to nsake, relative to the manner in
which signatures were obtained. In the first place, the
names of some of those who positively refused to sign were
notwithstanding put down by Mr. Chambers, and were the
means of obtaining other names, and when an indignant re-
monstrance was made, the forgeries were erased. Signatures
also were obtained from other persons, under the pretence
that the purport of the petition solely was, to ask the
Bishop to refuse the resignation of the Trustees, A few
thought N that their signatures were actually doing me a
Service.
Not being skilled in literature, their lives having been
spent in guiding the plough, or handling the spade, con-
ceiving that honor and truth must reside within the garb
of a gentleman, they confessed their ignorance, trusted to
Mr. Chambers, and believed that they were, while getting
some mysterious benefit for their minister, only securing the
Trustees in the retention of their office.
The forged names were those of John Nuttall,
Bostock, George Pegg, Thomas Pegg, and Robert Pegg,
but were prudently erased when they had done their work,
and before presentation to the Bishop.
A prevarication was attempted on the part of Mr.
, Chambers, as to the time, when the names were erased, but
Mr. W. Hopkins proved that they were on the petition, when
presented for his signature; and Mr. J. Moysey, whose name
is dose to the bottom of the list, proved, that his only reason
for signing what he-said he knew nothing about, was, that
he saw Mr. R. Pegg’s name ambng others : that is one of the


forgeries afterwards erased, And he demanded to have bis
name taken off, because he was a friend to Mr. Haies.
Mr. Aikin directly contradicted Mr. Moysey in this, and
stated, that before they reached bis place, the unauthorized
names were taken out.
Mr. Aikin also contradicted the testimony of Mr. R.
Pegg, saying that he had requested bis name tobe
appended.
Messrs. James Nuttall, J, Shearan, and T. Coventry, stated
in evidence, that they understood from Mr. Chambers that
the petition only desired to retain the “ old Trustees,” and
was not at all opposed to Mr, Haies ; that they did not sign
to the purport of the petition, then read, on which their
names were found, and demanded that they should be there-
fore taken off. Mr. Aikin bore witness, that Mr. Chambers
invariably read and explained the petition, and in this was
supported, to a certain extent, by Mr. Ross, who recollected
Messrs. Nuttall, Shearan, and Gill signing the petition.
Mr. Waterfield distinctly supported the testimony, that
stated false pretences were employed in order to obtain sig-
natures; and the before-mentioned Mr, Ross also spoke of
advantages in some way to accrue to Mr. Haies in conse-
quence of the petition.
The state of the testimony concerning the manner in which
Mr. Chambers obtained signatures to bis petition is this—
T. t> f In the matter of Mr. Pegg’s
Mr. R. Pegg, versus Mr. Aikin, j signature Sö
( In that the forgeries were
Mr. J. Moysey, versus Mr Aikin, < on the paper when he
( signed.
Messrs. James Nuttall, f T ... ... -,
“ J. Shearan, „ lln staüng that false pre-
“ T Coventry versus Mr. Aikin, tences were employed to
“ J.' Waterfield, J ( « et names -
In all .this there is absolute, unqualified contradiction.
Mr. Ross’s evidence in the latter case cüt both ways; for
while he supported Mr. Aikin in the matter of the explana-
tion, he supported the contrary testimony in the matter of
some supposed advantage tobe derived by Mr. Haies.


Thus by counting Mr. Eoss’s namo, the testimony is seven
to two ; by omitting, it is six to one.
I may here mention tbat a number of others, unable tobe
present, also stated to Mr. Haies, with permission to use
their names, tbat tbey signed ander an erroneons impression,
and not in the least to do bim an injury. Of tbese were
Messrs. Morey, Moss, Wbite, and Hayward. To tbese I
may add Mr. Hodgson, whosc name is appended to an ad-
vertisement in the Argus, inserted a few pages fartber on,
stating, tbat Mr. Sales was expelled from bis parish “ witb-
out grounds,” tbat is sufiicient grounds, “ and contrary to its
expressed wisb.” It wonld be found, had I a list of tbe
names to the counter-petition, tbat a large number of tbose
on Mr. Chambers’ are also on tbat desiring Mr. Haies’ con-
tinuance in tbe parisb. Mr. Chambers’ petition also con-
tained tbe names of dissenters, of whom I may instance Mr.
Aikin and Mr. Eoss.
Passing from the manner in wbicb tbis petition was got
up to its matter, it will be well to state, tbat the judgment
was founded upon Mr. Haies’ own testimony, wbicb was per-
verted in a ratber dishonest way. The language of tbe
judgment is also insinuating and deceitfub Thus it States,
tbat Mr. Haies “ did use the Church, not merely as a
temporary refuge,” concluding with an acknowledgment
tbat, after all, it was only “ for two or three weeks.” Again,
tbe expression “occasionally entertaininghis friends tberein,”
would lead a stranger to suppose tbat Mr. Haies had been in
the habit of giving parties, wben the fact was, tbat tea had
been on a very few occasions supplied in tbe Church to the
ladies, wbo came to practise sacred music, and perbaps once
or twice, to the same ladies, on another occasion. Again,
tbat Mr. Haies “persevered tberein in Opposition to the
declared wisbes of tbe Trustees,” is unsupported by any
evidence tbat I can either find or remember, and is simply
untrue. Mr. Hawdon once expressed bis dissatisfaction,
but not in a very clear manner. Mr. Haies understood
bim to refer to the fact of bis cbildren sleeping in the


vestry, but was not quite suro to wbat he teferred. Dr.
Martin, during the whole time of Mr. Haies’ nse of the
Church, sent bis son to receive Mr. Haies’ instruction in tbe
Church, and expressed to Mr. Haies no dissent. Mr.
M‘Arthur once questioned Mr. Haies about the occupation,
seemed to acqniesce in the plea of necessity, and presided at
a meeting held in the chancel, which was curtained off, seated
in the midst of the very fnrniture that desecrated its walls,
and on the very spot where these shocking scandals were
enacted.
The charges are two —Ist. Desecration of the Church;
2nd. Producing dissension by bis language and conduct,
One would suppose from this that Mr. Haies went about the
parish, stirring up the people against the Trustees; but of
this there neither was nor could be evidence. Till the
Trutees publicly attacked Mr. Haies, he expressed no
opinion of them, except to a very few of those most nearly
connected with him in parish matters, and that in the course
of conversation. Afterwards, in self-defence, he spoke out
plainly and distinctly his feelings of dissatisfaction and their
cause. That this was only very late in the contest is shewn
by the fact that those who, in evidence, demanded the erasure
of their names from Mr. Chambers’ petition, who took part
in favor of Mr. Haies by uniting in that for his retention ;
and afterwards by subscribing to the munificent testimony of
sympathy and regard presented by the parish upon his
expulsion, readily yielded their names, when required by
Mr. Chambers, in favor of the Trustees.
The Bishop himself might have come forward in evi-
dence, since Mr. Haies frequently spoke to him of the con-
duct of some of the Trustees for its haughtiness and arrogance
respecting the rest of the parish, whom they considered
beneath them. Nay, he has even spoken of it to Mr.
M‘Arthur, and both, with seeming acquiescence in its truth,
received the information without reproof. The conclusion of
the Bishop’s judgment might as reasonably and correctly be
deduced from these two instances, as from the testimony


Mr. Haies gave concerning himself ; tlie facts being that he
abstained, except in rare instances, from giving bis opinion
of the Trustees, tili they openly and avowedly determjned to
attempt bis expulsion from tbe parisb. These opinions are-
overwhelmingly shewn to have been correct by the history
of the parsonage, which was an offence to the Trustees—not
on public grounds, as an injury to the parish, but because
their private feelings were hurt ; and also by their refusal to
/
listen to any terms of accommodation to retain Mr. Haies,
though thereby they placed themselves in Opposition to the
expressed wish of an overflowing majority; but Mr. Haies in
no degree admits the truth of the accusation of being an
agitator, and of arraying dass against dass.
The Bishop refers to the events of the trial in these
words —“The breach of harmony so painfully evident on
the occasion of the investigation.” After all, the meetings
were remarkably well behaved; there was no improper
language or conduct, except when Dr. Martin stood up to
Interrupt Mr. Haies’ evidence, by stating that he “ told a
falsehood,” There was much Indignation, but it was com-
pletdy suppressed tili the meetings, after breaking up, had
formed into knots on their way home ; when it is not at all
impossible that they spoke to one another pretty fredy
the sentiments they feit.
This latter paragraph of the judgment scarcely comes in
good taste from the Bishop, who brow-beat witnesses, stop-
ped the mouth of the accused, and invariably met with ready
obedience and support such as he ought to have received,
though he used his authority in a rather lordly and offensive
manner, That is, at all events, the Impression he left upon
every one.
But there were other matters against the Minister : he
desecrated the Church by taking shdter within it from the
pouring rain, and, taught by experience the worthlessness of
the best tont, he is blamed for retaining an unused portion of
the Church, when the clouds ceased to blacken the sky and
the rain to deluge the earth. If, as it was admitted, it were


lawful for htm under the pressure of necessity to go into tlie
Church, but not lawful wben the day was fine, bis time must
be occupied in shifting backwards and forwards, a prey to
continual excitement, watching tbe threatening clouds to fly
from them into shelter, and watching the returning sun to
fly out of shelter to the teilt.
The defence for using the Church was grounded on the
plea of necessity—a plea recognised by Our Blessed Lord in
matters not subversive of morality.
The wretched abode in which Mr. Haies lived for nearly
four years—neither wind-tight nor water-tight—he was at
last obliged by the landlord to leave at a time when houses
began tobe scarce. Days he spent in riding round the
country, in search of an abode where bis family might lay
their heads ; an increase to bis income had not then been
granted. However, no house could be obtained at any rent.
He was obliged to Order a tent.
When dwelling in it, by the Church, the storms raged and
the rain feil; and on bis return home one afternoon he found
the tent flooded, so that he was obliged at once to remove
bis family to the Church, tili the tent was again rendered
*
dry. The rain so constantly put out the fire, and the cold
began so to increase, that it became necessary to put a kitchen
stove inside, by which much room was taken up. Many of
his effects were destroyed by exposure. He was determined
to remove the sitting-room furniture and his books from
the tent. Doubtless he could have met some friend to
take them into an outhouse or loft. But in order that a
minister of an extensive and populous pariah may do in
some degree his duty, he must have something more than a
tent, divided into a kitchen and bed-room; and the sub-
stantial shelter of an empty building, hard by, was too great
a temptation tobe resisted. His habit was, notwithstanding,
to take his meals in the open air, in a little corner formed by
f
a side of the Tower and Church; a habit in which he perse-
vered, though the rain often moistened the cloth, and the
cold made it any thing but comfortable.


The contractors for the completion of the parsonage
stipulated for the Vestry as a sleeping-room for the work-
men, and demanded a covered place, in which they might bo
sheltered from the rain. They, therefore, planed the boards
in a part of the Church yet unpewed.
All this might be endurable, were the Minister hiniself
only concerned, and that he had no family to make it dis-
tressful. However, he was buoyed up with the hopes of a
promised house, for which subscriptions had been paid some
months previously, and comforted his comfortless family
somewhat in the manner of the perplexed but stout-hearted
Eneas :
. . . vos et Cyclopia saxa
Experti, revocate animos, msestumque timorem
Mittite : forsan et hoc olim meminisse juvabit
Per varios Casus, per tot discrimina rerum
Tendimus in Latium.
Through roofs of rotten wood,
Through tents and toil
Which may supply our future merriraent,
We tend, my children, to ä parsonage.
But, alas ! now that that happy day has come, the par-
sonage we must leave, —our toils and wants be borne for
nothing.
Ostendent terris hunc tantum fata, nec ultra
Esse sinent.
The fates will only show the parsonage,
Npr aught allow beyond.
While in my tent, I was very ill with" fever; the Doctor
ordered me imperatively and instantly to get better shelter.
When recovering, I slept in the Church for a day or two
tili I was able to remove to the house of Mr. Wadeson, which
was offered in the noble manner, and tender spirit, of a
Christian. Düring the time I was in the tent, my children
and servant slept in the vestry.
At the termination of the second trial, the Bishop de-
manded the manuscripts of two sermons of mine, at which
the trustees had taken offence, though they were not present.
The demand was refused, unless it was proved that the
English Bishops possessed the power of enforcemcnt. This


the Bishop endeavored to do by stating, that be liad lately
seen in an English paper, tbat a clergyman was cited before
a court for refusing bis Bisbop’s demand, but that he had not
heard the issue. Suspecting a holt loose in the logic, I still
demurred. The Bishop appealed to the Dean, who seemed
willing enough, if he conld, to please his Lordship, and
establish the servitude of the pulpit, The Dean never knew
such a demand refused. However the Bishop was compelled
to leave his promise, made to Mr. Chambers in the presence
of the meeting, unfulfilled, and to go away without getting
the sermons.
In the following extracts from “ Fafewell Addresses to my -
Late Charge,” will be found a rapid sketch of thehistory of
our connection, tili it has now been so abruptly and painfully
torn asunder: —
For fivc years we have held the relation of Minister and people, a space full of
events, momentous to the country, and sufficient to draw the notice of the
civilized world. In the midst of difficulty and oppressed with hardship, I have
given you my strength; and now, at the dose of our connexion, I can look
back upon the tokens of your acknowledgment and approval. AVhen I came to
reside in this parish, its extent, coupled with its population, rendered it far too
unwieldy for the unaided supervision of a single individual. It embraced all
the country round this village, with a large tract on the Southern bank of the
river; the entire region of the Plenty was also included; in all presenting an
extent of five-and-twenty miles by six or seven, the population being then about
two thousand. Scattered over such an extent, divided by long fences, con-
nected by had roads, the time and labor needed to visit all could not but be
great; yet for several years there was hardly a house in this vast parish which
had not been visited and its occupants known. Ten congregations have been
formcd at various times, and collected in different places, according to their
wants and the ability of the Minister to give them his assistance; for thrce
years, owing td the want of a Church in this place, Divine Service was cele-
brated only on every second Sunday; the Minister occupying that which
intervened in collecting people in the distant corncrs of the parish. His
journey on that day was never less than twenty miles; frequently it has been
nearly forty. He has had to perform two Services at different places ; occasionally
three ; and rarely, from eight in the morning tili six in the evening, has he had
a moment for refreshment or rest. To watch, as far as possible, over all the
people committed to his Charge, he has frequently on those occasions been for
some days absent. Unable to keep his horse in proper working condition, he
has been often in perplexity; and, while performing all the duties usually
fulfillcd by a servaut man, he was still supposed to carry out with unabated
vigor and undiniinished time all the Offices of a Parish Clergyman. He must
study and lay up in his mind a störe of thonght, that he may have somewhat to
impart when instructing others; he must meditate upon what he has read, that
he may make it his own; and exercise his independent contemplations, that he
may not utterly fail in feeding the minds of his people with “ sound speech,
that could not be condemned.’ All this was required, with a scanty supply of
books; with still more scanty time; while weariness, from unaccustomed
but necessary employments, for whose fulfilment he was unable to supply
a substitute, too often paralyzcd his strength. He has cver had to do the
work of a servant, in addition to that of a clergyman, which was alone
always sufficient to employ the undividcd vigor of two; with an income barely


sutficlent to supply the absolute necessaries of life, he must make a strenuous
effort to keep up, as far as possible, the appearances of bis Station, and to
maintain the means for visiting the distant parts of his parlsh ; his health and
that ofhis family has been severely tried, by the unworthiness of the accommo-
dation he has been always compclled to use, and he has for years known what
it was to tremble in his house at the approach of cvery shower ot rain.
When tlie discovery of gold reduced the value of his income to almost
nothing, it was raised, unasked, by the trifling amount of twenty pounds a
year; but he sought, in imitatlon of Paul, rather to supply his family 3 neces-
sities by the protits of his own toils, and for upwards of a year his time was still
further reduced by the occupation of a daily tuition.
The Bishop has offered to appoint me to another Situation: to accept his
offer would be to sanction his injustice. No laws of God or man support him
in my removal. Power has accidentally fallen, iuto his hands swe have not
been able to bring our Church laws with us into the Colony; we are not yet at
liberty to make laws for ourselves; meanwhile all power falls into the hands
of the Chief Ofticer of the Church. The autocratical power of the Bishops ia,_
elsewhere, utterly unknown; the most powerful Bishop in England is power-
less in comparison :itis a gigantic Usurpation. Why should I wish any longer
tobe subject to it? I wish it ftot. I would not have thrown it off, nor do
I now; it has rejected me. Were Itogo to another parish in the diocese,
if I agreed with the people, and the peopie disagreed with the Bishop, the
present act of injustice would be repeated. If I agreed with the Bishop and
disagreed with the people, I should be deserted by him as useless. I should
be always afraid of the Trustees, afraid of the Bishop: perhaps doubted by
all —perhaps despised by all. Fortunate only in a case where the Bishop and
the Trustees were unanimous: I should be always in terror lest they should
disagree, and that I should be puzzled to know whose part I should take, in
Order to save my living; afraid to utter a sentiment —afraid to have one, tili I
first knew that the Bishop and the Trustees agreed in their approval. How can
a minister have influence, if hebe but the empty channel for another’s thoughts
and acts ;ifhe be but an intellectual seryant ?He cannot love the people,
because he will not say nor do what he thinks is best for them, lest he should
lose his wages; they cannot love him, for selfishness none can love. The
way to their confidence he never can find; that is only found through their
love; but the spiritual nature of religion requires confidence, in Order that it
may pass from the mouth of one to the heart ot another. A minister without
influence would be useless to the parish, dishonorable to himself, unrewarded
by God.
In Australia the power of the Bishop is limited by no
law. This is proved, if it required proof, by my expulsion ;
but it will be more satisfactory to hear the Bishop himself on
this point, and I therefore give two extracts from a paper
with his initials, from the September Number of the Church
of England Messenger, for the year 1850: —
1. In every Episcopal Church, some authority over the Clergy, and some
power in the management of the general affairs of the Church, must necessarily
be committed to the Bishop. Such authority and power are implied in the very
nature of Episcopacy; but they may be possessed by Bishops in very different
degrees, according to the different constitutions of their respective Churches,
Thus one may be an absolute ruler, while another may be only the presideut of
a free republic. In England the power of a Bishop is as strictly defined and
limited as that of the monarch. He can do no more than the Ecclesiastical law
warrants; and, in the exercise of his authority, he must proceed according to
the form which that law prescribes. Absolute, irresponsible power would be
feit tobe as intolerable by Englishmen when vested in a spiritual, as when
vested in a‘civil ruler. Nevertheless, in some of our colonies such a power does


virtually exist; and it exists from this simple cause, that while tlie Bishop is
bound to govem the Church committed to his care according to tbe Ecclesias-
tical laws of the Church of England, it is considered doubtful by some, whether
those laws are in force in those colonies; and there is at anyrate no legal Court
through which they can be administered. There is, therefore, practically, na
restramt upon his authority. Whatever power he possesses is necessarily in-
definite and irresponsible.
2. We are fully persuaded, therefore, that whether the present Church Act
he, or be not, applicable to this province, whatever power the Bishop at present
possesses will remain virtually the same; that is, absolute and irresponsible.
But ought such an absolute, irresponsible power tobe posscsscd by any single
individual? We answer unhesitatingly, No. We believe that the present
relation of the Clergy to the Bishop is likely to produce an injurious effect hoth
upön bim and upon themselves ; and we agree in the opinion that its continued
existence may deter some excellent men who would otherwise gladly labor with
us in the Lord, from joining our ranks here.
The words “ absolute, irresponsible power,” are printed, in
the Messenger , in Capital lettefs.
Did the Bishop come honestly by this power ? is a very
important opiestion; he certainly caunot ground it upon the
pages of the New Testament, whose teaching is, “ Neither, as
being lords over God’s heritage, but being ensamples to the
flock,” and which directs that causes should be referred tp
the Church ; it does not find its origin in the establishment
at home, for Dr. Perry writes, “In England the power of a
Bishop is as strictly defined, and limited, as that of the
monarch;”. it is certainly powerless to expel a clergyman
on account of a paltry squabble with Trustees. In fact the
power came to him, as pasturage to a man before his neigh-
bor erects a fence; the one takes advantage to steal his
grass, the other his liberty. Who is the greater thief ? Dr.
Perry’s power is the result of accident; and, though he has
no objection to employ it, as if it were a lawful servant, he
takes to his heels, and allows it to answer for itself, when
sturdy independence, finding it trespassing, seizes it by the
collar, and asks “ how it came there ?”
Dr. Perry thinks “ the present relation of the Clergy to
the Bishop likely to produce an injurious effect both upon
him, and upon themselves. Therefore, in v. and vi. of the
minutes of the meeting of the Bishops in Sydney in 1850,
he writes, in disclaiming any desire or intention of per-
petuating it: —


“V. DISCIPLINE.
“(X,) Bishops and Clergy.
“ In consequence of Statements which have been made in various places, of
the arbitrary power possessed by bishops to suspend or revoke, at their own
discretion, the licenses of clergymen, we diaclaim all wish to exercise any such,
power; and we are of opinion, that in all cases of doctrinal error or other
ecclesiastical offences, the bishops of the province should he the court tor the
trial of a bishop, and that the diocesan synod should be the court for the mal
of a presbyter or dcacon, and that the metropolitan and the bishop ot the
diocese, respectively, should be ex officio presidents of such courts, either in
person, or by their commissaries.
“ VI. STATUS OF CLERGY.
“ ] We desire to express our opinion, that no clergyhian who shall have
been duly appointed, and licensed to any church, or permanent eure ot souls,
shall be removable therefrom, except by sentence pronounced, alter judicial
enquiry, before the Diocesan synod.’
And again, when some of the clergy of the diocese in
their letter of the 25th March, 1851, to the Bishop of Mel-
bourne, wrote ;
“ 2. That all clergymen not placed in Subordination to an incumbent, but
entrusted with an independent eure, should be in the same position as incum-
bents in England. , , , , .
“ 3. That no incumbent should be depnved of his mcumbency, who hau not
been duly convicted of a canonical offence.”
The Bishop replies on the 22nd April, 1851
“I am happy however to observe that _. . . upon the placing of the
clergy in the same independent position with their brethren in England (the
two°most important principles laid down in the minutes) we are all penectly
agreed.”
These letters are published in the Messenger for May, 1851.
How these fine professions can be reconciled with my ex-
pnlsion is beyond my wit; since I was not tried by a
diocesan synod; and since no incumbent in England could
be deprived of his parish, for the offences of which I was
said tobe guilty —offences certainly not canonical,
While such is the contemptible position of the Clergy in
this colony, there is no occasion in altering it to make them
more secure, than the well-being of the Church may require,
They may be placed in a position of a manly independence,
while they infringe not on the laws of morality, nor neglect
the duties of their office, nor subvert by false doctrine the
truths they are bound to maintain. When that line is
passed, let them, while not excluded from merey, be expelled
without reprieve, but not tili then.


A Clergyman, tobe useful, must possess tbe power of
influencing, which only exists in a spirit that is not cramped
by slavery, and a bearing upright, manly, and free ; and wben
we count the momentous Import, as well as tbe surpassing
dignity, of bis office, we will understand the necessity and
wisdom of guarding bis bonor, and preserving bis proper
independence witb the most jealous and constant care.
ünlike tbose engaged in the employments of tbe eartb,
which are occupied in perisbing things, tbe immortal spirit of
man is tbe matter of bis work, which be is to form and shape
for tbe Service of tbe Eternal and Holy One. However
high and noble other employments may be ; wbile we
reverence tbe magistrates wbo guard our bomes; wbile we
bonor the makers of our laws, that distribute equal justice
between man and man—destroy many causes of disputes—
give strength to tbe public guardians of tbe peace, and join
justice to tbeir strength—wbile we bonor the professions that
make life more happy, because more safe, that exalt our
minds by enlarging our knowledge, or that soften our
manners by presenting to our attention objects of skill or
beauty; and duly regarding tbose wbo are engaged in tbe
employment of our first parent, and tili the ground for food,
witbout which tbe arts and Sciences would perish; we must
remember, that all are the employments of a world where
none of us can long abide, and are destined to sink into
unbroken forgetfulness. The work of a Christian Minister
can never be effaced; it is “ a savour of deatb unto death in
them that perish “in them that are saved, a savour of life
unto life,” Upon every other work mortality is written ; tbis
partakes tbe immortality of its Divine original. The minis-
ter of Christ is sent to convey tbe balm of salvation, pre-
scribed by tbe Great Physician, tobe applied to the souls of
men. He must call them from tbeir iniquities, warn them of
punisbment, entice them witb the bopes of salvation, crying,
Seek ye the Lord wbile be may be found, call ye upon Hirn
wbile He is near; Let tbe wicked forsake bis way, and tbe
unrigbteous man bis thoughts, and let bim return unto tbe


Lord, and He will have mercy on him, and to our God, for
He will abundantly pardon.’’
His office is, to plant the ligbt of Christ within their souls,
and to bind their spirits to him who inhabiteth eternity. It
is his to awaken the conscience from the stupefaction of sin,
and the Great Bishop of our souls employs his labor to
soothe the wounds of evil, to speak peace to its troubles, and
guide the altered heart from the perishing vanities of earth
to the enduring realities of heaven. His mission is only
finally and formally terminated before the Almighty Father,
sitting on his everlasting throne; before the Judge of the
living and the dead, at whose tribunal the spirits of all shall
pass, and of them amongst whom he dwelt, when their lives
shall rise in review, and be rewarded or punished, as they
have repented at his preaching, or hardened themselves still
more in their iniquities; to him has been committed the
ministry of reconciliation, for “ it pleased God by the fool-
ishness of preaching, to save them that believe.”
Such is the office, such the object, of work; such the ter-
mination of the calling of those who, in Victoria, are exposed
to degradation at the offended pride of a Trustee, or the
lordly dominion of “ a servant of the meek and lowly Jesus."
FRANCIS HALES, A.B.


APPENDICEB.
Suhjoined are the concluding acts of this farcical tragedy.
ARGUS ADVERTISEMENT.
ZOth and 12th September, 1853,
HEIDELBERG.
A Public Meeting of the Parishioners is requested by the Undersigned, to take into
consideration the present position of the Parisb, in reference to the expulsion of the
Rev. F. Haies without grounds, and against its expressed wish. The Meeting to take
place in the Church, at 11 o’clock in the forenoon, on Monday, the 12th day of Sep*-
tember, 1853.
(Signed) LAWRENCE WADESON.
JOHN SHEARAN,
JA iv ES NUTTALL,
EDWARD WADESON,
JAMES HODGSON,
WILLIAM HOPKINS.
Minutes of Meeting held at St. John’s Church, Heidelberg, September 12th, 1853.
William Hopkins, Chairman.
Proposed by Mr. Ricardo—•
That this Meeting views with regret the removal of the Rev. Mr. Haies, and the ill-
feeling and disunion amongst this Congregation, and are anxious that all should meet
as consisterit Christians.
Mr. Ricardo remarked, that he was sure he would have the support of the' Meeting
to the first part of the Resolution, as he was aware the feeling of regret was almost
universal at the threatened loss of Mr. Haies; he is endeared to us by an acquaintance
of years; bis abilities are of no mean order; his moral cluvracter is irreproachable;
his manners arniable and unassuming; and he has always done his duty as a zealous
and faithful Minister. He has had to contend against, and has overcome, no ordinary
difficulties; his salary, tili lately, has been insafficient, and he could scarcely obtain
a roof to shelter bim. Now, when 01l seemed smooth, and he had some hopes of being
comfortable, and was looking forward to a long course of usefulness amongst us, the
tie is threatened tobe suddenly and roughly broken —all his f'riendships will be
severed, and he has, perhaps, to leave the loveliest village in the land, and again to
seek a home in a stränge place, and among stränge people; I am sure he demands,
and has our deepest sympathy.
No one can object to the second part of this Resolution, asall must admit that union
amongst all parties is desirable, as without cordial co-operation, this Church cannot be
supported in the liberal manner it should be.
The above, seconded by Mr. L. Wadeson, and carried unanimously.
Resolution Second.
Proposed by Mr. L. Wadeson, and seconded by Mr. T. Allen—
That Mr. Ricardo should be deputed to wait on the Rev. Mr. Haies, and obtain an
explanation of the latecharges ; and this Meeting, having a due sense of the high prin-
ciples and good feelings of the Trustees of this Church, shall cause such explanation to
belaid before them, and solicit their good Offices in favor ofthe Rev. Mr. Haies.
Proposed by Mr. Allen, and seconded by Mr. Nuttall—■
That Mr. Young’s name should be added after Mr. Ricardo’s in the above reso-
lution.
Resolution and Amendment carried unanimously.
Third Resolution.
Proposed by Mr. I. Nuttall seconded by Mr. James Nuttall, and carried —
That Mr. Ricardo and Mr. Young shall wait on the Trustees with the Rev. Mr.
Haies’ Explanation, and assure them of the good feeling entertained towards them by this
Meeting. ' ,
I ertify the above tobe a correct account of Meeting held in St. John’s Church,
Heidelberg, this day, September 12th, 1853.
WILLIAM HOPKINS, Chairman.


September 12tli, 1853,
Messrs. Ricardo and Young having called upon me, in consequence of a resolution
passed yesterday at the Meeting held in the Church by the Parishioners, asking to
obtain an explanation of late charges “made against me by two of the Trustees,”
I have great pleasure in complying with their request. The charges resolve
tliemaelves into this —discourtesy to the Trustees, in not recognising their proper
authority, by acting in Opposition to their formal protest. First, I may say,
that the discourtesy with which I am charged, was utterly unintentional, and
tliat I believe the Charge was made through inisunderstsnding my motives and
Position. My conduct has never been guided by the ruie of Opposition, but by
my own conceptions of what is right. In the matter of the Parsonage, I was not,
tili last week, aware that the Trustees had any power; which, if I had known, would
have been at once recognised; and I have no hesitation in saying, that had both the
Trustees given me the opportunity ofconversing with them at the time I desired, mauy
causes for their dissatisfaction would never have existed. I was obliged to think and
act without their ad vice; and I am sincerely sorry if any partofmy conduct has given just
grounds of otfence. My aira has ever been, to unite the elements of this parish in tho
bonds of brothcrly love. Whatever my opinions concerning the Situation of the Par-
sonage may be, I should never for a moraent have suffered them to create disturbance,
where it is my duty, as my wish, to produce peace.
As I feel it right to extend to the conduct of others the same favorable construction I
desire for my own, I am willing to believe, that in what they have lately done, they
have been actuated by their notions of duty. If they have real grounds for offence, I
apologise. If I have given them pain, I am now ready to express my regret. For my
own part, I feel that the Minister of the Gospel ought tobe more ready to forget differ-
ences than to remember; and to remember former kindness, rather than süßer their
memory tobe effaced.
In late matters, I feel deep thankfulness to all my friends, especially to those who
have taken the useful, honorable, and Christian Office of makers of peace. That they
may be successful is my hope, that they may be rewarded is my prayer.
FRANCIS HALES,
Minister of St. John’s Church,
Warringal.
Messrs. Ricardo and Yoirtig again called, after having seen
the Trustees, and stated that they refused to accede to any
terms of accommodation.
The inhabitants at once made a Subscription, and presented
me with the splendid gift of three hundred and sixty-six
pounds, to which I returned the following acknowledg-
ment;—
Parsonage, Warringal, Oct. Bth, 1853.
My de ab Mb. Wadbsoi« —
The munificent gift, frora yourself and fellow contributors, awaken in me strong
feelings of gratiflcation. This arises, not so much from the generous largeness of the
amount, as from the peculiar circumstances, that render it still more noble; it has
princlpally come from the laboring section of my congregation, who fully feel the value
of what they have hardly earned by the sweat of their brow, to part with it where they
feel no interest. My trouble has been lightened, for it is the token of sympathy from
those whose sympathy I value and desire. It is an overwhelming answer to our adver-
saries—spontaneous, because feit; convincing, because spontaneous; and it seals your
approval, at least, of my flve years’ ministry amongst you. All my anxieties—all my
difficulties, I shall not account to have been lost, if I have won your acknowledgment;
and of this you have given full and abundant proof. I value the offering for its amount,
which will save me from some of the distress to which I mlght eise have been subjected.
I value it still more, /oming, as it does, from the mass ot my people, whom my linger-
ing feelings of affection cannot even yet otherwise nor regard. The severities of my late
trials, the injustice and causeless malice of our enemies, the painful discovery of false
friends, though they be but few, make this expression of your goodwill come to my
heart —
« Come to my heart, as the refreshing breeze ln summer.”
While among you, my aim has ever been to make myself one with you—to give you
my heart with my work, and to imitate that righteous attribute of the Godhead in
being no respecter of persons, but in proportion as they gave their love and obedience
to their Heavenly Rather; and now that lam about to depart, you would make your-
selves one with me, in sending me away with my hands full, cheered by your appro-
bation, encouraged by your good wishes, able to look on the countenances of my little
family with less care in my own, and especially thankful that you have so far recog-


nised and approved the prlnclples of my public conduct, for which I am now
expelled.
On the subject of my late dlstresses I shall say nothing, as I am preparing my paper»
for publication.
Assure your fellow-contributors to the Memorial, that though sadness shade my
brow on accouut of the injuries of despotism, thankfulness overflows my heart for the
prompt, unwavering, maiüy and generous manner, in which they flocked to me will»
help or encourageraent.
Wherever I may be placed by the will of the Lord, the image of Heidelberg shall
not be effaced, nor us kindness forgotten, nor my love for the congregation I have lost,
know a diminution or change.
Yours most sincerely and affectionately,
Till the gathering and judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ,
FRANCIS HALES,
His unworthy Servant.
One good my expulsion has wrought; the Trustees seem
awakened to their duties. Even before the dispute, they
habitually deserted the Church, and neglected its welfare, for
which so late a zeal has sprung up within them.
Three of them placed a debt of three hundred pounds upon
it; while, as a contrast, Mr. William Perry, one of the
Parsonage Building Committee, himself advanced nearly five
hundred pounds for that building, and Mr. Wadeson and
myself upwards of one hundred each, without going to the
Bishop to borrow. Our repayment depends on the honor of
a bishop, the good faith of a manager of a bank, and the
honesty of the other gentlemen, their allies in the foregoing
proceedings.
I was urged by many to allow them to build me a church.
The most large and liberal offers of assistance were made;
but I did not consider it well to accept the proposal.
F. 11.
Geelong, September 27, 1853.
Mt dear Hk. Males —
Your letter of the 20th inst, came to hand yesterday, having been forwarded to me
here from Melbourne. With respect to the minutes of evidence, I directed Mr.
Miller, the Clerk of my Eegistrar, who also acts as my private secretary, to make a
copy of them for you, and you will probably have received it before this reaches you.
I will enquire about it on my return to Melbourne to-morrow.
I do not understand what you mean by asking for an exact copy of the judgment
read by me in the Church on the 3rd ult. What I read at the conclusion of the
examination upon that day, were the rough notes of the conclusions at which I and
my assessors had arrived. These conclusions were afterwards embodied in the judg-
ment, of which I forwarded to you a copy.
With regard to the money which yourseif and others have expended upon the par-
sonage, I will write to the trustees upon the subject, and have no doubtjthat they will
do what is right; but beyond this I have no authority to interfere.
I propose not to sign the revocation of your license until after next Sunday, if that
should be agreeable to yourseif. I have said nothing to you respecting your appoint-
ment to any other post, bccause you have not given me any intimation of your plans


or wishes with respect to the future. When I learn them I shall be ready to speak
with you upon the subject.
I am, my dear Mr. Haies,
Your faithful brother in the Lord,
C. MELBOURNE.
The following is my reply
My Lord—
My license was practically revoked for the last day of this month (30th September),
by your letter of the 18th August.
On last Sunday I preached my farewell sermon.
I shall ndl resign, but as I have no wish to occupy the pulpit of St. John’s Church
on sufferance, I shall be only preoarad to do so if none other can be obtamed, and
that your Lordship intimates yom wish. .
I am glad to have learned from your Lordship, that the copy oi the judgment,
transmitted to me, was not what was read in the church.
In the matter of the parsonape, I connot but consider your Lordship as morally
responsible for the payment of the debt.
I am, your Lordship’s obedient servant,
J P. HALES.
Right Reverend The Lord Bishop of Melbourne.
Up to the Ist October I was engaged with my parish
duties, and unable to make any preparations for removal tili
the eighteenth, I was detained in them, not by their
amount, but by my weariness succeeding a previous excite-
ment of months. I then sailed to Van Diemen’s Land to
procure a place for my family, and was absent exactly three
weeks. I did not state to the trustees when I should give
up possession of the parsonage, because they had given no
intimation of their intention to pay the debt due to Mr.
Perry, Mr. Wadeson, and myself.. Düring my absence the
following letter was sent: —
Bishop’s Court, October 27, 1853.
My dbär Mb. Halbs —
In a letter just received from the Trustees of the Church at Heidelberg, they say
“ We re°ret to find ourselves placed in a most painful Position as regards the parsonage,
Mr Haies and his family being still in possession thereof, and no intimation having
bee'n made to us, as to when he intends to remove therefrom, and we are apprehensive
that we shall be compelled to give him legal notice to vacate the premises.”
It gives me pain tobe obliged again, betöre you quit this diocese, to address you m
the lanoaxage of censure, but I am bound to point out the extreme impropriety of your
rctaining possession of the parsonage, without any communication with the trustees,
after you had ceased tobe the minister of the church. I am the more surpnsed at
your conduct, as you had previousiy expressed to me your unwillingness to fulhl
your ministerial duties “ upon sufferanceand I should have thought that you
would have boen at least equally unwilling to retain possession of the parsonage upon
sufferance. If you could not, without inconvenience, leave at the proper time, you
should have said so, and asked tobe allowed to remain two or three weeks longer, to
which I do not doubt the trustees would have readily consented. If you did not
choose to place yourself under an Obligation to them, you ought to have given up the
premises at once, whatever inconvenience it might have occasioned you. I write to
you thus in the hope that calm reflection will, at some future time, lead you, by God’s
grace, to perceive and lament the impropriety of your conduct in this and other
matters; and I remain as heretofore, .... . T
Your affectionate brother in the Lord,
C. MELBOURNE.


To which I returned the following reply;—
Warringal, Nov. 11, 185?,
My Lord-“
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your Lordship’s letter of the 27th ult., the last
I trust your Lordship raay find necessary to write. If otherwise, and that I can dis-
cover it from the superscription, I shall feel it my unpleasant duty to return your
Lordship’s letter unopened.
I am glad to leara, however, that the good hearted proposal to turn my family out
of the parsonage in such hot haste, did not originate with the trustees, as your letter
intimated, but with your Lordship yourself.
I am glad to find they both have so much gentlemanly feeling as utterly to repudiater
a proceeding of so very dubious a character. #
I am, with profound respect,
Your Lordship’s very obliged servant,
» F. HALES.
To the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Melbourne.
To the trustees I wrote :
Warringal, Nov. 11, 1853.
Gentlemen—
A day or two ago I received a letter of a very extraordinary nature from the Bishop,
relative to my removal from the parsonage. I trust my suspicions are not true as to
its mental causes.
I am glad to leam from Mr. Perry and Mr. Wadeson, that you have repudiated the
stränge proceeding ascribed to you, of complaining to the Bishop of my retention of
the parsonage, and of preparing to take legal steps for my ejection. I am glad you
have still so much good sense and gentlemanly propriety as to disown it —Dr. Martin
saying to Mr. Wadeson, “he knew nothing about it;” Mr. M'Arthur saying to Mr.
Perry, the kind hearted proposal was set on foot “by the Bishop.” Had I manifested
any desire tobe unreasonable in my delay, it would have altered the case. You know
that the moment the law was declared, I submitted ; the moment the sentence of my
removal was pronounced, I did not wait for compulsion, nor oppose the Bishop or
trustees in the matter of a pin’s-point. I trust that you also recollected the rules of
honesty, to pay the debt before you demand possession; and were therefore ashamed
to press your legal powers, while they were opposed to the rules of morality.
However that be, I have lost no time nor been unreasonable. I am now engaged
in preparations to leave; and hope, in less than a fortnight, to give up the key to any
one you name.
Though the rules of civility were once violated, I trust you will acknowledge the
receipt of this without delay ; and state whether you will pay th» timber account of
.£26 I sent ln, or whether it is your intention to leave it forme. I wish to settle it
at once.
Having heard a report that I darkened the east window “to aggravate” you, I
wish distinctly to deny its, smallest foundation in truth. I did nothing with the design
of “ aggravating ” you. This I did to lessen the painful effects of the red light from
the curtain. If you were displeased, that was your atfair, not mine. Mine was to do
what I thought right; the consequences I disregarded, but did not desire.
Yours respectfully,
F. HALES.
To the Trustees of St. John’s, Warringal.
The Bishop of Melbourne wrote to a Clergyman in another
diocese, asking him to exchange parishes with me. This
Clergyman wrote to his Bishop for permission. That Bishop
mentioned it to me. I stated that I had not resigned
Heidelberg, that I would not; and that I should take no
appointment whatever which would compel me to do so.
That anything he gave should come from himself without
reference to an exchange, and that I would accept no favor
whatever from the Bishop of Melbourne’s hands.
At a late meeting of the Clergy, the Bishop stated that
the Trustees had treated me very badly in not providing me
with a house, by which his conduct was extenuated.
THE END.
