

JXarrattoe
THE MUTINY
ON BOARD THE SHIP
WITH
LADY
Particulars of a Journey
THROUGH
PART OF BRAZIL;
% Setter,
DATED RIO JANEIRO, JAN. 18,1798,”
TO
THE REV. JOHN BLACK,
WOODBRIDGE,
FROM
iftXr. 3W(m Blarti,
ONE OF THE SURVIVING OFFICERS Or
THE SHIP.
11 —
SpaaridD
PRINTED BY JOHN BUSH.
oo>


TO
HIS EXCELLENCY THE CHEVALIER
D’ALMEIDA,
MINISTER PLENIPOTENTIARY FROM THE
COURT OF LISBON TO THAT OF
LONDON,
THIS NARRATIVE
IS HUMBLY INSCRIBED;
AS A
SMALL TESTIMONY OF GRATITUDE
TO THE
PORTUGUESE NATION.,
FOR
THE UNEQUALLED HOSPITALITY WITH
WHICH
Cljc barrator.
AND
HIS FELLOW SUFFERERS,
WERE RECEIVED AT RIO GRANDE AND THE
ISLE OF ST. CATHARINE, ON THE
COAST OF BRAZIL;
BY
HIS EXCELLENCY’S
MOST RESPECTFUL, MOST OBEDIENT, AND VERY
HUMBLE SERVANT,
THE EDITOR,


“ about noonwe fhall fail to night, or
“ to-morrow morning. I could fill quires
<£ of paper, if my time would permit, with
“ my adventures fince I faw you.”
When this circumftance is confidcred;
and that the narrator is a failor, —who has
not yet compleated his twentieth year—-
much accuracy cannot be expeded. The
reader, however, will find the language
fufficiently perfpicuous ; and if, in a few
inftances, the ftile fhould appear awkward
or uncouth, the critics will pleafe to recol-
lect, that it is not the production of vanity
rounding periods, to pleafe the public ear,
but of filial piety, with a rapid pen, fketch-
ing events, to relieve the anxious doubts
of parental tendernefs; perhaps it may
force the fevereft of the tribe, to draw the
back of his hand acrofs his evelid.
j
The narrative, being written only for
the


PREFACE.
A few days ago, I received a packet by
the Lifbon Mail, containing the Am-
ple, but affefting Narrative, with which I
now prefent the Public; accompanied by a
fhort letter, dated January 19, 1798, feven
o’clock, A. M. in which are the following
words, “ Inclofed I fend you a confufed
£C detail of our affair, and of my journey
ec over land; which you muft excufe, as it
et was written in hafle, and I have no time
“ to correft it, not even to read it over
(i again. The fhip is now dropping down
“to the harbour’s mouth :—I fhall embark
t( about


the perufal of myfelf, and that of my fon’s
particular friends, I have taken the liberty
of fupprelfing fome anecdotes of a private
nature.
Had he returned to Europe, been at
leifure to have revifed it, and to have fu-
perintended its publication; it certainly
would have been much more worthy of
public attention. Such as it is, I fhould
have thought myfelf to blame, on account
of thofe who may be particularly concern-
ed, if I had withheld it from the prefs.
The particulars relative to natural
hiftory, hunting, fifliing and cookery, in
the Appendix, No. 2. were written on fe-
parate pages. Some of them are curious,
efpecially the account of the lace and
balls. I have added fome notes from
Prefuming


Prefuming, that the reader will feel
fome intereft in the fortunes of this young
man; I have fubjoined, in the Appendix
No. 3. an extract or two from his letters
of a more recent date. On the Bth. of
June laft, he was again to fet fail from the
Cape of Good Hope, for Port Jackfon,
New South Wales, in the. Indifpenfable
South-feaman, with his friend Captain
Wilkinfon: the reader will join with me,
in wilhing, that it may be with more pro-
pitious aufpices, than his former voyage.
John Black
Woodbridge, Suffolk.
Oflobur, 23,. 1798,


NARRATIVE, &c.
Dear Father,
By my former letters * you were in*
formed that the foldiers embarked on board
the Lady Shore for Port Jackfon, New
South Wales, were in a ftate of mutiny, pre*
vious to our leaving England; and of my
fears, that, from the conduct ofthe perfons
to whole charge they were intrufted, the
fhip would never reach her deftination*
How far my conjeftures on that fcore were
well
* In a former letter dated May i, 1797, he fays. “ I iin-
“ cerely wilh (as do all the Ihip’s company) that we were now
“ lying at Port Jackfon, delivering our precious cargo, inftead
"of Torbay; for the foldiers are the moil difagreeable, mutinous.
“ fet of villains that eVer entered into a Ihip.—Two of the Ser-
“ jeants behaved fo ill that Captain Willcocks was obliged to.
“ infill upon their commanding officer confining them in Irons ;
“ for they have their owrf officers on board, and the captain and
“ officers of the fhip have no power over them, Major Semple
B
is


well grounded, has been proved by the me-
lancholy affair, which I am now about to re-
late to you.
On the Bth. of June 1797, as you al-
ready know, we left Falmouth, in company
with the Wcfl-India Fleet, with which we
parted, in about ten days. In the latitude
of North, we fell in with the Intrepid
of 64 guns, and the Eaft-India Fleet. The
foldiers were in general, during the padfage,
very quiet, until the mutiny took place;
which perhaps led poor Captain Willcocks
to be more unguarded than he ought to have
been. But, however, if thefe men were de-
termined
*' Is a quiet kind of man, and J have no doubt will behave like a
'' S ent,eman > and give us no trouble.—He was, feme days fince.
"applied to by two of the villains, to know if he would head
them in an attempt to feiae the fhip, after they fhould get well
" out to fea, and had left the convoy ; one of them at the fame
“ time telling him, this was the eighth time he had embarked
** f ° r Botan y Ba >’ without reaching it; and he was determined
‘he would not this time; and that he was fent on board by
" force from a police ofF.ce. This was immediately reported to
“ the officers of the Ihip, by Semple; in confequencc of which
“ f! 6 foldlers vovv vengeance againft him, threatening to throw
** him overboard the fixft opportunity,


tefmined to feize the fhip, it would havt
been impoffiblc, from the fituation of affairs
on board, to have prevented it. Their num-
bers were nearly treble thofe of the fhip’s
company, many of whom alfo were not
truft-worthy, as will appear in the coiirfe of
the narrative. The foldiers alfo were per-
mitted fire arms, and a confiderable quan-
tity of ammunition in their poffeffion be-
tween decks: the mutineers acknowledged,
that had it not been for this circumftance,
they never would have attempted the
feizure of the (hip ; and even, had they ,
attempted it without ammunition* there
was little probability of their fuccefs. But
as I have very little time, and only promi-
fed you the narrative* I fhall proceed in-
flantly to give you a faithful one* without
more comment, and let thofe who may here-
after perufe it judge for themfelves.
On the ift. of Auguft* about a quarter
paft four A. M, 150 leagues N. E. of Cape
Frio, I was awoke by the report of firearms,
and the cries of Murder. I inftantly jumped
out of bed and feized my piflols—at the
B 2 fame


fame inftant, Lambert burft into my cabin,
—I fired one of’my piftols, the ball of which
took one of the mutineer’s hats off’ his head,
without doing any other execution.
But I muff inform you of what had
happened previous to this.—Mr. Lambert,
the chief mate, who had the watch upon
deck, and who faw the men loading their
mufkets, and making ether preparations,
very imprudently, inftead of alarming the
captain and officers of the ftiip, went into
his own cabin and loaded his piftols; he
came out upon deck again, and walked
round the capftern, when he plainly per-
ceived the intention of the men, and return-
ed into his cabin, which they immediately
took the advantage of, by furrounding the
door and window: he feeing this, fired his
piftols ; the ball of one of them entered the
breaft of one of the mutineers (Delehay)
who immediately fell, but rofe again, and
fired feveral times, before he fainted from
lofs of blood. Several mufkets were fired
into Lambert’s cabin, and they charged up-
on him, through the window with theihbay-
onets


onets with luch torce, that they broke his
writing delk to pieces with the (tabs of their
bayonets; Lambert was wounded in feveral
places, but burft open his door, which they
had locked outfide, and ran into my cabin,
which was clofe adjoining to his, and had a
communication with the round-houfe. We
endeavoured to burft open that door, to get
to the captain’s ftate room ; while attempt-
ing to do this, feveral mulkets were fired into
O "
the cabin, and Lambert was again wounded
in the back. Finding it impoflible to en-
ter the round-houfe by this door, it being
locked on the>i other fide, and not being a-
ble to break it open, I ripped up the canvas
fcreen which divided my cabin from the
other part of the cuddy, through which
aperture Lambert immediately crept, and I
was myfelf following him, when he called
out that he was again ftabbed; and I per-
ceived a man Handing with his mufket pre-
fented at the hole, and the bayonet fixed.
At the fame moment Captain Willcocks ran
out at the cabin door, and received a ftab
juft below the heart, with a bayonet, and
fell; but immediately recovering himfelf,
he


he made a fpring at the after hatchway, and
received another ftab in the neck, with a
knife, and fell down the hatchway : a rnuf-
ket was fired after him in his defcent, but
■without taking effeft. Captain Willcocks
crawled into the great cabin, and in a faint
voice called out to Mr. Minchin, comman-
ding officer of the detachment, “ Your men
“ have feized the ffiip, and have murdered
“me.” and afterwards called out, .to give
up the Jhip ; which Mr. Minchin repeated
feveral times. Upon this the mutineers gave
three cheers, fired two of the great guns,
and a volley of fmall arms, and laid on the
,hatches'fore and aft.
Mr. Lambert finding the captain gone
from the ftate room, ran to the windows
abaft, and called out to Mr. Minchin, that
the foldiers had mutinied and were murder-
ing every body. One of the mutineers
who had undertaken to difpatch him, enters
cd the cabin and ffiot him in the head: he
groaned a few minutes and expired.
Knowing myfelf to be the only officer
of


of the (hip, left upon the upper deck, and
feeing their numbers as day began to dawn,
I determined to hand ftill where I was;
when I perceived a Man enter my cabin,
who twice pierced my bed with his bayonet,
and felt, as he thought, for my corpfe.—
What pen can defcribe ray feelings at this
moment!—Certain of Lambert’s death, and
fully convinced Captain Willcocks had not
efcaped—uncertain of the fate of thofe
below, and covered with poor Lambert’s
blood—certain of inftant death, if I attempt-
ed to move from the place where I flood,
as nothing but a canvas fcreen feparated me
from three or four of them, with their pie-
ces cocked, and ready to fire at any thing
they faw.—lt is eafier for you to conceive,
than me to defcribe my fenfations during
this interval.
I remained in this fituation fome time,
when I heard the furgeon’s voice, in the
cabin abaft, who was juft permitted to
come up, to drefs the wounds of the man
who was fliot by Lambert; at the fame time,
I heard one of them lamenting my death;
B 4 I


I was, therefore, determined to t r o out a*.
' ' i-j
mongft them, which I did ; when one of the
ringleaders took me by the hand, and told
me, they had gained all they wanted, and
that no more mifchief would be done..—He
laid, he was lorry for poor Captain Will-
cocks, for whom I eagerly inquired, and
was thrilled v/ith joy, when I heard he was
alive, and below in the cabin ; and that no
more lives were loft than poor Lambert’s.—
But my joy on this account, was very Ihort
lived, when I was permitted to go below to
join him ; as I conceived from the fituation
of the wounds, that they mull prove mor-
tal, if they had entered any depth. He
ftretched out his hand, and told me he was
happy to fee me file, for he had been told
that I was the firft killed; and this was be-
lieved throughout the (hip.—He begged we
would keep ourfelves quiet, and not at-
tempt any thing, as their numbers were fo
great; and, indeed, refiftance at this time
would have been vain, as two great guns
were pointed down each of the hatchways,
and the two forecaftle guns pointed aft,
loaded with broken glafs bottles, with men
having


having lighted matches in their hands, and
two (entries with fixed bayonets, at each?
and many others walking the quarter-deck#
All arms jwere demanded from the officers,
and Mr. Minchin was defired, to order the
ibldiers to give up their arms, which was
immediately done ; and all that were be-
tween decks were informed, that, if the leaft
refiftance was att empted, a general malfacrc
would take place; and this X firmly believe
was fully their, intention.
The furgeon, upon examining the
wounds of Captain Willcocks, entertain-
ed fome hopes, they were not mortal; but
immediately pronounced Delehay, the
Frenchman wounded by Lambert, a dead
man, —We were all ordered to remain
in the great cabin, at the door of which,
were placed two fentries—one without,
and the other within-fide, to prevent any
communication between us and the foldi-
ers amidfhips, and who had not joined
the mutineers ; the lattices of the cabin
door were kept open, and only one at a
time was permitted to leave the cabin* f i
About


About four o’clock in the afternoon,
of the 2d. Delehay died; Captain Will-
cocks was at this time much better, and we
entertained great hopes of his recovery;
but in the evening, he became reftlefs, his
fever increaled confiderably; at midnight
his ftrength was quite exhaufted, and a-
bout four in the morning of the 3d. he
expired without a groan.
The mutineers informed us, they in-
tended to bury the body of their comrade,
at eight o’clock, and defired we would inter
the corpfe of poor Captain Wilcocks as foon
as poffible; at the lame time telling us, we
might pay any honour we chofe, to the re-
mains of our late commander; but, how-
ever, this we thought proper to decline, re-
queuing nothing but that the Englilh Co-
lours might be hoifted, as ufual, half mall
high. They buried their comrade Delehay
at eight o’clock, and fired a volley of final!
arms on the occafion, affixing over him in
Englilh and French, this infeription, “II
fl a mart pour la liberie, —He died for
liberty.”
About


About ten, they defired we would all
attend upon the quarter deck, where we
found them, about twenty-five in number,
drawn up on each fide under arms, and the
failors on the fore part of the quarter deck.
One of the ringleaders, a Frenchman,
mounted the arm cheft, and, through the
interpretation of Major Semple, read the
rules they had adopted; and defired we
would follow them under pain of death.
They alfo informed us, they had appointed
a man of the name of Dubois, * alias Delis,
their captain; and another, Thomeo, alias
Thierry, their fecond captain ; that they
intended to give the officers the long boat,
and to put into her thirty-two people, as
foon as they had palfed the latitude of Rio
de Janeiro; —that we muft appear upon
deck but one at a time ; —that a fentry muft
always be kept in the cabin, where we muft
all mefs together, and another outfide the
cabin door, the lattices of which, they or-
dered to be kept always open.
At
* To the humanity of this than we certainly are much in-
debted for our lives.


At noon, we committed the body of
•ur unfortunate captain to the deep, from
the cabin windows; and I performed the laft
melancholy talk of friendlhip, that of read-
ing the burial fervice over him; at which,
all the officers attended, and two of the
ringleaders under arms.
On Saturday the 6th. they made a re-
quisition for us to furniffi them with linen,
and cloaths ; and the following day we had
the mortification to fee them all drelfed in
®ur apparel.
/
On Sunday afternoon, Enfign Prater,
having been feen talking with feveral of the
foldiers and failors, and having faid to one
of the feamen, that, it would be an eafy
matter to regain polfeffion of the ffiip, if the
feamen were unanimous; this the failor re-
ported to the mutineers, who immediately
came down with a guard, and carried Prater
upon deck, telling us they intended to hang
him : in about ten minutes they brought
him down again in handcuffs:—an additio-
nal guard was placed in the cabin ; and we
were


were informed, that the Conseil, < confining
of the fix ringleaders, which fat every night,
would decide upon his fate.—Poor Prater
kept us awake all night with his groaning;
they however, came down at daylight, and
releafed him; with a charge never to appear
upon deck again; adding, that if any officer
was feen converfing with either a foldier,
or failor, the guard had orders inftantly t®
ffioot him.
There was great danger in walking the
quarter-deck, not only from the malicious
intentions any of them might have, but
from their carelefthefs: they ufed to run
paft each other with cocked piftols in their
hands, and in their belts; and I frequently
wondered that many accidents did not en-
fue; the only one, I believe, which did hap-
pen, was that of a drummer boy being ffiot
through the leg. He was talking to one of
the mutineers upon the quarter-deck, when
by accident, one of the piftols in his belt
went off; the ball entered the calf of his
tegj juft below the ham, and came out by
the ancle:-—-the wound however was fobn
healed.


In this fituation \\ r e remained, nothing
material occurring, until Thurfday the
lith. when it was blowing frefh from the
N. E. and one of the foldiers fell overboard,
in the aft of walking a fwab in the fore-
chains, and was drowned, without their at-
tempting to render him any alfiftance, not-
withftanding he was feen fwimming a long
time:—the name of this unfortunate man,
was, I believe, Batt.
Saturday the 13th. about feven o’clock
in the evening, the wind having fallen, and
a high fea Hill continuing, the {hip was ta-
ken aback, and getting fternway, a heavy
fea pooped her, Hove in all the cabin win-
dows, and walked all of us that were fit-
ting in the cabin, forward to the door,
which had been walked open by the force
of the fea. Some of us attempted to get
upon deck, but found half a dozen mulkets
prefented at us, down the after hatchway,
with threats, that if we attempted to move
one inch, they would blow our brains out.
The fentries at the cabin door, who had
been wafhcd forward, were obliged to go
upon


upon deck, and explain our fituation, be-
fore we could get any afliftance.
Our fituation appeared now truly
dreadful: up to our knees in water, —our
trunks, beds, &c, all floating about, the ca-
bin windows, frames and every thing apper-
taining to them, wafhed compleatly away:
the (hip appearing to fettle fall by the ftern;
and had another fea pooped her, we njuft
inevitably have perifhed. The tiller which
traverfed in the cabin, was flying from one
fide of the flap to the other; the man who
was at the helm being alarmed, and nobody
to order him what to do:—not a word
that was faid upon deck could be under-
flood for the confufion of voices, except
that the (hip was going down; which might
be heard in feveral languages ; not one of
them feemed to know what to do. We,
however, after much application, got per-
miflion for two feamen to aflift us in pul-
ing in the dead-lights * abaft; which we
accomplifhed
* Strong ftiutters ufed in bad weather.


accomplifhed juft in time, as they had not:
been in two minutes, before two very hea-
vy feas ftruck her abaft; which would moll
probably have fent the fhip to the bottom,
had the dead-lights not been in. Vv e got
fome buckets, with which we bailed the
water out, as fall as polfible; as it was near
an hour before they cleared the pumps,
which were lituated upon the upper djpck ;
they however informed us, there was but
eighteen inches water in the pump well, it
not having yet found its way to the run*
the fhip was fo much by the ftern.
On Sunday, they told us, they intend-
ed to give us the boat on the following day,
--On Monday morning, they brought us
fome papers to fign; one a certificate, that
we would none of us ferve againft the
French, for a year and a day; and certifi-
cates, that the petty officers and feamen,
were detained by them, againft their incli-
nation, to'carry the fhip into the River de
Plata, We at firft objeffed to giving cer-
tificates for fome of them, as, from their
conduft, we had reafon to fufpeft, that
fome


Tome of them were acquainted with the
intention of the mutineers, previous to its
taking place • and becaufe, they had obey-
ed the orders of the mutineers, with much
greater pleafure and alacrity, than they
formerly did thole of the Captain and offi-
cers of the ffiipt they, however, infilled
upon our doing it; and we alfo refle&ed,
that a fignature, compelled by a bayonet
at the breall, and a pillol at the head, could
avail but little hereafter; for that was lite-
rally the cafe with us.
In return for thefe certificates, they
gave us one, that it was not on account of
any ill treatment, they had received front
the captain and officers of the ffiip, that
they had been induced to the meafures they
had taken; but on account of their having
been trepanned into the Britiffi fetvice,
without being able to obtain any redrefs;
they were very lorry they faid for the death
of the captain, and declared it was not
intentional.
About one o’clock in the afternoon*
C they


they hoifted out the boat, and began to
overhaul what little baggage the boat would
allow us to take, a great part even of this
they took from us ; and one of them had
the infolence, and I may fay wanton cruelty
to fay, W/ hat is the ule of their taking fo
much with them, they never will reach
“ fhore,” —and many others, though they
did not politively fay the fame, evinced by
their conduft, that they were of. the fame
opinion. They had previoufly informed
us, that we fhould have in the boat, a calk
of porter, as much cheefe, bifcuit, and wa-
ter, as we thought necelfary ; and a dozen
pieces of beef, &c. We now, however,
found, that our allowance of provihons was
far fhort of what they promifed.
They put into the boat, three fmall
calks of water, containing about ninety gal-
lons, four bags of bread, and three pieces
of fait beef. We, however, were fortunate
enough to evade the fearch of the fentries,
in the confufion, and got into the boat two
hams, two cheefes, and a fmall keg, con-
taining about four gallons of rum: we
begged


begged very hard to have two or three mlif-
kets, piftols, and cutlafles, in the boat;
but all our entreaties in this refpe6l, would
not avail; fo that, if we had landed upon a
barbarian coaft, we might have been torn
to pieces, without refiftance.
About half pall fix, having got every
thing into the boat, and all her rigging pro-
perly fitted, we dropped aftern, and made
fail to the N. W. to endeavour to get into
Rio Grande, being the nearell fettlement
on the Portuguefe coaft.—On muftering,
we found our number to be twenty nii;e
including women and children. *
We had the wind from the N. E. and
fine weather for the firft eight hours, after
which we had variable winds, with heavy
thunder, lightening and rain, and a tremen-
dous fea. In the morning, we fixed fome
ftanchions, and nailed a breadth of canvas
fore and aft, to keep off the fpray of the
C 2 fea
• See the lift in the appendix.


fea; and this we Found of infinite ufe after-
wards in keeping out the fea.—We took
for breakfafl, fome bifcuit and cheefe, and
a dram, with a cup of water; and at noon,
ferved out a dram and a (lice of ham, to
each perfon. In the afternoon, the wind
and fea increafmg, and thick weather, we
clofe reefed the mainfail. About midnight,
the fea flill increafmg, and a ftrong gale
from the weflward, we fhortened fail, and
flood under the jib, under which fire made
about four or five miles per hour.
At day-light, we took in the jib, and
let the reefed fore fail, hove to and found-
ed, found only ten fathoms water. At
“ j
eight in the morning, we fet a fmall fprit-
fail, we happened to have in the boat,
which made an excellent tryfail, and kept
in for the land, which we law about ten in
the morning, making in three fmall hum-
mocks : flood in for them, in hopes of find-
ing fome flicker for the boat; but found,
upon approaching it, to be only a low
fandy beach, and a tide drifting us fall
on fhore ;—flood out to the N, E. as we
found


found the breakers which were very high,
greatly endangered the boat, the water be-
ing very thick with the mud thrown up, it
being very {hallow. At noon, it cleared
up a little, and we had land in fight, from
about two points on the larboard bow, to
right aftern : we fuppofed ourfelves, from
the run we had had, to. be about twenty
miles to the fouthward of Port St. Pedro.
About three o’clock in the afternoon,
we faw the mad of a veffel, in Ihore ; flood
in for it, and found it to be a wreck, lying
in very {hallow water, and no land in fight;
but faw, in (hore of her, feveral mails, ap-
parently of veffels at anchor; and upon
handing a little farther in, found a low
fandy beach, all along between us and them,
without any vifible entrance: flood, how-
ever, direftly towards them, and about half
a mile to the N. E. of the wreck, found our-
felves furrounded by tremendous breakers,
which obliged us to lighten the boat, by
throwing overboard, fome trunks, and
other heavy articles. When in fliore of
thefe breakers, fmonth water; but,
C 3 fee : 'i£


feeing’ tremendous breakers a-head, and a
]ow landy beach, without the lead; appear-
ance of any entrance into the harbour, we
thought it expedient to come to : law a
houfe and llag-ftaff on the fhore ; hoifted
our jack at the mall head, which we were
obliged immediately to haul down again,
for fear of upfetting the boat; they how-
ever faw it, on the Ihore, and hoifted Por-
tuguefe colours.—When we were lying at
anchor, found a tide running at the rate of
four knots per hour ; and, by this means,
difeovered the bearing of the entrance of
the harbour.-—Several people came down
upon the beach, on horleback, and made
figns to us, to get under weigh, which we
did, and ran in under the forefail. We
found the breakers we faw a-head, to be oc-
casioned by a flrong tide, Setting over the
bar of the harbour; on opening the en-
tiance of the harbour, we faw, to our great
joy, a large boat full of people, coming to-
wards us: We had little ftdl fet, but° the
tide Soon drifted us within hail; they told
us, to follow them in : we did fo, and land-
ed at the houfe we had Seen, which we
found to be the harbour-mailer’s.


Tliefe people would hardly credit our
tale, as it had been blowing fo very hard;
and they could not believe it poflible a boat
could exift at fea, in fuch weather. Had it
not been for the wreck, which direfled us
where to find the harbour, we fhould moft
probably have perifhed in the night; as the
gale continued to rage with great fury, and
we were at the time we firft faw it, juft
handing off fhore for the night; as it be-
gan to look thick, and we were fearful of
lying to in fhoal water, the fea here broke
fo very high.—We all landed with the moft
grateful fenfe of the goodnefs of Proyidence;
and with aftonifhment at our miraculous
efcape ; for I can call it nothing lefs.
The mailer of this houfe, and his fa-
mily, received us with great hofpitality,
and made fires for us to dry and fhift our-
felves at. As for myfelf, I landed with all
my pojfejjisns on my back: my trunk having
been thrown overboard to lighten the boat
when in imminent danger, on one of the
bars of the harbour. —It however came on
fhore about four days after, upon the
C 4 beach*


beach, but was broke open and many va-
luable things taken out. I afterwards em
tirely loft it by the wreck of the veflel in
which I was embarked for Rio Janeiro, and
was again reduced to the pofleflion of lit-
tle more than what I flood in.
The pilot immediately 'fent a courier
to the General commanding the province,
with an account of our fituation ; our arri-
val having been previoufty announced by
fignal. The diftance up to town was about
three leagues, and, as it was blowing frefh,
the boat with the meffenger did not return
until the following morning about ten o*
dock, accompanied by a non-commiflioned
officer, who came from the General to in-*
form us, that he wiftied us, the officers,
immediately to come to town, as he would
wait dinner for us, and that our own boat
might follow us up the river with the re-?
mainder of the people. We embarked in
one of the pilots boats, viz. Lieutenant
chin and his wife, Enfign Prater and my-
felf, accompanied by Major Semple and
the fteward, whom we took as interpreter.
When


When we had got about half way to the
town, we were met by the General’s boat,
with the Fort Major, who was fent to eon-
dud us to town.
On our arrival at the landing place,
we were received by an officer appointed
for that purpofe, and by him conduced to
the Governor’s Palace, followed by a great
concourfe of people.
The General received us at the head
of his garrifon, and, after having afked a
few queftions, refpeding our capture, dif-
embarkation, and intended voyage, he in-
formed us, that every thing ffiould be done
for us that lay in his power ; that he would
provide us with a paffage to Rio Janeiro,
and in the mean time, that every thing
ffiould be done for us, and every attention
paid us, our fituation demanded—Not ex-
peding us up fo foon in town, he inform-
ed us, it would be fome time before his
dinner would be ready ; and that, as we
might wiffi to fee the town, he had appoint-
ed an officer to attend us for that purpofe;
/ but


but, however, this was ufelefs, as every one
feemed to vie who ffiould pay us the moll
attention.
The Colonel, Manoel Marquez de Li-
ma de Souza, Commandant of the town,
conducted us to his houfe, where we were
received by his amiable wife and family
with the moll fympathizing humanity.
Here the families of all the officers of the
garrifon were affembled to view ns, and
we each received as many careffes in the
courfe of an hour or two, as many people
receive in their whole lives.
About four o’clock, dinner was an-
nounced, and we fat down to table, with
all the officers of the garrifon,—about forty
in number.—The dinner was a very fump-
tuous one, confiding of three collides, of
about thirty diffies each, exclufive of the
defert, which was really an elegant one.
The fame ftile continued during our flay
in this hofpitable place. As we were riling
from table, the long boat, with the remain-
der of our companions arrived; and we ad-
journed


journed into another room, to take coffee,
whilft they feafted themfelves at the table
we had juft left.
After dinner, the General fent his Adju-
tant to fhew us where each was quartered.
The Colonel, and Lieutenant Colonel alfo.
accompanied us. The Lieutenant Colonel
being married, took into his houfe, —Mr.
Minchin, his wife, and two fervants : the
Adjutant took Mr. Drummond, and Major
Semple, into his houfe: Mr. Prater was
quartered by a Captain of dragoons, and
rnyfelf with a rich prieft.—An empty houfe
was procured for Mr. Murchifon (fecond
mate) and the fteward, and another for the
foldiers, and their wives,—But they did not
long remain thus fituated; for different
burghers took them into their houfes, and
treated them very kindly. The daughter
of one of the ferjeants, Hughes, was taken
care of by the Colonel’s lady, who during
our flay here, became very fond of the child,
and was anxious for her parents to leave it
with her, and even cried when the girl was
taken away.
On


On the following morning the 18th,
the General fent down an order to the vef-
fels, which were at the bar of the harbour,
waiting for a fair wind, to fail for Rio Ja-
neiro, to prepare to receive us on board ;
but they were all under-weigh, and forae of
them over the bar of the harbour : we were
of courfe obliged to wait for the' lading of
the other velfels up the river,
Nothing of import occurred until the
27th. when a velfel came down the river
from Port Alegre, a city about fixty leagues
from the mouth ; this velfel having feveral
palfengers on board, was able to take but
one of us.—Lieutenant Drummond, of the
Bombay Marines, being anxious to get to
Rio Janeiro, if polfible, to meet a fhip go-
ing to India, was accordingly pitched upon
as the perfon; and on the following day
embarked. By him I wrote to the fhip’s
broker, the captain’s agent, and my own
friends; to the former, James Duncan, Efq.
I fent a detail of the affair, with the names
of the mutineers, and thofe of the perfons
landed: thefe papers I got the other offi-
cers.


cers of tlie fhip to fign with myrdf; the
detail was drawn up in hafte, having fo
fhort notice of Lieutenant Drummond’s
going,, as only a few hours; however,
though the language might be incorred,
the circumflances were truly related.
4
On the firft of September, a report was
current in the town, of the arrival of the
Lady Shore at Montevideo ; this was fup-
pofed to have been brought by fome fmug-
glers from the frontiers ; but, however, it
could not be traced, and no certain intelli-
gence of it was received until the 13th. in
the evening, when a courier arrived with
feveral letters from different merchants at
Buenos Ayres, giving an account of the
fhip’s arrival; having been carried in by a
french frigate, which fell in with her, in
the mouth of the river On the following
day, I wrote to the furgeon of the fhip, a
young gentleman of ability in his profef-
lion, with whom I had formed an intima-
cy, and who was quite miferable upon our
leaving the fhip, being forcibly detained by
the mutineers.
On


On the igth. 20th, and 21ft. Enfigri
Prater, the foldiers and their wives, &c>
embarked in four different veffels, which
were ready to fail. On the 22d. I embarked
in company with Lieutenant Minchin and
wife. Major Semple, and four fervants, on
board a fmall veffel bound to Rio de Janei-
ro. On the the 24th, I left the veffel in
company with Major Semple, and paid a
vifit to the General, where we remained two
days : on the 26th. in the evening, we left
town in a boat, to go on board; but it
Coming on foggy, and blowing frefh, we
Were not able to reach the fhip; and thought
it expedient to land at a fmall place called
North town, on the north fide of the river.
We were conducted to the houfe of a rich
merchant, who a few nights before, had
been found murdered on the beach, having
been difcovered in fome unlawful amour ;
the next morning we went on board.
While we lay at the entrance of the
harbour, waiting (or a fair wind, to crofs
the bar, we conflantly amufed ourfelves
with fhooting. We found here a few par-
tridges,


tridges, and immenfe quantities of birds
fomewhat refembling the black plover, cal-
led in Potuguefe, quero, quero, I want,
from the cry. There are florks, ‘ fnipes,
and many other fpecies, I have not time
now to defcribe. Vultures greatly abound
here, and were it not for this circumftance,
the inhabitants would foon be killed by in-
fection ; the quantity of cattle they kill
merely for the fake of the fkin, leaving the
carcafes, being incredible. The number of
fkins exported annually from this river a-
lone, I was informed by one of the mer-
chants, is between 350000 and 400000. The
fineft horfe here does not coft more than,
fix or feven dollars, about twenty feven or
thirty two {hillings, each; and the price of
a fine bullock, is a dollar.—Many farmers
here polfeffed of thoufands of horfes and o-
ther cattle, are not pofleffed of five dollars,
ready money.
On Monday the 2d. the velfels all got
under weigh, about feven in the morning,
the wind being fair, but coming oh to blow
hard, none of the velfels got out, except
that


that in which Lieutenant Drummond was
embarked, which had been waiting for an
opportunity to get out upwards of a month.
On Tuefday, received a vifit from the Lieu-
tenant Colonel, and forae other officers, and
their ladies. On Wednesday, I joined
Major Semple in a requeft to the General,
to permit us to go overland, as we had now
laid fome time, and there was no profpeft
of a change of wind; and the pilot and
captains all agreed in the opinion; that
there was no probability of a fair wind till
the change of the moon, of which it want-
ed fome time.
On the following morning, we recei-
ved a very polite anfwerfrom the General,
that every thing ffiould be ready for us,
whenever we chofe to come to town; and
that we nTuft prepare ourfelves for many
hardlhips.
On Friday morning, at day-light, we
left the veflel, the wind and tide being both
unfavourable for croflingthe bar. We had
fcarcely got half a mile from the beach,
wheo


when the wind became fair, and the pilot
made the fignal for getting under weigh;
at eight they were all under weigh, about
fourteen in number. At ten, the wind fell,
all the veffels were over the bar, except the
one we had juft left; and finding a ftrong
current drifting her on the bank, fhe was
obliged to come to; —in half an hour a
light breeze again fprung up, from the S.
W. and they began to get under weigh :
at the infiant her anchor was loofened from
the ground, the wind increafed to a ftrong
gale, and before they could make fail, and
get in the anchor, the current, and wind
drove her upon the bank;—the fea having
rifen, and the wind (fill increafing, they
gave up all hopes of faving her, or her car-
go ; and with tlyeir own boat, and the aflift-
ance of the pilot’s boat, they all got fafe on
(here, with their trunks, and whatever elfe
belonged to them; but my trunk, which
contained my journals, * and the greater
D - part
* Amongft thefe was his journal of a former voyage in the
Walpole Indiaman, which he had kept with great accuracy.,
and mary drawings, &;c. Ed:i:r>


part of wliat remained of my little property,
as I had only taken out what was indifpen-
fably neceffary for my journey overland,
was unfortunately left, by the perfon to
whofe care I had entrufled it, to the mercy
of the winds and waves ; and I again found
myfelf polfelfed of little more than what I
flood in. The fhip filled in the courle of
the day.
The fecond day, it flill continuing to
blow, her mails went over the fide, and
foon after ffe went to pieces. At the time
the velfel ftruck, I was about a quarter of
a mile from the beach, and Major Semple
•with me, mounted ready to go to the town.
We immediately rode down to the Tea fide,
and could fee the people difembarking from
the velfel; but could not procure a boat or
canoe of any kind to go to her ; and, being
informed, that the General would wait din-
tier for us, we fet off for the town.
On our arrival, we found the General
had that moment received a letter from the
Governor of Montevideo, informing him
of


of the arrival of the (hip at that port;—that
all the men found on board, were in con-
finement : —that the women were in differ-
ent burgher’s houfes* throughout the town;
at the fame time requefting, that if the offi-
cers, who were reported by the mutineers
to have been turned adrift in the boat, had
arrived in his government, he would re-
queft us to fend a report of the affair, with
a lift of the mutineers names ; this I inftant-
ly did; at the fame time, requefting the
governor, if it lay in his power, to reftore
me my private property left in the ffiip.—
Mr. Minchin was the only officer befides
myfelf left here: he alfo made his feparate
report.
On the 3d. of October, every thing be-
ing provided for our journey, we left town
in the evening, after having taken an affefli-
onate and grateful leave of the worthy Ge-
neral, the Colonel and his amiable family,
D 2 and
* I have fince been informed, that only the pretty girls are
in burghers’ houfes, the reft are in prifon.


and the other officers of the garrilon, by all
of whom, during our ftay here, we had
been treated with the greateft kindnefs.
On the following morning, at feven
o’clock we left North town, feven in num-
ber* viz. Major Semple and myfelf, two
fervants, two dragoons as guides, and an
Indian to take care of the baggage horfe.—
About eleven o’clock, we arrived at a vil-
lage, called Eftreito, and dined at the houfe
of the Padre, (pried) of the village ; who
had invited feveral friends to meet us.
About two in the afternoon, we recom-
fnenced, our journey, having procured
freffi horfes ; about fix in the evening we
reached the houfe of a captain of auxiliary
cavalry, having advanced about eleven
leagues this day. After having taken a
cup of coffee, we amufed ourfelves by
walking round his gardens, which were ve-
ry well laid out: we returned to the houfe,
and found a very fumptuous fupper prepa-
red for us, to which we hit down alone, —
the family being all in an afflibled (late, on
account of the recent death of a near rela-
tion ;


tion : this at leaft was the excufe for their
non-appearance, but one of' the fervants
gave us a hint, that, the young man, the
merchant who was murdered, (which I have
before mentioned) was the caufe of their
uneahnefs. A great fuperfluity was provi-
ded for our fupper, and at lead twelve or
fourteen difhes went away untouched; a-
raong which were a roafl turkey, pig, ducks,
fowls, mutton, pork, and beef, cooked dif-
ferent ways ; fweetmeats of all kinds, and
good wine,
After taking a good night’s reft, upon
good beds, eating a hearty breakfaft, and
taking leave of our hofpitable landlord, we
fet off about feven in the morning; and a-
bout eleven arrived at a hut, inhabited by
a poor farmer, who killed a fheep for us,
part of which we ate for dinner ; little elfe
however was to be procured here. At this
hut, the crew of a fouth-feaman, that was
wrecked upon the coaft fome years ago, ar-
rived ; and were fubfifted for a long time.
One of them is now fettled a few leagues up
the country; and is baptifed in the Roman
D 3 Catholic


Catholic religion, the General having flood
fponfor for him, and taken a great deal of
notice of him ; but I underhand he is fuch
a drunken, worthlefs fellow, he will never
do any good for himfelf.
'After repofmg ourfelves a little in the
heat.of the day, we again began our march,
and in the evening reached the houfe of
a Captain of dragoons, where we j were
hofpitably received, fumptuoufly entertain-
ed, provided with fupper, wines, fruits, &c.
good beds, a hearty breakfaft, and fupplied
with a quantity of to carry with
us, in cafe of our not meeting with good
fare on the road.
On the morning of the 6th. we again
fet forward, and dined at the houfe of a
prieft, in a village called Moiftardio; where
we met with a kind reception,—dined, and
continued our day's journey to Nalftancia
de Pavoz, a royal farm, where we found
but bad fare and lodging.
On the yth. dined at the houfe of an
auxiliary


auxiliary captain ; a tolerable good dinner,
and about eight in the evening, reached
the houfe of a farmer, who was alfo an
auxiliary Lieutenant, who received us with
great hofpltality, and furnifhed us with good
beds: —the fpot is a mod delightful one.
On the Bth. we again fet off, and dop-
ed about one in the afternoon, at a poor
farm, where we had recourfe to our wallet
fora dinner, not being able to procure any
thine; more than a bowl ol milk. At fun fet
we arrived at another poor farm, where we
found bad accommodations and fare.
Set off, in the morning, at our ufual
hour; and about ten o’clock forded a river
with our horfes; and, about twelve dopped
at fome fifhing huts, on the bank of the
river, near its opening to the fea; dined
from the contents of our wallet; and forded
the river a fecond time. About five in the
afternoon, we reached a hut upon the fide
of a mod beautiful lake, bordered with ro-
mantic groves: we here procured a few
eggs and milk, repofed ourfelves upon our
D 4 faddle.


faddle-cloths, in an unfinifhed hut; and in
the morning, after a hearty breakfaft of
eggs and milk, again began our march.
About eleven, we flopped at a farm
houfe, to refrefh ourlelves and horfes, and
continued our march to Torres, a fmali
Fort, on an eminence, upon the fea ftiore,
being the frontiers of the government of
Rio Grande. It confifls of a few mud huts,
two guns, and ten ifien, commanded by an
old infantry Lieutenant, who informed us
he could call together five hundred men,
in a few hours time. The Lieutenant who.
was much indifpofed, appeared to be a man
of intelligence;—his two daughters, who
were lovely girls, played delightfully upon
the viol, harp, and lute; —the old man re-
gretted much, that his two fons were gone
fome diflance, to fpend a few days, as they
had never yet feen an Englifhman,
Not being able to procure frefh horfes
here; we were obliged to reft a day, to re-
frefh thofe we had with us;—the dragoon,
bur guide, being alfo much indifpofed. We
were


were anxious to proceed as faft as poflible,
but ftaid here with lefs reludance, than we
fhould have done in any of the places,
through which we had paffed, as our foci-
ety was an amiable one. —Our beds, though
not luxurious, were clean and comfortable.
Having; relied here one day, and our
O - '
guide being much better, we recommenced
our journey, along the fea fhore, on the
12th. at day-light. At noon we flopped at
a hut, about three miles from the (here fide
where we procured a little rum, and fome
milk, which was all we could get; of this,
and a little ferina we had in our wallet, we
made a dinner:—we repofed during the
intenfe heat of the day, and again fet off.
About feven in the evening, we croffed
a river, on the bank of which we found a
hut, occupied by ten or a dozen foldiers :
this was called a guard-houfe. There was
alfo another hut, dole adjoining, inhabited
by a frenchman, upwards of fixty years old,
be had been about twenty years in the
country, and was married to a native of it,
by


by whom he had feveral children ; he had
been fo long without hearing, or fpeaking
his own language, that he had almoft for-
gotten it, and could fcarcely make himfelf
underflood in Portuguele. This man pof-
felfed all the charafierifticks of the country
which gave him birth : he was continually
grinning, and jumping about, making gri-
maces like a monkey, at feeing Europeans.
We could procure nothing at this place,
but fome dried, {finking fifh, which was all
they had to fublift on ; they had not even
their miferable fubfiflute for bread, ferina.
nor a drop of rum. We, however, were for-
tunate enough to have brought with us,
from the hut where we dined, a horn full
of rum, for fear of want; and having re-
galed ourfelves with a glafs of grog, and a
handful of ferina, which by good chance
we happened alfo to bring with us ;we
laid down upon our faddle cloths, but the
rain, which came through the roof of the
hut, rather incommoded us.
At feven the next morning, we began
our journey; but forae of the horfes taking
fright.


fright, and not being able to recover them*
without fome difficulty, we did not leave;
the bank of the river, until about eleven
o’ clock.
At this place we purchafed fome fiffi,
from the men, who caught them, in the cu-
rious manner I have deferibed in the ap-
pendix ; but not being able to procure
any thing for breakfaft, we flopped at S
hut, about two leagues diftance, where we
procured a little milk, fome ferina and
cheefe, of which we made a truly delicious
breakfaft, being quite faint for want of
fome refreffiment, not having tailed any
thins for above twelve hours.
About one in the afternoon, we flop-
ped at a duller of huts, where we get the
fiffi we bought from the canoe in the morn-
ing dreffed for dinner ; and, having procu-
red a little rum, made a very hearty repaft-
After dinner, fet off for the town of
Laguna, which they informed us was not
more than five leagues diflant j and that we
might


might reach it at fun fet; but having tra-
velled a quick pace, until that time, found
our guides had erred in their diftance, be-
ing now at leaft four leagues from the town ;
fevcral mountains of fand, and a broad riv-
er to crofs; we therefore left the fea fhore,
from which we ftruck off. about two miles,
into the country, for the houfe of a Padre,
which we found unoccupied, except by the
flaves of the farm, from whom we purcha-
fed foms fowls, and made a tolerable good
fupper, made our beds as ufual, and after
a good night’s reft and hearty breakfaft, fet
off for the town of Laguna. We now
for the firft time, excepting at Torres , found
fome mountains to crofs: after having paf-
fed feveral immenfe hills of fand, found our-
felves on the edge of a rocky precipice, of
a tremendous height. Our guides having
miffed tbe traft, and being loth to traverfe
again the tedious mountains of fand we had
juft crofted, we examined for that part of
the precipice, which appeared the mod
pafi’able: we difmountcd, and all got fafe
down. Our horfes, which were almoft in
a ftate of wildnefs, were fure footed, and
got


got down very well, although we could
not induce them to defcend without much
flogging.
About two in the afternoon, we arri-
ved at Laguna; and dined at the houfe of
the Commandant of the town, a Major of
auxiliaries. Not being able to procure
horfes in time to purfue our journey this
evening, to the next accommodation, we
took up our quarters for the night.
At this place the dragoon who came
with us as guide from Rio Grande, left us,
and returned home; by him we wrote to
the General, and informed him of the plea-
ling difappointment we had met with, in
regard to the hardlhips he had prepared us
to encounter in our palfage; inftead of
which, we had been very agreeably enter-
tained on the way, having only fulfered a
few trifling inconveniences.
On the following morning, Sunday,
we mounted, and at noon arrived at a fmall
village, called Nova Villa, fituated upon
the


the fide of a fertile hill, and furrounded
with orange groves: —this fpot I thought
one of the mod delightful I ever beheld.—
Having refrelhed ourfelves here, and pro-
cured fredi guides, and horfes, we conti-
nued our route. This afternoon’s journey
was, to our horfes, the mod tedious we had*
yet met with, —to ourfelves, it was fome-
thing new, though not without danger:—
our march lay through feveral very exten-
(ive woods, which fprang out of immenfe
rocks: at one moment, we appeared to
mount into the Iky, at another, to be buri-
ed from the world, in an abyfs, apparently
the receptacle of none, but the inhabitants
of the woods—where the rays of the fun ne-
ver enter, to cheer the fatigued traveller;
few of whom, however, are to be found
here. At the clofe of the day, on each
fide, the wild beads warned us of their ap-
proach, by an inceffant roaring; though
none of them, or of the enormous fnakes,
which our guides informed us, infeded
thefe woods, came within fight.
We left thefe woods, about fun fet y
impreffed


impreffed with the moft fublime ideas of
the works of nature; —we here beheld im-
menfe forefts, compofed of the moft {lately
trees, the timber of which was as hard as
the rock from whence they fprang—having
no foil to take root in except the crevices
of the rocks.
Soon after the fun was down, we ar-
rived at a whale fifhery, fituated in a fmall
bay, about eleven leagues to the fouth of
the ifle of St. Catherine. The fuperinten-
dant of this place, who appeared a man of
intelligence, and inhabited the beft houfe
we had yet feen in the country, received us
with great hofpitality. In the evening, he
conduced us round the works, which were
well laid out, and built. They complained
bitterly here of the Englilh, and American,
fouth fea whalers who fifh upon this coaft.
The fuperintendant informed us, that the
fir ft year he fettled here, which was about
thirteen years ago, they killed upwards of
three hundred whales, but that the laft
feafon they killed only thirty two.—lndeed
complaints of the fame thing, are made
noon


upon the whole coaft where the filheries
are fituated.
He advifed us not to attempt the road
on the following day, as it was a very dan-
gerous one, having nothing but tremen-
dous rocks to pafs, and thcfe chiefly cover-
ed with woods like fome of thofe we had
already pafled; he very kindly offered to
lend us one of the whale boats, to go to
St. Catharine’s, where our journey by land,
was to end.
We, accordingly, the following morn-
ing, having taken leave of our hofpitable
landlord, fet off at day-light, in one of then-
whale boats, and reached St. Catharine’s
about two o clock.
We were upon our arrival, conduced
to the palace, and having produced our
letters, from the General at Rio Grande,
we were kindly received by the Governor;
and had each feparate appartments allotted
us in the palace. We found here part of
the Portuguefe fquadron, Rationed on this
coaft.


coad, confiding 1 of four (hips of the line,
three frigates and a brig, under the-com-
mand of .Admiral Am onio Jamiatio,' who
received us with great pohtenefs, and 'very-
kindly offered us a paflage to Rio Janeiro,
for which place he would fail in about a
month.... • - : -
We were very well Entertained during
our day here; and left the place, with the
Fleet, on the 9th, of November - Major
Semple in the Admiral’s (hip, and myfel£
on board one of the hue of battle fhips*
commanded by Captain Thompfdrt, art
Englifhman, at whole requed I was placed
there—the Admiral having offered meiAc-
commodation in his own fhip.——F canhof
pafs the name of Captain Thompfon, J with-
out acknowledging my gratitude to : that
gentleman for his favours, from the fird day
I faw him, until now. N v ’
We arrived at Rio Janeiro on the 19th.
Minchin having arrived the day before us,
from Rio Grande; the red of our compa-
nions had :of courfe arrived fome time,
E Mr,


Mr. Minehin, arid foldiers, received here-
from the court their Engiifh pay:—the offi-
cers of the fhip, &c. receive no more than
twelve vinteres, about thirteen pence ftir-
Ijng, Folia ; fo that, if we had not bad Tome
little money in our pofieffion, we fhould
abfolutely have flarved. 1 myfelf have
not received one farthing allowance from
the court, nor fhall I now.
If we wait to go home, with the con-
voy, which is now preparing to fail, it will
be at leaf! eight months, before we can
poffibly, any of us, reach England. Sick
ft the thoughts of being idle, fo long a time,
I have embarked on board the Indispensable
of London, a South-feaman, and Letter of
Marque ; by which means I think I fhall
reach England fooner than by any other.
The fecond mate, Murchifon, adopted the
fame plan, and left this place about fix
weeks fmee, in a fhip, called the Tobago.
‘We are well armed, and if we fhould
capture a Spanifh prize, running down the
coafl, I fhall take her over to the -Cape of
Good


Good Hope: this is my principal reafon
for going in the fhip. lam (hipped as
Navigator, there being no other Perfon
on board, except the Captain, acquainted
with navigation.
I embark to morrow: I hope my Mo-
ther, family and friends, &c. &c. are well.
I remain.
Dear Father,
Your affeftionate Son,
John Black.
Rio Janeiro,
Wednesday night, 12 o'clock.,
January 18, 1798.
E 2 Appendix


APPENDIX, No. 1.
CONTAINING THE LISTS OF PERSONS, REFER-
RED TO, IN THE FOREGOING NARRATIVE.
the underCgned, hereby certify,
that the following is a correft lift of the
Mutineer’s names, who bore arms in feizing
the drip. Lady Shore, on the ift. of Auguft,
1797, a bout 150 leagues N. E. of Cape Frio,
Frenchmen and Germans;—Du-
bois, alias, Delis, appointed Captain after
the feizure; Thomeio, alias, Thierry, ditto
fecond ditto; Laureche, OJficier de la force
Arms; Delehay, killed; Malleo, Secreta-
rie; Mallicott, OJficier de la force Arme ;
Le Garshe, Lockart, Crippong, OJficier de
la force Arme ; Greville, Wolfe, killed
Mr. Lambert, chief Mate ; Prevoft, one of
the Ship’s Company', who killed Captain
Wilicocks. Irishmen ; —Conden, Kea^'
ing, Lynch, M’Ginnis, Keating, KellV£
Sheridan. Englishmen :—Church, New,
Deviling, Pyott.
Witneft


Witnefs our Hands, this 22d. day of
Auyuft, 1797.
r 7 7 7
I jOtlll jjcdt'f'lj 1 X.li cd •
Signed, <; Simon Murchison, 2d. Mate,
\Gerard Drummond, 3d. ditto.
Port St. Pedro, Brasil.
NAMES OF THE PERSONS LANDED IN
THE S O AT.
Of the Ship : —Mr. S. Murchifon, fe-
cond Mate; G. Drummond, third ditto;
J. Black, Purfer; W. Lewis, Steward; M.
Richards, Boy, Lieutenant and Adjutant
Minchin and wife, Commanding Officer of
the Detachment; Enlign W. Prater ; Ser-
jeant Hughes, wife and two children; Ser-
jeant Barnes and wife; Corporal Morrifon
and wife; Corporal Lipfcomb; James
Welffi, Private, wife and child; James M’
Cleod, Private. Thomas Morrifon, Paffen-
ger, wife, and two children. Ann Willi-
ams, Mary Offiey, and Mary Berry, female
Convitls: J. G. Semple Lille, male ditto.
E 3 Appendix,


APPENDIX, No. 2.
CONTAINING SOME DETACHED PARTICULARS
RELATIVE TO NATURAL HISTORY, HUNTING,
FISHING, AND COOKERY.
IN our journey along the fhore, we found
feveral whales, lying dead upon the
beach; and fome turtle, of the hawks-bill
fpecies *; and alfo, many ermine ducks. —
This bird is about the fize of a common
duck: its neck very fhort and thick ; its
belly white; and all its upper part black.
Its wings, which however rather deferve
the name of fins, are fhaped like the fore
legs of a. feal, and are of the fame texture ;
the under part of them is a light fpeckled
brown;
* Turtle are ufually diftinguilhed by failors into four kinds;
the trunk turtle, the loggerhead, the hawks-bi!!, and the green
turtle.
The hawks-bill turtle is the leaft of the four, and has a long
and fin all mouth, fomewhat refembling the bill .of a hawk. The
flefh of this is very indifferent eating ; but the fliell ferves for
the moft valuable purpofes. This is the animal that fupplies
the tortoife-ftiell, of which fuch a variety of beautiful trinkets
are made. Buffin.


brown; the upper part dark ; the feet web-
bed, and of a dirty yellow colour.
We faw many oftriches upon our way.
Thefe birds are fo extremely fwift, that the
fleeteft dogs, which are here trained for the
purpofe of hunting them, frequently are
unable to overtake them; and even when
they are able to approach them, the birds
will face about, and attack the dogs, which
are of a very large and favage fpecies, with
the greateft fury; in which cafe the hunters,
who purfue them on horfeback, in general
take the opportunity to fhoot them. We
faw many burroyrs in the earth, in our jour-
ney, which we learnt v/ere made by the of-
trich, for the retreat of its young; and when
purfued, it diverts the attention of the hunt-
ers to itfelf, until it gives time to its young
to fecrete themfelves in thefe holes. They
make their nefts in the open plain and lay
from twenty to fixty eggs.
On our fecond days march, we found
the carcafe of a Tamandua, apparently juft
killed; and by the quantity of hair and
E 4 blood.


blood, which was-feathered.all around it*
we fuppofed that it had died, in combat
with fome other bead ; though the inhabi-
tants of this country, and, I believe, natu-
ral hidorians fay, that it never engages the
tiger, which is the mod powerful animal,
and which much abounds in this country,
but it ends in the death of both. It never
begins the attack, but when attacked, it
throws itfelf upon its back, in which date,
they fay, it is impregnable, and receives
the attacker in its fore paws, and never lets
go its hold, but with life. In this manner
ib holds the tiger until they both expire for
want of fudenance.—We faw feveral.*
- They
* South America produces three fpedes'of animals, with u
long fnout, .a. fmall mouth, and no teeth ; their tongues of a
round form, are remarkably long, with which they ;penetrate
into the ants nefls, and draw out the ants, which is their prin-
cipal food. The firft of thefe ant-eaters is that which the & ra-
dians call Tamandua quacu, or great Tamandua, to whom the
Trench fettled in America have given the name of Tamanoir.
The fecond of thefe animals is that which the Americans call
Tamandua. The third of thefe animals is that which the natu-
ralifts of Guiana call Onatiriouacu j ' and the French Fourmillier
or


They hunt the Tiger in this country
with dogs of great fiercenefs and fize; and
if the hunter is himfelf attacked, which is
frequently the cafe 1 , he receives the beaft
on his left arm, round which is wrapped a
large coarfe cloak, and with his right hand
ftabs the beaft in its breaft.
At Torres, we were fhewn a fmall rock,
about two leagues off the Ihore, which, by
the help of a good telefcope, we perceived
was covered with feals of an immenfe lize.
They informed us, that when the water was
fmooth, it was cuftoraary for them to go
and
or ant-eater. All three feed upon ants, and fuck honey and
other vifcous fubftances.
The Tamanoir—great Tamandoa—looks at a difiance like a
'rreat fox, and for that reafon fome travellers call him the Ame-
rican fox : he is ftrong enough to defend himfelf againft a large
dog, and even, a jaguar; when he is attacked, he fights Hand-
ing on his hind legs like the bear, and makes ufe of his fore-
daws, which arc murdering weapons, for his proteftion ; after-
wards he lies on his back to ufe his hind legs, and in this fixa-
tion he is almoft invincible, fights with obftinacy till the laft ex-
tremity ; and even after he has put his adverfary to death, he
keens hold of him a long time. Thefe three animals are natives
of the hottefl climates only of America. Buffm.


and kill a hundred feals in two or three
hours. They (hewed us feveral fkifts of
thefe animals, the largeft I ever beheld.—
Many of them were about feven feet long,
and five broad, and as coarfe as a bull’s hide.
At Guardas, we faw a very curious
3 j
way of fifhing. At the mouth of the river,
the fhoals of fifli are fo very thick, that the
men go out in canoes, and, by beating the
furface of the water with their paddles, they
alarm the fifh, which immediately fpring
out of the water, in all directions, and in
a (late of confufion: great numbers fall in-
to the canoes, and by this method, they
procure as many fifh, as a canoe will float
with, in a few minutes. I was myfelf wit-
nefs to the filling of fix or feven canoes, in
lefs than twenty minutes.
This country abounds with immenfe
j
herds of deer, and a confiderable quantity
of partridges. We (hot feveral partridges at
Rio Grande; and an Indian, who accom-
panied us, in our journey, killed one with
his Balls
The


The Lace and the Balls, are two very
curious inftruments, without which the in-
habitants of this country never travel, the
former is a very ftrong well plaited leather
thong, about thirty or forty feet in length;
at one end, is a ring of iron, through which
the other end is put; the man, who wilhes
to catch a beaft holds this ring, with a large
coil of the thong, in his right hand, and
having feveral coils in his left hand, ready
to veer away upon; he fwings the coil in
his right hand feveral times over his head,
and, having fingled out his beaft from a-
mongft the drove, he throws it over its
head, the ring being made large fo as to
draw eafily, immediately clofes and fecures
the animal by the throat. The operation
is the fame, whether on horfeback or on
foot; but in the latter cafe, they are obliged
to drive the herd into a large pen for the
purpofe, where they fingle out the fteed
they want to take, or cow they wilh to kill.
The latter inftrument, conftfts of three
balls, united together by a ftrong plaited
thong, of the fame texture as the former :
two


two of the balls are about nine inches in cir,
cumference each; the other, which in uling
is held in the right hand, is about fix inches.
They are made of a very hard wood, co-
vered with Ikin, and united together by a
ftrong leather thong, which at a certain dif-
tance from the ball held in the hand, di-
vides into two thongs of equal length, to
give play to the other two balls which are
fixed to the extremities. With this they
bringdown, horfes, cattle, and wild beads,
when they cannot approach them near e-
nough to ufe the Lace.
Their manner of ufing it is this: the
hunter purfues the animal he willies to take,
and if he perceives that it is fwifter than the
horfe on which he is himfelf mounted, he
exchanges the Lace for the Balls ; holding
°. . °
the final! ball in his right hand, he fwings
them feveral times over his head, to take
the proper direftion, and give it force; if
he wilhes not to maim the animal, which is
always the cafe in taking a horfe, he throws
the balls with fuch dexterity, and fuch a
degree of force, as only to entangle its legs;
but


but if the animal he is in purfuit of be a
wild beafl, or a cow, he wifhes to kill, he
then throws the balls with fuch force as to
break its legs, or at leafl to maim it fo
much, that it cannot pofhbly efcape.
The manner of cooking meat in the
inland parts is this; beef they fcald the hair
off, as we do off our pork, and cut it up in-
to joints with the fkin upon it: they put a
piece of flick through it, and place it over
a fife, made in a hole in the ground, I have
tailed fome dreffed this method, which was
delicious, as the fkin preferves the gravy in
the meat. Their fowls they alfo cook with
a fire in a hole in the ground.
This country might be rendered the
pa'radife of the world, it is fo very fruitful.
Some of the women vie with the Otaheitean
Ladies in lewdnefs : their lafcivious dances,
geflures, and exprefhons, are beyond con-
ception ; they have in general beautiful
eyes and hair; but they feem ruflic r . heavy;
and awkward to an Evgli/hman,
Appendix^


APPENDIX, No. 3.
CONTAINING SOME EXTRACTS OF LETTERS OF
A MORE RECENT DATE.
Cape of Good Hope, April 15, 1798;
Laft night, I arrived at this port,
with the Spanifh fhip, La Union, under
my charge. On the 20th. of January,
we failed from Rio Janeiro; on the 19th.
of February, fell in with and captured *
the above fhip, La Union, of Malaga, from
the river Plate to Lima, on the coaft of
Peru, having on board thirty-feven men
and mounting ten guns.—The Indifpen-
fable, mounts fourteen guns and carries
thirty-two hands: fhe put on board ten
hands, including myfelf, and leftfevenof the
prifoners, to afTifl us in working the fhip.
On the 15th. of March, in longitude
about 40° W. and latitude 37 0 S', fhe part-
ed company with us, to make the beft of
her way to this port, where fhe arrived a-
bout a week ago. We faw the land laff
* We gained our conqueft without lofs of blood on either fide.


funday evening, (Eafter) but having been
baffled, with light airs and calms, and were
not able to get in till laft night.
We have brought her to a good mar-
ket, as her cargo, which confifts of tallow,
candles, dried beef, &c. is much wanted
here. I fuppofe ffle will fetch about 12000/.
but is impoffible to make any near valua-
ation till we difcharge the cargo, and fee
its condition ; as we have had much bad
weather fmee we left Cape Horn; and pre-
vious to the capture, ffle had being lying
to a month, with contrary gales of wind.
The fflip is about three-hundred tons bur-
then, but is not coppered, which is much
agamft us in felling her at this port.
Cape Town , May 1, 2798.
As the bad weather is fetting in, we
have obtained permiffion to land and fell
the cargo, but the fflip cannot be condem-
ned until theexpiratioti of twenty-one days.
After our bufinefs is fettled here, we are
bound to Port Jackfon. New South Wales,
to fiffl.


Cape of G od Hope, May 9, 179SL
I expeft we (ha'l get away from this
place in about ten days.- * t'prefer, t we are
bnfily employed in land; ,g and felling our
prize goods, which turn out pretty well.
Note, Is is fomr.vhat Angular, that the namtiva, end theft
three letters alt arrived in an- inverted ’order—that of the
jpth of fytay, on the 13th of July—that on the ift. of
May, on the yth- of Aug oil—that of the 15 th of April,
on the 2d. of September, and the packet containing the
narrative'on the 19th »f O&ober;
■ 'Simoh r s 'Bay, June 7, 1798.
I have laid in a confrderable inveft-
nient for Port Jackfon, which I hope, will
turn to good account. All our bufinefs is
fettled here, and I expefl to fail to-mor-
row night.
May the Almighty preferve him from
the dangers of the fea, .and the violence of
the enemy, that.he- may return in fafety, to
enjoy the fruits of his labour, xoith a thank-
ful remembrance of the mercies of Divine
Providence. .
' ' ‘ FINIS.
