

SPECIAL
PEACE
SYDNEY HOSPITAL
APPEAL
1918-1919




' of this Building*
-ZA
His Excellency
Lachlan M.a c anak ieE s a*
* Governor in Chief
o^ru>
ATjsw South Wajljjs
OV t/gris
OF HIS
Most S ack eh Majfsty
GtE OH6 .E 111
Oyc/sr&r <3O, AD, 4811.
l ac-simile of Brass Plate recovered from the Foundation Stone of the original
Sydney Infirmary, the first Hospital in Australasia.


An Appeal
— by —
The Sydney Hospital
— for a —
Peace Offering Fund
£100,000
TO PROVIDE
An up-to-date home for its
nursing staff and better facilities
for carrying out its functions
HC=OD


AN APPEAL
The constantly increasing demands upon the ser-
vices of the Hospital have necessitated increasing demands
upon its funds, and as the Board’s policy has always been to
consider the interests of the sick of paramount importance, it
has found itself financially unable to carry out certain im-
provements which it had long known to be necessary for the
comfort and convenience of its staff of unpaid Medical
and Surgical Officers and its Nursing Staff. The com-
fort of the Nursing Staff in particular has given the
Board great concern. At present the Nursing Staff
is composed of 130 Nurses and Sisters, and their sleep-
ing accommodation is such that it is not only discredit-
able to the Institution, but unfair to the Nurses, and detri-
mental to their health, comfort and efficiency. When it is
stated that in some eases no less than five Nurses are com-
pelled to occupy one bedroom, the public will realise how


insistent is the necessity for reform in this matter. The am-
bition of the Board is to be in a position to provide a separate
bedroom for each individual Nurse. With the growth of the
Hospital the time approaches when it will be necessary, in
order to relieve the strain upon the Nursing Staff, to increase
its membership by at least thirty. An up-to-date Nurses’
Home, containing 150 bedrooms and modern conveniences is
therefore necessary, and forms the primary object of this
appeal. During the war period, by reason of the many
appeals that were being made from day to day to the patriotic
and charitable in the interests of our national safety and
freedom, the Hospital Management has felt that it should not
call upon the public to provide the means of carrying out this
important project; but now that peace is happily within sight
there is no reason why the community should not be asked
to remember the needs of the Hospital.
The Nursing Staff of the Hospital has shown a splendid
spirit of patriotism during the war. Many of our Nurses
have gone abroad to assist in the nursing of our gallant Aus-
tralian sick and wounded. They have cheerfully and bravely
borne the privations and risks of the service. The inhuman
bombing of their quarters in France by an unscrupulous foe
has not deterred them in the performance of their duties.
Many of them have won the highest Military Honors for their
bravery and suffering. Many a home is brighter to*day for
the young lives they saved in the field. When they return
they are entitled to all the comforts that a modern Hospital
should provide. It is impossible to provide these in the present
building and with our present finances.
The Hospital has over 60 Medical Men on its Honorary
Staff who, without fee or reward, give their services at
all times, day and night, to save the lives and restore
to health, happiness and usefulness the thousands of fellow
citizens whose means do not permit of their seeking private
medical advice and treatment. Surely the men who are doing
such splendid public service are entitled to such accommoda-
tion and facilities as will enable them to work under the
most favorable conditions and, therefore, with increased
efficiency. The success of this appeal will ensure these being


provided. It has been estimated that the gratuitous services
freely rendered by these men are at the lowest worth over
£IOO,OOO per annum. In asking the whole public of N.S.W.
for one sum of £IOO,OOO we are only asking them for a sum
the equivalent of which these 60 distinguished Medical and
Surgical Specialists give in services each and every year in
the same humane cause.
Doubtless many citizens of the State will believe that
their duty is done when they have subscribed to their local
Institutions, but the Sydney Hospital is the old historical
Hospital of the Commonwealth. It has done over a centuiy
of work and to-day it is performing services for the whole
State in every department. Its wards are always occupied
with cases which are sent by Medical men from all parts of
N.S.W. where operating theatres and facilities are non-
existent- It is the only Institution in the State that has a
branch hospital for the indoor treatment of eye troubles.
The service which it renders to those who come from the hot,
arid interior, where eye diseases are so prevalent, is incalcul-
able.
A glance at the Statistics contained in this Appeal will
show the magnitude of the service which the Hospital renders
to country residents who come to Sydney for X Ray, Finsen
Light, Massage and Radium Treatment and Pathological diag-
nosis. Country patients largely avail themselves of the bene-
fits derivable from these special Scientific Departments which
most of the smaller local Hospitals do not possess.
Therefore, whilst it is a public duty to subscribe to and
support the local Hospitals, the claims of the Sydney Hospital
should also appeal to country residents.
NATURE OF APPEAL.
The Hospital askc the public to come to its assistance
when peace has been declared and the British Empire emerges
victoriously from the tragic mist of war. Every worthy
citizen of N.S.W. should then feel bound to help their sick
and suffering fellow citizens, by subscribing to the funds of
the great curative Institution which carries so much of the


burden of the duty of restoring them to health and happiness.
The Hospital desires to be in a position to expeditiously carry
out the much needed additions and improvements above
stated. We therefore appeal to the people of this State, whose
generosity has already manifested itself in a multitude of ways
in the last four tragic years, to contribute the amounts neces-
sary to carry out the work.
When the Board knows the total of the donations that
will come in when peace is declared, Plans and Specifica-
tions for the construction of the work may be prepared.
Sums in keeping with the means of donors will be acceptable,
however small, and all sums when received will be suitably
acknowledged through the public press. The rules of the
Hospital provide that a life governorship may be secured by
a donation of £SO or over. A donation of £1,250 by any asso-
ciation, company or club will endow a bed in perpetuity; a
donation by an individual of £I,OOO will endow a bed in
perpetuity.
A donation on the following scale will endow a bed during
the life of the donor: —
Persons under 30 years of age . . .. £BOO
„ between 30 and 40 years of age .. £7OO
„ „ 40 and 50 „ „ . . £6OO
„ „ 50 and 60 „ „ .. £SOO
„ over 60 years of age .. .. £4OO
The names of all bed donors “in perpetuity” and “for
life” will be inscribed on the Endowment Fund Marble Tablet
in the Central Hall and on the beds donated.
A Promissory Note is sent herewith, and the Hospital
will be grateful if you will fill it up with an amount that will
mark your appreciation of the work of the Institution and
express your thankfulness for victory and peace.
When completed, please return addressed —
The Honorary Treasurer,
Sydney Hospital,
Macquarie St.,
Sydney.


Lest you may have any anxiety as to whether the docu-
ment is liable for stamp duty as a Promissory Note, we can
assure that it is not.
Promissory Notes, on the receipt of cheques in redemption of
the same when peace is declared, will be returned as “honored.”
It is rquested that donors when forwarding their Promissory
Notes will fill in clearly in writing the amount they intend to
give, together with a clear signature and address.
It may be that some donors may prefer to send their
amounts by cheque, and in such cases their donations will be
at once acknowledged through the public Press as “Sydney
Hospital Peace Offerings.”
In further support of this appeal your careful perusal
of the information and statistics set out in the following
pages, showing the early history of the Hospital, its develop-
ment and the scope of its present activities, is invited. In
addition to this there are reasons which, to the Directors,
appear conclusive that the extensions and improvements pro-
posed are absolutely necessary to keep abreast of the needs
of the public.
The Sydney Hospital has a Constitution of its own. It is
Incorporated under an Act of Parliament. Its Subscribers
annually appoint from amongst themselves a proportion of the
Board of Management, and the taxpayers who subsidise it,
through the Government of the day, appoint Life Members
of the Board to see that their subsidies are properly expended,
and that the management is all that it should be.
The Sydney Hospital has lived for 107 years. It is older
than the Parliamentary Institution itself. It has been in con-
stant session, night and day, for over a century. It has no
parties and no payment of members. It knows no parties.
Here are some statistics of its work in the last quarter of its
life—27 years’ work from 1891 to 1917: —
In that period it has treated 128,904 indoor patients. It
has discharged of these, cured and relieved, 105,049. Its
able Surgeons have performed 71,801 operations. Its percent-
age of deaths has been reduced steadily from 11.43 per cent, to


as low as 5.75 per cent., and during that period improvements
in its methods have been so marked that its highest average
of time for the indoor treatment of patients, viz.: 31 days, has
been reduced to 15.5 days.
During the last 27 years only it has also treated 800,483
outdoor patients, and a total of indoor and outdoor of 929,387
patients, involving, in respect to the outdoor patients alone,,
no less than 2,724,107 attendances.
Who can gauge the flood of happiness that its magnificent
services have brought into the homes of the poor in that
brief period of its beneficent career?
On behalf of the Board, s
C. L. GARLAND,
Honorary Treasurer,


An Historical Sketch.
THE FIRST GENERAL HOSPITAL IN AUSTRALIA.
The erection of the first Hospital was commenced in Feb-
ruary, 1788, on the west side of Sydney Cove, near what are
now known as the old Commissariat Stores, Ceorare-street
North.
It was completed by 12 convict carpenters and 16 men
hired from the ships, and it accommodated 80 patients.
On the arrival of the Second Fleet in July, 1790, the num-
ber of sick was increased by 486 patients, who were trans-
ferred to the Hospital from the transport ships, from 90 to
100 tents being erected to take the excess over the Hospital’s
normal capacity.
Ihe first Principal Surgeon was John White, whose office
carried a salary of £lB2/10/- per annum, and his assistants
were Wm. Balmain, Thos. Arndell, and Dennis Considen, at a
salary of £9l/5/- each, and a Junior, John Irving, at £SO.
Major-General L. Macquarie arrived in New South Wales
in December, 1809, to take charge as Governor of the Colony.
On Bth March, 1810, in a despatch to Viscount Castlereagh,
Minister for the Colonies, he stated that it was absolutely
necessary to build a new General Hospital as soon as possible.
The building was to be erected on an elevated ridge of
vacant land south of the Government House, and along this
ridge Macquarie formed a new street which he named after
himself.
On Wednesday, 30th October, 1811, at 12.45 p.m., the
foundation stone of the main building was laid by Governor
Macquarie, who used a silver trowel for the ceremony. On
the conclusion of the ceremony three cheers were given by
the assembled throng and a salute was fired from Dawes’
Battery.
This building was commenced and finished, and it is
recorded that “on the 2nd of February, 1816, at 12 noon a
meeting was held at the Hospital buildings to arrange the
preliminaries for raising a fund to provide for the widows
and orphans of the soldiers killed in the battle of Waterloo,
as the news of this British victory had been received in the
Colony on the 18th of January.”
The first marked improvement in the hitherto crude work
of the Institution commenced with the appointment of James


Bowman, an ex-surgeon of the Royal Navy, to its manage-
ment on October, the 25th, 1819—just a century ago.
Dr. Watson, in his history of the Sydney Hospital, says
of Bowman; “He undoubtedly possessed the faculties of a
good organiser and an excellent administrator. Under his
rule the Hospital in both branches, administrative and clinical,
rapidly emerged from the state of chaos into which it had
drifted, owing partly to the lax supervision of his predecessor
and partly to the local conditions of the day in the Colony.”
In those days the surgeons were paid by the British
Government, and it is recorded in its history that “nearly
all the surgeons, like other officials of the day, received grants
of land, Bowman and Gibson receiving 2,560 acres, Mitchell,
Brooks and Anderson 2,000 acres, and Mclntyre and Moran.
1,000 acres each.”
The passing of a hundred years has produced such an
improvement in the humanitarian instincts of the noble pro-
fession of medicine that to-day no less than 60 of the leading
surgeons and physicians of the State generously give their
services to the sick and poor in the Sydney Hospital without
fee or reward, or the prospect of grants of thousands of acres,
of the public estate, and many of them also subscribe to its.
funds-
By 1842 the military character of the Institution closed,
and the advent of its civil career commenced. With the advent
of the Constitution Act of 1843, the Legislative Council took
possession, and in 1848 Macleay became the first president,
T. Iceley treasurer, E. J. Keith secretary, and Dumaresq,
McKenzie, Terry and nine others, together with the medical
staff, as ex-officio members, formed the committee. It was
decided to rent premises and open a dispensary for the
gratuitous medical treatment of “free” poor patients who>
were unable to pay for medical attendance. The rules were
drawn up, and it was agreed that an annual payment of £1
entitled the subscriber to the right of having one patient
constantly on the books, and for every additional £1 subscrip-
tion a similar right.
Between 1848 and 1880 the management was marked by
many important changes, the old order giving place to more
modern methods; the buildings reorganised and important
additions made.
In 1881 the Sydney Hospital Act was passed by the
Legislature of the State, and this Act, together with the
By-Laws and Rules made thereunder, forms the Constitution
of the Hospital up to the present time. The late Sir Arthur


Renwick was largely responsible for the passing of the
measure.
The old title of the “Sydney Infirmary and Dispensary”
was altered to the “Sydney Hospital.”
The control of the Institution was veste'd in the Board of
Directors, consisting of twenty-six members, viz.:—A Presi-
dent, 2 Vice-Presidents, a Treasurer, 10 Directors nominated
by the Crown for life, 2 Directors elected annually by and
from the members of the Honorary Medical Staff, and 10
Directors chosen by the subscribers from amongst the
Governors, four of these members retiring annually, but being
eligible for re-election.
Sir Arthur Renwick was the first President, and continued
to occupy that position up to the date of his death, which took
place in 1908. He was a public-spirited, capable and tactful
administrator, and as President he rendered valuable services
up to the time of his death. As a mark of the esteem in which
he was held by those who had the privilege of being associated
with him, the new wing, which was afterwards erected in the
southern side of the grounds, was called the Renwick Pavilion.
Upon the death of Sir Arthur Renwick Mr. John Pope
was elected to the position, which he occupied until his death,
which took place in 1911. He was followed by the late Sir
Matthew Harris, who in turn occupied the position until his
death, which took place in 1917. Mr. A. E. Jaques was then
elected to fill the position, which he continues to hold up to
the present time. The members of the Board associated with
him are as follows:
A. J. BRADY, L.R. & Q.C.1., L.R.C.5.1., Vice-President, “Wy-
oming,” Macquarie Street. .Appointed to . the Board
March, 1907.
JOHN STINSON, Esq., J.P., Vice-President, Castlereagh
House, Castlereagh Street. Appointed to the Board
Jan., 1905.
CHAS. L. GARLAND, Esq., Hon. Treasurer, St. James’
Chambers, King Street. Appointed to the Board June,
1900.
Hon. GEORGE BLACK, M.L.C., “Coila,” Dutruc Street,
Randwick. Appointed to the Board March, 1913.
Dr. JOSEPH FOREMAN, 141 Macquarie Street. Appointed
to the Board Feb., 1896.
Hon. JOHN GARLAND, K.C., M.L.C., Solicitor-General,
Phillip Street. Appointed to the Board July, 1909.
PHILIP LAZARUS, Esq., 203 Clarence Street. Appointed to
the Board May, 1912.


J. J. MORRISH, Esq., “ Carmorthen, ” Oliver Street, Alston
Park, Bexley. Appointed to the Board Nov., 1911.
Hon. J. B. NASH, M.D., M.L.C., 219 Macquarie Street. Ap-
pointed to the Board Aug., 1903. (
R. T. PATON, M.D., F.R.C.5.,-Public Health Office. Appointed
to the Board June, 1915.
F. G. SARGOOD, Esq., 83-87 York Street. Appointed to the
Board Oct.. 1917.
Hon. J. JOYNTON SMITH, M.L.C., Hotel Arcadia. Appointed
to the Board Nov., 1911.
Hon. JOHN TRAVERS, M.L.C., “Halston,” Blenheim Street,
Randwick. Appointed to the Board March 1913.
CHARLES P. BARTHOLOMEW, Esq., Messrs. Beard, Watson
Ltd., George Street, Appointed to the Board Feb., 1916.
Hon. R. J. BLACK. Esq., Yaralla Chambers, Pitt Street. Ap-
pointed to the Board Oct., 1898.
SAMUEL S. COHEN, Esq.. 7 Hamilton Street, Sydney. Ap-
pointed to the Board Feb., 1918.
W. G. CONLEY, Esq., “Sydney Morning Herald” Office
Appointed to the Board April, 1917.
A. E. D’ARCY, Esq., N.Z. Insurance Co., Ltd., 79-81 Pitt
Street. Appointed to the Board Aug., 1916.
JAMES GREGG, Esq., Messrs. Richardson & Wrench, 98 Pitt
Street. Appointed fy) the Board April, 1913.
ALEX. J. McLACHLAN, Esq., E.S. & A. Bank Buildings, King
and George Streets. Appointed to the Board Sept., 1917.
ARTHUR RICKARD, Esq., 84b Pitt Street. Appointed to
the Board Oct., 1917.
R. N. SHERIDAN, Esq., Bank of N.S.W., George & Bathurst
Streets. Appointed to the Board Feb., 1891.
JAMES T. TILLOCK, Esq., Kent Street. Appointed to the
Board April. 1913.
RALPH WORRALL, M.D., Ch.M., Q.U.1., 183 Macquarie
Street. Appointed to the Board Sept., 1911.
Sir HERBERT MAITLAND, M. 8., Ch.M., 147 Macquarie
Street. Appointed to the Board March, 1916.
The activities of the Hospital have been largely extended
within the last fifteen years.
The new south wing has been erected, important changes
have been made in the Medical Staff, a Clinical School for the
training of medical students has been established, and the
following new Departments added, viz.:—Department of
Special Therapeutics, Radium and Finseirßeyn Light Depart-
ment. “Jessie Cargill” Ward for Sick Nurses.


Reasons for Further Extension.
THE USES OF A HOSPITAL:—
By an Hon. Surgeon.
FIRST: —To relieve and treat the sick and necessitous
poor.
SECOND: —For the Training of Nurses.
THIRD: —For the Training of Students.
FOURTH : —For the Training and experience of Specialists.
FIRST: —The sick poor make demands on Hospital ac-
commodation which, with the increase of population, is ever in-
creasing. The accommodation at present is insufficient and
necessitates patients having often to wait for weeks to gain
admission. In a very few years the accommodation will be-
come absolutely inadequate. The sick poor have a right to
expect the best that modern science can give them, and this
can only be given in a large and up-to-date Institution, which
has means enough to supply all improvements and appliances
known to art—the latest and best of which can only be found
in an Institution having many patients, with a staff of
many Specialists constantly on the watch for newer methods.
This would all be impossible in a small Hospital, so that it is
to the patients’ advantage to be treated in a large Hospital.
SECOND: — The Training of Nurses. —A Nurse can only
be thoroughly trained in an Institution capable of admitting
and treating many cases of all sorts and conditions of sick-
ness and disease, and having Departments dealing with all
branches of Surgery and Medicine.
THIRD: — The Training of Students. —ls also an impor-
tant part of Hospital usefulness, for upon the thorough train-
ing of Students depends the professional character of the
future Medical Prcatitioners throughout the country. For
both these purposes it is essential that a Hospital shall be a
large one, treating many cases of a variety of kinds. It is
essential therefore:—
(1) That many beds should be available.
(2) That there shall be Lecture Rooms set apart.
(3) Also a Museum.
(4) A Library.
(5) Properly constructed Out-Patient Department. Quar-
ters for Resident Students. Quarters for Nurses.


The Hospitals must become the teaching centres for all pro-
fessional work.
THE UNIVERSITY should be the examining body, grant-
ing degrees, the examiners for those degrees, not being the
teachers in the Sydney Hospital.
(1) From all points of view more beds are essential.
(2) Two or more Lecture Rooms will have to be provided,
An which the various classes mav be held.
(3) A NEW MUSEUM becomes a necessity for teaching
purposes, and for the preservation of various Patho-
logical Specimens, many of which hitherto have been
ruthlessly wasted, though of the utmost value, this
would in time become a valuable asset to the Hospital
and the country.
(4) A LIBRARY should be provided for.
(5) A properly constructed and spacious Out-Patient
Department is necessary (from the patients’ point of
view, the present Department has been already quite
outgrown, and make-shifts have for some time been
in use) both for the accommodation of patients and
for teaching purposes.
Before long also the Sydney Hospital must become a teach-
ing centre for Medical men, outside the staff, who wish to
take post-graduate courses and keep up-to-date in their work
—an important matter to Country Districts.
THE SURGEONS are gaining practice and experience—
they are “rubbing.shoulders” daily with others, all Specialists
in their particular branches —consulting with each other,
learning from each other every day, studying, talking of, and
practising all that is new. It is only a thoroughly equipped,
fully manned, many bedded, centrally situated Institution that
can undertake all these duties.
Small Hospitals, with limited staffs, getting less experi-
ence, cannot do this, and wmuld not have, nor would they merit
the confidence of either the public or the profession were they
to attempt it.
Consequently the Hospital wants space in which to ex-
pand and fulfil its destiny.
Nor are the facilities advocated of advantage alone to
those- who become patients—or are likely to become patients
—for the Medical Officers themselves gain by experience.
Nurses and Medical Men are trained here who go out all over
the country to practise their professions, and render services
to all in need of them, and it is to the State’s interest that those
men and women should be thoroughly trained in all branches of
their work. It is in such a large Institution that the Surgeons,


by long practice and constant experience gained on many cases
and repeated operations, become perfected in an art, which
does not, as some suppose, arrive with them at their birth.
Surgeons are not born but are the result of very hard and
constant work on a sufficiency of material—therefore as it is to
the rich man’s interest that he should have skilful Physicians
and Surgeons in the time of his or his family’s troubles; the
Hospital does interest him, for though he is not allowed to
enter it because he is rich it is only through the Hospital
that he can have them, and the thorough equipment of the
Hospital is of equal importance to both rich and poor. The
best can only be obtained in a large centrally situated Hospital,
having in its services the most highly trained Medical Men and
Surgeons, who have at their command the necessary material in
sufficient quantity to enable them to get experience and prac-
tice.
Under Proper Conditions The State helps to support the
Hospital—therefore country people being part of the State and
having the other requisite claims (inability on account of their
poverty to command privately the services of the Hospital
Doctors and Private Hospitals), have a right equal with that
of Metropolitans to seek admission to the Central Hospitals,
and should not be forced into a poorly equipped smaller local
Hospital. They also have a right to the best.
It may be argued that the Government should run the
hospitals.
The State should not assume control. Hospitals as at
pfesent managed are well governed.
By nationalising Hospitals the efficiency of their Staffs
would deteriorate—or would cost an enormous outlay—both
unnecessary and unjustifiable.
To put a few paid officials in charge would not be giving
the best, would destroy the spirit of emulation and rivalry
which is the soul of progress. The sick poor have a right to
the best. They have been getting the best, but we require
more space and money to go on giving them the best,
THE NURSING STAFF.
The great part which skilful nursing plays in the healing
of the sick and saving of valuable lives is now so well known
and so widely appreciated that one can scarcely imagine a
sick-room with a case of serious illness, or a hospital ward,
without a trained nurse.
The science of sick nursing has brought into existence a
new profession, which has attracted to its ranks some of the
finest and best that is to be found in womanhood.


For centuries past the care and nursing of the sick poor
have been a feature of Christian development, undertaken
principally by devoted women who gave up their time to such
charitable and religious work, but it is only in comparatively
modern times that the systematic, scientific and secular train-
ing of women forms a part of our social organisation.
The work of Florence Nightingale stands out as a land-
mark in this respect. It is too well known as a matter of
history to require any lengthy reference here. The work
undertaken and carried out so brilliantly by this lady and her
band of noble workers in the Crimea in 1855 demonstrates how
the principle of hygiene applied to the sick-room affects the
saving of human life. For instance, at one time Florence
Nightingale had under her charge 10,000 men. In the early
part of 1855 the death rate was as high as 42 per cent. Before
the end of the year it had been reduced to 2 per cent; 40 per
icent. of those soldiers had cause to bless the name of Florence
Nightingale. But her work did not end there. On her return
4o England she founded a Nightingale Home for-the training
of nurses at two of the great London hospitals. She applied
herself to the study of army sanitary reform and army hos*
pitals, and everywhere preached the doctrine of the proper
use of fresh air, cleanliness, warmth and proper diet. Who
-can estimate the number of men who, from that time, have
onjoyed the benefits of her training and work, and who can
say how far our own boys, in the great war in which they have
been engaged, are indebted for their lives to the example and
teaching of that great English woman.
Her connection with the Sydney Hospital is direct and
personal. The late Si? Henry Parkes, with that keen, practical
•observation and clear foresight that contributed so largely to
the making of a great Statesman, opened up a correspond-
ence with her in 1866 to enlist her sympathy and help in
introducing trained nurses and establishing a training school
for nurses in what was then the Sydney Infirmary. In October
of the same year Miss Nightingale replied to his letter, cordi-
ally approving of the project and promising her full support,
uot only in the work of advancing the cause of nurses, but
also because she considered that she was under a deep debt of
gratitude to Australia for the contribution to the Nightingale
Fund raised immediately after the Crimean War.
She made several suggestions for the appointment of
nurses and the organisation of the training school, all of which
were adopted, and in 1867 a lady superintendent, in the person
•of Miss Lucy Osburn, was selected, and in December of that
year she and five sisters sailed from England.


FIRST GENERAL HOSPITAL AT DAWES POINT, 1796-1816.


SYDNEY HOSPITAL ROLL OF HONOR.


MAJOR-GENERAL L. MACQUARIE.
Projector of General Hospital in Macquarie Street.


SYDNEY INFIRMARY, 1870.


THE HON. ALEXANDER
MACLEAY, M.L.C.
President, 1826 to 1848.
THE HON. SIR EDWARD
DEAS-THOMSON, K.C.M.G,
M.L.C.
President, 1848 to 1879.
THE HON. SIR ARTHUR
RENWICK, K.B., B.A., M.D.,
M.L.C.
President, 1879 to 1908.


JOHN POPE, ESQ.
Director, 1874; Hon. Treasurer,
1882; Vice-President, 1884;
President, 1908 to 1912.
SIR MATTHEW HARRIS.
Director, 1896; Vice-President,
1906; President, 1912 to 1917.




THE ENTRANCE HALL.


The experiment was not without it* drawbacks ajd a
good deal of difficulty was exper.enced m getting
scheme into working order. nursing staff and their
and the splendid organisation of our nursing
equipment and training are w established it was
When the presennurse s Nightingale Wing.
?ery T r“SstThaf gradually inereased, until it now
COn l?el»l"uurse
department equal to any to be found within tne
the intervening ye.™ d women who
received their training m made brighter and
the world, leaving a grateful men and
better by their labours. “ d b ‘"fie skill and knowledge ac-
women who have benefited by
Hospitals m h ranee, and t g care and
received at the hands of
these brave women.
FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE.


SYDNEY HOSPITAL.


Some of the Hospital’s Activities.
THE ROMANCE AND TRAGEDY OF THE X-RAY.
By the Hon. Radiographer.
It was a glorious and most wonderful discovery that
Rontgen, of Wurzburg, experimenting with a Crookes tube
in a dark room, made when he suddenly found that a hitherto
unknown ray was emitted from the tube when a current of
electricity was passed through it.
It was a tragedy for many of the early pioneers in X-Ray
work, and for patients, too, when it was found that this ap-
parently innocent ray could cause such damage to the un-
protected skin and body. hands, arms and even life
were sacrificed in the study and experimentation with the
rays. Now happily, owing to the methods that are used for
the protection of both operator and patients, the work can be
done without any harm to either.
At first only small apparatus was used—small coils and
small tubes. The first epoch-making improvement was made
when Jackson introduced the present-day tube. Then it was
found that X"Rays illuminated platino-cyanide of Barium in
the dark, so a screen was made of this material and a silhouette
of any object placed between the tube and the screen was
thrown on to the screen, and any foreign body, fracture, dis-
location or other abnormality could be detected, also an im-
pression of the object could be made on a photographic plate
which, after development in the ordinary way, showed the
nature of the injury or the presence of the foreign body, etc.,
as the case might be. Gradually the various parts of the
body came to be investigated. It was recognised as a wonder-
ful help to the surgeon and physician in many ways, especially
the localisation of foreign bodies, stones in the kidney or blad-
der, foreign bodies in the eye, etc.
All these things were done and were improved upon as
time went on. Then Reider, of Munich, worked out a plan
for the X-Ray examination of the stomach. He gave what


is now called the opaque meal, which consists of porridge and
milk or bread and milk with several ounces of pure Bismuth
Carbonate or pure Barium Sulphate. Here tragedy shows it-
self again. Originally Reider gave Bismuth subnitrate in large
quantities, but several fatalities occurred owing to impurities.
Since then, however, pure Bismuth Carbonate or Barium Sul-
phate, which is perfectly harmless, can be obtained from manu-
facturing chemists in large quantities, and is now used with
confidence. Improvements in apparatus were being made
all this time; coils were made larger, were intensified and then
super-intensified. Currents were laid on from the mains, in-
stead of being obtained from batteries. Then a new tube,
called the Coolidge X-Ray tube, was invented in America. It
was found to be much more powerful, and more easily regu-
lated than any other tube hitherto known. It was also much
more expensive, as indeed w r as all new apparatus. Finally, in
order to diminish the length of exposure in taking a skia-
gram, the interrupterless transformer was introduced. By
means of this machine a skiagram could be taken in a second or
fraction of a second, as against many minutes in the early
days.
At the Sydney Hospital the X-Ray Department is thor-
oughly up-to-date, and does the largest number of cases an-
nually in New South Wales and probably in Australasia.
The cost is a heavy item on the resources of the Hospital,
but it is felt that every penny given towards the expenses
by the public is well spent, and goes towards the alleviation
of patients either in diagnosis or treatment.
In the course of time the X-Ray came to be used in the
treatment of many diseases, and another epoch was established
when the illustrious Sabouraud, of Paris, treated and cured
ringworm by means of Epilation. By means of his platino-
cyanide of barium pastille a certain dose of rays is applied
to the scalp in successive areas. The hair commences to come
out in a, fortnight and the patch is quite bald at the end of a
month. It remains bald for a month or two and then grows
in again healthy. The rays cause the hairs to fall out and
the disease is removed with the hair. Provided an overdose
is not given the hair always grows again. This is the only
scientific method for the treatment of ringworm. In Paris,
Sabouraud had all the children that were affected with ring-
worm brought to a school at the St. Louis Hospital, where
they continued their lessons whilst undergoing the treatment
and cure. By so doing he hoped to practically eradicate ring-
worm altogether from Paris, Another disease which has sue


cessfully been treated by X-Eays is Rodent ulcer
cular glands and various other skin affections. It is essential
that a large Hospital such as the Sydney Hospital should he
a^posttion’financially to expend money in constantly renewmg
up-to-date apparatus, plates and equipment. The work done
is of the utmost value to surgeons, physicians, and the pu
generally, but there is still need of further expansion, both as
regards premises and new apparatus, so that this Hospital m >
continue^as heretofore to be a guide to the profession gene -
ally in all X-Ray matters.
U is therefore, to be hoped that any one who can will
subscribe’ something, however small, in the knowledge a
by. so doing he is assisting in a noble woik.
department of pathology and bacteriology.
The present epidemic of Pneumonic-Influenza has brought
before the general public the nature and use of vaccines in the
prevention and cure of disease. Many diseases caused by germs
can be prevented by inoculation with suitable doses of vaccine,
Tif subsequently contracted, they run a ™-h milder course
an outstanding example being Typhoid Fever. Since the intro
duction of this prophylactic method of routine inoculation w
typhoid vaccine of persons liable to be ex posed Ito>
eg, nurses and attendants in hospitals, also sold ers,.the '.mar
tality from typhoid has fallen tremendously. It is part of the
work of a pathological department to attend to the making
of vaccines The scope of the work done is, however, much
wider than this; many tests and investigations are carried out
which are of great assistance to the Medical Staff m t
diagnosis of disease and as a guide to treatment. During Wi-
the number of examinations made was 7,051, as compared w
6 687 in the previous year. Permission was granted
cases to make post-mortems (there were 407 deaths).
The department labors under a great disadvantage, in
that, owing to lack of funds, it is understaffed. In a hospital
the size of Sydney Hospital, it is essential that there should
be a permanent paid medical officer, one who has been speci-
ally trained in pathological technique, in charge of the depart-
ment, in addition to a junior resident pathologist This scheme
has already been submitted to the authorities, but has been
turned down for financial reasons. The present arrangement,
whereby the resident pathologist changes each year, is unsatis-
factory, but expansion is impossible unless the necessary
financial assistance is forthcoming.


This department therefore joins with the other depart-
ments of the Hospital in the appeal for a generous response
from the general public to enable the Hospital to carry on
and extend its sphere of usefulness in the community.
RADIUM DEPARTMENT.
The Radium Department at Sydney Hospital was opened
in May, 1911, and during the period which has elapsed 1,800
cases have been treated. Of these cases considerably over 1,000
were rodent ulcers, the vast majority of which wore success-
fully treated.
Practically no cases of malignant disease, except post
operative recurrent malignant diseases, is now treated in the
Radium Department, so naturally our results are not very
reassuring with these cases,
. ✓
During 1918, 270 new cases were treated.
SPECIAL THERAPEUTIC DEPARTMENT.
By the Director.
The Special Therapeutic Department of the Sydney Hos-
pital includes among its methods of treatment the use of
massage, medical gymnastics, hot air baths and electricity.
The demands for the above have greatly grown as the knowl-
edge of the value of these methods has extended. ' One result
is that now, about a dozen masseuses (aside from two honor-
ary masseurs) are fully engaged. To carry out the wishes of
the Honorary Medical Staff, there should be at the very least
half as many more available.
War requirements for the treatment of soldiers have,
however, made it very difficult to meet the urgent needs of
Civil Hospitals, in this respect, even though very large num-
bers of masseuses have been specially trained in Australia for
the purpose of meeting military requirements.
Unfortunately, even if the extra masseuses could be ob-
tained, the accommodation in the Hospital is hopelessly inade-
quate. Sometimes six operators are at work in a room only
large enough for four. The conditions may be made clearer
by steting that the departments are located in a portion of the
basement of the Renwick Pavilion, one room being set apart
for all phases of the work. This room at one end looks out on
to a narrow courtyard closed in on two sides by high buildings,
the other on to a lane with a high wall. To me.et necessities


party partitions have been erected, shutting off from the
massage department very inadequate spaces for the use ot hot
air, general electrical treatment, lonization, and Schnee Bath,
a small retiring room for masseuses, and a combined store-
room and consulting room for the Director, respectively.
Where the partitions are of wood, they are open above
and below so as to interfere as little as possible with air
circulation. Though stuffy enough in winter, the air becomes
at times very oppressive in summer, and occasionally patients
requiring hot air application have to be left untreated to
avoid them collapsing. At any time massage is exhausting toi
the operators if carried on continually, and especially so \\ hen
over 10 cases have to be treated by one masseuse in an after-
noon, as is necessary in our hospital practice under present
conditions. The two inner rooms (used for electrical treat-
ment) are so dark as to require to be lit by electricity. Ihe
partitions of the compartments with the necessary screens
reduce the circulation qf the air to an oppressive stillness. In
summer it is absolutely necessary to give the staff a fortnight s
holiday, because of the great exhaustion which the heat and
exertion in combination cause.
But in other important aspects the present accommodation
is utterly inadequate. Thus, if asked where do you place
your patients while awaiting treatment, the answer is: Out
in the courtyard, which they prefer unless the great heat
of the sun, or wetness or coolness of the weather drives them
into the gangway leading to the lift, or into the narrow
entrance passage of the Department itself. What of the
dressing-room for the masseuses? It is a dark, cramped, air-
less nook in the basement, under the stair case, which has
been closed in and lit by electricity. What about increasing
facilities for treatment as medical knowledge advances and for
which provision is made in other hospitals? If there is very
inadequate room for present need, there is clearly no room
at all for improvements, however necessary. What is the
remedy suggested? It is suggested that at least three times
the present space be allotted; that it be lit by natural light
and be airy, thus permitting the necessary increase of the staff
and due consideration for the comfort of them and their
patients, and allowing the addition of such apparatus as is
required by modern methods of treatment, and last, but not
least, providing for the proper protection and comfort of the
poor sufferers awaiting treatment and for whom the hospital
itself has been established.


THE EYE DEPARTMENT.
By an Honorary Ophthalmic Surgeon.
This department is staffed by two senior and four assist-
ant ophthalmic surgeons; the latter attend to all the out-
patients. Here attend patients seeking advice and receiving
treatment from the specialists. The patients come from all
corners of the State. From the dry interior and far West
country towns where the eye diseases are many and the
necessary attention for their special complaint impossible or
difficult to obtain, many being naturally far from the reach
of any sort of medical attention whatever.
Nor is it the country folk alone that avail themselves of
this opportunity to secure the best specialised skill, but the
dwellers of the city, and suburbs, eagerly throng the waiting
rooms, all eagerly anxious to avail themselves of the free
services of the experienced doctors in this special branch of
medical science.
Here all the cases are investigated and those requiring
the aid of spectacles have their sight examined and the neces-
sary glasses prescribed. Those needing treatment for the vari-
ous diseases which can be treated without the necessity of be-
coming in-patients are carefully examined and advised, and
treated; oftentimes the opinions of the whole staff being placed
at their disposal in the shape of united consultations as the
surgeons see fit.
Those patients who are afflicted with the terrible condi-
tions which affect some human eyes are at once admitted to
the indoor department situated (for want of accommodation
at the big hospital) at Miller’s Point.
From this department, too, are sent the cases for opera-
tion ; Cataract, Glaucona, Injuries, and removal of painful and
diseased useless eyes.
This great and useful work is continuously going on. The
patients attend the clinic twice a week, and as each week
upwards of 70 or 80 new cases are seen, in addition to old
patients who require attention from day to day (an “old
patient” is one who has been seen once already), it will be
seen how large a part this important work plays in the life of
the community.
At present the prestige of the department is second to
none in the States, and the urgency of financial support from
the public to whom its doors are freely and widely open,
should be made known throughout the length and 'breadth
of N.S.W.


The science of diseases of the eye continues to advance
and in order to keep abreast of the times it is necessary that
sufficient money be forthcoming to ensure the very best
equipment.
It is for the people with an appreciation of the magnificent
work being done in the alienation of pain, suffering, and men-
tal distress caused by the scourges to that most sensitive and
priceless possession, eyesight, that we here now appeal for
assistance.
SYDNEY HOSPITAL CLINICAL SCHOOL.
The opening of the Clinical School for the training of
medical students in 1909 was a brilliant epoch in the history
of the Sydney Hospital, a Hospital whose history is so closely
interwoven with that of Australia.
Since the inception of the Hospital medical students
walked the wards, but the almost insuperable difficulty of
providing adequate accommodation for a large number of
students made the Board of Directors hesitate to establish a
school offering a full course of instruction. However, as years
went by, it became increasingly evident that the national work
of training men to engage in the noble task of caring for the
sick of the community must be undertaken by the Sydney
Hospital, a Hospital which possessed everything necessary for
the work, except suitable accommodation for students.
In 1909 it was unanimously decided to establish a Clinical
School without delay in the hope that as the number of
students increased funds would be available for the necessary
additions and alterations in buildings.
The success of the School was assured from the outset,
and one of the first graduates, Captain Muir Smith, won the
University Medal in the Final Examination—the highest
honor to be obtained at the University by a medical student.
This distinguished graduate fell fighting for the Empire at
Gallipoli.
During the war some of the most distinguished graduates
of the School have made the supreme sacrifice, others have
been badly wounded, and not a few obtained high military
decorations.
Since the inception of the School 208 have graduated,
and at present 65 are pursuing their studies.
It has always been a welhrecognised fact that a hospital
with a clinical school attached is the most efficient. The keen
criticism of the students is a great stimulus to the physicians
and surgeons on the staff, and ensures that the patients are


thoroughly well treated, and the accurate diagnosis of their
ailments a matter of constant care.
The dislocation of work during the war has been unfortu-
nately considerable, and the want of a lecture hall, students’
reading room, and common rooms is now an urgent matter
which must be met at all costs if the School is to maintain a
high standard of efficiency.
The thorough training of medical students is of vital
importance to every citizen, as good doctors, imbued with the
highest ideals of the medical profession, mean much to the
community, holding, as they often do, the issues of life and
death in their hands.
KITCHENS.
There are two Kitchens at the Sydney Hospital, the main
Kitchen providing meals for the resident medical officers, staff,
patients, etc., and the Nightingale Wing Kitchen supplying
meals for the Nursing Staff.
The main Kitchen is equipped with those modern appli-
ances which ensure the food being cooked thoroughly and
with a minimum expenditure for fuel. In the centre of this
Kitchen there is a big range, which is heated by coal fires.
This range contains four large ovens. The other appliances,
which are constantly in use, are two steam cookers, each con-
taining six separate cooking chambers, two steam urns, and
three steam-heated steel tables. The urns are used for boiling
food, and the steam-heated tables for keeping the prepared
food hot. Attached to the Kitchen is an ice-house for general
purposes and a large ice-chest for butter and milk.
The consumption of food in a large general hospital is
a big item, and the following figures relating to Sydney Hos-
pital’s Kitchen may be of interest as showing the weekly
consumption of the staple articles:—
Beef .. .. .. ~ 409 lbs.
Mutton .. .. .. .. 562 lbs.
Pork .. .. .. .. 20 lbs.
Tripe 75 lbs.
Rabbits . . .. .. 20 pairs.
Poultry 61 lbs.
Flour 120 lbs.
Sugar 66 lbs.
Bread 980 lbs.
Sago .. 45 lbs.
Rice .. .. . .. 42 lbs.


Oatmeal .. .. .. 112 Ids.
Potatoes .. .. .. i ton
Butter .. .. .. .. 139 lbs.
Milk .. .. .. .. 1,610 quarts
Eggs 700
Ice .. .. . . .. 4,500 lbs.
In addition to these must be listed green vegetables in
season and articles for special diets, such as sheep’s tongues,
lamb’s frys, ox tails, calves’ heads, brains, jellies, junket,
cheese, bacon, etc.
Altogether the main Kitchen provides 7,770 meals per
week, and, if necessary, an additional 4,200 meals could be
provided weekly with the present equipment.
CHIEF ENGINEER’S DEPARTMENT.
The Chief Engineer’s Department contains what might be
aptly termed “the heart of the Hospital,” viz., the Boiler
House. Here the steam is generated which supplies the
sterilisers in the operating theatres and wards. The steam is
also supplied to the ward heaters, the kitchen, laundry, disin-
fector, etc. It is from here that the hot water supply is
secured, and here also are installed the pumps, ammonia com-
pressor and other auxiliaries. There are two boilers at present
in service—one is of the Babcock & Wilcox make and the
other a Hornsby Boiler. They are under steam 24 hours in
the day, and on every day of the year, steadily and efficiently
meeting all calls upon them.
At Sydney Hospital the Engineer’s Staff have many and
varied duties to perform. In addition to keeping the steam
boilers, engine pumps, dynamos and motors in good working
order, they maintain the sanitary, gas, electric power and
lighting services, and effect all necessary repairs to the
machinery, equipment, buildings, iron furniture, etc.
The manufacture and fitting up of iron splints, extension
and other special surgical apparatus is another phase of their
work, which is by no means the least important.
THE LAUNDRY.
The Laundry is a very important branch of the Hospital’s
industrial section, and it is most efficiently equipped with the
most modern machinery.
The whole of the clothing, bedding, etc., in daily use in
the Hospital is washed, dried, mangled and ironed, and the


amount of work involved will be realised when it is stated
that from 20,000 to 22,000 articles pass through this Laundry
weekly.
The Laundry consists of two main departments. In one of
these the articles are sorted out, steeped, boiled, and then
the water is removed from them, after which they are dried.
In this department there are three large washing-machines,
two hydro-extractors and a drying chamber. In the second
room the articles are either passed through a large five-roller
calender (mangle with heated rollers) or ironed. They are
then folded and sorted, being finally sent back to the wards,
etc. The machinery in this second room consists of the five-
roller calendar, two skirt irons, a shirt and collar ironer and
a compressed gas pump supplying ten hand irons.
The whole of the machinery is driven by a 14 horsepower
electric motor, and the steam is supplied to the washeis and
drying room from the Boiler House.
The annual saving to the Hospital by the installation of
the laundry amounts to £3,000 per year, when compared with
the present cost of sending washing out to public laundries.
DISINFECTING PLANT.
In 1907 a Kny-Scheerer Disinfector was imported from
America and installed in the South Wing. It is circular in
form, with inside dimensions of 100 x 40 inches, and is fitted
with a door at each end. A Formaldehyde Generator is also
attached. A brick wall was built up round this disinfector,
dividing the room into two chambers. The unclean articles
are received into the front chamber and passed into the dis-
infector. There they are subjected to a dry heat of 325 deg.
Centigrade for from 30 minutes to 45 minutes.
After disinfecting the articles are withdrawn through the
rear door of the disinfector and returned to the various wards,
etc.
From 12 to 15 mattresses, and 20 to 30 pillows, in addition
to large quantities of clothing, are disinfected daily.


The Hospital and the War.
RETURNED SOLDIERS.
In addition to the work done by the Institution for the
poor and sick of the civilian population of the State, the
Sydney Hospital had performed great public service in min-
istering to the relief and care of Returned Soldiers as both
indoor and outdoor patients, and hundreds of these brave rifen
have benefited by its treatment.
HONORARY MEDICAL STAFF.
The Honorary Medical Staff of the Sydney Hospital has
also freely given of its best to Returned Soldiers, both at this
Hospital and the Military Hospitals. Amongst those who are
specially engaged in this valuable patriotic work may be men-
tioned the following distinguished and able men:—Sydney
Jamieson, 8.A., M. 8., C.M. (Edin.), L.R.C.P. and M.R.C.S.E.;
A. Jarvie Hood, M. 8., C.M. (Univ. Glasg.); Fred, W. Hall,
M.D., M.S., L.R.C.P. (Bond.), M.R.C.S. (Eng.); H. Hamilton
Marshall, M. 8., M.S. (Edin.) ; Sir Herbert Maitland, M. 8.,
Ch.M. (Syd.); H. Skipton Stacy, M.D., Ch.M, (Syd.); Archie
Aspinall, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.) ; J. Crawford Robertson, M.D.
(Glas.), F.R.C.S. (Edin.) r H. S. Marsh, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.);
C. F. Warren, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., L.M.S.S.A. (Lond.) ; W.
McMurray, M.D., Ch.M. (Irel.); Walton Smith, M. 8., Ch.M.
(Syd.), M.R.C.P. (Lond.).
SONS OF MEMBERS OF THE BOARD.
Nearly every Honorary Member of the Board of Man-
agement is represented in the fighting lines of the various
theatres of military action by sons and relatives. Some of
these brave boys are still on Military Service abroad, and
some have returned with terrible but honorable wounds,
whilst others have died on the battlefields fighting in the
cause of our incomparable British Empire and for the Freedom
of the World.
RESIDENT MEDICAL AND LAY STAFFS.
Many members of the Medical and Lay Staffs early vol-
unteered for active service abroad. In all cases they have
been given leave, and in every case such as have returned
have found the positions which they vacated kept open for
them.


Sydney Hospital.
RULES RELATING TO BED DONORS
AND
PATIENTS NOMINATED BY BED DONORS.
A?iy Association, Company, or Club giving the sum of £1250 to the Bed
Endowment Fund of the Hospital shall have the privileges of a Bed Donor
in perpetuity, and be entitled to have one bed always occupied in the General
Wards, free of charge, by a patien\ nominated by its Chairman or Secretary.
Any person giving £lOOO to the same fund shall be a Bed Donor in
perpetuity, and be entitled to have one bed similarly occupied by a patient
nominated by him or her.
Any person giving a sum according to the following scale shall be a
Bed Donor for life, and be entitled to have one bed similarly occupied by a
patient nominated by him or her: —
Scale—Persons under 30 years of age £BOO
~ between 30 and 40 „ £7OO
~ ■' „ 40 and 50 „ £6OO
„ „ 50 and 60 „ £5OO
„ over 60 „ £4OO
Any person paying to the said Fund the sum of £5O shall
be a Bed Donor, and entitled to have one bed always occupied
by a patient nominated by him or her for one year from the
date of payment.
The names of all Bed Donors in perpetuity and for life
shall be inscribed on the Endowment Fund Tablet in the
Central Hall.
Bed Donors and Patients nominated by Bed Donors shall be subject to
the following regulations and all other rules of the Hospital: —
I. —Every patient nominated by a Bed Donor or his representative
shall be admitted under the Physician or Surgeon of the week, provided
there is a vacant bed, and should there not be a vacant bed such nominated
patient shall have a prior claim (except over cases of accident or urgency)
to the first bed vacant.
11. —No patient nominated by a Bed Donor shall be admitted if
suffering from an infectious disease.
XU. —Should any patient admitted under a Bed Donor’s nomination
be considered, after examination by his or her Physician or Surgeon, in
consultation with one or more of his colleagues, to be unfit for Hospital
treatment, such patient shall be discharged.
IV.—The Hospital shall supply a suitable brass plate to be placed a<t
the head or foot of each bed occupied by every nominated patient.


Rules for Admission of Patients.
rn he Hospital is for the treatment of cases of accident and
emergency, or of persons who'are suffering from serious illness,
and can lot afford to obtain the necessary treatment at their
own hemes.
The Medical Superintendent, as the representative of the
House Committee, determines the eligibility of the applicants.
Priority of admission is given to those cases which are the
most urgent. Accident and emergent cases are admitted at
any hour, day or night, without question.
Any country resident desirous of becoming a patient, and
who is unable to apply personally at the Hospital, should for-
ward to the Medical Superintendent a letter from his local
medical attendant, intimating the character of the disease,
and certifying that the case is a suitable one for admission.
This should be accompanied by a statement by the medical
man, or by a local clergyman or other person of repute to the
effect that the applicant is unable to pay for the necessary
medical attendance.
While those who are unable to contribute are admitted
free, others are expected to contribute something towards the
cost of their support while in the Hospital, according to their
means, but all patients are treated equally in the wards, and
no member of the medical or nursing staff knows the names of
those who contribute, and those who do not.
Should it be found that a patient has imposed upon the
Institution by false statements or otherwise, he or she will be
liable to immediate dismissal, and will be ineligible for read-
mission.
General Information.
FOR PATIENTS.
The primary object of the Sydney Hospital is the medical
and surgical treatment of the SICK POOR.
In-patients are selected for admission according to the
urgency of their condition, and their inability financially to
obtain treatment outside.
Accidents and cases of emergency are admitted at any
hour. The Out Patient Department is for the treatment
solely of the SICK POOR. No other persons need apply.
Applicants for treatment a-s out-patients must produce a


for examination as diiected.
FOR VISITORS TO PATIENTS.
Visitors are admitted, subject to the ™les from 2 tdl
3 p.m. on AVednesdays and Fridays, and from 2.30 till 4 p. .
on Sundays.
FOR THE PUBLIC.
Articles of bed-clothing for women (bed-jackets, etc.) and
nviama suits for men are constantly needed, am #
gratefully accepted. Useful work may be done
Parties undertaking to provide these and other articles xo
?ariius wards. Information on this matter may be obtained
from Do h naUo C ns et of y books, magazines,'papers flowers, fruit
etc. or any articles in kind which may be of ~the
Hospital will always be gladly welcomed. These may oe
fnrwarded addressed to the Secretary.
Entertainments for the benefit of convalescent parents
may be organised through the medium of the Medical
aUowed to convey stimulants or food
to anv patient, but simple delicacies may be handed to the
Sister of the Ward, who will give them to the patient under
the direction of the Medical Officer in charge of the case ,
Patients shall deliver any money or other va^ ™
their possession on admission to the Secretary or other Officer
authorised to receive it, in order that it may be returned to
them on their discharge subject to any deductions agreed upon
from the moneys so lodged, as a contribution towards the cost
of maintenance while in the Hospital. The Hospital authorities
will not be responsible for any money or valuables not lod &
in this way. , ' , _
In-patients who are dissatisfied from any cause, should
complain to the Medical Superintendent.
Any patient who wishes to receive the spiritual assistance
of the Chaplain, or of any other Minister of Religion, should
speak to the Nurse or Sister in charge of the Ward. >
No in-patient discharged for misconduct will again be
received into the Hospital unless by order of the House
In-patients are expected to provide the following articles
for their own use, viz.:—Hair Brush, Comb, Small Comb and
Tooth Brush.


THE BROUGH MEMORIAL FOUNTAIN.


THE NORTHERN QUADRANQLE,


THE WILLIAM PERRY DISPENSARY,
Oxford Street, Paddington,


SIR HENRY PARKES,
Who arranged with Miss Florence Nightingale for the engagement of
the first Trained Nursing Staff for Sydney Hospital.


X-RAY DEPARTMENT.


PATHOLOGICAL DEPARTMENT.


FINSEN LIGHT TREATMENT.


MASSAGE ROOM.


EXTRACTS FROM TYPICAL LETTERS OF
APPRECIATION RECEIVED BY SYDNEY HOSPITAL.
New Occidental Hotel,
Wellington, N.Z.,
March 30, 1915.
Secretary,
Sydney Hospital.
Dear Sir, — ,
-I also take this opportunity of asking
you to'convey to as well as the Hospital
Stall my sincerest gratitude for the magnificent treatment
which I received while under their care. I should especially
like them to know that during my illness I have by necessity
been forced to be an inmate of eight hospitals, chiefly in New
Zealand, but the attention I received in Sydney places your
hospital on a pedestal of its own.
At present I am feeling extremely well, coupled with the
knowledge that I am thoroughly cured of my illness, and it is
this fact which makes me feel extremely grateful to those in
whose hands I was placed.
I remain,
Yours gratefully,
, / ’ •
British Lion L. 0. Lodge, No. 44,
Show Ground,
Orange,
November 13, 1917.
To the Staff of H Ward,
Sydney Hospital.
Ladies and Gentlemen, —
At a meeting of the above Lodge held on 3/11/’17 I was
instructed to convey the following resolution to you
‘‘That the best thanks of the Officers and Members of
L.O.L. No. 44 are due to the Staff of H Ward, Sydney Hospital,
for their kindness and increasing attention to our late brother,
f during the time he was under their care.”
I might also state that our brother, on his return to
Orange, spoke in glowing terms of the treatment he had


received at the Hospital, and realised that everything possible
had been done for him.
Once again thanking you, '
I am,
Yours fraternally.
Sec., No. 44, L.O.L.
East Hills,
Dec. 7, 1917.
The Secretary.
Dear Sir, —
It is with very great pleasure I write you these few lines
expressing my gratitude and great pleasure foiythe treatment
I received as a patient at the Hospital.
The attention and kindly feeling extended by the Medical
Staff and the nurses is astonishing.
I noticed with satisfaction that the foreigner received the
same courtesy and attention as the Australian; also the food
was supplied liberally and the quality was excellent, and the
condition in which it was served was most creditable.
Trusting your Institution receives the public’s support
financially in the future, which it most truly deserves.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
Sydney,
15th June, 1918.
The Secretary,
Sydney Hospital.
Dear Sir, —
On behalf of my sisters (2), my brother and myself, I hand
you herewith a donation of £B/8/- towards the funds of your
most worthy Institution. Will you also permit me to say that
our family are deeply grateful for the prompt and exceedingly
kind treatment which our late mother received at your Hos-
pital. It makes us feel glad, indeed, that such an Institution
■exists where poor/afflicted souls can obtain care and comfort.
Yours very gratefully,


Honorary Medical Officers.
Hon. Consulting Physicians .
F. H. QUAIFE, M.D. & M.S. (Glas.) ,
THOMAS STORIE DIXSON, M. 8.,
Ch.M. (Edin.).
W. W. J. O’REILLY, M.D.,
M.R.C.S.E.
E. J. JENKINS, M.A., M.D. (Ox-
ford), M.R.C.P.L., M.R.C.S.E.,
C.M.
Honorary Physicians:
A. JARVIE HOOD, M. 8., C.M.
(Fniv. Glasg.).
J. MACDCNALD GILL, M.D. and
L.R.C.P. (Lond.), M.R.C.S.
(Eng.).
FRED. W. HALL, M.D., M.S.,
L. (Lond.), M.R.C.S. (Eng.)
k. MURRAY WILL, M. 8., C.M.
(Aber.).
Hon. Assistant Physicians:
H. HAMILTON MARSHALL, M. 8.,
M. (Edin ).
JOHN HARRIS, 8.A., (Syd.) ;
M.D., B.S. (Durham) ; M.R.C.S.
Eng.); L.R.C.P. (Lond.); D.P.H.
(Lflhd.) .'
H. J. RITCHIE, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.)
A. HOLMES A’COURT, M. 8., Ch.M.
(Syd.) (on war leave).
G H. S. LIGHTOLLER, M. 8.,
Ch.M. (Syd.) (acting).
L. W. DUNLOP, M. 8., Ch.M.
(Syd.) (acting).
Hon. Consulting Surgeons:
W. CHISHOLM, M.D. (Loud.),
M.R.C.S. (Eng.).
THOS. FIASCHI, M.D. & M.Ch.
(Univ. Pisa).
B. J. NEWMARCH, F.R.C.5.1.,
L.R.C.P. (Lond.), M.R.C.S. (Eng.)
(on war leave).
Hon. Consulting Ophthalmic
Surgeon:
ROLAND POPE, M.D. & F.R.C.S.,
(Edin).
Hon. Consulting Aural Surgeon:
A. J. BRADY, L.R. & Q.C.1.,
L.R.C.S.I.
Hon. Consulting Skiagrapher:
L. HERSCHEL HARRIS, M. 8.,
Ch.M. (Syd.).
Hon. Consulting Dentist:
C. G. HODGSON.
Honorary Surgeons:
R. STEER BOWKER, L.R.C.P.
(Edin.), M.R.C.S. (Eng.).
Sir HERBERT MAITLAND, M. 8.,
Ch.M. (Syd.).
C. E. CORLETTE, M.D., Ch.M.
(Syd.), D.Ph. (Cam.).
11. SKIPTON STACY, M.D., Ch.M.
(Syd.)
Hon. Assistant Surgeons:
G. BELL, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.) (on war leave).
ARCHIE ASPINALL, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.).
HOWARD BULLOCK, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.), F.R.C.S. (Eng.), L.R.C.P.
(Lond.), B.Sc. (Oxon.).
W. A. RAMSAY SHARP, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.), F.R.C.S. (Edin.) (acting)
J. G. W. HILL, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.) (acting).
H. R. BEATTY, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.) (acting).
W. S. BROOKS, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.) (acting).


Hon. Ophthalmic Surgeons:
C. GORDON MacLEOD, M.A., M.D., Ch.M. (Edin.).
R. H. JONES, M.B. et B.S. (Melb.).
Hon. Assistant Ophthalmic Surgeons:
CYRIL SHEPHERD, M.R.C.S. (Eng.), L.R.C.P. (Lond.)
E. A. D ’OMBRAIN, M.B. (Melb.).
A. G. CORBIN, M. 8., Ch.M., B.Sc. (Syd.).
GEORGE PAUL, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.).
Hon. Gynaecological Surgeons:
RALPH WORRALL, M.D., Ch.M.,
Q.U.I.
GEORGE ARMSTRONG, M. 8.,
Ch.B. (Melb.).
Hon. Assistant Gynaecological
Surgeons:
'C. V. BOWKER, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.)
J CRAWFORD ROBERTSON, M.D.
(Glas.), F.R.C.S. (Edin.).
Hon. Aural Surgeons:
T. S. KIRKLAND, M.D. (Glas.),
F.R.C.S. (Edin.).
P. J. KENNA, M. 8., M.S. (Edin.).
Hon. Assistant Aural Surgeons:
RICHARD ARTHUR, M.D., C.M.
(Edin.) (on leave).
H. S. MARSH, M:B., Ch.M. (Syd.).
C. F. WARREN, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.,
L.M.S.S.A. (Loud.) ■
HEDLEY TERREY, M.D., Ch.M.
(Syd.) (acting).
Honorary Dermatologist:
W. McMURRAY, M.D., Ch.M. (IreL).
Hon. Assistant Dermatologists:
LANGLOH JOHNSTON, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.)
0. N. PAUL, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.).
Hon. Director of the Pathological Department.
Hon. Assistant Pathologist:
WALTON SMITH, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.), M.R.C.P. (Lond).


Honorary Skiagrapher:
C. AYRES, M. 8., Ch.M. (Edin.).
Hon. Assistant Skiagrapher:
J. G. EDWARDS, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.).
Acting Hon. Director of the Department of Special Therapeutics
T. STORIE DIXSON, M. 8., Ch.M. (Edin.).
Honorary Dentist:
E. READING.
Hon. Operating Dentists:
P. B. READING, L.D.S. (Lond.).
H. V. HORDERN, B.D.S. (Phil.), (on leave).
Honorary Masseurs:
Mr. F. SCHMIDLIN.
Mr. F. S. CHAPLIN PRITCHARD.
Masseuses:
Miss A. B. CATLEY (on war leave)
Miss K. MACKEL
Miss M. MACNAB (on war leave)
Miss MARSH (on war leave)
Miss E. 0. THOMSON (on war
leave)
Miss H. A. HUNGERFORD
Miss F. A. PAIGE
Miss M. GRAVE (on war leave)
Miss C. MILSON
Miss D. M. MURRAY
Miss A. B. CORNWELI
Miss R. M. MITCHELL
Miss M. LINDSAY
Mrs. MALLAM
Miss A. M. MONOHAN.
Honorary Solicitor:
WILLIAM HAMILTON, Esq.
Hon. Consulting Engineer:
SYDNEY A. JOSEPHSON, Esq.
Honorary Consulting Electrical Engineer:
H. R. FORBES MACKAY, Esq. v
Honorary Architect:
GEORGE McRAE, Esq.


ADMINISTRATIVE STATE—
Medical Superintendent; WALTER PERRY, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.).
Chief Business Officer and Supervising Engineer: A. S. LINDSAY,
M.S.A.I.E.
Secretary; Captain C. H. HELSHAM, 0.8. E., B.A, Barrister-at-Law
(on war leave); A. G. GOLLEDGE, J.P., (acting).
GENERAL STAFF—
Chief Dispenser: W. T. WEARNE. M.P.S.
House Steward: C. F. MARTIN (acting).
Matron: Sister ROSE CREAL, R.R.C. (on war leave);
Sister M. A. FOX (acting).
Accountant: C. H. COOKE (on war leave);
J. H. DUNNE (acting).
Chief Engineer; W. A. HOWARTH.
Assistant Dispenser; A. THOMSON, M.P.S.
Out-Patients’ Registrar; S. A. DUNK, J.P. (acting).
Lady Collector: Mrs. C. WAGNER.
OUTDOOR DEPARTMENT FOR DISEASES OF WOMEN:
Drs. C. V. BOWKER and J. CRAWFORD ROBERTSON.
Days of Attendance—Tuesday and Friday, at 2 o’clock p.m.
OUTDOOR DEPARTMENT FOR DISEASES OF THE EYE:
Drs. CIRIL SHEPHERD, E. A. D’OMBRAIN, A. G. CORBIN
GEORGE PAUL.
Days of Attendance—Monday and Thursday, at 2 o’clock p.m.
OUTDOOR DEPARTMENT FOR DISEASES OF THE EAR, NOSE, and
THROAT:
Drs. P. J. KENNA, RICHARD ARTHUR, H. S. MARSH,
C. F. WARREN, and HEDLEY TERREY.
Days of Attendance—Tuesday and Friday, at 2 o’clock p.m.
OUTDOOR DEPARTMENT FOR DISEASES OF THE SKIN;
Drs. W. McMURRAY, LANGLOH JOHNSTON, C. N. PAUL.
Days of Attendance—Monday and Thursday, at 2 o’clock p.m.


Resident Medical Staff.
Medical Superintendent: WALTER PERRY, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.).
Assistant Medical Superintendent; E. H. STOKES. M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.)
Medical Registrar: W. H. COOK, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd).
Surgical Registrar: E. P. BLASHKI, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.).
Assistant Registrar; J. YOUNG-WAI, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.).
Radiographer: D. De La F. HENRY, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.).
Pathologist: MAVIS V. GRANT, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.).
Junior Resident Medical Officers:
W. T. NELSON, M. 8., Ch.M.
(Syd.).
E.-H. WHITE, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.).
A. J. METCALFE, M. 8., Ch.M;
(Syd.). .
JULIE M. HICKFORD, M. 8.,
8.5., (Melb.).
H. H. CROWE, M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.),
ROY C. WINN, M. 8., Ch.M.
(Syd.).
W. T. D. MAXWELL.
L. V. BUCKHAM.
H. K. PORTER.
H. R. SCRIVENER.


STATISTICS OF ANAESTHESIA
Main Theatre.
Want Memorial Theatre.
Ether
1,600
Ether
Chloroform
459
14
Ethyl Chloride
580
Ethyl Chloride . .
Sequences
240
Sequences
35
Mixtures
70
2
Local
279
Local
Spinal
2
Spinal
Total
3,230
Total
470
Total
Moorcliff Branch (Ophthalmic operations)
399
. Grand Total
GENERAL STATISTICS.
Patients remaining in Hospital on 31st December,
1917 304
Patients admitted during 1918 5,795
Total under treatment 6,219
Discharged Cured 3,287
Discharged Relieved 1,502
Discharged Unrelieved 390
Died 407
Died within 24 hours after admission 60
Remaining in Hospital 31st December, 1917 329
Percentage of Mortality on cases treated after deduct-
ing deaths within 24 hours after admission .. ’ 5.5
Average number of admissions per week 114
The largest number’ admitted in one week 134
The smallest number admitted in one week 92
The average number of beds occupied 365
The largest number of beds occupied 411
The smallest number of beds occupied 338
Average duration of stay (in days) 15.21
CIVIL AMBULANCE.
During the past year 2,527 urgent medical and
surgical cases were conveyed to the Hospital by the
Civil Ambulance.
This is 1,391 more than was received by any other
Hospital in the State.
The Board wishes to express its gratitude to the
Ambulance for its unfailing promptitude and
courtesy in all eases.
The following is a complete list of eases conveyed
to Hospitals:—


CIVIL AMBULANCE— Continued.
Sydney Hospital 2 ’ 527
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital 4 ’ 136
Balmain Cottage Hospital 3^ 3
Lewisham Hospital
.1 AQ7
St. Vincent’s Hospital
Royal North Shore Hospital 446
Crown Street Women’s Hospital 46
Royal Women’s Hospital, Paddington 293
South Sydney Women’s Hospital 2 |>
Sacred Heart Hospice 3
Royal Alexandra Children’s Hospital
Homoepathic Hospital
Marrickville Cottage Hospital
St. Margaret’s Hospital for Women
Western Suburbs Cottage Hospital 4
Mater Misericordiae
Callan Park Hospital 3 "
Reception House, Darlinghurst
Home of Peace Hospice
Royal South Sydney Hospital 4 ™
St. George’s Cottage Hospital 33
Garrison Hospital • • ,*
N.S.W. Home for Incurables 2
Coast Hospital -
Randwick Military Hospital 15
Gladesville Mental Hospital
St. Joseph’s Hospital .
Lidcombe Hospital
Little Sisters of the Poor 8
Private Hospitals 3
Homes, trains and boats 590
Total cases conveyed to hospitals, homes, etc., 7,678
RADIO-THERAPEUTIC DEPARTMENT.
Eczema 44
Tinea Tonsurans 7
Lichen Planus 4
Acne Indurata 4
Inoperable Sarcoma .... 1
Hodgkins disease 2
Tubercular glands of neck 3
Coccogenic Sycosis .... 10
Tinea Albigena 3
Rodent Ulcer 4
Inoperable Epithelioma 1
Lymphadenoma 1
Exophthalmic Goitre ... 8
Pruritus 4
Perinoychia 4
Keloid 4
Inoperable Carcinoma .. 9
Leucocythaemia 3
Malignant glands of
neck 4
Necessitating 466 applications in all.


LIST OF CASUALTY CASES DURING THE
YEAR
1918.
New
Attendances.
Patients.
Male.
Female.
Male.
Female
January ..
2689
1302
January
. 2095
1040
February ..
2276
1074
February
. 1796
826
March ... .
2240
1060
March
. 1707
836-
April
2250
1116
April . ..
. 1804
733
May
2574
1136
May ...
. 1763
' 870'
oune
2416
953
June . ..
. 1722
712.
uuly
2548
1034
July . ..
. 1831
774
August ...
2669
1225
August .
. 2100
953
September .
2529
1184
September
7 2068 •
1037
October .. .
2562
1222
October
. 2065
916.
November .
2469
1109
November
. 2045-
930
December .
2606
1151
December
. 2200
857
Total ..
30,118
13,566
Total .
. 23,196
.10,484
Male.
Female.
Number of Casualty New Patients ....
23,196
10,484
Number of
Patients
sent to
Out-door
Department from Casualty ....
2,565
1,38(>
Number of
Patients
actually
treated
in Casualty .
20,631
9,098
VENEREAL CLINIC.
Treated during year ending December 31, 1918:—
Syphilis,
Gonorrncea.
New Male Patients ...
New Female Patients .
733
262
New Male Patients ..
New Female Patients
1367
42
Total
995
Total
1409
Attendances (Male) ..
Attendances (Female)
5131
1834
Attendances (Male) ..
Attendances (Female)
9569
289
Total
6965
Total
9858
Patients. Attendances.
Grand Total
.. 2,404 16,823


MICROSCOPIC EXAMINATIONS DURING 1918.
Blood—
Full blood counts ..
342
Leucocyte counts ..
, ,
193
Bacteriological
92
Serum Diagnosis—
Positive Widals
17
Negative Widals ..
■ .. 103
120
Blood Cultures—
Bacillus typhosus present
8
Blacillus typhosus absent
61
—
69
Brine —
Sugar estimates
. . 403
Other estimates
722
1125
Sputum—
T.B. present.
79
T.B. absent
.. 449
528
Faeces—
, ,
87
Throat Swabbings—
K.L. present
.. 49
K.L. absent ..
. . 324
373
Test Meals Examinations —
Free HOI present
.. 15
Free HC1 absent
14
Lactic acid present
2
31
Hairs and Scales —
Eingworn present ..
. . 43
Eingworm absent . .
. . 40
—
83
Examination for Spirochete Pallida —
Positive
.. 51
Negative
.. 129
180
Bacteriological Examination of Pus and
Fluids —
1054
Sections of New Growths and Pathological Tissues —
479
Wassermann Eeactions —
Positive ..
.. 493
Negative
.. 987
1480
—
Ampoules of Gonococcal Vaccine—
• 302
Ampoules of Beranecks Tuberculin — ..
208
Ampoules of Diagnostic Tuberculin— ..
140
Miscellaneous —
27
Vaccines
140
Total
7051


POST MORTEM EXAMINATIONS.
Permission was obtained in 103 cases out of 407
deaths. The cause of death was as follows:
A. —Cerebral.
Cerebral Hemorrhage . . 4 Osteo Myelitis of Skull . 1
Cerebral Abscess .. .. 1 Fractured Skull .. . . 1
Tubercular Meningitis . . 1 Meningitis . • . . 1
Cerebro Spinal Meningi- Cerebral Embolus .. 1
~ tis .. .. . . I
B. —Pulmonary.
Pneumonia . . ~ 13 Acute Miliary Tubercul
Septic Pneumonia . . 1 osis .. .. .. 2’
Sarcoma of Lung . . 1 Tuberculosis . . . . 1
Malignant Pleurisy . . I Phthisis .. . . . . 1
Empyema . . . . . . 1
C. —Circulatory.
Syphilitic Aortitis •. 1 Aortic Aneurysm . . I
Endocarditis . . . • .1 Septic Endocarditis . . 1
Mitral Incompetence .. I Aortitis .. .. .. 1
T.B, Endocarditis . . 1 Aortic Regurgitation .. 1
Myocardial Degeneration 1 Cardiac Failure .. .. 3
Heart Block . . . . 1 Cardio Sclerosis . . .. 1
Chronic Interstitial Myo-
carditis .. . . 1
D. —Genito —U rinary.
Chronic Nephritis .. 11 Malignant Bladder .. 2'
Uraemia .. .. 2 Tubo Ovarian Abscess .. 1
Chronic Granular Kid- Pyonephrosis .. .. 1
neys .. . . .. 1 Pyelitis .. .. .. 1
Hypernephroma . . . . 1
E.—lntestinal.
Duodenal Ulcer .. .. 3 Malignant (Esophagus .. 3
Malignant Stomach . . 3 Cirrhosis of Liver .. 3
Malignant Larynx . . 1 Pyloric Obstruction . . 1
Malignant Liver .. 2 Empyema of Gall Blad-
Subphrenic Abscess .. 1 der .. ~ .. 1
Enteric Fever .. . . 2 Pelvic Peritonitis .. 1
Ruptured Gastric Ulcer 1 Hepatic Abscess .. ~ 1
' . • F.—General.
Lead Poisoning ... 1 Chorea .. .. ~ 1
Multilocular Hydatids . . 1 Aplastic Anaemia .. 1
Generalised Malignant Tubercular Spine .... 1
Disease .. . 1 Secondary Anaemia .. 1
Rheumatic Fever .. 1 Senility .. . . .. 1
Banti’s Disease .. .. 1 Beri Beri ~ .. .. 1


STATISTICS X-RAY DEPARTMENT.
1918.
,; |
1918.
Fractures
No. Osseous
Lesions
Detected.
Diseases
of Bone.
Renal Cases
Positive.
Renal Cases
Negative.
Foreign
Bodise,
Positive.
Foreign
Bodise,
Negative.
Meals.
Thorax.
Dislocations.
Cases.
Skiagrams.
Screens.
Total
Examinations.
January
210
96
39
9
28
13
26
34
25
8
488
465 297
762
February
119
69
35
7
34
7
16
38
32
12
359
336 202
538
March
140
91
29
11
30
19
21
18
26
3
378
355 212
567
April
184
138
39
11
21
10
12
41
20
11
487
410 324
734
May
213
119
41
11
39
25
25
29
22
4
510
496 269
765
June
140
84
34
11
33
t5
14
29
25
7
381
356 220
576
•Tuly
162
* 89
34
5
32
17
22
36
22
3
422
420 213
633
August
130
89
39
7
31
13
14
39
21
3
388
373 134
507
September
146
129
35
9
23
17
11
35
14
4
423
401 233
634
October
160
114
36
5
32
9
20
45
30
9
460
419 270
690
November
180
128
32
4
36
17
11
44
21
5
468
430 202
702
December
184
85
32
5
36
14
20
33^
11
8
431
443 202
645
Total ....
1968
1222
425
95
325
176
212
421|
259
77
5195
4904 . 2848
7752


ENCLOSED ARE TWO
“Promissory Notes.”
WILL YOU KINDLY HAND ONE TO A
FRIEND SO THAT HE, OR SHE, MAY
ALSO HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY OF CON-
TRIBUTING A
“Peace Thankoffering”?


STATISTICS, 1918.
GENERAL SUMMARY OF DISEASES.
1. —Animal Parasites
36
II. —Specific Infectious Diseases
356
III. —Constitutional Diseases
88
IV. —Intoxications
138
V. —Neoplasms and Cysts
373
YI. —Diseases of the Blood
30
VII. —Diseases of the Circulatory System ..
21&
VIII. —Diseases of the Respiratory System . .
423
IX. —Diseases of the Alimentary System
1016
X. —Diseases of Genito-Urinary System ..
613
XI. —Diseases of Pregnancy, Parturition and Puerperium '
37
XII. —Diseases of the Breast (non-Puerperal)
16
XIII. —Diseases of the Nervous System
253
XIV. —Diseases of Ductless Gland and Lymphatics
75
XV. —Diseases of the Eye
385
XVI. —Diseases of the Ear
31
XVII. —Diseases of the Skin
154
XVIII. —Congenital Malformations
7
XIX. —Diseases of Bones and Organs of Locomotion
127
XX. —Violence . . . . .. . . . . • • • •
1216
Grand Total
5574
SUMMARY
Medical Officers ’ Return of the Number of Persons under Treatment,
the Disease for which Treated, and the Number of Deaths in each
Class during the Year 1918 (including Cases brought forward from
Previous Year).


I.—ANIMAL PARASITES.
Diseases, Etc.
Discharged during Year.
Mortality %
Total.
Cured.
Relieved.
Unrelieved
Died.
A. Pbotoozoa —
Amoebic Dysentery
Malaria
B. Flukes —
Bilparziosis
C. Visceral — Liver
Lung
Muscles
Brain and Cord
Kidney
Soft Tissues
D. Nematodes —
Filariasis ..
F. Ticks—
Spine
Total
M
2
5
F
4
2
1
M
5
I
I
1
F
6
M
1
1
F
3
1
4
M
1
F
1
21
1
11
2
1
7
7
8
6
2
1
1
36
II. —SPECIFIC INFECTIOUS
DISEASES.
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
Beri-Beri
6
i
r2
1
9
Diphtheria
I
1
1
3
Gastro-Enteritis (Infantile) ..
1
2
3
Enteric ..
18
4
5
4
31
Infantile Paralysis
Dysentery (Bacillary)
Cerebro-Spinal Meningitis
Erysipelas .
Febricula
2
3
5
Influenza
21
21
i
1
1
1
46
Measles .. • •
1
i
2
_ 2
3
9
Pertussis
1
3
1
5
Scarlet Fever ..
1
1
Septicaemia and Pyaemia (Non-Puer-
peral)
i
2
2
5
Tetanus.,
1
2
1
4
Varicella
1
I


!
Diseases, Etc-
Disc
*s
3
CJ
1ARGKDL
<u
>
V
CC
URING V
T3 |
>
C
1
EAR.
-6
<U
Q
Mortality %
Total.
Tuberculosis —
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
V
Ac ute Miliary
1
- 1
Tenosynovitic
1
2
Arthritic
1
1
9
Bone .. .. . • • • •
1
5
3
2
Spine
2
1
Kidney .. .. • •
1
%
2
Laryngeal
1
1
Pulmonary ..
2
11
20
8
12
1
5
3
62
Meninges —Brain and Cord
1
5
6
Peritoneum ..
1
]
2
Lymphatic .. v • •
5
/
2
1
1
16
Abscess
1
X
1
Acute Rheumatism .. . .
16
13
5
5
1
40
Venereal Diseases—
Gonorrhoea, Acute ..
1
1
1
3
„ Chronic
Arthritic
8
2
5
15
Syphilis, Primary
1
1
Secondary
i
3
1
5
„ Cutaneous
2
i
3
-
6
Brain and Cord .. ' ..
14
1
3
1
19
,, Bone
1
1
1
3
,, Visceral
3
3
1
7
Parasyphilides, Tabes Dorsalis
15
3
5
1
24
General Paralysis ..
1
4
5
Sprue . . . .
1
1
Total
74
65
84
46
39
12
24
12
356
III.—CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES.
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
Arthritis Deformans
1
I
Rheumatoid Arthritis
3
5
7
15
Muscular Rheumatism
1
1
2
Chronic Rheumatism
1
1
2
3
7
Diabetes Meltitus .. ...
1
6
7
3
2
2
4
1
25
Gout
6
1
9
2
18
Rickets
1
1
Senility and Asthenia
1
7
8
1
2
19
Starvation and Marasmus ..
Addison’s Disease
—
Total
11
4
31
19
11
3
4
5
88
IX. —specific infectious diseases — (continued).


IV.— INTOXICATIONS,
—
-
_
Diseases, Etc-
Discharged during Year.
Mortality %
1
j Total.
Cured.
Relieved.
Unrelieved
Died.
Alcoholism, Acute
„ Chronic ..
Delirium Tremens . - - -
Chronic Arsenical Poisoning
,, Pb. Poisoning
,, Morphinism ..
M
43
1
6
F
19
«
M
34
5
F
15
M
4
1
F
3
M
1
F
1
118
•2
12
I
Total
50
19
39
15
5
3
1
1
133
V.
—NEOPLASMS
AND
CYSTS.
A. Cysts —
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
Dermoid ..
r>
Retention
B Benign Tumours —
1
1
Adenomata
1
3
Angiomata
Chondromata
Cystomata
1
1
2
Fibromata
Lipomata ..
2
5
Papillomata
i
1
Osteomata
•
Others
..
C. Malignant —
1. Carcinomata, etc.—
Face
Lip..
Tongue
Jaw
12
23
7
5
'i
4
4
4
2
2
1
3
7
1
2
p
p
1
20
30
10
20
Tonsil
1
i
2
i
5
Mouth
2
2
3
Orbit
16
14
1
Breast
Uterus
6
2
1*
. v
20
Vagina
1
1
Penis
1
Q
Testicle
1
1
Bladder
£
Prostate .. • ■ ■
1
I
l
7
Kidney
2
i
Larynx
1
2
Lung
|
N
0
Parotid
1


Discharged during Year.
65 i
•a
>» j
J
Diseases,
Etc.
>
H
X
a
>
*4
C
C
o 1
2 :
H
V
2
-
1
1
i
M
F
M
F
Ml
F
M
F
Oesophagus
Stomach ..
2
2
6
2
1
4 1
20
o
4
13
1
1
2
1
2
1 !
46
Intestine ..
1
5
4
o
7
-
18
Rectum
Liver
1
3
4
2
4
2
10
12
Pancreas . .
1
i
2
Thyroid ..
o
4
3
o
-
i
'20
12
Lymphatics
Skin
9
5
2
•>
1
1
3
1
Rodent Ulcer
11
3
7
2
24
Eye
2
Numeris •.
Jaw
2
1
2
2
Femur
1
.{
Ovary
" . .
i
i
1
]
6
Others
3
Lymplio-Sarcoi
n
4
i
Melanotic Sarcoma
Total
92
fr.
59
22
63
25
42
r
3i 3
VI DISEASES
OF THE BLOOD
*
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
Anaemia, Secondary ..
Pernicious
1
1
3
1
3
.2
s
1
2
1
3
Hi
,, Chlorosis
2
,
|
Leukaemia, Lymphatic
#>. „ Myeloid
1
1
Polycythaemia ..
Septicaemia (Streptococcal) ..
Total
2
3
6
8
3
1
3
4
30
v. —neoplasms and cysts — (continued.)


VII.—DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM.
Discharged during Year.
6?
•c
>>
Diseases, Etc.
•6
>
0)
H
O
Cured.
>
"3
cc
*5
u
c
D
c
Vi
O
s
H
A. — Heart.
M
F
M
i
F
M
F
M
F
1. Pericardium —
Pericarditis
2
2. Myocardium —
Myocarditis
1
5
6
1
1
1
4
3
21
1
2
Fatty Degeneration
1
Dilatation
I
Hypertrophy
1
3. Endocardium —
6
8
Endocarditis, Simple
2
1
1
1
7
1
4
,, Septic
Mitral Stenosis Regurgitation ..
1
21
21
1
2
57
Aortic ..
13
5
1
4
1
5
1
24
1
18
1
Mixed
Failing Heart
1
9
1
1
2
5. Neuroses —
1
1
1
Angina Pectoris ..
4
1
Paroxysmal Tachycardia
1
1
1
I
Heart Bio k
Functional Disease
3
B.— Vessels.
Aortitis
2
I
2
•
T
Aneurysm
4
3
12
Thoracic
Arterio Sc’erosis
2
1
j 9
I
1
1
14
1
1
10
17
2
Atheroma
~
1
1
Embolism
i ;
1
Pheletrtis and Thromlosis
12
Varicose Veins
1
a
I i
Varicose Ulcer
i
1.
Total ..
21
12, 71
5C
> 12
4
27
11
216
VIII.—DISEASES OF
THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM.
,
A. Nose and Naso-Pharynx —
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
1.. Nasal Cavity
(a) Rhinitis :
Q
Acute Coryza ..
2
1
4
Polypi ..
2
1
1
ID
Deflection
3
6
1
Acute S ppuration ..
3
i
1
2
Chronic „
2


Diseases, Etc.
Disc
I
■d
0
v
9
o
X
>
Relieved. g
c
IIRING Y
•u
d>
>
%
Vi
c
D
PAR.
*d
0)
5
Mortality %
Total.
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
3. Accessory Sinuses —
Frontal Sinus — Chronic Catarrh
1
2
3
Acute Suppuration
1
5
5
2
13
Chronic Suppuration ..
1
1
4. Naso-Pharynx —
Tonsils and Adenoids
5
5
1
5
16
Epistaxis
1
1
B. Larynx—
1. Exudations—Acute Catarrh
1
1
2
Croup Membranous Lanyngitis
1
1
Papiloma .. .. ...
1
1
Adductors
1
1
C. Trachea and Bronchi—
Tracheitis
1
1
Acute Bronchitis..
30
21
8
3
2
1
2
67
Chronic Bronchitis
1
10
1
1
1
1
15
Asthma
3
4
13
6
1
2
1
30
Bronchiectasis
2
1
3
D. Lungs—Emphysema
,
1
1
Congestion
1
1
Inparction
1
1
Broncho Pneumonia
10
20
3
3
1
3
1
47
Lobar Pneumonia
52
22
2
2
1
1
32
9
121
Pneumokoniosis ..
1
I
Abscess
1
1
1
3
Naemoptysi-s
1
2
3
E. Pleura — Acute dry
21
15
2
1
1
40
„ with Effusion
1
1
1
1
4
Chronic
1
1
Empyaema
4
1
5
1
11
Pneumo-Thorax .. . .
1
1
2
Pyopneumothorax
1
1
Total
145
112
60
25
14
7
43
10
425
IX.—DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY
SYSTEM.
A. Mouth—
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
1. Stomatitis
1
1
2
2. Ranula
1
1
3. Gums—Epulis .. ..
1
1
4. Pyorrhoea Alveolians ..
1
1
•— 5. Dentigerous Cysts
1
1
VIII. —DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM —( Continued).


Discharged during Year.
.
|
-a
a>
1
◄
Diseases. Etc*
I-
[Cured.
1
I
1
Relieved
|
i
I
a t
*3
c
D
T3
<J
5 I
o ;
>
<?
H
M 1
F
M
F 1
M 1
F
M
F
St.
Salivary Glands —
i
i
1
Pharynx—Chronic Pharyngitis
1
1
Acute Uvulitis ..
Tonsils —
11
21
1
9
Acute Follicular Tonsillitis
4
i
Peritonsillar Abscess
13!
33
vChronic Tonsillitis
20i
1).
Oesophagus —
lj
1
Stricture .. . • •
E.
Stomach —
Gastritis, Acute
32
19
9
2
3
i
3
2
1
74
4
„ Chronic
Gastroptosis
Gastric Ulcer
14
12
5
4
1
o
3
3
1
7
37
6
Gastrie Ulcer, Perforated
3
6
1
1
9
Pyloric Stenosis
i
Neuroses—
Dyspepsia
2
3
1
5
]
2
12
2
jtyferacidity
1
1
I
■Subacidity
1
1
*2
Dilatation'
1
3
Others
r!
L
Cardiospasm
F.
i
Intestines —
Intestinal Colic ..
2
2
•
1
5
2
Diarrhoea..
u
13
11
11
_
1
32
Constipation
1
2
j 3
i 3
; 28
[Enteritis ..
1
I
15
Colitis
4
I
Intestinal Stasis and Toxaemia ..
1
9
1
19
Duodenal Ulcer ..
Intestinal Obstruction ..
3
4
o
11
I
Intussusception ..
5
Perforation of Intestine
5
2
Dilatation of Callim
2
2
Falcal Fistula
•1
Benign Tumours
Parotid —Calculi
Haemorrhage after Tonsillotomy
/Foreign Body


Diseases, Etc-
Discharged during Year.
Mortality %
Total.
Cured.
Relieved.
1
Unrelieved
Died.
M
F
M
F
M
-
F
M
F
Hernia—
Inguinal ..
68
16
1
1
89
,, Strangulated
5
4^
1
10
Femoral
1
2
3
,, Strangulated ..
1
2
1
4
Incisional ..
2
6
1
1
1
i
12
„ Strangulated ..
Ventral
5
5
7
„ Strangulated ..
I. Intestines—Appendicitis..
1
1
Simple ..
114
125
4
5
5
2
3
259
Abscess
7
3
1
11
Gangrene
16
8
i
25
Perforation
1
1
Glenard’s Disease
5
5
G. Rectum -and Anus—
i— . ;
Proctitis ..
1
1
2
Prolapse ..
2
2
Stricture ..
Ulcer
Polypus
i
1
1
3
Fissure
3
1
1
i
6-.
Fistula in Ano ..
ft
4
1
1
i
| - •
16
Abscess, Anal
1
1
Abscess, Ischio-Rectal ..
3
2
1
• .
6
Haemorrhoids
LH
10
1
1
1
1
-
! »
33
H. Liver —
Jaundice ..
6
3
1
10
G'irrhosis .. ..
1
13
2
5
2
23
Abscess
2
1
1
4
I. Gall Bladder —
Catarrhal Jaundice
2
2
Cholecystitis
6
35
6
1
1
49
,, Acute
3
1
1
7
Biliary Fistula
1
1
Empyaema
1
1
1
3
Cholangitis, Acute*
1
1
Gallstones
4
14
1
4
2
30
J. Pancreas —
Pancreatitis Acute Halm.
1
1
K. Peritoneum —Gen. Peritonitis . .
1
• • '
‘
1
Adhesions
6
S
2
1
17
Subphrenic Abscess
1
1
2
Total .. ..
426|355
77
72
22
22
30
.
12
■ \ ' t
1016
IX.—DISEASES OF THE AUMENTAEY SYSTEM (continued).


X.—DISEASES OF GENITO-URINARY SYSTEM.
,
Discharged during Year.
/
*
i
■3
V
-M
<
Diseases, Etc-
<u
"3
0)
>
>
T3
4-»
U
o
o
. H
•
1
3
o
1
&
5 1
3 1
—•
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
A. Kidneys and Ureters —
1
I
II
14
10
Nephritis, Acute . .
„ Chronic
3
1
31
6
\
2
1
]
2
5
52
28
Uraemia
1
I
Hydronephrosis ..
i
16
1
Pyonephrosis
Pyelitis
9
15
5
4
1
1
40
1
Pyelonephritis
1
1
I
3
Perinephritis Abscess
1
■2
8
Renal Colic
2
6
1
16
Renal Calculus ..
5
2
12
Uretral Calculus
4
1
3
1
Fistulae
1
1
1
5
Nephroptosis ....
Anomalies and SeOkeiton
1
3
Haematuria
I
»
B. Bladder —
1
15
Cystitis, Acute ..
3
5
1
1
5
Calculus ..
i
1
Benign Tumours
5
Retention of Urine
5
1
1
Incontinence
1
1
Ectopia pesical .
C. Urethra —
14
3
1
27
Stricture .. •• •• *’
I
Urethritis (Non-Gonorrhceal) ..
1
6
Periurethral Abscess
A
3
Caruncle ..
I
Fistulas
I
Foreign Bodies • •
Extranaxtian of Urine ..
I
D. Prostate —
<•
7
19
Hypertrophy • •
E Male Genitals —
3
Orchitis and Epididymitis
Undescended Testis
2
4
2
I
2
27
Hydrococle
Varicocoele
5
6
17


Diseases, Etc.
Cured. c
HAI1GHD
•a
9
►
a>
”3
K
U
C
X
Unrelieved 2
0
EAR.
*6
9)
5
Mortality %
IVLOl
F. Female'Genitals —
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
(a) Vulva and Vagina — Vaginitis
1
1
Bartholina Cyst
a
3
„ Abscess
2
2
Rectocele and Cystocele
11
' 11
(b) Uterus
Endometritis,
26
2
28
Polypus
e
5
Fibromyomita
17
1
1
19
Fibrosis Uteri
17
1
18
Sub Involution
1
1
Displacements —
Retroflexion and Version
38
3
4
45
Procidentia and Prolapse
13
1
14
Endocervicitis
11
2
13
Pyometra
1
1
1
(c) Ovary
Cysts
26
1
27
Displacements
1
1
2
( d) Fallopian Tubes —
Salpingitis
49
2
2
53
Pyosalpinx
13
1
14
Tubo-ovarian Abscess ..
15
J
16
(e) Broad Ligament —
Perimetritis .. ..
4
1
5
Parametritis
(J) Menstrual Disorders—
Amenorrhoea
1
1
2
Dysmenorrhcea ..
3
3
(17) Sterility ..
(h) Severe Menofane
1
1
(j) Esthiomene
I
1
Total
106
293
82
50
15
21
37
9
613
X. —DISEASES OF THE GENITO-URINARY SYSTEM —{ Continued).


XL—DISEASES OF PREGNANCY, PARTURITION
& PUERPERII
M.
— : t
Discharged during Year. :
■ -5
O'
Diseases, Etc.
Ti
•a
a
>
a
1
j
I
•o
I
'a
i
i
1
*3
a
o
◄
H
O
H
U
3
V
1 1
1
5
M |
F
M |
F
M
F
M
F
PREGNANCY . . . * *
-
2
7
Hyperetnesis Gravid an um
]
1
Eclampsia
Abob/tion —
1
2
Threatened
7
Complete -. • • • • '
1
6
Incomplete
3
Septic • •
1
5
1
Hydatid Mole
5
Extra-Uterine Gestation
3
Ruptured Ectopic
*
1
2
Puerferal Septicaemia
Traumatism —
Lacerated Cervix • • •
to Perinaeum & Vagma
Breast Affections—
Mastitis
Abscess i •
| Totals
32
2
-
1
, — “
; ‘ xil --DISEASES OF THE BREAST (N-oN-PuEKPEii At,.
i
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
o
2
1
5
Mastitis, Acute
4
2
G
„ j Chronic ...
„ ' Suppurative
5
Beuigp Tuipours .
Paget’s Disease
• Total
11
2
3
16


XIII.—DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
Discharged
DURING Y EAR.
i
U
>>
J
Diseases, Etc.
i
d
>
H
d
u
>
22
V
c
d
V
U
o
H
J
X
D
5
M
F
M
1 F
M
F
M
1 F
Motor Tracts—
Progressive Muscular Atrophy
1
; i
c £.
Haniplehia ..
8
i
1
1
1
12
L Muscular Dystrophy
; 1
1
Freidrichs Ataxia
1
I
Spinal Cord —
Myelitis
1
1
Meninges—
Pachymeningitis
f 4
2
S
Septo ,,
1
1
Brain—
Cerebral Haemorrhage
3
2
6
3
1
1 16
6
37
Thrombosis
1
6
2
1
10
Disseminated Sclerosis
1 1
1
Tumor
i
2
T
Cerebral Abscess
1
b
Nerves—
Neuritis,
2
i
4
4
11
,, Multiple ..
2
i
I
1
5
Sciatica
3
i
3
o
9
Herpes Tester .. ..
1
1
2
Facial Paralysis
1
1
Tic Doloreux
1
1
Painfid Cicatrix
1
1
Other Paralysis
1
i
4
1
7
Diseases or Unknown Pathology-
Headache
2
•
2
Paralysis Agitans ..
2
2
Chorea
2
2
2
1
1
1
9
Infantile Convulsions
3
3
1
7
Epilepsy .. .. .. '• -.
9
26
5
7
1
48
Migrane
1
1
2
Neuralgia
1
3
1
i
6
Hysteria
1
8
3
13;
2
2
29
Neurasthenia'
8
5
4
10
2
29
Mental Disorders—
Insanity
3
1
4
Phobias .. ..
1
1
2
Total
39
30
66
53j
21
9
24
13
255


XIV-DISEASES OF DUCTLESS.GLANDS AND LYMPHATICS.
'
Discharged during Year.
I
6*
1
*3
>.
J
<
Diseases, Etc.
*2
T3
OJ
>
<u
.3i
"3
•a
cs
u
o
o
H
■
3
u
od
c
D
5
2
V
M
F
M
F
M 1
F
M
F
A. Lymphatics—
2
Lymphangitis
2
2
1
]
1
14
Lymphadenitis ..
7
\
2
Adenitis Inguinal
B. Thyroid—
3
2
40
Simple Goitre .. • • • •
5
Exophthalmic Goitre
6
5
Benign Tumours
1
1
Cysts
1
2
Myxodema
-
. Spleen—
1
*
I
Banti’s Disease ..
I
Other Enlargements
i
1
Acromegaby
1
1
Tumor ot Pituitary
—
—
Total
1C
38
3
1?
2
A
3
s
•
75
XV. —DISEASES OF
THE EYE.
M
F I
M j
F
M
F
M
F
j
Lids —Blepharitis .. ■ • '
1
1
1
1
3
I
Cha’azion
1
Trichiasis ..
1
11
Entropion
5
]
4
Ectropian
1
I
Ptosis
1
I
Meibomian Cyst ..
Lacrymal Apparatus—
2
Dacrocystitis and Abscess
1
5
Lacrymal Obstruction
6
„ Fistular
5
10
11
47
1
Conjunctiva —Granular (Trachoma)
10
1
16
Purulent ..
1
1
3
9
Phlyctenulas
3
17
2
11
1
29
Pterygium
Cornea ‘and Sclerotic— Keratitis
2
6
6
32
Ulcer of Cornea
15
5
D
2
Staphyloma '
2
o
2
o
6
Opacities ..
i
13
1
i
6
1
S
1
2
4
Hypopion
Urinal Tract—Tritis
26
1
Tridocyclitis
1
4
Prolapse of Iris ..
5
1
2
Chorxiditis


Diseases, Etc.
Disc
T3
<y
3
o
HAROED
"3
>
At
X
DURI
Unrelieved z
o
EAR.
"3
V
Q
Mortality %
Total.
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
Parnlent Ophthalmia
1
1
1
3
Sympathetic
1
L
Fan Ophtalmitis..
1
1
Lens—Lamellar
4
2
4
1
12
Congenital
i
3
2
6
Senile ..
37
22
8
6
1
3
77
Traumatic
1
4
5
Secondary
8
5
13
Dislocation
1
2
3
Retina —Detachment
4
4
Optic Nerve—
Optic Neuritis
5
2
2
1
10
Chronic Retrobullar Neuritis ..
1
, I
Senile Amblyopia
1
1
Ophie Abroply
1
1
2
Unclassified
2
2
4
Muscles —Strabismus
6
5
2
13
Others —
Arbital Cellulitis..
I
1
Glaucoma, Acute
4
2
8
7
21
Cysts and Tumours of Orbit ..
3
3
Total
147(
106
73
51
4
4
385
XVI.—DISEASES
OF
THE EAP.
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
A. External Ear—
\
Exostoses
1
1
Fenmculosis
1
1
13. Middle Ear—
Suppuration, Acute
I
1
1
8
„ Chronic
1
1
2
Polypus
2
2
Mastoiditis, Acute
4
7
2
1
14
„ Chronic
2
.3
2
1
8
■C. Neuroses—
Deafness ...
Total
8
12
7
1
2
1
31
xv. —diseases of the EYE— { continued).


XVII.—DISEASES OF
the SKIN.
w
|
1
U DURING Y EAR.
6® j
!
•o 1
{
£ i
<
Diseases. Etc.
1>
¥> 1
o
-2 i
O
•d
♦
>
T3
u
c
o
&
' j
—
j
M
F |
M
F
M
F
M
F
Urtriaria —
1
5
1
12
Eczema .. • • • • • •
1
o
4
Dermatitis Rcfems
3
o
•
7
Furunculosis • • • • • •
5
1
ij
•
7
Carbuncle • • • • • •
1
Impetigo ..
1
1
Psonasis .. • • • • • • j
Animal Parasites—
1
Pediculosis
Diseases or the Appendages —
Sebaceous Glands —
Sebaceous Cyst • • • • •
Nails—Ingrowing Nail ..
-
Skin and Subcutaneous Tissues
18
1 25
! e
is
f
3
1
1
35
Cellulitis
Abscess
14
o
j 6
1
2
64
7
Gangrene
Sinus
1 r
1
>
1 r
1
'
5
6
Chronic Ulcer
Others —
1
Nfevi
1
[
3
Angioneurotic (Edema ..
I
—
—
Total , .. • r
6
3 3
2 3
Bj 1
1
i
2
3
1
154
.
XVIII.—CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS.
M F
M
F
M i F
M ;
F
Alimentary Fbact —
o
2
Mouth —Hare Lip ..
4
Cleft Palate
1
1
Congentital Dislocations
Urogenital —
Congenital Absence of Uterus and
Vagina
1 1
—
—
—
—
Total
1 3^
i. 3 1
T


XIX.—DISEASES OF BONES
AND ORGANS OF LOCOMOTION.
Diseases, Etc-
Disc
•d
<u
3
u
Relieved. £
|
Unrelieved z
o
LAR
d
<u
5
Mortality %
Total.
1
Bones —
M
If
i M |
F
; M
i f
M
F
Periostitis
3
4
Osteomyelitis
1
I
I 1
3
Jaw
2
1
3
Humerus ..
1
I
Phalanges .. ...
. i
i
! 2
4
Femur ,.
5
7,
12
Tibia
!
1
1
3
Others
3
2
5
Benign Tumours
' 1
1
2
Asteitis Deformans
1
1
Spine of Os Calnis
o
2
4
Joints—
Synovitis Acnte
4
2'
1
7
,, Chronic .,
2
1
, '
3
Arthritis
1
2
4
4
1
12
Anklyasis
2
*
1
4
Loose Bodies
i
1
2
Muscles—Myositis and Fibrositis ..
3
6 :
2
n
Lumbago ..
1
1
2
Tendons and Bursae—
Bursitis Acute
5
3
1
9
Chronic
ol
O
Tenosynovitis
1
I
Deformities—Torhicollis Acquired
1
I
Scolivsis
2
2
Duputyrens Comp ..
5
i
6
Gen Varim .. .. . . . .
i
I
Hallux Valgus
3
1
4
Talipes Acquired ..
2
o
Flat Foot
I
i
Contracted Tendons
1
i
Spardylitis Deforms
2
I
1
3
Infantile Paralysis ..
2
2
Ingrowing Toenails..
i
1
2
Coxa Vara
i
I
Drop Foot ..
1
I
Hammer Toe
21
2
Coccydinia ..
2
li
3
Total
45j
21)
39 13|
8
1
127


XX.—VIOLENCE.
Discharged during Year.
-
•o
0)
<
Diseases, Etc.
T3
•a
0)
>
>
%
•6
u
O
H
U
*3
C*
C
5
s
A.” Fractukes —
M
FI
M
F
M
F
M
F
1. Simple—
(a) Head —
Skull Vertex, Linear
30
4
5
1
6
3
28
3
80
1
4
Depressed
1
1
Skull, Base
3
I
7
Nasal Bones
3
1
1
1
3
Mandible
1
1
1
4
Facial Bones . •
1
f
(6) Trunk —
Spine
Ribs /..
7
14
1
7
6
5
2
1
2
3
18
29
(c) Upper Limb —
3
Clavicle
Scapula
Humerus
Ulna
Radius ..
2
11
6
6
2
2
6
6
3
0
1
1
1
2
1
5
20
13
12
7
Ulna and Radius
2
5
2
Metacarpals
2
1
1
Phalanges
( d) Lower Limb —
1
9
1
6
o
1
12:
Pelvis ..
Femur ..
i
36
4
1
1
57
6
Patella
Tibia
Fibula
Tibia and Fibula
Tarsals ..
4
30
35
35
5
2
6
7
7
14
12
12
6
1
4
1
1
1
1
52
58
57
11
&
Metatarsals
3
3
4
Philanges ..
4
2. Compound —
(a) Skull and others
(b) Upper Limb
Humerus
Ulna
Radius and Ulna
Phalanges
(c) Lower Limb —
Femur ..
Tibia and Fibula
Metatarsals
Phalanges ..
3. Ununited Fractures
4. Malunited Fractures
B. Sprains —
' .
Wrist .. .. ~ • ■
i
10
Ankle
Others


MOORCLIFFE OPHTHALMIC HOSPITAL.
(Miller’s Point.)


ONE OF THE CHILDREN’S WARDS


MAIN OPERATING THEATRE.


KITCHEN.




THE LAUNDRY.
(Washing Machinery.)


THE LAUNDRY.
(Mangling, Ironing, Folding and Sorting Room.)




-
Discharged during Year.
— '
TD
<
Diseases, Etc.
TJ
I
V
c
T3
4
>
.2:
*4
a
>
u
V.
c
D
•a
C
I
*c«
41
U
O
s
H
O
H
"
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
E
C. Dislocations —
1. Simple—
i
Spine
I
Clavicle
0
1
Shoulder ..
2
1
1
4
Elbow .. • • !
1
2
1
2
2
Fingers
Hip
Semilunar Cartilage
2
2
1
Others .. ..
'
2. Compound
D. Muscles and Tendons —
Contusion
Rupture ..
Cut Tendons ..
3
2
E. Heart and A t essels—
1
1
6
Haematona
2
2
F. Nerves —
1
Division ..
1
1
I
Nerve in Callus ..
G. Regional Injuries —
1. Head
31
Scalp Wounds
17
4
5
o
8
1
Concussion
84
30
28
4
3
1
159
1
15
Triamatic Epilepsy
2. Face .. • • • • - • •
1
4
3
4
3
1
3. External Ear
4. Eye — Injuries to
35
6
25
Penetrating Wounds
2
1
69
5. Nose
>
6. Neck
Wounds of
3
]
1
8
Cut Throat
5
1
1
7. Mouth and Tongue
8. Chest —
Contusions and Crush ..
3
1
4
Rupture of Viscera
1
0
9. Back —
Contusion and Sprain ..
21
2
10
2
—
36
Others
10. Abdomen —
/
6
3
Contusion and Crush ..
2
1
1
*
Injury to Liver ..
Injury to Spleen
Rupture & Perforation of Bowel
Injury to Kidney
xx. — violence —( continued).


Diseases, Etc.
Disc
T3
V
u
3
o
HARGBD
•6
>
.Si
U
cc
DURING Y
U
>
*3
c
D
TAR.
tJ
<D
5
>.
*3
4-»
u
o
s
Total. )
M
*f
M
F
1V1
i?
iVl
0'
11. Tel vis—
1
Injury to External Genitals
3
2
5
Rupture of Urethra
3
3
12. Extremities—
(a) Upper—
Contusion and Crush
9
7
16
Wounds and Avulsions
6
3
3
2
1
14
( b ) Lower—
r
Contusions and Crushes
11
3
8
1
1
i
25
Traumatic Amputations
Wounds and Avulsions
8
1
1
1
l
12
H. Bites —
Snake ..' ..
•
I. Gunshot Wounds —
Soft Parts
5
1
6
1
l
13
Viscera
Skull
1
1
3
5
J. Infected Wounds
K. Foreign Bodies —
Needles and Bullets
3
3
Others
19
6
3
2
2
32
L. Burns and Scalds —
12
5
8
7
1
3
36
Boiling Water and Steam
Fire
M. Insolation —
Heat Stroke
4
1
2
1
8
N. Poisoning—
Carbolic Acid and Derivatives ..
4
11
1
2
1
I
20
Opium and Morphia
2
I
3
Cocaine .. .. ., '
1
1
2
Arsenic
5
1
6
Phosphorus
1
1
Corrosives
2
6
1
1
9
Belladonna ..
1
1
Mercurv ..
2
1
3
Coal Gas ..
5
3
8
Food Poisoning ..
C
7
1
1
15
Others
6
8
1
15
0. Shock
16
8
11
2
1
1
39
P. Immersions
6
3
8
Haemorrhage (under E.) —
After Teeth Extraction..
1
1
After Tonsilectomy
14
20
34
Secondary..
3
3
No Disease
4
12
16
Not Classified
2
4
6
Total
601
191
246
63
32
19
54
11
1216
xx.—vxolkn ce —(conti n ued).


I.
GENERAL SUMMARY.
Auixnal Parasitic Diseases
26
11.
Specific Infectious Diseases
1858
III.
Gonstitutional Diseases
344
IV.
Intoxications ., .. .. ..
37
/■ V.
Neoplasms and Cysts
327
VI.
Diseases of the Blood .. .. ..
147
VII.
Diseases of the Respiratory System
1454
VIII.
Diseases of the Circulatory System ..
342
IX.
Diseases of the Alimentary System ..
1300
X.
Diseases of the Genito-Urinary System
1145
XI.
Diseases of Pregnancy, Parturition and Puer-
perium
104
XII,
Diseases of the Breast ..
39
XIII.
Diseases of the Nervous System
504
XIV.
Diseases of the Dutcless Gland and Lymphatics
118
XV.
Diseases of the Eye
2312
XVI.
Diseases of the Ear .....
373
XVII.
Diseases of the Skin
1478
XVIII.
Congenital Malformations
20
XIX.
Diseases of Bones and Organs of Locomotion
288
XX.
Violence . . .. .,
409
Grand Total
12625
I.—DISEASES DUE TO ANIMAL PARASITES.
Disease.
Male
Female
Total.
Protozoa —
Malaria
8
8
Ceatodes —
* Hydated of
Brain and Cord ...
1
I
Liver
1
1
imng
1
I
Nematodes —
Ascaris Lumbricoides..
Oxyuris Vermicularis..
4
11
15
Ticks
Totals ..
13
13
20
Statistics of Out-Patient Department
for 1918.


II.—SPECIFIC INFECTIOUS DISEASES.
Disease.
Male
Female
Total.
Infantile Paralysis
2
2
Diphtheria .. . r
1
3
4
Gastro-Enteritis (Infantile)
12
11
23
Enteric
3
1
4
Erysipelas..
2
2
Febricula ..
3
3
Influenza ..
42
70
118
Measles
6
6
12
Mumps
2
2
Pertussis ..
27
4
31
Lobar Pneumonia
1
• 1
2
Varicella •.
3
7
10
Tuberculosis —
Arthritis
5
1
0
Bone
2
2
Spine
2
1
3
Kidney
1
1
2
Laryngeal
4
4
Pulmonary ..
48
T3
101
Peutoneum ..
1
1
2
Lymphatic ..
4
4
8
Abscess
Cutaneous —
1
1
Lupus Vulgaris
3
3
Scrofulo-derma
1
1
Acute Rheumatism
2
2
Venereal Disease —
Chancroid .. .. .. ..
21
1
22
Gonorrhoea —
Acute
725
34
759
Chronic
72
4
76
Arthritic ..
12
3
15
* Prostatis..
I
I
Epidydimitis
Ophthalmia Neonatorum
22
22
Balamitis
23
23
Syphilis—
Primary ..
288
TO
358
Secondary..
57
34
91
/ Tertiary ..
38
43
81
„ Cutaneous
11
7
18
„ Brain and Cord
2
2
„ Bone ..
3
1
4
,, Visceral
2
2
Parasyphilides—
24
Tabes Dorsalis
21
3
Congenital Syphilis .. •
7
5
12
Totals ..
1480
378
1853


III.—CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES.
Disease.
Male.
Female
Total
Arthritis Deformans ....
14
4
18
Rheumatoid Arthritis ..
(5
17
23
Muscular Rheumatism ..
38
35
73
Chronic Rheumatism . . ..
47
75
122
Diabetes Mellitus
3
14
17
Gout
21
2
£3
Obesity .. .. .. .. ...
I
1
Rickets
2
1
3
Scurvy
Senility and Asthenia ..
11
2
13
Starvation and Marasmus
\ 2
2
Debility
8
41
49
Totals ..
153
191
344
IV.—INTOXICATIONS*.
Disease.
Male.
Kcmale
Total
Alcoholism, Acute
6
6
„ Chronic
12
7
19
Chronic Arcemial Poisonings—
Lead . .
4
4
Morphiasm .. .. .. .. .. .7
I
i
Nicotine
7
7
Totals ..
29
8
37
V.—NEOPLASMS AND CYSTS.
Diskasi;.
Male.
i
PemaJe
Total
Cysts, Retention .. .. .
3
3
Benign Tumours—
Adenomata .. .. .. .. •
1
1
Angiomata ..
Fibromata ..
i
5
0
Lipomata
4
11
15
Papillomata
8
10
18
Osteomata .. .. •
1
;j
4
Others (Ntevi, see Skin) ..
1
I
Malignant—
Carcinomata .. .. .. ..
14
14
Face
7
7 '
Lip.,
24
7
31
Tongue
8
8
Jaw
3
i
4


Disease.
Male.
Female
Total
Tonsil
2
1
3
Mouth
3
3
Salvary Glands ..
1
1
Orbit
1
1
Breast
9
9
Uterus
4
4
Vagina
1
1
1
Larynx
2
3
Oesophagus
4
4
Stomach ..
11
7
18
Intestine .. .. .. .
5
5
Rectnm
4
i
6
Liver
2
4
6
Thyroid
Lymphatics .. ■ ..
4
3
4
Skin
I
4
Rodent Ulcer
68
69
127
Endotheliomata ..
Sarcomata .. .. ....
1
1
Eye
1
1
3
Jaw
3
Skin
1
I
Others
1
1
2
Lymphosarcoma
1
i
Melanotic Sarcoma
1
4
5
Leukoplakia
3
3
Totals ..
187
140
827
VL—DISEASES
OF THE BLOOD.
Disease.
Male
Female
Tot al.
/
Anaemia—
Secondary
Pernicious
Chlorosis
♦
Leukaemia —
Lymphatic .
Myeloid
•
26
1
114
1
6
139
2
6
,
Totals ..
/
..
26
121
147
V. —neoplasms and cysts— (continued).


V1L—DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM.
Disease.
Male
Female
Total.
Nose and Nasopharynx—
Nasal Cavity — Rhinitis —
1
I
Acute Coryza
12
9
21
Simple Chronic
46
62
108
Atrophic
4
6
10
Hydrorrhoea .. * ..
2
2
Ozyena
1
1
Anosmia
-
I
I
Hay Fever
4
4
Neoplasms — Polypi
11
9
20
Septum — Deflection ..
129
50
179
Ulceration ..
I
1
2
Perforation ..
1
1
Accessory Sinuses — Frontal Sinus—
Acute Catarrh
3
o
5
C hronic „
4
4
Antrum of Highmore —
Suppurative
2
3
5
F.B. .. ...
2
2
Naso Pharynx —
Acute Nasopharyngitis
1 '
2
2
Chronic Nasopharyngitis ..
8
18
26
Tonsils and Adenoids
320
328
648
TurbinaJs
2
2
Epistaxis
3
2
5
Larynx—
Exudations — Acute Catarrh
10
14
24
Chronic Catarrh .. .. .>
4
4
Neuroses—Hysterical Aphonia
I
1
Paralyses of Adductors ..
1
1
Trachea and Broncht —
Tracheitis .. .. v '
1
I
Bronchitis, Acute
46
53
99
„ Chronic
76
69
145
Asthma
22
18
40
1
Broncbielasis
1
Lungs—
Emphysema
8
8
Broncho Pneumonia ..
2
4
6
1
Interstitial „
1
Haemoptysis
5
5
Pdedra —
Pleurisy—Acute Dry
20
16
35
Acute effusion
1
1
Chronic
13
13
Pleurodynia .. ..
8
12
20
Totals ..
759 1
695
1464


VIII.—DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM.
Disease.
Male
Female '
Total.
Heart.
Pericarditis
5
1
10
1
Myocardium—Myocarditis
Lj L
20
Fibroid Degeneration
10
10
Fatty Degeneration
4
4
Dilatation
1
4
Hypertrophy .. .. ••
I
3
1
4
3
Endocardium —Endocarditis, Simple ..
Valvular Disease—
11
15
26
33
Mitral Regurgitation
Mitral Stenosis .. ....
13
20
Aortre
7
4
I I
Mixed .. •• •• • • • •
2
2
4
Failing Heart .. •. • •
10
24
40
Neuroses —
5
- 5
n
Angina Pectoris .. .. • • • • - •
5
0
Paroxysmal Tacchycardia..
6
I
8
Heart Block
1
2
Functional Disease
11
13
Vessels.
6
6
I
Aortitis
Anemysm
Thoracic ..
Arterio Sclerosis
1
6
25
10
35
Phlebitis and Thrombosis
6
5
21
11
Varicose Veins
18
39
Varicose Ulcer ....
11
23
34
Totals .. .. ‘
140
193
342
IX.—DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY SYSTEM.
Disease.
Maie
Female
Total.
Mouth—
Stomatitis
4
I
Aphthous
\
Tongue —-Glossitis
Ulcers of
Ranula
1
o
Gums — Gingivitis
- i
1
\
Epulis
1
3
3
Teeth — Carious ..
Unerupted .. . . • • ~
2
Pyorrhoea Alveolaris
Alveolar Abscess (see Bones)


Disease.
Male.
Female
J Total
Salivary Glands—
I
Parotid—Abscess
Parotitis
1
1
I
Benign Tumors
1
Submaxillary—Inflammation
J
Calculi
1
1
Oro-Pharynx—Pharynx
2
1
Pharyngitis, Acute
16
6
„ Chronic
14
Acute Follicular Pharyngitis
11
6
25
Acute Infectious Pharyngitis
4
6
Pharyngitis Ulcerosa
4
4
Foreign Bodies
4
Uvula—Ulceration
i
i
i
Elongation
1
Tonsils—Acute Follicular Tonsillit
30
23
8
41
I
Peritonsillar Abscess
3
24
53
11
Chronic Tonsillitis
Linginal Tonsils — Myscosis . .
05
1
Oesophagus—
Stricture
i
Foreign Body
2
Stomach—
3
Gastritis, Acute
Gastritis, Chronic
35
24
36
59
Foreign Body
1
14
i
41
1
Gastric Ulcer
14
Pyloric Stenosis
r *
28
1
2-18
6
Neuroses—Dyspepsia
Hyperacidity
131
3
117
Q
Pylorospasm
[
Intestines —
1
Intestinal Colic
Diarrhoea
4
s
12
Constipation
Enteritis
60
173
11
8 i
27
233
Colitis
Intestinal Stasis and Toxfpjnia
7
3
1
21
18
' 11
1
Duodenal Ulcer
Intussueeption
1
11
24
Hernia, Inguinal
88
99
Femoral
Incisional
1
2
1
3
Ventral
3
Interstitial . .
4
. 1
76
1
Appendicitis—Simnle
Glenard’s Disease
31
45
Rectum and Anus—
J
Proctitis
I
Prolapse
1
1
5
Fissure
1 1
4 I
IX.— DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY SYSTEM— {continued).


Disease.
Male.
Female
> Tot al
Fistula in Ano
7
5
12
12
Abscess, Iscliio-Rectal
5
/
Haemorrhoids ..
40
10
50
12
Pruntis Ani
12
Liver—
8
11
1
5
9
10
Jaundice
Cirrhosis
Gall Bladder —
1
Catarrhal Jaundice ..
Cholecystitis
9
2
11
Acute
Chronic
8
8
Cholelithiasis ..
1
7
8
Pancreas —
1
1
3
Haemorrhagic Pancreatitis,
Acute ..
3
Chronic
Peritoneum —'
Adhesions and Bands
5
3
Others
Totals
050
600
1300
X.—DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM.
Disease.
Male
Female
Total.
Kidneys and Ureters —
6
12
1
17
_
Nephritis —Acute ..
29
Chronic
1
I
]
Ureanna ...
Pyonephrosis
1
24
53
77
Pyelitis
1
5
4
Renal Colic ..
Renal Calculus
25
30
Ureteric Calculus .. • • ,
3
11
11
Nephroptosis ..
Anomalies of Secretion —
1
1
1
3
1
Albuminuria..
4
Hsematuria ..
3
4
Polynria ..
3
3
Dysuria
i
i
I
Pynria ..
1
Phosphaturia
Bladder —
Cystitis, Acute
1
10
14
9
24
16
„ Chronic
Calculas
2
3
1
8
5
Q
Retention of Urine ..
13
Incontinence .. ..
5
Urethra —
23
24
23
Stricture
Urethritis (Non-gonorrhoeal)
28
52
6
Periurethral Abscess ..
0
IX. —DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY SYSTEM (continued).


Disease.
J Male.
Fema
v | Total
Fistulas
1
7
7
Caleuli ..
1
Foreign Body . .
1
1
PR03TATE—
1
1
Hypertrophy ..
19
19
Prostatitis . . • • •. .
Male Genitals—Phimosis
3
3
Paraphimosis ..
29
29
Orchitis and Epididymitis
6
33
0
Undefended Testicle
33
Hj'drocele .. • • .. .
7
7
Haematocele
22
1
23
Varicocele * ..
1
18
1
Wet Dreams . . • • .. .
•
18
Female Genitals—
3
3
Vulva and Vagina—Vulvitis
9
9
Vaginitis ... '
Kaurosis Vulvas
.io
30
Vainisums .. • • .. .
10
10
Bartholin’s Abscess.
2
2
Rectocele and Cystoce’e
5
5
Uterus—Endometritis, Acute
39
39
Endometritis, Chronic
4
4
Metritis. Acute
104
104
Metritis, Chronic .
4
4
Polypus .. .
8
8
Fibromyomata
3
3
Others
15
15
Fibrosis Uteri
1
1
Sub-Involution
5
5
Super-Involution
3
3
Displacements—Retreflexion and Vision”
Anteflexion and Version
3
118
3
IIS
Inversion
5
5
Procidentia and Palps*
Endocervicitis
13
13
7
7
Adenoma of Cervix
70
76
Ovary —Inflammation .
0
G
Cysts
15
15
Benign Tumours
10
1
16
Displacements.. • “
1
6
Adhesions
0
Fallopian Tubes—Salpingitis
Pyosalpinx ..
10
70
10
70
Menstrual Disorders—Amenorrhcea
IT
15 J
I 1
Dysmenorrhoea
15
Menorrhagia
111
10
Metrorrhagia
8
8
Sterility
4
4
Severe Menopause
4
34
4
34
Totals . .
30 r»
840
1145
X.-DISEASES Of THE GENITO-URINARY SYSTEM -(continued).


XI.—DISEASES of pregnancy, parturition &
PUERPERIUM
Disease.
Male
Female
Total.
84
84
Pregnancy
Hyperemesis Gravidarium
2
2
Abortion —
4
4
Threatened ..
2
2
Complete
6
6
Incomplete ..
Carneous Mole .. • • • •
6
Extra-Uterine Gestation
6
Traumatism —Lacerated Cervix
Breast Affections —
Mastitis
Abscess
Totals ..
104
104
XLI.—DISEASES OF THE
BREAST.
'
Disease.
Male
Female
Total.
Mastitis —
1 [
11
Acute
16
16
Chronic
1
6
7
Suppurative
Paget’s Disease ..
3
3
Benign Tumours
Mastodynia
2
2
.
Totals ..
1
38
39


XIII.—DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
Disease.
Male
Female
Total.
Motor Tracts—
Progressive Muscular Atrophy
1
1
2
Spostic Parapbgia ., ..
3
3
Infantile Diplegia
1
1
Muscular Dystrophy ,. .. .. .,
Spinal Cord—
Myelitis
I
1
2
Brain—
Brain
1
I
Cerebral Haemorrhage
7
4
11
Cerebral Thrombosis ..
]
1
1
Disseminated Sclerosis
1
Nerves—
Neuritis, Localised
9
25
34
„ Multiple
2
3
5
Neuioma
1
1
12
Sciatisa
9
3
Facial Paralysis
8
3
11
Tic Doloureux
2
1
3
Painful Cicatrix
4
2
6
Other Paralysis
8
2
10
Diseases of Unknown Pathology —
Headache
18
40
58
Paralysis Agitans
5
2
7
Chorea ..
10
13
23
Infantile Convulsions ..
I
1
Epilepsy
37
18
65
Migraine
7
7
Neuralgia
17
28
45
/ Hysteria
5
14
19
Neurasthenia ..
56
102*
157
Tics and Spasms
1
2
3
Reynand s Disease
1
J
Mental Disorders—
Insanity
2
8
10
Malingering
2
2
Insomnia
6
2
7
Phobeas
4
1
5
Totals ..
221
283
501


XIV, DISEASES OF DUCTLESS GLANDS AND LYMPHATICS
Male.
Female
Total
Disease.
.
Lymphatics —
2
2
Lymphangitis ..
15
10
25 •
Lymphadenit s
g
1
0
„ Inguinal
4
4
Hodgkin’s Disease
Thyroid —
|
16
17
Simple Goitre . .
1
50
51
Exophthalmic Goitre
Benign Tumours ..
5
5
Cysts
4
4
Myxoedema
Suprarenal—
I
I
Addisan’s Disease
.
Totals . .
3.
87
118
XV.— DISEASES OF THE EYE.
Disease.
Male.
Female
Total
Lids —
19 i
27
46
Blepharitis
2
I
3
Hordeolara
16
16
32
Chalazion
5
9
14
Trichiasis
4
4
Ectropion
2
2
Entropion
6
I
6
Ptosis ..
9
13
22
Meilbomian Cyst .. ■ • •
Lachrymal Apparatus—
3
6
9
Dachryocystitis
2
16
• 18
Lachrymal Obstruction
Conjunctiva —
Conjunctivitis—
160
178
338
Catarrhal ..
2J
21
42
Granular (Trachoma)
2
1
3
Purulent ..
1
5
6
Phylctenular
28
21
49
Pterygium
Cornea and Sclerotic —
29
17
46
Keratitis
33
20
63
Ulcer of Cornea
2
2
Staphyloma
3
2
5
Pannus ..
34
31
65
Opacities
2
2
Scleitis • •
2
2
4
Episcleritis
5
1
6
Hypopion .. • • •• •• ’’


Disease.
j Male.
1
Female
Total
Uveal Tract—
Iritis
Iridocyclitis
37
34
7L
Choroiditis .. "
I
1
7
12
19
Vitreous—
Opacities
6
6
12
Lens—Cataract
Congenital
Senile ..
2
1
3
Traumatic
24
24
Secondary
4
2
6
Unclassified
Z
2
Dislocation of Lens .
44
51
95
Dislocation of Aphakia
3
2
1
3
3
Retina—
Detachment of
Retinitis
2
1
3
„ Pigmentosa ..
Embolism of Central Artery
8
1
1
6
14
1
1
Optic Nerve—
Optic Neuritis
Toxic Amblyopia
2
3
5
Optic Atrophy
4
9
4
4
13
Neuroses—
Hysterical Amblyopia
4
1
1
1
5
Errors op Refraction
Unclassified
25
72 |
43
174
Hypermetropia .. ., ■
Myopia .
68
246
Asthenopia
26
59
85
Presbyopia
56
2
2
Ammetropia ..
188
244
Astigmatism
77
169
246
• • •-< • •
45
161
206
Muscles—
Strabismus
58
1
66
1
Nystagmus .. .. , _ ’' ’ * • *' p
124
2
Others—
Orbital Cellulitis
Glaucoma, Chronic
*
1
3
Cysts and Tumours of Orbit
8
9
17
Nueaoppthaluros
1
1
Pingueculum ..
i
1
1
3
2
Totals ..
921
1391
2312
xv.—diseases OF the eye —(continued).


XVI.—DISEASES OF THE EAP.
—
Male
Female
Total.
Disease.
-
External Ear —
1
2
3
Benign Tumours
1
1
Foreign Body in Meatus
86
57
143
Cerumen
2
I
3
Otitis Externa, Acute
4
4
Chronic
Furunculosis ..
4
4
8
Middle Ear —
5
5
Perforation of Tympanum ..
2
2
4
Catarrh, Acute
22
27
49
Chronic
2
8
10
Suppuration, Acute
36
25
61
Chronic
I
I
Otosclerosis
4
3
7
Salpingitis, Chronic ..
I
1
Mastoiditis, Acute
4
1
5
„ Chronic ... • • , * *
Cholesteotoma
1
I
Internal Ear —
1
1
Menures Disease
Paralysis of VIII. Nerve
2
Neuroses —
22
15
37
Deafness
10
4
14
Vertigo ..
Tinnitus
2
11
13
Totals ..
205
168
373
XVII. DISEASES OF THE SKIN
Disease.
Male
Female
Total.
Hyperaemia —
3
2
5
Erythema Simplex ..
tt Intertrigo
1
1
2
Exudations —
Erythema Exudativa Multiforme • •
Peliosis Rheumatica ..
5
3
5
3
I
I
Erythema Nodosum
Urticaria
16
26
42
Prurigo
119
115
234
Eczema
Impetigo Contagiosura
56
46
102
Pemphigus Contagiosum
Furunculosis • • «• • •
36
13
49


SECRETARY’S OFFICE.


“D” WARD.
(One of the Female Wards.)


“H” WARD.
(One of the Male Wards.)


DAY CASUALTY ROOM.


NIGHT CASUALTY ROOM.


THE WANT MEMORIAL THEATRE.


THE WANT MEMORIAL THEATRE.
(Sterilising Room.)


THE CHAPEL.


Disease.
Male.
i
Female |
*■' Total
T
Carbuncle
2
1
2
Pustular Folliculitis ..
10
1
Herpes Zoster ..
27
37
„ Facialis
2
4
6
„ Progenitalis ..
1
35
1
Psoriasis
20
55
.Pityriasis Rubra
13
9
22
,, Alba
5
4
9
.Lichen Planus
3
4
7
„ Varigatus
it
3
3
Dermatitis
.Haemorrhage—
9
13
1
1
Purpura
■Hypertrophy —
3
3
Icthyosis
3
k 3
Verruca
3
3
0
Cornu ..
2
2
4
Callosities
1
1
Keratosis Nigricans ..
5
1
5
Scleroderma
i
Anomalies of Pigmentation —
Leucoderma and Melanoderma
2
2
Neuroses —
1
11
1
20
Dermatolgia
Pruritus
9
■New Formations —
Mole
Xanthoma
Lupus Erythematosis
2
5
7
Keloid
2
0
8
Mycosis Fungoides
Verruca Peruviana
(Diseases of the Appendages —
2
Sweat Glands—
1
1
1
Hyperidrosis
Bromidrosis
Milafia Vesiculosa ..
1
Sebaceous Glands—
30
52
88
Seborrhoea
Seborrholic Dermatitis
14
16
16
Sebaceous Cyst
14
Pritium
1
13
27
1
Acne Vulgaris
40
, Rosacea
4
22
26
Hair Follicles apd Hair —
0
6
Alopecia
Alopecia Arata
5
4
9
Sycosis
Dermatitis Papillaris Capillitu
12
12
-Nails —
1
Onychia
3
4
Paronychia ..
10
10
1
Ingrowing Nail
1
xvii. — diseases'of thb skin —( continued■


Disease.
Male.
Female
Total
Hypf.rmycelic Parasites—
Tinea Tryckophytina
22
27
49
„ Imbricata Circinata ..
„ Versicolor
6
9
15
Animal Parasites —
111
246
Scabies ..
135
Pediculosis
9
22
31
Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue—
22
15
37
Cellulitis jg ..
Abscess ■ ..
6
1
5
18
24
Gangrene gj|
Sinus .. " & . •
2
]
7
Chronic Ulcer ..
24
65
89
Pus Infection ..
Others ..
8
15
23
Keratosis
6
25
31
Naevi
Xeroderma
Angio-neurotic Oedema
Erthpma
7
1
16
23
I
Totals ..
••
684
794
1478
XVIII.—CONGENITAL
MALFORMATIONS.
Disease.
Male
Female
Total.
Alimentary Tract : Mouth —
I
Hare Lip
1
I
I
Cleft Palate
Tongue Tie .. •. • • * •
Thyroglossal Cyst
!! !!
2
1
2
1
Nervous System—
1
2
Spina Bifida
Others ..
1
2
Organs of Locomotion —
1
4
Talipes ...
5
5
Others
Facial Deformities
i
i
Totals ..
..
14
6
20
XVII.— DISEASES OF THE SKIN —(continued).


XIX.—DISEASES OF BONES AND ORGANS OF LOCOMOTION.
•
Disease.
Male
Female
Total.
Bones—
Periostitis
17
10
27
Osteomyelitis ..
5
5
Caries and Necrosis of—
Skull
1
1
Jaw
4
4
Humerus ..
Phalanges
4
1
5
Femur
2
*
2
Tibia
3
3
Others ..
3
2
5
Alveolar Abscess
5
1
6
Benign Tumors
1
1
Osteotitis Deformans
3
3
Coccydynia .. ..
4
4
Joints —
Synovitis, Acute
10
8
18
„ Chronic
18
25
43
Arthritis
16
17
33
Ankylosis
1
1
Loose Bodies ..
2
2
Arthralgia .. .. ..
1
1
Muscles—
Myositis and Fibrositis
12
17
29
Lumbago
3
6
9
Tendons and Bursae—
Bursitis, Acute
1
2
3
„ Chronic ..
13
9
22
Ganglion
6
10
16
Teno Synovitis
10
10
20
Bunion ..
5
5
Deformities—
Tcrticallis
1
1
Scoliosis
2
2
Dupytren’s Contraction
1
1
Hammer Toe ..
2
2
Flat Foot
3
6
9
Contracted Tendons ..
2
2
Contraction from Bums
1
1
Spondytitis Deformans .,
1
1
2
Totals ..
143
145
288


XX.—VIOLENCE.
•
Disbasb.
Male
Female
Total.
Fractures —Simple—
Head —
1
1
Skull, Vertex Linear
„ Base ..
4
1
5
Nasal Bones
1
1
2
2
2
Facial Bones
Trunk —
4
1
5
Ribs ..
Upper Limb—
2
2
Clavicle
3
2
5
Humerus
1
1
Ulna
3
I
4
Radius
1
3
4
Ulna and Radius ..
I
I
Metacarpals ..
3
3
Phalanges
Lower Limb —
Pelvis .. # •
Femur
Patella
1
1
Tibia
Fibula
.
2
2
Tibia and Fibula ..
1
1
1
Metatarsals
I
Phalanges
Others
Fractures —Compound—
1
i
I
Upper Limb—
Phalanges
Ununited Fractures ..
SpraTxs—
1
1
Wrist ..
2
2
4
Ankle ..
1
4
5
Others ..
Dislocation s—
1
i
Clavicle
2
1
3
Shoulder
2
2
Elbow • • . • •
1
1
Knee
Semi-Lunar Cartilage ■ -
3
3
Muscles and Tendons
2
10
12
Contusion
1
1
Rupture
3
1
4
Cut Tendons ..
1
1
Wounds of Burs® .. • • • • • •


Disease.
Male.
Female
Total
Regional Injuries—
Head—
Scalp Wounds
7
1
8
Concussion ..
1
1
Face
5
5
Eye
Injuries to ..
23
14
37
Foreign Body in Cornea ..
5
2
7
„ „ Conjunctiva ..
2
2
Foreign Body in Eye
19
1
20
Abrasion of Cornea
3
3
Subconjunctival Haemorrhage
1
2
3
Cut Throat .. .. .. ..
1
1
Chest—Contusion and Crush
3
1
4
Back—Contusion and Sprain
9
I
10
Others ..
2
2
Abdomen—Contusions and Crush ..
Pelvis—Injury to External Genitalia
4
4
Wounds
3
3
Extre mi ties—Upper—
Contusion and Crush
12
1
13
Wounds and Avulsions
7
7
Extremities—Lower—
Contusions and Crush
20
I
21
Wounds and Avulsions
2
3
5
Bites—
Animal ..
1
1
Insect ..
1
o
3
Infected Wounds
o
i
3
Gunshot Wounds—
Soft Parts
Foreign Bodies—
Needles and Bullets ..
L
1
Others ..
6
4
10
Burns and Scalds—
Boilng Water and Steam
3
3
Fire
6
2
S
Corrosives
1
1
2
Poisoning—
Food Poisoning
No Disease
til
82
143
Totals ..
250
159
409
xx.— violence — ( continued ).


SUMMARY.
I. — Abdominal
551
103
II. — Urinary
. .
171
IIIA. — Generative Organs — Male
338
50
IIIB. — Gynaecological
XV, — Rectum and Anus
4A
V. — Breast
10
VI. — Thorax
58
VII. —Face
119
VIII—Mouth
IX. — Ear, Nose and Throat ..
38
X. — Neck
11
XI.—Skull and Brain
10
XII. — Spine and Cord
* *
98
XIII. — Amputations
263
XIV. — Bones and Joints
28
XV. — Muscles and Tendons ..
19
XVI. — Arteries and Veins
XVII. — Nerves
319
XVIII. — Skin and Subcutaneous Tissues
403
XIX.—Eye
80
XX. — Lymphatics
210
XXI. — Miscellaneous
Totals . .
-
••
..
3593
I.—ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS.
'
-a
•a
>
*5
Nature of Operation.
T3
<D
>
*a»
•o
c"a
-“ 1 «3 |
• 1
5
o
%
CC
c
D
5
X 1
o
H
Exploratory Laparotomy
12
12
7
8
39
Stomach —
4
7
Gastrostomy
1
i
3
Pylorectomy
z
3
g
Perforated Gastric Ulcer
5
29
Gastro-enterostomy
16
8
Cauterisation of Gastric Ulcer
Intestines —
I
2
Enterostomy
Enterectomy
4
Closing Fistula
3
o
1
4
Colectomy ..
1
2
11
Colostomy ..
3
6
Anastomosis
Operations, 1918.


Natubb op Operation.
Cured.
Relieved.
| Unrelieved.
•6
0>
5
In
Hospital.
Total.
Perforated Enteric Ulcer . .
i
1
Appendical Abscess
6
i
7
Appendicectomy (Simple)
216
4
1
2
223
Perforated Duodenal Ulcer
7
2
9
Hernia —Inguinal
104
2
1
107
Inguinal Strangulated ..
7
4
11
Femoral ..
4
N
1
5
Femoral Strangulated .. ..
Ventral
12
1
1
1
15
Ventral Strangulated
1
1
Liver —Draining Hydatid of
9
1
10
Draining Amoebic Abscess
2
1
3
Gall Bladder—
Closing Fistula ..
Cholecys tos to my
6
1
7
Cholecystotomy ..
9
2
5
16
Cholecystectomy
11
11
Spleen—^Splenectomy
2
2
Peritoneum—
Bands and Adhesions ..
10
1
11
Subphrenic Abscess
Duodenopexo
Totals
452
38
11
50
551
II.—URINARY OPERATIONS.
Kidney —
Nephroraphy
1
-
1
Nephrotomy
I
1
Nephrectomy
5
I
6
Nephrolithotomy..
8
1
2
11
Perinephric Abscess
2
2
Hydatid—Removal of ..
Bladder —
Cystoscopic
7
13
20
Cystotomy—Suprapubic
7
2
5
14
Tumors, removed
4
4
Vesical Calculus ..
2
1
3
Prostate —
Prostatectomy—Perineal
„ Suprapubic
9
1
3
13
Urethra —Dilatations and Urectotomy ..
1
1
2
4
Catheterisation ..
2
4
6
Fistula of
I
1
Urethrotomy—Internal
1
1
„ External
6
3
I
10
Periarethral Abscess
6
6
Totals
62
26
15
103
I. ABDOMINAL OPEKATIONS (continued).


IIIa.— GENERATIVE ORGANS
—MALE.
Nature of Operation.
Cured.
Relieved.
Unrelieved.
•a
a>
5
In
Hospital.
Total.
Penis —
Dorsal Incision of Prepuco
2
6
B
Circumcision
102
2
104
Paraphemosis, Reduction
11
11
Plastic for Malformation
Testicles —
Undescended
3
1
4
Varicocele
22
22
Hydrocele
19
I
20
Orchidectomy
1
1
Epidydectomy
Totals . ;
160
10
1
171
IIIb.— GYNAECOLOGICAL OPERATIONS.
Vulva —
Caruncle of Urethra
Bartholini’s Cyst
„ Abscess
Malignant of
Hsematoma of
4
6
4
1
4
6
4
1
Vagina and Perinaeum —
Cystocele and Rectocele, etc. :
Anterior Kolporraphy
Posterior Kolporraphy
Kolpoperineorraphy
3
49
3
49
Curettage —
1. Endometritis and Pyometra
2. Miscarriage ...
3. Malignant Disease
24
9
3
I
3
24
9
7
Cervix Uteri —
Trachelorraphy ..
Cervical Polypus. .
25
25
Vaginal Coeliotomy—
1. Pelvic Abscess
2. Hydatid
3. Extraperitoneal Rupture of Ectopic
Gestation
10
1_
10
1


Nature op Operation.
I
"3
u
a
U
Relieved.
1
Unrelieved.
Died.
In
Hospital.
0
M
\ £
Abdominal Section fob—
Uterus —
Myoma Uteri:
1. Myomectomy
7
7
2. Subtotal Hysterectomy ..
12
12
3. Total Hysterectomy
10
10
Cancer Uteri
1. Cauterized ..
1
1
2
2. Total Hysterectomy
10
1
11
3. Wertlieim’s Operation
3
3
Fibrosis Uteri:
1. Subtotal Hysterectomy ..
9
9
2. Total Hysterectomy
12
12
Pyometra :
i
Hysterectomy ..
5
5
Retroversion and Flexion
1. Ventro Suspension
25
1
1
27
2. Ventro Fixation
i
1
3. Internal Shortening of the Round
6
1
7
Ligaments .. .. .
4. External Shortening
1
i
Adhesions .. .. .. ..
1
i
Ovaries—
•
Prolapse Suspension
•
Cysts
17
17
Resection (Partial)
1
1
Ovariotomy (Complete)
4
4
Fallopian Tubes—
Salpingitis
36
1
37
Pyosalpinx
10
1
11
Tubo-ovarian Abscess
13
13
Ectopic Gestation :
1. Ruptured
2
2
2. Unruptured
Alexander’s Operation
•
Examination under Anesthesia
2
2
Totals .. .. ■
325
5
6
2
338
Ill B. —GYNAECOLOGICAL OPERATIONS—( Continu'd ).


IV.—RECTUM AND ANUS.
-
•6
T3
>
Nature of Operation.
1
•d
•
u
>
o
b
C
•d
0)
c'E
*"• (0
o
15
o
o
os
3
5
H
Fistula ..
9
2
11
Fissure ..
3
3
Haemorrhoids ..
27
27
Ischio-rectal Abscess ..
4
4
Sigmoidoscopic
3
1
3
7
Proctoscopic ..
1
1
Prolapse, reduced
1
1
2
Excision of Rectum
i
1
Totals .. .. /.
48
4
3
1
56
V.—BREAST.
Benign Tumours —
Excision of
4
1
5
Amputation of Breast
8
4
12
with Glands ..
8
2
1
11
Incision for Suppuration
16
16
Totals
36
6
2
44
VI.—THORAX.
•
Thoracotomy for—
1. Empyema
6
2
2
9
2. Hydatid
1
1
Totals ..
5
3
2
10
VII.—FACE.
Hare Lip
1
I
1
Plastics
1
1
2
Lip—Simple Tumour
1
1
Malignant Tumour
30
6
2
2
39
Parotid Tumour
2
2
„ Abscess
1
1
Ear—Malignant Tumor
1
1
Cheek—Epithetioma ..
7
2
1
1
11
Totals
44
8
3
3
58


VIII.—MOUTH.
■a
T3
il
>
Nature op Operation.
T3
3
>
”3
V
Hj
u
C
•6
a>
c'a
Cfl
O
*5
o
06
D
5
X
H
Ranula ..
4
1
5
Cleft Palate
2
2
Tongue— v
Excision—Partial
3
4
1 ,
8
• ,, Complete
1
2
4
7
Carious Teeth
66
66
Dental Splint
1
L
Dentigerous Cyst
1
1
Malignant of—
Lower Jaw
5
2
2
7
16
Upper Jaw
1
1
2
Epulis
1
1
Tumor of Gum
1
I
Abscess of Jaw, incision
2
2
Totals
87
11
2
12
112
IX.—EAR, NOSE, AND THROAT.
Nose —Deflected Septum
86
86
Septal Spurs ..
3
3
Polypi
9
9
Turbinals ..
6
6
Empyema of Antrum ..
3
1
4
Inflammation of Antrum
8
5
13
. Empyema of Frontal Sinus
1
1
2
Tonsils and Adenoids ..
254
254
Adenoids ..
193
193
Abscess of Septum
1
1
Straightening Post Nasal Bones
5
5
>, Pharynx
Infection of Parapin (deformity)
Ear—Polypi
1
1
Foreign Body
6
5
Furunculosis
Mastoid ..
16
I
I
18
Otitis Media Drum Pierced
Throat —Tonsillectomy
42
42
Oesophagoscopy ..
7
2
3
2
14
Passing Bougies ..
I
1
Foreign Bodies in .. .. „
4
4
Malignant Tonsil..
1
I
Pentonsillar Abscess
2
2
Totals
646
11
3
4
664


X.—NECK.
T3
T3
CJ
>
_i
05 ’
Nature of Operation.
r
~6 - !
Cj
X.
>
U
c
T3
O'
c'S.
"" 1 (A
o
03
O
y
K
3
5
X
H
Larynx and Trachea —
•
Bronchoscopy
Cut Throat
Thyroid—
Partial Excision of—
1. Exophthalmic Goitre
20
2
I
23
2. Parenchymatous Goitre ..
9
1
10
Thyroglossal Cysts
1
1
T.B. Ulcer of Vocal Chord (cauterised)
2
V
2
Socision of Sub-Maxillary (abscess) ..
2
Totals .. ...
30
7
1
38
XI.—SKULL AND BRAIN.
♦
Elevation of Depression —
1. Skull
4
4
2. Facial Bones ..
1
Exploration by Trephine
3
1
4
3
Cerebral Tumours
2
Totals
7
2
1
1
11
XII.—SPINE AND CORD.
Lumbar Puncture (Anaesthesia)
Totals
1
7
2
10
1
7
2
10
XIII— AMPUTATIONS.
.Upfee Exteemity—
2
■' 1
2
Upper Arm .. .. •.
1
1
2
Forearm ..
Hand .
3
3
Fingers
67
67
Lowee Exteemity—
Leg
11
3
3
17
Foot
1
1
Toes
5
I
6
Totals
89
5
4
98
*
—
—
—


XIV.—BONES AND JOINTS.
t5
T3
V
>
Nature op Operation.
>
V
0}
0)
~6
*■“' t/5
rt
o
X
D
5
K
o
H
Bones—
Drilling for Periostitis ...
Incision of Periosteum ..,
3
1
4
Drainage of Medulla
3
I
4
Osteotomy
33
4
1
1
39
Wiring Fractures
1
1
Plating Fractures
6
2
■
1
9
Suturing Fractures
6
2
8
Removing Plates and Wires
4
1
5
Insertion of Pins ...
I
i
Bone-grafting—Autoplastic
Sequestrectomy ...
7
o
J
10
Curetting Sinus ...
4
6
10
Excision of—
I. Partial
6
1
7'
2. Complete
2
2
Removal of Tumours .
12
.
12
Fractures—Reducing
101
12
1
1
115
Joints —
Dislocations—Reducing ... * ...
16
3
19
Arthrotomy
3
1
2
6
Arthrectomy
Foreign Bodies ...
Loose Bodies
Semilunar Cartilages
2
2
Arthroplasty ...
1
1
Deformities
5
1
6
1. Acquired
Moving Stiff Joints
2
•
2
Totals
218
34 1
5
6
i
263
XV.—MUSCLES AND TENDONS.
Severed Tendons and Muscles
5
5
Division of Cicatrix ..
Excision of Ganglia
4
4
„ Bursae
5
1
6
Incision of Bursae
6
2
8
Tenotomy
5
5
Transplantation
Totals
25
3
28


XVI. —ARTERIES AND VEINS.
Nature of Operation.
Cured.
1 Relieved.
Unrelieved.
Died. r
In
Hospital.
Total.
Ligature of Arteries
Excision of Veins
Totals
1
15
3
1
18
16
3
19
XVII.—NERVES.
Excision (Neuroma) ...
2
I
1
1
3
Stretching
1
I
I
Freeing from Callus ...
I
Section ..
Excision of Gasserian Gangton .. • •
1
Totals
4
3
n
<
XVIII.—SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUES.
Plastics
12
9
21
Skingrafting
Cellulitis
II
1
12
Abscess
131
2
3
2
138
Removal of Nails
31
31
Rodent Ulcer—
13
2
1
16
Curettage
Excision
18
8
26
Sebaceous Cysts
19
19
Dermoid, etc. ...
1
1
Papilloma
15
15
Lipoma
16
16
Fibroma
6
6
Corn, etc.
Nsevus ..
Malignant of —
1
I
A
Face
4
4r
Ear
Nose ... ... *... ...
Skin
2
1
3
Hydatid
I
1
2
Excision of Scar
6
2
8
Totals
287
25
4
3
319


XIX.—EYE.
•a
<u
>
Nature of Operation.
-D
m
Vi
3
►
Q>
15
15
V
c
•a
<v
c a
NH U3
o
15
u
os
D
a
X
H
Excision of Tumours of—
Lids
3
3
Conjunctiva and Lids
8
8
Trachoma
8
3
H
Pterygium
39
39
Ulcer of Cornea—
Corneal Ulcers Cauterised
10
12
22
„ „ Subconj Injection
3
3
Foreign Bodies in Cornea ..
9
9
Iris—
Cauterised
3
3
Iridectomy
32
29
61
Iridotomy
1
1
Plastics for—
Ectropion..
4
4
Trichiasis and Entropion
21
6
27
Electrolysis
7
7
Old Wounds
1
1
Lachrymal Operations
13
4
17
Strabismus—
Advancement
9
1
10
Tenotomy
3
3
Cataract Extraction—
Congenital
1
1
Senile
41
3
44
Traumatic..
10
10
Cataract Discission
33
14
47
Enucleation
30
•
30
Eviseration
4
4
Mules Operation
1
1
Injury of Eyeball by Blows and Burns
2
2
4
Removal of Chalazia..
8
8
Canthotomy
1
1
Paracentesis of Anterior Chamber ..
2
2
Trephinings for Glaucoma
5
5
Examinations of Eyes Under Anaesthetic..
2
2
Tapping for Sub Retinal Fluid
4
4
Tarsectomy for Trichiasis and Entropion ..
10
10
Removal of Foreign Bodies from Interior
1
1
of Eye
Totals
303
100
403


XX.—LYMPHATICS.
Nature of Operation.
Cured.
Relieved.
Unrelieved.
•a
a»
3
In
Hospital.
Total.
Excision of Glands for —
Adenitil, Simple
Tubercle Bacilli ..
Hodgkin’s
Malignant
Incision for Suppuration
Totals
7
13
63
1
2
2
1
1
-
7
13
2
56
2
74
5
1
80
XXI.—MISCELLANEOUS.
Removal of—
*
Needles
8
8
Bullets
4
4
Foreign Bodies ...
35
2
37
Curetting Sinus of Skin
5
Examination under Anaesthesia (not P.V.)...
12
i
3
1
17
Dressings, Splints and Plaster
6
7
1
14
Under Anaesthesia
1
1
Trimming Wounds
27
27
Stitching
26
1
L I
Explorations under Anaesthesia
6
1
1
8
Snipping for Microscope
4:
1
1
I
Opening Up of Wounds
15
15
Nob Classified
30
G
1
3
Totals
179
19
5
7
210


SYDNEY HOSPITAL DISPENSARY.


REGENT STREET DISPENSARY.


>*—' — ■■■ I..I — > - — ■■ — -— ~ ■ , ■■ ...... — 1 ■■■■■■
Sydney Hospital Special Appeal Fund.
To C. L. GARLAND, Esq,,
Hon. Treasurer Sydney Hospital, Date 1919
Macquarie Street, Sydney.
On the Declaration of Peace
I will Contribute the Sum of Pounds,
J| pL - Shillings, Pence, to the
Special Appeal Fund of the aboue Hospital as a
Personal ThankoP
£
This document is not liable for Stamp
Duty as a Promissory Note.
CHAS. L. GARLAND,
Hon. Treasurer.


The HONORARY TREASURER,
SYDNEY HOSPITAL,
Macquarie Street,
SYDNEY.


Sydney Hospital Special Appeal Fund.
To C. L. GARLAND, Esq.,
Hon. Treasurer Sydney Hospital, Date
Macquarie Street, Sydney.
On the Declaration of Peace
I will Contribute the Sum of Pounds,
, - Shillings, Pence, to the
Special Appeal Fund of the aboue Hospital as a
Personal Thankoffering.
£
C
Signature
Address
This document is not liable for Stamp
Duty as a Promissory Note.
CHAS. L ; GARLAND ,
Hon. Treasurer.


SYDNEY HOSPITAL.
Pneumonic-Influenza Epidemic.
General Information for the Citizens of
New South Wales.
1. Masks should be made of four thicknesses of gauze or
butter-muslin, and worn so as to cover mouth and nose.
2. Persons in contact with influenza patients should also
wear goggles—motor goggles are a good pattern.
3. Personal cleanliness is even more important during the
epidemic than at any other time. This especially applies
to persons in close contact with cases. They should rinse
their hands in \ per cent. Kresolvo solution, and then
wash them in Lifebuoy Soap and water.
4. The general health should be carefully watched. Regular
exercise short of fatigue should be taken daily. The
bowels should be evacuated daily and a nourishing dietary
is essential. It is only by means such as these that the
individual resistance, which is the first line of defence
against the scourge, can be kept at a high level.
5. In all cases of illness of sudden onset, isolate the patient
and call in a medical man immediately.
G. Watch for and implicitly obey all instructions issued by
the Public Health Department.


Wholly Set Up and Printed in
Australia by Deaton & Spencer,
Douglass Street; Sydney.
