

AUSTRALIAN POLICY.
THE HON. GAVAN DUFFY,
PRIME MINISTER OF VICTORIA,
.A.T CASTLEMAIINE,
March 20, 1872.
MELBOURNE : STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS,
Collins Street East.
1872. -v.




i w t-y f / /
/fS'7'7 rtf 2~)iSf
AN AUSTRALIAN POLICY.
SPEECH OF THE
HON,
. GAYAN DUFFY.
A complimentary dinner to the Ministry
was given on Wednesday, March 20, at the
volunteer orderly-room, by the public bodies
and others of the Castlemaine district. The
invitation had been given and accepted
over two months ago, and great efforts were
made to give the members of the Government
who attended a fitting reception. The
Ministerial party consisted of Mr. Gavan
Duffy, Chief Secretary ; Mr. Grant, Minister
of Lands ; Mr. Walsh, Attorney-General; Mr.
M‘Lellan, Minister of Mines; Mr. Vale,
Commissioner of Customs; Mr. Spensley,
Solicitor-General (Mr. Berry, Treasurer, was
absent through illness); and they were ac-
companied by the Hon. Julius Vogel, C.M.G.,
Treasurer of New Zealand, who had been
specially invited. They left the Spencer-
street station at 2 p.m., in a special train,
which reached Castlemaine in about two
hours and a half. Here grand prepara'
tions had been made. The railway station
was profusely ornamented with evergreens and
flags, the work of the committee charged with
the task of arranging the details of the
reception, and the latter was a triumph
in its way. The train drew up amid cheers,
and the local brass band, subsidised by the
borough council, struck up “Here the Conquer-
ing Hero comes.” Space being cleared by the
police, who, commanded by Superintendent
Winch, managed very well, the leading local
authorities of the district waited on their
visitors. Mr. Callaway, mayor of Castle-
maine, was absent through illness, but his
place was filled by Mr. W. Dawson, ex mayor ;
and there were also Mr. Davis, town clerk;
Mr. Potter, president of the Metcalfeshire
Council; Mr. Mitchell, mayor of Chewton; Mr.
Maher, mayor of Malmsbury ; Mr. Rabbage,
president of the Shire of Newstead; Mr. P.
Lawrence, president of the Maldon Shire
Council, and Mr. C. Tolstrup, president
of the Mount Alexander Shire. The Minis-
terial party (accompanied by Mr. Mason,
M.L.A., Mr. Farrell, M.L.A., and Mr.
Curtain, M.L.A., and Mr. Zeal, M.L.A.)
were escorted to a train of carriages in
waiting. The transit took place amid
cheers, and the cortege quickly proceeded
to M‘Gregor’s Cumberland Hotel, where
proper accommodation had been provided.
At 6 p.m. the banquet took place, and
was attended by about 250 person, the
gallery being crowded with ladies. The
room was tastefully decorated with flags,
flowers, evergreens, and military trophies.
The chair was taken by Mr. W. Dawson,
and the vice chairmen were Mr. Tol-
strup, Mr. A. 'Kirwan, J.P., and Mr.
G. Smyth (late M.L A. for the district).
Mr. Duffy sat on the right of the chair-
man, and his colleagues (to whom had
been added Mr. O’Grady, Minister of Public
Works) also occupied seats of honour, which
were likewise accorded to several other lead-
ing local men and members of Parliament.
The “Borough Band” was in attendance,
and discoursed brazen music most voci-
ferously during the repast.
The list of toasts was opened with “ The
Queen and members of the Royal Family.”
The health of the Governor was proposed by
Mr. George Smyth, vice-chairman.
Mr. James Chapman asked the company to
drink the health of Her Majesty’s Ministers
in Victoria. He said that they were gentle-
men on whom the public might rely in every


possible way. (Cheers.) The public might to be treated ; from which it follows of course
look forward to the future with the confidence
that their interests were in the hands of men
who would not betray them. (Cheers.) It
was no reproach to the Ministry to accept
the various invitations which they had
received from country districts. He thought
it rather an advantage that the Government
should have frequent opportunities of com-
muning with the people, upon whose will they
existed. Nothing but liberality had marked
the action of the present Administration,
nothing but activity had marked their
movements. (Cheers.) There had been
greater alacrity in the performance
public duties since they had come into
office than at any time before. (Cheers.)
Whisperings of opposition had been heard.
They must look to the signs of the times.
Where were the members who represented
the district of Castlemaine ? (This question
gave rise to a little confusion. There were
numerous cries of “They are here.” One
enthusiastic gentleman dragged Mr. Farrell,
M.L.A., reluctantly to an upright position,
and another took care that Mr. Zeal should
be made equally conspicuous, whereupon
considerable cheering took place, and the
speaker ended by proposing the toast.)
Mr. Duffy rose to respond to the toast amid
enthusiastic applause and repeated volleys of
cheering. He said —I am happy to meet this
great assembly; more pleased and happy to
meet it than any which it has been my good
fortune to address in this country, because I
am here to declare on behalf of the Govern-
ment a policy by which they will not only
stand or fall as an Administration, but by
which their countrymen will be able to clearly
understand and definitively test the use they
propose to makeot political power. (Applause.)
The policy of a Government is simply its ad-
vice what is fit to be done under the existing
circumstances for the benefit of the common-
wealth. Let me state at the outset, that in
developing our policy, I do not propose
to recite a long catalogue of bills for
Parliament, which has sometimes no
more meaning to the popular ear than
a page from the Melbourne Directory, but
to indicate in the plainest language I can
command, the precise spirit and purpose with
which we think certain leading subjects ought
that we will immediately originate the neces-
sary measures of legislation or administration
to carry our opinions into effect. In at-
tempting to improve the future of a man,
an institution, or a state, an indispensable
condition of success is that you should under-
stand its present condition. In business you
take stock, on a gold-field you prospect the
district, and in a state you are bound to
begin by an inquiry of a similar character
to ascertain its possessions and resources,
in what direction its natural develop-
ment tends, and what impediments stop
the way. If you cannot build a house or a
ship without a plan and an estimate, how
much less can you build up a nation without
first having ascertained the materials at your
disposal and determined on the method in
which they ought to be employed ? I invite
those who surround ns to-night, as our fellow-
labourers in the noble work of rearing a
future nation, to begin by a rapid glance at
our ways and means.
Among British colonies scattered over
the globe there is but one, the Dominion
of Canada, which exceeds Victoria in
population, and there is not one which
remotely approaches her in public revenue,
or in the imports and exports which con-
stitute external commerce. (Cheers.) Her
revenue is nearly as great as the revenue
of all the other Australian colonies united;
it is nearly six times as great as the
revenue of the Cape and all the African
colonies and settlements; more than three
times as great as the revenue of the West
Indian possessions ; and it is in excess of the
revenue of the Dominion of Canada, with those
of all the other British colonies and settle-
ments in North America added to it. (Cheers.)
Her foreign commerce is in about the same
proportion as her revenue to that of these
other British possessions. That this national
wealth is diffused among all classes is illus-
trated by the fact that the deposits in the
savings banks where the industrious classes
place their earnings, exceed a million sterling,
and the assets of building societies exceed a
million and a half. A comparison with some
of the sovereign states in Europe would show
nearly as striking a result in revenue and
resources.


And, happily, this prosperity is on the in his claim to that of a man working for
increase. Every interest in Victoria is more
prosperous in 1872 than it has been for
10 years—generally it is as prosperous as it
was in the most favoured years in our annals.
In 1871 our miners earned more than half a
million sterling beyond the earnings of 1870,
and 1872 is an improvement on 1871. It has
been a good season for farmers, and pre-
eminently a good season for squatters, who
in the last two years have wiped out the losses
of a long period of depression ; the number of
manufactories has signally increased, and
artisans necessarily share the prosperity in
an abundance of profitable employment, and
at a rate of wages considerably improved.
We start, therefore, with the knowledge that
the state can afford to undertake works of
progress and civilisation without impru-
dence—(applause)—and, indeed, that it is the
height of prudence and practical statesman-
ship to divert the savings of the people and
the resources of the country into projects of
permanent utility. In 1853 and 1854, the
colony got sudden wealth, which was no*
utilised either by the people or the Govern-
ment. There was no inducement held out
to the people to invest their savings, and no
security for investment. The miners were
not permitted to put their money in what
has been well called the only bank that does
not break—a bank of earth (cheers) ; and the
Government spent in extravagant salaries
and allowances funds which might have pro-
vided great public works of permanent use-
fulness. Now, I trust we shall learn to do
better with our present prosperity. A glance
at the condition of the people furnishes
results as satisfactory as the increase
of our material resources. We are
rapidly becoming a settled population, with
fixed pursuits and fixed residences. A larger
proportion of the people are in the vigour
of life than in any of the other colonies, and
consequently a much larger proportion than
in old countries. The inequality of the sexes
has nearly disappeared; a third of our
population are native born, who know no
other home than this. There are more births
and far fewer deaths in proportion than in
older countries. Our chief pursuits foster
independence of spirit, for how different is
the position of a miner who has an interest
wages in the old world. Our farmers are
more and more rapidly ceasing to be tenants
and becoming Yoemen proprietors, and our
artisans, in constantly increasing numbers,
are becoming owners of the houses they
occupy. I believe it is justly claimed
for the mechanics of this country that
they are among the ilite of their class,
and their intelligence, and culture, and
special knowledge, are data as important in
our resources as a people, if we knew how to
utilise them, as minerals or railways or
shipping, or any other realised wealth. For
it was the industry of the people on farms
and gold-fields, and in workshops, more than
than any other factor, which has produced
the national prosperity of which we are
taking stock. And finally this country is free
from the cancer of pauperism, which is
eating away the strength of Europe, free
from the inheritance of slavery, which,
even after emancipation, is a perpetual
embarrassment to America; and it is possessed
by a population as orderly and well-con
ditioned as exists in any part of the empire.
(Cheers.)
What can a Government do for the pros-
perity of such a people ? Not much, beyond re-
moving impediments out of its path. Each
great industrial interest has been found to be
in want of certain aids and appliances for the
more profitable employment of its skill and
industry; and if-the state can furnish these
aids and appliances, it does nearly all that it
can compass. The policy of the Government
at the present time is to do this work as effect-
ually as they are capable of doing it; and to
do it at once as the task which is preliminary
to all others in point of time and importance.
Ltet us turn to some of the great interests, and
see what it is they want from the state. I
will begin with our staple industry—mining,
an industry which may be said to be
in its infancy, for the gold-fields of Victoria
promise to last longer than the coal-fields of
England or the iron-fields of Sweden. (Hear,
hear.) This interest was probably never
more prosperous, and never more energetic
than at the present time. Within the last
half-year more than 2,000 mining leases have
been applied for, covering upwards of 25.000
acres of land believed to be auriferous.


During the last two months the Mining And here, in the centre of the Coliban
department has granted over 1,000 leases for
13,000 acres of land, which, if successfully
worked, will increase enormously the national
resources. This land, as we know, is held
at an annual rent of £1 an acre,
and as much of it is temporarily
unproductive, the rent, where the area
held is considerable, becomes a serious
drag upon enterprise. I may remark, there-
fore, in passing, that the Government pur-
pose to reduce the rent to 10s. an acre for
the future, relying on the labour clauses to
prevent the misuse of this concession,
and on the great extension of min-
ing, to prevent any considerable loss of
revenue. (Cheers.) The chief impedi-
ment to mining enterprise is, undoubt-
edly, the immense quantity of land which,
having become private property, is with-
drawn from its operation. I can now
confidently announce that a Mining on Pri-
vate Property Bill will be ready to be sub-
mitted to Parliament on its reassembly.
(Cheers.) In the first session of the first
Parliament of Victoria such a measure was
promised in the Governor’s speech, and it has
been frequently promised in Governors’
speeches in the 15 years which have followed ;
but it was never forthcoming till now. Before
we were three months in office, while we were
still dealing with the deficit in the public
account, with a new tariff, and a railway
scheme of unusual difficulty, an impulsive
gentleman asked the Parliament to declare
that we had neglected our public duty in not
proposing a Mining on Private Property Bill
also! He apparently expected more from us
in three months than from our predecessors in
five times three years; but the House was
not so unreasonable. The recess, however,
has enabled us to do this long postponed
work. We have been urged to propose a
large grant for prospecting. We do not believe
such a fund could be wisely or profitably
spent, but we are quite willing to apply to
prospecting the principle of payment by
results, and to ask Parliament to grant a
liberal reward to the discoverer of every
new gold-field, to be payable as soon as
it is in profitable occupation. Bat the
question of primary importance to the gold-
fields is, the supply of water. (Hear, hear.)
scheme, I will only say, that if we can
avoid past errors a water-supply may still
be what I have no doubt it was designed to
be by the Government which projected it, a
noble national undertaking. We have
gone back to the beginning by getting
a competent hydraulic engineer to direct the
works; and Mr. Gordon, who was recommended
to our predecessors by the Government of
India, is now on his way to Australia to under-
take that office. It is inconceivable that thia
course was not taken in the first instance.
When the Government of India itself
projected an improved irrigation system,
some years ago, it did not rush blindly into
the experiment; its most competent engineer
was sent to Piedmont to study the best
system in Europe, and the consequence was that
it not only did its work successfully, but has
trained a school of hydraulic engineers, from
whom we are now glad to borrow assistance.
As Victoria has already wasted nearly three-
quarters of a million sterling through the
state reserving waterworks in its own
hands, we propose to proceed for the future
on the principle of joint action between
the state and the district requiring water-
supply. (Cheers.) In Ballarat, and in some
other districts, the works have been conducted
under local management, with funds which
the state enabled these districts to procure on
moderate terms, and those works all yield an
interest on the expenditure over the cost of
management and maintenance. On the
other band, the works constructed by the
state, with the exception of the Yan Yean,
which is highly reproductive, cost us interest
on the outlay to the extent of upwards of a
thousand pounds a week, and yield about
40s. a week in return. (Laughter.) With
respect to the national works, we will
announce no positive decision until we
have the advantage of Mr. Gordon’s
advice how we may best utilise the
expenditure already made for the benefit
of the districts concerned. But, as re-
spects works not yet commenced, we are eager
to help them wherever there is a fair probabil-
ity of their becoming reproductive. We mean
to propose to Parliament that no new work
shall be undertaken without the professional
sanction of Mr. Gordon, and when that


sanction is given, we propose to enable the legislation. It is the aim and desire and
locality to obtain funds in the same manner
that Ballarat obtained them. Local works
which would cost more than half a million
sterling have been already projected, and a
loan for that sum, or whatever sum may
prove necessary, will be promptly taken up in
our own market. (Applause.) I trust there
will be many such works, for not only
enterprise and profit, but health, cleanli-
ness, and civilisation will follow in their
track. When I have mentioned that we
have a mining accidents bill in preparation,
and recalled what I stated elsewhere—that
the increased price of gold caused by the
opening of the Mint will be worth nearly
£lOO,OOO a year to miners—l have said all that
I think necessary in connexion with the
mining interest.
Let us now turn to the next class in num-
bers and importance, the farmers. It is
the aim and policy of the Government
to create more and more settlement on
the public lands. (Loud cheers.) There are
politicians and publicists who declare that
the agricultural population is already too
large; but the same class of politicians pro-
fessed the same opinion when Mr. Latrobe was
Governor, and from the same motive—a pre-
ference for sheep that may be shorn over
men who object to that process. (Laughter
and cheers.) They assure us that farming will
not pay, and that no farmer can make a
fortune. Probably not ; but are we to live
for ever in the fever of fortune-hunting,
inherited from the era of daily nuggets.
Farmers may have plentiful homes, a healthy
pursuit, reasonable hours of labour, means to
educate their children and start them in the
world, and a little annual balance to their
credit, and the produce of Ballarat added to
Bendigo can do little more for their
happiness. It is just in this condition of
steady prosperity that the farmers of Belgium
and Switzerland live. They don’t make
fortunes, or dream of making fortunes; but
they fulfil far higher purposes in life—
they are good fathers, good citizens, good
Christians, and, as a rule, honest, self-reliant
man, and that you will admit is winning success
in its highest sense. (Great cheering.) The first
advantage we propose to secure to the agri-
culturist class is one which does not require
expectation of Mr. Grant and his colleagues
to stop absolutely the sale of country lands
by auction, and reserve them for selection and
settlement. (Vociferous cheering for several
minutes.) From the beginning of the next
financial year, on the Ist of July, we expect
to be able to commence this salutary reform.
It may be said that selectors here
and there will get land at 20s. an
acre, for which a capitalist would
give more; and perhaps they will; but
the state will be better paid by planting men
on the soil than by extracting a few pounds
more of land revenue. And why should not
agricultural settlement have its prizes as well
as other pursuits ? Nobody grudges the miner
his nuggets; and it is the occasional big
nugget that covers the land with vigorous
mining enterprise. The next measure I will
mention is also administrative. If Mr. Grant
had leisure from the daily claims of an over-
worked department to visit country districts
in detail; to see the land reserved under
various pretences, and raise ,the ban
where need was by a word ; to hear
the complaints of individual selectors on
the spot, and to strike terror into evil doers
sitting in places of authority, no ruler since
Haroun A 1 Raschid the Good produced such
results, or has been rewarded by such con-
fidence and affection. But since this is not
physically possible, he proposes to do the next
best thing. He-will appoint an inspector of
settlement, having his full confidence, who
will visit every district of the country where
settlement has begun or is desired, bold a
public court, ascertain what demand exists for
land, hear individual complaints, and bring
them to the Minister for redress. (Cheers.) It
has often been a marvel to me how a poor,
ill-educated man in the country succeeds in
making his way through all the turnpikes
which impede his access to the land ; but
under this system Mr. Grant, who is as eager
to give the industrious selector a farm as the
selector is to get it, will make firewood of
some of the turnpike gates. (Loud applause.)
As a supplement of the same reform, the
district surveyors will be required to send
in regular quarterly reports of the progress of
settlement, to be laid before Parliament, in
order that the selectors in one district may


know what is being done in another, and aim fair and just, I trust they will immediately
to do as well as the best. At present we
inspect our post-offices, our police, our savings-
banks, and the audit commissioners keep a
vigilant superintendence over our public ex-
penditure in every district. For the future
we propose to maintain as careful a
watch over our public property in land
as over our public property in money.
For selectors actually in possession there is
nothing they want so much as intelligent
advice and guidance in turning their land to
the best account. Judge Bindon has done an
invaluable work for artisans by his schools of
technology, and the spirit of inquiry and love
of discipline which they have produced. I
wish some competent man would do as much
for farmers. Failing any external effort, how-
ever—or in aid of it—Mr. Grant, lam rejoiced
to say, intends to organise in connexion with
the Lands department, a Ministry of Agri-
culture. (Cheers.) Some of the experienced
officers of that department, and of other
branches of the public service, will be
enlisted in the work, for which the Com-
mission on Foreign Industries, I may say,
has in some degree prepared the way. The
Botanic-gardens will be placed under its direc-
tion, and made a storehouse of new products
for the colony. (Cheers.) The United States
has set a noble example in this respect, and
even in the stress of war never turned from
the task of teaching and inciting her farmers
to use their raw material most profitably. Men
who have only tilled other people’s soil have
seldom learned to be prudent and forecasting.
Men who have lived only in cold climates will
not know instinctively the crops and the
culture suitable to their new circumstances;
but they must strive to learn, for in farming
as in every other pursuit, you may be assured
the lazy or ignorant man has no chance
against the man who educates himself. I
trust there will ba a voluntary organisation
of farmers’ clubs to cooperate with the
new department—(hear, hear)—for, after
all the state can do, it is on the farmers
themselves, and their sons, the future
farmers, that progress and success depend.
I have only to add to this list of land re-
forms that the Fencing and Impounding Bills,
rejected by the Council last year, will be
re introduced ; and, as they are intrinsically
become law.
Before parting from the subject of the
public estate, however, let us inquire how
settlement has proceeded of late. I have
asked for a report from the Land department
of its operations since the present Adminis-
tration assumed office, as a test of how far
they have been a Ministry of Action, and
I will mention some of the results, Ic will be
remembered that the first thing we did was to
abolish the zebra stripes (cheers), by which
four millions of acres had been shut up from
selection; the next thing, to abolish the
practice of severing selectors’ allotments by a
road, and only granting the land on one side
of it. The result of these reforms has been
an enormous increase in the rate of
settlement, a decided improvement in the
class of selectors, and the important dis-
covery that our available land is much
greater than was supposed. (Hear, hear.) In
Echuca and Swan-hill road district, between 50
and 60 thousand acres have been selected by
persons who, as a rule, have settled down
and are cultivating their farms. These selec-
tions are on the plains and box-forests, which
were long pronounced worthless except for
pastoral purposes, but which now promise to
become homes of thriving industry. In the
Ararat district (which includes Stawell and
Wimmera), 70,000 acres have been selected, a
large portion of it in the country round
Horsham by Germans, who have left South
Australia to come to this colony, and enjoy the
benefit of our more liberal land system. These
industrious farmers are raising crops averaging
20 bushels of wheat, 26 bushels of oats,
and 30 bushels of barley to the acre, on land
hitherto pronounced to be fit only to grow
grass, lam assured that the immigration
of these Germans was largely promoted by
Mr. Woods, the member for Crowlands, who
was able to communicate with them in their
own language, and explain the nature of our
land system; and it must be admitted he has
done a useful and memorable work. It is
worth noting that the settlement in both
these districts took place not only on land
which the squatters assured us was unfit for
agriculture, but to a considerable extent
on land from which the zebra stripes were
removed. (Cheers.) When Mr. Grant re-


turned to Latrobe-street, upwards of 20,000 ofwhichmore than 20,000 of that exceptionally
acres of the land since selected in the
Ararat district were striped with the
tint which meant “no admission for selec-
tors.” (Laughter.) I wish the newspapers
which confidently assured the people that
in blotting out the zebra stripes, we
threw no land open to them worth having,
would be good enough to account for this
phenomenon. But let me come to the Seymour
district, which includes a great part of the
county I represent in Parliament, and notably
the Alexandra gold-field, where I first dis-
covered and denounced these zebra stripes on
the run of Mr. Loyd Jones. (Cheers.) What
pains were taken in Parliament to persuade
the country that these tabooed lands were
of no value ; in fact, one would suppose,
to listen to these gentlemen, that the zebra
stripes were tinted on the map for the bene-
volent purpose of warning the people
not to select country so totally worthless.
(Laughter.) Well, in that already thickly-
populated district, 10,000 acres of zebra
land have been selected since the Ist
July last, and 20,000 acres of other land,
of which I learn with great satisfaction
that a considerable proportion consists of
extension of previous holdings, rendered pos-
sible by the decision to grant land on both
sides of a road. In this large district
in which I have the honour of addressing you,
Castlemaine and Maryborough, the selection
since we came into office is close upon 70,000
acres. Some of it, especially near Dunolly, is
already yielding good crops. Some of it round
St. Arnaud consists of land which was for-
merly counted wholly unfit for agriculture.
In the Melbourne district, where the suitable
land was supposed to be nearly all occupied.
700 selectors have taken possession of over
50.000 acres of land, of which one third had
been protected by the zebra stripes, and a
considerable proportion of the remainder was
taken up under the more liberal interpretation
of the provision about roads. In the Beech-
worth district there have been upwards of
40.000 acres selected, of which more than
10 000 acres was zebra land. In Benalla
district, nearly 50,000 acres, of which 12,000
acres was zebra land ; and strangest of all, in
the Camperdown and Geelong district,
upwards of 40,000 acres have been selected,
good soil had been protected by the official
stripes when we came into office. I will spare
you further details ; the total selection since
the present Government threw open the door
and both the doors, to all bond fide selectors
amounts to no less than 604,673 acres. (Cheers.)
Since the zebra stripes were abolished
we have, however, discovered what may be
called the new zebra stripes, which want
abolishing also. (Hear, Hear.) When the Land
Act of 1869 was in its last stage, Mr. Macpher-
son, then in office, aided by Mr. Francis, then
in Opposition, carried a proviso which practi-
cally gave every squatter a new pre-emptive
right. (Shame.) It provided that an acre of land
should be reserved for every pound spent by
the squatter on pastoral improvements either
before the passing of the act or after the
passing of the act, if made with the consent
of the Board of Land and Works. The very
best land in every run has of course been
taken up under this provision, and as there
was no means of testing the amount of these
pastoral improvements, which were neces-
sarily claimed all over the colony within a
few weeks of the passing of the act, the most
excessive and unreasonable claims were
allowed to pass. When a selector desired
to settle on a run it very often happened
that the land he selected was discovered to
be reserved under this proviso in the 110th
section ; and as such reserves were not marked
on the surface of the soil, he had no notice
to keep away froili them. (Shame.) It is Mr.
Grant’s intention, under a power in the act,
to require every squatter who has got such a
reserve, to prove before arbitrators the
amount of land he is actually entitled
to, and when the boundaries of a
reserve are determined, to have them
visibly marked on the surface of the
land ; and the result will be an unspeakable
boon to selectors. (Cheers.)
“When you have got your selectors
planted on the land,” a newspaper
cynic recently asked me, “ how do you
expect him to live ?” The basis of agricultural
prosperity is, of course, the profitable disposal
of our surplus breadstuff's, and on this subject
Mr. Laby, the chairman of the Creswick
banquet, told me some significant and
encouraging facts. He is a miller on a large


scale, and his mills are more than 100 miles
from Melbourne, and a dozen miles from a
railway station ; so that they cannot be said
to possess any advantage in position except
being in a good agricultural district. For the
last four years baying his wheat at from 4s.
to 4s. 9d. a bushel, he has sent flour to London,
to New South Wales, and to Queensland, and
always sold it at a profit. Two or three
years ago he began to export to India, and
has had profitable sales ever since in
Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay; though
the P. and 0. Company charge the
enormous freight of 70s. a ton, and the Indian
Government, notwithstandiug that it is ad-
ministered from London, exacts a very op-
pressive import duty. Our flour finds a ready
market in India, not only as food, but to
make starch for the cotton factories; and
there promises to be a constantly increasing
demand for it to supply that enormous
population. Now Mr. Laby assures me that
at the price he gave for wheat, a farmer in a
good year can make from £2 to £5 an acre
profit from his land. But we have taken
possession of a still better market than India
—the market of Victoria. One of the prin-
cipal millers in South Australia recently
assured me that Adelaide flour is no longer
imported into Victoria. With facts like
these before us it is idle to doubt that
if we grow good produce it will find a good
market. There is another crop from
which we may expect important results
—sugar beet. Parliament has granted a
bonus to encourage its growth, and in addi-
tion to its direct advantages, it requires a
mode of tillage which demands a great deal
more labour, and pays for it; and I have no
doubt it will be cultivated in all our best soils
in a few years.
I have dwelt long on the land question,
because it is, and has always been, at
the root of our public policy. Parties
in Victoria, under whatever disguise they
figured, have still been divided between those
who wanted to give the land to the indus-
trious people, and those who wanted to
distribute it in great estates among a
favoured few. (Applause.) For myself, I desire,
and have always desired, the increase of
small proprietors; not from any sentimental
preference for poor over rich, but because
history and political science concur in
teaching us that so the basis of a nation is
best laid. A community where property is
widely diffused among the class who actually
till the land is of all others the community
most contented, most orderly, and where
manners are simplest and morals purest—
and that class of cultivators obtain
most from the soil and increase most
rapidly the savings which constitute the
wealth of a nation. (Cheers.) The
present President of the French Republic
declared more than a quarter of a century
ago that when the land is tilled by farmers
who own it, the personal care and superin-
tendence, and the complete sense of security
which property begets, enable them to obtain
ten times, twenty times, and even a hundred
times more from the same surface than it would
yield to hired labour. (Cheers.) And it is the
savings of the farmer which primarily set mill-
wheels whirling and engines panting, and which
feed commerce and enterprise. Of all things
yon can plant in a good soil to gain a
productive return, the most profitable is to
plant a man upon it. Half a century ago,
when Prussia was trampled on and humiliated
by Napoleon, two statesmen began the reforms
which have since placed her at the head of
Europe, and the greatest task of Stein and
Hardenberg was that which turned the serf
into a landed proprietor. “It must be con-
fessed,” says a critic of the period, who bore
them no goodwill, “that in 10 years it has
carried us forward a whole century.” And
the policy of giving the land to the people
can do as much for us here in Australia.
I now pass on to the interest of trade and
commerce. We aim to make Melbourne the
entrepot of trade and the metropolis of the
Southern Pacific by a series of efficient mail
services: and to share her advantages with
the whole country by an extensive
system of railways. We propose a series
of mail services which, if they obtain
the' assent of Parliament, will enable
us, without inordinate outlay, to make Mel-
bourne the terminus of the communication
with Europe, India, and America. (Cheers.)
We have entered into a contract with New
Zealand, subject to theapprovalof Parliament,
for a mail service running from Melbourne to
San Francisco by way of New Zealand. It will


give us habitual access to the United States,
and habitual access to the Pacific islands.
We want access to the United States, because
they can teach us the industrial and social
arts by which a new nation rises to pros-
perity. Our houses and farm yards are
stocked with implements of their invention
for increasing the power of labour ; we ride
in vehicles which they have made or taught
us to make, and we are beginning to under-
stand their public affairs and relish their
literature. And we want direct and regular
communication with the islands of the
Pacific, that we may share the trade of that
new world. There is a market there for Aus-
tralian wines, beer, brandy, and for fabrics
and implements of every sort we can supply—
a market constantly increasing, and not too
fastidious as to quality while we are still in our
apprenticeship. lam afraid to estimate the
profit our friends the squatters will have from
the facility for American woolbuyers coming
to this market. In 1870 they did not send a
bale of wool to American ports, In 1871 and
1872 they have sent nearly a million and a
half pounds weight—worth £BO,OOO sterling.
The squatters count on me as their opponent;
and when they are seeking undue advantages
for their class, or oppressing the free selectors,
or evading their proper responsibility, I will
always be their opponent; but when I can
fairly help them to increase the national
wealth of Victoria, there is nobody more
willing to do so. (Cheers.) Here is an
opening for boundless trade, but it wants
to be pushed as the irrepressible Man-
chester man pushes his calico. Much
depends, of course, upon the individual enter-
prise of our merchants and manufacturers,
but the state can do something; and we
propose that whatever it can do shall be done
promptly. (Cheers.)
As respects the Suez route, we have
been paying too highly for our share of
its advantages, and a notice has been sent to
the company terminating the present contract.
We propose to substitute for it, either a
renewal of the contract on much more reason-
able terms, which the late earnings of the
company justify us in expecting, or to invite
a colonial company to carry the mails from
Melbourne to Point de Galle, this Govern-
ment undertaking to make fair arrangements
with such colonies as will contribute to the ser-
vice. The Imperial Government proposed such
an arrangement some years ago, and offered to
pay half the cost. At present we have no con-
trol over the service, no direct part in the
contract, and the mailships pass our doors.
We believe what we propose can be done
without much extra cost; but if a country
bids for empire, it must pay for its supremacy
by some proportionate price, and the cheapest
cost at which it can be bought is a little money.
(Cheers.)
There remains the Cape route, respecting
which I am rejoiced to say we have
received substantial proposals, which, for the
first time, make it practicable to present it as
a third service to Parliament. What do we
expect from a Cape route ? Is it merely a
regular monthly steamer of the best class,
bound under heavy penalties to make the
voyage and deliver our mails or merchandise
under 50 days? If so, we can have this
service under the present improved con-
ditions of shipbuilding, for a subsidy of
about one-fourth of what it was formerly
estimated to cost. Is it a method of carrying
a useful class of immigrants to the colony at
moderate passage ■ money we want, which
would be an inestimable benefit ? (Loud cheers.)
That can be had in addition, and to whatever
extent we desire, at a fixed scale of expenditure.
I refrain of course from stating the exact
cost of these services, because that informa-
tion is properly reserved for Parliament.
But if these designs are accomplished, the
three lines will probably cause the expendi-
ture of a quarter of a million annually in
Melbourne.
And that all the colony may partake
of this prosperity, the one thing essen-
tial is a well-considered railway system
to bring the centre and the outlying districts
into habitual communication. As far as
railways exist among us, they have promoted
comfort, economy, and civilisation ; and 1
though they were enormously expensive, no
one can regret that they have been made.
Had they been made at the cost we now
propose to incur, they would have paid
splendidly, and have been a steady source
of national income. And, what is more,
costly as the construction was, they would
have paid their way if the Legislative Council


had simply kept their hands off them. But
by an unfortunate blunder called an amend-
ment, imported into the construction bill in
that chamber, double lines were ordered when
single lines would have sufficed. The Council
had no constitutional right to make a change
of this nature, involving new expenditure;
but unhappily they were permitted to do so,
and we are paying in interest upon money
wasted in this experiment, and in mainte-
nance of a superfluous way, £4OO or £SOO a day.
This is a fact which it is necessary to recall,
for the whole future of railway extension is
involved in the question, Can we make rail-
ways cheaply ? If we can, we shall open up
the country rapidly ; if we cannot, the policy
of adding to lines that will not pay is very
hazardous. The desire of the Government is
to make them as cheaply as is consistent
with safety; cheap railways and plenty of them
is our policy. (Cheers.) The private lines in
operation in Victoria cost about one-tenth of
the amount expended on Government lines,
because, among other reasons, they dispensed
with bluestone villas for station-houses, and
made redgum platforms answer for cut stone ;
and instead of obtaining only oae-tenth of
the same annual receipts they obtain nearly
one-fourth. It is our intention, therefore, to
ask the sanction of Parliament for a number
of additional lines, and for the line rejected
by a chance vote in the Council. Our neigh-
bours in New Zealand, who, it must be con-
fessed, are making vigorous and practical
efforts for a foremost place, have boldly pro-
jected 1,500 miles of railway on a narrow
gauge, to be made at the rate of 150 miles a
year; and I don’t think Victoria will be
alarmed at a responsibility which New Zea-
land can afford to undertake. (Cheers.) During
the last nine months the Government have
encouraged companies to project local lines
because we wanted to enlist local interests
in such enterprise, and to induce those who
have made fortunes in Victoria to risk a little,
as men habitually do in the United States, in
the interest of the country. Some of the
local lines will go on I believe, but the prin-
cipal one, the Gipps Land line, is not in a
satisfactory condition. We reserved half a
million of acres as an endowment for it, and
selection is necessarily checked where this
reserve stops the way, and yet the projectors
ask for more concessions. We Lave come
to the conclusion that it is the wisest
economy to take the project into the
hands of the Government, and throw
the reserved land open for selection. (Great
cheering.) Here is a district rich in natural
resources, but, being without the materials
for road-making, almost as deficient in
highways as an African desert. This is not a
case for the small prudence called caution,
but for the large prudence called statesman-
ship, and we must make this concession if we
arenotto render Gipps Land anotherßiverina,
discontented, angry, and eager for separation.
(Hear, hear.) Money is unusually cheap and
plentiful just now, especially at our own door,
and this fact makes the present a fit occasion
for industrial enterprise; for events in
Europe may make it dear and scarce,
and our opportunity will have vanished.
Of our financial proposals I will only say this
much, as a guarantee for the future—that
hitherto they have proved safe and sound.
When my hon. colleague the Treasurer
developed his fiscal scheme last session, we
were informed it was all wrong. Mr. Francis
confidently assured the Assembly that Mr
Berry’s estimate of Customs revenue was so
erroneous that there would be a deficit of at
least £150,000; Mr. Langton is reported
in his favourite authority, Hansard, to have
cheered that melancholy prediction ; and one
of their new allies spent his days in Collins ■
street, stopping passers by, like Coleridge’s
Ancient Mariner, to listen to his speeches
in answer to the budget. (Laughter.) Now,
nearly nine months of the financial year
which was to see these disasters are passed,
and if Mr. Francis and Mr. Langton are to
be relied on as financiers, there ought to be a
deficit of £110,000; but, unfortunately for
their financial reputation, there is not a de-
ficit of (Applause.) On the contrary, the
financial year will close with a liberal surplus ;
and we will come before Parliament having
extinguished the deficit created by our prede-
cessors, and restored the public finances to a
healthy and prosperous condition.
In connexion with these industrial projects,
let me recall certain work which I formerly
promised to promote ; first, to render prison
labour, if possible, self-supporting, and next to
employ the children of thelndustrial Schools in


planting new industries amongst us, or in other
reproductive pursuits. (Cheers.) I have col-
lected from Europe and America the most im-
portant reports and essays on prison labour,
and I have had communications from practical
persons here and in the neighbouring colonies
on the same subject; and as respects the
children, a Royal Commission have been
collecting evidence and preparing suggestions
for practical action. But I must say frankly
that I counted upon much greater progress,
and counted upon superintending the reforms
myself as the very pleasantest task which
office would bring me. And if I have failed
to do my personal share of the work hitherto,
it is that I have not had a day’s leisure
since I came into office. It is still my hope
and aim to have a personal part in these
projects. One of the grandest sayings of the
great Napoleon was, “I will not leave a
pauper in France,” and if, instead of con-
structing pasteboard thrones for his relatives
and dependents, he had worked out that ideal,
what a different reputation he would have
bequeathed to history. Happy the Minister
who will be able to say, “I have not left a
‘larrikin’ in Victoria.” (Cheers.) Some
politicians propose to flog these young-
sters, and I make no doubt they often
richly deserve it, but it would be a more
effectual work, I think, to instruct and
employ them. (Hear, hear.) Remember what
these boys will become in a community where
manhood suffrage exists, and let us not sow
with rotten seed for a future crop of citizens.
I have indicated the main scope and direc-
tions of our proposals for the progress and
development of the country. Of the Parlia-
mentary measures we have in hand,’ however
important, which do not necessarily belong to
this scheme of national policy, I take no
notice, but there are two or three measures so
auxiliary to it tbatthey can scarcely beomitted.
There are 20,000 foreigners in Victoria, irre-
spective of Chinese, of whom not one in
twenty is naturalised. And we want more
and more foreigners like the settlers
in the Wimmera. It is proposed, there-
fore, to amend the Alien Law, in order
to make easy their admission to all the
rights of citizenship. A beneficial change
has taken place within the last 20 years in
the practice and procedure of our courts of
law, which have been wonderfully simplified
and rationalised; but the reform has not
reached the many. The poor man’s law and
equity are administered before a bench of
magistrates, and a Justice of the Peace Bill
will be immediately introduced, thoroughly
revising the practice of minor courts. We
propose to bring in a Fishery Bill to protect
and encourage the fishing trade. Of all
our undeveloped resources there is none
more neglected ; the United States, the
other day, were ready to imperil their
enormous commercial relations with Eng-
land by going to war in defence of
fishing rights, of which we make little
account. As soon as it is practicable we will
introduce a measure revising the acts under
which local government is conducted in the
direction which experience has shown to be
necessary. It has been reported that we
propose to reduce or abolish the subsidy
granted to local bodies. This was a bad
guess of our opponents, for we purpose to do
exactly the reverse. The grants terminate in
1874 under the present law, but by continuing
to help the local bodies many districts will b 0
made prosperous and habitable a generation
earlier than would otherwise be possible, and
this is the course we mean to advise.
I have spoken of industrial progress
alone, not surely because I rate money-
making as the highest of human pur-
suits, but because history teaches us that
national wealth is the nurse of civilisa-
tion and liberty, "With wealth come the agents
of civilisation and the inevitable ambition to
be first in the arts of peace and war; and the
late conflict in the United States furnishes
conclusive evidence that great prosperity is
not incompatible with self-sacrificing public
spirit. The Australian is distinguished from
the American by a greater love of holiday
and a keener enjoyment of life, and—if I
may venture to say so—a juster idea of the
relative value of money and happiness; and
there is little fear that he will show himself
deficient in that ardour for human liberty and
progress which above all things keeps the
world from falling into rottenness and chaos.
Ihave spoken chiefly of industrial progress, also,
because the policy of the Government upon
some great political questions has been suffi-
ciently indicated by our action since we have


been in office. We have had to negotiate
between the colony and the mother country
on international legislation, and between this
colony and neighbouring colonies upon the
Border duties, and Parliament and people have
approved of our course. (Cheers.) We do not
forget that Victoria is bound to set an example
to the other colonies which will facilitate the
coming of the time when they will be united
together, and become the centre of a system
of states yet unborn—the three dozen Victorias
for which there is space on the surface of
Australia; nor do we forget that it does
not become an opulent and ambitious city
which aims to draw to itself the commerce of a
hemisphere to have its Supreme Court
resembling a dilapidated hospital, and its
Parliament-house an unfinished gaol. We
propose to have edifices worthy of the
country in which to transact the highest
business of the country ; anl I trust Parlia-
ment will not grudge a few hundred pounds
more to place in the Treasury-gardens busts of
a hundred of the greatest men whom the
British Islands have produced, that Australian
children may learn to love the faces of those
who taught and ruled and led their fore-
fathers, as I have seen young Italians glow
before the heads of the world-renowned men
of their race on the Pincian Hill. (Cheers.)
We have declared our intention to
revise the electoral system in a direction
which will make it work better and
more fairly, and we are of course pre-
pared to do so. It is an insult to common
sense to tell the electors of Victoria that
they are equally represented, if a hundred
men in Belfast have greater representation
than 1,000 men in Creswick or the Murray ;
or while you maintain an artificial system by
which one man out of every three is deprived
of his vote because his local rates are not
paid on a particular day. We propose to amend
these inequalities without any unnecessary de-
lay.
I will stop here. There is more to be said,
but the time has not come for saying it;
and it is good, in the words of a thoughtful
modern writer, “ to keep the germinating
seed away from the light.” (Applause.)
We have proposed a plan upon which
this state ought to be developed. We
may be mistaken, and the plan may
be a blunder; but of one thing be sure
—there is no safe national progress
without a national policy. Let whoever
opposes it propose a better, not assume that
we must still sail without chart or compass.
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.
These reforms are not only directly beneficial
to large classes, bat, we believe, will re-act
beneficially on every interest in the country.
It is for the people, on whose behalf they
are projected, to say whether or not they
shall be carried out. We will do our part,
but the greater part is theirs, without whom
we labour in vain. Ido not care, and lam
persuaded my colleagues do not care, for the
office and authority of Ministers unless it
enables us to accomplish work like this. The
necessary bills will be laid before Parliament
in the coming session, but a Parliamentary
session, you must remember, resembles a
day’s journey—the quantity of ground you
can get over depends on the state of the road
quite as much as on the vigour of the team
or the experience of the driver. If there be
ugly ruts and pitfalls skilfully contrived with
a view to upset the coach, the journey may
be rendered somewhat more slow and uncom-
fortable. But whoever stops the way, and
whatever “engineers of ruin” are at work,
I can confidently promise that if the bulk
of the country approves of this programme it
can and shall be carried out. It must not be
forgotten that we stand at a serious disad-
vantage in presenting our policy to a Parlia-
ment elected under the auspices of our oppo-
nents. There have been four general elec-
tions within seven years, and in all of them
they had the opportunity of selecting the
issues upon which members were elected. Had
our policy received the previous sanction of the
people at a general election, a few months
would be sufficient to clothe it with the autho-
rity of law. The people, however, know what
we have to contend with, and they will
not be unduly impatient. Home was not
built in a day, nor can the Rome
of the Pacific, any more than the Rome
of the Mediterranean. But they knew what
they wanted, these grand old Pagans; it was
impossible to turn them from their path, and
at last the mother of cities and the mistress
of states was crowned with the crown of
com pletion. I have spoken at unusual length,
and I owe you an apology for such an inordi-
nate claim on your attention. I will now con-
clude in the language of the greatest living
poet of England, Robert Browning—
“It but remains
That words grow deeds. Aud with G id's help they
shall;
But with the devil’s hindrance—doubtless, too."
(The speaker then resumed his seat amid
an uproar of enthusiastic cheering.)




