

Queensland.
THE ABORIGINALS PROTECTION AND RESTRICTION OF
THE SALE OF OPIUM ACTS, 1897 TO 1901.
An Act to make Provision for the better Protection and
' Care of the Aboriginal and Half-caste Inhabitants of
the Colony, and to make more effectual Provision for
Restricting the Sale and Distribution of Opium.
[Assented to 15th December, 1897.]
( i) Eit enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty, by and
'1) .with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and
Legislative Assembly of Queensland in Parliament assembled, and
by the authority of the same, as follows; —
1. This Act shall be styled, and may be cited as, “The
Aboriginals Protection and Restriction of the Sale of Opium Act, ■
1897,” and shall commence and take effect on and from the first day
of January, one thousand eight hundred and ninety-eight.
2.
3. The following terms shall, in this Act (unless the context
otherwise indicates), bear the several meanings set against them
respectively:—
“Reserve” —Any reserve heretofore or hereafter granted in
trust, or reserved from sale or lease by the Governor in
Council, for the benefit of the aboriginal inhabitants of
.the Colony, under the provisions of any law in force in
Queensland relating to Crown lands;
61 Vic. No.
17.
The
Aboriginals
Protection
and
Restriction
op the Sale-
of Opium
Act, 1897.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Interpreta-
tion.
U Preamble repealed, 8 Edw. YIT. No. 18, s. 2, title Acts.
* P scaling section repealed, 8 Edw. VII. No. 18, s. 2, title Acts,


“Minister”—The Home Secretary or other Minister of the
Crown administering this Act;
“Protector” —A Protector of Aboriginals appointed under
the provisions of this Act;
“Superintendent”—A Superintendent appointed under the
provisions of this Act for any Reserve;
“District”—A District proclaimed under the provisions of
this Act;
“Regulations”—Regulations made under this Act;
“Prescribed” —Prescribed by this Act or the Regulations
under it;
“Liquor”—Liquor as defined by “The Licensing Act of
1885.”’" and any Act amending the same;
“Opium”—Opium, whether in the form of gum or liquid,
and every substance, whether solid or liquid, which
contains opium, not being a substance cOTnpounded
exclusively for medicinal purposes, and every substance
which is or contains the ash of opium, or charcoal of
opium;
“Half-caste” —Any person being the offspring of an aborig-
inal mother and other than an aboriginal father:
Provided that the term “half-caste,” wherever it occurs
in this Act elsewhere than in the next following section,
shall, unless the context otherwise requires, be construed
to exclude every half-caste who, under the provisions of
the said section, is deemed to be an aboriginal.
4. Every person who is—
(a ) An aboriginal inhabitant of Queensland ; or
( b ) A half-caste who, at the commencement of this Act, is
living with an aboriginal as wife for husband; or
(c) A half-caste who, otherwise than as wife for husband,
habitually lives or associates with aboriginals;
%{d) A half-caste child whose age does not in the opinion of
a Protector exceed sixteen years;
shall be deemed to be an aboriginal within the meaning of this Act.
5. The Governor in Council may, by Proclamation, declare any
portion or portions of the Colony to be a District, or Districts, for
the purposes of this Act.
6. The Governor in Council may from time to time appoint,
for the purpose of carrying the provisions of this Act into effect,
fit and proper persons, to be severally called “Protector of Aborig-
inals,” who shall, within the Districts respectively assigned to
them, have and exercise the powers and duties prescribed,
7. The Governor in Council may appoint such and so many
Superintendents for the reserves, situated within such Districts as
aforesaid, as may be necessary for carrying the provisions of this
Act into effect.
Persons
deemed to be
aboriginals.
Proclamation
of Districts.
Protectors to
be appointed.
Superinten-
dents to be
appointed.
* 49 Vic, No. 18.
f Words “ or husband” substituted for ‘‘ husband or child ’ by section 2 of
the amending Act of 1901, infra.
+ Subsection {d) inserted by section 2 of the amending Act of 1901, infra , and
thereby this section 4 “ shall be read and construed as if the said provision had
been inserted therein at the commencement of ” this Act.


8. Every reserve shall be subject to the provisions of this Act
and the Regulations.
9. It shall be lawful for the Minister to cause every aboriginal
within any District, not being 1 an aboriginal excepted from the
provisions of this section, to be removed to, and kept within the
limits of, any reserve situated within ’The same or any other
District, in such manner, and subject to such conditions, as may
be prescribed. The Minister may, subject to the said conditions,
cause any aboriginal to be removed from one reserve to another.
10. Every aboriginal who is—
(a) Lawfully employed by any person under the provisions
of this Act or the Regulations, or under any other law
in force in Queensland;
(b) The holder of a permit to be absent from a reserve; or
(c) A female lawfully married to, and residing with, a
husband who is not himself an aboriginal;
(d) Or for whom in the opinion of the Minister satisfactory
provision is otherwise made;
shall be excepted from the provisions of the last preceding section.
11. It shall not be lawful for any person other than an
aboriginal, not being a Superintendent or a person acting under
his direction, and not being a person authorised under the Regula-
tions, to enter or remain or be within the limits of a reserve upon
which aboriginals are residing, for any purpose whatever.
Any person, without lawful excuse, entering or remaining or
being upon such reserve as aforesaid, shall, for every such offence,
be liable on conviction to a penalty not exceeding fifty pounds,
or to imprisonment for any term not exceeding three months, and
the proof of such lawful excuse shall be on the person charged.
• 12. A Protector may permit any aboriginal or half-caste who,
before the commencement of this Act, was employed by any
trustworthy person, to continue to be so employed by such person,
and, in like manner, may permit any aboriginal or half-caste not
previously employed to be employed by a like person.
13. Every permit, so granted as aforesaid, shall remain in
force ffor such period not exceeding twelve months as the
Protector may fix, but may at any time before the expiration of
such period be renewed for such further period as he may fix, not
exceeding twelve months, to commence from the expiration of the
previous period, and so, from time to time, so long as such aborig-
inal or half-caste is willing to continue to be employed by such
person. Any such permission as aforesaid may be revoked at any
time by a Protector by writing under his hand, and thereupon, if
such related to an aboriginal, such aboriginal may be removed,
by order of the Protector under and subject to the conditions
prescribed, to a reserve, or, at the discretion of the Protector, the
Reserves to
be subject
to Act and
Regulations,
Aboriginals
may be
removed
to reserves.
Aboriginals
excepted
from
liability to
removal to
a reserve.
Persons
who are
prohibited
from
entering
a reserve.
Aboriginals
and
half-castes
may be
employed.
Duration,
renewal, and
revocation
of permit.
* Words “the same or any other District 5 ’ substituted for “such District”
by section 5 of the amending Act of 1901, infra.
f Words from “ for such period ” to “ previous period ” substituted for “ for
twelve months only, but may at any time 3 before the expiration of such period,
be renewed for any period not exceeding twelve calendar months, to commence
from the expiration of the previous period of twelve months,” by section 5 (1) of
the amending Act of 1901, infra. As to permits, sec further section 5 (2) and
section 10 of that Act.


aboriginal or half-caste to whom such license related may he
permitted, in like manner, to enter the employment of some other
such trustworthy person as aforesaid. Such revocation shall not
entitle any such employer to claim or recover any compensation
for the loss of the service of such aboriginal or half-caste, or to
maintain any action in respect of any alleged loss or damage that
may be occasioned by such revocation.
14. Any person who, except under the provisions of any Act
s or Regulations thereunder in force in Queensland, employs an
aboriginal or a female half-caste, otherwise than in accordance
with the provisions of this Act or the Regulations, or suffers or
permits an aboriginal or a female half-caste to be in or upon any
house* or premises in his occupation or under his control, shall
be guilty of an offence against this Act, and shall be liable, on
conviction, to a penalty not exceeding fifty pounds and not less
than ten pounds, or to imprisonment for any term not exceeding
six months,
15. Every person desirous of employing an aboriginal or
female half-caste under the provisions of this Act, shall forthwith
upon permission being granted by a Protector, enter into an
agreement with such aboriginal or female half-caste, in the pres-
ence of any justice of the peace or member of the Police Force,
for any period not exceeding twelve months. Every such agree-
ment shall contain particulars of the names of the parties thereto,
the nature of the service to be rendered by such aboriginal or
female half-caste, the period during which such employment is
to continue, the wages or other remuneration to be paid or given
by the employer for such service, the nature of the accommodation
to be provided for such aboriginal or female half-caste, and the
conditions on which the agreement may be determined by either
party. Every such agreement shall be in duplicate and be attested
by such justice or member of the Police Force, who shall forthwith
forward one of the said agreements to the nearest Protector. •
16. Ex r ery aboriginal or female half-caste employed by any
person, under the provisions of this Act, shall be under the super-
vision of a Protector, or such other person as may be authorised
in that behalf by the Regulations; and every employer of such
aboriginal or female half-caste shall permit any Protector, or such
other person as aforesaid, to have access to such aboriginal or
female half-caste at all reasonable times, for the purpose of
making such inspection and inquiries as he may deem necessary.
17. Any person who, without the authority of a Protector,
by writing under his hand, removes, or causes to be removed, an
1 aboriginal or female half-caste from one District to another
District, or to any place beyond the Colony, shall be guilty of an
offence against this Act, and shall be liable, on conviction, to a
penalty not exceeding one hundred pounds, or to imprisonment
for any term not exceeding six months,
18. Every blanket issued by an officer of the Government to
any 'aboriginal or half-caste shall be and remain the property of
Her Majesty, and any person, other than an aboriginal or half-
caste, who has in his possession or custody any such blanket or
Harbouring
of aboriginal:
and female
half-castes
prohibited.
Aboriginals
and female
half-castes to
be employed
under
written
agreement.
Aboriginals
and female
half-castes in
employment
to be •
subject to
supervision.
Prohibition
of removal
of aboriginals
from one
District to
another or
beyond the
Colony.
Possession of
blanket, &c.,
issued to an
aboriginal or
half-caste a
punishable
offence.
* This provision is extended to any ship, vessel, or boat. See section 4 of the
amending Act of 1901, infra.


portion thereof which shall reasonably appear to the .justices, from
the max-ks thereupon or otherwise, to have been so issued for the
use of an aboriginal or half-caste, shall he guilty of an offence
against this Act, and shall be liable, on conviction, to a penalty
not exceeding ten pounds.
19. Any person who supplies, or causes or permits to be
supplied, any liquor to an aboriginal or a half-caste, except for
bond fide medicinal purposes, proof of which shall be on the person
accused, shall, for every sxxch offence, be liable to a penalty not
exceeding fifty pounds, or to imprisonment for any term not
exceeding three months, and in every ease to the costs of the
conviction. In the case of a licensed victualler or wine-seller who
is convicted of such offence, the penalty, by this section provided,
shall be substituted for the penalty provided in respect of such
offence by the sixty-seventh section of “The Licensing Act of
1835.
20. Any person who supplies, or causes or permits to he
supplied, any opium to an aboriginal or a half-caste, shall be
guilty of an offence against this Act, and shall be liable, on
conviction, for the first offence, to a penalty not exceeding one
hundred pounds and not less than twenty pounds, one-half of
which shall be paid to the person giving the information which
leads to such conviction, or to imprisonment for any term not
exceeding three months, and for the second and every subsequent
offence to imprisonment for any term not exceeding six months,
and in every case to the costs of the conviction.
21. Notwithstanding anything in “The Sale and Use of
Poisons Act, 1891,”$ to the contrary contained, it shall not he
lawful for any person, not being a legally qualified medical practi- '
t loner, or a plxarmaceutical chemist, or a wholesale dealer in drugs,
to sell, or in any manner dispose of, deliver, or supply, opium to
any other person, or to have or keep in his possession any opium
for any purpose whatever; and it shall not be lawful for any
legally qualified medical practitioner or pharmaceutical chemist,
residing or eariying on business at a greater distance, by the
nearest practicable road, than one hundred miles from Brisbane,
Rockhampton, or Townsville, to have or keep in or upon any
premises in his occupation or under his control, at any one
time, any greater quantity of opium than two pounds weight
avoirdupois:
Provided that it shall not be unlawful for a common carrier
to have in his possession opium, for the purpose of conveying the
same for delivery to the person to whom it has been lawfully
consigned.
22. Any person who unlawfully has in his possession any
opium, or unlawfully sells, or in any manner disposes of, delivers, 1
or supplies opium to any person other than an aboriginal or a |
half-caste, shall, for every such offence, be liable, on conviction, c
to a penalty not exceeding fifty pounds, one-half of which shall ‘
be paid to the person giving the information which leads to such
Penalty for
supplying
liquor to
aboriginals
and
half-castes.
Persons
supplying
opium to
aboriginals
or half-castes,
guilty of a
punishable
offence, and
penalty
therefor.
Possession
or sale of
opium by
certain
persons
unlawful.
Penalty for
unlawful
possession
or sale or
delivery of
opium.
* The penalty or imprisonment for a first offence cannot be reduced below
twenty pounds or two months respectively. Sec section 8 of the amending Act of
1901, infra.
t 49 Vie. No. 18.
I 55 Vic. No. 31.


conviction. Any legally qualified medical practitioner or phar-
maceutical chemist, residing or carrying on business at a greater
distance, by the nearest practicable road, than one hundred miles
from Brisbane, Rockhampton, or Townsville as aforesaid, who has
or keeps, in or upon any premises in his occupation or under his
control, any greater quantity of opium than two pounds weight
avoirdupois, shall be liable, on conviction, for the first offence, to
a penalty not exceeding fifty pounds and not less than ten pounds,
and for the second, and every subsequent, offence to imprisonment
for any term not exceeding six months.
23. Upon complaint made or laid on oath, before any justice
of the peace, by any person, that he believes that opium is kept
or concealed in any house,’* building, or place, contrary to any
of the provisions of this Act, whether by a person authorised under
the provisions of “The Sale and Use of Poisons Act, 1891 ”t to
sell or deal in poisons or not, such justice may grant, a warrant,
to any member of the Police Force, to enter and search such house,
building, or place, between the hours of six in the morning and
twelve at night, and, if admission is refused, to break into the
same, and to seize and detain all opium found therein contrary
to the provisions of this Act.
24. Any member of the Police Force, and any person acting
under the direction and in the presence of a justice of the peace,
may detain any person, found travelling, whom such member of
the Police Force or such justice of the peace may suspect to have
in his possession any opium contrary to the provisions of this Act,
and may searcli such person, and may open and search any pack,
swag, or other receptacle carried or conveyed by such person, and
may seize any such opium as aforesaid found in the possession
of such person, and may forthwith arrest such person without,
warrant, and detain him in custody until he can be brought before
justices to be dealt with according to law.
25. If, upon the hearing of a complaint against any person
in whose possession opium has been found in contravention of any
of the provisions of this Act, the justices, before whom such com-
plaint is heard, convict such person of the offence stated in such
complaint, they shall, in addition to any penalty imposed upon
the offender, order that all the opium so found in his possession
be forfeited to the Crown, and the same shall be forfeited
accordingly.
26. In every prosecution for an offence against any of the
provisions of this Act relating to an aboriginal or a half-caste, the
averment in the complaint, that any person named therein is an
aboriginal or a half-caste, shall be sufficient evidence of the fact
unless the contrary is proved.
27. All actions and proceedings against any person for the
recovery of any wages due to an aboriginal or a half-caste, who is,
or has been, employed by such person under the provisions of this
Act, or for any breach of an agreement entered into by such person
under the provisions of this Act, may be instituted and carried
on by, or in the name of, a Protector, or by, or in the name of, any
other person authorised by the Minister by writing under his hand.
Premises
may be
searched
for opium
believed
to bo kept
contrary to
provisions
of Act.
Travellers
suspected
to bo in
unlawful
possessio n
of opium
may be
searched, &c.
Opium found
in unlawful
possession
to be
forfeited.
Averment in
complaint
sufficient
evidence of
certain
matters.
Persons
by whom
certain
proceedings
may be
instituted.
* This provision is extended to any ship, vessel, or boat. >SV<? section 4 of the
amending Act of 1901, infra.
f 55 Vic. No. 31.


28. Every complaint for an offence against the provisions of
this Act or the Regulations, other than the provisions contained
in the twenty-second, twenty-third, twenty-fourth, and twenty-
fifth sections hereof, may be made or laid by a Protector or Super-
intendent, or by a member of the Police Force, and the prosecution
may be conducted by the person by whom the complaint is so made
or laid. Every complaint for an offence against any of the pro-
visions of this Act, contained in the sections hereinbefore in this
section mentioned, shall be made or laid by a member of the Police
Force or a justice of the peace only.
29. Any person who shall be convicted of an offence against
this Act or the Regulations, shall, unless hereinbefore or in the
Regulations otherwise provided, be liable to a penalty not exceeding
ten pounds.
30. All offences against this Act, or the Regulations, not
herein otherwise specially provided for, may be prosecuted in a
summary way before any two justices.
31. The G overnor in Council may from time to time, by
Proclamation, make Regulations for all or any of the matters
following, that is to say,—
(1) Prescribing the mode of removing aboriginals to a
reserve, and from one reserve to another;
(2) Defining the duties of Protectors and Superintendents,
and any other persons employed to carry the provisions
of this Act into effect;
(8) Authorising entry upon a reserve by specified persons
or classes of persons for specified objects, and defining
those objects, and the conditions under which such
persons may visit or remain upon a reserve, and fixing
the duration of their stay thereupon, and providing
for the revocation of such authority in any ease;
(4) Prescribing the mode of distribution and expenditure
of moneys granted by Parliament for the benefit of
aboriginals;
(5) Apportioning amongst, or for the benefit of, aboriginals
or half-castes, living on a reserve, the net produce of
the labour of such aboriginals or half-castes;
(6) Providing for the care, custody, and education of the
children of aboriginals;
(7) Providing for the transfer of any half-caste child, being
an orphan, or deserted by its parents, to an orphanage;
(8) Prescribing the conditions on which any aboriginal or
half-caste children may be apprenticed to, or placed
in service with, suitable persons;
(9) Providing for the mode of supplying to any half-castes,
who may be declared to be entitled thereto, any rations,
blankets, or other necessaries, or any medical or other
relief or assistance;
(10) Prescribing the conditions on which the (Minister may
authorise any half-caste to reside upon any reserve, and
limiting the period of such residence, and the mode of
dismissing or removing any such half-caste from such
reserve;
Persons
by whom
certain
complaints
may bo
made.
Provi.- inn
for penalties
where not
specified.
Offences to bo
prosecuted,
before any
two justices.
Regulations.


(11) Providing for the control of all aboriginals and half-
castes residing upon a reserve, and for the inspection
of all aboriginals and half-castes, employed under the
provisions of this Act or the Regulations ;
(12) Maintaining discipline and good order upon a reserve;
(13) Imposing the punishment of imprisonment, for any
term not exceeding three months, upon any aboriginal
or half-caste who is guilty of a breach of the Regula-
tions relating to the maintenance of discipline and good
order upon a reserve;
(14) Imposing, and authorising a Protector to inflict
summary punishment by way of imprisonment, not
exceeding fourteen days, upon aboriginals or half-
castes, living upon a reserve or within the District
under his charge, who, in the judgment of the Protector,
are guilty of any crime, serious misconduct, neglect of
duty, gross insubordination, or wilful breach of the
Regulations;
(15) Prohibiting any aboriginal rites or customs that, in the
opinion of the Minister, are injurious to the welfare
of aboriginals living upon a reserve;
(16) Providing for the due carrying out of the provisions of
this Act;
(17) Providing for all other matters and things that may be
necessary to give effect to this Act.
32. Such Regulations, not being contrary to the provisions of
this Act, shall have the force of law.
33. It shall be lawful for the Minister to issue to any half-
caste, who, in his opinion, ought not to be subject to the provisions
of this Act, a certificate, in writing under his hand, that such
half-caste is exemx>t from the provisions of this Act and the
Regulations, and from and after the issue of such certificate, such
half-caste shall be so exempt accordingly.
that, if at any time he thinks it necessary so to do,
the Minister may revoke any certificate issued by him to any half-
caste under the provisions 0 f this section, and thereupon the
provisions of this Act and the Regulations shall apply to such
half-caste as if no such certificate had ever been issued.
THE SCHEDULE, f
Regulations
to have the
force of law.
Certain
half-castes
may be
exempted
from
provisions
of Act.
* Proviso added, by section 6 of the amending Act of 1901. infra.
t Schedule of repealed enactments repealed, 8 Edw. VII. No. 18, s. 2.


An Act to Amend “The Aboriginals Protection and
Restriction of the Sale of Opium Act, 1897,” and for
other purposes.
| Reserved ; His Majesty’s Assent Proclaimed, 3rd May, 1902.]
BE it enacted by the King’s Most Excellent Majesty, by and
with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and
Legislative Assembly of Queensland in Parliament assembled, and
by the authority of the same, as follows: —
1. This Aet shall be read and construed with and as an amend-
ment of “Tiie Aboriginals Protection and Restriction of the. Sale
of Opium Act, 1897”* (hereinafter called the Principal Act), and
may be cited together with that Aet as “ The Aboriginals Protection
and Restriction of the .Sale of Opium Acts, 1897 to 1901,” or
separately as “ The Aboriginals Protection and Restriction of the
Sale of Opium Act, 1901.”
2 and 3.f
4. (1.) The Principal Aet and this Aet and the Regulations
shall, for all purposes, extend and apply to any ship, vessel, or
boat lying in any river, harbour, or other water within a District,
in the same manner as if it were a house within such District.
(2.) The master or other person in charge of any such ship,
vessel, or boat shall be deemed to be the occupier of such ship,
vessel, or boat.
(3.) This section does not apply to any ship, vessel, or boat
which is under the command or charge of any officer hearing His
Majesty’s Commission, or to any ship, vessel, or boat which belongs
to the Government of any Foreign State.
5. (L)t
(2.) Every permit to employ an aboriginal or half-caste and
every agreement for such employment granted under the provisions
of the Principal Act shall be in the prescribed form:
Provided that no such permit shall be granted to any alien
of the Chinese race.
6.§
7. A Protector shall not authorise the removal of any
aboriginal or of any female half-caste from one District to another,
District, or to any place beyond Queensland, for any period exceed-'
ing twelve months, nor until the person desiring such removal
enters into a recognisance wdth a surety, or sureties at the discre-
tion of the Protector, in a sum which the Protector considers
2 Edw. VII.
No. 1.
The
Aboriginals
Protection
and
Restriction
of the Sale
of Opium
Act, 1901.
Short title
and
■ construction.
Provisions
as to ships.
Forms.
Proviso.
Recognisance
on removal
of aboriginal.
*6l Vic. No. 17, supra.
t Section 2 amended section 4 and section 3 amended section 9 of the Principal
Act, supra.
£ Section 5 (1) amended section 13 of the Principal Act, supra.
§ Section 6 amended section 33 of the Principal Act, supra.


sufficient to defray all expenses of the return of such aboriginal
or female half-caste to the place from which such aboriginal or
female half-caste is to he removed, and to pay all wages due to
such aboriginal or female half-easte during the period of absence.
Every such recognisance may be taken by a Protector or officer
in charge of police, and shall be in the prescribed form.
8. Notwithstanding the provisions of section one hundred and
seventy-three of “ The Justices Act of 1886,”* in the case of a
conviction of a first offence under sections nineteen and twenty of
the Principal Act, the justices, if they impose a penalty for such
offence, shall not be competent to reduce such penalty below the
sum of twenty pounds; and, if they impose imprisonment, shall
not be competent to impose imprisonment for a less period than
two months.
9. No marriage of a female aboriginal with any person other
than an aboriginal shall be celebrated without the permission, in
writing, of a Protector authorised by the Minister to give such
permission.
And the Protector who grants such permission shall forthwith
transmit a copy of the same to the Minister.
10. (l.)f
(2.) No aboriginal or half-caste shall be employed under the
provisions of “The. Native Labourers’ Protection Act of 1884,”J
without the permit of a Protector granted in that behalf under
the provisions of the Principal Act and this Act.
And such permit shall he produced by the master of the vessel
to the shipping master in whose presence the agreement of hiring
is signed.
(3.) No person shall employ on board of or in connection
with, or suffer or permit to be upon, any ship, vessel, or boat, any
male aboriginal who has not arrived at puberty, or any female
aboriginal or female half-caste, unless under a written permit
given by a Protector;
. Provided always that no female aboriginal or female half-
caste who has not been tribally or otherwise lawfully married shall
be employed upon any ship, vessel, or boat.
(4.) A Protector shall not grant a permit for the employment
of any aboriginal or half-easte on board of, or in connection with
any ship, vessel, or boat trading, fishing, pearling, or voyaging
outside the territorial waters of Queensland.
(5.) If any aboriginal or half-caste employed on board of or
in connection with any ship, vessel, or boat, dies or deserts his
employment, all wages due to such aboriginal or half-caste shall be
paid to the shipping master at the port of discharge up to the date
of such death or desertion.
Penalty
under 61 Vic.
No. 17, ss. 19
and 20, not to
be mitigated.
Marriage of
female
aboriginals.
X ) crmit for
employment
of
aboriginals,
&c., under 48
Vic. No. 20.
Females and
children not
to be allowed
on ships.
No permit for
employment
outside
Queensland
waters.
Wages in
event of
death or
desertion.
* 50 Vie. No. 17.
t Section 10 (!) amended .sections 3 and 4of Th< Xa/lrc Labourer*' Protection
Act of 1884,” supra.
+ 48 Vic. No. 20, supra.


(6.) When any aboriginal or half-easte employed on hoard of
or in eonnection with a ship, vessel, or boat is discharged at any
port the employer shall, in addition to the payment of his wages,
pay to the shipping master at the port of discharge a sum which
•such shipping master considers sufficient to defray all expenses of
returning him to the place from which he was brought for the
purpose of being engaged.
11. If any aboriginal or half-caste who is employed under a
permit dies during the period of his employment, the employer,
within thirty days after the death, or if the deceased was employed
on board of, or in eonnection with a ship, vessel, or boat, witliin
thirty days after the arrival of such ship, vessel, or boat at any
port in Queensland, shall transmit to the nearest Protector notice
in writing of such death Tinder the hand of the employer, and
containing such particulars as will enable the deceased to be
identified.
12. (1.) The wages of an aboriginal or half-caste employed
under a permit, exclusive of food, accommodation, and other neces-
saries, shall not be less than ten shillings per month, if he is
employed on hoard of, or in connection with a ship, vessel, or boat,
or five shillings per month, if he is employed elsewhere.
(2.) A Protector may direct employers or any employer to
pay the wages of aboriginals or female half-castes to himself or
some officer of police named by him, and any employer who fails to ;
observe such direction shall be deemed to have not paid such wages.
The Protector or officer of police who receives such wages shall
expend the same solely on behalf of the aboriginal or female half-
caste to whom they were cine, and shall keep an account of such
expenditure.
13. The P roteetor shall undertake the general ('are, protection, i
and management of the property of all aboriginals in the district 1
assigned to him. and may— I
(a) Take possession of, retain, sell, or dispose of any
property of an aboriginal, whether real or personal;
(b) In his own name sue for, recover, or receive any money
or other property due or belonging to an aboriginal, or
damages for any conversion of or injury to any such
property;
(c) Exercise in the name of an aboriginal any power which
file aboriginal might exercise for his own benefit;
(<7) In the name and on behalf of an aboriginal appoint
any person to act as attorney or agent for an aboriginal
for any purpose connected with the property of the
aboriginal:
Provided that the powers conferred by this section shall not be
exercised by the Protector without the consent of the aboriginal,
except so far as may be necessary to provide for the due preserva-
tion of such property.
t* Abo riginals
r to be returned
to native
i place.
Death of
employed
aboriginals.
Minimum
wages.
X , ayment of
wages to
responsible
person.
Protector to
manage
property of
aboriginals.


The Protector shall keep proper records and accounts of all
moneys and other property and the proceeds thereof received or
dealt with by him under the provisions of this section, and shall
for such purpose be deemed to be a public accountant within the
meaning of “The Audit Act of 1874”* or any Act amending or
in substitution for that Act.
14. In any prosecution under sections two hundred and twelve,
two hundred and thirteen, two hundred and fourteen, and two
hundred and fifteen of the Criminal Code,! the averment that any
aboriginal or aboriginal half-caste girl is of or under any specified
age need not be proved. It is a defence to a charge of any of the
offences defined in these sections to prove that such girl had
developed a state of puberty; and such proof shall he an absolute
rebuttal and avoidance of any averment as to her age.
15. Notwithstanding the provisions of “The Mining Act of
1898,”$ no holder of a miner’s right shall be entitled to enter or
remain or he within the limits of any reserve for aboriginals except
under the written permit of a Protector. In all cases where such
permit is refused or withdrawn, such holder of a miner’s right
shall have the right to appeal to the Minister, who may confirm or
reverse the decision of the Protector. Any such person who, with-
out such permit, or without lawful excuse, the proof whereof shall
lie upon him, is found upon any such reserve shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding fifty pounds or to be imprisoned for any
period not exceeding three months.
16. It shall not be lawful for any person other than a Superin-
tendent or Protector, or person acting under the direction of a
Superintendent or under the written permit of a Protector, without
lawful excuse, to enter or remain or he within or upon any place
where any aboriginals or female half-castes are camped. Any
person, save as aforesaid, who without lawful excuse, the proof
whereof shall lie upon him, is found in or within five chains of
any such camp shall he liable to a penalty not exceeding fifty
pounds or to imprisonment for any period not exceeding three
months;
Provided that no person shall be prosecuted for an offence
against this section except by the direction of the Minister.
17. If at any time he thinks it necessary so to do, the Protector
may cause any aboriginals or half-castes who are camped or are
about to camp within or near the limits of any township to remove
their camp or proposed camp to some place at such distance from
such township as he may direct. And all police officers shall assist
the Protector in carrying out the provisions of this section.
18. Any two Justices may, notwithstanding any Act to the
contrary, hear and determine any complaint for any offence against
Burden of
proof of age
of consent.
Mining on
reserves for
aboriginals
without
permit
prohibited.
Persons
prohibited
from
frequenting
camps, &c.
Removal of
camps in or
near town-
ship?.
Jurisdiction
of justices,
Ac.
* 38 Vic. No. 12.
t 63 Vic. No. 9, Sched. I.
t 62 Vic. No. 34.


the provisions of the Principal Act or this Act or “ The Native
Labourers’ Protection Act of 1884, ”* or any Regulation made
under any of those Acts, at any place within Queensland where the
offender may he or where any ship, vessel, or boat connected with
any such offence may be found, or at any place within Queensland
appointed for holding courts of petty sessions, and may make
orders for the safe keeping, detention, seizure, or sale of such ship,
vessel, or boat, and all things found thereon, as they think fit.
If any person appears to a Protector to have committed any
such offence, the Protector may, by written order under his hand,
direct the offender, and if necessary the ship, vessel, or boat to which
he belongs, and the master or the whole or any of the crew or
passengers thereof, to proceed to the nearest convenient place at
which a court of petty sessions is held, and the justices may hear
and determine the matter in a summary manner. The Protector
may order the detention of any such ship, vessel, or boat until the
alleged offence has been adjudicated upon.
Any person who disobeys any order of a Protector under the
provisions of this section shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding
twenty pounds, or to be imprisoned for any period not exceeding
two months.
19. (l.i In all cases where any half-caste child whose age does
not exceed sixteen years is being maintained at the cost of the*
Government, the father of such child shall, if of sufficient ability!
so to do, contribute to his support while such child continues to be'
so maintained. A Protector may apply to a justice for a summons
to lie served on the alleged father of such child for the purpose of
obtaining such contribution.
(2.) On the return of such summons, any two justices shall
proceed to hear the matter of the complaint, and if the paternity
of the defendant and his ability to contribute to the support of
such child is proved to the satisfaction of the justices, they may
by order adjudge the defendant to pay such weekly sum not exceed-
ing ten shillings for the maintenance of such child as such justices
think fit:
Provided that no man shall be taken to be the father of any
such child upon the oath of the mother only.
(3.) Any two justices, on the complaint of any such father or
of a Protector, while the first or any subsequent order continues
in force, may make further inquiry into such father’s ability to
contribute as aforesaid, and may remit or lessen the amount of the
weekly payment that has been adjudged by the last preceding
order, or may increase the same if they see cause so to do, so that
the amount shall not in any case exceed the weekly sum hereinbefore
mentioned.
(4.) 'Whenever, after the making of any such order as afore-
said, it is made to appear to any justice, by a complaint in writing
Father liable
to contribute
to support of
half-caste
child.
* 48 Vic. No. 20. supra.


and upon oath, that any weekly sum to be paid in pursuance thereof
has not been paid, or that any father named in such order is about
to leave Queensland, or remove from his usual place of residence,
without having first notified his intention to the clerk of petty
sessions officiating at the court at which the order was made, or
without having made due provision for the payment of such weekly
’sum, such justice may by warrant cause such father to be brought
before him or some other justice to answer the complaint.
(5.) On the return of such warrant the justice shall proceed
to hear the matter of the complaint, and if the same is proved to
be true shall proceed to levy or enforce payment of the said weekly
sums by distress or imprisonment for any period not exceeding
three months.
(6.) All contributions and enforced payments under this
section towards the support of a half-caste child shall be paid into
the Consolidated Revenue.


“THE ABORIGINALS PROTECTION AND RESTRICTION OF
THE SALE OF OPIUM ACTS, 1897 TO 1901”
(REGULATIONS UNDER).
Home Secretary’s Department,
Brisbane, sth June, 1919.
HIS Excellency the Governor, with the advice of the Executive
Council, has, in pursuance of the provisions of “The. Aboriginals
Protection and Restriction of the Sale of Opium Acts, 1897 to 1901,”
been pleased to approve of the following Regulations.
JOHN HUXHAM.
Regulations Nos. 8 and 11 of the Regulations made under the above
Acts and published in the Government Gazette of 26th March, 1904, are
hereby revoked.
Definitions.
In these Regulations the term “the Act” means “The Aboriginals
Protection and Restriction of the Sale, of Opium Act, 1897,” as amended
by “The Aboriginals Protection and Restriction of the Sale of Opium
Act, 1901,” and any Act incorporated therewith, and all regulations
made under any of the above Acts, and the following terms shall (unless
the context otherwise indicates) bear the several meanings set against
them respectively: —
“Station hands.” —All aboriginals and all female half-caste
natives of Queensland not holding exemption under Section 33
of “The Aboriginals Protection and Restriction of the Sale,
of Opium Act, 1897,” who may be employed in any capacity
or for any term upon station properties, including pastoral
leases, grazing farms, and grazing homesteads.
“General farm work.” —Work on agricultural or dairy farms,
fruit, coffee, or cocoanut plantations, and all other farm work
not included in the above description of station hands.
“Inspectors.” —The chief protector and all protectors of
aboriginals, all officers of police, superintendents of aboriginal
reserves, inspectors of the Health Department, and inspec-
tors under “The Workers’ Accommodation Act of 1915,”
and all industrial inspectors.
“Local protector.”—The protector of aboriginals assigned to the
petty sessions district in which the place of employment is
situated.
“Employer.”—Any owner, master, manager, foreman, overseer,
contractor, or other person having control of aboriginal and
[or] female half-caste workers.
“Employee.”—Aboriginal and [or] female half-caste workers,
whether employed as station hands or in other branches of
labour, or as domestic servants.


‘ ‘ Prickly-pear cutters. ’ ’ —Employees engaged in cutting, stacking,
burning, or otherwise destroying pricldy-pear for not less
than twenty-four hours in any week.
'‘Place of residence,” —The institution, town, or camp from which
an employee is brought for the purpose of being placed under
engagement.
Agreements.
After the publication in the Gazette of these Regulations all the
following provisions shall, where applicable, be deemed to be incorporated
in all agreements entered into by and between employers and employees
under section 15 of the Act, and shall be as binding upon the parties to
the said agreement as if the same had been repeated therein as part of
such agreement.
Minimum rates of wages to be paid to employees.
1. («.) General station hands, including all employees not otherwise
specified—
Per week.
£ s. d.
Adults 21 to 40 years . . . . . . ..200
Over 40 years—if active . . . . • ■ 1 10 0
Over 40 years—if not active . . . . ..100
18 years to 21 years . . . . • ■ ..150
Under 18 years —after two years’ training . . 015 0
Under 18 years—with less than two years’ .
training . . . . . . . . 0 10 0
(b) Prickly-pear cutters, scrub or forest clearing,
timber-getting and wood-cutting—
-21 to 40 years . . .. . . . . ..220
Over 40 —if active . . . . . . . . 1 15 0
Over 40—if not active . . . . . . 110 0
Under 21 years . . . . . . . . ..150
Youths under 18 shall not be allowed to work at
prickly-pear cutting.
(c) Carpenters and others —
If tradesmen . . . . . . . . ..350
Tradesmen’s assistants . . . . ..200
(d) Cooks —
Stale, if cooking for white employees—
. For average of under 12 persons . . . . 210 0
Over 12 and up to 30 persons . . . . ..300
Male, if cooking for aboriginals—
For 8 and up to 12 persons . . . . ..200
Over 12 and up to 30 persons . . ..250
Female, if cooking for white employees—
For average of up to 6 persons . . . . 15 0
For 7 and up to 12 persons . . . . 2 10 0
For 13 and up to 30 persons . . . . ..300
Female, if cooking for aboriginals—
For average of up to 6 persons . . . . 015 0
For 7 and up to 12 persons . . . . ..150
For over 12 persons . . . . . . ■ ■ 115 0


Where 24 persons or more are cooked for, an
offsider at two-thirds of these rates shall also be
employed.
If the wife of an employee cooks for the quarters
of other employees, she shall be paid not less than
2s. 6d. per head per week for employees cooked for
up to six in number, and thereafter at the rates fixed.
(f.) Head stockmen —
In charge of 4 or more employees—At
McCawley award rates.
If in charge of aboriginals only . . ..300
Stockmen in charge of outstation . . . . ..300
Drovers —European half-castes —if experienced
hands —At McCawley award rates.
Drovers (except as above) —■
When on road with stock .. . . ..300
With plant only .. . . . . . . 1 10 0
(/) Bullock, horse, camel, donkey, and mule drivers—
When on road 2 10 0
When not on road .. . . . . ..200
{g) General farm labourers, ploughing, cornpicking,
dairying, and general farm work; also houseboys,
grooms, gardeners, yardmen, and all persons
engaged in work not otherwise specified—
Under 18 years after three years’ training .. 015 0
Under 18 years after two years’ training .. 012 6
Under 18 years and untrained .. .. 010 0
18 to 21 years . . .. -. .. .. 017 6
21 to 40 years .. .. .. .. ..150
Over 40—if active .. .. .. ..110
Over 40 —if not active .. .. 0 15 0
(/i) Sugar farm work—As per McCawley award.
(j) If an employee’s wife is employed at laundry or other house-
work at the station apart from her own household duties she
shall while so employed be paid at the rates prescribed for
domestic servants.
( k) All employees under 18 years of age shall (in addition to
being paid the above wages) be kept supplied with the follow-
ing clothes by the employer or at the employer’s expense:—
One summer suit 1 f , .
, ~ I tor best.
One winter suit )
Two pairs working trousers, with belt or braces.
Four singlets.
Six pairs socks.
Pour working shirts.
Two ties.
Two soft white shirts.
Two pairs boots —one for working.
One raincoat.
One warm overcoat.
One sweater or guernsey.
The employer shall be responsible for the keeping in a
decent state of cleanliness and repair of the clothing provided
by him for any such employee.
B


Where an employer fails to keep an employee under IS
years of age supplied with clothing to the satisfaction of the
local protector, the local protector may, after one warning,
given in writing, supply at the employer’s expense the clothing-
needed, and the cost of such clothing supplied shall be regarded
as wages due from such employer to such employee.
The following deductions from the wages of employees
shall be payable as per terms of agreement by the employer to
the loeal protector or some official nominated by him: —
Single men—7s per cent.
Married men and men with families or other dependents
to support—so per rent, to 33 per cent, according to
circumstances.
Boys under 18 years of age—Bo per cent.
(0 The local protector may vary the amount of deduction to be
made but only where, under special circumstances, he con-
siders it advisable; but in no case shall a deduction be made
of less than 50 per cent, for single men or 25 per cent, for
married men or men with dependents, without the authority
of the chief protector.
Wherever in the opinion of the local protector the ser-
vices of an employee are. from the ability, intelligence, and
experience of such employee, worth more than the rates set
, out in these regulations as the minimum rate of wage for
such services, the loeal protector may insist on the payment
of the award rates for station employees, or may fix such
higher rates for such services as he thinks will be equitable.
No reduction of the minimum rates set out in these
regulations shall be made without the authority of the chief
protector.
A deduction of 5 per cent., in the ease of single men, and
per cent, in the ease of married men, of the total wages
earned shall be made by the local protector from the wages
collected for all employees, except such as are already contri-
buting to settlement funds, and the amount so deducted shall
be remitted to the chief protector to be contributed towards
a fund for relief of indigent natives.
Every employee shall maintain his own family and [or]
dependents as far as he can from his earnings and only such
relief from the above fund will he allowed for them as may
be necessary and as it may be beyond his means to provide.
Wages conditions.
2. (i.) All employees to be engaged shall be engaged under agree-
ment and [or] on permit, in accordance with the provisions of the Act,
as shall be directed by the local protector, such agreement to be in the
form prescribed in the Schedule to these Regulations, and wages shall
he paid in accordance with the terms of the agreement, otherwise such
wages shall he deemed not to have been paid.
(ii.) The portion payable to employees as pocket money shall be
paid regularly at the interval stated in the agreement made as aforesaid.
The employer shall provide and keep a pocket-money book in which the
acknowledgment of the employee shall be obtained of each payment and
[or] any deduction, and witnessed by a third disinterested person.


(iii.) A detailed account sliall be furnished to the employee before
any deductions are made from his pocket-money for purchases from the
station nr local store.
(iv.) The pocket-money book and copies of any store accounts
deducted shall be sent to the local protector at least half-yearly for his
inspection, and the local protector may disallow any deduction or charge
which exceeds local prices if the place of employment is distant less than
twenty miles from town, or exceeds ten per centum increase on local
prices if the place of employment is distant more than twenty miles from
town, or if such goods charged for ought to have been provided free by
the employer in terms of the agreement made as aforesaid: Provided
also that an employer shall not be entitled to charge an employee in
excess of wholesale market rates for any beef and [or] any other produce
produced or grown by the employer when same is purchased for the
employee’s dependents.
(v.) No debts shall be recognised which are contracted by the
employee with the employer in excess of the pocket-money allowance
without the authority of the local protector.
(vi.) The employer shall not sell to or purchase for any employee
any horse, cattle, vehicles, cycles, guns, land or buildings without the
consent of the local protector, and no such consent shall be given until
after inspection by the local protector or a competent disinterested
person nominated by him.
(vii.) The employer shall pay in advance all expenses of the
employee’s conveyance from the place of residence to the place of
employment, and, on discharge, for his return to the place of re.sidenee.
and an allowance not exceeding five shillings per day for his mainten-
ance en route.
(viii.) No daily allowance shall be claimed while the employee is
travelling by steamer where board is provided for by the passage money.
(ix.) Where an employee by his own default fails to fulfil his part
of the agreement, the employer may claim a proportionate refund of
any such costs of travelling, but the employer shall not, except with the
approval of the local protector, deduct from the pocket-money or other
wages due to an employee any cost of travelling where such employee
is being discharged by him, no matter for what cause.
(x.) No employee shall be discharged under any circumstances
without the consent of the local protector.
(xi.) No deduction shall be made by an employer from the wages
or pocket-money due to an employee for any time lost through wet
weather or any other cause not the fault of the employee, nor for
sickness or accident contracted or occurring ordinarily in the course of
duty.
(xii.) The employer shall provide every reasonable facility in the
event of the illness of an employee or any accidents occurring to an
employee for such employee to obtain medical attention or medicine, and
no charge shall be made against any wages due to the said employee for
such attention or medicine without the approval of the local protector.
(xiii.) The employer shall provide convenient means for the
employee to obtain all extra provisions, clothing, tobacco, and medicines
needed for his family or dependents, but the employer shall be held
responsible that such orders or purchases of supplies do not exceed the
amount authorised.


(xiv.) In the event of the illness of an employee under eighteen
years of age, or of any accidents occurring to any such employee, the
employer shall at his own expense provide such employee with the neces-
sary medical attention, medicine, and maintenance during his illness or
state of incapacity to the satisfaction of the local protector.
(xv.) The employer shall forthwith report to the local protector
in writing, the desertion, illness, or death of any of his employees, and
in the case of death shall, within fourteen days, furnish the local
protector with full particulars in writing of deceased’s account with the
employer, and hand over to the local protector or any officer nominated
by him all property and moneys in deceased’s estate.
(xvi.) Where an employee dies during employment, the employer
shall be liable for wages to the date of death: Provided, however, that
the local protector may, at his discretion, allow a remission of any
portion of such wages from the date of the illness where such illness was
the fault of the deceased, or was caused by a complaint contracted before
the engagement, as he may deem just.
(xvii.) Where an employee deserts from his employment the
employer shall within fourteen days furnish the local protector with a
statement of the employee’s account with him, and remit to the local
protector all wages and balances of pocket-money due to the date of the
employee’s desertion.
Food.
d. (i.) The employer shall supply, to the satisfaction of the local
protector, food of sufficient quantity and variety which shall include the
following:—
Bread (or flour with baking powder) ;
Meat (to include fresh meat at least once a week) ;
Sugar;
Tea;
Milk, fresh or condensed;
Vegetables, fresh or dried;
Rice or sago;
Salt;
Soap;
Kerosene;
Fresh or dried fruit;
Jam, syrup, or butter.
(ii.) The employer shall provide, to the satisfaction of the local
protector, a sufficient supply of good water, fit for drinking and cooking
purposes.
(iii.) The employer shall, to the satisfaction of the local protector,
provide at each quarters some secure means of protecting foods from
ants and flies.
(iv.) The employer shall provide at his own expense a cook at each
quarters where eight or more workers are accommodated, and allow
sufficient time off during ordinary working hours for one employee to
prepare meals where less than eight persons are employed, or make other
arrangements satisfactory to the local protector.


(v.) The employer shall allow one or more of the workers sufficient
time off during working hours to obtain firewood for the use of the
quarters, or make other satisfactory arrangements for providing such
firewood.
(vi.) An employer may, with the approval of the local protector,
agree with an employee to give a cash allowance in lieu of the food or
any portion thereof, but such arrangements shall not affect such
employer’s liability as regards any of the other food or accommodation
regulations.
Accommodation.
4. (i.) The employer shall provide, free of expense to the employee,
weather-proof quarters in a dry, healthy position, with separate sleeping
and cooking rooms. Such quarters shall be built with floors raised from
ground; if of wood, on stumps at least two feet high and with walls not
less than eight feet high, and shall be properly and sufficiently drained.
(ii.) The sleeping room shall be large enough to allow 42 square
feet of floor space for each occupant.
A bed or bunk at least 6 feet long by 2 feet 6 inches wide, raised
18 inches from the floor, shall be provided for each employee.
The sleeping room shall be ventilated and lighted to the satisfaction
of the local protector, having not less than one glass window for each
room 12 feet square.
(iii.) No part of any quarters shall, while such quarters are occu-
pied by employees, be used for the storage of material, tools, implements,
or provisions, other than rations issued.
(iv.) A table, with chairs or forms for meal times, shall be provided
at each quarters and situated under shelter in the quarters, with satis-
factory means of enclosing from wind and rain.
(v.) An earth-closet, sheltered and sufficiently private to the satis-
faction of the local protector, with pan made fly-proof, shall be provided
at each quarters for every six employees, and a weekly cleansing service
arranged for. Such privies shall be not less than one hundred yards
from the quarters water supply, if underground.
(vi.) The quarters shall be sufficiently provided to the satisfaction
of the local with kitchen and cooking utensils, cutlery, eating
and drinking vessels, utensils, and implements for lavatory, laundry,
and house-cleaning purposes, for the use of the inmates.
(vii.) The employer shall, unless the inspector is satisfied there is
not a sufficient water supply, provide baths and an adequate supply of
water in a room or enclosure sufficiently private to the satisfaction of
the local protector.
(viii.) The employer shall provide, to the satisfaction of the local
protector, sufficient artificial means of lighting for cooking, eating, and
sleeping rooms.
(ix.) The employer shall provide, to the satisfaction of the local
protector, a sufficient quantity of good disinfectant for sanitary purposes
and disinfection of quarters.
(x.) The employer shall provide, to the satisfaction of the local
protector, proper garbage tins with covers for the use of each quarters,


and shall provide facilities for the daily cleansing of them by burning
or burying.
(xi.) No quarters shall be situated within sixty yards of any horse
or cattle stalls, milking or slaughter yards or piggery, nor within sixty
feet of any earth closet or urinal.
The employer shall provide, to the satisfaction of the local protector,
separate and sufficiently-private sleeping quarters for married couples
or men with young families.
The quarters of female employees shall, to the satisfaction of the
local protector, be sufficiently separated and private from the men’s
quarters and be under responsible supervision.
(xii.) Where employees have to camp away from their quarters,
sufficient tent or other weather-proof shelter, with camp cooking and
eating utensils, shall be supplied by the employer, to the satisfaction
of the local protector.
(xiii.) If an employee’s wife accompanies and lives with him at the
place of employment, they shall be provided 'with separate sleeping
quarters as a married couple.
(xiv.) All quarters shall be kept clean and protected from damage
or defacement by the occupants. If such occupants fail to keep their
quarters clean, or cause or suffer defacement or damage to be done, the
employer may have such cleansing and [or] any repairs rendered neces-
sary by reason of such defacement or damage effected at the expense
of such occupants, but no deduction shall be made for this purpose from
any pocket-money or wages of any employee unless such deduction shall
have been approved by the local protector.
Hours of work, holidays, <f'c.
5. (i.) The hours of work for employees engaged at or about the
homestead shall not exceed forty-eight hours in any one week, between
the hours of 6 a.m. and 6 p.m. daily.
(ii.) One week day half holiday shall be allowed once a week, or
one whole week day holiday per fortnight, exclusive of working hours.
(iii.) Time off in lieu may be granted for any overtime worked not
exceeding six hours in any week, but otherwise it shall be paid for at
overtime rates of time and a-half.
(iv.) No Sunday work shall be allowed other than the necessary
work of feeding and watering animals, milking, separating, and cooking
at quarters. Such time shall be regarded as overtime in terms of the
preceding subsection,
(v.) The following days, viz,:—Christmas Day, Boxing Day, New
Year’s Day, Good Friday, Easter Monday, and Empire Day shall be
paid holidays. Employees may be worked the usual hours on any of
these days without being paid overtime therefor, but for any such day
or part of it worked the employee shall receive one full day paid holiday
in lieu. In addition to the above paid holidays, all employees, on com-
pletion of two years’ service, shall be entitled to one week’s holiday on
full pay then and in each succeeding year.
(vi.) Time lost in wet weather shall not be deducted from working
time nor counted as time in lieu.


Domestic servants — females.
6. (i.) The following wages scale and rules shall be observed in
the hiring of aboriginal and for] half-caste females for domestic
service:—
If clothing If clothing not
found. found.
Per week. Per week.
s. d. s. d.
12 to 14 years . . . . . . .3 6 . . 7 0
14 to 16 years . . . . .. 4 6 . . 8 0
16 to 18 years . . . . . . 6 0 . . 10 0
Adults . . . . . . . . 8 0 . . 12 0
Trained generals . . . . . . . . 14 0
Cook and laundress '. . . . . . . . 15 0
Mothers with one child, 3s. per week less.
Camp females not in residence —
10s. per week, or 2s. per day, and food.
Laundry work or scrubbing—4s. per day and food.
If over 50 years of age, light work only—ls. per day and
food.
If over 50 years of age, laundry and scrubbing—2s. 6d. per
day and food.
Deductions payable to local protector for banking—according to
age, 75 per cent, to 90 per cent, to nearest 6d.
No reduction of the above minimum rates shall be made without
the sanction of the chief protector.
(ii.) All aboriginal and half-caste female servants shall be
employed under agreement in terms of the Act, and wages shall be paid
in strict accordance with the terms of the agreement. Such agreement
to be in the form prescribed in the schedule to these Regulations, otheiv
wise such wages shall be deemed not to have been paid.
(iii.) The portion payable to such servants as pocket-money shall
be regularly paid at the interval stated in the agreement. The employer
shall provide and keep a pocket-money book in which the acknowledg-
ment of the servant shall be obtained for each payment, and witnessed
by a third disinterested person. The pocket-money book shall be sent
to the local protector at least half-yearly for his inspection.
fiv.) No debts shall be recognised which are contracted by a servant
with an employer in excess of the pocket-money allowance without the
authority of the local protector.
(v.) The employer shall pay in advance all expenses of the servant’s
conveyance from the place of residence to the place of employment, and
on discharge for her return to the place of residence, and an allowance
not exceeding ss. per day for her maintenance en route.
No daily allowance shall be claimed while the servant is travelling
by steamer, where board is provided for by the passage money:
Provided that where a servant by her own default fails to complete
her agreement the employer may claim a proportionate refund of any
such costs of travelling, but the employer shall not, except with the
approval of the local protector, deduct from the pocket-money or other
wages due to such servant any cost of travelling where such servant is
being discharged, no matter for what cause.


(vi.) No servant shall be discharged under any circumstances
without the consent of the local protector.
(vii.) No deduction from the wages or pocket-money due from him
to a servant shall be made by an employer for any time lost through
any cause not the fault of such servant, or through sickness contracted
by or an accident occurring to such servant ordinarily in the course of
duty, nor for holidays where such are granted by the employer.
(viii.) No female servant shall be allowed to be absent from the
premises of an employer after dark unless in charge of a responsible
member of the employer’s family or friends.
(ix.) The employer shall provide cooked food of reasonable quantity
and quality and variety, to the satisfaction of the local protector, which
shall include sugar, milk, butter, and vegetables or fruit.
(x.) Where clothes are provided by an employer they shall consist
of serviceable articles, to the satisfaction of the local protector, suitable
for the climate and sufficient in quantity to allow at least three changes
of underclothing.
Such sufficient and suitable outfit of clothing shall in such cases be
provided by the employer within seven days of engagement. If the
servant through her own fault fails to serve at least six months, a
proportionate refund of the value of such clothing supplied may be
allowed the employer with the approval of the local protector.
(xi.) The employer shall provide, to the satisfaction of the local
protector, suitable accommodation, which shall consist of a room in a
portion of the employer’s premises sufficiently protected to the satis-
faction of the local protector, to ensure the servant’s being under proper
care and supervision at night. Such room shall be large enough to allow
at least. 480 cubic feet of air space per individual, with sufficient ventila-
tion, light, and means of security, to the satisfaction of the local pro-
tector. The employer shall, to the satisfaction of the local protector,
provide for each servant a comfortable bed with mattress and blankets,
bed linen and mosquito net, a receptacle or cupboard for storage of
clothes, and conveniences for health and cleanliness.
(xii.) Employers shall, to the satisfaction of the local protector,
allow their servants every opportunity and facility for washing their
clothes and keeping them in repair, and provide sufficient water and
utensils for washing and bathing purposes.
(xiii.) All caps and aprons for wear when on duty shall be provided
by the employer.
(xiv.) The employer shall provide, to the satisfaction of the local
protector, suitable and sufficiently private sanitary conveniences, with
disinfectant, for the use of servants.
(xv.) No employer shall use for the storage of provisions, produce,
machinery, lumber, or laundry material the sleeping room allotted to
a servant, nor place therein any surplus furniture which shall reduce
the prescribed air space.
(xvi.) The local protector may cancel any agreement and remove
any servant from the employment of an employer who, in his opinion,
is not properly treating or earing for or controlling such servant, and
the employer shall not in such a case have any claim for refund of any
travelling expenses incurred or clothing outfit supplied. The local
protector may also refuse to hire any further servants to such employer.
