

AN ACCOUNT OF A GANOID FISH FROM
QUEENSLAND ( Ceratodus ).
By DR. ALBERT GUNTHER, F.R.S.
Assistant Keeper in the Zoological Department of the
British Museum.
[PLATE LXXXVI.]
257
The genus Ceratodus lias been established by Professor Agassiz
for teeth which are found in strata of Jurassic and Triassic forma-
tions in various parts of Europe and India. These teeth (fig. 3),
of which there is a great variety with regard to general shape
and size,* are much longer than broad—sometimes 2 in. long—
depressed, with a flat or slightly undulated, always punctuated
crown, with one margin convex, and with from three to seven
prongs projecting on the opposite margin. They have always
been found isolated, sometimes with a portion of a bony base
attached to them. Yet Professor Agassiz pointed out, from
their shape, that there must have been only two of them in the
upper jaw and the same number in the lower, that the convex
margin was directed inwards, and the prongs outwards. No
other part of the fish to which they belong has hitherto been
found associated with them; but Agassiz considered it to have
been a cartilaginous fish, or more especially a shark—a view
not so very far from the truth, as we shall see hereafter.
The discovery of a Ceratodont fish in the recent fauna is
due to the Hon. William Forster and Mr. Gferrard Krefft, the
Curator of the Australian Museum at Sydney. Years ago the
former of these gentlemen had informed Mr. Krefft that there
existed in the fresh waters of Queensland a large fish with
cartilaginous backbone, but he was thought to be mistaken
* Mr. Higgins possesses the largest, and probably most unique, collection
of Ceratodont teeth from one locality—viz. from Aust-passage near Bristol.
Among some 300 specimens there are scarcely two which are sufficiently
alike to be assigned to the same individual.
VOL. XI. —NO. XLIV. ' S


PI.LXXXVI.
DT Gi-m-tker Vv. West &C° Irtk
A. ganoid Fisli from Queensland. (Ceratodus)


266
POPULAR SCIENCE REVIEW.
genus ( Ceratodus ) testify to its presence; no further trace of it
has been found until the present period, where it reappears in
three genera ( Ceratodus , Lepidosiren , Protopterus), one of
which is identical with that of the? Mesozoic era. Now, at
present scarcely any zoologist will deny that there must have
been a continuity of the Dipnoous type, and it is only a proof
of the incompleteness of the palaeontological record that we
have to derive all our information regarding it from only three
so very distant periods of its existence.
In conclusion I may add a synoptical table, from which the
systematic views advocated above, and more especially the posi-
tion of Ceratodus in the system, may be readily understood.
After the separation of Amphiosus and the Lampreys as types
of two distinct sub-classes ( Leptocardii and Cyclostomata\
the remaining host of fishes are referred to two other sub-
classes :
Sub-class : Teleostei. Heart with a rigid bulb us aortee ; intestine without
spiral valve; optic nerves decussating (living species, nearly 9,000).
Sub- class : Palceichthyes. Heart with a contractile conus arteriosus ; intes-
tine with a spiral valve ; optic nerves non-decussating.
Order I.—Plagio stomata, or Marine Talceichthyes (sharks and rays; living
species, nearly 300).
Order II. — Holocephala (four living species).
Order 111. —Ganoidei , or Freshwater Palceichthyes.
Sub-order I.— Amioidei (one species).
Sub-order 2. — Lepidosteoidei (three species).
Sub-order 3.— Polypteroidei (two species).
Sub-order 4. — Chondrostei (sturgeons, thirty species).
Sub-order s.— Dipnoi.
Fam. a. — Sirenidce.
Sub-fam.— Ceratodontina (Ceratodus).
Sub-fam.— Protopterina (Lepidosiren, Protopterns).
Fam. b. — Ctenododipteridce (Ctenodus, Dipterus).
Fam. c.— Phaneropleuridce (Phaneropleuron).
