

a
NEW SOUTH WALES.
JLHSEN'JEA.ISr HALL,
ITHACA ROAD,
October 31st, 1885.
146 PITT STREET.
LINNEAN SOCIETY
RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS.
F. CUNNINGH AME & CO., STEAM MACHINE PRINTERS,
r n(?5 si




An Account of the Proceedings connected with the
Dedication by the Hon. W. MAGLEAY, M.L.G.,
F.L.S., of a New Hall, Laboratory and Chambers ,
for the use of the Linnean Society of New South
Wales, of which he has been for many years an
energetic and, munificent'' supporter.
The building is erected on the Ithaca-road, within a few yards
of the waters of Elizabeth Bay, and adjoins the well-appointed
museum which lies to the north of it. The structure is 80 feet
in length by 40 feet in width, and the rooms have a total height
of 20 feet. The principal chamber is the central hall, which
is 40 by 40 feet. The ceiling and roof are supported by six
columns with enriched capitals. The front portion of the
building consists of two rooms. One will be used for the meet-
ings of the council, and the other will be allotted to the secretary.
A large room at the end will be devoted to the purposes of a
laboratory. The rooms are all well lighted, and ventilating
appliances of the most perfect description have been introduced.
On Saturday, October 31st, 1885, the rooms, which had been
decorated for the purpose with flowering plants and ferns, were
opened to receive all the members of the society who were able
to attend. About 80 guests partook of the hospitality of Mr.
Macleay. The chair was occupied by Professor Stephens, Pre-
sident of the Linnean Society, who was supported on the right
by the Hon. W. B. Dailey, M.L.C., the Hon. W. A. Brodribb,
M.L.C. ; and on the left by the Hon. Wm, Macleay, the President
of the Legislative Council (Sir John Hay), the Colonial Secretary
(Sir P. Jennings), Mr. E. C. Merewether, the Rev. Dr. Woods,
and Professor Anderson-Stuart (Dean of the Faculty of Medicine
in the University of Sydney.) The vice-chairs were occupied
by Dr. Cox and Mr. C. J. Wilkinson, Government Geologist.
Amongst the other guests were the Hon. C. K. Mackellar, M 8.,
M.L.C., the Hon. P. G. King, M.L.C., Hon. J. Norton, M.L.C.,


Rev. J. N. Manning, Captain Eldred, Dr. Yon Lendenfeld, Dr.
Tucker, Dr. Laure, Dr. Foucart, Mr. W. A. Haswell, M.A., B.Sc.,
(lecturer in Zoology and Comparative Anatomy in the University
of Sydney), Mr. A. G. Ralston, Alderman P. M‘Mahon, Mr. P.
Hayes, J.P., and Mr. Fred. Wright. The following congratu-
latory message was read from Baron Yon Mueller, of Melbourne :
—“ My best felicitation at festival for inaugurating new Linnean
Hall raised by Hon. Mr. Macleay as an Australian Maecenas.”
After luncheon,
The Hon, William Macleay delivered an address. He
said : Mr. President and gentlemen, —The occasion which has
brought us together will justify, I think, a few remarks from me
on the past and present of this society, and its prospects of future
usefulness. (Hear, hear.) The past may be briefly dealt with. The
society was first formed chiefly through the exertions of Captain
Stackhouse, R.N., about the beginning of the year 1875, so that it
has now been 10 years in existence, and it has during that period
published annually a volume, varying in size from 600 to 1400
pages with many plates, containing entirely original matter con-
tributed by'members of the society. (He&r, hear.) The estima-
tion in which those publications have been held by the world of
science has been evidenced by the large number of scientific
societies in all parts of the globe, which have applied for an inter
change of their publications with ours. But during all this period
in which we have been, it may be said, building up the scientific
reputation of the society, we have been labouring under serious
difficulties of several kinds, but none so great as the want of
sufficient space to meet our requirements. (Hear, hear.) For
the first year or so of the society’s existence, it occupied an up-
stairs room in Hunter-street, extremely inconvenient and difficult
of access. It then, for about three years, held its meetings in a
room in the Public Library, by the permission of the trustees of
that institution. The next move was to very excellent and com
modious apartments in the Garden Palace, which the Government
of the day had most liberally placed at our disposal. Up till then
we had had no room for books or anything else, and the scientific
publications sent to us from foreign societies were packed away
in cases, and were literally inaccessible. But when we found
ourselves in possession of the ample space allotted to us in the
Garden Palace, we were at once enabled to enter upon the course
of usefulness which was the original intention of the founders of
the society; and we had collected a large and valuable library of


works on scientific subjects and had completed the first series of
lectures on natural history, open to the public, when the destruction
by fire of the entire building rendered us once more homeless and
destitute. It is only right to mention here that the warmest
sympathy for the misfortune which then befell the society
was evinced by kindred societies. The Royal Society of Sydney
offered us the use of their house for our meetings, and from the
learned societies of all parts of Europe we received sets of their
publications to replace those destroyed by fire. For some months
after the tire we were again accommodated at the Public Library,
and then for a few months we occupied a small room in Hunter
street but in both these places the space at our disposal was so
limited that we were precluded from making any attempt to again
get together a collection of books. ' Subsequently we obtained
possession of a convenient and central house in Phillip street, in
which the noise of the tram cars was our only serious disadvan-
tage, and since then, that is to say, during the last two years, we
have, though not overburdened with space, been enabled to invite
contributions to the library, and the result, I am glad to inform
you, is that we have now a large and excellent reference library,
comprising over 5000 publications on scientific subjects, (Hear,
hear.) The necessity, however, for more room, and I may add
less noise, has induced me to build the edifice we are now
assembled in, which I beg to present, such as it is, to the society
—(cheers) —for the period of 89 years, the unexpired term of my
original lease of the ground for 99 years.
And now, having got to this point in our history, when I
hope that all difficulties have terminated, and we may look for-
ward to a prosperous future, it would be well to review the objects
with which the society was founded. Our rules state that the
society is “ for the promotion of the study of natural history ir
all its branches.” Few people, I suspect, are aware of the widt
significance of that sentence. Natural history in all its branches
includes the knowledge of everything material, natural or con-
ceivable on the globe, thereby differing widely from metaphysics,
which deals with what is not material, not conceivable, not
natural, and is not properly, in my opinion, a science at all.
(Laughter, and hear, hear.) That portion of the science of
natural history which deals with animated nature or what is
called biology, embraces systematic and morphological zoology and
botany ; animal and vegetable anatomy, physiology, pathology,
embryology, and histology; anthropology, ethnology, and organic
chemistry ; while the branch which deals with inanimate matter,


geology, includes mineralogy, seismology, palaeontology, geography,
and meteorology. The importance, therefore, of the subjects
coming within the scope of this society can scarcely be over-
estimated, and one of our chief duties, it seems to me, is to keep
prominently before the public the advantages to be derived from
scientific education and training. I believe myself that the
society, without claiming for it either political or social influence,
might do much for the improvement of education generally.
(Hear, hear.) But reform in our system of education must begin
with our schools, and to reform them is by no means an easy
matter. The impression has got such a hold of the English mind
that a knowledge of the Latin and Greek languages alone con-
stitutes a good education, that it would, I believe, be nearly as
easy to persuade a Chinese scholar that his “ Nine Books of
Classics,” all about 3000 years old, were not the sole guide to
knowledge and high culture, so as to induce an Englishman to
surrender Greek and Latin as the most essential part of education.
(Applause.) I have no wish to see Greek and Latin banished
from schools, but I object most strongly to the disproportionate
amount of time expended on those studies to the exclusion of
what I conceive to be other and more- important branches of
learning. (Hear, hear.) The chief advantage to be derived from
a knowledge of languages is the opportunity it gives of benefiting
by their literature, and surely the rich literature of the French
and German languages must be more conducive to culture than
the scanty literature of nations which flourished 2000 years ago.
(Hear, hear.) An acquaintance with the language and literature
of both French and German, even though it necessitated the
complete disappearance of the old classics, should be imperati\ e in
all schools. The student then, when he goes to the Universitv,
is in a position to enter upon the study of whatever branch of
knowledge he may select. Iby no means think that science must
necessarily be taught in schools, but if time can be found for it,
without interfering with proper school education, it would cer-
tainly be most beneficial to give some instruction in elementary
science. But of one thing there can be no doubt; that every one
having any claim to the most ordinary education, must ci;
some time or other acquire some knowledge of science; and let it
be remembered that even a little knowledge is better than none ,
the line of Pope “ A little knowledge is a dangerous thing” is,
if applied to science, arrant nonsense. (Hear, hear.) It is
only of late years that Natural Science has found its proper place
in University education in England and among English-speaking


people, who are, in this respect, far behind France and Germany.
It is now, however, making rapid strides, and the ancient
University of Cambridge bids fair to become as famed as a science
school as ever it was for mathematical excellence. Other
Universities are now emulating its example, and I trust that
Australia will not permit herself to be left behind in the race for
knowledge. Up till now, biology has as a rule never been taught
except as a compulsory part of the medical profession, and the
time required for the study of the specialities of that profession,
precludes the possibility of acquiring more than elementary
knowledge of general biology, yet it is from the ranks of the
medical profession that the most eminent biologists of the day
have been drawn. Those branches of science which treat of the
forces of nature, and the changes brought about by combination,
viz., natural philosophy and chemistry, lead to so many profitable
occupations and employments that there is little risk of their
being neglected; but it is not so, at present at all events, with the
science of natural history. I do not admit that the value of
knowledge should be tested by the amount of money it will put
into the pockets of its possessor, or that the acquisitionof wealth is
the sole aim and intention of education, but there can be no doubt
that to the mass of people the consideration “ what will it lead
to” must take a prominent place in the training of youth. Is
then a knowledge of natural science financially worthless 1 Does
the degree of B.Sc., which necessitates a knowledge of both
ancient and modern languages and of all the sciences, not involve
a higher and more general culture than that of 8.A., which has a
recognised value for teachers, clergymen, and barristers! Will
not a like, if not a higher value, be placed on the science degree,
when its superiority is ascertained and admitted 1 The time, 1
am sure, is not far distant when the graduate in science will be
eagerly sought, not only for the education of youth, but for the
many and important offices under Government, in which scientific
attainments are desirable, as in the departments connected with
agriculture, pastoral pursuits, fisheries, woods and forests, horti-
culture, mining, metallurgy, geological surveys, &c. Indirectly
the advantages of scientific culture will be felt above all others by
the resident in the country. Even a limited acquaintance with
natural history will enable him to take a never-failing interest in
all he sees. He notices everything, and understands what he
notices ; his observations, if he notes them down, are valuable,
which is seldom the case with an ignorant observer, and he never
can go anywhere without his untiring attention being constantly


and pleasingly occupied. (Applause.) But in truth the grandeur
of the study needs neither defence nor recommendation—the
science of life, the mystery of creation, the design of the Creator,
are surely subjects as worthy of the study and attention of man
as the works of the ancient Greek and Latin authors. (Hear,
hear.) For natural science I claim no more than a fair oppor-
tunity in the struggle of conflicting educational systems ; for the
rest it can take care of itself. And now to return once more to
the occasion which has bronght us together, I think I may con-
fidently say that our society has before it now a long career of
untroubled usefulness. We have a secured home, a well-furnished
library, a large and well-fitted laboratory, and, above all, a quiet
and comfortable room for our meetings. To this I may add that
the burden of generally directing the business of the society, and
of editing its publications, which, under the control of the council,
has, for some years past, chiefly fallen upon me, will, I hope,
henceforth be borne on worthier shoulders Mr. J. J. Fletcher,
M.A., of Sydney University, and B.Sc., of London, is about to
undertake the duties of secretary and director of the institution,
and it is worthy of note that he is the first Australian who has
ever taken a science degree. (Cheers.)
The President of the Linnean Society then rose, and
addressing their host, said : In the brief history of the operations
of the Linnean Society in New South Wales, which you have just
laid before its members, and your notice of the inconveniences and
even disaster under which its work has been hitherto maintained,
I observe a serious omission of important facts. It is quite tiue
that the society was in the first instance confined to a very
indifferent lodging, that our affairs were improved by the permis-
sion of the trustees of the Free Public Library to occupy for the
purposes of our meetings a room in that establishment, and that
our possession of excellent quarters in the Garden Palace was only
terminated in a fatal conflagration.. You have forgotten, however,
to state that since that misfortune you have lodged the society
at your own expense—(applause)—providing for its use in the
first place an office in Hunter-street; and, secondly, a commodious
house in Phillip-street, in which we have been for two years
exceedingly comfortable, and which you cease to place at our
disposal only because you have now completed the building of
this spacious and admirably planned Palace of Science which you
have this day presented to us. (Cheers.) You have also neglected
to inform us of the fact that you have yourself supplied the salaries


of the paid officers of the society. (Applause.) That you have
defrayed by far the greater portion of the cost of the society s
publications, and that you have purchased and presented to the
society two inestimable collections of scientific books and records,
one unhappily doomed to perish in flame, the other, I trust, likely
to remain safely and conveniently arranged in this house for the
continual use and advantage of the society. (Applause.) One further
benefit you have conferred upon all members, present and future,
and I may add, upon the whole of Australia, in the incorporation
of the society by Act of Parliament. (Hear, hear.) It is to you
that the country owes the establishment of a new and permanent
institution, founded not for the sake of any pecuniary, social, or
political advantage to its members, but for assistance to students
in their labours to promote knowledge, for the progress of this
community, and for the welfare of humanity. There is a malig-
nant old proverb which advises us not to look a gift horse in the
mouth. Your horses, however, require no examination.
(Laughter). They have been given with a warranty, a warranty
absolute and perfect, which we all recognise with a kind of wonder,
in the far-reaching and thorough-going character of your munifi-
cence. (Applause.) No higher guarantee for the soundness of
your gift horses could be offered, and your own delicacy and
reticence prevent us from knowing, except on our own conjecture
and estimate, how astonishing and prodigious your liberality has
been. (Hear, hear.) I purposely omit on this occasion any
particular reference to the similar services which you have
rendered to other institutions, and hasten, as President of the
Linnean Society of New South Wales, to offer you a faint and
inadequate expression of the feelings which animate our whole
body. (Applause.) The society entertains an ardent gratitude
towards you —a gratitude which is not dulled, as gratitude may
sometimes be dulled, by any affectation of beneficence, or any
haughty or inconsiderate phrase or touch of manner in your acts
of donation, but is, on the contrary, ever quickened by the freedom
from vulgar ostentation and by the generous simplicity which
specially characterise your behaviour towards the society. You
will, I hope —or rather, lam confident —accept these few words,
as an honest attempt to give some expression, however imperfect,
to the sentiment dominant in every heart in this gathering of your
friends and guests. In their name I thank for your services as an
active partner in their labours, as a wise legislator and officer in
the management of their affairs, and a benefactor whose munificence
would have made us feel a heavy burden of obligation, had it been


attended with scantier courtesy, or with less emphatic kindness.
(Applause.) Gentlemen, I have discharged one part of my duty
with a high degree of gratification—marred only by the conscious-
ness that I am unequal to the full interpretation of your feelings
towards our host. (Hear, hear.) But I should like to add a few
words upon the position and prospects of the society as now
established. It is now more than 200 years since the oldest
of all our scientific associations, the Royal Society of London, was
first incorporated by a charter of Charles XL, whose pious memory
can hardly afford to be deprived of the credit of any reputable
action. (Hear, hear, and applause.) From this original stock
sprang the multitude of similar or more special organisations for
mutual assistance in scientific research, to which more than to any
other factor the vast progress of modern science is due. The
early work of the Royal Society was naturally heterogeneous, and
even sometimes puerile, as when a series of experiments were
formally made to determine whether it was a law of nature that
a spider could not escape from the inside of a circle formed with
raspings of unicorn’s horn. (Laughter.) But the germ of scientific
enquiry was there sheltered and fostered and ingrafted upon the
most learned and ingenious spirits of the age, not excluding those
of foreign nations. And they in turn gave continuous and liberal
assistance to inventors, discoverers, and investigators, until the
supremacy of Britain in at least all the more utilitarian arts and
sciences became recognised throughout the world. How closely
the extension of the British Empire has depended upon this
general recognition is more or less known to all. Here, in the
immediate vicinity of Botany Bay, 1 need only recall the names
of three members of the Royal Society of London—Captain Cook,
Sir Joseph Banks, Dr. Solander—to remind you of our own
extraordinary and singular interest in the history of that body.
(Hear, hear.) So great a part in the drama of scientific
progress can never again fall to the lot of any one society. Yet,
what was far beyond the reach of any single association, however
enlightened, earnest, and liberal, is now already in the grasp of
the various, yet harmonious, operations of the hundreds which
from that original stock have sprung into vigorous existence in
every civilised part of the globe; and it may be that this Linnean
Society of Hew South Wales will, in the course of ages, become
entitled to emblazon some comparable, if not equal, record of
achievement. It is true that we are not the first in the field.
We have an older sister as our rival in the campaign, with whom
we shall contend for the post of honor, but against whom we main-


tain only the friendly tactics of an honourab e emulation. (Hear,
hear.) Mr. Macleay has addressed to us a few words of advice and
•encouragement as to the furtherance of scientific study, without
our walls as well as within, upon which I should like to make a
brief comment. 1 suppose most of us have read Sir Lyon Play-
fair’s address to the British Association, in which the subject is
treated at length, and with great force and eloquence. How, that
distinguished advocate of science is, as every one knows, a man
who has shown throughout his life a wide-stretching and
enlightened zeal for the extension of national education. He is,
however, essentially and especially a chemist, and his particular
predilections are naturally more lively for that branch of scientific
training which we have been accustomed to call technical, and
which rightly expects immediate results, capable of valua-
tion by experts, and leading to further issues of vast economical
importance. This technical education has already, both in the
central and in the outlying regions of the Empire, established on
a firm basis its claim to public support. It remains that this
support, which will be freely given, should be wisely distributed.
Money may be thrown away even on education; and public money,
of all moneys, ought to be that most cautiously and economically
expended, without stint, but without prodigality. On this head
we Australians have yet to learn our first lessons. (Hear, hear.)
Technical education is, however, in no sense a substitute for
general education, but implies the previous and co-ordinate
existence of the latter. And while universities are established to
continue the spiritual, moral, literary, scientific and bodily train-
ing which is commenced (or ought to be) in the school, and which
we call general culture, technical colleges are, on the other hand,
essentially seminaries of handicraft, where not science in itself,
but science in its profitable application, is the main purpose and
result. With this object, vitally important as it is to the pros-
perity of the community, we are not, as a society, directly con-
cerned. The object of this society is science pure and simple,
science for its own sake, and not for its results—(hear, hear) —
and more particularly that branch of science which gives least
prospect of pecuniary emolument, at least in the immediate future.
But the health of the people is at least as important as their
wealth, and biological science, which endeavours to explore the
mysterious conditions of life and death, health and disease, offers
at least as noble an aim to the student as those other branches do
which have already been turned to such enormous service that we
are in danger of overlooking the beauty of knowledge for itself


in the splendid blaze of knowledge in its application. But while
our regard is mainly fixed upon the sciences which have to do
with organised or living matter, we do not overlook or willingly
understate the claims of other culture. Certain views as to the
higher education are frequently maintained which we hold to be
erroneous; but we do not on that account sneer at the aims of
those who maintain them. Mr. Macleay has suggested an illus-
tration of my meaning in his reference to the positions of
Latin and Greek in the curriculum of English schools and univer-
sities. And that great alterations are necessary all are agreed.
But since the school course is to a large extent controlled by the
influence and the endowments of the universities, the reform of
the university must precede the reform of the school. Now our
universities were but a generation ago only schools of specialists.
The specialism was not minute, it is true, but specialism it
surely was. One seat of learning turned out doctors, another
scholars, another mathematicians; and it was quite possible
for a graduate to occupy a distinguished position in his univer
sity without possessing even a child’s knowledge of all that
lay outside the fence of his particular garden. A strange
remedy for the disease has been hit upon and applied. By
the very multiplication of specialisms an onslaught has been
made, under the flag of culture, on the strongholds of specialism.
For just as it is better for the learned and scientific teacher to-
handle one subject rather than many, so for the learned and
scientific corporation it is infinitely wiser to embrace many
specialisms than to devote itself to one. Let me not be mistaken.
It is to the specialist that we must now look for all progress in
discovery. The field of science is so vast that it can only be cul-
tivated after a systematic and minute subdivision into plots, in
each of which each labourer’s whole energies are concentrated
upon one particular form of produce. Yet, however little it may
seem, even this minute and separate task may require the energies
of a giant. Nevertheless, the aim of the university is not, and
ought not to be, the manufacture of specialists. It is within
her precincts indeed that they spring, because in that soil are con-
centrated all the influences and the appliances which lead and
enable the enthusiast to follow the track which he will pursue
with the studies of his lifetime. But this is but an accident of
her purpose, which is to cultivate her sons, and her daughters too,
into capacity, versatility, and fitness for any service, station, office,
or charge in the State, and not to limit or stunt them into superior
but uncultured artisans. “ Let my children,” she says, “be


shilful as the skilfullest, each upon his own line, but, above all, let
them be wise, brave, and gentle, trusted and trustworthy citizens. ,r
Now, the danger which besets every specialist is the temptation to
extol his own subject by depreciation, or by silent contempt, of all
others. It is needless to quote examples. And it is therefore a
prudent step in the advance of general culture that the persons
thus endangered should be forced into such mutual relations of
acquaintance, respect, and friendship, as may persuade each to-
recognise his neighbour’s peculiar bent as something more than
a “fad,” and as even almost ranking equally with his own.
And this is gained by the encouragement of specialists in the
university. Yet we have not got to the root of the matter.
Things are better than they were, but the watchword has not yet
been issued. Many speak of it, many think about it, but the
exact phrase has not yet been struck ; I mean some word that
shall imply the best possible training of body, mind, and soul in
the Primary School, the Grammar School, the University. This
training involves many factors, too many for me to attempt their
examination on the present occasion, and among them one of
eminent importance, from whatever side we approach the subject.
Scientific teaching must —there is no should or ought left open
—take its place in general education. (Hear, hear.) In the
University of Sydney this has been provided for to a certain
extent, and in course of time the influence of the University
will have its effect upon the higher schools. But I doubt
if we can wait. Let us rather appeal to a higher authority, which
has the power, and must be presumed to be willing to assist. Let
the State enjoin and enforce the teaching of science in due degrees
from the lowest to the highest place of education. And when it
is pleaded, as it will be, by the schoolmaster —and I have a good
right to speak for the schoolmaster, you know—(laughter)—that
the tasks of the young are already too heavy for the time at their
disposal, and that either the hours or course must be lengthened,,
or the number of subjects diminished, the State should answer,
“We will have neither of your alternatives. You shall shorten
the hours and increase the number of subjects. Thirty hours in
the week are quite enough for school work, and task work in the
evening shall only be allowed when there has been no afternoon
school. (Applause.) Yet you shall turn out your average pupils
at the end of their course better scholars (both in ancient and
modern languages), better mathematicians, and a great deal more '
proficient in history, geography, and the like, than you now do,
and besides this, they shall have a good knowledge of elementary


science, a large fund of general information and intelligence,
together with one or two of those qualifications which are styled
‘ accomplishments’ In consideration of disturbance, although to
your own profit, you shall be set free at once and for ever from
the gerund mill. You shall be relieved from Ihne and from Aim.
You shall have no more villainous exercises, Latin, French,
German, and Greek to sicken your soul. (Applause.) No more
prose and verse compositions filled, day after day, and year after
year, with the same idiotic and maddening blunders. Out of the
wreck of your language apparatus we shall select a few elementary
grammars, and all the rest shall be destroyed for ever.
(Laughter.) You shall not devote more than ten hours in
the week to language, nor less than five to science, apart from
mathematics.” That would be something like reform. (Hear,
hear, and applause.) But it cannot be attempted by the school-
master, for reasons which they know well enough. The State
alone can accomplish it. Were it accomplished, and the system
duly supported and fostered by the patronage of the State, what
a spring of vitality and energy the University would strike ! How
its waters would flow through every department of the common-
wealth, enriching and extending knowledge, exploring our
resources, beautifying our lives, and ennobling our purposes !
Have present methods produced such results ? Will the most
■earnest admirer of ancient literature, if there be any more earnest
than myself, venture to contend that the continued predominance
of Latin and Greek in the studies of our earlier years offers any
hint of such a possibility 1 Or can any improvement upon the
■existing lines help us in our difficulty 1 Is it not plain that the
reform must be radical, and that the State alone has the power to
make it a reality. (Cheers.)
The Chairman then called upon the company to charge their
glasses to drink to the health of their host, which he said would
now be proposed by Mr. Dailey.
The Hon. W. B. D alley said : Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,
—Perhaps of all persons present on this most interesting occasion
I am, unhappily, so far as concerns an educated familiarity with
the various branches of knowledge specially cultivated by this
society, the one person with the least title to be here. (No, no.)
I am a flagrant example of the necessity of that sweeping reform
in education (alas ! in my case commenced too late) to which
allusion has been made in the address by our founder and bene-
factor, to which we have listened with so much attention and
admiration ; and, as far as the pursuit of science is concerned, I


feel with shame that 1 belong to a remoter and mistier antiquity
than even the nine books of the classics of Chinese scholars to
which reference has been made. (Hear, hear, and laughter.) I
think it was the great Lord Derby who once apologised for his
defective acquaintance with such subjects of study as you cultivate
by remarking that, unfortunately, he was born in a pre-scientific
era. (Laughter, and hear, hear.) That pathetic confession might be
made by me with perhaps greater truth. And yet I have a title
to be here, and that is the depth and earnestness of my admiration
of the life and character and attainments of the man to whom your
society in this country owes its origin, its maintenance, and to-day
and henceforth its home. (Loud applause.) I lament to say that
I am as profoundly and absolutely ignorant as Dr. Johnson
declared Goldsmith to be of “Animated Nature,” when that
kindliest of our humourists undertook to write a book upon it;
but I have a fuller knowledge of the great heart of your bene-
factor than perhaps anyone about me—(hear, hear) —and this
is my title to be here to-day and to undertake the duty which
your president has asked me to discharge in proposing the
health of Mr. Macleay on this memorable occasion. It is one of
the greatest pieces of good fortune that can befall any community,
young or old, to possess citizens who combine a love of culture in
any of its multitudinous forms with the means of its encourage-
ment, and the generosity to employ them for its diffusion,
(Cheers.) In such hands wealth (so often used for mere purposes
of vulgar display or personal ambition) becomes an arm—-and a
strong one—to uphold and promote public education. (Hear,,
hear.) In the person of our friend, who has done us the honour of
inviting us here to this festival of his liberality, you have one who
in a pre-eminent degree is our representative man in this colony
of the kind of citizens of whom lam speaking. (Cheers.) He is
one who is already possessed of a reputation which would secure
him a cordial welcome in the first scientific circles of European
capitals. (Cheers.) With a princely fortune, which he expends
on such objects as those of your society, he lives amongst us, has
never left us, and has no other idea of the employment of his life
than that of being useful to the oouixtry, which is proud of his
culture, of his great simplicity, and of his noble munificence.
(Loud cheers.) It was worth coming here to-day to hear the
characteristic terms in which, in a single brief sentence, he pre-
sented to you your home for ever. (Cheers.) The words seemed
to me, after a 25 years’ friendship—which I regard as one of th&
great distinctions of my life—not altogether unfamiliar, since I


have known in the intimacy of our relations almost numberless
cases where actions as noble were performed with the accompani-
ment of speech as simple; and whose rare generosity was dis-
guised as an ordinary commonplace proceeding. “ The necessity,
however,” he says, “ for more room and less noise, has induced
me to build this edifice we are now assembled in, which I beg to
present, such as it is, to the society for a period of 89 years, the
unexpired term of my original lease of the ground for 99 years.”
This is all you have of the solemn act of dedication of this magni-
ficent building for the noble purposes of your society. Mr.
Macleay gives you his house with a half feeling of shame that, in
the pursuit of his sovereign passion in life, the splendid gift is so
unworthy of the objects of your society ; like that noblest of
Cavaliers in the old civil wars—for he himself brings into science
something of the Cavalier spirit—who said of his house given up
by him to the service of his sovereign, that “if his king had no
more ground in England than Basing House stood upon he would
■adventure it as he did, and would maintain it to the uttermost
in his service.” (Applause.) I propose to you the health of one
•of whom the county is proud, to whom you are grateful for daily
and numberless benefits, and to whom my obligations as a dear
friend, have been for nearly half my life unspeakable. I give
you the health of William Macleay. (Cheers.)
The toast having been drunk with the utmost enthusiasm,
Mr. Macleay rose to respond, and was received with
renewed cheering, which was maintained for some time. He
said :—Gentlemen, —I feel quite incapable of making a speech
after the very eloquent eulogium passed upon me by Mr. Dailey,
which has completely silenced me. I can only say I am very
much obliged to you for the enthusiasm with which you received
the toast proposed by my eloquent friend. I am extremely
obliged. But my obligations are not confined to that. I consider
myself under obligations to all of you for coming here to meet me
on this occasion. I regret very much that a considerable number
of other gentlemen who would like to have been present were
prevented from attending. I thank you sincerely for the enthu-
siastic way in which you drank my health ; but I must at the
same time say that, whilst I highly esteem the honour, I cannot
help feeling that the wonderful eloquence of my honourable friend
has materially contributed to the enthusiam with which it was
received. (Cries of “No, no.”) At the same time I thank you
all for the honour which you have done me, (Cheers )


The Honorable W. A. Brodribb rose and said: He had
listened to the remarks made by his honorable friends, Mr. Wm.
Macleay, Professor Stephens and the Honorable W. B. Dailey,
with much interest, and he endorsed every word that came from
Mr. Dailey. He had known personally, Mr. Macleay, for nearly
fifty years—and he considered him a gentleman in a thousand
—a real colonist in every sense of the word. He came here years
ago quite a young man, and embarked in pastoral pursuits—
first on the Lachlan, subsequently on the Murrumbidgee Biver.
He has never returned to the old country, like many others
who come out here and when they have made their fortunes return
home and spend them there. Not so my honourable friend ;he
devotes his leisure and means to scientific pursuits in the colony.
He gives an instance of this in this fine Hall and its surroundings,
filled with natural productions of, all kinds—both animal and
vegetable, and this has been done at his own expense. I may say I
feel proud in giving expressions to these sentiments—the honorable
gentleman deserves them.
Sir John Hay, K.C.M.G., President of the Legislative Council,
then proposed the toast of “ Prosperity to the Linnean Society of
New South Wales.” He said that while he demurred to any
claims made by science to the exclusive control of our educational
system, inasmuch as the great problems of humanity, whether as
regarding the individual or the society, would be in danger of
being overlooked at that time of life when it was most important
that they should be seriously and earnestly considered, he
nevertheless hoped to see a large extension of what might be
called practical teaching in the knowledge of things. It was not,
however, to be expected that any system of education would
produce exactly the results contemplated by its enthusiastic
supporters. More, perhaps, depended upon the teacher than
on the subject. The experience of all history warns us
that men may be distinguished as poets, philosophers, statesmen
and kings, without a scrap of scientific training. There were
warriors before Agamemnon, and there will still be good men with
small acquisitions of science. But he had very great pleasure in
proposing the toast of Prosperity to the Linnean Society of New
South Wales, as an institution calculated to do, and doing in an
admirable way, services of the greatest value not only to this
community, but to the whole world.
Dr. Cox, Vice-President, in responding to this toast, took
occasion to propose that a bust of Mr. Macleay should be, with his


F. Cunninoiiamb & Co., Steam Machine Printers, 146 Pitt Street, SVdney.
MUD ,
fubz rf
K)
permission, obtained by the members of the Society, and placed in
a conspicuous place of honour in the hall in which they were now
assembled. This proposal was received with unanimous applause
and it was also agreed, on Dr. Cox’s motion, that Mr. Macleay
should a second time open the new Hall, by reading the first paper
at the first montly meeting in the New Year.
Mr. C. S. Wilkinson, Vice-President, also expressed the
pleasure he felt in returning thanks for the hearty manner in
which the toast for the prosperity of the society had been received.
With the splendid opportunity now afforded in their new home, the
members of the society must feel a double incentive to work, if
only as a duty, in response for the privileges conferred upon them
by the Hon. William Macleay. This munificent gift to the society
they all highly appreciated, and regarded as evidence not only of
the truly generous and scientific spirit of the donor, but also of
his far-seeing mind; for when it is remembered that the national
greatness of a country materially depends upon its natural
resources, and that very few portions of the globe can compare
with New South Wales in its possession of so large a variety and
abundance of commercially valuable minerals and other natural
products, and that the labours of this society will largely contribute
that scientific aid which is necessary for 'the proper development
of those resources, the important and increasing influence of
the society in bringing this country to the high national position to
which it must attain is foreseen, and its future prosperity and
usefulness are assured.
Cheers having been given for the Queen, the company
separated.
NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA






Linnean Society of New South Wales
SCIENCE HOUSE.
157 GLOUCESTER STREET.
SYDNEY. AUSTRALIA.
MR. JUSTICE FERGUSON,
WE HAVE THE FOLLOWING 'WHICH MAY BE OP INTEREST
AND WHICH MAY BE SEEN AT THE SOCIETY 1 S
LIBRARY
List of Members,lB74;
Rules of the Society with List of Members and
Catalogue of the Library (1882)
(which contains U Alphabetical Catalogue
of the Books in the Society’s Room,
Garden.«Ealace ,f ,).
WITH THE COMPLIMENTS OP THE LINNEAN SOCIETY
OP NEW SOUTH WALES,


J sTrj>
MUO
f 1(655/'..
Aj u^Y-j
