



' '










ADDRESS TO THE WOMEN
WHO DEBARKED AT SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES,
FROM THE TRANSPORT SHIP MARGARET,
ON THE 26th OF AUGUST, 1840;
COLIN ARROTT BROWNING, M. D.
SURGEON, ROYAL NAVY.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge.”— Hosea iv. 6.
“ And this is life eternal, that they might know Thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.” — St. John xvii. 3.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY JAMES TEGG, GEORGE STREET.




v \ tc
PREFACE.
Although the following pages were
written expressly for the benefit of the
Women who, last August, debarked at
Sydney from the Transport Margaret,
they are intended for the perusal and
improvement of all Prisoners, Male and
Female, into whose hands they may
come. And since I have, without dwell-
ing on the peculiar circumstances which
mark the melancholy condition of the
prisoner, addressed myself throughout
t© Sinners needing Salvation , a denomina-
tion under which the whole of mankind
are, in the Holy Scriptures, arranged, it
is earnestly hoped that the great truths
which have been set forth from the sa-
cred records, will arrest the serious and
candid attention of persons of every


grade in the community, and produce in
them those happy results which they are
intended and calculated to produce, and
which involve the glory of God and the
salvation of the soul.
Should any one be disposed to ques-
tion my right to address myself to my
fellow mortals in reference to the solemn
subject of their present and eternal sal-
vation, my only reply is, that I do so in
accordance with the benevolent Spirit of
the Gospel, and in obedience to the Di-
vine command, (Rev.xxii. 17,) “Let him
that heareth say, Come .... take of the
water of life freely;” and I do so, I would
add, in imitation of Andrew, who, having
become acquainted with Christ, findeth
“ his own brother Simon, and saith unto
him, we have found the Messias .. . .and
he brought him to Jesus;” and of Philip,
who, having been found of the Saviour,
“ findeth Nathaniel, and saith unto him,
We have found him of whom Moses in
the law, and the Prophets did write,


Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Joseph,,.,
Come and see * and according to the
example of the Woman of Samaria, who,
after she had met with Jesus, hastened
to address her townsmen thus—“ Come,
see a man who told me all things that
ever I did: Is not this the Christ?”'!'
It may be proper to observe here that,
in writing the following address, I have
thought fit chiefly to dwell on some of the
Cardinal doctrines of Revelation, because
we are assured that nothing short of a
Scriptural knowledge of Christ, and of
a vital union with Him, by a living faith,
can ensure our present and everlasting-
peace, lead to an acceptable obedience
to the Divine will, restore the offender
to the society of the virtuous, prevent the
farther commission of crime, and super-
sede the necessity of punitive inflictions:
and because we are equally assured that,
nothing can render either man or woman,
* St. John i. 35—46.


whether bond or free , deserving, under all
circumstances, of unhesitating confidence,
but personal Christianity.
If the truths exhibited in these pages
be so blessed of God as to draw those
Prisoners, and others of my fellow-sin-
ners, who may examine them, to Jesus
Christ, and thus to become associated
with the holy and the useful in this life,
and with the glorified and the blessed in
the life which is to come, the end of the
writer will be answered, and the Lord
shall have all the praise.
C. A. B.


INTRODUCTION.
You all know in what light I regarded you when
you were first placed under my superintendence,
namely, as a trust committed to me during the
period that might elapse between your embarkation
at Kingstown, in Ireland, and your debarkation at
Sydney, in New South Wales. You know that I
received you, not merely from the hands of our
earthly rulers, but from the hand of God, who go-
verneth all things, numbers the hairs upon your
heads, bringeth good out of evil, and determineth
the boundaries of your habitations. Whatever had
been the character of your past lives, or the cause
of your removal from your native land to this dis-
tant Colony, it was incumbent upon me to seek, by
all possible and lawful means, your improvement
in principle and in conduct, and the advancement
and security of your present and future happiness.
The system of instruction and management which
was adopted, was that which experience had sug-
gested and approved of,—which harmonised with
the commands of Government, —and was clearly in
unison with the revealed will of God as contained
in the Scriptures of Inspiration; and I believe
that the most, if not all of you, have acknowledged


the fitness and the excellency of the measures
which were carried out during our voyage, with a
view to the attainment of the great ends which we
were bound steadily to keep in contemplation.
It is not improbable that many of you think my
duty to you terminated with the hour that took you
from under my charge, and placed you in the hands
of the Colonial Government. But I think other-
wise, and I feel it to be far otherwise. For when
I reflect on the circumstances which gathered you
together from so many parts of your native Island;
consider that mysterious movement of Divine Pro-
vidence which placed you under my care; call to
remembrance the interesting and important exer-
cises in which we engaged during the four months
we spent together on board the Margaret; and
recollect the relation in which we continue to stand
to each other, not only as the offspring of the same
parents, as the creatures of the one true God, but
as sinners for whom the one and only Saviour died?
through whose blood alone we have redemption
and the remission of our sins ; I say that, when I
consider all these circumstances, I cannot but re-
gard you still as objects in whom I ought to cherish
a kind interest, and for whose spiritual and ever-
lasting peace, I must, through grace, always pray.
Besides, the spirit and the precepts of the gospel
of Christ, and the approved example of His fol-
lowers as set forth in the Scriptures of truth, which
required that I should seek the salvation of your


souls on board the ship, equally urge me now to
care for you, and by all means in my power to
promote your true and only happiness.*
The farther consideration too, of the many temp-
tations and dangers to which you are now exposed,
tends to increase my anxiety for your preservation
from evil, and prompts me to make, at least
another effort, to advance your present and future
welfare.
As my opportunities of addressing you in person
have now for ever passed away, two modes only of
doing you good remain available to me; these are,
prayer , and written communication. So long as
the spirit of prayer is granted to me, so long must
I carry you, and all other exiles, especially those
who have been intrusted to my care, to a throne of
grace, to seek for you all the pardon of sin, the re-
novation of your hearts, and an interest in all the
promised blessings of the everlasting covenant,
through faith in Christ Jesus. But I feel that it is
not enough that I remember you in prayer. I must
also, if possible, communicate with you in writing;
and in doing so, I shall not, as on a former occa-
sion, when communicating with my first three
charges, enter upon a recapitulation of the multifa-
rious subjects which we considered together during
* I refer you to St. Matthew vii. 12 ; Gal. vi. 10; Rev. xxii. 17 ;
Prov. xi. 30; Num. x. 29; James v. 19, 20 ; St. John i. 40—46;
iv. 29; Prov. xv. 7.


our voyage; for this would require a lengthened
production, inasmuch as we should have to go
through a large portion of the Bible, and to set
forth in considerable detail the doctrines and pre-
cepts of the divine system of Christianity. Here,
I shall merely express my hope that you endeavour
often to call up to your recollection the solemn
exercises in which we daily engaged, and the mo-
mentous and impressive truths which were from
time to time brought before you, and earnestly
urged upon your consideration. You remember
my first address to you in Dublin, immediately after
the inspection, the addresses to which, in tears, you
listened in Kingstown harbour, and those which
were day by day delivered to you during our long
passage across the great waters which now separate
you from your native shores. You will often think
upon our morning and evening assembling together
for social prayer, and the reading of the sacred
Scriptures, in accordance with the gracious com-
mand of their Divine Author. You will, I trust,
habitually meditate on the instructions you re-
ceived from these holy oracles of God, as we pro-
ceeded with their perusal, beginning, you remem-
ber, with the first chapters of Genesis and Saint
Matthew, and reading on, (occasionally, and of
necessity, passing portions, the substance of which
was recited to you), until we had perused a great
part of the Old, and nearly the whole of the New
Testaments. You will not forget our coming to-
gether on the Lord’s Day, in the forenoon for


<c Church,” in the afternoon for the recital of Scrip-
ture, and for the purpose of examining you in
reference to what you had read, and also had com-
mitted to heart. Although lam most anxious you
should remember the lessons derived from the Word
of God, I would not that you should forget those
afforded by His providence and His works. Our
observations on the former, and particularly as con-
sidered in reference to yourselves; to your separa-
tion from the land of your birth; the cause of that
separation; your instruction during your voyage ;
and your disposal in your new country, you surely
cannot forget. Nor can you entirely lose sight of
the view we endeavoured to give you of the form,
magnitude, and motions of the earth we inhabit;
and of the moon which, in the night season, sheds
upon you her silvery light. And you will some-
times think on what was said to you respecting
other worlds, besides the earth and the moon,
namely, the sun and stars, especially those stars
called planets, and which, accompanied by their re-
spective moons, perform, like our earth and moon,
their appointed revolutions round our common sun,
the centre of his system of worlds.
Our discourses on the wonderful works of God,
you will recollect, were intended to lead you to en-
tertain more worthy thoughts of Himself, and to
enable you in the spirit of a deep and unfeigned
humility, to appreciate the sublime descriptions of
creation you meet with in the sacred writings, and


to increase in you that lowly self-abasement in
which you should, at His feet, adore Him who
made and upholds all things,—and who gave Him-
self a ransom for your souls, that you might be
saved through faith in the blood of His cross.
Since circumstances render it inexpedient that I
should recapitulate to you the various points on
which you were instructed on board the Margaret ,
a task which would necessarily lead me to recite not
only, as already observed, a large portion of the
Bible, but much that is stated in my address to my
men, above alluded to, and which was printed at
Hobart Town in the year 1836, copies of which
you may occasionally meet with in this Colony,—l
shall, in this communication, endeavour to confine
myself to a brief view of the Gospel of Salvation,
and then olfer a few practical exhortations, all of
which I hope you will receive and peruse in the
spirit in which I write, and for the purpose for
which, when you reflect on the labours of our
voyage, you must know , these pages are written.


PART I
Section First.
In the first place then, I would, as proposed 5
most earnestly solicit your attention to a few ob-
servations on the momentous subject of the salva-
tion of your souls.
You will admit, that He who made the soul and
laid down His life to redeem it, knows how to esti-
mate its value; and it is He who (Mark viii. 36,37,)
puts to you these questions, What shall it profit a
man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his
own soul ? Or what shall a man give in exchange
for his soul?” Questions which are intended to
teach you, that your souls are of more real value
than all created worlds, and that it ought to be
your first and chief concern to secure their present
and everlasting peace.
Before I proceed to speak to you in reference to
the great subject of your salvation, I shall premise
a few observations, with the view of putting you
in remembrance of the affecting and humbling
truths that you are guilty, depraved, and lost sin-
ners, standing most urgently in need of the Divine
deliverance.


When God at first created man, He formed him
in His own likeness, —as you have learned from the
sacred Scriptures,—a holy, wise, and intelligent
being, happy in the service of his Lord, and blessed
in the enjoyment of His gracious presence and
love. He withheld from him nothing calculated to
promote his comfort, but gave Himself to be the
portion of his inheritance, and placed under his
dominion the whole of the world we inhabit, and
all that it contains; and by commanding him to
abstain from the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil, afforded him an opportunity of proving
his love and obedience to his Almighty Sovereign
and Divine Benefactor. Thus you read in Ge-
nesis, the first book of Moses, “And God said, Let
us make man in our image, after our likeness....
So God created man in His own image; in the
image of God created He him; male and female
created He them; And God blessed them.” (Ch. i.
26 —28.) It is also written (Eccles. vii. 29,) “ God
hath made man upright.” Again, (Gen.i.3l,) “ And
God saw every thing that He had made, and behold
it was very good.” * Likewise in reference to the
Divine prohibition, you read(Gen.ii. 15—1 T,) “And
the Lord God took the man, and put him into the
garden of Eden to dress it, and to keep it; and the
Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every
tree in the garden thou mayest freely eat, but of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt
* 1 Corinth, xi. 7 ; Eph. iv. 24 ; Coloss. iii. 10.


not eat of it: for in the day thou eatest thereof,
thou shalt surely die.” *
But although formed in holiness, and in the
happy enjoyment of his Maker, neither the con-
sideration of the Divine goodness, nor the assurance
of all the evil necessarily involved in disobedience
to the command of Jehovah, was man restrained
from joining the standard of rebellion, which a
fallen and an apostate spirit had presumptuously
dared to set up in this lower world. Making use
of the tongue of a serpent in a way which our ig-
norance does not enable us to explain, but which
implies no difficulty to enlightened reason, whose
province it is to bow in faith and with reverence to
the testimony of God, Satan addressed himself to
our unsuspecting mother, —induced her first to
question the truth of the Divine declaration, then
to oppose and reject the Divine authority, and to
put forth her hand and take of the fruit of the tree
which she was commanded not even to touch; and
not contented with eating it herself, she persuades
her husband to partake of it with her, and thus to
become united in their apostacy from their Maker,
and in effecting their own spiritual and eternal de-
struction, together with that of their hapless off-
spring.-]- Our first parents in listening to the
suggestions of temptation, were led to believe the
insinuations of the father of lies rather than the
* Gen. iii. 3. f Gen. iii. I—l 4.


well-defined word of the God of truth, and so by
transgression were involved in guilt, stripped of the
pure robe of innocency, deprived of peace, lost
their confidence and delight in the Lord; and hav-
ing, in their nature, become depraved, were no
longer capable or disposed to render to their Creator
an acceptable service, or to seek for happiness in
the enjoyment of His presence. Their act of dis-
obedience was an act of rebellion ; an act by which
they at once detached themselves from the throne
of the Eternal, and entered the ranks of the great
Apostate.
In becoming sinful transgressors, they exchanged
the image of God for the image of Satan; —their
minds from being enlightened, became darkness ; —-
their hearts, instead of supremely loving the God
of love, were filled with enmity against Him; —the
conscience, loaded with guilt, lost its sensitiveness ;
slavish fear took the place of filial confidence in the
Father of Mercies; and the deed, which covered
them with shame, and sank them in depravity,
subjected them to the just sentence of condemna-
tion and death, and consigned them to all the
terrors of a violated law and of a broken covenant.
Man having- withdrawn himself from God, de-
parted farther and farther from virtue, and hastened
to fill up the measure of his guilt, and to become
finished in crime. His offspring gave early proof
that they inherited the corrupt propensities of their


parents; that their will was averse to good, and
readily inclined to evil; that they were lovers of
forbidden pleasures more than lovers of God, pre-
ferring the ways of sin and of death, before the
paths of holiness and of life.
The penalty of death annexed to the prohibition
not to touch the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil, was incurred by the forbidden act. —“ In the
day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die,” were
the intelligible words of Jehovah ; and, according
to that word which cannot be broken, the day of
disobedience determined the day of the trans-
gressor’s death. The moment our first parents
partook of the prohibited fruit, and thus set them-
selves up in opposition to the Almighty Sovereign
of the Universe, that moment they died. They
suffered a moral or spiritual death in the loss of the
moral image of their Maker, and of all desire of
communion with Him in His required service, and
in the enjoyment of His presence and love. They
immediately became subject to disease, and the
separation of soul and of body called temporal death,
and which consigns the body to the tomb to be
returned to dust. And they became liable to
eternal death , which consists in the everlasting
consciousness of guilt, and of non-conformity to
God, and separation from His gracious presence to
endure the torments of the worm that never dies.
The woeful condition of mankind, in virtue of


our violation of the laws of God, was frequently
brought under your consideration during our voyage
from Ireland, and in the course of our daily perusal
of the Holy Scriptures. I would here remind you
of the few following texts. And first, I call your
attention to two or three of those from which you
learn the connection that subsists between sin and
all that is involved in the term death . “ Where-
fore as by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin ; and so death passed upon all men ,
for that all have sinned .” (Rom. v. 12.) “By
man came death In Adam all die, as is the
earthy, such are they also that are earthy.” (1
Corinth, xv. 21, 22.) “ When lust hath conceived,
it bringeth forth sin ; and sin, when it is finished,
bringeth forth death.” (James i. 15.) “ For the
wages of sin is death ” (Rom. vi. 23.)
In the second place, I submit to your considera-
tion a few passages by which you are taught that
man’s apostacy from God was instantly attended by
that fearful depravity of his nature, which is called
moral or spiritual death, and which has never
ceased to manifest itself in acts of opposition to the
Divine will, tending to render our nature still more
malignantly depraved.
“ And God saw that the wickedness of man was
great in the earth, and that every imagination of
the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.
And it repented the Lord that he had made man


on the earth, and it grieved Him at His heart.”
(Gen. vi. 5,6.)
“ Behold I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin
did my mother conceive me.” (Psalm li. 5.)
“ Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean ?
Not one.” (Job xiv. 4.)
“ Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the
leopard his spots ? Then may ye also do good that
are accustomed to do evil ?” (Jerem. xiii. 23.)
“ The wicked are estranged from the womb ;
they go astray as soon as they be born, speak-
ing lies. Their poison is like the poison of a
serpent.” (Psalm lviii. 3,4.) “ And Adam begat
a son in his own likeness , after His image”
(Gen v. 3.)
“ How then can man be justified with God ?
Or how can he be clean that is born of a woman ?
(Job. xxv.)
“ The heart is deceitful above all things and
desperatey wicked; who can know it ? I the Lord
search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every
man according to his ways, and according to the
fruit of his doings.” (Jerem. xvii. 9, 10.)
<{ For I know that in me, saith the Apostle of


the Gentiles (that is in my flesh), dwelleth no good
thing.” (Rom. vii. 18.)
“ For to be carnal minded is death. Because
the carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.—
So then, they that are in the flesh cannot please
God’’—(viii. 6—8.)
“ For we have before (chapters i. and ii.) proved
both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under
sin; as it is written, there is none righteous, no,
not one. There is none that understandeth, there
is none that seeketh after God. They are all gone
out of the way, they are together become unpro-
fitable ; there is none that doeth good, no, not one.
Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their
tongues they have used deceit; the poison of asps
is under their lips ; whose mouth is full of cursing
and bitterness; their feet are swift to shed blood,
destruction and misery are in their ways, and the
way of peace have they not known; there is no
fear of God before their eyes. Now we know that
what things soever the law saith, it saith to them
who are under the law, that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world become guilty before
God. Therefore, by the deeds of the law there
shall no flesh be justified in His sight; for by the
law is the knowledge of sin.” “ For we know that
the law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under
sin.” (Rom. iii. 9—20; vii. 14.) “And the whole


world lieth in wickedness,” or “in the wicked
one.” (1 John v. 19.)
Lastly, I set before you a few of those texts by
which we are assured that sin, besides subjecting
the transgressor to a moral death, exposes him to
the stroke of temporal death, which consists in the
separation of soul and body, —and likewise to the
endurance of everlasting death, which involves the
eternal perpetuity of the sense of guilt and of non-
conformity to the moral image of God.
First, in reference to temporal death, we read,
“ Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return.”
(Gen. iii. 19 ; Eccles. xii. 7.)
“ Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even
over them that had not sinned after the similitude
of Adam’s transgression.” (Rom. v. 14.)
“It is appointed to men once to die.” (Heb.
ix. 27.)
Secondly, regarding eternal death, it is written :
« Woe unto the wicked ! it shall be ill with
him: for the reward of his hands shall be given
him.” (Isa. iii. 11 ; xxx. 1; lviii. 22.)
“ The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all
the nations that forget God.” (Psalm ix. 17.)


“ Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and
brimstone, and an horrible tempest; this shall be
the portion of their cup.” (Psalm xi. 6.)*
The heart of man is now at enmity with God,
not subject to His law, nor, while in his unrenewed
state, possibly subject. By wicked works he stands
out as the enemy of his Lord and Benefactor,
preferring his own will, and his own pleasure, to
the will and glory of Him, who, at the first, formed
him for Himself, and in whose favor alone are to
be found peace and joy. Our natural character is
now that of children of wrath. In every thing we
commit sin, come short of the glory of God, add to
the burthen of our guilt, and increase our con-
demnation. Our transgressions are more than we
can number; we know not the sum of them, —we
cannot answer for one of a thousand : they are gone
out over our heads, and are a heavy burthen, too
heavy for us to bear. Not one of us could for a
moment stand in judgment before God: our own
hearts condemn us; and He is greater than our
hearts and knoweth all things. Do not your con-
sciences testify against you to the face? Do they
not bear witness to the guilt you have contracted
by the countless number of your offences against
God, and against man ? Does not your experience
correspond with the declarations of the inspired
* Head attentively Matth. xxv.; Luke xxiii. 24—30 ; xvi. 19—
31. Mark ix. 43—48. Rom. ii. 8, 9. Rev. xxi. 8—27.


Scriptures respecting both the depravity of your
hearts and the iniquity of your lives ? And are you
not prepared to admit the truth of all that God the
Holy Spirit affirms concerning you, as fallen and
depraved creatures, who have lost all relish for
spiritual pursuits and spiritual enjoyments, and who
are by nature dead in trespasses and in sins . J
Unless you are yet blinded by the god of this
world, the spirit that rules in the hearts of the
children of disobedience, you must deeply feel, and
readily acknowledge, that you are poor, and miser-
able, and wretched, and and naked, having
nothing, and standing in need of all things ; —that,
as sinners, you lie under a sentence of condemna-
tion and death; and that it is of God’s long-
suffering forbearance that you are not cast into
outer darkness, overwhelmed by the accumulated
load of your guilt, and enduring the vengeance of
eternal fire.


Section Second.
It is from this state of guilt, depravity, and
death, I so earnestly desire you should obtain
deliverance, and shall therefore hasten to direct
your minds to the great salvation accomplished for
you by Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
Before God removed man from the Paradise
which he had forfeited, and sent him forth to cul-
tivate and subdue the earth which his sin had
converted into an accursed wilderness,* He was
graciously pleased to lighten the burthen of his
heart, and to cheer the prospects of his future
existence, by the promise of a Divine Saviour,
who, in suffering, should vanquish and triumph
over the malignant and artful seducer of our race,
and make provision for our deliverance from his
power. The first intimation of Jehovah’s merciful
purpose towards apostate man, you have in the
denunciation of his destroyer, as set forth in that
memorable passage of Scripture contained in the
third chapter of Genesis, “ And I will put enmity
between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed. It shall bruise thy head, and
* Gen. iii. 17—19.


thou shalt bruise his heel.” He who was set up
from everlasting, as the Head of the New Cove-
nant, and to whom belongs all power in heaven and
in earth, is, in these words, set forth to the faith of
mankind, as their Almighty Saviour, who should,
in His one Person, unite the human nature with
the Divine, and in the character of our Emmanuel,
the Seed of the woman —the Son of God, should
overthrow the Kingdom of Satan, and restore the
guilty and lost children of men to the image and
the enjoyment of God.
The Lord pitied our fallen race, and in the
infinitude of His love and mercy, purposed to save
us. But how can He be just, and at the same time
the Justifier of the ungodly? How can sin be
pardoned, and the transgressor restored to the
Divine favor, and yet no encouragement be given
to the commission of sin,—no inconsistency appear
in the Divine procedure,—no dangerous setting
aside of the claims of law and justice take place,—
no imputation become chargeable on the Ruler of
the Universe, —no stain or imperfection appear in
His Moral Government ? The law of God demands
a sinless obedience, —the penalty of its violation is
Death. Justice must be satisfied, —and Justice
requires that the soul that sinneth shall die. How
then can the W-breaker be forgiven, and yet the
honor and efficiency of the law be maintained ?
How can the claims of Justice be met, and the
souls of men be rescued from everlasting death ?


How can God look with complacency on *our
rebellious family, and receive us back to the enjoy-
ment of His favor, and not promote the spread of
rebellion through His Empire, with its consequent
guilt, and misery, and death ?
The Son of God must become the Son of Man.
The Eternal Word must be made flesh. He who
was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery
to be equal with God, must appear in the form of
a servant—yield in our nature, a sinless obedience
to His own holy law; and, as our substitute, volun-
tarily bearing all our iniquities, and engaging to be
answerable for all that Divine Justice can exact
from us, must render the required satisfastion, and
thus bring in Everlasting Righteousness, which, in
the Gospel of His Grace, should be held up, or
exhibited to all, and be actually put upon all them
that believe, or avail themselves of the provided
gift, and so secure their acceptance with God, and
restoration to holiness and to bliss.
Our adorable and ever blessed Redeemer, and
the work which, from everlasting, He had under-
taken to accomplish, were set forth to the contem-
plation, reception, and confidence of men, in ordi-
nances, and in language, more and more clear,
until the days of the last of the Old Testament
prophets. In the sacrificial offerings of Abel, and
Noah, and Abraham, and the other believing pa-
triarchs; in the passover,—in the whole of the


Mosaic Ritual, was Jesus Christ the promised
Shiloh seen by the Fathers who believed in, and
worshipped Him, as the promised Deliverer, —the
only Saviour from sin and from wrath. In the
shedding of the blood of the devoted lamb, the
enlightened and believing worshipper acknowledged
his own character and deservings as a guilty trans-
gressor, and saw by faith the Lamb of God bearing
the iniquities of the children of men, and dying, the
Just One in the room of the unjust, that He might
be our peace, and restore us to the image, and the
service, and the enjoyment of God. By the Ark
of Noah; —by the offering of Isaac ; —by the cloudy
and fiery pillar;—by the manna from heaven ;—by
the smitten rock; —by the brazen serpent lifted up
upon the pole;—by the character and history of
Melchizedek, of Joseph, of Moses, of the Jewish
High Priest; by the cities of refuge, and by other
typical places, and persons, and things, were the
Messiah and His Redemption set forth to the be-
lieving contemplation of the Old Testament wor-
shipper, unto life everlasting. The writings of the
prophets also abound with predictions concerning
Christ the promised Saviour; and these predictions
become more and more full and clear as the ap-
pointed period of His appearing draws near. The
early language of the Church by the patriarch Job is,
“ I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that He
shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, &c.”
(Job xix. 25—27.) Jacob, speaking by the Holy
Spirit, declares that the Sceptre should not depart


from Judah until Shiloh come, unto whom should
be the gathering of the people. (Gen. xlix. 10.)
Even the wickedßalaam the son of Beor, is, for the
comfort and encouragement of early believers, made
to see in a vision, the Star that should come out of
Judah, and the Sceptre that should arise out of
Israel. (Numb. xxiv. 15—19.)
By His servant, Moses, the Lord is graciously
pleased to repeat His great premise of a Divine
Saviour in these remarkable words, “ I will raise
them up a prophet from among their brethren, like
unto thee, and will put my words in His mouth;
and He shall speak unto them all that I shall
command Him, and it shall come to pass that who-
soever will not hearken unto my words which He
shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.”
(Deut. xviii. 15—19.)
The predictions of Isaiah are clothed in language
nearly approaching that of history.—“ Behold my
servant... He is despised and rejected of men, a
man of sorrows and acquainted with grief; and we
hid as it were our faces from him; He was
despised and we esteemed Him not... He was
wounded for our trasgressions, He was bruised for
our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was
upon him, and with His stripes we are healed...
The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us a 11...
He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter... for


the transgression of my people was he stricken...
He hath poured out his soul unto death; and He
was numbered with the transgressors; and He bare
the sin of many, and made intercession for the
transgressors.” (Isaiah lii. 13—liii.)
The prophet Daniel most distinctly declares also
that Messiah the Prince shall he cut off, but not
for Himself. (Dan. ix. 24— 27.) And Micah thus
celebrates the place of Messiah’s birth, “ But thou
Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among
the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall He come
forth unto me, that is to be the Ruler in Israel;
whose goings forth have been from of old, from
everlasting.” (Micah v. 2.) His triumphant en-
trance into Jerusalem is thus set forth by Zeehariah,
“ Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion ; shout, O
daughter of Jerusalem; behold thy King cometh
unto thee ; He is just and having salvation, lowly
and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an
ass.” (Ch. ix. 9.) And Malachi, the last of the pro-
phets thus writes, <c And the Lord—that is Jehovah
the Saviour, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to
His temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant.”
And again, “ Unto you that fear my name shall
the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in His
wings,” as sang Isaiah, “ Behold your God! He
will come with vengeance, even God with a recom-
pense ; He will come and save you.” (Malachi iii.
I—4)1 —4) iv. 2. Isaiah xxxv.)*
* Observe Psalms ii.; xvi.; xxii.; xl.; xlv.; ixviii.; lxxii.


The Blessed Saviour thus foretold and exhibited
in the Old Testament writings, who, in Paradise,
gave judgment in the case of our first parents and
their seducer,-who frequently appeared to the
Patriarchs as the Angel Jehovah,-the Messenger
of the Covenant,—who spake with Abraham, -
who wrestled with Jacob—who watched over his
church in the various stages of her progress towards
perfection; maintaining her in the midst of tie
fires and the darkness of Egypt, the temptations ol
the wilderness, and the backsliding and vicissitudes
which followed her establishment in the land of
promise,-is at length by a heavenly host an-
nounced to mankind as the " Child born m
Bethlehem,-the Anointed One,—the Prophet,—
the Priest, and the King of His Church. Hie
fulness of the time being come, God sent fortli
His Son, born of a woman, born under the law, to
redeem them that were under the law, that we
might receive the adoption of children. Go \\ as
now manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit,
seen of Angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed
on in the world, and was soon again to be received
up into glory. “ The Word,” saith the Apostle
iw T iv . C x.; cxvi. Prov. viii.; xxx. 4. Isaiah, iv. ; vi. (con-
nected with John xii. 37—41); yii. 14; Xl /\
xxviii., 16; xxxii, 1,2; xh; xlu.; iv., v., » Ezek xxxiv
the end of Isaiah’s Prophecies. Jerem. xxm. 5,8 Ezek. xxxiv.
23 24; xxxvi.; xxxvii. Dan. u. 31 45. Hosea, v . > - »
Ze’ch iii 8, 10; vi. 12, &c.; xi. 12, 13; xii. 10; xm. 7. In ah
these portions of Scripture you will find references to Jesus Christ,
the Messiah promised to the Fathers, or to His King
* Gal. iv. 4, 5.


St. John, “ was made flesh and dwelt among us,
(and we beheld His glory, the glory of the only
begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth.”
By John the Baptist was He baptized and intro-
duced to the notice of men, “ as the Lamb of God
who taketh away the sin of the world.” He came
to seek and to save the lost, and to lay down his
life a ransom for many. His heart was set on the
accomplishment of the work which, from eternity,
He had in His love to mankind, undertaken; and
He desisted not until He had magnified the Law
and made it honorable; —accomplished the things
written of Him in the books of Moses, the Psalms,
and the Prophets;—wrought out a perfect robe of
justifying righteousness for the guilty sons of men;
secured all those sanctifying influences and gifts of
the Holy Spirit which are necessary to prepare a
people for Himself and for glory;—and when He
had effected all the work His father had given Him
to do, He said as He hung on the accursed tree,
“ It is finished,” —and He bowed His head and
yielded up His Spirit,—His human soul, —into the
hands of His Father. According to the Scriptures,
Christ died for our sins ;—-according to the Scrip-
tures He was buried; —and according to the Scrip-
tores, He rose again on the third day from the
dead; —for it was not possible for death to detain
Him, because He had magnified law, and satisfied
justice, and finished the work of man’s redemp-
tion. By the offering up of Himself once as a sa-


crifice unto God, He made an atonement for the
sins of a lost world; and as the great High Priest
of His Church, He ascended up on high, leading-
captivity captive; entered into the heavenly holy
place with His own blood, to appear in the pre-
sence of God for us, as our all-prevailing Interces-
sor, our one and only Mediator with the Father, in
whom the Father receiveth even the chief of sin-
ners, who believe in His name, as pardoned and
complete.*
To this Divine and all-sufficient Saviour, the
Son of God, were your minds daily directed while
on board the Transportand to the same mendful
and gracious Saviour are you now once more in-
vited to look. In the Sacred Scriptures you have
the assurance of Him who cannot lie, that you have
salvation in none else; that there is no other name
under heaven given amongst men whereby you can
possibly be saved, but the blessed name of Jesus,
the Son of the Highest, f In Him only have you
redemption through that precious blood which alone
cleanseth from sin, and speaketh to the guilty con-
science peace. Under the sprinkling of that blood
alone have sinners refuge from the wrath to come;
for every other refuge must, according to the aver-
ments of eternal Truth, prove a refuge of lies.
The Lord Jesus Christ, who, through the Eternal
Spirit, offered Himself without spot unto God, pour-
* Heb. vii. 25—27. 1 Tim. ii. 5, 6. Coloss. i. 14; ii. 10.
t Acts iv. 10 —12. Luke i. 31 —35.


ing out His Soul unto death; —the righteous and the
holy One, in the room of ungodly and depraved
transgressors, is exhibited in the Sacred Scriptures
as the only Foundation that God hath laid in Zion ;
and upon which alone, poor, perishing sinners can
warrantably build their hopes of pardon and of life.
Every other foundation will, to the shame and con-
fusion of all who build thereon, prove a foundation
of sand. Christ crucified is the Rock of ages, —
the Rock which affords a ready and secure protec-
tion to every homeless and forlorn traveller who avails
himself of its shelter; —the Smitten Rock which
gives forth in abundance the streams of the water
of life, which alone can refresh the souls and cheer
the hearts of the weary and the sad; —and which,
in all who partake thereof, will spring up a well of
water unto life everlasting. (( Ho, then, every one
that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that
hath no money; come ye, buy and eat; yea, come,
buy wine and milk without money and without
price Incline your ear and come unto me;
hear, and your soul shall live Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and
He will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
He will abundantly pardon.” (Is. xxxii. 1,2; lv.
St. Johniv. 14; vii. 38, 39. “ Come unto me, all
ye that labour and are heavy laden,” proclaims
our blessed and compassionate Saviour, “ and I
will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you and
learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and


ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is
easy and my burden is light.” “He that cometh
to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on
me shall never thirst, and him that cometh
to me I will in no wise cast out.” Matt. xi. 28 —30.
John vi. 35 —37. “ This is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came
into the world to save sinners.” “ Wherefore, He
is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto
God by Him, seeing He ever liveth to make inter-
cession for them.” 1 Tim. i. 15, 16. Heb. vii.
25—27.


Section Third.
Such is the blindness of the human mind, —such
the pride and legality of the human heart,—that we
are all, even the most guilty and wretched amongst
us, disposed to try every method which Satan or
our diseased imaginations may suggest to us, of
making our peace with God, and securing the sal-
vation of our souls by our own efforts, rather than
fall in with the Divine scheme of Redemption
through Christreceive Him as our peace,—as
the power of God, and the wisdom of God, unto
salvation unto every one that believeth, and rejoice
in Him only, as the -Lord Our Righteousness and
our strength,—who alone is able to work in us by
His spirit to will and to do His good pleasure, and
to prepare us for the exercises and the bliss of
heaven.
That you may be saved from the folly of at-
tempting to work out for yourselves a righteousness
which, at the best, can only prove filthy rags, or the
spider’s web; and from the guilt of setting aside or
undervaluing that glorious work which Christ as our
Surety hath perfectly accomplished, and through
which is published to every one of you, in the
Scriptures of truth, a free and unconditional par-


doni —and entire restoration to the favour and moral
image of God, —I shall, for a few moments, call
your attention to certain declarations of sacred
Scripture, which are calculated to correct all mis-
apprehensions on the momentous subject before
us; —to draw us away from every false and insecure
refuge; —and to dispose our hearts to be satisfied
with nothing short of rest in Him in whom the
Father rests well pleased for His righteousness’
sake, and in whom alone the guilty and polluted
sinner can obtain forgiveness and peace, holiness
and life.
The limits which I am compelled to assign to
this communication do not permit me to reason with
you about the matter under consideration; nor in-
deed is it necessary that I should, since you all ad-
mit that the holy and inspired Scriptures are the
Word of God; —and that therefore, whatever they
affirm must be true —for this simple reason, that their
language is the language of the God of Truth.
Now, that no sinner can be justified and saved
through his own merits or deservings, or through
the merits of any creature , but solely through faith
in the meritorious obedience and death of the Son
of God, is a doctrine most abundantly taught, and
most strenuously maintained, in the Scriptures of
Truth.
You recollect that striking and decisive passage


in the iii. of St. John, and which many of you
committed to memory and recited to me in the pre-
sence of all assembled on the Quarter Deck: “ And
as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness,
even so must the Son of man be lifted up, that who-
soever believetli in him should not perish, but have
eternal life. For God so loved the w r orld that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever be-
lieveth in him should not perish, but have everlast-
ing life. For God sent not his son into the w'orld
to condemn the world; but that the world through
him might be saved. He that believetli on him is
not condemned, but he that believetli not is con-
demned already, because he hath not believed in
the name of the only begotten son of God. And
this is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness rather than light
because their deeds were evil. He that believetli
on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that be-
iieveth not the Son shall not see life; but the
wrath of God abideth on him.”
In these verses is Jesus Christ clearly set forth as
the unspeakable gift of the Father’s love to a rebel-
lious and a lost world.
Secondly, it is affirmed that every sinner, how-
ever guilty and polluted, that believes on Christ; —
that is, accepts * of Him for the purposes for which
* St. John i. 12.


he is given,—hath everlasting life; and shall not
come into condemnation.
Thirdly, that they who do not receive Christ,
and put their confidence in Him, are condemned
on account of their unbelief.
Fourthly, that all who are united to Jesus by a
living faith, —live a holy life according to the Scrip-
tures; or, give evidence that their deeds are wrought
in God.
Fifthly, the illustration of saving faith derived by
our blessed Lord from the xxi of Numbers, most
pointedly repudiates and rejects all notion of human
or creature merit in the matter of our salvation.
What merit accrued to the dying Jew from lifting,
in obedience to the merciful and gracious will of
Jehovah, his languid eye to the serpent raised upon
a pole ; and in thus looking, receiving health and
life ? And what merit can you claim for your look-
ing to Jesus crucified and slain for sinners, and receiv-
ing from Him pardon, and purity, and life, as matter
of free gift , and which is infinitely beyond all price,
save the price of his own most precious Blood ?
Again, that salvation is entirely of grace, or of
free and undeserved favour, you learn from the iii.
of the Romans, a chapter from which we have al-
ready largely quoted, and which, from the 9th
verse, some of you committed to memory. <£ Tliere-


*ore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be
justified in his sight; for by the law is the know-
ledge of sin. But now the righteousness of God
without the law is manifested, being witnessed by
the law and the prophets; even the righteousness
of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all
and upon all them that believe; for there is no dif-
ference ; for all have sinned and come short of the
glory of God; being justified freely by his grace
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus;
whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood, to declare his righteous-
ness for the remission of sins that are past, through
the forbearance of God; to declare, I say, at this
time, his righteousness, that he might be just and
the justifier of him who believeth in Jesus. Where
is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law?
Of works ? Nay, but by the law of faith. There-
fore we conclude that a man is justified by faith
"without the deeds of the law.” Also in chap. iv.
we thus read, “ But to him that worketh not, but
believeth on Him that justifieth the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness.” And in chap, v.,
“ Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.” Like-
wise in chap. viii. <c There is therefore now no con-
demnation to them who are in Christ Jesus, who walk
not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit.”
In PauTs Epistle to the Galatians, is the same funda-
mental doctrine of Christianity most clearly and dis-
tinctly maintained; in chap. ii. 16, we read “Knowing
c 5


that a man is not justified by the works of the law,
but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed
in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the
faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law;
for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justi-
fied.” And chap, iii., “ The Scripture hath con-
cluded all under sin, that the promise by faith
of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.
For we are all the children of God by faith in
Christ Jesus.” Study closely the whole of this
invaluable Epistle, the great object of which is to
establish the doctrine under consideration,- -to pre-
serve to sinners the only truth that can at once
give peace to the conscience , and purity to the heart,
and the life, —the truth on which are founded the
hope, and confidence, and joy of all the people of
God.
If you turn to the Epistle of Paul to the Ephe-
sians, you will find the Apostle urging upon the
consideration of his readers the same wholesome
doctrine. At chap. ii. B—lo, it is thus written:
“ For by grace are ye saved through faith; and
that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God: not
of works lest any man should boast. For we are
His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works which God hath before ordained that
we should walk in them.” It is unnecessary to
multiply quotations. The doctrine of salvation
from sin, and guilt, and death, unto peace, and holi-
ness, and life, through faith in a crucified Redeemer,


as the free and unmerited gift of sovereign grace, is a
doctrine which pervades the whole of the sacred page
noth of the Old and New Testaments. It marks
the Books of Moses, the Psalms, and the Prophets,
as well as the writings of the Evangelists and of
the Apostles of Our Lord.*
And if you duly reflect on the spirituality and
extent of the law of God under which you live,
and according- to which you must be judged; and
compare the requirements of that law with the
character of your hearts and lives, you cannot fail
at once to perceive and to feel the utter impossibility
of your ever meriting, even by your utmost efforts,
either the forgiveness of your sins, or the restora-
tion of your persons to the favour and moral likeness
of God. The Divine law takes account, you will
remember, not merely of your outward actions vi-
sible to the eye of man, but of all your most secret
and hidden proceedings. It deals not only with
your doings , but also with your words. Yea, more-
over, it determines in strictest justice upon the
character of your very feelings, your motives, your
principles of action, your secret purposes and desires,
and of all the affections and movements of your
hearts. It requires that you love the Lord your
God with all your heart, and soul, and strength,
and mind; and, likewise, that you love your neigh-
* 2 Gen. iii. 15; xii. Lev. xvi. Numb. xxi. 7 —9. Is. liiL
Dan. ix. 24—26. Zech. xiii. 1. John iii. Acts ii. iii. iv. Rom.
Heb. Gal.


boar as yourselves. And in the Scriptures it is
declared, that he who is guilty in one point, is
guilty of all,* that is, of violating the Divine code,
and subjects himself to the condemnation of death.
Now, I ask, is there a woman among you so utterly
ignorant, so fearfully presumptuous and daring, as
to affirm that, in the whole of her behaviour, and
speech, and thoughts, and feelings, and desires,
and motives, and affections, she has come up to the
demands of the holy and spiritual law of the Most
High, as set forth in His works and in His inspired
word ? And if, to the present moment, you have
failed, and failed every day and every hour to come
up to the requirements of the law of God, what
prospect have you of ever being able, by your own
unaided strength, of yielding in the sight of the
Searcher of hearts a sinless obedience ? Does not
even a superficial acquaintance with your past his-
tory, lead to convictions corresponding with the
declarations of Scripture, that sin is mixed with all
you do ; that in every thing you come short of the
glory of God; and that when you have done your
utmost, you are by truth compelled to acknowledge
that you are unprofitable servants, and that your
best and holiest works have in them more than you
can comprehend which requires to be forgiven ?
And if the most perfect of your performances add
to the number of your trangressions, and increase
the amount of your guilt, how can you hope to be
* James ii. 10 ; iii. 2.


able to give satisfaction to law and justice for past
offences? If your best endeavours only increase
the debt which you already owe to God, how can
that debt be ever liquidated by any exertions of
yours ? Even the righteous, we are told, fall seven
times a day; and if they, who avail themselves of
the provisions of the everlasting covenant, are per-
petually contracting guilt, and every moment re-
quire to have recourse to the Fountain which was
opened for sin and for uncleanness, what must be
the condition of those who reject the Divine help,
rely on their own understanding, and confide in
their own strength ? “ Cursed be the man that
trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and
whose heart departeth from the Lord.” (Jer. xvii.s.)
But it is not enough that you are convinced that
your best works are imperfect, and need for-
giveness. The Scriptures teach you, that all your
attempts to effect your reconciliation to God by
means of your own doings or fancied personal
worthiness, are not only vain, but most iniquitous ,
inasmuch as they set aside that all-perfect righteous-
ness which Christ hatli provided for you, involve
erroneous and dishonouring thoughts of God, of
His law, and of His government, and necessarily
lead to the eternal destruction of your precious and
never-dying souls. An attempt to accomplish their
own justification before God, was the crime of the
unbelieving Jews, of whom the apostle Paul, in
his Epistle to the Romans, (chap lx,) thus speaks,


“lor they being ignorant of God’s righteousness,
and going about to establish their own righteousness,
have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness
of God. For Christ is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believeth.” And
since it is in Christ alone that you can have righ-
teousness and acceptance with the Father, to reject
Christ, or to presume to substitute any thing in
His place, is to reject the only justifying righteous-
ness in which the sinner can appear before God
with acceptance and in peace : it is to prefer our
own folly and presumption before God’s wisdom
and condescending love : it is to choose condemna-
tion and death, rather than a free pardon and
everlasting life. For this is the record, that God
hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his
Son. He that hath the Son hath life; and he
that hath not the Son of God hath not life.’’ (1
John v. 11, 12.)
If there are any among you who, through igno-
rance, or the influence of pride, or of Satan, or of
any other cause, are disposed to conclude that your
sins are too many and too aggravated ever to be
forgiven; that your guilt is too deep ever to be
washed away; that your hearts are too hard ever
to be softened or changed; that you have sunk too
far in the mire of iniquity ever to be lifted out and
cleansed; that you have departed too far from God
ever to be brought back to Him again; that you
have become too degraded and debased ever to be


recovered to a state of moral excellence ; that you
have rendered yourselves too deserving of the scorn
and contempt of mankind, ever to admit of being
restored to the society and the regard of the wise
and the upright; that, in short, your case is alto-
gether too desperate to be met by any remedy,—l
say, if any of you are assailed with these, or with
any such thoughts or apprehensions, let me beseech
you to remember whence they come, and that they
are opposed to the clearest declarations of the
Scriptures of Divine truth. The apostle John
assures you, that there is no sin from which the
blood of Jesus cannot cleanse; that there is no
sinner that comes to Him that He will refuse to re-
ceive, or will in any wise cast out; and it is a doc-
trine which pervades the whole of the inspired
writings, that there is no case so wretched and
hopeless, that the provisions of His Gospel are not
able to meet. By the prophet Ezekiel, the lan-
guage He addresses to you is, “As I live, saith the
Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked ; but that the wicked turn from his way and
live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for
why will ye die, O house of Israel?” “Hearken
unto me ye stout-hearted , that are far from righ-
teousness,are the gracious words of Jehovah by
the prophet Isaiah, “ I bring near my righteous-
ness : it shall not be far off, and my salvation shall
not tarry.” And again, “ I have blotted out, as a
thick cloud, thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy
sins: return unto me; for I have redeemed thee.”


(Isa. xlvi. xliv.) In the Acts of the Apostles, (chap,
xiii.,) you have these words from the lips of Paul
and Barnabas, “ And we declare unto you glad
tidings, that the promise which was made unto the
fathers, God hath fulfilled the same unto us their
children, in that He hath raised up Jesus again
Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren,
that through this man is preached unto you the for-
giveness of sins, and by Him all that believe are
justified from all things .” “ For this is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour, who
will have all men to be saved, and to come unto
the knowledge of the truth. For there is one God,
and one Mediator between God and men, the Man
Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a ransom for all
to be testified in due time.” (1 Tim. ii.) “And the
spirit and the bride say, come, and let him that
heareth say, come; and let him that is athirst
come; and whosoever will, let him take the water
of life freely .” And that no obstacle in the way of
any sinner’s return unto God should remain unre-
moved, He hath positively enjoined it upon all who
hear of Jesus Christ, that they believe on His
name and not perish, but have eternal life. (1 John
iii. 23,) “ And this is His commandment , That we
should believe on the name of His Son Jesus
Christ, and love one another, as He gave us com-
mandment.”
Should there be among you any who have been
enlightened in the knowledge of Christ; have


tasted that He is gracious, and have made an open
profession of faith in Him, and have nevertheless
fallen by iniquity; have turned aside from follow-
ing Him in the path of holy obedience, and so
grieved the Spirit of grace, and brought dishonour
upon the cross; take heed that ye do not, therefore,
give yourselves over to Satan, by shutting your
ears to the gracious invitations of the gospel which
are still addressed to you in the sacred Scriptures.
If you have done iniquity, do so no more.* Let
the time past suffice to have wrought the will
of the flesh. Be your transgressions what they
may, you are still urged to return to that God
from whom you have by disobedience, revolted.
Hear the words of redeeming love by the prophet
Hosea, “ O Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself; but
in me is thine help.” “ O Israel, return unto the
Lord thy God, for thou hast fallen by thine ini-
quity. Take with you words, and turn to the
Lord: say unto Him, Take away all iniquity, and
receive us graciously.” “ I will heal their back-
sliding, I will love them freely ; for mine anger is
turned away from him.”f “My little children,”
saith the beloved disciple, “these things write I unto
you, that ye sin not. And if any man should sin,
we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous, and He is the propitiation for our
sins; and not for ours only, but also for the sins of
the whole world.” “If we confess our sins, He is
* Job xxxiv. 31, 32. f Hosea xiii. xiv.


faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness.”
Thus you perceive it is the Divine command
that you do not commit sin; but it is also the Di-
vine command to you that, having- sinned, you
delay not, but make haste and flee to Jesus, and to
His atoning blood; and at the foot of His cross
seek that repentance which He alone can give you,
and which He is exalted to bestow,- —make a full
and a penitent confession of your sins, and in the
exercise of faith in his faithful promise, and of
confidence in his pardoning love, implore the for-
giveness of all your iniquities; the uprooting of all
the corruptions of your nature ; the bestowment of
the new heart and the right spirit, which He hath
promised to give to all them who ask Him: and so
being saved from all your “ filthiness and all your
uncleannesses, you shall remember your own evil
ways and your doings that were not good, and shall
loathe yourselves in your own sight for your ini-
quities and for your abominations.” And having,
by faith in a merciful Redeemer, returned to your
Heavenly Father, you will be able to understand
the import of His language to the Church, and
which is thus recorded by the prophet, “And 1
will establish my covenant with thee, and thou
shalt know that I am the Lord, that thou mayest
remember and be confounded, and never open thy
mouth any more because of thy shame, when lam
pacified toward thee for all that thou hast done,


saith the Lord God. (Ezek. xxxvi. 25, &c.; xvi.
62, 63.
Whatever may be your present condition as a
sinner in the sight of God; —however numerous
and aggravated your iniquities; however heavy the
load of your guilt,—you are at this moment invited,
yea, even commanded by the God of Love, Holi-
ness, and Truth, to cast yourself and your entire
burden on the blessed Jesus, who gave Himself to
be your Ransom, and who rejoices to save to the
uttermost all who come unto God by Him. You
are lost! lay hold by faith on Jesus, and you are
saved ! You have been bitten by the old serpent
the devil, —the bite is deadly,—your souls are
perishing under the effects of the wound ! There
is but one antidote, —the Lamb of God lifted up
and crucified on the accursed tree: —to Him Je-
hovah bids you look for healing and for life ! Oh,
look unto Him; be healed, and live !—and look
now; — delay not a moment; —for behold now is
the accepted time, saith the Lord,* behold now is
the day of salvation. Every moment’s delay adds
to your iniquity } tends to harden your heart;
increases your danger. The next moment may
remove you from the sound of the Gospel for ever,
and consign you to the fearful and everlasting
abode of the unbeliever, to reap the bitter fruit of
your disobedience and unbelief. Jesus Christ, who
* 2 Cor. vi. 2, &c. Heb. iii.


died and rose again, is the foundation which God
hath laid in Sion, —the only Foundation of the
sinner’s hope.* That foundation is, in the Holy
Scriptures, set before you: —Oh, hearken to the
counsel of Divine pity and love, and step upon it!
and thus be secure from the torrent’s power, and
safe amidst the tempest and the storm. With such
a foundation before you, placed nigh you, yea, at
your very foot, and the Divine Warrant to occupy
it, and enjoy its everlasting security,—why should
you trust to the sand-hill and perish for ever !
But here I would remind you that you are not
only condemned but diseased , and need not only the
pardon of a Sovereign, but the cure of a Physician.
Jesus is the only Physician who at once under-
stands your malady, and is able to effect a cure.
Why do you not, in confidence, place yourselves in
His hands, believe in His power and willingness to
heal, and be filled with gratitude and praise for His
deliverance ? You are defiled by sin,—His precious
blood is the fountain opened for sin and unclean-
ness. He bids you wash and be clean; —and why
should you longer prefer the defilement of the
ungodly to the purity of the sanctified in Christ
Jesus ?f Your souls are naked and exposed to the
shame and all the consequences of nakedness.
Jesus hath provided for you the robe of righteous-
* 1 Cor. iii. 11—18, &c. Eph. ii. 20. 1 Peter ii. I—lo
f Zech. xiii. 1, Heb. ix. 14


ness and the garments of salvation, and bids you by
faith put them on. Why is it then that you are
not arrayed with the linen clean and white, which
is the righteousness of Saints, and ready to appear
with acceptance at the Marriage Feast and in the
presence of the King ?* Remember that momen-
tous and fundamental truth which has been so
often sounded in your ears, from the word of God,
“ Christ is all.” (Coloss. iii. 11.) It is in Him
alone that you can be justified and accepted of God.
All your “ righteousnesses”—that is, all your best
works, as you have already heard, are in the sight of
the Holy One of Israel, accounted as nothing
better than “ filthy rags,” or “ the spider’s web.”
(Isaiah lxiv. 6 ; lix. 5, 6. Rom. iii. 19, 20.) Let
me beseech you then to reflect, ere it be too late,
on the fearful condition and prospects of the man
who, as related in the parable of our Lord, pre-
sumed to appear among the guests, at the Mar-
riage Feast, which the King made for his Son, not
having on “ a wedding garment.” Do you ask
what is that wedding garment ? Observe attentively
the texts just quoted, and those referred to below,f
and you will learn that the wedding garment,
alluded to in this parable, is that everlasting
* Rev. iii. 4,5, 18; vi. 11 ; vii. 9—14; xvi. 15 ; xix. 8, 9.
Matth. xxii. I—l 4.
f Dan. ix. 24. Isaiah, Ini. 11. Jerem.xxiii. 5, 6. Heb.ix. 11—
28 ;x. 8—23. Rom. iii. 21—26 ; iv. 3—5, 22—25; ix. 30—33; x.
xiii. 14. Isaiah, lxi. 10. Zech. iii. I—s. Rev. iii. 18; xix. 8;
xvi. 15; Coloss. ii. 10. 1 Cor. i. 30. Psalm, xlv. 13," 14; Ezek.
xvi. 14. Phil. iii. 7—9.


righteousness which Jesus Christ brought in, when
He bowed His head upon the accursed tree, and
said, “It is finished.” It is the complete robe
of righteousness which consists in the perfect obe-
dience and suffering even unto death of Jesus
Christ as the substitute of sinners; arrayed in which
robe, put on by a living faith, the guilty trans-
gressor experiences in his conscience peace, is
brought nigh with acceptance, unto God, by whom
he is now viewed as being complete in His beloved
Son, who died that we might live, and rose again
for our justification. Or, the wedding garment, to
W'hich we have been alluding, may be considered
Jesus Christ Himself and His finished work of our
Redemption. And you will most carefully observe
that, all who, by faith, “ put on the Lord Jesus
Christ,” for justification unto life, are sanctified by
His Word and Spirit, and so made partakers of
that holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord. (Heb. xii. 14.)
But you require not only to be pardoned,
and healed, and washed, and clothed, you are
poor and needy, and standing in need of all
things. In Jesus are all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge; in Him dwelleth the fulness of
the Godhead. He is, as our Emmanuel, consti-
tuted Head over Universal Creation, for the benefit
of His Church and of her humblest member.
Accept of Jesus, and with Him all things are yours ;
for, “He who spared not His own Son, but deli-


vered Him up for us all, how shall He not with
him also freely give us all things ?” Without Jesus
you have nothing, but the certain fearful looking
for of judgment and fiery indignation, which will
devour the adversaries ; but embrace Christ, and
with Him you receive a new Covenant right to all
Covenant provision for time and for eternity.
“ Your bread will be given you, and your water
shall be sure.” His grace shall be, in all circum-
stances, sufficient for you, and His strength shall
be perfected in your weakness. Being united to
Christ by a living faith, you derive from Him your
spiritual life, and all those spiritual supplies by
which that life is maintained in strength and vigour.
To Him you look at once for righteousness and
for strength. For righteousness unto acceptance
with the Father; —for strength to enable you in all
things to do your heavenly Father’s revealed will.
Christ being formed in your heart the hope of
glory, and your life being hid with Christ in God,
you will be enabled to give evidence that your
carnal nature is crucified (Rom. vi.); that you are
risen with Christ to walk in newness of life (Coloss,
iii.); that your affections are in heaven where your
treasure is; that you have received grace to be
faithful to all the holy commands of your Lord, and
to hold fast the beginning of the confidence and the
rejoicing of the hope steadfastly unto the end
(Heb. iii.), being saved in Him with a present and
an everlasting salvation.
And let it be deeply impressed upon your minds


that you now have not only to dispose of the gift of
Christ, but of the promised gift of the Holy
Spirit. Oh ! how impressively solemn is this
consideration ! You have learned from the Scrip-
tures that Christ is the unspeakable gift of the
Father’s love to sinners, and that you either receive
or reject Him. You learn also from the Scriptures
that the Holy Spirit is the Father’s unspeakable
promise, (Joel, ii. 28. Acts, ii. 17, &c.) and
Whom our Blessed Saviour, before He ascended to
the glory whence He came, assured His disciples
He should send into the world to abide with His
Church and people for ever; to lead and guide
them into all truth; to sanctify them and make
them a holy temple fit for Himself to dwell in ;
to take of the things of Christ and shew them to
His humble followers; and to reprove and convince
the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment
to come. The Holy Spirit is now dealing with
every one of you by means of His works, His Pro-
vidence, the voice of conscience, and by His written
word. He is convincing you of your sin* and
wretchedness as fallen and rebellious creatures.
He is bearing witness in the Scriptures and in your
consciences to the Lord Jesus as an all sufficient
and willing Saviour. He is dealing with your
understandings and your hearts, and persuading
you to flee to the blood of the cross for pardon and
for purity, and for deliverance from the wrath to
* St. John, xvi. B—]l.


come ; and every one of you must either yield to
the influences and persuasions of the blessed and
Eternal Spirit, or you resist and reject them ! In
a word, by quenching the influences of the Holy
Spirit, and refusing to receive Christ Jesus ac-
cording to the revealed will of the Father, you at
once put away from you the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, and make choice of the service of
sin and of Satan, whose wages is everlasting death,
rather than take up the Redeemer’s easy yoke, and,
walking in the path of a cheerful and happy obe-
dience, be made partakers of that eternal life, which
is the gift of free and Sovereign grace.


Section Fourth.
From what has been said, you must have observed
that, all who by faith embrace the Lord Jesus Christ,
experience a change of state and a change of charac-
ter. They experience a change of state. Prior to
their union with Christ, they were under the old and
broken covenant, of which the first Adam was the
head, and with him, because of transgression, were
involved in condemnation and death. But when
they are united to Jesus, they come within the bond
of the new covenant, of which He who is the “ se-
cond Adam, —the Lord from Heaven,” is the Head;
in Him they are justified and accepted; in Him as
their new covenant head, they have spiritual and
everlasting life; and in virtue of their union with
Him, they have secured to them all new covenant
blessings, temporal, spiritual, and eternal. They
are thus translated from the kingdom of Satan into
the kingdom of God’s dear Son; —they pass from
darkness to light; from a state of slavery to a state
of freedom; from a state of rebellion to a state ot
loyalty to Zion’s King;—from the family of the
wicked one, they pass into the family of God; they
cease to belong to the present evil world, and be-
come members of that Church which God hath
purchased with his own blood, and against which


the powers of hell can never prevail, because it is
founded upon the Rock of Ages, the Lord Jesus
Christ.
Besides a change of state , the Disciples of Jesus
experience also a change of character. They are
no longer the enemies of God by wicked works;
their enmity to God is destroyed; they are recon-
ciled to him by the death of His Son; they have
obtained peace through the blood of his cross; they
love God because He first loved them; His love is
shed abroad in their hearts by the Holy Ghost given
unto them, and their habitual desire and prayer is,
that they may love the Lord their God with all
their heart and soul, and strength and mind, and be
enabled to manifest their love to Him by a con
scientious and uniform observance, in thought, word,
and deed, of all His holy commandments. Loving
God supremely, they also love all His creatures
according to His revealed will. Being born of
God, and having become new creatures, a new
creation in Christ Jesus, they especially, wherever
they may meet them, love all who bear His image,
and who, by their temper, dispositions, and conduct,
give Scriptural evidence that they, have received
His Spirit, and are amongst His pardoned and
sanctified children. The genuine disciples of Jesus
are no longer what they were before their union
with Him, and reception of His Spirit. Their
principles are changed, and they act under the in-
fluence of new motives. Their habitual desire is,


in all things, to please God by doing His will; and
this holy desire results from just views of the
Divine nature and character, and of the relation in
which they stand to Him who hath made and pre-
served them, hath redeemed them to Himself by
His precious blood, and hath called them by the
Gospel to be partakers of all the blessings of His
great Redemption. Feeling that they are not their
own, but bought with a price, their aim is to live
to Him who gave Himself a Ransom for them.
Having put off the old man with his affections
and lusts, and being renewed in the Spirit of
their minds; and having put on the new man,
which, according to God, is created in righteous-
ness unto good works, they study to have in all
things, a conscience void of offence towards God
and towards man. While as much as in them lies,
they live peaceably with all men, seeking not only
the advancement of their own interests, but the
promotion of the interests of others; their grand
aim is to please God , and to seek the advancement
of His glory by the consistent discharge of every
incumbent duty personal and relative.
Are they united together by the ties of holy matri-
mony ? * They walk together in mutual forbear-
* I introduce here some of the domestic relations not merely
for the purpose of setting forth the blessed effects which the
Gospel, of moral necessity, produces in the hearts and lives of all
who believe it, but because many of you may be disposed to avail
yourselves of the encouragement which the law of God and the
regulations of the Colonial Government give you, to form prudent


ance and love; they live as being together heirs of
the grace of life; they affectionately watch over
and edify each other’s souls; being united in the
Lord, —to the Lord, in the strength of His grace,
they live; —to Him they have dedicated themselves
and their whole household, that they may be to
the praise of the riches of His grace. Their house
is the tabernacle of prayer, of praise, and of thanks-
giving. The Scriptures of truth guide them in
their faith, obedience, and worship; and from the
relation which subsists between Jesus Christ and
His Church, they derive their most exquisite and
touching lessons on mutual tenderness, mutual
fidelity, personal and mutual holiness in heart and
in life. (Eph. v.)
Are the followers of Christ Parents ? Their
children they have received as a trust from God,
to whom they are required to rear them, and to
whom they must render an account of the manner
in which they have discharged the sacred and mo-
mentous duties involved in their trust. It is their
high privilege to dedicate their offspring to Jesus,
who hath promised to accept the offering of faith ;
and it is the joy of the believing parents’ hearts to
and honorable alliances in marriage; and likewise because the
cultivation of pious and moral habits may, in the course of years,
place both male and female prisoners in a position, in which they
shall be invested with the high responsibilities which necessarily
attach to those who, in the dispensations of Divine Providence,
are intrusted with the management and interests of servants.


avail themselves of their privilege, and to devote,
conscientiously, their children to the Lord, accord-
ing to the precepts and approved example of His
holy word. Their beloved children are never off
their hearts; and on their hearts they never cease
to carry them to the footstool of the throne of grace,
there to place them in the arms of that “same Jesus,”
who in the days of His humiliation, received such and
blessed them; and who continues yet to say, “ Suffer
little children to come unto me, and forbid them
not, for of such is the Kingdom of God.” In
connexion with the scriptural, believing, dedication
of their offspring to the Lord, and frequent daily
prayer with them, and for them, Christian parents
will make a diligent and devout use of all divinely
appointed means to have them instructed in the
knowledge of themselves, and of Jesus Christ their
only Saviour from sin and from death. The holy
Scriptures will, together with the works and provi-
dence of God, be the subjects of their daily conver-
sation. Their desire and aim will be to have them
led into all truth, especially into the saving know-
ledge of Jesus; and since it is the Holy Spirit who
alone can teach to profit, they will earnestly im-
plore for themselves and their children, His divine
teaching and gracious indwelling and influences,
that both they and their offspring may be formed
for the Lord, for shewing forth His praise, dur-
ing the whole period of their pilgrimage here be-
low, and throughout the ages of eternity in heaven
above.


Are the converts to Christianity in the position
of musters or mistresses ? They will remember
that it is written that, “ God who made the world
and all things therein, hath made of one blood all
nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the
earth that they have a master in heaven who re-
quires that they deal with their servants as dealing
with the Lord , with whom there is no respect of
persons,f and who will render to every man, with-
out distinction, according to his works. They will
bear in mind that their servants have immortal souls
which must be either saved or lost; that they must
give an account to God of the example they set before
them, whether in disposition , or in speech , or in
behaviour. They will act towards their servants as
they themselves would wish to be dealt with were
they in their servants* place. They will desire
them to say or to do nothing that is clearly and dis-
tinctly in opposition to the will of God, revealed
in the Holy Scriptures of truth. The one day in
seven, which the Lord hath, in His great mercy
and goodness, given to all men, as a day of holy
resting from worldly labour, for the purpose of en-
gaging in spiritual exercises and enjoyments, con-
nected with the advancement of the glory of God
and the highest interests of the soul, the Christian
master and mistress will not rob their servants of;
but on the contrary, they will as far as necessity
and mercy will admit, make such wise and prudent
* Acts xvii. 22—31. f Ephes. vi. 9 ; Coloss. iv. 1.


arrangements, as will enable their servants to de-
vote the Lord’s Day to the sacred and momentous
purposes for which it was divinely set apart.* In
a word, they will watch over the souls and best in-
terest of their servants in the spirit of that holy re-
ligion of the cross which they profess, affording
them, as far as possible, an opportunity of joining
with the family in the morning and evening reading
of the Scriptures and prayerthey will endeavour
to instruct them in the knowledge of Christ; —
and will devoutly use every scriptural measure to
induce them to comply with the call of the Gospel,
to give their hearts to Him who died to save them,
and in His strength, to become followers of God,
as dear children, and through faith in Christ Jesus
be made partakers of that heavenly and eternal rest
which remaineth for the people of God.
Are the disciples of Jesus in the situation of ser-
vants ? They will, whether they be bond or free,
study in all things to act towards their masters and
mistresses, in the spirit , and according to the pre-
cepts of the Gospel of Christ. Their behaviour
towards their superiors, will be that which they
themselves would reasonably expect to experience,
were they in their position. They are not eye
servants, but act conscientiously as in the sight of
Him who searches the heart, and to whom the night
is as the day, and the darkness as the light. They
* Isa. lviii. 13, 14; Deut. v. 12—15 ; Neh. xiii. 15—22.


are purchased by the blood of Christ, and called by
His grace; they, therefore, feel that they are not
their own, but His who bought them, and their de-
light is to please Him well in all things. His love
is shed abroad in their hearts by the Holy Spirit
given unto them; they, therefore, render to their
earthly master and mistress a cheerful service, ac-
cording to the Scriptures ; —doing everything hear-
tily to the Lord, and not to man merely, knowing that
they serve the Lord Christ. To their blessed and
exalted Redeemer they habitually look and pray
for that abundant supply of promised grace which
they hourly feel they need, to preserve them from
temptation and sin, and to enable them to act with
that holy consistency in spirit, speech, and conduct,
which, through the power of the Holy Ghost, will
constitute them living epistles of Christ, known,
and read of all around them. Their habitual prayer
and endeavour is, not only to guard against every
thing which might tend to bring discredit, or a blot,
on the sacred Scriptures, and on that holy religion
they inculcate, but so to demean themselves as to
commend the doctrines of the cross to all under
whose notice their example may come, and thus by
bringing forth the fruits of righteousness in holy
living, to glorify their Father who is in heaven, and
produce in the minds of their superiors the convic-
tion, that the servants who love Christ and follow
Him faithfully, according to His word, must be
faithful and valuable servants to their earthly mas-
ters ; and, all other things being equal, vastly su -


perior to those servants who know not God, are
strangers to the power of His grace, and continue
to class with the children of this evil world, in
whose hearts the spirit of darkness continues to
reign.
Have the followers of Christ parents ? They
will feel that the obligations they are under to
honor and obey them in all things lawful, in virtue
of their natural relation to those from whom they
have derived their existence, and to whose anxious
care they were, at their entrance into life, com-
mitted, are strengthened and increased by the higher
obligations they are under to Him who created and
redeemed them : and that the consideration of all
that their father and mother have suffered and ac-
complished for them, derives additional solemnity
and weight from the remembrance of the claims of
that Divine Love, which was manifested in the suf-
ferings endured on the accursed tree to save the
rebellious and the lost, and to restore them to the
family of God, to participate in all the blessings
and enjoyments of His renewed and sanctified
children.
In one word, all who receive the truth concern-
ing Christ in the love of it, give evidence of its
quickening and sanctifying power on their hearts
and minds, by studying habitually to yield a cheer-
ful and universal obedience to the blessed will of
their divine Lord, as set forth in the writings of


Inspiration. They give honor to whom honor is
due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear.
They render to Csesar the things which are Caesar's,
and unto God the things that are God’s. They are
conscientiously subject unto the higher powers,
knowing that there is no power but of God, and
that the powers that be are ordained of God. They
hear and observe the exhortation, “Dearly beloved,
I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain
from fleshy lusts which war against the soul; hav-
ing your conversation honest among the Gentiles;
that whereas they speak against you as evil-doers,
they may by your good works which they shall be-
hold, glorify God in the day of visitation. Submit
yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord’s
sake; whether it be to the King as supreme, or
unto governors, as unto them that are sent by Him
tor the punishment of evil-doers, and for the praise
of them that do well. For so is the will of God,
that with well doing ye may put to silence the ig-
norance of foolish men : as free, and not using your
liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the ser-
vants of God. Honor all men. Love the brother-
hood. Fear God. Honor the King. Servants be
subject to your masters with all fear; not only to
the good and gentle, but also to the froward. For
this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward
God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what
glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults,
ye shall take it patiently ? But if when ye do well
and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is accept-*


able with God. For even hereunto were ye called ;
because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
example, that ye should follow his steps : Who did
no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth; who,
when He was reviled, reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not; but committed Him-
self to Him that judgeth righteously. Who His
own self bare our sins in His own body on the tree,
that we being dead to sins should live unto righ-
teousness ; by whose stripes ye were healed. For
ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned
unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.”*
Thus have I endeavoured to direct your minds
once more to the great salvation of the Son of God:
and you have been taught, that He came into the
world to save us not in our sins, but from our sins,
to bless us by turning us away from our iniquities,;
not only by His obedience and death to redeem for
us the lost inheritance, but by His word and spirit,
to sanctify and fit us for the enjoyment of it, and
for engaging in all the exercises and duties con-
nected with such enjoyment;—not only to restore
us to the favor and friendship of God, but to recover
us to the holy image of God,—to form us for de-
lighting supremely in His service and worship, and
to prepare us for the possession of that blessedness
which is inseparable from our seeing our exalted
Lord as He is, from our being made like Him, and
* 1 Peter ii.


from our being by Him conducted throughout
endless ages, into the unfathomable mysteries of
redeeming love.


PART 11.
Section Fifth.
In addition to what I have said, I would now, in
the second place, proceed to olfer for your considera-
tion and observance, a few more practical Exhor-
tations.
First, I beseech you to bear constantly in mind,
whose you are, and for what great purpose you were
created. You are the creatures of God; you are
His property, He made you, and He made you
tor Himself, that you might glorify and enjoy him
tor ever; and seeing that you had destroyed your-
selves, —that you were utterly lost, —He gave His
beloved Son to redeem you, and His Holy Spirit
to renew and sanctify you; and all this because He
pitied you, and loved you! Do you ask, then,
“ "W hat shall we do that we might work the works
of God ?” This is the question that the Jews put
to our blessed Lord, (John vi. 28,) and in the fol-
lowing verse you have his gracious reply, “ Jesus
answered and said unto them, This is the work of
God, that ye believe on Him whom He hath
sent.” To believe on Jesus, that is, (John i. 12,)
to receive Him, is the commencement of a sin-
ner’s acceptable obedience. All the w r orks you


perform prior to your reception of Christ, are dead
works; the works of a rebel; —and of a rebel who
persists in refusing to be reconciled unto God
through the death of His dear Son; they are the
works of an unbeliever, and you know that without
a living faith in the Lord Jesus Christ it is impos-
sible to please God; (Heb. xi. 6,) and you are as
well assured, that it is only through Jesus you can
draw near to God and enjoy fellowship with Him;
and therefore it is, that your serving and enjoying
God, and thus answering the grand end of your
being, begins with your acceptance of Christ
Jesus as all your salvation and all your desire.
And your continuing to serve and enjoy God, must
ever be inseparable from your continuing to hold
fast His Son, and living by Him a life of faith.
Abiding in Christ, and Christ abiding in you, you
will, in all things, aim at glorifying your Father
who is in Heaven. Whether you eat or drink, or
whatsoever you do, you will, in the strength of
divine grace, do all to the Glory of God.
Secondly. Since it is not will-worship which
God will accept of you, but the worship and service
which He requires; and since it is only in the
writings of Inspiration that you can ascertain with
fulness and with certainty what the will of the Lord
is concerning you, I would earnestly entreat you to
read the sacred Scriptures daily, according to the
opportunity which God in His providence may be
pleased to afford you. Nearly the whole of you


iUtve been taught to read, and for the express pur-
pose that you might read God’s holy word, , which is
able to make you wise unto salvation through faith
in Christ Jesus. And you have not only been
taught to read, but put in possession of a copy of
the holy Scriptures;—of the holy Scriptures uncor-
rupted, and unmixed with any thing human: the
Old J estament, translated from the Hebrew Scrip-
tures, as preserved by the Jewish nation, and recog-
nized by our blessed Lord and His Apostles; and
the New Testament, translated from the Greek
Scriptures, which were written by the Inspired
Lvangelists and Apostles, and received and held
by the Christian Church to the present day.
In order to impress the matter more deeply on
your minds, I shewed you the Old Testament in
Hebrew, and the New Testament in Greek; the
very languages in which the holy men of God
wrote as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. I
told you that I had put into your hands the whole
of the inspired Scriptures; the Old Testament con-
sisting of thirty-nine, , and the New Testament, of
twenty seven , books; —in all sixty-six Inspired
Books; and which contain the whole of God’s re-
vealed will to man; all that is necessary for us to possess
both for faith and for conduct. By these inspired
Scriptures you are to regulate both your belief and
yo.ur life; —by these Scriptures you are, as com-
manded of God, to prove all things; and it is ac-
cording to the same Scriptures that you and all


mankind shall be judged at the last day. (Is. viii. 20.
Psalms cxix. and xix. 1 Thess. v. 21. Rom. i. ii.)
And since the safety of your souls, and the holiness
of your lives, depend on your holding fast the pure
and unmixed word of God, I beseech you to store
your memories with the following texts:—“Ye
shall not add unto the word which I command you,
neither shall ye diminish ought from it.” (Deut. iv.
2 —19.) “ Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God is
one Lord. And thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy might. And these words which I com-
mand thee this day shall be in thine heart: and
thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children,
and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine
house, and when thou walkest by the way, and
when thou liest down, and when thou risest up,
&c.” vi. 4—9. “ Every word of God is pure, he
is a shield unto them that put their trust in him.
Add thou not to his word, lest he reprove thee, and
thou be found a liar.” Prov. xxx. 4—6. “ For I
testify unto every man that heareth the words of
the prophecy of this book. If any man shall add unto
these things, God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this book: and if any man shall
take away from the words of the book of this pro-
phecy, God shall take away his part out of the book
of life, and out of the holy city, and from the
things which are written in this book.” Rev. xxii.
18, 19. “ But though we, or an angel from
heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than


that whicn we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed. As we said before, so say I now again,
If any man preach any other gospel unto you
than that ye have received, let him be accursed.”
(Gal. i. 8,9.) “ And that from a child thou hast
known the holy Scriptures , which are able to make
thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in
Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by inspiration
of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in righteousness: that
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly fur-
nished unto all good works.” (2 Tim. iii. 15—17.)
“ Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye
have eternal life; and they are they which testify
of me.” (John v. 39.) “ Blessed is he that read-
eth, and they that hear the words of this prophecy,
and keep those things which are written therein;
for the time is at hand.” (Rev. i. 1—3.) “And it
came to pass as he (Jesus Christ) spake these
things, a certain woman of the company lifted up
her voice and said unto him, Blessed is the womb
which bare thee , and the paps which tliou hast
sucked. But he said, Yea, rather, blessed are
THEY THAT HEAR THE WORD OF God, AND KEEP
it.” (Luke xi. 27, 28.) “ They have Moses and
the prophets, let them hear them If
they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will
they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.”
(Luke xvi. 29—31.) “ Sanctify them through thy
truth; thy word is truth.” (John xvii. 17.) “ This
people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth,


and honoreth me with their lips; but their heart is
far from me. But in vain they do worship me,
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.”
(Mattli. xv. 3—9. Mark vii. 6—9.) “ Fear God,
and keep His commandments, for this is the whole
duty of man. For God shall bring every work
into judgment, with every secret thing, whether
it be good or whether it be evil, —in the day when
God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus
Christ, according to my gospel .” (Eccles. xii. 13,
14. Rom. ii. 16.) *
If you duly consider and lay to heart the import
of these and corresponding passages of Scripture,
you will study the inspired volume with devout at-
tention, and always with a sincere desire to know
the divine will, and an honest intention, through
grace, to conform thereunto whatever may be the
result. You will not merely be careful not to add
to , nor take from the holy oracles of God, but you
will conscientiously endeavour to yield, in divine
strength, a cheerful compliance with all their re-
quirements, whether in matters of faith or of prac-
tice ; knowing that all which the inspired writings
contain is true, and that all they enjoin is of
divine obligation, because they are the writings
of the God of Truth, the Almighty Sovereign of
the Universe. And since no Scripture is of private
* Carefully reflect also upon the following passages:—Rom. xvi.
25—27. 1 Peter i. 3—25. 2 Peter i.


unfolding or invention;—in other words, since holy
men of old spake not according to the suggestion
of their own minds, but as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost, your success in studying the sacred
writings will ever be in proportion to your humble
and child-like reliance on the promised teaching
and influences of that same Spirit by whom the holy
men of old spake. *
Approach the Bible, therefore, under a deep
sense of your own ignorance, and of the danger you
are in of substituting the doctrines of men, or your
own pre-conceived notions, in the place of the re-
vealed will of God, and so of embracing error
rather than divine truth. Implore, in the all-pre-
vailing name of Jesus, the promised gift of the
Holy Spirit; rely on His guidance, and while He
discovers to you, from the Scriptures, your own
wretched condition as sinners, He will enlighten
your minds in the knowledge of Christ as your all-
sufficient Saviour; while He fills you with self-
abasement in the sight of God, because of the cor-
ruptions of your nature, and the transgressions of
your lives, He will lead you to the fountain of the
Redeemer’s blood; cause you to experience joy
and peace in beliving; produce in you abhorrence
of sin and love of holiness; root out of you every
evil root of bitterness; bring all your thoughts and
imaginations into subjection to the obedience of
* 2 Pet. i. 19—21. Heb. i. 1. 2 Tim. iii. 16.


Christ: and by leading your hearts and minds into
all revealed truth, will sanctify you thereby, qualify
you for the discharge of every Christian duty, and
for the enjoyment of every Christian privilege, and
ultimately make you meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light.
Obey the command of Christ by searching the
Scriptures diligently (John v. 39) ; take them as a
light to your feet, and a lamp to your path ; bring
both doctrine and practice to the test of their
decision; —by them “ prove all things and “ hold
fast that which is good.” (Thess. v. 21.) “To the
law and to the testimony, if they speak not ac-
cording to this word, it is because there is no light
in them.” (Isaiah, viii. 20.) “If the blind lead
the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.” (Matth.
xv. 14.) “ Peter and John,” when commanded by
the high priests and elders not to teach any more
in the name of Jesus, “answered and said unto
them, Whether it be right in the sight of God to
hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye.”
(Acts iv. 19. Read the chapter.) “ Take heed
that the light which is in thee, be not darkness;
for if the light which is in thee be darkness, how
great must that darkness be. (Matth. vi. 2,3,)
For every one that doeth evil, hateth the light,
neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be
reproved, or discovered. But he that doeth truth
cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made
manifest that they are wrought in God.” (John,
iii. 20, 21.)


Continue the practice of committing portions of
Scripture to memory. Meditate upon them. Be
guided by their precepts. Be encouraged by their
promises. And as newly-born babes desire the
milk of the mother, so do ye thirst for the pure
unmixed word of God, that ye may grow thereby
in heavenly knowledge, and in every Christian
grace, until you arrive at the measure of the stature
of the fulness of Christ.*
* 2 Peter, i. Philip, iii. 7 —14. 1 Peter, ii. I—3. Eph. ir.
7—16. Matth. xii. 46—50 ; vii. 15—29.


Section Sixth.
Thirdly.— Cherish the Spirit and cultivate the
habit of devout and believing prayer. The true
Christian finds that scriptural prayeV is as necessary
to the maintenance of his spiritual life, as breathing
the pure air is requisite to the preservation of the
life that is natural. In every age of the Church it
has been the practice of the people of God to be
much engaged in this exercise. And the Holy
Scriptures not only enjoin the practice of prayer as
a duty , but encourage its observance as a peculiar
privilege , and abundantly record the example of the
Saints in this particular, for our imitation and
encouragement. In the Old Testament you read
of the prayers of the patriarchs, of Moses, of the
prophets and of other devout worshippers of the
true God. In the New Testament you observe the
Apostles and first Christians frequently engaging
in prayer,* and it was the practice of our Blessed
Lord to be much engaged in the exercises ot
devotion. The Book of Psalms, you must have
observed, is mainly made up of the language of
prayer, —confession, supplication, adoration, and
thanksgiving. Jesus taught “that men ought
* Acts, ii. 42. Luke, vi. 12. Mark, xxv. 36—39. Heb. v. 7.


always to pray and not to faint.” (Luke, xviii. 1 —
14.) And again He says, “ Ask, and it shall be
given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you. For every one that
asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and
to him that knocketh it shall be opened.” (Chap. xi.
1 —13;) and, Chap. xxi. 36, He commands, “Watch
ye therefore and pray always.” The Apostle of
the Gentiles exhorts the followers of Christ thus—
“ Rejoice evermore. Pray without ceasing. In
every thing give thanks, for this is the will of God
in Christ Jesus concerning you.” (1 Thess. v.
Coloss. v. 2,3.) “ Praying always with all prayer
and supplication in the Spirit, and watching there-
unto with all perseverance and supplication for all
Saints, and for me,” &c. (Eph. vi. 10—19.) And
you are commanded to be anxiously or sinfully
“ careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer
and supplication with thanksgiving” to “ let your
requests be made known unto God.” (Philip,
iv. I—9, 19.)
You have seen that you need the aid of the Holy
Spirit to enable you to understand the spiritual
import of the Sacred Scriptures; you no less
require the help of the same Divine Spirit in order
to your engaging in prayer in a manner that will
be acceptable to God and profitable to yourselves.
In the name of Jesus therefore, draw near to the
footstool of the throne of mercy, and implore the
gift of the Holy Spirit, as “ the Spirit of grace and


of supplications,” and which God hath promised to
bestow on all them that ask Him according 1 to His
word. (Zech. xii. 10. Joel, ii. 28, 29. Luke, xi.
13. John, xiv.) Remember the words of the
Apostle Paul, “ I will pray with the Spirit, and I
will pray with the understanding also ; I will sing
with the Spirit, and I will sing with the under-
standing also.”* “ Likewise the Spirit also helpeth
our infirmities; for we know not what we should
pray for as we ought; but the Spirit itself maketh
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
uttered.” (Rom. viii. 26, 27.) Humbly confiding
m the teaching and guidance of the Holy Spirit,
you will lift up your hearts to your Father in
Heaven, who waits to be gracious; and drawing
near to Him through His dear Son, in whom alone
sinners can find acceptance, you will, for His sake,
and on the ground of His merits, seek the supply
of all your wants, and the communication of all
spiritual blessings, according to the extent of the
Divine promise contained in the Scriptures of
truth.
Let all your prayers be in accordance with God’s
revealed will contained in His written word. Re-
member the declaration of the Apostle Paul to Ti-
mothy, (1 Epis. ii. 5) — “ For there is one God, and
one Mediator between God and man, the Man
Christ Jesus.” And that God hath said (Isaiah,
* 1 Corinth, xiv. 15. Read attentively the Chapter.


xlii. 8), “I am the Lord : that is my name; and
my glory will I not give to another, neither my
praise to graven images.” Consider whom the
Holy Scriptures reveal unto us as the hearer and
answerer of prayer, and as the One Object of
religious worship and adoration. Our Blessed
Lord says (Mattli. iv. 10), “It is written thou
shalt worship the Lord thy God and Him only
shalt thou serve.” In the Book of Revelation,
(xxii. 8,9,) we read, “And I, John, saw these
things and heard them; and when I had heard and
seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the
Angel which shewed me these things. Then saith
he unto me, See thou do it not, for I am thy
fellow servant and of thy brethren the prophets,
and of them which keep the sayings of this book,
worship God.” #
The prayers contained in the Book of Psalms
you will observe, are all addressed to God. “Give
ear to my words, O Lord, consider my meditation.
Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and
my God, for unto thee will I pray.” (Ps. v.) “ Pre-
serve me, O God, for in thee do I put my trust.”
(xvi.) “ Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.”
(xxv.) “ I will bless the Lord at all times ; His
praise shall be continually in my mouth. The eyes
of the Lord are upon the righteous, and His ears
are open unto their cry.” (xxxiv.) “As the hart
* Deut. x. 20, 21.; xiii. 1 Sam. vii. 9. Rev. xix. 20. Coloss,
ii. 16—23. Read the Chapter, and observe verse 8.


pantetlr after the water brooks, so panteth my soul
after thee, O God. My soul thirsteth for God, for
the living God.” (xlii.) “ Offer unto God thanks-
giving; and pay thy vows unto the Most High:
and call upon me in the day of trouble; I will de-
liver thee, and thou shalt glorify me.” (1.) “ Hear
my cry, O God, attend unto my prayer.”* (lxi.)
“O thou that liearest prayer, unto thee shall all
flesh come.” (lxv.) Make the Book of Psalms
your daily companion. It will not only lead you
to God as the hearer and answerer of prayer, but
will furnish you with that language which is most
suited to the heart’s exercises at the throne of
Grace. Read also attentively the ix chapter of
Daniel, which contains one of his prayers. In the
xxxvii. and xxxviii. of Isaiah, you have recorded two
of the prayers of Hezekiah, King of Israel. In the
book of the Acts of the Apostles you read, that
when Peter was shut up in prison, instant and
earnest prayer was made for him by the Church
unto God. (xii. 5.) Luke ii. 25—32, you have
recorded the divine worship which the aged Simeon
offered to the Holy Ghost. At the close of the vii
chapter of the Acts, you have Stephen, the first
New Testament martyr, offering his dying prayers
to the Lord Jesus Christ, “And they stoned Ste-
phen, calling upon and saying, Lord Jesus, receive
my spirit. And he kneeled down and cried with
a loud voice, “ Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.”
* Matt. vi. 6,7, &c.; Eccles. v. 1,2; 1 Peter iii. 12.


Matt. vi. 9—13, and Luke xi. 2—4, the blessed
Jesus teaches us to pray to “ Our Father in heaven.”
In the xvii chapter of the Gospel by John, we have
the prayer which our Saviour, before He was be-
trayed, addressed to His “ Father.” And, finally,
in the Apostolic benediction, (2 Cor. xiii. 14,) “The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of
God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be
with you all, Amen,” the whole Church of the
living God worship and adore the Godhead— the
one Jehovah.
Let us take the Holy Scriptures for our guide,
and following their directions, whether by precept
or approved example, we shall be kept in the path
in which we shall please God, and be preserved in
holiness unto everlasting life, through Christ Jesus.
If you are duly influenced by the Gospel of peace
and of love, your prayers will not be limited to
your own immediate personal concerns, but will
embrace the interests of the whole Church of
Christ, the welfare of the whole human race, and
will have a special respect to every thing connected
with the glory of God, the spread of the knowledge
of a crucified Redeemer as set forth in the inspired
Scriptures, and the establishment of His spiritual
reign in the hearts of men, through the power of
His word and of the Holy Ghost. Keeping in
view the twelfth and thirteenth chapters of the
Romans, the second chapter of the first Epistle to
Timothy, and corresponding portions of Scripture,


you will present your earnest supplications to God
for all ranks and conditions of men, and particularly
for your master and mistress, their whole household,
your fellow-servants, whether bond or free, —for
your friends and for your enemies, wherever they
may reside, and for the best interests of the country
in which you now live.
With the exercise of prayer the Scriptures re-
quire, both by precept and example, that you con-
join meditation, self-examination, and watchfulness.
“ O how I love thy law,” saith the Royal Psalmist,
“it is my meditation all the day.” (Ps. cxix. 97.)
“ Examine yourselves whether ye be in the faith;
prove your own selves ,” saith the apostle Paul,
(2 Cor. xiii. 5;) and the words of our blessed
Lord, (Mark xiii. 33—37,) are, “Take ye heed,
watch and pray and what I say unto you, I say
unto all, Watch.”
With regard to the seasons of prayer, the Holy
Scriptures and the true spirit of Christianity will
safely guide you. The injunctions that we “pray
everywhere,” and “without ceasing,” imply not
only that we are to pray on stated occasions, but
that we are to carry about with us the spirit of ha-
bitual prayer. The practise of engaging in this
solemn exercise morning and evening, as well as at
other particular seasons, and especially under pe-
culiar circumstances, appears to be consonant with
the cherished habits of all consistent and growing


Christians. The custom of King David you have
recorded in Ps. lv. 16, 17, “As for me, I will call
upon God, and the Lord shall save me. Evening ,
morning , and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud ;
and He shall hear my voice.” To pray regularly
three times a day was also the habit of Daniel, as
you learn from the vi. chapter of his Prophecies.
Besides observing these stated opportunities, the
thriving Christian will mix prayer with all he does,
and with all he suffers. While engaged in the dis-
charge of even his most active secular duties, he
will be often lifting up his heart to God in secret
ejaculatory prayer, and will habitually maintain
fellowship with the Father, by the Spirit, through
our adorable High Priest Christ Jesus.
Recollect what I said to you in reference to your
securing for yourselves fit opportunities for en-
gaging in prayer, whether in secret, or in the public
assemblies of the professed people of God. Be
sure that you always act conscientiously, and rather
appropriate to religious exercises a portion of the
time which is allotted to you for sleep and rest,
than encroach on the time which belongs to your
master. Diligence in the performance of your ap-
pointed work, with prudent management and fore-
thought, will, for the most part, secure to you
reasonable opportunities of engaging in the reading
of the Scriptures, self-examination, and prayer.
And if your general conduct is of a decidedly con-


sistent and superior character, and affords a pleas-
ing illustration of the power of Christianity upon
your principles and temper, your master and mis-
tress may see the propriety of affording you reason-
able opportunity of attending to those devotional
exercises which, tend to advance your spiritual
interests, and which, appear to contribute so much
to the formation of your character as industrious?
careful, and valuable servants. Besides, the hearts
of all men are in the hands of the Lord, and as the
rivers of waters He turneth them whithersoever He
will; and, therefore, He is able to influence the
minds of those who are in Providence placed over
you, and to dispose them to have a proper respect
to the present and everlasting concerns of your
souls, and to God’s claims upon you, as His crea-
tures whom He made, and requires to serve and
glorify Him, according to His holy word. What-
ever may be the circumstances in which you are
placed, see that you act with Christian wisdom and
prudence ; diligently redeeming your time, and in
all things conscientiously striving to please God,
while you discharge, with fidelity, every incumbent
duty to man. In all difficulties “ Cast thy burden
upon the Lord, and He shall sustain thee: He
shall never suffer the righteous to be moved.” (Ps.
Iv. 22 ; 1 Peter v. 7;) And seek by prayer that
Divine guidance and Christian discretion which
will prevent you from causing “your good to be
spoken evil of,” and will enable you to guard
against even the appearance of evil; and thus, to
all around you, to commend the gospel of Christ


Section Seventh.
Fourthly. Use all lawful and Scriptural means
to secure for yourselves the observance of the Lord’s
Day, for the purposes for which, a seventh portion of
time was divinely set apart. If you love the Lord
Jesus, you will cheerfully study to yield obedience
to all the ten commandments contained in the xx.
chapter of Exodus, and as unfolded and explained in
the Sermon on the Mount, recorded in the v. vi. and
vii. chapters of Matthew, and throughout the whole
of the New Testament. Here I would especially
urge upon your consideration the vast importance
of the consecration of the first day of the week,
which is designed to remind us that He who rested
on the seventh day from the work of our Creation,
1 ested on the first from the more marvellous work
of our Redemption, when he rose again from the
state of the dead. It is utterly impossible for us to
calculate the evil which results to ourselves and
others from the desecration of the Lord’s Day.
And it is equally impossible for us to determine the
amount of good, which, through the divine blessing,
flows from our observance of that holy day ac-
cording to the revealed will of God. Do you
remember what is written in the Ivi. and Iviii.
chapters of Isaiah ? Read these chapters; from


the latter I quote these words—“ If thou turn awav
thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure
on my holy day; and call the Sabbath a delight;
the holy of the Lord, honourable ; and shalt honour
him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine
own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words : then
shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord for
the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.” The
manner in which the Lord’s Day is observed ,by
individuals, goes far to determine the spiritual and
moral condition of their souls in the sight of God :
and the same remark may be made in reference to
families and larger communities. Those men, and
those women, who are the most consistent observers
of the Lord’s Day, according to the Scriptures, are
the truest friends to souls, to their country, and to
their Sovereign; and the converse, —the opposite
of this, —holds equally true. Read attentively the
last chapter of the Book of Nehemiah, and observe
the holy zeal that wise and resolute Reformer
manifested in reference to the sanctification of the
Sabbath Day. Would to God that we all, in our
respective stations in life, possessed and exercised
a corresponding regard for the glory of the Most
High, and the best interests of souls and of the
community !
I have said {< Use all lawful and scriptural
means” to secure for yourselves the observance of
this holy day for the purposes ordained of God.
If you are most diligent in the performance of your


work during the week; if you are careful to make,
with the concurrence of your employers, those
prudent and wise arrangements which are favorable
to the sanctification of the Lord’s Day;—if you
give decided evidence, that you have no intention,
under hypocritical pretensions, of profaning that
Blessed Day, and if you mix faith and prayer with
all your endeavours, you will, I should fain hope,
seldom have to encounter difficulties, arising from
the dispositions of your masters and mistresses, in
your devout aim to keep the fourth commandment,
by devoting the Lord’s Day to spiritual purposes,
excepting such portions of it as He requires should
be taken up with works of clear necessity and mercy.
It is a comfort for us to know that those employers
who are most alive to the advancement of their own
best interests, the welfare of their country, and the
glory of God, will be most solicitous that their de-
pendants be encouraged to keep holy the Christian
Sabbath.
Here I would remind you of the divine command,
that the followers of Christ forget not the assembling
of themselves together for the observance of the
public ordinances which He hath been graciously
pleased to institute in His Church.* From the
Holy Scriptures you learn what these ordinances
are, and you honor the Lord by adhering closely
and meekly to His revealed will. From the same
* Heb. x. 19—25. Jude, 17 —21. Ezek. xiv. 6—ll. Hosea,
iv. Study all the Epistles contained in the New Testament.


Sacred Scriptures you learn the character of the
Church of Christ; that she is the pillar and ground
of the truth; that all her members are required to
abide in the truth and to walk in the truth; and
that her Ministers are appointed rightly to divide
the word of truth, to declare the whole counsel
of God, as set forth in the inspired oracles; —
to feed God’s people with sound and scriptural
knowledge, and faithfully to preach the Gospel of
Christ, according to the example of the holy
Apostles, whether men will hear, or whether they
will forbear. Be ye sure that ye attend in a
Scriptural Church in which Jehovah alone is
worshipped,—even the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Spirit,—the one living and only true
God; —in which Jesus Christ the only Saviour of
sinners, the one Mediator between God and man,
is fully and scripturally exhibited: and in which
the Blessed Redeemer is acknowledged as the only
Lord of the conscience, which He requires to be
guided and governed according to His holy will as
revealed in His written word. And let me beseech
you to recollect for practical purposes that it is
written, “ My people are gone into captivity, be-
cause they have no knowledge.” (Is. v. Read
attentively the whole chapter.)
But remember that it is not enough that you
belong to a visible Church of Christ in which His
ordinances are duly administered; the Sacred
Scriptures are read and consistently expounded;


and the gospel is faithfully preached : you must, if
you would be saved, be spiritual members of
that spiritual, and, to man, invisible Church of
God ivhich consists of all true believers, wherever
they may exist: and which Church forms that
mystical body of Christ of which He is the Spi-
ritual and Divine Head. It is not enough that
you have the form, while you deny the power,
of godliness;—'that you have a name to live whilst
you are really dead, —dead in trespasses and in
sins;—it is not enough that you belong to a parti-
cular sect of Christians, however orthodox that sect
may be considered; you must belong to Christ;
you must, by a living faith, be engrafted into
Jesus the true Vine ; —in Him you must constantly
and perseveringly abide ; from Him you must
derive your life, and all those promised supplies of
grace which are requisite to preserve you in Him,
and to render you fruitful in every divinely required
good work, to His honor and glory, according to
His own blessed words, « Abide in me, and I in
you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself
except it abide in the vine, no more can ye except
ye abide in me. I am the Vine, ye are the branches;
he that abideth in me and I in him, the same
bringeth forth much fruit: for without me, —sepa-
rated from me, —ye can do nothing.” (John, xv.
Study closely this chapter, and commit it to memory.)
Where it is absolutely impossible for you to wor-
ship God in the public ordinances of His House,


you can, at all times, and in every place, hold
secret communion with Him, according to His
word. It is most encouraging and at the same
time most solemnizing for you to be assured, that
it is an essential attribute of Jehovah (and it is the
attribute of Jehovah alone,) to be everywhere
present, at every moment, and to know the thoughts
and desires of every heart of the whole of the
children of men. He must always perceive the
longings of the soul. And the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Spirit, have promised to dwell in the
hearts of the saints, who prove they are born of
God by the habitual observance of all His holy
commandments as made known in his written and
inspired word. (Read often the Gospel and Epistles
of St. John.)
Those of you who are privileged to reside in
Christian families, in which, morning and evening,
the holy Scriptures are read, and prayers and sup-
plications are presented to God, through our great
High Priest Christ Jesus, will have daily oppor-
tunities of engaging in the social exercises of do-
mestic Christianity. If you are truly Christians,
you will rejoice when you meet with those who
really love and serve the Lord and Saviour of all
the genuine children of God. And you will prac-
tically remember that beautiful, interesting, and
affecting prayer contained in the seventeenth chap-
ter of St. John’s Gospel, and which was offered up
by the Lord Jesus, to our new Covenant Father,


before He was betrayed to be crucified, In which
prayer, the Divine Suppliant requests that all who
believe in His name, even to the end of the world,
may be one, as the Father and the Son are one;
and that the world, observing the unity of Chris-
tians, in love, in the truth, and in holiness, may
learn that Jesus, the one Head of the one Christian
Body, is the Messiah whom God in His love sent
to redem His people by the sacrifice of Himself.
Fifthly, I would now offer to you a few very
oiief remarks in reference to consistency of conduct.
and on various points of practice , on which my
space does not permit me to enlarge.
Words cannot tell the injury which has been
done to the cause of God in the world, and to the
souls of men, by the inconsistent behaviour of those
who profess to know Christianity, but are strangers
to its quickening and sanctifying power; and even
by the falls of those who, we have reason to believe,
have received the truth in the love of it, and habi-
tually live under its purifying influence, but who,
through want of watchful circumspection, have
suffered themselves to be ensnared by the tempta-
tions of the enemy, who is continually spreading
his net for the feet of the people of God. * There
are a few among you whose hearts appeared to
have been touched by Divine Truth, and who pro-
v * },“«!• E . p l ies - vLI1 ’ &c - 1 Peter, v. B—ll. Luke,
•-XD. o\f Qic • 2 Cor* ii» 11*


fessed to have embraced the Saviour, and to have
made an honest surrender of yourselves to Him.
The Lord alone knoweth the real state of your
hearts, whether or not they are indeed renewed by
the power of His word and Spirit: and your
temper and general behaviour must bear witness, so
long as you are in this world, whether you have
been born of God, and introduced into His new
Covenant Family, or whether you continue “ in
the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity.”
As this communication has extended much be-
yond the limits originally assigned to it, I cannot
dwell upon the momentous subject now before us.
But I would remind those amongst you, if any
such there be, wdio have taken up the cross of
Christ, and have experienced the illuminating and
transforming power of the Holy Spirit, that they
are called unto Holiness; that Jesus Christ gave
Himself for us that He might redeem us from all
iniquity , and purify unto Himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works.” And that he hath com-
manded all His disciples, saying, “ Be ye perfect
even as your Father who is in heaven is perfect.”*
Let the followers of Jesus, then, ever bear in
mind that they are the temples of the Holy Ghost;
that they are to shine as lights in the world; that
by their spirit and general tenor of their conduct,
they are to commend the gospel of peace to all who
* Tit. ii. 11—15. Matth. v. 48, 1 Peter, i. 14—16,


behold them; that in their several spheres they are,
according to the Scriptures, to be wise to win souls
to their Lord and Saviour; and that they are to be
ever prayerfully watchful, lest by any manifestation
of temper, neglect of duty, or violation, in any way,
of the precepts of Christ, or disregard of His holy
example, they should cause the way of Truth to be
evil spoken of, or give occasion to the wicked to
blaspheme that holy and blessed name by which
they are called.
You who have not received Christ, but still con-
tinue under the power and dominion of sin and
Satan, I would remind, that you were, for the pe-
riod of four months, daily instructed from the sacred
Scriptures; that you have, from their inspired
pages, all heard of Jesus Christ as the only Saviour
trom sin and from the wrath to come; —that when
you now sin, you sin, not in ignorance, but against
much light and knowledgeand that if you per-
severe in the rejection of Christ, you reject pardon
and life, and deliberately make choice of condemna-
tion and eternal death. Let me entreat you then
to consider your ways, and now to lay to heart the
things which belong to your peace, lest they be for
ever hidden from your eyes, and your place ap-
pointed with the ungodly, who, like you, refused to
accept the deliverance of the Son of God, and pre-
sen ed to reap the wages of sin in the endurance of
the agonies of everlasting remorse, in the regions
of perdition and despair. As yet, it is not too late ;


but you know not the moment at which your spirit
may be summoned to appear before God, and your
body consigned to the dust, —when your ears must
be closed from the sound of the Gospel for ever,
for thus it is written, “ There is no work, nor device,
nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither
thou goest;” and, “In the place where the tree
falleth, there it shall be.”*
I would implore the whole of you to recollect
what you have heard from the word of God ; —with
the heart to believe His truth, and so to conduct
yourselves, during the remainder of your days, as
to demonstrate to your employers and to all around
you, the value and importance of Bible instruction.
Remember, that by your conversation and example,
you must be always doing good, or doing evil, and
that to an extent that defies the powers of human
calculation to determine. For who can set limits
to your moral influence ? Its tendency is to extend
from individual to individual, from family to family,
from country to country, and to descend through
time to the latest generation ! Think not that be-
cause you have reduced yourselves to your present
humbling position in society, you are, therefore, too
insignificant to influence materially the character
and destinies of your fellow-mortals. An insig-
nificant human being !—an insignificant immortal!
—an insignificant subject of the moral government
* Eccl. ix. 10 ; xi. 3. Rev. xxii. 11


of God !—cannot exist. You are all beings of im>-
mense moral power. The good example of any
one of you may draw immortal souls to Jesus, and
through Him, to the everlasting abodes of the
blessed ! The bad example of any one of you may
confirm immortal souls in the love and pursuit of
sin, and so prove instrumental in their consignment
tot he regions of impurity and never-ending sorrow!
See then, that your speech and behaviour be
ever such as will prove a blessing to your master,
to your mistress, to their children, to your fellow-
servants, and to all with whom, in the discharge of
your duty, you may come into contact; and thus
walking in the faith, and under the influence of the
love, of Christ, you will glorify God, and answer
the great end of your existence.


Section Eighth.
It remains now for me merely to name a few
points on which circumstances do not permit me to
dwell.
1. All things whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this
is the law and the prophets, as declared by Christ
Jesus.
2. Be most attentive to the proper duties oi
your respective stations and callings, and whatever
ye do, do it heartily to the Lord, and not to man,
serving the Lord Christ.
3. See that you never wickedly sully the repu-
tation of your employers, or of others; that you
never bear false witness, or on any account what-
ever, utter a falsehood, but. firmly adhere to truth
whatever your firmness may cost you.
4. Be thoroughly honest in all your dealings,
both as it respects time and property. Be careful
of all property with which you may be entrusted,
and beware of all unwarranted appropriations.


5. Be zealous in watching over, and advancing,
your employer’s interests, as far as is consistent
with your duty to God.
6. Beware of the character of the tale-bearer,
the busy-body, the tattler, the sower of discord, the
gossip, and the idler. See that none of these
characters belong to you, and that, as far as in you
lies, you avoid associating with those who bear
them.
7. Guard against a turbulent, quarrelsome, dis-
contented disposition, and refrain from accompany-
ing with those whose disposition is such. Cultivate
an amiable, a meek, and thankful spirit, and as
much as in you lies, live peaceably with all men.
8. Never talk to strangers, or in any way im-
properly, of your master’s or employer’s affairs, and
never encourage other servants so to talk to you.
When you are sent on a message, let nothing divert
your attention from the duty entrusted to you,
which it becomes you to execute with due despatch ;
and not to suffer yourselves to be tempted by any
one whom you may happen to meet, either to loiter
by the way, or to take a single step aside from the
course which you ought to pursue.
9. See that you redeem your time; appropriate
no more to sleep and rest than is absolutely neces-
sary ; be prudent and methodical in all your ar-


rangements, and in carrying them out, unite punc-
tuality with firmness and decision. Recollect how
much the comfort of a family depends on regularity
and order.
10. Be clean and neat in your persons, and tidy
in all your habits. Dress according to your station
in life, in modest apparel, such as it becomes a
woman of pure and humble mind, and who is
grieved at the past offences of her life, to wear.
Cultivate habits of frugality and economy; —guard
against a selfish and a covetous disposition ; —learn
to “do good,” and recollect that, all which God
may be pleased to confer upon you, you are to
dedicate, with yourselves, to His honor and glory.
(Observe 1 Peter, ii. Tit. ii. 9, 10. Eph. vi.
Coloss. iii. 1 Tim. vi. 1—12.)
11. See that you accept of no money or presents
of any kind, when it does not clearly appear to you
that such are offered on proper grounds, or with
pure and honorable intentions. Keep your hearts
with all diligence, as in the sight of God , and
devoutly guard against the slightest approaches to
indecency, whether in thought, look, speech, or
behaviour. Remember there is nothing more
ornamental to a female than true and unaffected
modesty, the modesty which the Gospel requires,
and an enlightened conscience approves. Observe
the spirit of the divine law as set forth by our
Blessed Saviour (Matth. v. 28), and recollect that


it is written, “ Whoremongers and adulterers God
will judge and that none that defile, or work
abomination, can enter the Heavenly Kingdom,
but must have their part in the lake which burneth
with fire and brimstone ; which is the second death.f
12. When any of you who are single, have a
suitable opportunity of becoming united in marriage,
according to the laws of God and of the country in
which you reside, you will remember that the Lord
hath said, “Marriage is honorable in all.” (Heb.
xiii. 4.) It is incumbent upon you to take heed
that such an alliance be entered into with the
greatest circumspection and prudence;—that it be
of such a character as is calculated to promote
mutual comfort, and to advance the glory of God.
Be sure that you act according to law, and with the
advice of your most judicious and respectable
friends. And you that are Christians will forget
not that the Lord prohibits His believing children
from intermarrying with the people of the world.}:
13. Flee as much as in you lies from wicked and
corrupting associates; and in the spirit of prayer,
and in reliance on the grace that is in Christ Jesus,
watch against the influence of the example of those
* Heb. xiii. 4.
t Rev. xxi. 8—27. 1 Cor. vi. 9—ll. Gal. v. 19—21. Isaiah,
xxxv. 8, 9.
+ Gen. vi. 1,2, 5 ; xxiv. 3 ; xxvi. 34, 35 ; xxvii. 46. 2 Kings,
viii. 18—27. 1 Cor. vii. 39. 2 Cor. vi. 14.


from whose presence you cannot flee. Let them
come over to God, but go ye not over to them.
Beware of ever indulging in the tfse of profane
oaths; cursing or execration, of taking the holy
name of God in vain, or of uttering any language
which it is not fit that the Lord should hear.*
14. Cultivate habits of perfect sobriety. Beware
of ardent spirits and of all intoxicating liquors, that
they do not prove a snare to your souls. Flee from
temptation. Drunkenness, you know, is one of the
principal causes of your past sufferings and of your
present degradation ; and you will admit that, it is
the prolific source of many vices and of much
suffering. The abuse of intoxicating liquors seems
to be Satan’s grand expedient for enlarging and
securing his Kingdom, and overthrowing the eternal
interests of the children of men. It is a point well
ascertained that intoxicating liquors have destroyed
the health and character, and ruined the best
interests, temporal and spiritual, of tens of thou-
sands of the human race. Can you imagine a more
disgusting object than a man, and especially a
woman , in a state of intoxication ? Neither the
one nor the other is fit to be at large in society.
Every drunkard ought to be treated as a proper
subject for the mad-house until he or she has
returned to habits of sobriety. Recollect what was
* James, ii.; v. 12. Study the whole Epistle in connection
with the Epistle to the Romans ; also, Eph. v. I—7.


said to you on board the cc Margaret” on this
subject, forget not your obligation, and remember
that it is written (1 Cor. vi. 9, 10. Rom. i. 29
32. Rev. xxi. 8.), that drunkards (who are classed
with murderers , and other vilest of characters) shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God. Thither none
but the sanctified in Christ Jesus can ever come.
15. I consider it of the utmost moment that you
keep steadily in view the instructions you received
on the subject of obedience to all the lawful com-
mands of men. To what object soever the command
refers,—whether it be in itself a matter of trivial or
of great importance, the command being lawful, and
compliance your incumbent duty, it is of vast im-
portance that you yield an unhesitating and a
cheerful obedience. To obey the lawful commands
of man is to obey God; to disobey man’s lawful
commands is to disobey God; and you have His
estimate of disobedience in the words of the prophet
Samuel addressed to the disobedient and rebellious
Saul (1 Sam. xv. 22, 23.), “ And Samuel said, hath
the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and
sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord ?
Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to
hearken, than the fat of rams. For rebellion is as
the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity
and idolatry.” It is utterly impossible for you to
attach too much importance to obedience, or fully
to comprehend all the good that obedience to the
divine will involves, or all the evil, that on the other


hand, is inseparable from disobedience to lawful
authority. Disobedience is the cause of all the evil
which prevails in the world, the cause of all the
crime, and wretchedness, and disease, and death,
by which we are surrounded, and to which w r e are
exposed. It was disobedience which converted
noly Angels into devils, —that kindled hell for their
reception,—and it was disobedience that detached
mankind from God, and holiness, and peace, and
that subjected them to Satan, impurity, and death.
And nothing short of the obedience of the Son of
God could avert the fearful consequences of our
disobedience, and recover us to obedience and life.
Here I would once more remind you that your
only security from temptation and sin is your being-
in Christ, and abiding in Him, according to His
written word; that the only one way by which you
can possibly render to God any acceptable service,
or enjoy, in peace, His Divine presence, is to be-
lieve in His Son Christ Jesus; to live by the faith
of Him; —to have His love shed abroad in your
hearts by the Holy Ghost given unto you; —to be
habitually drawing from that inexhaustible fulness
of grace that is treasured up in Him as the new
Covenant Head of His ransomed people, and cul-
tivating, in His strength, that holiness without
which no man shall see the Lord.
In conclusion, let me beseech you, and all other
prisoners, whether male or female, and all other


persons, whatever may be their rank or condition
in society, who may in the course of Providence,
be led to peruse these pages, calmly and seriously
to consider, and devoutly to lay to heart, all that
they contain that is in accordance with the writings
of inspiration, by which we are to prove all things,
rejecting that which these waitings reject, and
holding fast that which these writings demonstrate
to he true , and command us to believe , to the honor
and praise of their Divine Author.
Oh, remember that God permits you not to de-
lay your reception of His beloved Son, who was
crucified and slain for you. Remember that time
is short, and to you uncertain; that the day of
death is at hand; and that the Judge standeth at the
door ! How’ can you walk through the dark, dark
valley of death alone and unaccompanied by a
Friend ? and who can attend you but the Friend
of sinners who gave Himself to save them from
sin and death, —the good Shepherd who laid down
His life for His sheep? (Ps. xxiii.) If he be
not with you, then your path must be beset by
those wicked spirits with whom you chose to con-
tinue to the end to act in rebellion against the
Most High, and with whom you chose to reap
the wages of iniquity, and to endure for ever
the agonies of the ceaseless remembrance of your
having rejected that salvation which was not pro-
vided for them , but which was urged in vain
upon your acceptance even to the hour of your


death. Oh remember that every moment you put
off the reception of Christ, hardens your heart more
and more, and renders your acceptance of Him
more and more improbable. Forget not that He
hath said, “ He that is not with me is against me ;
he that gathereth not with me scattereththat “no
man can serve two masters; —that whosoever will
be a friend of the world is the enemy of God; and
that His injunction is, “ Seek ye first the Kingdom
of God, and his righteousness, and all these things
(mentioned in the preceding verses) shall be added
unto you.” (Matth. vi. 24—33. James iv. 4.)
Remember that the Father is well pleased in His
Son; —that in Him He is reconciled, and waits to
be gracious; and that He is (2 Cor. v. 18—21)
beseeching you to be reconciled to Him; —to throw
down the weapons of your rebellion, and to yield
yourselves up to Him, by your believing reception
of Jesus who died to save you, and in whom alone
you have righteousness and life. With God there
remaineth no barrier or hindrance to the salvation
of the chiefest of sinners. All hindrances are with
the sinner. And the grand obstacle is the sinner’s
culpable unbelief; the sinner’s criminal unwilling-
ness to be saved by Jesus according to His word.
His complaint is “ Ye will not come unto me that
ye might have life.” Weeping over rebellious
Jerusalem, that rejected Him, He says, “ How
often would i have gathered thy children to-
gether, as a hen gathereth her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not.” See how willing


Christ is to receive you; consider how unwilling
you are to be received by Him ! Still he bids you
come; (Matth. xi. 28—30; Is. i.;) still he invites
you to the Gospel feast, and assures you that “ yet
there is room.” (Luke xiv. 22, Read the chapter,)
that the wedding garment is provided for you; and
that He who cometh to Him, He will in no wise
cast out. (Matth. xxii. I—l 3. Rev. iii. 18.
John vi. 37.) “ Say not then, in thine heart, Who
shall ascend into heaven? that is, to bring Christ
down from above; or who shall descend into the
deep? that is to bring up Christ again from the
dead. But what saith it ? The word is nigh thee,
even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the
word of faith which we preach: that if thou shalt
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus; and shalt
believe in thine heart, that God hath raised Him
from the dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the
heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with
the mouth confession is made unto salvation. For
the Scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on him
shall not be ashamed.” (Rom. x.) Hear then,
every one of you, the word of the Lord, (Acts xvi.
31.) “ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shalt be saved, and thy house.” Believing on
Him, you enter the family of God, and are
reckoned among His children. (Gal. v. 26.) Being
born again, you are new creatures, and experience
that old things are passed away, and that all things
have become new. (John iii. 3 —5 2 Cor. v. 17.)
Being renewed in the spirit of your mind, and God


working in you to will and to do his good pleasure,
you will walk with and worthy of God unto all
pleasing, being fruitful in every good work and
increasing in the knowledge of God. And giving,
in His strength, all diligence to make your calling
and election sure, you will add to your faith cou-
rage; to courage knowledge; and to knowledge
temperance; and to temperance patience; and to
patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly kind-
ness; and to brotherly kindness charity. (2 Peter i.
]—ll.) Your treasure being in heaven, your
heart will be there; you will walk as strangers and
pilgrims on the earth, declaring by the spirituality
of your minds, and the holiness of your lives, that
your citizenship is in the Zion above, whence also
you will look for the second coming of the Saviour,
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall, at that great day,
change your vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto His glorious body, according to the working
whereby He is able even to subdue all things unto
Himself. While the hope of the hypocrite shall
perish for ever, the hope of the humble follower of
the Lamb shall be realized in the full enjoyment of
God, according to Gospel promise, throughout the
endless ages of a blessed eternity.
I now leave you to God, and to His written and
inspired Word. Regarding you as my fellow-sin-
ners, and my fellow-immortals, I have endeavoured
to discharge conscientiously the duties I owed you.
During our voyage from Ireland, it was my un-


ceasing aim to instruct you from the Holy Scrip-
tures, that you might, by that Spirit who alone
teacheth to profit, be guided into all revealed
truth, and taught in the knowledge of Jesus Christ,
unto present and everlasting salvation. According
to the grace and strength given to me, I have not
shrunk from declaring to you the whole counsel of
God as set forth in His inspired Oracles. The
pages which I now put into your hands, have been
written during my journeying in the Colony in
pursuit of health, and therefore, do not exhibit
that degree of connectedness and brevity which
might have marked them, had they been written in
more favourable circumstances. Such as they are,
I trust you will often peruse them with devout at-
tention, and be enabled to receive every scriptural
truth they contain as coming to you from God, be-
cause contained in His written word.
Whether or not the Divine blessing has been
vouchsafed to my labours among you, is a point
which will be made manifest by your future con-
duct, and the exposures of the great day. If you
have rejected Jesus and His great salvation, and if
you persevere in your unbelief, your life will be a
life of sin, and the end everlasting death. If you
have received Jesus, and cleave to Him with pur-
pose of heart, you will live a life of holy and
cheerful obedience to His revealed will, and will
finally realize the rest and the bliss of heaven.
Wherever you may reside, you wall prove a bless-


ing and a comfort to all with whom the discharge of
your duties may bring you into contact. There
will be no additional punishment inflicted upon you
on account of your crimes , because that, in all
things, you will habitually study conformity to the
moral image of your God and Saviour, who, in His
divine love, redeemed you by His blood. In the
event of your becoming Christians , in the Bible
sense of the term, your removal from Ireland will
ensure an unspeakable blessing to New South Wales;
while your reformation in heart and in life will
afford a happy illustration of the power of the
Gospel, and will demonstrate to every candid mind,
that the doctrine of a free pardon in Christ Jesus
to the very chief of sinners, is a doctrine which is
according to godliness.
Again, “I commend you to God, and to the
word of His grace, which is able to build you up,
and to give you an inheritance among all them who
are sanctified.” And finally, let me beseech you
to remember the exhortation of the Apostle to the
Philippian Church, “ Whatsoever things are true;
whatsoever things are honest, or venerable; what-
soever things are just; whatsoever things are pure;
whatsoever things are lovely ; whatsoever things
are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things:” Your
faith in the Divine testimony* being established, —
* 1 John v. 9—15 ; St. John iii. 31—36.


your conversation being as it becometh the Gospel,
and your rejoicing being always in the Lord, the
peace of God which passeth all understanding,
shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ
Jesus, unto life eternal.
Since writing the foregoing pages, I have learned
with unfeigned sorrow, that some of you have, since
your arrival in the Colony, returned to your former
sinful habits, and have thus again plunged your-
selves into crime; brought fresh guilt upon your
consciences; despised and dishonoured the blessed
Saviour; grieved the Holy Spirit; given to the
wicked occasion to defame the Sacred Scriptures,
in which ye have been instructed; subjected your-
selves to additional punishment, and to the deserved
and just censure and reproach of all virtuous peo-
ple; and have given fearful cause to apprehend
that, as yet, ye have not received Divine Truth in
the love of it; but continue the enemies of God,
by wicked works, and therefore the children of
wrath, even as others who have not submitted
themselves to Christ, nor felt the quickening and
purifying power of His word and spirit.*
My space does not permit me to write what 1, at
* Rom. vi.; Gal. v.; Eph. iv. 17—32 ; vi. 21; 1 Jbhn i. 6;
ii.; iii. I—lo.


this moment, wish to say to you in reference to
your unwise and iniquitous conduct, in neglecting,
as you have done, the counsel of the God of all
grace and of truth, and preferring the wages of sin
which lead unto everlasting death , rather than the
paths of holiness in which the followers of Jesus
delight to walk, and which conduct them to the
realms of everlasting bliss.
I must now satisfy myself with beseeching you
to reflect with seriousness and solemnity upon your
conduct, and lay to heart all that a just and a mer-
ciful God is addressing to you in His holy word.
Read attentively again and again what I have been
enabled to write for your perusal; and seeing that
you have again fallen by iniquity, I would espe-
cially urge you duly to consider what is contained
in the “ Third Section ,” and under the “ fifth head”
of u Section Seventh.” Once more I entreat you
to flee to Jesus, and at His feet make full confes-
sion of your sins, and in the exercise of faith
in His atoning blood, implore forgiveness, and
grace to help you in every time of need. Seek
not only the pardon of past transgressions, but the
new heart, and the indwelling of the Holy Spirit of
promise, to preserve you in the belief and obe-
dience of the Gospel, and to “accomplish in you
all the good pleasure of His goodness, and the
work of faith with power,” and thus prepare you
for spending the remainder of your days to His
glory, and for entering upon the enjoyment of the


inheritance that remaineth for all the humble and
holy followers of the Lamb. If you have done
iniquity, do so no more ; —but make haste and flee
to the Fountain opened for sin and uncleanness;
and put on the Lord Jesus Christ, not only for
righteousness but also for strength, that you
may be fortified against all the assaults of your
spiritual enemies; and, Christ dwelling in you,
and ye in Him, may work out your salvation with
fear and trembling, recollecting that it is God who
worketh in you, both to will and to do His good
pleasure as set forth in the Scriptures of Inspiration.
It has been reported to me, that some of you
have been induced to part with your Bibles and
Testaments. Should this report be well founded,
then you have given lamentable demonstration of
your enmity to God, and to holiness, and of the
danger you are in of losing eternally your precious
and immortal souls!
Let me entreat you to read again, and to read
attentively, wliat I have said under the second head
of “ Section Fifth.” It is unnecessary that I should
repeat here what I have there already stated. I
shall only add, that the translation of the Holy
Scriptures, which I have put into your hands, is by
pious and learned men, admitted to be, as a whole,
one of the most correct that has ever been made
from the Original Tongues into any of the nume-
rous languages of the earth. The New Testament


in Greek, I have attentively and critically read from
beginning to end; and I have devoted some time
to the study of the Old Testament, in Hebrew, —.
the two languages in which, as you have been told,
the Sacred Scriptures were originally written, with
the exception of a portion of the book of Daniel,
which was written in the Chaldaic tongue, —and I
can, as your faithful friend, confidently recommend
to you the English translation, with which I pro-
vided you, as an honest, and sound, and unmixed
translation of the whole of the Inspired Oracles of
Divine Truth.
Take heed, then, that you suffer no one wickedly
to deprive you of the Word of God, which is able
to make you wise unto salvation through faith in
the Son of God, and to guide your steps, and
to comfort your hearts, as you journey through this
world's wilderness. Christ commands you to
search the Scriptures, and they who forbid you to
obey Christ, must, of necessity, be the enemies of
your soul, the enemies of our country, the enemies
of mankind, and the enemies of God. Recollect
for your guidance and encouragement the noble
example of Peter and John, recorded in the fourth
chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, particularly at
verses 19 and 20. The “ Rulers and Elders and
Scribes” and “ High Priest” of the Church com-
manded Peter and John to disobey their Lord and
Master, and not to teach the people in the name of
Jesus ; but Peter and John refused to disobey


Christ, and declared boldly their determination to
yield obedience to Him rather than unto men ,
whatever might be the authority with which their
opponents might be invested. And let us follow
them who thus followed Christ, according to
His revealed will. Take heed, I once more beseech
you, to that which is written in Matth. xii. 46—50 ;
xv. I—9. 2 Tim. iii. 12—17. (Read the chapter.)
iv. I—4. 2 Peter, i. 15—21. Ps. xix. 7—ll.
John, v. 39 —47. Is. viii. 20 ; xxxiv. 16. Habak.
ii. 2 —4. Deut. vi. I—9;1 —9; xi. 18—22; xxix. 29.
Is. xxix. 9—13, &c. Hosea, iv. 6 —9. Acts,
xvii. 11, 12. 1 Thess. v. 21. Matth. xxii. 29;
xxiii. 9. (Read the chapter.) xxviii. 19, 20. Luke,
xvi. 29 —31. Mark, vii. 5—13, &c.; xvi. 15, 16.
1 Cor. x. I—ll, &c. Rom. xv. 4. James, i.
18—27 Rev. i. I—3; xxii. 8,9, 18, 19. Gal.
i. 8, 9. 1 Sam. xv. 22, 23. Is. xi. 9. And that
your minds may be the more deeply impressed
with the necessity of your being intimately ac-
quainted with the doctrines and precepts contained
in the Bible, I earnestly beg your attention to the
following portions which I trust you will devoutly
study and seek by believing prayer to understand:
namely—Matth. xxiv. 2 Peter ii. iii. 1 John iv.
2 Epistle of John. The Epistle General of Jude.
Coloss. ii. 16—23. 2 Thess. ii. I—l 2. 1 Tim. iv.
Dan. vii. And the Book of the Revelation of
St. John ; —and remember that God, as formerly
stated, requires you to prove all things by the
inspired writings He hath given to you; to reject


what these holy writings reject, to hold fast what
these writings enjoin and approve, and thus to
contend for the faith delivered to the Saints, and
be followers of God as dear children, “ holding fast
the faithful word,’ 5 and with purpose of heart
cleaving to Jesus the Lord and giver of life, who
never can forsake any who put their trust in Him,
or suffer his faithful promise to fail; but Who, on
the contrary, will accomplish all that He hath
caused to be written in His holy Oracles of Truth,
to the eternal confusion of His, and His people’s
enemies, and to the everlasting consolation and joy
of all who take up His cross and follow Him in
newness of life, according to the inspired Scriptures.
I again take my leave of you by solemnly re-
minding you, that in the Word of God, it is thus
written, “ He that believeth on the Son hath ever-
lasting life; and he that believeth not the Son,
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on
him.” # “ Except a man be born again, he cannot
see the Kingdom of God.” “We know that we
have passed from death unto life, because we love
the brethren ; ” and “ By this we know that we love
the children of God, when we love God, and keep
His commandments. For this is the love of God,
that we keep His commandments; and his com-
mandments are not grievous. For whatsoever is
born of God, overcometh the world; and this is
* John, iii. 36 —3. 1 John, iii. 14 ; v. 2—4. Matth. vii. 21—23.


the victory that overcometh the world even our
faith”—“ Not every one that saith unto me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven ; but
he that doeth the will of my Father who is in
Heaven.” “ For the grace of God that bringeth
salvation to all men hath appeared, teaching us that,
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present
world; looking for that blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of the Great God, even our
Saviour Jesus Christ; who gave Himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto Himself a peculiar people zealous of
good works.”*
PRINTED BY J. TEGG, ATLAS OFFICE, GEORGE-STREET,


ERRATA.
Page 35, beginning of Note, for 2 Gen. read Gen.
37, last line , for (chap, lx.) read (chap, x.)
59, 1. 10, for fleshy read fleshly.
79, near the bottom, for spoken evil of read evil spoken of.
66,1. 9, for redem read redeem.


It I




FC f


1508
01935975


