

AN ESSAY
ON THE
WEAR AND TEAR
HUMAN LIFE:
WILLIAM BELL,
MEMBER OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF SURGEONS, LONDON;
CORONER FOR THE DISTRICTS OF CAMPBELLTOWN,
LIVERPOOL, AND APPIN.
“ Time hovers o’er impatient to destroy,
And closes all the avenues of joy.”
SYDNEY:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY GROCOTT AND WARD,
BATHURST STREET WEST.
18 59.




AN ESSAY
ON THE
WEAR AND TEAR
HUMAN LIFE:
WILLIAM BELL,
MEMBER OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF BURGEONS, LONDON;
CORONER FOR THE DISTRICTS OF CAMPBELLTOWN,
LIVERPOOL, AND APPIN.
“ Time hovera o’er impatient to destroy,
And closes all the avenues of joy,’ ’
SYDNEY:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY GROCOTT AND WARD,
BATHURST STREET WEST.
18 59.




TO THE
\. W. BKOTHER JOHN WILLIAMS,
DEPUTY PKOVINCIAL GRAND MASTER,
THE OFFICERS AND MEMBERS OP
TRE PROVINCIAL GRAND LODGE
UNDER THE ENGLISH CONSTITUTION,
AND THE BRETHREN OP THE CRAFT IN GENERAL.
This little work is most respectfully inscribed, by their
Obedient and humble servant and Brother,
THE AUTHOR.
Campbelltown, New South Wales,
October, 1859.




PREFACE.
On ruy initiation to the Ancient and Honorable Order of Free and Accepted
Masons in tliis Colony, some twenty years ago, among other good and useful
advice I got, was a recommendation that I should devote some part of my
leisure hours to the study of such of the liberal Arts and Sciences as might
lie within the compass of my attainment. This I have not forgotten, and
remembering that man is a creature to be improved by cultivation ; that
knowledge of things is the. source of improvement; that time iar the
material to be properly used to that end ; and labour, cither mental or
bodily, the means of application. I lave endeavoured in this small work,
to show the operations which are busy with our mortal frames, and which
produce the various effects we witness in others and feel on ourselves, in our
journey through life’s uncertain way. The Wear and Tear of Life is not a
subject devoid of interest to the Masonic fraternity ; for in tho various
degrees, we are solemnly taught to look upon our existence as fleeting; and
by the emblems of ■•kality hold to our view, led to contemplate our inevit-
able destiny ; such reflections leading us, and guiding our minds to that
most interesting of human study—a knowdedgo of ourselves. It is not my
intention in this short Preface to moralize ; but still I cannot help thinking


that if we take up this grand study—of ourselves—not as Masons, or any
particular classes of the community, but simply as men, it will surely lead
us to the solution of a great and wwthy problem—how can the time of
human life be best spent ?
If the following pages will have the tendency to make men, and mv
brethren of the Order in particular, think more ot themselves, “ then shall
my labour not be in vain,” and the gratification thus afforded w'ill bo
incomparably more to me than any other reward I can and with this
hope I will say—
‘ ‘ Go forth my little book
From this my sanctuary, and
As I believe thee good, some Tew
Perhaps may find thee out.”


WEAR AND TEAR OF HUMAN LIFE.
CHAPTER T.
“ Like leaves trees the race of man Is found,
Now green in youth, now withering on the ground,
Another race the lollowing spring supplies ;
They fall successive, and successive rise :
So generations in their course decay ;
So flourish these when those have passed away.”
The porpotual mutability to which wo are a,nd which con-
stitutes one of the fundamental law.s of our condition, must he a
matter of much interest to any wlio seriously reflect on what w'c
are, ano to what we are all hastening. Our existence, or, as it is
called our “ earthly pilgrimage,” is but one series of actions and
re-actions, affinities and repulsions, sometimes harmonising, again
antagoi istic, ever varying, yet still tending to specific and definite'
ends. The human stiucture is made up of compiiient parts, each
having a separate duty or function to fulfil, and the hai'moniou'
action of the whole constitutes that which call the living or
gauism, or man; and these component parts undergo progressivi-
changes in their size, structure, arrangements, and functions,
that the materials which constitute our frame this year are removc<'
and replaced by others, which in their turn again are cast off, an'l
new ones substituted, till, in the process of time, scarcely an atov:
of our original structure or composition remains. No parts of tin
body are exempt from this renovation and decay ; the hardest anL
apparently most durable parts of our frame are as easily thu
affected as the softest and most delicate textures. To this alter-
nation of the materials of our bodies certain epochs have been set
down, and seven a .d eisht yoar,s assigned as the periods fitr an


eiitiic cliangc; but modern researches teach us that such is quite
uncertain, and if -vve tahe for instance the rapid repairs nature
effects to a fractured bone, the renewal either to its substance, or
growth of new bone, it may be very well argued that a much shorter
period can, and dees produce a complete renovation. There is,
however, another and much more controlling principle, to which we
are all subject, and that is the Law of Moviality ; for, no matter
liow strong and vigorous are our frames, with what complete beauty
and perfection cur maturity is consummated, we have still the seeds
f)f death irrevocably intermixed with the germs of life; we know
that our days are numbered, that a limit is set to our earthly ex-
istence, from which there is no escape; we are doomed to perish by
the opjeration of natural causes, slow but sure, and unerring; in-
separable from our nature, and coeval with our birth. All this
embraces a period from the first dawm of our existence, through
adolescence and puberty, to the ‘Mhree score and ten years,” when
decrepitude has set in, and when
we shun to know,
I’liat life protracted is protracted woe.”
In tracing out the several phenomena which mark these distinc-
tive periods, and constitute the varied links in the chain of pro-
gression and transition, we find much that is instructive and
interesting, and many topics that furnish a fruitful source for
enquirv.
youth is the transiri* n state from infan; y to maturity, so is age
that from maturity to decay; the powers of nature, in the early
period of our existence, are bnsily employed in building up the
frame, prerfccting the different organs, and adapting them for the
proper performance of their functions. This is no light or easy
work, and ofrentimes the exertions of nature are very great, and
commensnratc with the importance and rn;;gnitude of her under-
takings
Tlie stock of materials requisite to supply the consumption and
renovation constantly going on, must be abundant, and in every
way adequate to the demand; and fr.m youth to maturity we
seldom find nature at a loss, seldom drawing from a scanty pro-
vision, but, on the other hand, taking from a rich storehouse in the
propoi tion proper and necessary for the case. Maturity then follows
and the parts cease to grow, reparation and decay seem to be nearly
equally balanced, ;tnd the powers of nature are then called upon to
pmeserve that equilibrium, to maintain a uniform condition of health
and vigour, suitable for the exercise of our mental and physical
faculties, and it is surprising -with what wmnderful order and
accuracy these arrangements are executed, even for a long series of
years.
At length the period comes when this nice balance, which has
been so long and evenly kept, begins to incline, to take the down-


ward course; when the demands upon the system are much more
than the reparative powers of nature are equal for, and a great
diminution of her energy becomes plainly perceptible. I3ut still,
in this great emergency, nature does not abandon her ivork, hei
protective aid; she makes new arrangements, resorts to difteren t
provisions, so as to accommodate the s}stem to those changes which
are inevitable, and irresistible. She goes on economising according
as the waste is excessive and the supply less abundant: slm
husbands with unceasing watching and diligence the resources
which are now becoming more scanty, and thus, by her extreme
good care, does she support the body in all its seeming pristine
vigour, and make the diffeient organs perform their allotted func-
tions without any material or manitest alteration The “ age that,
melts in unperceived decay,” is, however, all th's time stealing
surely and insidiously .on us by slow and imperceptible degrees,
often unknown to and unthought of by ourselves, when clearly dis-
oernible by others. Our descent in the path of life, if solely com-
mitted to the care of nature, is kindly smoothed of its asperities,
relieved of the ruggedness tvhich had previously made it a labour
and a pain, and we find ourselves conducted by easy stages to our
destined place of repose, that place ‘Svhere the wicked cease from
troubling, and the wearied are at rest.”
But small indeed is the number of those who glide gently down
the stream of years, compared with the many whose declining age
has been embittered by adversities, or withered by the painful and
blighting eflects of disease. Large, miserably large is the list of
those who suffer from the diversified causes of premature infirmity
and decrepitude, to which man in his civilized condition is ob-
noxious.
Complicated and various as are the changes which take place, and
which the system undergoes in passing from maturity to old age,
decrepitude to dissolution, we find the same continued and uniform
operations at work, to comprehend which, and form a proper esti-
mate of them, it will be necessary to examine more accurately their
nature and effects upon the textures and functions comp, sing the
animal economy.
With respect to the progressive changes which take place in the
several textures and functions of the animal economy, our first
enquiry must be as to the mechanical properties of those textures
which, in early life, constitute so great a difference to those at more
advanced stages. The germ or embryo, for instance, is nothing but
a gelatinous mass in the first stage of existence, and this is the
case with all animals. Then, by degrees, we come to discover fila-
ments and membranes, which are again extended, and fashioned into
organs of various kinds, retaining for longer or shorter periods their
original softness of consistence.
The cohesion and increase of new materials imparts then greater


(lousify and tinimess, so that in pi-ocess of time the furm augments,
the body expands in all directions, aad the proportion of solid
matter that enters into the composition of the various parts, be-
comes so great as to give a mechanical basis of support. It is the
osseo'is or bony stracture that forms the support, at first partially,
and in detached masses, then united, and connected by a continued
framework, which receives solidity according as the body grows and
becomes developed. The other #nd softer textures become gradu-
ally consolidated, acquire great elasticity, and again in the same
proportion, and as age advances, become less flexible and extensile.
This is very perceptible with the ligaments of joints, tendons,
carti’agcs, and even with the muscles themselves; condensation of
their structures takes place as age creeps on, together with a visible
contraction of their dimensions. Whatever part is composed of
fi' re, becomes tough with age, a matter which comes under our daily
observation whenever we eat the flesh of old anima's, which is not
only very difficult to be torn asunder by the teeth, and masticated,
but is les.s easily digested than the same species of food fr> m a
younger animal. With respect to bone, not only does it very much
increase in solidity, but it becomes deposited in various structures
quite to, and useless for, any purposes, and erving only as
an instance of how nature, with the advance of age, ende,:vou sto
favour the density of the body. The coats of blood-vc>sels, ten-
dons, cartilag s, and even the bones themselves, are affected by this
change; a deposition takes place, which makes these structures
harder and more brittle as age increases. This tendency to ossifi-
cation is sometimes so great as to give rise to large osseous tumours,
:md in this rcsp ct the bones differ very materially from all other
parts of the body; for whi'c there is a general shrinking and con-
traction of other structures, the bones either augment in substance
or Have an increase in the solid materials of which they are com-
posed. Hones which in early life are detached, in old age become
(irmly cemented, as those of the skull and chest; and where in
youth these arc made up of m ny distinct and separate parts, in
ago the distinctions become almost obliterated, and they a| pear to
consist of one single bone. The loss of flexibility and degree of
ligidity other ports sustain, often disturbs and interrupts the action
of them. Joints get stiff’ from the less pliable and yielding nature
ot their ligamen s and membranes; the cu’tilages which separate
each bone in the .spinal column have their flexibility considerably
impaired, and it is to this cause wo see the body I cut forward in
senility, and diminished, too, in s'aturc. Their c lour is also sen-
sibly a tered, for instead of the white, shining,, and polished ap-
pearance of them in youth, in oM persons they seem du.sky and
yellowish, indicating condensation of structure, ari'l ivscniHiij<>' the
change as if artificially driiui. °
hrom this \vc iiil’er, and vcty ii:tiurally so, tluif th*-pniportion of


Huids ill the body generally, as well as in each organ, diminishes
very much as we advance in age. But not only do the solids and
fluids undergo a mechanical change of their textures or structures,
but they also suffer a chemical alieration j for we see in the embryo
and the infant a large quantity of water exists, with a gelatinous
compound; phosphate of lime is very scarce in the body, and fibre
but little developed. As the body grows, however, these increase
in quantity, while the proportion of gelatine gradua ly diminishes,
and almost wholly disappears in very advanced age. With this
diminution, also, from the effects of age, an alteration becomes re-
markable in the quality of the gelatine, as, for instance, the jelly
obtained from calves feet is not the same as that procured from old
oxen j the g ue from young animals differs very much from that
o taiued from old; and the same change or remark applies to the
fibrous textures of the o d, which are < f a darker and deeper color,
i!Ot so easily soluble, and resist putrefaction much longer than the
same parts in younger animals. The secretioirs next merit our con-
sideration, and we will see that they are affected in like manner by
tto c'lauges of progressive age, and partake of the genois 1 decrease
or diminution of fluidity incidental to old age. As instances : we
seldom suffer from the copious perspiration of vouth; our skin
beconies dry and sin ivelled, showing that there is little or no lymph
deposited between i;s layers, or in the ce’luhir tissues; the lymph-
atic vessels, which in youth w re active, and carried on a brisk cir-
culation, become contracted, and often ub iterated, in o'd age • the
blood becomes daiker in color; discharges from the eyes, nose,
moutn, lungs, Ac., b’Come more s<!anty, and less frequent, and,
when they do take place, arc more viscid, opaque, and teiiacious
than when they happen in ear.y life; the secretion from the kid-
neys becomes more odorous, iiigher in color, and much more prone
to grave! or calculus deposits Upon the skin w> have those changes
in a very mark d degree, but to none is the diftVrence in texture so
remarkable, at different ages, as to the anatomist and surgeon, who
have to use the t-culpcl and needle on every age in life.
As parts of the body diminish and contract fr.mi age, so the skin,
no longer adapted to the o parts, gets flaccid and wrinkled, and on
the face, neck, and hands, this is most plainly perceptible, 'i'lie
features gradual y shrink, contract, become furrowed, and progres-
sively leave deeper indications of advancing ago; the dark and
sombre furrows which time indelibly traces on the checks and other
parts of the face,—-often rendered more distinct from the frequent
impressions of care and sorrow, —afford but too unerring evidences
of declining life. Another proof of diminished S'-cretii n with old
age's aftbidecl by the change of color in the hair, that almost in-
Aoiriable attendant cn 1 ngcvity; for, though vigorous and exube-
rant the growth may have been in youtii, .s'ill it"sooii changes, and
tall,.' c\'cn into prctnature decay.


This state, however, is subject to great difFerences, for many men
are grey and bald who have scarcely even reached the meridian of
life; and this, too, has been hereditary, and rtgularly descended to
several generations. Intense thought, continued passion.', cares
and anxieties, have all contributed to the change and decay, and the
hair which, at the commencement of a fever, has been black and
glossy, or might even vie with the raven’s wing, has become, from
the protracted and severe illness, grey, hoary, and scant, as if from
venerable age.
There is a great difference, however, in the effects of fever, or
other causes, and old age, upon the vitality of the hair; with the
former there is some chance of a restoration, time may restore it to
its pristine look and vigour; but with old age, the bulbous cap-
sules, from which the hair is formed, are destroyed, hopelessly and
irretrievably; the root, as well as the shaft, is destroyed, and sepa-
ration and destruction of the hair inevitably follow.
In the eye we have remarkable changes which take place in the
watery constituents of that organ; the quantity of fluid in the
anterior chamber becomes much diminished, and the cornea conse-
quently flattened, whereby its refractive power is impaired; the
vision of near objects becomes very indistinct, and the images
formed in consequence are much contused, and very irregular. To
aid this defective vision, we have recourse to convex lenses, which
supply the want of power of conveyance. There may be other
changes, however, which have their effect in producing this short-
sightedness, and may be connected with a diminution in the powers
of adjustment in the eye, from some defective muscular power or
arrangement.
The ear, too, comes in for some share of the defects or impair-
ments of old age; the fluid which imbricates or lines the internal
cavities, becomes gradually absorbed, and at length entirely disap-
pears, which is of course productive of permanent and irrecover-
able deafness. Other causes, however, may and do contribute to
deafness, arising from, or incidental to old age.


CHAPTER 11.
’'l'is nature’s law, wave follows wave,
The coffined grands ire seeks the grave,
The babe that feeds by suction ;
Finds with its ancestors repose,
Life ebbs, and dissolution sows
The seeds of reproduction.
With respect to the changes which affect internal organs, the most
important perhaps, in the alteration of condition, are those of the
blood-vessels. Not only do they undergo a gradual diminution, in
the proportion which they bear to the bulk of the body, in the
successive periods from infancy to manhood, and old age, but they
suffer also a material alteration in the relative disposition among
themselves. As long as the body is growing and extending, these
vessels pervade every part, and soon become tortuous and numerous,
but when that growth has approached its limit, they then begin to
contract in their diameter, become more dense and rigid in their
coats, and less capable of dilatation. This alteration is much more
visible in the small branches of arteries, a number of which become
impervious to the passage of blood, and finally obliterated, assuming
the form of mere .shreds. The sanguineous disposition and appear-
ance which predominates in youth, becomes less active, or is alto-
gether lost 3 and a good illustration of this is found in the difference
of appearance in detaching the membranes from the bones of old
and young animals 3 with the former scarcely any blood will issue,
while with the latter the parts will be covered with red dots. But
as we have with age such a remarkable diminution in the number
of the smaller arteries, and contraction of the diameter of the
larger vessels, we have, on the other hand, a remarkable dilatation
of the veins. The coats of these vessels do not partake of the
same changes which affect the arteries, are much thinner in their
texture, and, as age advances, become more thin at d dilatable than
before.
In old age we see the extremely prominent and tortuous state of
the veins, so that their capacity must be much increased, for at this
time, though the total quantity of blood in the body is diminished,
the veins, or the venous system, contain two-thirds of the propor-
tion, while in youth the state is nearly balanced. This difference
in the arterial and venous systems in youth and age led the cele-
7
or HUMAN LiFE.


hrated Cullen to found Ins beautiful doctrine of ha>tnon luigv, or
flows of blood, an exjdanatien of which is found in the great' ten-
dency to arterial bleedings with the young, and venous at the more
advanced periods of life. The most common appearance* of the
veins of old people, especially in the feet and legs, is that of a va-
ricose, or swollen and knotted state, and this arises from the pres-
sure of the column of blood they have to support, a force which is
constantly distending their coats, and which their diminished
strength is not so able to withstand. Women, and more especially
those who have had large families, are very prone to this state.
The heart does not become much affected by the change of age >
its energy is certainly diminished, and the force by which the blood
is sent over the system is characterised by more langour and slow-
ness in age than youth. The pulsations in old persons do not often
exceed fifty in a minute, and are frequsntly much less than
even this.
We must now endeavour to trace the effect which this diminished
energy of the circulation, and the diminution of the proportion of
blood produces on the different functions of the body.
Not only is less blood sent to the different organs, but it is per-
haps less completely or perfectly acted on by the air in respiration,
on account of the diminished proportion sent through the vessels
of the lungs; and a diminution ot the various secretions, or a dete-
rioration of them, is a consequence of these changes.
We find digestion, for instance, more tardily carried on, and less
effective, and it is from this function the materia’s are foimed from
which the blood is prepared and its loss replenished, and from which
all parts of the body derive their nutriment and support.
Some organs, however, continue their activity, and perform their
offices, ahn >st as well in old age as maturity, and even when the
muscular and nervous powers of the body have sensibly declined,
and these are the liver and kidneys. But it must not, be supposed
that this is always the case.
As a compensation for the diminished energy of the circulating-
system, we find the absorbent system of the body in a state of much
activity, and retaining its power for a much longer period than the
blood vessels, and to this action may be attributed many of the
changes which take place in the form and bulk of the body, or
various parts of it.
It is the cause of induration and consolidation of several organs;
by the absorption or removal of fat it produces emaciation ; it is
the loss of this^adipose substance, so .generally dispersed in the cel-
lular, texture neft the skin, which induces,such a visible alteration
in the countenance; the eyes sink in their sockets, the cheeks be-
come hollow, and bones prominent; the teeth decay, and gums
recede from them ; the lower jaw, from having lost its teeth, ad-
vances, so that the, chin projects, and all those changes combine to
render the features eharaeteristio of old ago.
I'HI-: WKAH AM) 'I'K,AT{


But we frequently find, however, that these absorbents lose their
power of action, a complete failure in their functions ensue, and
dropsical accumulations are the consequence. All the operations
of nature, all the functions of the animal economy are so blended
and linked together in one harmonious order, that any changes
affecting some will disturb the nice balance kept up; and, if these
changes extend over a considerable period, or constitute much alter-
ation in the system, the greater will be the difficulty of tracing
their origin, and the less likely shall we be to arrive at certain
conclusions.
We will now briefly enquire what changes the' muscular and
nervous systems undergo in the course of years ; changes which are
as important and considerable, though not so obvious, as in other
textures.
Condensation affects the structure of muscles as much as any
other parts, and, from the deposition of osseous and fibrinous mat-
ter, they frequently acquire tire hardness of tendon or bone. Such
a state, of course, impedes the free action of the muscles, and there
is a greater slowness or imperfection in moving the body or limbs ;
but, independently of this impediment to motion, a change takes
place in the muscular fibres themselves, which become more rigid
and contracted.
Those muscles which are under the power of the will, or called
voluntary muscles, are less powerfully influenced; while the invo-
luntary muscles execute their office with very diminished energy;
they may be said to have lost that property commonly known
as tone.
In old people the texture of the muscles is loose, flabby, and re-
laxed, while at the same time the individual fibres of those muscles
are tough and dense, and hence we have the tottering and infirm
gait of senility, a consequence of deterioration and paleness of the
substance of the muscle. The voice undergoes an unequivocal
change, and, from being big and manly,” becomes shrill and tre-
mulous, “ turning again towards childish treble.”
The muscular coats of the stomach, intestines, and other organs,
partake of this diminished tone, and do not nearly so readily con-
tract on their contents when but little is contained in them, and
thus many of the diseases incidental to old age are caused and pro-
moted. But, as muscular power and contractility is so intimately
connected with a condition of the nervous system, we must take that
into consideration before we can form a true estimate of the causes
that occasion a decline of such power.
The changes which affect the structure and composition of the
brain are as great, and quite as important, in the progressive ad-
vances of age, as of any other parts, and probably more so, when wo
consider the office or functions of this wonderful organ.
In very early life, —say at the time of birth, —the brain is
9
OP HUMAN LIFE.


almost in a state of fluidity, so mucli so that, if detached fro'n the
rest of the body, it can scarcely retain its original form or figure,
and only acquires greater consistence and firmness with the progress
of years. As age advances, a greater condensation of structure
takes place, and the sub-divisions of this organ are much more dis-
tinct and developed; from the almost universal reddish-grey mass
of childhood, we have the well-marked divisions of what are termed
the grey or cineritious, and the white or medullary substance of the
brain.
The number and distribution of blood-vessels is much greater in
early life than with age, and may be said to diminish in the same
proportion as the brain acquires firmness and consistence; and with
this, too, a chemical alteration takes place with the properties of
the substance of the brain, for it has been shown by the celebrated
Bichat and others, that re-agents act more slowly upon the sub-
stance of the brain of adults than of infants : the dissolving power
of alkalies, fiar instance, is much less effective or potent upon an
old brain than a young one. Osseous deposits often take place in
the blood-vessels and membranes of the brain, and these membranes
or coverings, though they become more tough and rigid with age,
are more easily separated and detached, in consequence of the obli-
teration of vessels connecting them with the brain in advanced life.
The regular and well-defined sutures, or lines marking the separate
pieces of the skull, become, in old age, almost obliterated, so that
the bony case covering the brain, which, in youth, consisted of seve-
ral bones, becomes at length one consolidated mass. The size of
the brain becomes much less in old age, and sometimes so dimi-
nished in volume as not nearly to fill the cavity of the skull. A
change, however, quite the reverse to such as I have now described,
often takes place, and a soft, flaccid state ensues with aged persons ;
but this, I apprehend, is more the effect of a diseased condition
than the result of senility. Similar, or analogous to the changes
affecting the brain, the nerves participate in those changes, though
probably in a less marked or perceptible degree, as the membranous
covering of each nerve may make them less distinguishable; their
nervous matter diminishes ; their blood-vessels, both in number and
size, decrease; and the ganglions, which form part of their system,
get harder, of a deeper grey colour, and considerably shrink in
their size.
With respect to the functions of the brain, we are in ignorance
of the mode by which such are conducted, nor do anatomical
enquiries as to the organisation of the brain, throw any light upon
the subject, nor can we predict with any certainty what alteration
will take place in any or all of the functions of the brain, from
disease of that organ. Direct observation alone will give us know-
ledge, and the whole series of phenomena, characteristic of declining
years, indicate the general diminution of energy in the nervous


system generally; but in the brain more particularly. Sensations
are received more tardily, and transmitted more feebly to the brain,
and the impressions consequently produced are much less vivid,
but more transitory, than formerly. Sensibility is much diminished,
or blunted, with age, and to this cause may be attributed the less
acute nature of bodily sufferings; the less likelihood of exciting
constitutional disturbance in the system ; and the more languid is
the character of all inflammatory actions. All those diseases which,
in youth, are so extremely painful and agonising, are borne without
much suffering, and quickly assume a more chronic character in old
age. There is less susceptibility of the action of contagion in
advanced life : and, when a certain period has passed, if the body
has escaped those diseases which affect the System once in the
course of life, there is generally, if not always, perfect immunity
from them.
It is to the loss of nervous energy that a diminution in the tem-
perature of the body is experienced in declining life, though it has
been attempted to be explained from the circumstance of the dimi-
nution of fat, which, from its non-conducting powers, prevents the
escape of heat from the body; but, whatever may be the cause,
there is no doubt of a sensible decrease of animal heat, and no-
thing is more common than to see chilliness a frequent attendant
on old age.
Old persons sleep much less than young, and this may be ex-
plained thus—that the quantity of sleep, or the necessity there
exists for such, is in proportion to the requirements of nutrition
for the body. Thus, with infants and young children, from sixteen
to twenty hours, out of the twenty-four, are passed in sleep. Seven or
eight hours may be said to be the average time with adults, and
four or five hours the most common duration of sleep with old
people. Many exceptions, however, to this may be taken, as to all
other effects or operations in which the nervous system is engaged,
and especially, too, where habit, associations, and many other cir-
cumstances are concerned, and which may very justly be said to
constitute a second nature. Vigilance is often a most distressing
attendant on advanced age; but may also arise from many circum-
stances, as indigestion, the effects of cold,, wet feet, or other internal
sources of irritation. As the body becomes weakened and
wasted by the ravages of time, so does the mind participate in the
general deeay, and the loss of memory, the tottering of reason, may
be the first indications of that decline, a painful ease of which w'as
lately under my care, and which fast approached imbecility and
death. The power of recollection, and upon which depends the
association of ideas, appears, and is said to have a closer relation to
the physical condition of the brain, than any other of the mental
faculties; for it is often the case that the judgment is unimpaired
when the memory is defective. Recent events, or things happen-


ing to-day or yesterday, are with much more difficulty remembered
than the occurrences of many years back, even of youth and child-
hood ; old, familiar, and once well-remembered names of persons, are
now forgotten, and, when carried a little further, even the names
of the most useful and used things are with difficulty recollected.
The command of language, which the mind once possessed in the
roost eloquent, fluent, and remarkable degree, degenerates into a
few disconnected and unmeaning sentences, tardily delivered, and
heavily expressed. There is sometimes a state of garrulity with
old age, which is no less the elfect of loss of memory, where the re-
collection of what has just been uttered becomes as speedily sfi'aced,
and this leads to the constant repetition of the same ideas.
In the same proportion that bodily feelings are blunted, mental
sensibility becomes impaired in all that relates to circumstances
recent or present; but still we find numerous exceptions to this rule,
and often witness as acute and poignant grief with old people, at
the loss of former friends and companions, as could possibly seize
upon the young, and it is not an unusual thing to find that, when
an aged person has become the tenant of the cold, cold grave, he or
she who has been left the survivor in this world, has soon followed
to the tomb.
The loss of sight, or failure of hearing, will very much contribute
to the diminished exercise of the intellect, and, as they are senses
which connect us very largely with the external world, their im-
pairment will greatly abstract that necessity for exertion.
Without exercise, intellectual as well as bodily powers become
slow, impaired, and finally lose their tone; and impediments to this
are often added to bodily exertion, by stiffness of the joints, rigidity
and debility of the muscles, and weakness of nervous energy. The
tottering and infirmity of age cannot be accompanied by the plea-
sure which once characterised the light, active, and buoyant step
of youth ; and, wffien labouring under these deprivations, it is sad
to think that sometimes the pleasures of the table are sought for,
and artificial excitement indulged in. But even in this does Nature
impose her limits, and say, “ So far shall you go and no further."
“ In vain their gifts the bounteous seasons pour.
The fruit autumnal and the vernal shower ;
With listless eyes the dotard views the store;
He views, and wondera that they please no more.
Now pall the tasteless meats, the joyless wines.
And Luxury, with sighs, her slave resigns.”
It is sad to contemplate the wreck of those faculties which exalt
and ennoble man’s nature, the deprivation of which lowers his con-
dition to that of the beasts of the field ; it is mournful to dwell on
the sickening spectacle of “ second childishness and mere oblivion
the picture is too humiliating of the frailties of human nature, and
forcibly remind us of what
“ Wc shun to know,
That life protracted is protracted woe.”


CHAPTER 111.
“ Life rolls apace
And that incurable disease—old age,
In youthful bodies more severely felt,
More sternly active, shakes their blasted pride, ’ ’
In the different stages I have previously described, and whieh con-
stitute the progressive transitions from infancy to old age, it
becomes a question whether we can discover one single principle
operarting more than another to bring about those changes.
We know there is a general diminution in the force of the circu-
lation of the blood, and a density of fibre and cellular tissue as a
consequence of it; but whether such arises from the loss of mus-
cular power, and decline of nervous energy, becomes a matter for
enquiry. It is said that at the first formation of the germ or
embryo a certain stock of vital power is given it, as a provision for
enabling it to maintain its existence, and carry out the career of
its destiny; and if such is the case, the greater the expenditure, or
demands for carrying on the different functions of the system, the
sooner will the supply fail, or be consumed.
That very great and considerable differences should exist in dif-
ferent individuals as to this stock of vital force imparted to the
frame, cannot be doubted or questioned; and is plainly perceptible
in the longer or shorter periods of human destiny we see daily
occurring among us, independent entirely of accidents, or other
adventitious eireumstances which tend to hasten the decay of nature
and the demolition of the body. The more precocious and excit-
able some are in their youth, the more liable are they, and may be
said to be, doomed to premature senility and decay.
But, whatever may be the cause of the spontaneous decay of the
body, and the decline of those powers inseparable from the lapse of
time, we must look upon them as completely iiiterwoven with our
natures, and the laws and conditions of our existence; as arising
from internal circumstances that are but little influenced or con-
trolled by external causes. While living organic bodies perish
from within —consumed, as it were, by the fire which had pre-
viously animated and enlivened them—organic bodies owe their
decay to external causes, which complete their decomposition and
destruction.


Health is a condition observable in all ages, and may exist with
different degrees of energy, for so long as a proper balance and
harmony of all the functions of life is maintained, the system may
be said to be in a healthy state. The powers of the constitution
may be enfeebled by age, and the different actions less vigorously
performed, but still thfere may be a healthy condition, and all the
ends of nature answered even to the last steps of our existence.
The health of youth is certainly more secure and uniform than of
old age ; and even when that great activity of the different func-
tions takes place, which in youth alone exists, and which often
endangers the equilibrium and harmony of the system, nature is at
hand with a power of restoration adequate and proportioned to the
demands if such are needed,
After severe and protracted illness the contrast between the re-
sources of youth and age are most plainly seen ; the resilient power
of the one rebounds with surprising readiness and elasticity from
the depression of disease, and seems to gather new vigour from the
shock, while with the other this power is wanting, the stretch
W’hich the constitution has had, has been beyond reasonable and
proper limits, and it no longer returns to its former bounds; the
string has been bent by a greater force than that which is capable
of re-acting on it, and these effects produce not only permanent
alterations of structure, but greater incapacity to perform the same
extent of action.
We may however be insensiWe to the slighter deviations from a
healthy state of the different organs, which are not only very
obvious, but usual concomitants of advanced age, and they may not be
observed either by ourselves or others until they increase in extent,
and manifest themselves by some outward and visible signs of
declining health.
At first, such indications may be obscure, slight, and evanescent,
recurring at intervals, and by degrees or stages acquiring a more
decisive and permanent character, until at length they arrest atten-
tion, and require proper medical means for restoring the healthy
action, and correcting those disordered functions. But those devia-
tions from a healthy state cannot continue long, or recur with im-
punity ; and the consequence is that a greater proneness to disorder
is experienced; various degrees of labour, excitement, and exer-
tions, which before had been harmless and easily endured, now
become both irksome and dangerous. Disturbances in the system
follow, and some particular symptom, or sets of symptoms, occur, to
which there may be some pre-disposition in the system; as, for
instance, headache,dyspepsia, lassitude, palpitation, watchfulness, &c.
These generally pave the way for, or are the forerunners of, more
serious disorders ; something is sure to be going wrong, and before
much time has elapsed we begin to detect structural disease stealing
on by slow but sure steps, producing a state of the system which


lias not been unaptly termed a hreahing tip of the constitution ; an
indescribable condition just bordering on the breaking out or deve-
lopment of positive, and too often irremedial disease ; giving us no
hope in any successful combat with it, and obliging us eventually
to surrender our charge unconditionally to that relentless enemy—
death. There is a state, which occurs at certain periods of time,
attended with a sudden and general alteration of health, uncertain
in its duration, and without any positive change in the structure of
any particular organs; this is termed t\\Q climacteric period of disease,
or turn of life, and is common to both men and women, varying
in the time of its attack from forty to sixty years, and caused
generally by mental anxiety and suffering, which scarcely ever faij
to leave their corroding effects, and undermine the most healthy
and robust constitution. This state we generally recognise by a
peculiar and careworn expression of countenance, and in wasting of
the flesh; sleep, that refreshing invigorator, is wanting, and nights
are passed without it, an accession of fever takes place, accom*
panied with feelings of exhaustion and lassitude ; these symptoms
may last for a greater or less period, or may even continue until
the person sinks with no other indications of disease than a gradual
and general failure of the vital functions. But if the powers of the
system are equal to a restoration, the symptoms become gradually
mitigated and disappear, there is a return to health, which may be
undisturbed for years, but still at the same time traces of the effects
are left, especially in the countenance, which may never become
obliterated, but remain fixed and indelible.
Such is the simple form of climacteric disease, occurring with
individuals who have been previously in a sound and healthy state;
but it becomes a much more dangerous thing when supervening on
frames already enfeebled by habitual and severe diseases; it then
partakes of the character and assumes the features of those most
prominent complaints, and becomes associated with structural dis-
orders, so as to render it difficult to assign the proper share that
belongs to each specific source of disease, and this complication of
previous local and constitutional ailments, with the consequences of
old age, often obscures the case, and makes it escape even the most
attentive observation.
Old age has its attendant or specific diseases, and of such a nature
that we find it is often terminated by them. The most prominent
are the symptoms of derangement of the digestive organs ; which
either shew undoubted manifestations of organic disease, or
simple disorder of functions; a wavering of that true equilibrium
which should exist, but which is almost always incidental to
declining years.
Dyspepsia is the earliest and most frequent disease of longevity,
and its prevalence is very obvious when we take several circum-
stances into consideration ; the principal of which are decline of


muscular power, so general in tke whole system, and which affects
the fibres of the stomach and bowels equally with other parts. The
appetite will be, however, frequently good and unaffected, while
the power of digestion is impaired or diminished, and the conse-
quence is, that more food is often taken into the stomach than can
be converted into healthy nutriment for the body, and that which
is imperfectly digested still further tends, by its presence, to
greater impairment and disturbance of the functions of that organ.
Flatus becomes generated and distends the bowels, and this, with
the accumulation of acid or acrid substances, lays the foundation
of serious, permanent, and irremediable injury. The loss of teeth
is one of the most fruitful sources of indigestion, from the inability
to properly masticate and reduce to unpalpy consistence the food
about to be swallow'ed, and the want of accustomed exercise, exerts
a baneful influence in combining with those other circumstances to
impair digestion.
Ease and indolence are claimed as the privileges of old age,
especially when the previous years have been spent in activity and
exertion; but too much indulgence in such, only increases the risk
and danger to health, these are foolishly imagined to obviate.
Disease of the liver often arises from protracted indigestion, and
especially with those whose early life had been spent in scenes of
dissipation and debauchery. The habit of indulgence contracted
in youth, and persevered in during maturity, is seldom given up,
and frequently increases with thickening years until it grows
beyond controul, increasing and aggravating the miseries of old
age, until mind and body sink together
The aged are peculiarly liable to dropsical affections. Piles,
which give rise to profuse and dangerous discharges of blood,
besides creating much suffering, and the ravages of cancer are more
observable at advanced periods of life than any other.
Groiit, rheumatism, and enlargement of the joints, though not
exclusively attendants upon old age, may certainly be said to rank
among those diseases to which there is a great predisposition in the
decline of life.
Disorders of the kidneys and bladder are also frequent in old
age, and the first indications of stone or gravel are found in the
deposition of uric acid, in the shape of red sand, in the urine.
There may be retention of urine in the bladder, and an inability
to expel it, or there may be a constant dribbling away of it, and a
want of power to retain it.
The brain is the next organ which participates largely in the
changes induced by age, and probably exercises a more fatal
influence than any other in the advanced periods of life.
Its failure, or the impairment of the energy of its functions, is
plainly shewn in an altered state of mind; a gloomy despondency
jind foreboding; confusion of thought, memory, and ideas; lethargy;
listlessncss; heaviness; and great disposition to sonjnolcney.


liciidacliC; giddiness, noises in tlie cars prevail; the loss of sight,
hearing, or some other sense takes place; numbness, tingling, or
shooting pains, are experienced in the limbs, trunk, or other parts
of the body, and those may be, and generally are, the precursors,
or premonitory signs, of more serious evils. Apoplexy and palsy
soon set in, terminating suddenly and fatally, or if by chance a
short respite is gained, the interim furnishes a sad spectacle of a
wreck, compared with the form and vigour of one’s former and
younger days.
These modern days of civilisation furnish more examples of fatal
head diseases than former times, and the recorded cases in the “ Bills
of Mortality,” are double now to what they were at the beginning
of the last century. The causes which tend to produce such a
state, however, I cannot enter upon —would be foreign to my present
work.
Diseases of the skin often make their appearance about the
decline of life, jrnd are more connected with, or dependent on
some particular state of the brain, or nervous system, than, as is
too frequently imagined, with disorder of the digestive organs,
There is a peculiar kind of itching, without any visible eruption,
that is remarkably annoying, and inveterate, and the source of most
indescribable trouble to old people. In elderly persons the heart is
frequently found diseased, and also the larger blood-vessels in
immediate connection with it; there may either be dilatation,
thickening, or ossification affecting the dificrent structures and
coats, or collections of water may form in the bag enclosing the
heart, and thus impede the proper performance of its actions, and
endanger life. We often find mortification succeeding to some
inflammation of the skin with old people, especially in the fingers
and toes, and carbuncle is not an unfrequent disease at this period
of life.
The respiratory organs are often affected with disease in aged
people, and it is very common to witness severe and protracted
catarrhs, asthmas, pneumonic and bronchial affections, requiring
much care and discrimination in their treatment, before they arc
benefited or eradicated. Indeed these complaints are often very
destructive to life, and the epidemic catarrh, commonly called
influenza, which frequently prevails, is known to be very fatal to
old persons. I have thus briefly alluded to some of the more pro-
minent or specific diseases affecting old age, but feel it would be
unsuited to my present purpose to enter on a more lengthened or
particular description of them, designed, as my little work is, more
especially for non-professional readers, and I null conclude w ith a
few remarks, still having reference to the wear and tear of life,
applicable to both young and old.
The quantity of food necessary for the support, and to repair
the continual wasting of the body, is as necessary as the quality,


and should he such as the stomach can easily digest. It should be
such as to provide for the gradual growth of tlie body, which to a
certain period talies place, otherwise the deficiency will be marked
by a want of nourishment, an imperfect growth, and a debility
which often begets or is the forerunner of various diseases. Kx-
cesses in diet may, and frequently do, lay the foundation of a host
of maladies, by the inordinate calls which are imposed on the con-
stitution to get rid of them, and the injurious influence they
exercise on all the functions of life. A healthy stomach will
always know the quantity necessary to satisfy the demands of
nature, and thus be rarely guilty of excess j but though the appetite
may have ceased, or, in other words, the stomach be satisfied, it is
still capable of holding and digesting more food. The law of tem-
perance, both in eating and drinking, is common to all, and no
matter how We disregard it, or way to our sensual feelings, we
cannot violate it long with any certainty of impunity. To enter
more fully into this matter would bring me to the consideration of
digestion,dietetics, and physical education: subjects that though inti-
mately connected with life and health, would come more under the
head of be suited to, the philosophy of living. No two cases of'
disease are identical, unless the symptoms precisely correspond j and
from the differences in habits, age, constitution, and temperament
in every member of the human family, you can fre(iucntly detect a
something, which renders consideration necessary, before a general
treatment can be adopted. Every case of disease presenting itself,
may be said to be an individual case, rarely resembling another, and
even when epidemics prevail, although there may be some general
symptoms, still it is not often that two persons experience precisely
and exactly the same.
To seize on a few symptoms of which the patient may most
loudly complain, and neglect others more occult, though perhaps
equal indices of deranged action, and treat the person accordingly,
would be coming to an erroneous conclusion, from an erroneous
principle. Causes must be sought for, to the end that the effect
may as speedily as possible be removed j and the less eagerly we
seek out, or enquire for such, the greater will be the difficulties of
a cure. If, passing over these, we strive to fathom the nature of
diseases, we only leave sunlight for obscurity, and certainty for the
doubtful dreams of speculation.
This induces me to make some reference to what are usually
called Universal remedies or medicines,” which have now become
so numerous that the only surprise is that any disease should be
left. It is not to be wondered at that persons ignorant of medicine,
and ui'ged by avarice, should affect to believe in their existence and
efficacy, and recommend them to others as ignorant and superstitious
as themselves.
Who is not aware of the lying and impudent advertisements of


the curative effects of those universal poisons, daily blazoned forth
in the columns of the press ? And this seems to be the way with
every knave and impostor who wishes to make money, and bring
himself into notoriety in the easiest possible way, by deceiving a
too gullible public., A flaming name to some ridiculous compound,
or box of deleterious ingredients, almost forms a provision for life ;
a cure is coined with all the artful plausibility of truth, and the
venom of deceit is scattered far and near, carrying this ultima spes
to the Tinfortunate patient, that if it does not cure, it will most
likely kill, or lay the foundation of more dangerous and intractable
disease. No one, for a moment, should countenance the belief in
the existence of a universal remedy, as if it were possible that
diseases, the elfeets of different causes, could yield to the same
treatment j as if the remedies that are applicable in a diarrhoea
will cure an opposite state, or that of constipation, not to mention,
the niultitudes of diseases in which the causes, although not oppo-
site, arO yet as widely different as possible.
Many diseases, however, no matter how their causes have been
known and treated, or their symptoms classified or understood, are
still beyond the reniedial aid any human being can bestow j and it
is not an unfrequent spectacle to see beauty fading, youth languish-
ing, and art exhausted, without the slightest ray of hope of an
amendment.
When corn is ripe, and falls beneath the sickle; when autumnal
leaves drop softly from the branches they had once beautified and
adorned j and hallowed age, after having fulfilled the full period of
human destiny, is called on the journey whence no traveller
returns,” why, this is nothing; but when the tempest sweeps fields,
not yet white for the harvest, nips the opening bud on the verge
of a luxuriant expansion, dims the lustre of a laughing eye, or
strikes into languishing decay the once beautiful form of female
loveliness, then may we be tempted to say, in the words of the
prophet, “ Oh, virgin daughter of Egypt, in vain shalt thou use
many medicines, for thou shalt not be cured.”
In the foregoing brief sketch many points of detail have been
passed over, or but slightly noticed, which would admit much
more copious illustration or more explicit instruction j but it may
be that something has been advanced to display the of
life, health, and disease, and an outline has been furnished which
each reader may fill up according to his desire, intelligence, and the
Condition of life in which he is placed.
riNis.


