

SYDNEY'S NEED
Being the Second Brochure of the
SYDNEY REGIONAL
PLAN CONVENTION






No one could look upon the Champs Elysees in Paris without
realising how great is the moral influence of such a thoroughfare,
and this street has served as a guiding star to cities the world
over.


AN EXHIBITION
OF
PLANS & PHOTOGRAPHS
Illustrating civic pride and progress in various parts of the
World, with special application to the growth of Sydney,
and stressing the urgent need for comprehensive planning
for the City’s future.
February 28th. 1924.


SYDNEY REGIONAL PLAN
CONVENTION
MEMBERS OF THE EXECUTIVE
Chairman:
The Hon. Sir Henry Braddon, K.8.E., M.L.C.
Vice-Chairman:
Frank Whiddon.
Hon. Treasurer:
C. A. Le Maistre Walker, C.B.E.
Hon. Secretary:
R. Keith Harris, A.1.A., A.R.1.8.A.
Dr. W. G. Armstrong.
R. J. Boyd, M.E., M.lnst.C.E.
H. E. Budden, C.8.E., A.I.A.
N. Chalmers, F. 1.5., A.M.I.C.E.
L. T. Courtenay.
Alderman S. L. Cole.
E. H. Cowdery, F.I.S.
H. G. Foxall, 8.E., A.M.1.E., Aust.
G. H. Godsell, F.I.A.
H. F. Halloran, F.I.S.
R. Walter Hardie.
Rayner Hoff.
A. S. Hook.
A. Howie.
Professor R. C. Mills.
W. H. Myers, B.E.
Finlay E. Munro.
Alderman W. P. McElhone, M.B.E.
Wm. Poole, M.E., M.I.C.E.
Col. Alfred Spain, F.R.1.8.A.
Alderman Milner Stephen.
John Sulman, F.R.1.8.A.
Professor Griffith Taylor.
S. Ure Smith.
B. J. Waterhouse, F.I.A.
Nokman B. Weekes, A.R.1.8.A.
Professor L. Wilkinson, F.1.A., F.R.1.8.A.
Secretary:
Harold K. Riley,
80 Hunter Street, Sydney.
80 HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY


FOREWORD
The efforts of the Sydney Regional Plan Convention are directed
towards the preparation of a comprehensive and rational plan
for the future development of the city and suburbs, embracing
the Sydney Region, fundamental principles being co-ordination
between the various State and Municipal Departments, and the
co-operation of the citizens.
The aims of the Convention are to decide, as far as possible, upon
the most suitable main traffic routes, not only into and out of the
city, but also between the surrounding suburbs, and to make
provision for those routes to carry the traffic; also to provide the
greatest possible facilities for factory and residential sites, with
provision for sufficient parks and play-grounds; and, lastly, to
ensure that, once the plan is approved, it should be adhered to in
the main principles —unless there should develop some sound
reason for altering it.
To arouse the civic pride and interest of the citizens in this
important subject, this Exhibition of plans and photographs has
been inaugurated, showing something of what has been done, and is
being accomplished, in other parts of the world.
Great as is the material benefit accruing from such a plan, the
civic spirit engendered is of equal, if not greater, value, for the
realisation of the duty of citizenship is the greatest incentive to
progress and social development, and the best preventive of
private and political intrigue.
It must be the desire of every man., woman and child to secure its
accomplishment, and to strive to see Sydney, not as paste in a
priceless setting, but as a pearl beyond price, “the true Pearl of
the Pacific.”
"c As the city is, so 'will its people be.”


One of the greatest problems which civilization has to face to-day
is the tendency of the country to become depopulated as the
people gravitate to the towns. This drift to the city, serious as it
is from the point of view of deserted agricultural land, is equally
serious from the aspect of overcrowded towns. The measure of a
country’s prosperity depends upon the successful handling of these
problems.
Before going further, let us pause for a moment to consider what
is meant by Progress. Surely neither more nor less than advance-
ment for the general well-being and happiness of the greatest
number. This being so, the country and towns being interdepen-
dent, the cities of to-day must be capable not only of handling and
distributing the produce of the country and from abroad, in the
most economical manner, but must provide also for the citizens the
maximum amount of convenience and happiness.
Upon these two factors depend not only the city’s prosperity, but
its very existence.
In these days of keen competition, the city which lacks adequate
transport facilities for economical conduct of its business, which
does not provide convenient and cheap access for its workers,
together with healthy home sites, and ample provision for educa-
tion and recreation, is so seriously handicapped that its future
development and prosperity are seriously jeopardised.
The modern city is a complex mechanism with its numerous
utilities of traffic, transport, water, gas and electricity; its streets,
buildings, wharves and railways; its police and fire departments;
its health and education authorities.
All these vital services are interdependent, and while each is con-
trolled by a separate department—and often under entirely
different authorities—it is self-evident that such methods are
inimical to sound progress, and that co-operation and co-ordination
are essential between departments, and between authorities and
citizens.
Efficient but isolated effort cannot function for communal benefit.
The city that does not provide facilities for quick and cheap
transport, is seriously handicapped by excessive overhead freight
and haulage charges, which must be paid by the consumer, both at
home and abroad, and thereby reduces its Financial Efficiency.
Town Planning—to put it briefly—means the arranging of towns
in an orderly manner.
It is thought by many that this is a modern idea, but as a
matter of fact, more than 2,500 years before the birth of Christ,
the small town of Kahun in Egypt was deliberately planned on
a definite pre-designed pattern, to house the builders of one of
the Pyramids.


The Ramp, Central Railway Station, Sydney, showing the
unsatisfactory congestion that occurs in the main traffic way.
The city that does not provide healthy sites for its homes, and
proper facilities for recreation, reduces the Physical Efficiency of
its people, as recruiting statistics clearly prove.
The city that does not provide convenient and quick access between
its different working parts and between these and its residential
sections is reducing its Economic Efficiency.
The city that does not provide for educational and religious
facilities and (esthetic conditions, lowers and degrades the morals
of its people, and thereby loses in Moral and Intellectual
Efficiency.
A city, like a business, may give service for a time, in spite of
neglect of city-planning methods, but as extension of business
occurs, it is essential to have efficient organisation and co-operation.


When we remember that Railway Square is Sydney’s only sub-
stitute for a real public square, we cannot but be impressed by
the chaotic conditions which must result through lack of civic
pride and for the want of co-operation among our different
services.
The citizens of Sydney cannot afford to vegetate in a “fools"
paradise,” and rest content that the beauties of the harbour are
alone sufficient to counteract their lack of foresight.
Of what use are deep water frontages if the means of access are
throttled by a congeries of chaotic structures and ill-graded roads.
An illuminating instance of lack of foresight and consideration
is the setting of our public buildings. It is unique to find in a
city of more than one million people practically all its important
public buildings erected without consideration of site and setting.
From time to time spasmodic efforts are made to overcome some
of the city’s serious congestion by widening a street here, and
rounding a corner there, but such local and isolated efforts are
utterly ineffective, relieving pressure in one area, only to increase
and crystallize it in another.
So far we have not comprehensively tackled the problem before
us, and even the advent of a city railway or bridge may only
alleviate, and create additional problems by the concentration of
thousands of people at vital points; thus, unless special provision
is made, congestion is intensified, existing difficulties aggravated,
the great problem is left unsolved, and probably more seriously
entangled.


Contrasting the Railway Square with a much smaller example —
The Place Vendome in Paris—we realise what orderliness will
achieve.
The compression of the city’s expansion into confined and
restricted areas has only one result, that of serious inflation of
values within that limited area, and consequently with reduced
values in neglected areas—attendant evils, which clog the wheels
of progress.
Every thinking person must be alarmed at our future prospects
unless some concerted action be taken. Already two of our main
streets are confined to one-way traffic. What will happen in
twenty years—or even ten? There are some who pride them-
selves on not being “visionaries” and believe that, by leaving
things to look after themselves, they are essentially practical.
Those people talk consolingly about “when the trams are off the
street, we shall have motor ’buses and no congestion.” The
answer to that may be seen in the two photographs showing
motor-’bus congestion in London in spite of a remarkable under-
ground system.
In addition to the aspect of traffic, the increasing height of build-
ings on both sides of our streets renders it necessary to provide
for light and air.


The shops at Earswick, England, show how much is to be gained
in a residential suburb by a simple and harmonious shopping
centre, and we, who live among hideous advertisements and a
jumble of buildings, each trying to attract attention from its
neighbour—and all failing to do so—must envy that restful
atmosphere which is merely the result of a little community
thinking.
The realisation that, under existing conditions, the city, suburban
and shire councils, and the various government departments were
all limited in their tasks by lack of co-ordination among them-
selves, and also by lack of co-operation among the citizens, lead to
the formation of the Sydney Regional Plan Convention.
This body, which numbers among its 240 members many of the
leading business and professional men of Sydney, has set itself
the task of endeavouring to formulate a general outline plan for
the future development of the Sydney Region, so that, as improve-
ments are made, each one shall be a logical step towards a definite
result.
And, furthermore, that once having formulated that plan, and
having it backed by the citizens, it shall be put into effect by
legislation and the co-ordinated effort of all the authorities work-
ing together with one common aim—the welfare of the city and
suburbs, and of the country which, in providing them with the
needs of life, looks to them to fulfil their duty of efficiently
handling its produce.
One thing is certain, and that is that a comprehensive plan, which
provides for main traffic routes throughout the city and suburbs,
is vital to every municipality and citizen alike, and also that rail-
ways, wharves and all public buildings and services within the
Sydney Region must be considered in their relation to that area
as a whole.
We can gain most town-planning methods by using them to
control the changes and the development of our villages, towns
and cities.


The illustration which shows how we plant telegraph poles makes
an illuminating contrast with its neighbour. The wanton
destruction of trees is one of our most unaccountable accom-
plishments, for, in this climate especially, shade is essential.
True civic pride is perhaps the greatest moral and patriotic
incentive that the world has known, but to inculcate civic pride
the citizen must have a city to work for and to be proud of. The
harbour is not sufficient; he didn’t make that. If he had, he
wouldn’t have parted with its foreshores so easily!
Apart from the moral effect, an orderly, convenient and beautiful
city is one of the soundest investments known, for it means
economy of time, and, therefore, of cost of production. It
encourages visitors and consequently trade.
As an instance of time wasted, it is interesting to note that at
one crossing in London, it is calculated that the time lost by
traffic hold-ups, if capitalised, would mean a loss of at least £7,000
a year; and there are hundreds of crossings.
The same principle applies in Sydney.
One new thoroughfare contemplated for London is estimated to
cost nearly £6,000,000 for “land and damages.”
The places in which we live and work, instead of steadily
deteriorating by the process of haphazard growth, should steadily
improve by the process of gradual change worked out on scientific
and artistic lines.


Antwerp.
Royal Art Gallery.
As a proof of the benefits accruing from comprehensive and well-
studied town plans, it is interesting to note that Paris, which is
acclaimed the Queen City of the World, owes her greatness to
her wonderful plan. The £53,000,000 which Hausman lavished
upon her has proved to be one of the sanest investments that a
city could make. So much so, that she has never ceased to con-
tinue the good work, and even to-day contemplates spending
£30,000,000 on extending her streets and avenues.
Chicago may claim the greatest example of modern city planning
in a democratic country, and fourteen of the major projects,
involving an expenditure of nearly £70,000,000 are stated to be
under way and assured of early realisation. It is also interesting
to note that the estimated cost of one street reclamation was about
£1,050,000. The report showed how the entire cost could be saved
in a single year, and that almost £1,000,000 would be saved
annually through the re-modelling. So impressed were the
business men of the city that the Commercial Club launched the
plan with £60,000, subscribed by its members.
Antwerp.
Avenue de Keyser.


State Street, Chicago, looking
North from Madison Street.
Said to be the busiest corner
in the World.
London, in spite of its difficult problems, even before the war had
spent £20,000,000 on street improvements, and had under way a
further expenditure of £25,000,000. To-day every city in England
of over 20,000 inhabitants is required to prepare a Town Plan.
Before the war, Berlin was engaged on improvement schemes
calculated to involve an expenditure of £16,000,000, and was
bidding fair to rival Paris.
Birmingham and Liverpool have long ago realised the necessity
of proper re-modelling schemes, and Los Angeles, San Francisco,
Denver, Detroit, Philadelphia, Ottawa, Toronto, and Delhi in
India, the devastated towns of France, and hundreds of others all
over the world are at work on their city plans.
In short, there is scarcely a city of any importance which is not
spending huge sums in an effort to secure a comprehensive plan,
in order to accommodate the great stress imposed by modern
conditions during the past fifty years.
R.K.H. and B.J.W.
“The planning of a city means making it what we would our
individual home—a thing of order, of convenience, and of
attractiveness.’’ — Walter L. Moody.
Paris. A sight on the Tuileries,
Champs Elysees and the
Arc de Triomphe.


LUNCHEON HOUR ADDRESSES
SYLLABUS
During the period of the Exhibition, special public addresses
will he given relating to various aspects of Town Planning,
in Farmer’s Exhibition Hall, each day, at 1.30 p.m., from
Friday, February 29th, to Friday, March 7th, inclusive.
R. Keith Harris, A.1.A., A.R.1.8.A., Lecturer in Town
Planning, Sydney University.
Friday, February 29th, 1.30 ip.m.—“The Sydney
Regional Plan.”
John Sulman, F.R.1.8.A., President of the Town
Planning Association.
Monday, March 3rd, 1.30 p.m. —“Town Planning.”
Professor L. Wilkinson, F.1.A., F.R.1.8.A., Dean of
the Faculty of Architecture, Sydney University,
Tuesday, March 4th, 1.30 p.m.—“City Architecture.”
B. J. Waterhouse, F.I.A.
Wednesday, March Sth, 1.30 p.m. —“The Civic
Responsibility of the Citizens.”
Norman B. Weekes, A.R.1.8.A., City Surveyor, Town
Hall, Sydney.
Thursday, March 6th, 1.30 p.m. —“Roads in their
relationship to Town Planning.”
H. G. Fox at.t., 8.E., F. 1.5., A.M.1.E., Aust, President of
the Institution of Surveyors, N.S.W.
Friday, March 7th, 1.30 p.m.—“The Collection and
the Correlation of Data.”
These lunch-hour addresses will be limited to twenty
minutes.


Paris. Notre Dame and the Seine —General View.
Canada. G.P.R. Hotel and Sulphur Mt., Banff.
In order that schemes of town-planning may achieve the best
possible results, it is essential that there be a strong body of
well-informed public opinion behind them.


The Directors of Farmer & Company, Limited, and the members of the Sydney
Regional Plan Convention, desire to record their appreciation of the valuable
contributions of exhibits and literature received from the following gentlemen :
Ministry of Health, Whitehall, London.
The Manchester and District Joint Town Planning Advisory
Committee.
Town Planning Department of the City of Gothenburg.
Toivn Clerk, Chesterfield.
Town Clerk, Manchester.
Chicago Plan Commission.
The Mayor of Lyons, France.
Vice-Consul, Argentine Republic.
Consul for Belgium.
Canadian Pacific Railways.
The Mayor of Toronto, Canada.
Toronto Publicity Bureau, Toronto.
President of the Canadian National Railways.
Acting Consul-General, Czechoslovak Republic.
The Consul-General for Netherlands.
The Director, Ministry of Education, Amsterdam.
The Chancellor of the Swedish Consulate.
Donald Mackinnon, Commissioner for Australia, New York.
City Clerk, Winnipeg, Canada.
The Secretary, The Chamber of Commerce, Los Angeles, California.
The Secretary, The Chamber of Commerce, Galveston, Texas.
Town Planning Consultant, Westminster.
Birmingham Civic Society.
Bordeaux Chamber of Commerce.
Detroit City Plan Commission.
Norway Trade Intelligence Bureau.
Paris La Renaissance des Cites.
Welwyn Garden City Ltd.
West Middlesex Joint Town Planning Committee.
City Engineer, City and County of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
Architect to the Council, London County Council.
Town Clerk, County Borough of Bournemouth.
The Eastry Rural District Council, Sandwich, Kent.
The Town Clerk, Melbourne, Victoria.
W. G. Layton, Deputy Town Clerk, Sydney.
Thos. J. McMahon, Brisbane.
Norman B. Weekes, A.R.1.8.A., City Surveyor, Town Hall, Sydney.
W. Scott Griffiths, Government Town Planner, Adelaide, South Australia.
J. Garlick, Under-Secretary, Local Government Department, Sydney.
J. J. C. Bradfield, Chief Engineer, Metropolitan Railway Construction
Branch.
R. J. Boyd, M.E., M.lnst.C.E., Sydney.
The Commissioners, The Sydney Harbour Trust, Sydney.
Henry F. Halloran, L.S., Sydney.
C. F. Dewey, International Association of Railway Correspondents,
Sydney.
B. J. Waterhouse, Sydney.
John Sulman, F.R.1.8.A., Sydney.
R. Keith Harris, A.1.A., A.R.1.8.A.
H. G. Foxall, 8.E.. A.M.1.E., Aust.
Professor A. L. Saddler, M.A.
Professor L. Wilkinson, A.1.A., F.R.1.8.A.
Town Clerk, Town Hall, St. Kilda, Melbourne.
“The Evening News.”
“The Sun.”
The “Daily Guardian.”


Paris. The Arc de Triomphe; Tomb of the Unknown
Soldier, and Place de I’Etoile.
Town-planning is not restricted to buildings and roads. It deals
with transport problems, park systems, recreation centres, allot-
ment gardens, etc.
Town-planning aims at making towns and cities more efficient,
more healthy, more pleasing, and more inspiring.


Shepherd and
Newman, Ltd.
svdnky.
