

AN EXTENSIVE POPULAR FRAUD.
F r 9S3>o
It has been truly said that when a lie has got a good start it takes
a long time for truth to overtake it; and this is especially the case
with a pious falsehood which an interested class has, for many centuries
past, cajoled their dupes into the belief that it is of divine authority,
to doubt which is a mortal sin, whereby their immortal welfare is
blighted for ever. Through the judgment of their dupes having been
thus warped from infancy, it is almost an impossibility for them in after
years to allow the divine faculty of reason, with which God has en-
dowed them, to assert itself in the consideration of the truth and
validity of the religious views that have been insidiously instilled into
their minds. The consequence of this is that while the arts and
sciences have made great strides, religious views have remained stagnant
for ages, and ancient superstition has usurped the place of true
religion, which, as said of old, is comprised in love to God and love to
man, and has nothing to do with ecclesiasticism and ceremonial.
The great popular religious fraud referred to is none other than
Roman Catholicism, with its priestly assumption of its divine authority
and the consequent unlimited power of its priesthood over the masses,
even to the enslavement of the consciences of their dupes. It may,
however, be asked does not the Roman Catholic Church inculcate
morality and charity ? This it certainly very wisely does, for without
it professed to teach these virtues it would not have existed for one
century, far less for fifteen as it has done. It is the morality and
charity which it teaches that has given this huge system of fraud and
imposture its vitality, but teaching on the part of its priests is one
thing and practising is another. It is truly astounding how so many
educated and otherwise sensible people do not perceive the glaring
absurdities of the claims and pretensions of the Pope of Rome and his


subordinate priests. Take for example the powers they profess to have
to forgive sins and thereby to override the divine and equitable law of
retributive justice, to convert pieces of dough into the actual body of a
righteous man who was endowed with spiritual gifts and was murdered
some eighteen centuries ago, and to change wine into his blood. Can
the height of folly further go 1 Take again the arrogance of the Pope
in claiming to be the vicegerent of the God of universal nature, and in
bestowing his blessings on certain occasions on favoured parties and
their utter futility, as the following examples incontestibly prove.
Have not his benedictions instead of blessings invariably brought curses
and misfortunes apparently on those whom he has had the audacity to
favour with his special blessings ? For, as examples of this, take the
following :
The Spanish Armada received the blessing of Pope Sextus Y., yet
it was destroyed as much by the wrath of heaven as by the efforts of
Howard, Drake, Hawkins and Frobisher. Further back the Crusaders
were blessed by Clement 111., yet the king, Richard 1., got manacled
and cast into a foreign dungeon, and his subjects did not know what
had become of him. At last his place of detention became known in
England through Blondin, the troubadour, and his subjects had to pay
one hundred and fifty thousand pounds for the ransom of their
sovereign. The crusaders had to come to terms with the Saracens, and
the Holy Land still remains in possession of the infidel, who has lately
slain 20,000 Christians. The Archbishop of Peru was blessed by the
Pope, and he died of poison forty-three days afterwards. The Republic
of Columbia was blessed by the Pope, and it is said to be “ the most
distressful country that ever yet was seen,” The college of the Sisters
of Charity in New York was blessed by the Pope, and it was burnt
down three weeks later. Prince Rudolf of Austria was blessed by
the Pope, and he committed suicide a few days afterwards. Queen
Mercedes of Spain was blessed by the Pope and only survived the
benediction three days. Alphonso XII. received the Pope’s blessing
and died in the springtime of life. In 1860 the Pope bestowed his
special blessing on Francis 11. King of Naples, and three months later
the mere presence of Garibaldi in the city caused it to fall and the
king to be exiled subsequently. In 1866 the Pope sent his blessing,
together with the Golden Rose, to Queen Isabella 11. of Spain, which
was followed by many insurrections and military rebellions, culminating
in the loss of the Spanish throne to the Queen and her family. In


1870, before the Franco-German war, the Pope’s blessing was given
to Napoleon 111., or rather to his Empress Eugeni, who subsequently
termed the great conflict between France and Germany “her own
war ” : hostilities soon broke out at Ohiselhurst, which were followed
by the early and tragic death of the Emperor. General Boulanger
obtained the Pope’s special blessing, but in less than three months
he was compelled to take refuge in Germany, and subsequently he
committed suicide. The Emperor M.aximilian, the brother of Francis
Joseph of Austria, obtained the Pope’s blessing for himself and wife,
and in 1867, three years later, his entrance into Mexico was followed
by his utter failure to establish a permanent government, his capture
at Quarritaro, his sentence of death by court martial, and his execution }
while the unfortunate Empress Charlotte, daughter of King Leopold of
Belgium, completely lost her reason. In 1870 the Pope sent his
blessing to the Sisters of Charity who were starting for South America,
and a fortnight after this the ship on which they were sank and not
one of them escaped being drowned. Don Pedro, Emperor of Brazil,
obtained the Pope’s blessing for himself and the Empress : three days
after receiving it the Empress had a fall from her horse and had hei
leg broken, and two months later the conspiracy of Don Francisco
deprived the Emperor of his throne. The celebrated parliamentary
orator, Windhorst, died a few months after receiving from the Pope
his blessing and the order of Jesus Christ. Carnot, President of the
French Republic, was assassinated shortly after Madam Carnot had
obtained the Pope’s blessing and the Golden Rose. The defeat of
Spain and the destruction of her fleet in the Spanish-American war
followed close upon the bestowal of the Pope’s blessing upon the Queen
Regent, upon the young King, and upon the soldiers sent to Cuba.
While the announcement of the Pope’s blessing on the Chanty Bazaar
in Jean Gaufon Street, in Paris, in 1897, was being circulated in the
city, the fire by which it was consumed broke out, and one hundred
and fifty persons perished. The Empress Elizabeth of Austiia, soon
after receiving the Pope’s blessing and the Golden Rose from Leo
XIII., was fatally stabbed by Lucheni. The Archduchess Stephani,
widow of Prince Rudolf of Austria, on her marriage with Count d<?
Lonyay, went to Rome for the special purpose of obtaining the Pope’s
blessing, and a few days after it was granted the castle chosen for the
newly-wedded couple’s future residence was destroyed by tire. Mrs.
W. T. Sherman died shortly after she received the Golden Rose from


the Pope as a special mark of favor for her services to the Church,
The Pope cursed Italy as he had cursed England, and he excom-
municated King Humbert for his having made Rome the capital of his
kingdom : since then Italy has risen from being a mere cipher among
the nations to be a voice and a power in the councils of Europe. He
also cursed Germany, which has since become one of the greatest
continental powers. When near her accouchement, the Empress of
Brazil requested the interposition of the Pope and his blessing on her
child, which were granted, and were followed by the child being born
deformed. The Archbishop of Damascus in August, 1895, when
addressing the Spanish troops who, were about to start for Cuba
declared that the Pope was a new Moses and that he had raised his
hands to heaven and prayed for victory ; with what result is well
known.
The foregoing are only a few of the numerous well-authenticated
facts which could be quoted to show the utter futility of the blessings
of those men who have the audacity to claim that they are the vice-
gerents of God on earth, yet the crudulous adherents of the Roman
Catholic Church are so blinded by superstition and priestly fear that
they cannot perceive that this huge institution is but a pious fraud,
resting solely on their credulity and dependent on their monetary
contributions, without which latter it would certainly cease to exist.
Here follow some interesting quotations from authorities regardin'*
the Roman Catholic Church, her priests, her principles, her aims,
Regarding oral confession, Liguori, in Selva, p 254, asks: “Is there
danger in a n,un confessing to a priest ?” “Yes,” says Augustine,
“there is danger ; you ought to fear and fly from familiarity with her ;
for the more spiritual and holy a woman is the more easily she gains
the affections of men.” Dr. Wylie, in his work entitled The Papacy, p.
329, writes ; “ There is not a better school of wickedness on earth than
the confessional History testifies that for every offender whom the
confessional has reclaimed it has hardened thousands ; for one it may
have saved it has destroyed millions.” R. W. Hogan in Auricular
Confession and Popish Nunneries, London, 1851, pp. 19-28, states :
I now declare most solemnly and sincerely that, after living 25 years
in full communion with the Roman Catholic Church, and officiating as
a Roman Catholic priest, hearing confessions and confessing myself, I
know not another reptile in all animated nature so filthy, so much to
be shunned, loathed and dreaded by females, both married and single,
as a Romish priest or bishop who practices the degrading and 'de-
moralising office of auricular confession ” Dr. James Browne, Roman
Catholic Bishop of Shrewsbury, in A Guide for Priests, p. 68, asks :
“What is Woman?” St. Jerome, also a Roman Catholic ’ priest,
supplies the answer (mark this ye women who go to confession): “ She


is the gate by which the devil enters, the road that leads to sin ; she is
the sting of the scorpion. Woman is a tire, man the tow, and the devil
the bellows.” St. Maximus writes of woman : “She makes shipwreck
of men, a tyrant leading them captive, a lioness tearing with its claws,
a monster decked out to lure them to destruction, a malicious beast.”
And St. Anastatius writes : “ She is a viper clothed with a shining
skin, a comfort to the demon, a laboratory of devils, a flaming furnace,
a javelin where the heart is pierced, a storm by which houses are
overthrown, a guide leading to darkness, a teacher of all evil, an
unbridled tongue speaking evil of the saints. A fair woman tricked
out with linery is a keen and sharp-edged sword in the hands of the
devil.”
In the Melbourne Argus of September 17, 1887, appeared the
following, headed “ Sad occurrence at Deniliquin ” : “ Mr. Patrick
Slaman, an old and highly respected draper of this town, died here
on 'luesday night under very painful circumstances. On Tuesday
evening Slaman, who was in good health and spirits, received about
six o’clock an anonymous letter by post conveying to him the
intelligence that his eldest daughter, a girl of about twenty years of
age was enciente, and that a Roman Catholic priest, who had left
Deniliquin, was her seducer and the father of the child. The letter
came as a thunderbolt to Slaman ; it was the first intimation he had
received of the unfortunate affair. He immediataly interviewed his
family, and the daughter confessed that the statement in the letter
was true. .. . The priest left here about three months ago, when a
testimonial and a purse of sovereigns were presented to him. Slaman,
who was a leading man in the Roman Catholic Cljurch, being the
prime mover in the testimonial and the principal subscriber.”
Roman Catholics must agree with Protestants that Pope Alexander
Yl. was one of the most infamous monsters and debauchers the world
has ever seen. Not satisfied with living in public concubinage with
his own sister, he seduced and dishonored his own daughter Lucretia.
There is a perfect unanimity among historians, both of the Roman
Catholic and the Protestant persuasions, that Pope Alexander VI.
must be put at the head of the monsters who have overstepped the
limits of human depravity and infamy. Notwithstanding all this, the
Romish Church holds that that incarnated devil was not only infallible,
but that his ordination gave him power over the Son of God through
the intercession of His mother. According to Cardinal Bellarmine :
“ the Pope should err by enjoining vices and forbidding virtues, the
Church would be obliged to believe vice to be good and virtue to be
bad.” In the Roman Catholic Tablet of July 20, 1872, it is stated ;
“The Jesuits are at the head of the great Catholic mission in this land.
They are working while we are sleeping, preparing for the overthrow
of the Protestant dynasty, fulfilling Cardinal Manning’s words.” “ The


Jesuit Society has been expelled more than seventy times from the
different states of Europe, and has for some time been flocking into this
country (England) in order to carry out their nefarious work.” In the
Tablet of August 6, 1859, p. 582, Cardinal Manning, a pervert, writes:
“It is good, too, for us to be here in England. If ever there was a
land in which work is to be done, and perhaps much to suffer, it is
here. I shall not say too much if I say we have to subjugate, to
conquer, and rule an imperial race ; we have to do it with a will
which reigns through the world as the will of old Rome reigned once ;
we have to bend or break that will which nations and kingdoms have
found invincible and inflexible. . . . Were heresy, that is Protes-
tantism, conquered in England, it would be conquered throughout the
world : all its lines meet here, and therefore in England the Church of
God must be gathered in its strength.” The Rt. Hon. B. Disraeli
(Lord Beaconsfield) declared : “We are sinking beneath a power
before which the proudest conquerors have grown pale, and by which
the nations most devoted to freedom have become enslaved—the power
of a foreign priesthood. . . . Your Empire and your liberties are more
in danger at this moment than when the army of invasion was
encamped at Boulogne.”
Who would believe that people in these colonies would permit
such insolence as the following : In the Centennial Magazine appears
an article by Mr. B. R. Wise, entitled “Plain Speaking on Great
Questions.” The writer gives instances of interference on the part of the
Catholic priesthood with New South Wales affairs. Among the rest of
these he quotes from a circular directed to be issued by the Roman
Catholic Diocesan Synod held in Sydney, April 1888. It is addressed
to parish priests, and opens as follows : “ Reverend and Dear Sir, —I
am instructed by the Cardinal Archbishop to forward to you the
Diocesan Regulations adopted at the Diocesan Synod, held in the
Cathedral on the 25th of April last: Oddfellows, Foresters, Druids,
Good Templars, Rechabites, and all kindred societies have not the
approval of the church, and all Catholics who, after this date, shall join
such societies, disregarding the instructions of their clergy, shall be
deprived of the benefit of the presence and service of the priests at their
funerals.” In the Catholic Telegraph appears the following : “It will
be a glorious day for the Catholics of this country when, under the
blows of justice and morality, our system of free schools will be
shivered to pieces.” In the address at the Council of Trent of the Pope
of Rome to all the bishops and priests, and to the whole world, it
states ; “ Thou shalt not make unto you any graven images (called
wafers), or a likeness of anything which is in heaven (the body of
Christ), and you shall not bow down yourselves and serve them.” Yet
this is what has been done constantly since then, and is still being done
by all Roman Catholic bishops and priests.


Rome is known as “the seven-hilled city.” In Revelation xvii.
1.8, it states: “The great city which reigneth over the kings of the
earth,” In the 9th verse of the same chapter it states: “ Seven
mountains on which the woman sitteth.” In the Ist verse it states :
“The great whore that sitteth on many waters”; and in the 15th
verse : “ The waters where the whore sitteth are peoples, and mul-
titudes, and nations, and tongues.” In St. John’s age there was one
city, a great city, built on seven hills—Rome. The name of each of its
seven hills is well known, and in St. John’s time it was usually called
“the seven-hilled city,” It was celebrated as such in an annual
national festival. There is scarcely a Roman poet of any note who has
not spoken of Rome as a city seated on seven mountains, On the
Imperial medals, which are still preserved, we see Rome displayed as a
woman sitting on seven hills, as she is represented in the Apocalypse.
St. John gives another criterion by which the Apocalyptic city is to be
identified. “ The woman which thou sawest is that great city which
reigneth over the kings of the earth.” (Revelation xvii. 18.) The
epithets commonly applied to Rome by the poets of St, John’s age are
the great, the mighty, the royal Rome, the Queen of Nations, the
eternal city, the mistress of the world. “It is confessed by all,” says
Cardinal Baronius, “ That Rome is signified in the Apocalypse by the
name of Babylon.” The Babylon of the Apocalypse is allowed by
Romish, as well as Protestant waiters, to represent the city of Rome.
In Revelation xvii. 4, it states : “ The woman was arrayed in
purple and scarlet colour, and decked with gold and precious stones and
pearls, having a golden cup in her hand.” The first appearance of the
Pope of Rome, on his election to the Pontificate : “ The Pontiff-elect
is conducted to the sacrarium, and divested of his ordinary attire, and
is clad in the Papal robes.” The colour of these five different articles
of dress in which he is arrayed is scarlet. Another vest is specified,
and this is covered with pearls, and his mitre with gold and precious
stones. Such is the attire in which the Pope is arrayed, and in which
he first appears to the world as Pope. Rome still sits as a queen and
claims the title of divinity, and calls herself eternal. In Revelation
xix. 24 it is stated : “In her was found the blood of prophets, and of
saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.” And in Revelation
xvii. 6 it is stated : “ I saw the woman drunken with the blood of
saints, and with the blood of martyrs of Jesus.” It has been calculated
that the Popes of Rome have directly or indirectly slain, on account of
their faith, fifty millions of martyrs, and they would do so again if they
had the power. Fortunately, through the march of civilization, the
present Pope or his successors are not likely to have the power to put
those they call heretics to death in the future, or to suppress the
liberty of the Press, the liberty of conscience, the liberty of speech, or
the liberty of worship other than according to the Pope’s dictation. It


is high time that all educated Roman Catholics should rise up and
denounce this huge system of priestly fraud and imposture, and
endeavour to replace it with practical religion, which is of individual
and universal application, the sum and substance of which is morality
in its mildest sense, requiring no special sacerdotal class or dogmas to
mystify and terrify the credulous. Those who have not the courage to
do this openly can render material aid by withdrawing their support
from the church and stopping their subscriptions thereto, at the same
time setting a good example to others.
“ In thee, 0 Rome, the blood of millions slain
Cries for God’s vengeance, nor shall cry in vain ;
Those martyred millions yet shall rise again
To testify against thee !”
Printed by C. W. Burford, 37-41 Gordon Place, Melbourne.
