

'Tzfr
mi
% r i\
I
R€Ua '°JS P/»HS
Boa n
AN EXAMINATION
SECULARISM
ROBERT POTTER, B.A.
Canon of Melboui nc, Incumbent of St Mary's, Hotham, and Lecturer on
Christian Evidences in Trinity College, Melbourne
GEORGE ROBERTSON
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
♦ ?? ♦♦c== ) c=>«♦<=^<=^*==♦*c=r==^=>^*^r^C: = ,
PRICE SIXPENCE.




pi 4-^B6
AN EXAMINATION
SECULARISM
ROBERT POTTER, B.A.
Canon of Melbourne, Incumbent of St Mary's, Hotham, and Lecturer on
Christian Evidences in Trinity College, Melbourne
GEORGE ROBERTSON
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE


MELBOURNE :
PRINTED BY WALKER, MAY, AND CO.,
9 MACKILLOP STREET.


EXAMINATION OF SECULARISM
We hear a great deal about secularism at present It seems to be
considered a power, and a rising power. It is a phenomenon,
certainly, which is large and significant enough to excite curiosity, if
not to create alarm. And people are already asking all sorts of
questions about it; as, for instance, What are we to do if secularism
prevails ? What is to become of religion ? What of morals ? What
of society ? All of them highly interesting and important questions,
but all yielding in both interest and importance to another, namely
this, Is secularism true ?
For if it be true, it will prevail, let the consequences be what they
may. They say that the sun is cooling down, and must go but some
day; and if so, it is a very interesting question, What is to become
of mankind ? But if the sun is cooling, the fact that mankind must
perish in consequence will not stop the process. And so, too, if
religion, morals, and society must all vanish before the prevalence
of secularism, that will not prevent secularism from prevailing if it is
true. One is tempted to hope that if both doctrines are true—
secularism and the cooling of the sun—they may run a parallel
course, and the truth of both be made manifest together, so that by
the time our soul and conscience have disappeared before the one,
our bodies may be ready to perish before the other, so that we or our
posterity (as the case may be) may be delivered from the embarrass-
ing question, How to manage a body without a soul or a conscience ?
But if secularism is not true, then it will not prevail; and then, no
matter how long the sun’s heat lasts, we shall never be troubled with
the problem of “ bodies without souls.”
Now, the only way to know whether any theory is true, is to con-
front it with facts. And my principal purpose in this lecture is to do
this with secularism. I propose to confront secularism with one fact,
one historical and actually existing fact, and to ask you to draw your
own conclusion as to its truth.
But first we must ask, What is secularism ? For it appears in
two forms, one cruder, the other more organic, better considered
both as to'principles and effects, and so better fitted for attack and
defence. The cruder form of secularism is, nevertheless, the more


popular, perhaps I should say therefore the more popular; it appeals
to very general sympathies ; it flatters our lack of knowledge, and
can put on a sort of blunt matter-of-fact manner that looks honest.
The cruder secularism affirms that this actual perceptible
“ seculutn," * this visible universe—all parts of which are capable of
being examined by our five senses, or would be so capable if we
were near enough to them in time and space—is absolutely all that
exists; that there is nothing else, and, therefore, that all that we call
spiritual realities, God and the soul, and all thoughts which have
these thoughts for their basis, are very much less than moonshine.
There is no need, however, to treat this cruder form of secularism
with any such consideration as to confront it with the great historic
fact to which I made allusion just now. For it professes to make
appeal to science, and to science we shall go with it.
What, then, is the point at issue between us and this cruder form of
secularism ? It is this. Does anything exist except that which is a
possible object of sense? Is there any substance which cannot be
apprehended by the senses, or by any of them, which may be near
us, round us, in us, and yet not be so apprehended or apprehensible ?
Science alleges not only that there may be, but that there must
be, some such invisible, intangible, absolutely imperceptible sub-
stance. Science teaches that it is necessary to postulate such a sub-
stance in order to account for the visible universe as it exists. You
have heard, I dare say, of what the men of science call the aether, or
the setherial medium. This, they tell us, fills all the interplanetary
and interstellar spaces, and permeates all bodies freely as the water
does a sponge. That comparison, indeed, is a very imperfect one,
'for the sponge drawn through the water is greatly retarded by the
water which passes through it, whereas bodies passing through the
aether, and permeated by it, are not retarded at all. Now, what is
this aether? Can it be seen ? No. Can it be heard ? No. Tasted,
or smelt, or touched ? No ; none of these. Surely, then, it is
capable of resistance? No; it appears not, for the planets are not
retarded by it; it was supposed for a little while that comets might
be retarded by it, and calculations Were made about the movements
of Encke’s comet, which were thought at first to indicate such
retardation. But the final result of these investigations shows that
there is none such discoverable t Again, the earth’s atmosphere
extends to a height of upwards of one hundred miles from the earth’s
surface, and at that height is vastly more attenuated than any air of
which we have experience, yet when a meteor strikes it the meteor
takes fire. Why ? Because of its friction with that extremely
attenuated air. But the same meteor was careering through the aether
at the same speed a few moments before. Why did not its friction
with the aedier set it on fire ? Because there was no friction : friction
implies resistance, and there was no resistance. Although the aether
penetrates in every direction every body that passes through it, yet it
offers no resistance. Thus it is in every way imperceptible to the
senses.
Hebrews xi. 3 —Vulgate. f Newcomb’s “Popular Astronomy,” p. 384.


How, then, did the men of science come to imagine or invent
such a thing ? Well, the history of that is interesting, and bears
directly upon our subject. Let me try to sketch it for you. When
the law of gravity was first discovered, it seemed to contradict a
principle which was then held, and is still held, to be axiomatic and
self-evident. That principle is that nothing can act where it is not.
If there be any object which I desire to act upon, a post, for example,
which I want to pull down ; and, if I cannot reach it with my hands,
then, before I can pull it down, I must get something that will reach
it, a rope, or a wire, or something or oilier by which I may transmit
my force. If there is absolutely nothing between me and the post, I
cannot affect it in any way. Sir Isaac Newton believed in this
doctrine, so did Descartes and all his followers, and so does Mr,
Herbert Spencer now, for he says, to the great astonishment of John
Stuart Mill, “ If an astronomer vowed that he could conceive gravi-
tative force, as exercised through space, absolutely void, my private
opinion would be that he mistook the nature of conception.”* And
Stewart and Tail say, “ It is impossible (as Newton long ago pointed
out in his celebrated letters to Bentley) for any one ‘ who has in
philosophical matters a competent faculty of thinking’to admit for
a moment the possibility of action at a distance.”f
So then comes the question, How can the sun act upon the earth
if there is nothing between ? “ Oh,” say the men of science, “ but
there is something between ; there is the aether between.” It is true
the aether is absolutely imperceptible to our senses ; still, there it
must be, or gravity cou'd not act. The sun could not pull the
planets, and the earth could not pull the moon, and so the whole
system would fall to pieces.
Now, think what that means. It means that in order to account
for the motions and stability of the visible universe we are obliged
to assume the existence of a substance of which our senses give
us, and can give us, no direct evidence at all.
But more; when the men of science assumed the existence of
this aether, they found it serviceable for several other purposes.
Professor Clifford writes : “ The actual aether which fills space is so
elastic that the slightest possible distortion of it produced by the
vibration of a single atom sends a shudder through it with incon-
ceivable rapidity for billions of billions of miles : that shudder is
light.” J So then the aether, although itself absolutely invisible, is,
nevertheless, the cause of our seeing all that we can see. The way
in which the men of science account for our seeing anything at all is
by postulating the existence of an immeasurably vast substance, which
is absolutely imperceptible to human sense. But more still; I quote
Professor Clifford again, “ Until it is finally disproved, it must remain
the simplest and most probable account that the smallest molecule is
a knot or coagulation of aether.” § Remember that molecules are the
composite parts of all matter, and you will see now how far we have
got. The aether is probably the storehouse, out of which the whole
. * Mill’s “Logic,” vol. i., p. 317, 10th edition,
t “Unseen Universe,” p. 109, Ist edition. + “Fortnightly Review,” 1875.
§ “Fortnightly Review,” 1875.


visible universe is made. In the opinion of advanced men of
science, such as Professor Clifford, all the material of which our
senses are cognizant is formed out of a substance which is invisible
and intangible, and otherwise absolutely imperceptible. It appears
that John Stuart Mill did not like this doctrine of the aether, and the
writer in the Encyclopedia Britannica notices this fact and apologizes
for it. He says that so many absurdities had been promulgated
about aether in former times that the philosophers of the 18th
century had conceived a prejudice against the doctrine, and this pre-
judice had descended to Mill, But we have the concurrent testimony
of such men as Sir Isaac Newton, Clifford, Herbert Spencer, Stewart,
and Tait, and the writer in the Encyclopedia Britannica , that it
admits of no doubt that the whole interplanetary and interstellar
spaces are filled with a substance which is absolutely imperceptible
to human sense.
Now, do not suppose that I am going to ask you to identify the
aether with the spiritual world, in which Christians believe. lam
going to do no such thing. For aught I know the aether of science
may be a figment; the theory may have to be altered or given up, and
another substituted for it. But all the same this remains proved,
that the men of science cannot account for the visible universe as it is
without assuming the existence of a vast, invisible, intangible, utterly
imperceptible substance, permeating all space and all matter, and
probably not subject to gravity, which is the means whereby the forces
act which hold the universe together, which, itself invisible, is the
source of light, and which is probably the storehouse out of which the
whole visible universe was made. And so it is clear that when secu-
larism in its cruder form affirms that the absolutely imperceptible is
the non-existent, and when it makes its appeal to science, science
dismisses the appeal. There is that which exists, and which yet is
not perceptible; and it is vastly greater than, and it conditions the
being of, and it is the antecedent of, all that is perceptible. Such is
the judgment of science.
And so we have done with secularism in its cruder form.
And now, before we confront secularism in its reformed and more
formidable shape, let us note one indication which emerges in the
course of the appeal to science. The men of science tell us of
certain primary structures called atoms, which according to them are
the ultimate component parts of the whole material universe. And
of these we learn that they are uniform in their constitution, insomuch
that Sir John Herschel and Clerk Maxwell (two of the greatest names
in science) tell us that they bear all the marks of “ manufactured
articles.” This is most important in its bearing upon the question.
For whenever we find a vast number of objects of exactly the same
pattern fitted to fulfil certain functions, we know at once that we are
on the track of intelligence. And so, when we find these primordial
atoms thus uniform in constitution, and forming by their various
combinations worlds and systems of worlds, and all the complex
mechanism of Nature, then we cannot help concluding that they owe
their origin to intelligence. So then we claim as the result of the
appeal to science these two conclusions, (i) That there is a world


beyond the reach of human sense; and (2) That the visible material
world is the work of an intelligent Maker.
And now let us turn once more to secularism. For, as I
have said, secularism by no means accepts the judgment of
science as a defeat. It reforms itself in accordance with the
judgment, and in its reformed shape it is a more formidable
adversary. For, indeed, its first contention that there is no-
unseen world at all is one that never could make much real way
amongst men. The human mind can never be persuaded that there
is no unseen, for it knows that it belongs to the unseen itself. Its-
outward senses, by which it examines the material world, fail to give
it any information when it questions them about itself. They tell it a
great deal about the functions of nerve, and muscle, and brain, and
about the coincidence of these functions with its own action ; but then
comes a vast chasm, which they cannot cross. And beyond that
chasm the mind knows that there is more than mere non-existence,
for it knows that it dwells beyond that chasm itself.
And so secularism finds its advantage, after all, in accepting the
judgment of science. It throws aside its earlier crudities, and says,
“ Yes, there must be an unseen world—a ‘ somewhat behind pheno-
mena ; ’ but it is a world of which nothing can be known. The
senses are all the means we have of getting information, and they
absolutely fail us there. It is all in vain to talk about a life in that
other world, and a King of that other world who rules both there and
here. It is all mere guesswork, and never can be more, and there-
fore, if we are wise, we will put all thought about such matters wholly
away from us, and try to make the best we can of the world that we
know.”
Well, now, certainly if we are left to ourselves, then we can know
nothing about the unseen world. But that is just the question. Are
we left to ourselves? What if the Maker of us all, who dwells in the
unseen, have sent us a message from the unseen world ? And, mind,
there may be a very good reason beforehand for His doing so. For,
if the unseen world and this world be so closely related to one an-
other as science says they are, then there are most likely principles at
work there, and modes of action in process there, which may affect
us here, and confessedly we cannot find such out unless the powers
of that world reveal them to us. Mind you {and this is important)
there would be no such reason why the powers of the unseen should
tell us thus of things which we have been given faculties to discover;
but we have been given no faculties wherewith to penetrate the
unseen. And so, if there be anything which it would be specially
good for us to know, and if we have a friend there, we might well
expect him to let us know of it if he could. And this is all the more
a reasonable expectation, inasmuch as science itself leads us to con-
jecture that there must be intelligence there, for this visible material
world presents the appearance of being the work of an intelligent
Maker. So the question now at issue is this —Is there a revelation of
the unseen world given to man ? If there is, then secularism is not
true.
i Here, then, comes in the fact which I desire to confront with


secularism—Jesus Christ, His teaching, and His character. And I say
that on that fact, and on that alone, rests the whole question between
secularism and religion. There are side issues plenty, science and
the Bible, the nature of inspiration, the complexities and difficulties
of creeds and dogma ; all interesting questions, all of them presenting
a readily assailable side to the secularist, all of them highly available
for controversy, but none of them going to the heart of the matter.
The one crucial question which contains within itself the solution of
all the rest is this—The teaching of Jesus of Nazareth, whence did it
come? For that Jesus of Nazareth is a real historical person no
secularist can any longer doubt. The secularist may doubt about
the story of His birth, of His miracles, of His resurrection, but no
longer about Himself. Attempts have been made to evaporate His
personality, but all such have resulted in the establishment of it
beyond the possibility of doubt, J. S. Mill was not a credulous
person, so little credulous that the men of science have to apologize
for him on account of his disbelief in their doctrine of the aether.
Well, he believes ihat Jesus was beyond all doubt an actual person,
and that His teaching is substantially preserved in the first three
Gospels.
Now I will here take for granted no facts excepting those which
secularism cannot deny. And, therefore, in confronting secularism
with Jesus Christ, I will assume nothing that is commonly called
miraculous. I will assume only, for the purpose of argument,
His actual personal existence and His teaching, and His teaching
only as it is preserved for us in the first three Gospels.
That which is preserved of the teaching of Jesus, although so
fragmentary, is nevertheless a large store. I will select from it a few
particulars in order to illustrate the vast scope of the moral revolution
which He wrought.
See, then, (i) how Jesus, in dealing with men, strips at once the
outside away, and goes direct to the conscience and the heart.
That was done occasionally, in their higher moments, by great
teachers before, but Jesus did it systematically. He sets up in each
bosom a tribunal of judgment, and from that tribunal He recognizes
one appeal, the appeal to the Father in Heaven. “ Let not thy left
hand know what thy right hand doeth, and thy Father which seeth in
secret shall recompense thee.” “ Enter into thy inner chamber, and
having shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and the
Father which seeth in secret shall recompense thee.” The mind of
man recognizes the fact that itself dwells in the unseen; so does Jesus,
and He tells man of the Father who dwells there too. He reveals
an inseparable bond between the inward silent sense which claims
the sway over the man, and the Father who seeth in secret and who
loves all His children. Thus at one stroke Jesus changed the moral
centre of gravity for mankind; and, ever since, the one mighty
inducement to virtue has been the appeal of love to the sense
of duty.
Look now at another point. (2) “Not the righteous, but sinners.”
The best moral legislators before Jesus aimed at little more than the
exclusion and banishment of the fallen and degraded. Jesus declares


His mission to be their exaltation and transformation. And who
shall say how much renewed hope, and how much restored purity,
and what enthusiasm of goodness, is due to those two glorious
apologues of the lost sheep, and the returned prodigal ? And Jesus
wrought that work of the exaltation and transformation of the lost
and fallen in strict accord with His primary principle of “ inwardness.”
For as long as the heart obstinately resisted goodness, no matter how
fair the outside seeming, no words could be strong enough for His
indignation. But once the heart turned, however faintly, yet in
earnest, to goodness, then no words were too gentle and sweet
for Him. But never did He give the slightest excuse for believing
that the inward change could be produced without itself producing
a corresponding outward change. “Go and sin no more,” “ The
tree is known by his fruit,” “ He that doeth the will of My Father in
Heaven is My brother and sister and mother.”
But once more. (3) Since Jesus lived and taught, we find that the
very ideal of human virtue has been transformed and exalted. One
need only name such virtues as humility, personal purity, and the
forgiveness of injuries, in order to see how that ideal has been essen-
tially and permanently altered by Jesus Christ. Take, for example,
the last-named of these virtues, the forgiveness of injuries, and let me
ask you to consider what an enormous change in this respect upon the
best men, the picked specimens, the saints and prophets and righteous
men, has been wrought by the teaching of Jesus. If you want to
see the startling nature of that change, imagine for a moment Bishop
Patteson, when he was dying of the poisoned arrows of the Santa
Cruz men, charging his successor thus —“ Watch round the island
with your war-ships. Don’t let the men escape; bring down their
grey hairs with sorrow to the grave.” Is it not a monstrous thought?
Yet such was the charge of David, saint, prophet, and psalmist, upon
his dying bed. “ Oh, but,” I seem to hear some one say, “ nearly
3,000 years have passed since King David’s time. And such a vast
lapse of time must make a difference in everything.” Come on then,
let us investigate that point. The interval between Bishop Patteson
and Saint Stephen is nearly twice as long as the interval between
Saint Stephen and King David, yet we find Stephen dying like Patte-
son and not like David. And so we reduce the interval to 1,000
years. But, look now at the story of the death of Zachariah, the son
of Jehoiada, in the days of Josiah, King of Israel. He died a martyr.
They stoned him at the command of the king in the court of the
temple. “ And when he died he said, The Lord look on it and
require it." “ Oh, but,” perhaps some one says, “ that’s in Chronicles,
and Chronicles is a book of late date and of doubtful historic value.”
Very well, take it so ; it is all the better for my argument, for what
have we in that case ? We have then the Jewish writers ideal of the
prophet and righteous man dying a martyr, and what does he make
him say ? “ The Lord look on it, and require it.” And by the
hypothesis, that was written about 250 years before Christ. But
there is no need to go back for 250 years, or ten years, or five years,
for the simple men who have preserved for us the sayings of Jesus
tell us of two of their own number, that they were once so enraged at


an insult offered to themselves and to their Master, that they asked
leave to call fire from heaven down upon their enemies; and Jesus
rebuked them. So you see that up to a certain date the black spirit
of revenge tor injury had its recognized place, not only in the heart
of the wicked or the worldly, but in the heart of saint and psalmist,
of martyr, and prophet, and apostle; and in the brief space of a year
or two it had given way to the sweet spirit of loving forgiveness.
What made the difference ? It was no development or evolution; it
was no mere growth of mental faculty, or of more highly organized
convolution of brain ; it was no mere natural process at all. It was
“ The wave
Of love that set so deep and strong
From Christ’s then open grave.”
Cast your eyes down now for a century or two upon the stream of
time, and mark the effect of the teaching of Jesus on the common
run of men then. Take some poor slave or freedman of the Roman
Empire who was a disciple of Jesus. Such we know there were in
plenty; quiet, law-abiding men, who scarce ever asked who sat in
Caesar’s seat, but did his bidding peaceably, because “the powers
that be are ordained of God.” Such a one, perhaps, you would call
a poor, mean-spirited creature, who lived an ignoble life, unillu-
minated by any high thoughts of liberty or independence. But wait
a moment. Let the man who sits in Caesar’s seat bid him do some
little thing which he considers to be insulting to his Master, Jesus.
Bring him before you and command him to sprinkle just a little
pinch of incense before the shrine of Jupiter, or of the Emperor, and
then, though you have all the majesty of the throne and of the state
behind you, and all the legions of the empire to back you, yes, and
cruel tigers from the jungles of Asia, and hungry wolves from the
forests of Germany, waiting in the arena to tear him to pieces if he
refuse to do your bidding—yet he’ll defy you to your face.
One other illustration of a different kind. Symbols they say are
little things. I will not deny it. But a true symbol is a little thing
which has its roots in reality, and therefore it is a little thing which
is full of life, and of great significance. I ask you, then, to think of
the cross, what it meant once, and what it means now. It meant
once the felon’s doom, the death of infamy, the fate of the basest of
mankind. It means now the union of earth and heaven, of God and
man. It means now Divine self-sacrifice, love which stoops from
the highest to the lowest, and yet never soils its heavenly perfection.
It has grafted itself upon the thoughts and feelings and fancies of
generation after generation of mankind. It stands on the most sacred
places, on churches, on altars, and over graves. The gaze of
millions rests upon it with untiring veneration The voice of
millions bursts forth before it in words of rapturous apostrophe !
What power is that which takes a thing, the least, the lowest,
and the vilest, and exalts it beyond all thought and imagination,
and makes it bud and blossom into life and glory and beauty, and
surrounds it with associations the grandest and the loveliest, and
wreaths it about with such incomparable splendour ? The power of


that great Teacher, who by His pure and holy life and words trans-
formed and exalted mankind’s ideal of goodness; the power of Him
who changed the bitter and vengeful curses of psalmist and prophet
into the sweet and gentle accents of peace and forgiveness and love;
the power of Him whose word, spoken hundreds of years before,
inspired the poor slave to face the whole strength of the cruel brute
force of the Roman Empire ; the power of Him around whose name
still gather all the highest and holiest hopes of men.
And now, who was He? What is His testimony to Himself?
For we must believe Him. Why ? Because untruth is incompatible
with the highest moral goodness which the world ever knew or
could conceive. If you think otherwise, you confound utterly and
hopelessly all ideas of right and wrong. If untruth can co-exist
with such otherwise perfect goodness, then there is no right and
wrong. That is what it comes to. Reject the testimony of Jesus
to Himself, and you have no alternative but that. There is, indeed,
an impossible via media proposed by a school of moralizing agnostics.
They think to keep the results of religion, while denying its postulates.
It is for ever absurd and impossible. If the postulates go, the
results must go \if the foundation goes, the building must go. And
such a conclusion is accepted with a light heart by the more
advanced secularist. He will tell you that there is no such thing as
right and wrong; he will tell you that all the moral commandments
are just the invention of men who want to keep what they have got.
That is his contention ; and he is right if Jesus Christ spoke falsely 1
And think what the world must come to if the world abandons
all distinction between right and wrong as a mere pestilent imagi-
nation ; if that inward sense that holds in check the lust and greed
of mankind is universally admitted to be an exploded absurdity. The
black darkness of moral-death must be spread over all the earth, and
society itself must be dissolved. That is what must follow if the
testimony of Jesus is to be rejected; moral death and social death :
in other words, if mankind finally rejects the testimony of Jesus to
Himself, mankind must “ go into perdition.”
But mankind never can and never will believe that there is no
such thing as the distinction between right and wrong, for the sense
of that distinction is an inseparable part of human nature, and
therefore it lies in the very nature of the case, that mankind must
accept the testimony of Jesus to Himself.
Well, and what is that testimony ? I confine myself for the sake
of argument to the synoptic Gospels, “All things have been
delivered unto Me of My Father, And no one knoweth the Son save
the Father, neither doth any know the Father save the Son, and he
to whom the Son willeth to reveal Him.” * Once more, “He saith
unto them, Whom say ye that I am ? and Simon Peter answered and
said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus
answered, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood hath
not revealed it unto thee, but My Father which is in heaven.” f And
yet once more, “ The high-priest asked Him and saith unto Him,
* St Matthe x . 27.
+ St. Matthew xvi. IW7.


Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed ? And Jesus said, I am;
and ye shall see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of power,
and coming with the clouds of heaven,” *
There you have the testimony of Jesus to Himself; delivered to the
people; delivered to His chosen apostles; delivered in the hour of
dread bodily peril to His murderers. He comes out of the unseen
world to reveal God to man. He stands in such relation to Him
whom He calls the Father as to call Himself the Son. And not only
does He tell us that He reveals the Father, but that the Father
reveals Him. And the Father of whom He speaks is that one who
“ seeth in secret,” and who shall “ render unto every man according
to his deeds.” Such is the testimony of Jesus to Himself.
And here, be it observed, we have not merely, as J. S. Mill
thinks, one ascribing his goodness to God as the best men do “ any
honourable peculiarity in themselves.” f Here we have the case of a
man claiming to be the one revealer of God, coming out of the
unseen world to declare to us who dwell in flesh and blood God’s
character and purpose as regards ourselves. And Jesus knew what
He was saying. It would be as absurd to suppose that folly and
fanaticism could co-exist with His insight and wisdom as that false-
hood could co-exist with His goodness. J. S. Mill says, “It
remains a possibility to the rational sceptic that Christ w r as a man
charged with a special express and unique commission from God to
lead mankind to truth and virtue.” J That is to say, the thing is
possible, even upon intellectual considerations alone. I say take in
moral considerations, and give them their due weight, and the thing
becomes not merely possible but certain.
So then, it is not true that we have no means of knowing any-
thing about the unseen world. For we have the authentic words of
Jesus the Revealer. And if the secularist turns away from those
words, and says they are incredible, he is like the famous ostrich who
thinks that, because he has contrived to fill his eyes and ears with
sand and dirt, there is nothing to be heard or seen.
But perhaps the secularist may say, “ There are others besides
Jesus who were moral teachers of the highest class, and worthy of all
credence,” or, ‘‘There are others besides Jesus who alleged them-
selves to have come from the unseen world charged with a unique
mission from God to man.” But I ask the secularist, is there any
besides Jesus of whom both these statements are true, not only that
he was a moral teacher of the highest class, and so worthy of all
credence, but also that he alleged himself to have come from the
unseen world with a unique mission from God to man ? Mohammed
alleged himself to have such a mission, but he was not a moral
teacher comparable to Jesus, or a man that one must believe. Sakya
Muni was a great moral teacher, if we may accept as authentic,
records of his life and teaching which were first committed to writing
more than 400 years after his death. And he was, as far as we can
judge from the same evidence, a man well worthy to be believed.
* St. Mark xiv. 61-62. t “Essays on Religion,” p. 241, 3rd edition.
J “Essays on Religion,” p. 255, 3rd edition.


But the Buddha pretended to no knowledge of the unseen world, or
of the unseen Father, because he had no such knowledge. And so
he lacked the fulcrum from which Christ wrought upon the world,
and we cannot wonder, therefore, that he failed to transform and
exalt mankind’s ideal of moral virtue. Sakya Muni was himself a
secularist, but he had an excuse for his secularism that no man can
ever have again. For the claims and testimony of Jesus were not
before him. And if they had been before him, I have no doubt that ,
he would have been a Christian. And when the Church blundered
once into claiming him as a saint, as Max Muller * tells us that she,
did, her spiritual instinct was right although her history was
wrong.
Now, let us try to apply our conclusion to some of the most
formidable of the religious difficulties of the day. Remember our
conclusion is this Jesus Christ came out of the unseen world to
reveal to us the character and attributes of the Father who rules both
there and here. And He himself is revealed by the Father, and He
came to make men as the Father would have them be, good and just
and true
1. Well, then, it follows for one thing that the difficulty about
believing the miraculous as far as the person and acts of Jesus are
concerned disappears at once. For, surely, if we believe that Jesus
came out of the invisible world charged with a unique mission from
God and standing in a unique relation to God, we cannot expect that
all that such a one does can be accounted for by the laws of this
visible material world. And therefore we cannot pretend to account
for them, for we know and can know only the laws of the natural
world, except in so far as He may reveal to us the laws of the super-
natural world. No doubt, the boundary between the two worlds is
only relative to us We have the faculties to examine the one ;we
have not the faculties to examine the other. No doubt law reigns
throughout the whole universe, both seen and unseen. But it would
be the height of absurdity for us, who know only the laws of the seen,
to brand as antagonistic to law the actions of One who lives and acts
in both seen and unseen. If we believe Jesus to have been what He
said He was. then surely there is no difficulty in believing that He rose
from the dead, and that He showed men for a time His body, gradually
ridding itself of the sway of mere material forces until it passed
gloriously into the unseen again. In the words of Stewart and Tail,
we may say that what “ Christ accomplished was not in defiance of
law, but in fulfilment of it; and that He was able to do so much was
simply due to the fact that His position with reference to the universe
was different from that of any other man ”f
2. Does our conclusion throw any light on the much-debated
question of creeds and dogma? I think it does. And first let me
say that if we proceed to develop logically Christ’s statements
about Himself, I am persuaded that we cannot stop short of the
Nicene formula, that He was “ the Very God of one essence with the
* “ Selected Essays,” vol. i., p. 540, et seq.
f “Unseen Universe,” p. 61, Ist edition.


Father.” But ought we to exercise our intellect on such questions?
Surely the answer is that we cannot help doing so. Surely God did
not give us our intellect that we might silence it upon the highest of
topics. Be it said with emphasis, that it was no part of Christ’s
mission to stifle the human intellect. But be it said with equal
emphasis, that we have learned from Christ to say of the intellect, that
“ she is the second, not the first.” For Christ enthroned the
conscience, and not the intellect in the man. It was the conscience
that Christ made the connecting link between the soul of man and
the Father who seeth in secret.
These considerations appear to me to point to two conclusions,
which to some people may seem inconsistent. The first is that, so
long as the Church professes to guide men in the name of Jesus
Christ, she is bound to offer to men’s intellect a doctrine of Christ’s
person. The second is, that no statement further and more than
Christ’s account of Himself in His own words ought to be required
of any as a condition sine qua non of church fellowship. For if
it be true, as Christ says, that on the two great commandments of
love to God and love to man hang all the law and the prophets,
it is surely true that on the same two commandments hang all
the creeds. And I think that if this were authoritatively declared
and understood, no one would feel himself excluded from church
fellowship by the public use of any of the three creeds. lam
aware that public opinion considers that the famous Athanasian creed
is intended to effect such exclusion. Let me say, therefore, that I
think that if any one will fairly and intelligently examine the terms of
that creed he will find these two propositions implicitly contained
therein.—(l). That moral virtue is identical in the opinion of the
Church with holding the Catholic faith, insomuch that every good man,
i.e ., every man who keeps the two great commandments, as interpreted
by Jesus, whatever be his position as regards intellectual assent or
dissent,*keeps the Catholic faith whole and undefiled; and (2) that
as regards the explicit intellectual assent to the church’s definition of
her doctrine, it is the opinion of the church, there expressed, that
every good man will ultimately be brought, either in this world or the
next, to see the truth of that. I could wish that these two propositions
were expressly affirmed by the church. But, meanwhile, as they are
plainly implied in the Athanasian creed, and nowhere else in the
formularies, I should be very sorry to see the Athanasian creed
withdrawn.
The 39 articles stand on a very different footing from the creeds.
The creeds form one of the few links that still bind us to the rest of
Christendom. The 39 articles are of our own making, and we can
deal with them without affecting our friendly relations with other
churches. And I confess that I should not be sorry to see them
authoritatively withdrawn.
3. Does the teaching of Jesus Christ and His testimony to Him-
self throw any light on the difficulties which arise out of the supposed
* Compare these verses, “They that have done good shall go into life ever-
lasting,” and “which faith except everyone do keep whole and undefiled, without
doubt he shall perish everlastingly. ”


conflict between the Bible and science? As regards the New Testa-
ment, I have already pointed out that Jesus Christ by his assertion of
a mission from the unseen world suggests a vera causa for all those
acts of His which transcend nature. And as regards the Old Testa-
ment, this is to be said, that Jesus undoubtedly accepts it as a
divinely-inspired testimony to Himself. And, therefore, as Jesus is
the great moral teacher, we may expect to find in the Old Testament
a divinely-inspired discovery of moral truth. A gradual discovery ;
I add the word gradual because Jesus expressly affirms the morals of
the old Testament to be defective.* But the teaching of Jesus does
not require us to accept the Old Testament as containing a divinely-
inspired discovery of any other sort of truth. And this agrees well
with what I have already said about our a priori reason for expecting
a revelation. We cannot by searching find out God, and therefore
we may expect Him to reveal Himself to us if our welfare requires us
to know Him, But we can by searching find out scientific truth, and
therefore we have no such reason for expecting a revelation of scien-
tific truth. It seems to me, therefore, that we have no right to expect
to find the writers of the Old Testament (when they have to deal
with science) speaking any other language than that of the best
informed science of their own time. And therefore we must expect
to find their scientific statements at variance with the science of our
own day, just as our scientific statements will be found, no doubt, at
variance with the science of a future and more enlightened era.
There is one statement with reference to which it has been lately
said in Melbourne that science and religion must occupy the same
ground ; that is the statement that God is the creator of the world.
But I venture to think that they do not, and cannot, occupy the same
ground even there. That the Kotrfxog was formed by intelligence out
of some pre-existing material is one thought. That such pre-existing
material was created by God is another thought. The first belongs
to science, and is apprehended by the intellect. The second belongs
to religion, and is apprehended by faith. The two thoughts are no
way inconsistent, but from one to the other there is a chasm which
science never can bridge.
4. What light does the teaching of Jesus throw upon the great
question of the ultimate destiny of man ? Jesus taught assuredly that
no bad man shall or can partake of eternal life. If any resist His
spirit to the uttermost they cannot but perish eternally. And Jesus
also said plainly that in His time more far were going the way to
death than the way to life; and, further, Jesus warns us that if we
neglect now the opportunity of repentance and amendment which
He offers, we shall be
“ Evermore a life behind.”
But Jesus nowhere says what proportion of mankind, if any at all,
shall be found to have resisted Him to the last, and so to have con-
tinued in the way to death. The parables which relate to the final
judgment are clearly hypothetical (as all prophecy which deals with
free moral agents must be). These parables indicate how those who
* St. Mark x. 5,


resist God until then (if there shall be any such) must be dealt with.
Besides, the end which they speak of is the end of the present age,
and they reveal nothing of the age beyond, except that it shall be
age-long, and that what we shall be then will depend on what we are
now. But Jesus reveals a life of man reaching beyond all the ages,
and Jesus tells us that “it is not the will of the Father that one of
these little ones should perish,” and, we are, therefore, surely justified
in hoping that in the immeasurable reach of those ages all will at
last give in their allegiance to the Lord of the world to come, and so
the will of God shall be done.
You will tell me, perhaps, that this is universalism, and that
universalism is heresy. I ask you to remember that the term heresy
is rightly applicable only to formulated creeds, and I admit at once
that it would be heresy to formulate as a creed either universalism or
the opposite doctrine, for neither doctrine is revealed. But it is
surely no heresy to hold universalism as a hope, and as such I hold
it. I have no doubt, indeed, that the longer any man resists the
spirit of Jesus the more painful and the more protracted must be the
discipline which will win him over at last. But I hold the hope,
nevertheless, that all will at last be won over. Not in this world,
indeed—no reasonable man can look for that—but in the worlds
to come. And the more I meditate upon the work and suffering of
Jesus, and on the words in which He reveals Himself and the
unseen Father, the more encouragement I feel for the splendid
hope,
“That not one life shall be destroyed,
Or ca>t as rubbish to the void,
When God has made the pile complete.”
5. I hasten to conclude a paper, which is already too long, with
the consideration of one more difficulty. The secularist says, Why
should God, if there be a God, leave men so long in opposition to
Him ? Cannot He bring them over by a simple exertion of His
power, and if not, why does He not ?
We have a clear answer in the teaching of Jesus. For Jesus
teaches us that God sets the highest value on moral goodness. Can
we expect God then to wipe out of existence and make for ever
impossible the very thing that He values most highly? For that is
what He will do if He forces men to do His will. For, if Ido what
I cannot help doing, there is no moral good or moral evil in my deed.
Moral goodness implies moral freedom. As sure as Jesus declares
that God sets the highest value on moral goodness, so surely he
declares that God cannot destroy moral freedom. To say that men
cannot be forced into moral goodness is no more than to say that
two contradictories cannot be true. If men are to be made good, i.e.,
morally good, they must be won to goodness, no matter what incal-
culable ages may pass in the winning of them. We may be sure that
God has already counted the cost, and foresees already the result.
And when we think of those attributes of God which Jesus Christ
reveals, we may rest assured that such result will prove to be well
worth all the painful throes of divine and human effort which must
be the cost of its attainment. •




