

UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF
REV. RABBI FRANCIS L. COHEN
AND
THE VERY REV. A. E. TALBOT
(DEAN OF SYDNEY)
"a pleasant land,
a goodly heritage”
Art Exhibition
by
AHRON HALEVY
(A Jewish Palestinian Artist)
To be held at
David Jones’ Auditorium Annexe
(7th Mezzanine Floor)
Oct. 16th to Oct. 29th
1929


SELF PORTRAIT OF THE AETIST


THE GREAT SYNAGOGUE,
166 CASTLEREAGH STREET,
SYDNEY.
October 2nd, 1929.
MR. A. HALEVY is a very welcome recent arrival
who brings to Australia an evidence of the
Jewish spirit already familiar in several natives
of this region. His realistic work shows him to have
duly mastered his medium, and to handle it with scien-
tific accuracy. His decorative work in a primitive idiom
is no doubt of more importance, as well as more char-
acteristic, whilst also exhibiting the accuracy of one
who grew up and studied amid the Palestinian scenes
he depicts. The Palestinian atmosphere, said the old
Talmudists, inspires ; and in Mr. Halevy’s scenic pic-
tures we have characteristic evidence of the local
inspiration. Its simplicity in intricacy, and constant
fervour, enhances the Biblical flavour with a directness
of appeal like the wording of those ancient consecrated
writings ; and the work is in consequence infused with
some of the immediately impressive and yet enduring
flavour of the old Hebrew diction. Every citizen of
the Empire which holds the Mandate for the Holy Land
must be interested in this earnest artist’s pictures as
some first fruits of the Jewish resettlement, for if such
convincing expression is attained in the first generation,
great and enduring things may be hoped for from the
future.
(Signed) FRANCIS L. COHEN,
Rabbi.


IT is a privilege for Australian people to have the
opportunity of viewing the pictures of Mr. Ahron
Halevy, for they have a uniqueness all their own.
The Artist devotes his talent in interpreting his native
land and its great religious traditions, which he loves
so well. Versed in the ancient lore of his people, he
illustrates scenes from the Hebrew Scriptures in their
own frame and colouring; he executes for us the
Land of Canaan as the Patriarchs knew it. By his
symbolic subjects he suggests to us the Country of
The Creator, and enforces the great moral texts of
the Hebrew Faith. Christian people will be inter-
ested in his sympathetic though natural representation
of the temptation of Christ in the Wilderness.
It is to be hoped that many will avail themselves
of seeing Mr, Halevy’s Works.
(Signed) A. G. TALBOT,
Dean of Sydney ;
Tyrwhitt Hebrew Scholar,
University of Cambridge.


Ahron Halevy
" ... a pleasant land,
a goodly heritage."
AHRON HALEVY was born in 1887, and has spent
all his mature life in EreZ Israel (Palestine). Twenty-
five years ago he attended art classes in Jerusalem
at the Academy of Bezalel, under the tuition of Professor
Boris Shatz. Finding the atmosphere spiritually unsatis-
fying, he left the Academy to continue his studies among
the pioneers of the land-movement. Beside these en-
thusiastic builders of a new land he found artistic inspira-
tion in harmony with his nature. He went to the Jewish
Colonies and worked among the workmen. He was a
“ Shomer ” (watchman) in the Valley of the Jordan. Living
under the free skies and in constant communion with
nature, he drank deeply from the fount of beauty, and
occasionally took up the brush or pencil to give expression
to his feelings.
The world-war found Mr. Halevy following the peaceful
occupation of a fisherman, living and working along the
Jordan River.
Immediately after the war, he commenced working for the
Scientific Department of the Museum at Jerusalem, which


was founded by the Zionist Organisation and which has
since been absorbed by the Hebrew University. His work
was to depict the flora and fauna of Palestine, and his
entire collection now hangs upon the University Walls.
For several years he continued in this occupation, but
found in it no spiritual satisfaction, and eventually aban-
doned it, taking again to the plough and the spade in one
of the new Jewish Colonies, “ Herzlia.”
Being thus once more in communion with nature, his
spiritual longings were again driven to find an outlet, and
during the last three years, the call of the land was dominated
by the more insistent appeal of art.
Eighteen months ago he came to Australia, was elected a
member of the Victorian Artists’ Society, and exhibited
regularly with that body. Once more the land exerted an
irresistible appeal, and once again Mr. Halevy engaged in
farming, this time in the Gippsland district. But the
brush proved a stronger master than the plough, and Mr.
Halevy returned to Melbourne, where he held his first
exhibition, which was well received by the critics.
Mr. Halevy comes from a land which is romantic and
primitive, and which has retained almost undisturbed the
simplicity of life that marked the days of the Prophets,
An artist in such surroundings could not fail to be in-
fluenced by them.
He believes that Art is a living force, and no living force
can remain constant. It is an eternally flowing stream,
and gives expression to the inmost spiritual needs of Man.
He refuses to accept the theorem that Art is the mirror
of Nature.
The eye only registers phenomena after the manner of a
camera, and the artist who works on these lines is vying


“LAKE OF GALLILEE”
with the photographer. It is Mr. Halevy’s opinion that
such art is in the domain of mere draughtsmanship.
His conception of the artist is that he is a master of dreams.
He sees what not all can see ; he feels what not all can
feel; and his mission is to convey to others what, un-
assisted, they would probably never apprehend.
To him, Art is the free expression of an emotional state
produced by outward stimuli.
What strikes one on examining savage or primitive art, is
its essential truthfulness its unmistakable expression of
spiritual values. And we, who are more cultivated —or
sophisticated are liable to lose sight of this eternal truth
and place boundaries upon the free growth of art. There
should be no boundaries, for boundaries stifle ; and even
perspective and anatomy cannot be permitted to cumber
the path to creative work.
Such is Mr. Halevy’s artistic creed.


Noah and the Building of the Ark
MAKE unto thee an ark of the wood of Gopher.
Rab Huna saith in the name of Rabbi Jose :
For one hundred and twenty years did the Holy One, Blessed be
He, warn the generation of the Flood to enable them to repent. But when
they did not repent, He said to Noah, “ Make unto thee an Ark of the
wood of Gopher.” Then did Noah arise and planted cedars. People said
to him, “ Wherefore these cedars ? ” He answered them, “ The Holy One,
Blessed be He, seeketh to bring a flood into the world and He hath bidden
me to make an ark in order that I and my house shall be saved,” But
people laughed at.him and mocked at his words. But he watered the cedars
and they grew. The men of his generation said unto him, " What doest
thou ? ” And he answered as formerly. But they mocked at him.
After a while he cut down the cedars and planed them. People said to
him, “ What doest thou ? ” He answered them thus and thus, and did
warn them.
When they did not ultimately repent, the Holy One, Blessed be He, brought
the flood upon them.


Noah’s Vineyard and Satan
WHEN Noah was beginning to plant his vineyard Satan came and
stood before him and spoke to him, saying, ” What dost thou
plant ? ” Said he, “ A vineyard.” Satan said to him, “ What is
the nature thereof ? ” Said he, “ The fruit thereof is sweet whether fresh
or dried, and wine is made therefrom which rejoiceth the heart.”
Satan said to him, " Wouldst thou that we plant it together, thou and I ? ”
He said to Satan, “ Yea,”
What did Satan do ? He took an ewe and slaughtered it over the vine.
Then he brought a lion and slaughtered it over the vine likewise. Then
he brought an ape and slaughtered it over the vine, and so he did with a
swine. He then caused their blood to drip and caused the vine to drink
it. By that Satan wished to indicate the following:—
When a man drinketh one cup of wine he is like the ewe, humble and lowly
of spirit.
When he drinketh two cups he feeleth strong like the lion, and speaketh
boastingly, saying, “ Who is like to me ? ”
When he hath drunken three cups or four he becometh as an ape in that
he danceth and sporteth and uttereth lascivious words in front of every-
one and knoweth not what he doeth.
When he is drunk, he is as the swine, soiled in mind and thrown on a dung
heap.
And all these things happened unto Noah.


Abraham and the Idols
THERE came a certain woman bearing a dish of fine flour in her hand.
Said she to him ; “ Take this and offer it up to them.” He there-
upon arose and took a stick in his hand and shattered all the idols
and placed the stick in the hand of the largest idol. When his father re-
turned he said, “ Who hath done this to them ? ” Abraham answered,
“ Shall I have secrets from my father ? A certain woman came with a
dish of flour in her hand and she said to me, ‘ take this and offer it up
to them.’ I did so ; then one said, ‘ I will eat first,’ and another said, ‘ I
will eat first.’ And this one, the largest amongst them, arose and did
shatter them all.”
But his father said to him, “ Why dost thou make sport of me ? Can they
do aught like that ? ”
And Abraham answered, “ No! Thine ears hear not what thy mouth
saith.” ' ' '


Catalogue
Gns.
No. i The Dead Sea - - ----- - ido
2 Lake of Gallilee, Palestine- - - 150
3 In the Evening, Palestine- - - 125
4 Rachel’s Tomb, Palestine - - - 150
5 Jesus in the Wilderness- - - - 1000
.6 Ancient City of Shechem, Palestine 60
7 Arab Village, Palestine - - - - 70
8 Noah and the Building of the Ark 35
9 Noah’s Vineyard and Satan - - 35
10 Abraham and the Idols- - - - 35
11 Sketch “The Golden Calf” - 15
12 The Ancient City of Safed, Pales-
tine -------- - 25
13 Autumn ------ --- 10
14 Lake of Gallilee, Palestine - - - 25
15 Oils “ Etude ” - ----- 14
16 Water Colours, “ A Plate ” - - 15
17 Cactus - -- -- -- -- 15
18 Francolinus Vulgaris - - - - 25
19 Ammaperdix Heyi ----- 25


IN THE EVENING. PALESTINE
20 Deut. VIII : S ----- - 20
A land of wheat, and barley, and vines,
and fig-trees, and pomegranates ; a land
of olive oil and honey.
21 Genesis IV : 2- ----- - 15
And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain
was a tiller of the ground.
22 Genesis XV: 18 ----- - 15
In the same day the Lord made a coven-
ant with Abram, saying : Unto thy seed
have I given this land from the river
of Egypt unto the great river, the river
Euphrates,
23 Genesis XXIX: 9 - - - - - 15
And while he yet spoke with them, Rachel
came with her father’s sheep, for she
kept them.


“RACHEL'S TOMB”
24 Numeri. XIII : 27 - - - - - 15
And they told him and said : We came
unto the land whither thou sentest us, and
surely it floweth with milk and honey,
and this is the fruit of it.
25 Deut. XXXIV: 3 - - - - - 15
Jericho (the city of palm trees).
26 Judicum XXI : 21 - - - - - 15
And see, and behold, if the daughters of
Shiloh come out to dance in dances then
come ye out of the vineyards, and catch
you every man his wife of the daughters
of Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin.
27 i. Regum IV: 25 - - - - - 15
And Judah and Israel dwelt safely every
man under his vine and under his fig tree.


28 Jeremiah IV: 3 ----- - 15
For thus saith the Lord to the men of
Judah and Jerusalem : Break up your
fallow ground, and sow not among thorns.
29 Jeremiah 111 : 19 - - - - - 15
A pleasant land, a goodly heritage,
30 Ruth II : 6 - -- -- -- 15
And the servant that was set over the
reapers answered and said: It is the
Moabitish damsel that came back with
Naomi out of the country of Moab.
31 Pilgrims -------- - 15
32 Legends -------- - 15
33 A Watering Place near Jaffa,
Palestine ------- 130




