

pem #
2 osv *
RELIGIOUS PAN
Box /
« •
ESSAY
THE DELUGE.
In practice, “ Do unto others as you would they should do unto you!!!”
In matters of faith, endeavour by every means in your power to believe “The truth,
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth !!!”
MELBOURNE:
FEINTED FOE THE AUTHOR BT E. BEIL, LITTLE COLLIN'S STEEET EAST.
9 fo>
• l.cfec


! •
I 9 ♦* f •; ;
• I *
* ■ # I


THE DELUGE.
Tite Rev. A. M. Henderson’s lecture on “ The Deluge” and the public
discussion thereon, was the immediate cause ot the present paper being
written, although circumstances have hitherto delayed its publication.
The subject ought to be considered entirely on its own merits,
and without the slightest reference to the writer’s belief in other mat-
ters, but recent and direct personal experience has shown us that many
men as yet are not sufficiently far advanced to act so magnanimously,
not to say impartially. Their imperative demand before they will
read at all is, What does the writer believe generally, and more
especially does he believe in a future state ? In reply to this question,
therefore, in pure self-defence, as we wish to be read, our answer
is— ffr e firmly believe in the immortality of the soul; that beyond
the grave every man will in some all-wise manner be punished or
rewarded for the deeds done in the body , and that amongst our
other acts the present paper , in proportion to the sincerity with which
it is written, will be a source of joy or regret to us in that after life.
We also firmly believe that it is our duty personally, in common with
that of all men, to exercise the powers of discrimination which we
possess, however humble they may he—that amongst the hundreds, nay,
the thousands, of things which challenge our belief or unbelief, it is our
duty to carefully watch, and try to believe only those things to be true
which really are true, and those things to be false which really are false.
This appears to us to be man’s first and most imperative duty—the
very foundation of all right action. With these preliminary, somewhat
foreign but necessary, remarks, we comeat once to our subject by simply
informing the reader, that we cannot believe in the Noachian deluge;
and the reasons why we cannot, and to which we now respectfully invite
his calm impartial attention, are as follows :
The dimensions of the ark, according to Gen. vi. 15, were—length
300 cubits, breadth 60 cubits, and height 30 cubits. A cubit is the
distance from the elbow to the tip of the middle finger, or about one foot
and a-half. The ark would be, therefore, 450 feet long, 75 feet broad,
and 45 feet high (and this is the almost universally adopted measurement
by writers on the subject) —with the exception of the “ Great Eastern” it
would be the largest ship that ever was built. The first thing that strikes
us is the exceeding improbability that men in those times, unacquainted
with the ai'ts and with no knowledge of shipbuilding, would have been
able to build such a structure as that—such a structure that the accumu-
lated experience of mankind has only just been able to produce one of
parallel size, by aid of the best tools, the best workmen, and the
greatest engineering knowledge.


But allowing- the ark to have been built, Noah was commanded to bring
into it two of every kind of animal, beast, bird, reptile, insect, etc. —two
{i of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth,” u of every living
thing,” “ of all flesh wherein is the breath of lifeseven pairs of all
clean animals, and his own family numbering eight persons.
It is difficult in our present state of knowledge to tell with any degree
of accuracy the number of land animals existing upon the earth.
Authorities differ about even the approximate number, but all admit that
it is very great. The compilers of “ Black’s General Atlas,” Colenso,
Hugh Millar, and others have estimated them as high as half a million.
Dick puts them down at 800,000, and others at a different figure. Of
course it is impossible to state the exact number, but this much is certain —
it is agreed on all hands that the known and classified species amount
to upwards of 150,000, and that fresh species are being discovered and
classified every day, especially among the smaller insect tribes. Taking
then the latter figure as admittedly the lowest, and estimating the un-
classified species at the same (which certainly is a low estimate also) we
have 300,000 species. For Noah then to have taken a male and female
of every kind into the ark, he must have admitted 600,000 individuals,
and these we are informed remained shut up in it for nearly a year.
Again, it is very improbable that Noah, 4,000 years ago, would have
had a knowledge of every living animal, a knowledge which the most
intelligent men of the present day, by aid of the accumulated observa-
tions of mankind, and by the most laborious research, careful classifi-
cation, and the great assistance of printing, have not even yet obtained.
Further, it is very improbable that had he the knowledge, he would have
been able to gather together into one building, say situate in the plain
of the Euphrates (where most writers place the building of the ark)
from all parts of the earth’s surface, a male and female of upwards of
300,000 species of animals ; two of every kind of the wild beast of the
desert and the forest; of every kind of serpent and reptile of the rivers
and marshes; of every kind of fowl, butterfly, and winged insect of the
air 5 of every kind of caterpillar, worm, vermin, etc., and two of every
kind of animal invisible to the naked eye, that peculiarly dwell in the
various vegetable and other substances of the earth. For instance, to
dwell for a moment on the latter alone, fresh revelations in science daily
prove to us that almost every visible object around us —that the food we
eat, that the water we drink, the air we breathe, and even our own
bodies—teem with innumerable multitudes of living beings, various in
form and nature, but invisible to the naked eye. The microscope reveals
that thousands of living animals of many species exist in a single drop
of water, and in many other substances, are equally numerous and
various. An authority before us writing on the subject says :
“ Professor Ehrenberg has discovered a new world of creatures in the infusoria, so
minute that they are invisible to the naked eye. He found them in fog, rain, and
snow, in the ocean, in stagnant water, in animal and vegetable juices, in volcanic
ashes and pumice, in opal, in the minute dust that sometimes falls on the ocean ;
and he detected eighteen species twenty feet below the surface of the ground in peat-
bog, which was full of microscopic live animals While enquiring
into the causes of the cholera which prevailed at Berlin in 1848, Mr. Ehrenberg dis-


covered 400 species of living microscopic animalcule in different strata of the atmos-
phere, so that the air is analogous in the distribution of its inhabitants to the ocean, which
has marine animals peculiar to different depths. This lowest order of animal life is
much more abundant than any other, and new species are found every day. . .
Language and even imagination fail in the attempt to describe the inconceivable
myriads of these invisible inhabitants of the ocean, the air, and the earth.” — Somer-
ville's Physical Geography, p. 398.
Respecting the exceeding minuteness of these animals, another
authority writes: —
“ The microscopic researches of Ehrenberg have disclosed most surprising examples
of the minuteness of which organized matter is susceptible. He has shewn that
many species of infusoria exist which are so small that millions of them collected into
one mass would not exceed the hulk of a grain of sand, and a thousand might swim
side by side through the eye of a needle."■^—Lardner's Museum of Science and Art,
vol. 6, p. 202.
Another writer speaking of the smaller observed animalcuhe says :
“ The size of many hears the same relation to that of a mite as the dimensions of
a bee to those of an elephant.” ( Encyclopedia Britannica, Art. “Animacule.”) And
another authority remarks that some species are known to exist so small that a cubic
inch would hold more in number than there are human beings upon the face of the
earth.
Thus much has been shewn by scientific men, but notwithstanding the
vast, almost inconceivable, power of the best existing microscopes, they
fail even by the use of such powerful aids to see a limit to the minute-
ness and variety of animated beings. Every increase of microscopic
power shows fresh species of still minuter forms, and the most intelligent
microscopists do not for a moment expect by,means of the most power-
ful microscope that man can invent, to be able to find a limit to the
minuteness or variety of animal life. The real size of these infinitesimal
forms are scarcely realised by our ordinary modes of thinking; but, to
make use of a previously quoted, not very scientific, but still familiar
figure as an illustration, let us for a moment imagine Noah collecting
a male and female of species of living animals so small that a thousand
eould swim side by side through the eye of a common needle. And to
fully accord with the evident and entire meaning of the story, he must
have*collected two and two of every animal, however small, that would
drown in a twelvemonth’s flood; and, consequently, a vast number of
those small animals to which we have just referred. Let us fancy to
ourselves a man collecting a male and female of 200,000 species of
insects, the great majority of which are invisible to the naked eye, and
many of which cannot be seen except when artificially magnified a
thousand, ten thousand, a hundred thousand, or a million of times, and
then only just as the smallest perceivable point. Besides, the vast memory
it would require to be certain that no species was collected twice over and
none omitted, the amount of knowledge and acute preception required to
be able to discriminate and collect just one male and one female of this
vast number, is almost inconceivable. Certainly in this advanced age of
the world, by aid of the results of vast laborious research, the most
careful classification, and the thousand other valuable aids of advanced
science, it is a task that no man, no thousand men, not the whole


scientific men of the world, could perform ; not even were the accumu-
lated knowledge on the subject of the whole human race concentrated
in their persons. True, it is argued, by some that Noah did not collect
the animals, but that they came to him into the ark ol their own accord.
It may be remarked here, in explanation, that certain portions ol the
Pentateuch, especially of the first chapters ot Genesis, have been shown
by late commentators to consist of two versions of the same or similar
traditions, blended together by some later compiler or editor, so as to
form a species of double or parallel history. The chapters recording a
deluge are particularly ol this class; in fact, so much so that two
almost distinct narratives can be made out of the document, and this
may account for the fact, that while in two places the language seems to
imply that Noah was to collect the animals as he was to collect their
food, in other two places it says that they came to him to be taken in.
But even for the sake of argument to concede the point, and allow that
they had given to them an irresistible impulse to travel from their
native homes, from the tropics, the polar regions, or whatever part ol the
earth it might be, and place themselves under Noah’s care, the difficulties
seem almost equally great.
For instance, many of the inhabitants of the tropical and polar regions
could not have existed in the latitude of the ark. Some ot the
smaller insects, whose length of life does not exceed two or three days,
and in the case of some species two or three hours, if they had
travelled with the speed of a railway carriage, or even that of a cannon
ball, from some parts of the earth, they could not have reached the ark
in the term of their natural lives. Again, many animals travelling such
distances would have been liable to innumerable casualties from want ol
food, excessive fatigue, destruction by others, etc. Many land animals
indigenous to the various islands of the earth, would have had to cross
hundreds, and others even thousands of miles of sea to reach the ark.
Animals peculiarly indigenous to the south polar regions must have
passed through the burning tropics, as well as over vast oceans ol water,
and in some cases deserts of scorching sand to reach it.
To impress the case more on the mind, let us by way ol' illustration,
just imagine a couple of animals, say of the snail or the grasshopper
tribes, peculiarly indigenous to that far southern island Terra DelFeugo,
starting for the valley of the Euphrates. If they travelled the nearest
way, they would have first to cross over 5,000 miles ol the Atlantic
Ocean, battling with the salt waves and the fish of prey ; then across
2.000 miles of the tropical deserts of Africa, with its myriads of ants
and carnivorous insect tribes; then over the Red Sea, and across the
deserts of Arabia into Mesopotamia, a distance altogether ol upwards of
8.000 miles. But taking it the other way, so that the least possible dis-
tance of water w r ould have to be crossed, and the difficulty is equally
great, if not greater; they would first have to cross the Straits ol
Magellan, then over the entire continent of America up to the Arctic
Circle, a distance of 8,000 miles ; then across Behring’s Straits and
over 6,000 miles of the Asiatic continent. It is manifestly absurd to
remark that such a journey for such animals is exceedingly improbable,
and yet such is the journey that pairs of animals of many thousand


species must have made to have reached the ark from the country in
which they were peculiarly indigenous, to literally agree with the
account in Genesis, that two of every kind that ‘‘breathed,” or “creeped,”
or “ moved upon the earth” went into the ark.
Again, it is said in Genesis vi. 21, 22, that Noah gathered together
every kind of food that was eaten to sustain the life of those in the ark
while the Hood lasted. Now it is certainly very improbable that Noah
would have been able to collect together into the ark from the plains,
valleys, mountains, jungles, rivers, swamps, deserts, and crevices of the
earth, from the equator to the poles, over which the various kinds of food
eaten were spread. And it is equally improbable that he would have
been even acquainted with all the various kinds of fond that were eaten by
the entire animal kingdom, a knowledge not yet attained, nor nearly attained
by the first scientific men of the day, after years of laborious research,
and by aid of the accumulated observations of mankind. The various
kinds of food already known to be eaten by the animal kingdom are of a
startlingly immense variety; modern scientific researches have demon-
strated that an immense variety of the vegetable kingdom serves as
food for minute animals, and it is highly probable that there is not a
single species of plant, not a single representative of the vegetable
kingdom, but is eaten by some animal or other. Nay, more, reasoning
by analogy from similar and extensive observations of scientific men
on the animal kingdom, it is very questionable whether there is a single
animal, even down to the smallest perceivable by the most powerful
microscope, but is eaten by some other animal. For the account in
Genesis then to be literally true, Noah must not only have collected
together into the ark a male and female of every kind of animal that
“ breathed,” or “creeped,” or “moved upon the face of the earth,” but
he must have collected also, in addition, every representative of the
animal and vegetable kingdom to serve as food for them. In other
words, he must have collected simply for the purposes of food, a portion
at the very lowest estimate, of 200,000 species of plants, and 1300,000
species of animals, a work which would require an amazing memory, a
discriminating knowledge, and an activity certainly unexampled in the
world’s history. A thousand of the first scientific men of the present
day would not be competent to such a task. Again, Noah must not only
have collected them together and their food in a simple manner, but for
many species which live only in the sap of trees, in green leaves and
pulpy vegetable bodies, he must have gathered, and kept such vegetables
in a growing state in the ark. Many species of animals only exist
in the bodies of other animals, and exist there only by the destruc-
tion of the bodies of such animals, and in a few weeks or months
undergo metamorphosis, and then live upon different food. Noah must
have known all this, and prepared for it accordingly. Many species ot
animals appear to exist in and upon the bodies of certain other peculiar
animals, in various diseases, etc. As instances of this there are various
species of worms, head and body vermin, the itch and scurvy insects,
etc., on the human body, ticks, animal lice, the mange, the scab
insects, etc., upon various animals. For the account in Genesis then to
be literally true, it is questionable whether we must not conclude that


the eight persons in the ark must have supported upon their bodies a
male and female of every species of loathsome insect that is at any time
peculiar to the human body, and that every other animal on board must
have supported representatives of all the vermin that at any time lived
upon the bodies of their species.
Again, in a universal flood, in which all the salt and fresh water of
the globe commingled together, it would have been impossible for
the fresh water fish to have lived. Noah, therefore, must have pro-
vided water accommodation for them on board, and supplied them
with their appropriate food, and have done the same with respect
to all the fresh water amphibia of the earth, who would have been
unable to live for a year in a universal deluge of salt water. Again,
fresh water would be required for the consumption of all the land ani-
mals in the ark, as the waters on which the ark floated would be salt.
This would have to be stored away at first, or caught during the forty
day’s rain, and in either case, the quantity required for twelve
months’ consumption for such a vast quantity of animals must be enor-
mous, and would well nigh freight the ark itself.
But allowing for the sake of argument that the ark is built, that Noah
and his family, and two of every kind of animal, and the necessary food
and water for them all, are stowed away in it and shut in. Now let us
examine the interior arrangements, and to do so properly, we must revert
to the description of the ark ;it was (reckoning the cubit at feet) 450
feet long, 75 feet broad, and 45 feet high, divided into three stories;
each story, according to this measurement, would comprise an area of
about three quarters of an English acre; it had one door in the side,
and one window in the top, H feet square, both of which we are in-
formed were closed. The first difficulty that we meet at this stage, is
that all this vast accumulation of living animals would be involved in
total darkness until Noah opened the small window again at the end of
eleven months, and it is very unlikely that all kinds of animals could
exist for eleven months deprived of a thing so necessary to the healthy
action of the vital functions as light. Again, according to the natural
laws of inspiration and respiration, they would all have been smothered
in less than twenty-four hours, and many of the inhabitants of the
lower story in less than an hour. But admitting for the present, to
pass on, that there was light in the ark, and that breathing was
possible, we will suppose that the above estimated 600,000 animals
were distributed abroad over the three floors of the ark, their food
stored, and all under the superintendence of Noah, his wife, his three
sons and their wives, who, according to the account were all upwards of
a hundred years old, and allowing that the animals were fed and watered
once a day, each man and woman of the eight persons, if they kept on
for twelve hours each day, and every day that they were in the ark, they
would have to feed of all sorts and sizes 833 animals per minute, of up-
wards of 400 different species, and that with more than 200 kinds of
food, and not only would they have to feed all this number of animals, but
in addition, they would have to feed until they were required for con-
sumption, all those animals which were to serve as food for the carnivo-
rous animals on board. It has been said that carnivorous animals could


in a case of necessity exist upon vegetable food, and that all thfit Noah
had to do was to collect a sufficient quantity of vegetable food to serve
the necessities of every living' animal, but this suggestion does not meet
the difficulty. True, some few carnivorous animals would, if starving,
eat vegetable food and preserve their lives for a time, but the great
majority of them would die sooner than eat anything but animal food ;
and besides the account expressly says that Noah took into the ark all
food that was eaten to serve for the period required. (Gen. vi. 20, 21).
We shall next take a glance at the animals themselves. The natural
disposition of carnivorous animals is to tear each other in pieces, and
also to tear and devour the timid, herbivorous animals, and it seems very
improbable that the lion and the sheep, the cat and the mouse, the eagle
and the dove, deadly serpents of all kinds, etc., would lie down peaceably
together for a year. Again, in obedience to the laws of their nature,
all the animals in the ark would have had sexual intercourse with their
kind; this amongst the smaller animals, and especially the insect tribes,
would have swarmed the ark with young. Many thousands of small
animals whose length of life does not exceed a few weeks, days, or
hours, would according to their nature have died of old age; great
numbers of the various animals that are shut up in the menageries of the
present day die within the first year, although tended by men who make
the instincts, dispositions, and entire natures of animals their life’s study,
and take the most solicitous care of them. And it is very improbable
that Noah would be more fortunate with such an enormous and hetero-
genous collection as it is asserted went into the ark. Again, all animals,
even under the most favorable circumstances, are subject to general
mortality. Perhaps under ordinary circumstances, taking the animals in
the ark, large and small, 300,000 out of 600,000 estimated under
ordinary conditions, and in accordance with the law of their being, would
have died within the year ; but the account in Genesis in the most
positive manner implies that not a single creature died from old age,
sickness, or any other cause whatever.
The next thing we shall Consider is the sanitary regulations we have
already referred to, the deficiency of ventilation and light. The amount
of fresh air and light that could come in through the single door and
the single window of a foot and a-half square would be small indeed;
but the account says that even these were closed, in fact the authorised
notes of the Douay Bible say that they were not only closed, but like
all the rest of the structure pitched within and without; that when
they were closed Noah pitched the crevices on the inside, while an angel
pitched them on the outside; but however this may be, the account in
Genesis evidently implies that they were closely shut.
Another objection is that the quantity of solid excrements and urine
that according to the general operations of nature would come from this
number of animals in upwards of a year would be enormous, and would
of itself breed such a pestilence that few animals could survive it; it
must in an ordinary way have covered the floors to a considerable depth.
What if it did not swamp the animals in the lower story altogether,
certainly it would be impossible for the eight human beings on board to
keep it clean, as they would have their time fully and more than em-


ployed in feeding' the animals; for if they could stand the stench of the
accumulated and united excrements of representatives of the entire ani-
mal kingdom, wade through it, and feed 800 animals per minute, for
twelve hours each day, they must have been hardier than human beings
at present existing, or any recorded in reliable history. The mythical
Hercules himself could scarcely have been competent to such a task.
But again, they could not dean out the excrements, even had they the
leisure, the power and tbe will, as the only window and door were
closed; evenif the window was not closed it would be more laborthan that
number of persons could accomplish to sweep and gather it all up, bring
it from all parts and put it through the window in the top of the vessel ;
it would be impossible to put it through the side, as with the immense
freight on board the top of the ark would be near the edge of the water
if not underneath.
Another matter, although not so great a difficulty as the proceeding
ones, may be incidentally mentioned here: it is respecting Noah’s pro-
ceedings to ascertain if the waters had dried up from off the earth. It
is said in Gen. vii. that about the beginning of the tenth month of (he
flood he opened the window of the ark and sent out a dove to see if the
waters were dried up from off’ the earth; that finding no place to rest
her foot because the waters still covered the whole earth, she came back,
and Noah put his arm out of the window and pulled her in; that he
stayed another seven days and sent her out again, and she came back
in the evening with an olive branch in her mouth, which she had plucked
off, and by that Noah knew that the ground was dry, and after seven
days he sent her forth again, but she came back no more, and a few
days after that Noah removed the covering of the ark and looked , and be-
hold the ground mas dry. Now this reads much more like a legend than
real history; in a general way, if a dove was simply put out of the win-
dow of a building that contained her mate, she would not leave it at all,
but according to the account this dove acted like a rational being on behalf
of Noah. In the first place she comes back to inform him by implication
that the waters still prevailed, in the second place she comes back with
a branch which she had plucked off to inform him that the waters had
dried up, and in the third place she keeps away altogether to confirm
the information. Now to us, this, as we have seen elsewhere remarked,
reads very like a “ childish legend or fairy tale.” The mere fact that a
bird flew away and did not come back, although it would be a species of
presumptive evidence, yet would not prove to a certainty that the earth
was dry ;as the bird might have met with some accident; and in the next
place no man of ordinary intelligence of the present day, or even of the
past as history portrays him to us, were ho placed in the position
assigned to Noah, would think of sending a bird out to see if the ground
was dry, he would simply open the window and look out himself. This
strange proceeding' of Noah does not of course of itself prove the
account to be false, but we are bound to be guided in our beliefs by the
general probabilities of a story; and the probability is, that nine hundred
and ninety-nine men out of a thousand, if placed in similar circumstances
to those ascribed to Noah, would not only have looked out, but from the
top of the ark would have been anxiously waiting for, and watching the
gradual subsidence of the water and drying up of the earth.


But to return to the closer argument, and allowing for the sake of
such argument that the flood has taken place—that its waters during
subsidence have deposited the ark with its immense menagerie, safely,
and in an upright condition upon the top of Mount Ararat, and here
fresh difficulties await us. Jn the first place the top of Mount Ararat is
covered with eternal ice; it is, according to the physical geographies,
17,000 feet above the level of the sea, which in that latitude would be at
least 3,000 feet above the line of perpetual snow; and although an unusual
flood which would cover the mount would considerably equalise and
lower the temperature by the currents of water, and by the dense atmo-
sphere of the lower portions of the earth being borne upon its surface, yet
as soon as the waters receded the usual temperature would return and
the top of Ararat would again become, one large block of ice; and
consequently as soon as the ark was opened, if not before, at
least all the animals from warm countries would die, and even
vast numbers of the more delicate of the others be frozen to death.
Again, there is another difficulty respecting the great steepness of
the mount. So difficult is the ascent that no living being was ever
known to ascend it until the year 1829, when Professor Parrot an-
nounced that he had succeeded in reaching its summit; but so impossible
of execution was his feat thought, that it was not credited by the people
living in the country around. (Kitto s Pictorial Bible , p. 23). Another
writer speaking of its steepness, says :
“ So exceedingly difficult of access is it, that it is doubtful whether, since the deluge,
anyone ever succeeded in reaching its summit till the year 1829. Indeed it is an
article in the creed of the Armenian church that its ascent is impossible.”— Hitchcock's
Religion of Geology, p. 124.
It is urged by some, to get over the difficulty of the ark resting on
Mount Ararat, that the Bible does not expressly say the mount, but the
mountains of Ararat. This is quite true, but the highest mountain is
evidently implied, as the story informs us that the ark grounded on a
given date, (Gen. viii. 4,) that the waters “continually decreased,” that
about two months and a-half later the tops of the mountains were seen
(Gen. viii. 5,) and two months later the face of the earth was dry (Gen.
viii. 13.) This evidently implies, according to the fairest criticism, that
the ark grounded on the highest mountain summit, that the waters con-
tinually decreased, that in ten weeks the tops of the lower mountains
were seen, and in two months more the face of the entire earth was dry.
To us it appears absurd to suppose that the writer of the account inten-
ded to convey the idea that after the ark grounded, it took ten weeks
for the waters to subside the few feet which constituted the draught of
the ark, so that the other mountain tops of a like elevation with that on
which the ark rested could be seen, and that in only two months more
it subsided many thousand feet, so that the entire ground was dry. The
reasonable reading of the story evidently is, that from first to last the
waters continually and gradually subsided. Besides, from time im-
memorial believers have universally pointed to Mount Ararat as the
veritable mountain on which the ark rested, a fact which we firmly
believe, in short, will venture to assert, would have never been called in


question, had not scientific difficulties rendered the faith untenable; and
even now, although some of the ffiore advanced thinkers see the
difficulties of the position and argue accordingly, yet the great bulk of
the Christian, the Jewish, and the Mahometan world still believe it.
The Catholics, the largest body of believers in the Noachian deluge in
the world, still hold that it did rest there. Dr. Calmet in his Theologi-
cal Dictionary, has what he terms “ The Calender of the Melancholy
Year, a.m., 1655,” and one item in it is “April 17, the ark rested on
Ararat in Armenia.”
But, to proceed, admitting the difficulties of the temperature
and of the descent from the mountain or mountains of Arai’at to be
overcome, and in a few hours the low lands to be reached in safety, here
a fresh class of difficulties meet us. Consequent upon a twelve month’s
Hood of salt water covering the ground, the earth is a barren desert,
there is not a single plant living throughout the wide and dreary ex-
panse upon which the preserved creatures; an subsist. Some few seeds
and roots may have preserved vitality in the water for the year; but the
vast majority will have utterly perished. The land would be deeply
saturated and encrusted with salt, and consequently would not for a
great length of time be in a condition to grow a great many kinds of
plants which would be required for food for the various animals. But
allowing all this, and that they are planted, it will take some months for
the fastest growing vegetables, and in the case of trees, some years,
before they are grown and ripe for food, and upon what are the animals
to subsist meanwhile. But leaving the difficulty of the immediate want
of vegetation, upon the coming out of the ark another one equally as
great follows ? One-fourth of the entire number of animals is carnivorous,
and requires other animals to eat if they follow their natural instincts,
and would at once seize upon the herbivorous animals; they would supply
them with food at most but for a few days, and they in their turn must
die for want of more to eat, and then the whole animal race which had
been for twelve months so carefully preserved would be annihilated. If
on the other hand, they did not follow their natural dispositions, but
patiently waited for something to eat, until flesh could in the natural
order of things, have been grown and spared them; without prejudice to
the permanent existence of the herbivorous species, some of them would
have had to wait months, and others even years before a single meal could
have been supplied to them. Certainly it would have been many months
before such large animals as the Hon, tiger, hyena, and crocodile
could have obtained a single meal without endangering the existence of
the herbivorous species of animals upon which these animals live.
The next thing which we shall consider is the water with which the
world is said to have been drowned. The amount of water necessary to
deluge the world above the tops of the highest mountains, some of which
are five miles above the sea-level, would be enormous. Dr. Pye Smith
( Geology and Genesis , p. 140) says that the quantity of water so re-
quired “ might he fairly calculated as amounting to eight times that of
the seas and oceans of the globe.” And Professor Hitchcock ( Religion
of Geology , p. 115) admits this estimate to be a fair one. Now the
question arises, whence came this water, and where did it go to ? The


account says, that the flood was caused by a forty days’ incessant rain from
heaven, and the breaking up of the fountains of the great deep. The idea
wished to be conveyed by the words breaking up of the fountains of the
great deep, we shall leave until we come towards the end of this article, to
glance at the general notions of most rude people on the causes of natural
phenomena, and which beliefs, we feel convinced, and shall attempt to show,
played a considerable part in the construction of the story of the flood
generally. The forty days’ rain being a more definite idea, and consequently
more readily and certainly understood than the other, we can more satisfac-
torily answer that by the aid of physical science, and shall at once attempt to
do so, leaving also to be noticed farther on, the notions of most rude people
respecting the phenomena of rain—whence it comes, etc. The child and
the uninformed of every country, may and do imagine that it is possible
for rain to fall, and in time, to deluge the earth, but the man acquainted
with the simple elements of science knows that this is impossible.
Science demonstrates in the most satisfactory manner, that if the atmo-
sphere round the entire globe were completely saturated with watery vapor,
it would not contain sufficient to form a sheet of water over the entire face
of the earth of a foot in depth. On this point we shall quote a couple of
unexceptional authorities. Or. Pye Smith ( Geology and Scripture,
p. 140) says :
“ Were we to imagine the air to be first saturated to the utmost extent of its
capacity, and then to discharge the whole quantity at once upon the earth, that whole
quantity would bear a very inconsderable proportion to the entire surface of the globe.
A few inches of depth would be its utmost extent
Sir John Leslie, ( Discourse on the Progress of Mathematics, Enc. Brit.
vol. 1, p. 150) says :
“ Supposing the vast canopy of air, by some sudden change of internal constitu-
tion, at once to discharge its whole watery store, this precipitate would form a sheet
of scarcely five inches over the surface of the globe.”
See (Colenso, vol. 4, p. 198). Every one acquainted with meteorology
is aware that rain is caused by the condensation of aqueous vapor sus-
pended in the atmosphere which has arisen from the earth by evaporation;
if this vapor were all condensed and precipitated upon the earth, then there
could be no more rain until more vapor arose from the surface of the earth
to cause it. Were it therefore to rain for forty days over the entire surface
of the globe, it would not raise the water upon that surface a single foot,
not even a single inch, because before the water could come down it must
first go up. That the world should be drowned by rain, therefore, how-
ever feasible and probable such a thing might appear to a child or an
uninformed person, one acquainted with the simplest elements of science,
with the plainest laws of meteorology, is compelled to pronounce such a
thing according to these laws impossible.
Many ways have been suggested to meet the water difficulty, every one
of which has been utterly inadequate to account for it. We have not
space to specify a number of these, which we cannot but characterise as
attempts to prop up a weak cause by the most futile and absurd reasoning,
but as specimens of such reasonings we shall just give two instances from
authorities of considerable standing. Dr. Clarke in his commentary on


Gen. vii. 11, attempts to lighten the difficulty by supposing that the atmo-
sphere might have been turned into water. His own words are :
“ A multitude of facta have proved that water itself is composed of two airs,
oxygen aud hydrogen, and that 85 parts of the hrst and 15 of the last, making 100
in the whole, will produce exactly 100 parts of water. And thus it is found that
these two airs form the constituent parts of water in the above proportions. The
electric spark, which is the same as lightning, passing through the airs, decomposes
them and converts them into water God, therefore, by the means of
lightning, might have converted the whole atmosphere into water for the purpose
of drowning the globe, had there not been a sufficiency of merely aqueous vapors
suspended in the atmosphere.”
But the Doctor makes a great mistake when he supposes that atmo-
spheric air is composed of the elements of water. The elements of water
are as he correctly states, oxygen and hydrogen, but the elements of the
atmosphere are oxygen and nitrogen, and would if chemically united form
not water but one of the five oxides of nitrogen ; the first of which is
laughing-gas, and the last is aqua-fortis. But even supposing the com-
ponents of the atmosphere to be oxygen and hydrogen, instead of oxygen
and nitrogen, yet its weight is but about 45 pounds to the square inch, and
consequently would not, il precipitated, form a body of water more than
about 30 feet in height, while the height of the loftiest mountains on the
globe is nearly thirty thousand feet. Again, allowing that the atmosphere
was composed of the elements of water, that electricity caused them to chemi-
cally unite, form water, and fall upon the earth. This fact alone, would
originate another enormous difficulty. It would annihilate the atmosphere
as air, and according to natural law, all in whom was the breath of life in
the ark, would immediately die for want of air to breathe. In any
case this certainly appears to us a most absurd mode ot searching
after water, and shows to what extreme and illogical arguments men will
sometimes resort, sooner than give up a cherished dogma when pressed
with overwhelming evidence against its truth.
A different, but equally absurd argument is used by another writer to
the following effect; he states in the most confident manner that the world
could have been drowned by the expansion of the present oceans, caused
by the application of a slight increase of heat. Everyone is acquainted
with the fact that water is slightly expanded by the application of even a
moderate degree of heat. To explain the idea by a familiar illustration—if
a kettle or pot is filled completely full of water, and put upon the fire some
times before it boils a small portion of it will swell over consequent upon
its slight expansion by the heat. This fact of the expansion of water by
heat, seems to have been seized hold of by some ingenious person as a
happily discovered water supply, and he assures us that il the waters of
the. ocean were raised only to about blood heat, they wmuld swell up
sufficiently to deluge the world above the tops of the highest mountains.
His own words are: —
« a further progress in mathematical and physical knowledge has shown .» . . .
that the mere raising of the temperature of the whole body of the ocean to a degree
no greater than marine animals live in, in the shallow seas between the tropics, would
so expand it as more than to produce the height above the mountains stated in the
Mosaic account.”


Absurd as this idea is, requiring, aceording to the reasonable estimate
of Dr. Pye Smith and Professor Hitchcock, all the water of the globe to
expand into eight times its present bulk, and being in no way countenanced
by the story of the flood itself, yet it is adopted and sent out for the edi-
fication of the masses in such works as “ Watson's Biblical Dictionary ,”
(Art. “ Deluge),” and “ Gardner's Christian Encyclopedia," (Art.
“Deluge)” and in both of them is accompanied by the following comment: —
“As to the deluge of Noah, therefore, infidelity has almost entirely lost the aid of
philosophy in framing objections to the Scriptures’’
Now, in the first place, we must question the charity, the fairness, and
in fact the general propriety of calling all those who cannot conscientiously
believe in its entirety, the account of the Noachian deluge by the oppro-
brious name of infidel; and secondly the statement that at the present
day, philosophy has scarcely any objections to urge against the account.
For there certainly never was a time in the world’s history when so many
scientific objections were urged against the story as it stands ; objections
which with the advance of scientific discoveries are continually increasing
in number and magnitude ; and which by the sheer force of, and in many
cases unwilling conviction, are being urged by the most eminent men ot
the scientific world.
But to proceed with the examination of the story, the next question that
occurs for our consideration is, where did all this vast quantity of water
go to ; the account says that a strong wind passed over the earth and it
dried up. Dr. Clarke in his Commentary on Gen. viii. 1, in explanation
and confirmation of this passage, says: —
“It was such a wind as produced a strong and sudden evaporation. The effect
of these winds, which are frequent in the East, is truly astonishing. A friend of
mine who had been bathing in the Tigris, having on a pair of
Turkish drawers, one of these hot winds, called by the natives Samiel, passing rapidly
across the river just as he had got out of the water, so effectually dried him in a
moment, that not one particle of moisture was left either on his body or on his
bathing dress. With such an electrified wind as this, how soon could God dry the
whole of the earth’s surface.”
That very hot, sometimes almost fiery blasts of wind do frequently sweep
across parts of certain Eastern countries, arising from the sun s action
upon the surfaces of parched, rocky, and sandy plains in those or the
neighbouring countries, is patent to every traveller in the East; but these
winds are easily and certainly accounted for—are always local, and are
never in any case materially felt over the whole globe, or a thousandth part
of it. But allow such a wind, as hot and as strong as at any time blows
on any part of the earth’s surface to blow over every part of the world ;
and it could not according to the natural laws dry up a thousandth, or a
ten thousandth part of such a body of water as is represented in the account.
As we have before shown, the atmosphere is not capable of holding in
suspension more than a few inches of water at a given time, therefore when
the air is once saturated with water, some of it begins to fall again, and
must fall before any more can rise from the earth. Get the winds then as
strong and as hot as you will, and the faster the water goes up the faster
it will come down again, and in one, or one thousand years, not one foot
of water will dry up off the surface of the earth.


Another objection to the story is, that if the ark was built in the plains
ofMesopotamia (the position universally ascribed to it both by the ancients
and the moderns), it could not according to known laws, have grounded on
Mount Ararat at the end of five months. On this point Dr. Pye Smith,
(Geology and Scripture, p. 154, 155) remarks :
“ Its form was adapted to secure slowness of motion so that it should float as lit-
tle a distance as possible from the place of human habitation, but by the action of
the sun upon the atmosphere, currents would be produced by which the ark would be
home away in a southerly, and then in a westerly direction. To bring it back into
such a situation as would correspond to its grounding in Armenia or any part of Asia,
it must first circumnavigate the globe. But this was impossible in the time, even if
it had possessed the rate of going of a good sailing vessel.”
Another species of evidence against the literal truth of the story is mani-
fest in the monumental sculptures of Egypt. They shew most distinctly
that an uninterrupted civilisation existed there, extending thousands of years
farther back than the asserted deluge of Noah. On this point Nott (Types
of Mankind, p. 211) writes :
“ When Egypt first presents itself to our view, she stands forth not in childhood,
but with the maturity of manhood, age, arrayed in the time-worn habiliments of
civilisation. Her tombs, her temples, her pyramids, her manners, customs, and arts,
all betoken a full-grown nation. The sculptures of the sixth dynasty, the earliest
extant, show that the arts of that day, some 3,500 B. C., had already arrived at a
perfection little inferior to that of the eighteenth dynasty, which, until lately, w r as
regarded as her Augustan age.”
And again, (page 287) he says:—
“ Bas-reliefs beautifully cut, sepulchural architecture, and the engineering of the
pyramids—reed pens, inks (red and black), papyrus paper, and chemically prepared
colors; these are grand evidences of civilization of the Memphis, (the Capital of Egypt)
5,300 years ago, that every man with eyes to see, can now behold in noble folios,
published by France, Tuscany, and Prussia.”
The sculptures above referred to of the reign of Menes of the sixth
Dynasty, according to the united testimony of Humbolt, Bunsen, Kenrich,
Lipsius, and Hinks, show an antiquity of at least 8,400 B. C. while,
according to the Bible chronology, the date of Noah’s deluge was less than
2,400 B. C. (See Colenso on the Pentateuch, vol. 4, p, 274). And if we
allow a reasonable time for Egypt to become sufficiently populated to form
a kingdom in the first place then for five dynasties to become extinct,
and another established, and if we find that the sixth dynasty was in exis-
tence more than 3,400 years before the Christian era, we may reasonably
suppose that Egypt must have been first inhabited at the least, from 4,000
to 5,000 years before such era. Some eminent men have concluded from
certain data, that there is a strong probability that it was inhabited 8,000
years from the present time, but even the lowest of these figures which are
founded upon the most satisfactory evidence, emphatically exclude the idea
of a universal deluge in which all mankind was destroyed 4,000 years
ago.
If we turn to the science of Geology, it instead of supplying evidence
of a universal flood having taken place 4,000 years ago, demonstrates
most incontestably that such a flood did not take place. Although perhaps
geology is most general and convincing in its evidence against the


account, wie shall not go largely into this part of the subject, but
shall just instance two or three points which appear to us most conclusive.
The first is, that we might have reasonably expected that a flood which
was universal for nearly a year, would have left behind it geological evi-
dence of its having taken place; that there would have been a deposit of
the remains of all the existing species of animals, and especially of fish,
marine plants, etc., commingled together in drifts, in caves and other places
favorable to the preservation of such remains throughout the world.
Geology tells us that there is nothing of the sort, that although in the
long lapse of ages, extending over a period of millions, and hundreds of
millions of years, there have been innumerable partial deluges at different
times, in different parts of the world, and that many parts have been sub-
merged and elevated many times in succession, and bear evidence of such
successive changes by the various fossil remains of both land and marine
animals, and vegetables, in some cases of extinct species, and in others of
extinct, together with existing specie*, yet there is no evidence of this kind
that points to a simultaneous deluge throughout the world ; and which there
certainly would have been had it taken place. In fact, so forcible is the
presumption, that such a flood would have left fossil and general geological
indications of its having taken place, that some of the most persistent be-
lievers to get over the difficulty have even suggested that God has wrought
a special miracle to obliterate all such evidences. To cite instances in
point, the Rev. Alfred Barry, in his “ Introduction to the Study of the
Old Testament ” and Dr. Kitto in his “ Encyclopedia of Biblical Litera-
ture,” Art. “Deluge” each argue in this way.
A second geological objection, a very strong one, and one we believe
now allowed by all the principle writers of every shade of opinion on the
deluge is, that respecting the accumulated heaps of pumice, and other
light refuse of extinct volcanoes having remained undisturbed for many
thousand years, and which would most certainly have been swept away in a
universal deluge. A number of unexceptionable authorities could be quoted
on this point, but as our space is limited one must suffice, Hugh Miller
{Testimony of the Rocks, p. 341, 342) says ;
“ The cones of volcanic craters are formed of loose incoherent scorioe and ashes ; and
when exposed, as in the case of submarine volcanoes, such as Graham’s Island and
the islands of Nyoe and Sabrina, to the denuding force of waves and currents, they
have in a few weeks, or at most a few months, been washed completely away. And
yet in various parts of the world, such as Auvergne in central France, and along the
flanks of Etna, there are cones of long extinct or long slumbering volcanoes, which
though of at least triple the antiquity of the Noachian Deluge, and though composed
of the ordinary incoherent materials, exhibit no marks of denudation. According to
the calculations of Sir Charles Lyell, no devastating flood could have passed over the
forest zone of Etna during the last twelve thousand years, —for such is the antiquity
which he assigns to its older lateral cones, that retain in integrity their original
shape; and the volcanic cones of Auvergne, which enclose in their ashes the remains
of extinct animals, and preserve an outline as perfect as those of Etna, are deemed
older still. Graham’s Island arose out of the sea early in June, 1831; in the beginning
of the following August it had attained to a circumference of three miles, and to a
height of two hundred feet; and yet in less than three months from that time the
waves had washed its immense mass down to the sea level; and in a few weeks
more it existed but as a dangerous shoal. And such inevitably would have been the
fate of the equally incoherent cone —like craters of Etna and Auvergne during the
seven and a-half months that intervened betiveen the breaking up of the fountains of
the great deep and the reappearance of the mountain tops, had they been included
within the area of the Deluge. ”


The third, and which we consider to be one of the strongest objections of
geology to the deluge is the fact, that in almost every district of the whole
world, the fossil remains of animals of those kinds now existing upon the
surface, are found buried in the strata immediately beneath, shewing that in
each case such animals have been peculiarly indigenous to those spots for
an immense number of ages. Naturalists by universal consent, founded
upon the most careful and long continued observation, are agreed that
every considerable region on the earth’s surface contains animals and plants
distinct in species from those of any other region. For instance there is a
marked difference between the animals and plants of Europe, America, and
Australia, and it admits of much smaller, but still distinct divisions. One
authority before us, after referring to the peculiarly local distribution of
plants, etc., thus refers to the analogous distribution of animals:—
“ Each continent and even different parts of the same continent, are centres of
zoological families, which have always existed there, and nowhere else, each group
he inq almost always specifically different from all others.”—(Somervilles Physical
Geography, vol. 2, p. 210, 218.)
Professor Hitchcock on this point says :
“ Naturalists reckon a large number of botanical and zoological districts, or pro-
vinces, as they are called, within which they find certain peculiar groups of animals
and plants, with natures exactly adapted to that particular district, but incapable
pf enduring the different climate of adjoining districts. They differ considerably as
to the number of these districts, because the plants and animals of our globe are by
no means yet fully described, and because the districts assigned to the different
classes do not fully coincide; hut as to the existence of such a distribution, they are
of one opinion. The most reliable divisions of this kind make twenty-five botanical
provinces, and five provinces among ahunals. The fact that man, and some of the
domesticated animals, and a few plants, are found in almost every climate, until
recently, blinded the eyes of naturalists to the manner in which the great mass of
animals and plants are confined within certain prescribed limits. But so soon as the
general fact is stated we immediately recur to abundant proof of its truth. We
should be disposed to question the veracity of that traveller who should visit a new
and remote country, and describe its vegetable and animal productions as essentially
the same as our own; and all because the analogy of other portions of the globe leads
us to expect that a new geographical province shall present us with a peculiar fauna
and flora; that is, with peculiar groups of animals and plants.”—(Religion of
Geology p. 117, 118.)
The above quotations shew what an immense variety of animals must
have been preserved in the ark, in opposition to the assertion of many
commentators, that a few forms only were required to be saved, whose
progeny after the flood stocked the earth. Each country possesses its own
peculiar plants and animals, and consequently some of every sort from
every country, must have been preserved to fully accord with the account
in Genesis.
In support of the statement, that in nearly if not quite every country,
the fossils of the upper layers of the tertiary strata, are of the same or
similar forms to those now living and moving upon its surface, numbers
of eminent authorities could be adduced. We shall just quote concisely
two or three. One writer ( Encyclo. Brit. art. Physical Geography )
says:—
“ A marked and almost complete separation subsists between the fossil faunas of
the Old World, America, and Australia Australia is especially


characterised by the exclusive prevalence of the marsupial type which is altogether
absent in other parts of the Old World and represented only by a single genus in
the Nev», and in its fossil fauna we find an equally striking prevalance of the same
singularity. According to Professor Owen on the forma-
tion of the more recent tertiary periods in the limestone caverns of Australia
abundance of mamalian fossils have been found, but except a single tooth of a marto-
don all of marsupials. Among them are fossil kangaroos, potoroos, wombats,
dasyuri, etc., equalling the lion and leopard in size on the other hand
Europe, Asia, and Africa have not ojfered a single marsupial fossil in the pleiocene
and pleistocene deposits [upper divisions of the geological strata] and those in
America are limited to the genus didelyhus ( oppossum) species of which at present
exist there.” and “ the distinction between the fossil faunas of America and the old
continent is not less marked.” See also Professor Owen’s British fossil Mammaliap.
Another authority Professor Huxley (Lectures to Working Men p. 143)
says:—
“ The animals for instance of the newest tertiary rocks in any part of the world
are always and without exception found to be closely allied ivith those which now live
in that part of the wrold. For example in Europe, Asia, and Africa, the large
mammals are at present Rhinoceroses, Hypotamuses, Elephants, Lions, Tigers, Oxen,
Horses, etc., and if you examine the newest tertiary deposits which contain the
animals and plants which immediately proceeded those which now exist in the same
country, you do not find gigantic specimens of Ant-eaters, and Kangaroos, but you
find Rhinoceroses, Elephants, Lions, Tigers of different species to those now
living but still their close allies.”
He goes on to say that it is so with America, so with Australia, etc.
Now we hold that this fact, that in all the countries of the world the
fossil remains imbedded beneath are similar in conformation, to those
animals now living and moving upon the surface above them, is strong pre-
sumptive evidence, that in each case those kinds of animals have inhabited
their own peculiar districts for an incalculable period of time, and that no
universal deluge swept them from the face of the earth 4,000 years ago.
But once more allowing for the sake of argument that such a flood did
take place 4,000 years ago, what does the evidence we have just adduced
necessitate as the only way of surmounting the enormous difficulties. Either
the animals moved of their own accord towards the ark, from all the con-
tinents and islands of the earth, in which they were peculiarly indigenious,
through difficulties multifarious, and multudinous, and placed themselves
under Noah’s care, and again after the flood each pair moved back through
similar difficulties to their respective native spot of earth or water; or else
Noah went into every part of the world over, through, or across all the
hills, mountains, plains, deserts, forests, jungles, swamps, lakes, rivers,
water-holes, caverns, and crevices of the earth, from the burning' tropics,
to the polar regions of eternal ice and collected them together just one
male and one female of each species and brought them into the ark, and
again as soon as the flood was over, carried them all back to the exact spots
from which he took them. In any case, however the animals might have
come and returned, (whether by the aid of Noah, or of their own accord both
equally improbable), one thing is certain that according to the account, Noah
was commanded to collect every kind of food that was eaten by all the
animals that “lived” or “breathed” or “creeped” or “moved upon the whole
earth” he therefore, whether ho collected and distributed the animals or not


must have gone into every spot of earth where some of all this vast variety
of animals lived, and collected the peculiar food which they respectively ate;
and again as the vegetable kingdom would be almost annihilated in a twelve
months flood of salt water, after such flood he must have gone back to all
those innumerable spots, and planted in their proper situation seeds, roots,
or cuttings, of nearly 200,000 species of plants, and which he must have
collected before the flood and preserved in the ark, and then allowing that
all these, overcoming the unfavorable conditions of a salt-encrusted earth
etc., grew, as we before remarked, it would take some months at least, before
the vast majority of animals could obtain a single meal.
We need not multiply the diffieulties of a universal deluge; they are
innumerable, but we have adduced enough to show the most casual reader
that it is utterly indefensible on natural grounds. The reader who has
made this class of subjects his especial study, knows that it is. The
great mass of the people of Christian countries, are still taught that it
can be defended on natural grounds ; yet the more educated, intelligent,
and thoughtful, perceiving the vast and innumerable difficulties, but still
wishing to believe the account, as it stands in Genesis, to be historically
true, have attempted to solve the difficulty by an hypothesis that the
writer only meant to record a partial, and not a universal deluge. Now
although this hypothesis, could it be demonstrated, would immensely
lessen the difficulty ; yet even with a partial deluge, the difficulties would
still be so great, that it could not for a moment be defended on natural
grounds, and besides it does the grossest violence to the plainest literal
sense of the language, and the whole tenor and rationale of the story.
We shall now therefore attempt to consider as concisely as possible the
hypothesis of—
JSL. s*>~| M*cvl 'mm £►€*■.
For many centuries it was universally believed by all who regard the
Bible as a sacred book, that the Noachian Deluge was universal; it is still
believed by the Jews, by the Greek and Catholic churches, and by the large
proportion of Protestants that it was so, that the language in Genesis was
quite literal, in fact means exactly What it says. And it is only in modern
times that some eminent men as before remarked, moved by observing the
overwhelming, and still increasing mass of physical objections to it, have
attempted to give it a diffierent reading, namely that of a partial deluge.
If we turn to the account in Genesis we find it one of the most clear,
forcible, and explict relations of ancient history, it states most distinctly
and in a variety of ways, that the entire world was deluged, and every living
creature in it, except those in the ark, died by drowning. Take the
following passages Gen. vi., 7: —
“And the Lord said I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the
earth ; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air ; for it re-
penteth me that I have made them.”
This statement of course utterly excludes the idea that any living
animals except those in the ark, could have existed throughout all the world.
All that he had made were included. In the first chapter of Genesis it says


that God made the animals in one day, and here in a cognate tradition it
distinctly says that God determined to destroy all that he had made, and
the whole tenor of the after-story serves to give emphasis to the literality
of this statement. Gen. vi. 18, 17, it says :
“And G-od said unto Noah, the end of all flesh is come before me ; for the earth
is filled with violence through them ; and behold, I will destroy them with the earth.
And behold I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth,
to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven ; and everything
that is in the earth shall die."
Again Gen. chap. vii. :
“And the Lord said unto Noah, come thou and all thy house into the ark;
For yet seven days, and I will cause it to pain upon the earth forty days and forty
nights ; and every living substance that I have made will I destroy from off the face
of the earth And every beast after his kind, and all the cattle after
their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind,
and every fowl after his kind, every bird of every sort. And they went in unto
Noah into the ark, two and two of all flesh wherein is the breath of life ....
and the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth ; and all the high hills, that
were under the whole heavens were covered and all flesh died that
moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and of every creep-
ing thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every man : all in whose nostrils was the
breath of life, of all that was in the dry land died. And every living substance was
destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the
creeping things, and the fowl of the heaven, and they were destroyed from the aarth :
and Noah only remained alive and they that were with him in the ark."
Such is the language of the text, and we will venture to say, that in the
whole range of history, ancient or modern, few passages can be found more
explicit, definite, and positive in their language, if such language as this is to
be explained away, surely any statement in history may bo explained away
and where would such unlicensed criticism lead us, but into utter and
endless confusion.
The mode of argument adopted by Pye Smith, Professor Hitchcock,
Hugh Millar, and others who take this view of a partial deluge is that
there are many other passages in the Bible where the writers intending to
speak of only a part do literally speak of the whole. The following
passages are generally given in illustration. In Genesis xli. 54-57, speak-
ing of the famine in the history of Joseph, it says :
“ The dearth was in all lands over all the face of the earth.
and all countries came into Egypt for to buy corn, because
that the famine was sore in all lands.”
And they argue that the writer could not have meant all the world in
reality because it would be absurd to suppose that men would come from
Japan or America to buy com in Egypt. Now in this case they assume
that the writer was acquainted with such countries as Japan, and America,
and therefore could not have meant literally what he said. But we know
that the world as known to the ancients, more especially to the Jews, was
very limited, and did not include stch distant countries as Japan, and
America, and there is not the slightest reason to suppose that this writer
had a knowledge beyond that of his Countrymen, and men have no right
to assume an improbability, namely, that he had such knowledge to get
them out of a difficulty. The words used by the writer, are most explicit
and comprehensive.


The dearth mas in all lands over all the face of the earth.
If such clear positive language as this is to be explained away whenever
convenient, by an arbitary assumption, all fair and reasonable criticism is
at an end.
Another passage given in illustration is Deut. ii. 25, where it says, that
God put the fear of the Jews upon all nations. The passage is—
“ This day will I begin to put the dread of thee, and the fear of thee, — upon the
nations that are under the whole heaven, who shall hear report of thee , and shall
tremble , and be in anguish because of thee."
Here again the writer spoke of the limited world, the whole world as
known to him, and literally meant the whole. We cannot reasonably
attach any other meaning to his words, men have no right to superinduce
their modern, and more extensive geographical knowledge, upon him, and
then reason, they should judge of the man as he really was.
Again in the account of the miracalous gift of unknown tongues, at the
feast of Pentecost, Acts ii. 5, 6. It says and they—
“Began to speak with other tongues, as the spirit gave them utterance. And
there were dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews, devout men out of every nation under
heaven. Now when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and were
confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own language.”
The evident intention of the writer here was to convey the idea that the
disciples were miracalously gifted to speak all the languages of the
earth, and that men from every nation under heaven were there present
who verified the fact, and this is the sense in which it was always under-
stood and explained by the early Christians, and is so still by vast numbers
of the modern ones.
There are many passages in the Bible of a similar class which are
frequently quoted, but in our opinion the words of nearly or quite every
passage which we have seen instanced, taken literally, convey the meaning
of the writer. But even supposing that, in some places, a hyperbolical or
exaggerated mode of speaking is indulged in, one or two, or a dozen hyper-
bolical statements do not prove that all the plain definite statements of
an entire history are hyperbolical also; that there are hyperbolical state-
ments more or less in nearly all histories is true, but if every
critic to suit some particular theory, is to explain away the most
positive statements of history at will, and in utter opposition to
their contexts by the application of such a principle of criticism as
this, then all real history is at an end. The first chapters of Genesis state,
most distinctly, that God created every living thing, both plants and
animals, that for certain reasons he determined to destroy every living
thing by a flood which he had made, that every living animal that breathed
or creeped, or moved upon the earth, and every living substance died
drowned in a flood of water, which rose above the tops of all the high hills
under the whole heaven. If this was not intended to be a record of a
universal deluge the language, to use an old but apt figure, is “ a mockery, a
delusion and a snare.” For a real universal deluge could he expressed
in no plainer terms. *■
In other respects also this hypothesis of a partial deluge is beset with


insurmountable difficulties ; for instance, a flood that would cover
Mount Ararat would of necesity in obedience to the law of thp equilibrium
of fluids by which water finds its level, cover the whole world (at least
with its present shape ; and history, and physicial science, both affirm that
it has scarcely altered it in the slightest degree since that time). An ordi-
nary tidal wave, caused by some slight upheaval will in a few weeks sweep
round the world, how much more then, and with what increased velocity
would a flood covering a mountain 17,000 feet high, sweep around the
world even allowing such flood to have entirely originated in the single
region of Armenia,
Different ways have been imagined, by which the top of Mount Ararat
might be covered, and still the flood not deluge the whole earth. One is
that the water might have stood up like any body of solid matter with
Ararat in the centre and another is that a portion of the earth’s surface,
say a track of country the size of France, but including Mount Ararat, might
have been gradually sunk, allowing the water to rush in, and flood the
depressed area, and at the end of a few months, be as gradually upheaved again
allowing the water to drain off and leave the ground dry.
Respecting the first we can only say that it appears to us absurd, inas-
much as it is totally opposed to the laws of physical science, and to the
universal experience of mankind, for water to stand up unsupported,
like solid matter. And respecting the second, that although physically
possible such a solution is a pure assumption, unsupported, and in fact,
altogether opposed, to the relation in Genesis. True, it is one way, and
an ingeneous way of getting out of a difficulty, but with a similar licence
of imagination, and ignoring the evident sense of history, we could at once
get out of any historical difficulty whatever.
The real cause which originated, and spread the hypothesis of a partial
deluge was the overwhelming, and increasing testimony of modern science
against a universal one. This is denied by some who are unwilling to
allow that science should in the slightest degree influence their faith,
and they affirm that they hold the view of a partial deluge, not because
science produces vast presumptive evidence against a universal one, but
because the Deity always works by the most economical means. They
argue that man alone had committen sin upon the earth, that man only
was to be destroyed, that a flood which would cover the world, then inha-
bited by man, was sufficient for the purpose ; and that God carrying out
his own purposes as he ever does by the most economical means, would
most certainly not have drowned the entire world, a great portion of which
would be flooded to no purpose, and innumerable multitudes of living-
beings who had not sinned at all, would unnecessarily, cruelly, and un-
justly perish.
But in addition to the general and all comprehending statement that
God determined to destroy, and did destroy, every animal, and every
living substance which he had made, and placed upon the earth, it says
in that the animals had sinned, as well as man, that God had
determined to destroy them also, that he did destroy them, and after the
flood made a solemn covenant, with those that were saved in the Ark, as
well as with the htiman beings, that he would no more destroy either of
them with another deluge in the future ages of the world. We have not


space to give the passages in immediate confirmation, but let the interested
reader turn to Gen, vi. 7, 11, 12, 18, 17 ; vii. 21—23, ix. 11—17 ;
and he will see that our words are fully borne out. It may by way of illus-
tration be remarked here that many of the ancient nations held that animals
as well as man, were morally responsible for their actions, Mahomet taught
and it is believed by the Mahometan world at this day, that at the day of
judgement every beast will be resuscitated, and judged of the deeds dons
in the body. (' Sale's Preliminary Discourse to Koran). See also, Gen.
ix. 5.
The upholders of the hypothesis of a partial deluge, in evidence that
science did not compel them to adopt their present views, but that it was
the overwhelming one of economy, adduce as the strongest argument in
point that Matthew Poole, and Bishop Stillingfleet both as far back as the
seventeenth century, took the view of a partial deluge, on the grounds of
economy, before the scientific difficulties were known. But without
wishing to be uncharitable, we cannot but consider this argument of
economy, then, as now, the ostensible and not the principal real one.
The physical difficulties even ih the seventeenth century, must have
appeared in great force to thinking men. Poole and Stillingfleet, in the
seventeenth century, both knew of the existence of China, South Africa,
North and South America, and other distant countries which were entirely
unknown to the ancients, and which they must have known contained an
immense variety of animals differing from those of the old world, and
representatives of which, according to the literal account in Genesis, must
have been brought and preserved ip the ark; this, and in fact a great
number of the other difficulties now seen, must even at that time have
been manifest to them. As a direct evidence that in the seventeenth cen-
tury a variety of difficulties were advanced against a universal deluge,
we find different writers arguing in support of it, and attempting to prove
it physically possible. Sir Walter lialeigh in his “ History of the
World," Willet in his “ Commentary on Genesis," Dean Wilkins in his
“ Essay towards a Real Character and a Philosophical Language,'
each attempt to answer the objections of doubters. Isaac Yossius argued
for a partial deluge, because the difficulties of a general one were so great;
and lastly Poole and Stillingfleet themselves, in arguing for a partial deluge,
both attempt to answer the sceptics. We have not Stillingfleet now before
us, but Poole after suggesting or adopting the hypothesis of a partial
deluge, remarks:—
“ If we take this ground, the difficulties which some have raised about the deluge
fall away as inapplicable, and mere cavils; and irreligious persons have no reason
left then for doubting the truth of the Holy Scriptures.”— Synopsis on'Gen. vii. 19.
It is incorrect therefore to say that Stillingfleet and Poole started, or
adopted the hypothesis of a partial deluge, on the grounds of economy
alone, before scientific difficulties were perceived at all. True, within the
present century, by the great advance in geological, and general science,
the difficulties against the universal deluge have been perceived in greater
number and magnitude ; still long before the seventeenth century many
and great scientific difficulties were perceived, urged against the account,
and argued by the opposite parties, pro and con.


We shall now in a few words, consider this question of economy upon
its own merits. It is said that mankind could not have spread far over
the earth in the time that had elapsed from the creation to the flood, and
that all the portion which it would be necessary for God to drown, would
perhaps be a country the size of France. But would it be the most
economical mode of destroying the present inhabitants of France, to sub-
merge the country ? Certainly not! A thousand more economical means
might be adopted. We read in the Bible that 50,000 people were struck
dead at one time for looking into the “ Ark of the Covenant,” that an
angel killed 70,000 people in one day by smiting them with a pestilence —
that an angel killed 185,000 men in one night while they slept—that all
the first-born of the Egyptian nation, without a single exception, were
struck dead in one night. It might fairly be argued that these were
economical means of destroying men, but surely not the deluge, not even
if it was a partial one, covering a tract of country no larger than France.
If we may bo allowed to illustrate the subject by a reference to man and
his domestic possessions, we may ask, What man on the grounds of economy
would think of deluging his estate if he simply wished to destroy the cattle
upon it ? If he were specially to study economy he might drive them all
together, or shoot or spear them where they were, or poison their drink,
or put into operation a hundred other modes more economical than sub-
merging the entire estate, over which they were spread.
And besides if it was a partial deluge on the grounds of economy, why
the unnecessary labour of collecting pairs of every living thing into the
ark? The Catholic commentator Calmet, in his Dictionary article on the
deluge, arguing for a universal one, very pertinently puts this point, he
says :
“ Supposing a partial deluge only, what necessity was there to build at a great
expense, a prodigious ark P to bring all sorts of animals into it for preservation ?
or to oblige eight persons to enter into it, etc. Was it not more easy to have
directed these people, and animals, to travel into those countries which the deluge
was not to reach.”
This would certainly have been the greater economy. The birds in par-
ticular, who many of them, fly from one distant country to another at
certain seasons to escape the inclemency of the weather, etc., could have
flown into the adjoining countries, and lived there much more easily than
in the ark.
Again, what economy and what justice was there, if man alone had
sinned, in drowning all those animals which were within the deluged area ?
surely it was as unnecessary and as unjust to drown them as it would
have been to have drowned those outside of that area.
Again, if the question of economy was considered what necessity was
there for the earth to remain under the water, and all that vast number of
animals to remain in the ark for twelve months, when twelve hours immer-
sion would have been sufficient to drown every man.
In conclusion therefore we cannot but regard this plea of economy now
almost universally advanced by those who, being compelled to modify
their faith by the irresistible deductions of science simply as an ingenious,
a happy mode of explaining away a defeat, and feel convinced that had not
the scientific objections pressed so hard upon them, we should never have


heard of a partial deluge, upon any such grounds as that of economy ; nay
more, as an eminent authority has observed, it is only the finding them-
selves driven by the irresistible facts of science into a position of “ utter
'perplexity'' that has made them, at the cost of such violence to the
evident sense of the account in Genesis, attempt to solve the difficulty by
the hypothesis of a pai'tial deluge at all. In Exodus xx. 9—ll it is said
that in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and everything
in them, and rested on the seventh, and the Jews in commemoration of
the event are commanded to work six days in the week, and keep holy the
seventh. Of late years geology has shewn by an overwhelming mass of
presumptive evidence that the earth itself was not made in six days. The
scientific evidence is too plain to be ignored, and so accommodating inter-
preters have made arbitrary divisions in the geological strata, and inform
us that the world was not made in six days, but in six epochs. As has been
suggested, the passage therefore in all consistency should read —
Remember the seventh epoch, to keep it holy. Six epochs shalt thou labour*
and do all thy work, but the seventh epoch, is the sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it
thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy man-
servant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor the stranger that is within thy
gates. For in six epochs, the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in
them is, and rested the seventh epoch, wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh epoch,
and hallowed it.
Into a position of similar absurdity does the most positive language, and
the whole tenor of the account in Genesis, force the upholder of a partial
deluge.
How did tlie Account of flic Delude Originate I
We shall next attempt to consider the question —How did the story
originate ? That a universal flood did not take place four thousand years ago,
geology very conclusively proves, unless as has been suggested, a miracle was
wrought to remove all natural evidences of such a catastrophe from the
earth —a conclusion wrung out by stern necessity from those who attempt
to defend the position at all costs against overwhelming evidence —and a
position so forced and improbable that few thinking men can possibly
accept it. That all that vast number of animals was brought together—a
pair of each, from all the various parts of the world, kept together for
twelve months in a close vessel, and then each pair distributed to its own
spot of earth and proper natural conditions, that a rain of forty days
deluged the world above the tops of the highest mountains, etc.—science
proves, could not have taken place according to natural laws as we now see
them uniformly working.
Science, therefore, furnishing strong presumptive evidence that the
account of the deluge in the Pentateuch is not literally true, the question
naturally arises, How did the story originate ? Is it a description of a local
flood exaggerated by its ignorant traditionary custodians, or is it a pure
myth ? We cannot say, but are strongly inclined to think that some
extensive local flood served as a foundation for the story, and that in the
course of ages, colored and embellished by the exaggerating tendencies and
igneranee of those through whose hands it passed, the account of such
local flood grew into the story of a universal deluge as it stands in
Genesis,


That there have been a vast number of deluges on the earth is demon-
strated both by geology and history. The science of geology informs us, that
there is scarcely, one, if a single spot on earth, but what has been at some
time or other deluged, and most places many times in succession, some-
times by the sea and sometimes by a flood of fresh water. These floods
have frequently been extensive, but never universal. It seems that our
globe is gradually settling down to a state of quiescence, that of late
centuries the convulsions of nature and floods among them have not been
so numerous, so violent, or so great as they were in the long past; yet even
within the historic period, we find many such floods recorded. We read of
enormous floods in Greece, in Egypt, in Chaldea, in India, in China, in
Mexico, in Peru, and in other countries in ancient times ; and from those
times up to the present, universal history recoi’ds an immense number of
extensive floods that have happened in various countries of the world,
floods caused in some cases by the sinking of tracts of country, and in
others by heavy and long-continued rains.
By way of illustration, we shall just give one instance of each species
of flood which has occurred within the memory of living men. Hugh
Millar ( Testimony of the Rocks, p. 298) says:—
“ In 1819, a wide expanse of country in the delta of the Indus, containing fully
two thousand square mile.) of flat meadow, was converted by a sudden depression of
the land, accompanied by an earthquake, into an inland sea, and the tower of a small
fort, which occupied nearly the middle of the sunken area, and on which many of the
inhabitants of a neighbouring village succeeded in saving themselves, may still be
seen raising its shattered head over the surface, —the only object visible in the waste
of waters of which the eye fails to determine the extent.”
In the year 1839, Mesopotamia, the very country where the ark is said to
have been built, was subjected to a vast inundation. Colenso, quoting an
authority on the subject {Pent. vol. iv,, p. 220) writes :
“ On April 21, the water was high upon the ramparts of Bagdad, and six feet above
the level of the city. As far as the eye could reach, nothing was to be seen, from the
highest tower of the mosques, but a great waste of waters, studded here and there with a
few date groves, which appeared like little islands : all cultivation in corn and garden
produce was completely destroyed; thousands of square miles of country were at that
time inundated, and numerous encampments of Arabs were drowned in the localities
where they had been accustomed to dig wells for a scanty supply of brackish
water Nearly a third of Mesopotamia was under water''
These are but a couple of modern floods amongst many, even thousands,
which could be ennumerated. In fact there is scarcely a country upon earth
but has had at some time or other its extra great flood or floods, even
within the last few centuries, and in most cases greater and more numerous
ones the farther we go back in time.
And this immediately brings us to the consideration of the greatest and
almost only even plausible external evidence which is still advanced by
learned divines in support of a universal deluge, namely, that “ amongst all
nations is to be found the tradition of such a deluge."
That such traditions of a deluge or deluges do exist amongst all nations
is admitted on all hands. One of the most uniform and universal
assertions to bo found in the traditions of all the aboriginal races, is that
a very long time ago the whole world was drowned by a flood of waters, and


all humanity perished except one man and his wife, or a single family; and
that these saved themselves by a raft or a boat, or by going up to the top
of one of the highest mountains in their neighbourhood, and that after such
flood these persons peopled the earth again.
It is useless to waste space in noticing the various accounts of such
deluge or deluges (for some nations record several universal ones) —they
can be found in nearly every history or notice of the various aboriginal
races. Humboldt thus summarises this universal feature:—
“ These ancient traditions of the human race, which we find dispersed over the
surface of the globe, . present among all nations a resemblance
that fills us with astonishment; there are so many languages belonging to branches
which appear to have no connection with each other, which all transmit to us the
same fact. The substance of these traditions respecting the destroyed races and the
renovation of nature is almost everywhere the same, although each nation gives it a
local colouring. On the great continents, as on the small islands of the Pacific, it is
always on the highest and nearest mountains , that the remains of the human race
were saved."
Now that such traditions do exist amongst all the aboriginal tribes of
the earth, we hold is not of necessity any proof whatever of the truth of
the Noachian deluge, or of any universal deluge at all. Since man has
existed upon the earth, as we before noticed, according to the emphatic
and mutual testimony of geology and history, there have been many, and
extensive floods in nearly if not quite every country of the world —floods
which have inundated large tracts of land and swept away multitudes of
the inhabitants. What more natural, then, than to suppose that traditions of
the most extensive of these terrible catastrophes, although but partial deluges
in reality, have been handed down, gathering as they came, as all traditions
do, until at length a number of them have grown into universal deluges.
Again, it is exceedingly probable that there have been many cases since
man has been upon the earth (a period according to the estimate of Sir
Charles Lyell and the later geologists of at least fifty thousand years')
when in some of the great floods two or three or a dozen persons have been
saved on a raft, or in a boat, or by flying to high ground, who in their
limited knowledge of the world, have really believed that they were the
only persons saved, and who hkve afterwards increased in number, but for
generations formed an isolated community. In such a case (and that
many such have happened amongst the scattered tribes of the earth
in the long lapse of ages is almost certain), we can see how the story
of a universal deluge, and with the single exception of the isolated saved
ones, of the total destruction of all mankind, would in all sincerity
originate.
Such, therefore (whether the flood was at first ignorantly thought to have
been universal, and in all sincerity handed down as such, or thought
to have been a partial deluge, and in the course of time became exaggerated
into a universal one), wo believe was the origin of the traditions to bo found
amongst all the various aboriginal tribes of the earth, and such the origin
of the Noachian deluge itself. And we think that, taking all the circum-
stances of the case into consideration, the wonder should appear to us, not
that such traditions are to he found amonyst all nations, hut that a single
nation should he found, which had no such tradition.


We shall next, and lastly, attebipt to show that the account in Genesis,
(like the traditions of deluges among all nations), whatever circumstances
might really have originated it, bears clear internal evidence of b.eing at
least exaggerated and coloured by ignorant men, that its entire detail is made
up by men holding the crude limited child-like belief of the untutored
barbarian respecting the extent of the world and natural phenomena in
general, by men unacquainted with even the simplest elements of geogra-
phical, zoological, and meteorological science.
The ancient Jews, like most rude people, appear to have had very limited
notions of geography. In their writings we find passage after passage which
impresses this idea upon us. Babylon is spoken of by an eminent person
dwelling at Jerusalem as 11 a far country ” (2 Kings, xx. 14), and yet
Babylon was only about as far from Jerusalem as London is from Edinburgh.
It is said that the Queen of Sheba came from “the uttermost parts of the
earth ” to hear the wisdom of Solomon (Matt. xii. 42); and yet according to
thegeneral opinion of commentators, her country was only afew hundred miles
from Jerusalem. Again the Mediteranean sea is spoken of as emphatically
“ the great sea ” (Joshua, xxiii. 4, etc.), and the river Euphrates as em-
phatically “ the great river ” (Gen. xv. 18, etc.) Of more distant seas, rivers,
and countries they appear to have had very little knowledge, and not the
slightest conception that the world was a globe, that such countries, as
America, Australia, farther Europe, farther Africa, or farther Asia, that seas
greater than the Mediterranean, or rivers greater than the Euphrates,
existed at all. We know how limited, comparatively, was the world as
known to the earlier Greeks and Romans, and as known to the ancient
Jews it appears to have been much less.
Again, the earlier Jewish notions of zoology were exceedingly limited
and crude. They believed that about two thousand years before the flood,
God had created the various kinds of animals, and brought them to tho
first man, and that he had named them all. They knew nothing of the
vast variety of animals of far distant countries, and other minute ones
immediately beneath and around themselves ; they know nothing of the two
hundred thousand species of living animals invisible to the naked eye,
which it would take a man a month to name if he named fifty every
minute, and a discriminating memory , and power of linguistic invention
never yet possessed by any man, or any ten men. The barbarous tribes
of any country are acquainted with comparatively few forms of animal life,
just the larger forms of their own, and a few of those of the immediate
surrounding countries, and there is every reason to suppose that the Jews,
or whoever originated the account of the Noachian deluge, possessed an
equally limited knowledge; to them it appeared simple enough for one man
to collect pairs of all kinds of animals and bring them into one spot,
equally as simple as it did for one man to name them in one spot a few
hundred years before.
Again, respecting tho want of sanitary regulations, the necessary supply
of light, etc., in tho ark. These are objections which would strike the
reflecting man of science, but would scarcely occur to the ignorant man at
all, and accordingly we find these indispensable conditions of animal life
entirely ignored and directly violated.
The Jewish notions of meteorology were equally crude and erroneous.


Judging from appearances, they believed that the apparent dome above our
heads was a firmament, a solid concave structure, and according to
Josephus (a fair exponent of Jewish views) built of crystal. (Antiquities
of the Jews, chap. 1, sec. 1.) This belief of the Jews may be easily
illustrated by a reference to the beliefs of many uninformed nations at the
present day, who like the ancient Jews, judging from superficial appearances
have arrived at similar unscientific and child-like conclusions. We shall
just adduce two or three instances. One writer speaking of the Hindoos
says :
“ According to them the firmament is a solid fixed arch of a blue color.”— Calcutta
Review, vol. 11, p. 432.
Mr. Ellis, speaking of the Polynesians, says:—
“ They imagined that the sea which surrounded their islands was a level plain, and
that at the visible horizon, or some distance beyond it, the sky, or rai joined the ocean,
enclosing as with an arch or hollow cone, the islands in the immediate vicinity.”—
j Ellis's Polynesian Researches, vol. 3, p. 168.
Another writer, speaking of the inhabitants of Madagascar, says;—
“ The geographical and astronomical theory of the Malagasy philosophers in relation
to the world’s form and nature is, that we live on a flat surface encompassed on all
sides beyond the sea by a solid sphere let down upon us, which is the horizon. They
entertain no doubt that one might climb up this horizon on its outer side, supposing
they could only transplant themselves thither, and innumerable are the fables founded
upon the history of such arduous enterprises, encountering the great God, and so forth.
One of the first questions which they put to a white man, has immediate relation to
the said sphere —What is the horizon ? is it made of gold, or of pearl, of wood, or of
stone ?”— Madagascar, Past and Present, by a Resident, p. 30. See also, Chinese
Repository, vol. 7, p. 510 ; Morrison's Chinese Miscellany, p. 34 ; Williams's Mis-
sionary Enterprises, p. 541.
The Jews in their account of the creation, allot the making of this
supposed firmament or solid sphere to God as one day’s work out of the
six (Gen. i. 6,8), while another day is allotted for the making of the sun,
moon, and stars, (Gen. i. 14, 17). And to the child, to the barbarian, or
even the unscientific in civilized countries, the making of the firmament
would appear the much larger day’s work of the two, and this was evi-
dently the opinion of the ancient Jews, as portrayed in their account of
the creation. They had not the remotest idea that the sun was more than
a million times larger than our earth ; that the stars were so many millions
of stupendous suns and worlds rolling in majestic and inexpressible harmony
through illimitable space ; that instead of being created especially for the pur-
pose, and placed in the under surface of the “ firmament” to give light to
our earth (Gen. i. 15, 18), the great majority of them were thousands of
millions, and millions of millions of miles beyond it; that our earth was,
compared to them was but as a drop of water to the ocean, and the supposed
“ firmament,” no firmament at all, but simply an optical illusion.
The Jews, also, like many other rude peoples, believed that the top of this
vault or firmament formed as it were the ground-floor of Heaven, where
dwelt God and his angels (see Gen. xi. 5,6,7; xviii. 21; xix. 24; Psalms
Ixxviii. 23, 25; Gen. xxviii. 12), and that the earth was communicated
with, through windows or doors formed in the solid framework of the
structure. The term windows of heaven, with them in most cases meant
no figure of speech, but a reality. It is necessary for the proper considera-
tion of our subject to fully realise this fact.


All rude peoples throughout the earth, and in all ages, have had a mode
of accounting for all the various phenomena of nature, and among others
for that of rain. Some account for it in one way, and some in another,
but the most common belief is, that there is a large quantity of water
stored up above, and that when it rains it is simply a portion of it by
some agency being precipitated upon the earth. The Hindoos believe that
the moon is the great reservoir of water, and that rain results from a portion
of it being by a certain agency made to drop through numerous pores in
the clouds.— Calcutta Review , vol, 11, p. 480, 431.
Another authority, speaking of the Siamese, says :
“ The Siamese priests say, that in the midst of the heavens there is a great basin,
in which the angels bathe ; when too many angels go to bathe at the same time, the
celebrated basin overflows and this causes rain upon the earth.”— China , Pictorial and
Piscriptive, p. 387.
The Greenlander believes that there is a largo lake up above; that when
this lake overflows it rains, and that should it happen to burst there would
he a universal deluge wpon earth. — Crantz's History of Greenland , vol.
1, p. 178.
The Jews were equally simple in their notions. They imagined that
above the “firmament” were situate large reservoirs of water, and large
quantities of hail, snow, etc. ; that when it rained, or hailed, or snowed,
it was in consequence of some of these substances being poured down
through the “ windows of heaven,” and generally by special command of
the Deity. Hail in particular (probably in consequence of its fitful and
destructive character) they believed to be beyond all doubt, an agent of
God’s vengeance. In the book of Eccles. xxxix. 35, it says : —.
“ Fire, hail, famine, and death, all these were created for vengeance.”
In the book of Job, God is made to put to Job the following query:—
“Hast thou entered into the treasures of the snow, or hast thou seen the treasures
of the hail which I have reserved against the day of trouble, against the day of battle
and war.”—Job, xxxviii. 22, 23.
In another place we are informed that God cast down great hailstones
out of heaven upon the enemies of the Jews :
“ And it came to pass as they fled before Israel, and were in the going down to
Beth-Horon that the Lord cast down great stones from heaven upon them, unto
Azekal and they died. They were more which died with hailstones than they whom
the children of Israel slew with the sword.” —Jos. x. 11; see also Ex. ix. 23;
Rev. xvi. 21.
In the account of the creation given in the first chapter of Genesis, this
belief of the great waters being above the supposed solid firmament is
clearly shewn: —
“ And God said, let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it
divide the wafers from the waters. And God madej the firmament and divided the
waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firma-
ment, and it was so; And God called the firmament heaven And God
said let the ivaters under the heaven be gathered together into one place and let the
dry land appear, and it was so. And God called the dry land earth, and the gather-
ing together of the waters called he seas.”—Gen. i. 6-10.
Here evidently the idea is that a part of the water went up, and remained
above the solid firmament, and we find this idea running throughout the
Bible. The Psalmist exclaims;—


“ Ye waters above the heavens praise him.”—Psalms, cxlviii. 4.
The writer of the second book of Esdras relates a conversation carried
on between himself and an angel. The angel puts what he considers some
unanswerable questions to Esdras, as follows: —
“ Weigh me the weight of the fire, or measure me the blast of the wind, or call mo
again the day that is past How many springs are in the
beginning of the deep, or how many springs are above the firmament.” —2 Esdras vi.
5-7.
And again in speaking of the creation, Esdras says :
Oh Lord, upon the second day thou madest the spirit of the
firmament, and commandest it to part asunder, and to make a division betwixt the
waters, that the one part might go up, and the other remain beneath .” —2 Esdras
vi. 41.
In the days of the prophet Elijah we are informed that the heaven* were
shut, and it rained not upon the earth for the space of three jmars and six
months.—Luke iv. 25. See also 2 Chron. vii. 13.
Another writer says :
“By his (Hod’s) commandment he maketh the snow to fall apace, and sendeth
forth swiftly the lightnings of his judgement, through this are the treasures opened
and the clouds fig out like birds.” —Eccles. xliii. 14, 15. (Douay Trans).
But the most forcible passage which wo have come across in the Jewish
writings, as illustrating the notion of the Jews on this subject, is in the
book of Enoch. The book of Enoch, although not strictly a canonical
book of either the Jews or the Christians generally, yet it is quoted by St.
Jude, was held as canonical by many of the early Christians, and is still held
as canonical by the Christian church of Abyssinia. The Jews believed
that Enoch went to heaven without dying, and the book of Enoch under-
takes to inform us what he saw when he was there. We are informed that
among other things he saw God sitting on his throne, surrounded by
angels and archangels, he saw the future habitation of the blessed and
the condemned, the tree of life, etc. But what is more immediate to the
purpose of our subject he saw the receptacles, or great depots, from
wuich come all the clouds, and snow, and rain, and hail, and mist, and
dew, also the great receptacle of light, and thunder, and every species of
lightning the great receptacles of darkness, and of the winds, the great
receptacles of fire, and water. He saw also mountains of the gloom which
constitutes winter, etc., each receptacle in charge of an angel. Book of
Enoch.
To persons holding such views as these, it seemed very simple for rain
enough to be poured down from heaven to deluge the world above the tops
of the highest mountains. And accordingly we are informed that the
11 windows of heaven were opened ,” and it rained for forty days and forty
nights upon'the earth, and again “ the windows of heaven were stopped, and
the rain from heaven was restrained ” (Gen vii. 11, 12 ; viii. 2), and the
waters prevailed and all the high hills under the whole heavens were
covered. The originator or originators of the account had not the slight-
est idea that it might rain for centuries without increasing the amount of
water on the earth by a single drop:—
“ The same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows
of heaven wex’e opened.”—Hen. vii. 11.


We are unable to say what is exactly meant by the fountains of the
great deep being broken up, but we think that the idea which the writer
wished to convey was that all the natural springs of the earth com-
menced to flow with increased velocity, in a similar manner as the rain
poured down out of heaven more incessantly.
If we were to ask an uninformed man what were the principal sources
of water supply, he would answer “ Rain and natural springs,” not
knowing that all the fresh water springs of the earth were also pro-
duced by accumulations of rain water; besides, we know from many ex-
pressions in the Jewish writings, that they believed there to be a great
quantity of water under the earth—what if they did not believe that the
earth actually stood upon the waters? Ex. xx. 4 refers to—
“ The waters under the earth.”
Ps. xxiv. 1, 2 says —
“ The earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof, the world, and they that dwell
therein. lor he hath founded it upon the seas and established it upon the floods.”
Again, Ps. cxxxvi. 6 :
“ Him that stretched out the earth above the waters.”
And again, 2 Esdras, xvi. 58, 69 ;
“He framed the earth upon the waters. He spreadeth out the heavens like a vault,
upon the waters hath ho founded it.”
This idea of the earth standing upon the waters was an old one of the
Hindoos and other nations, and probably, as the above expressions in-
dicate, also that of the Jews. Men saw that in most countries where
they dug wells they found water, they saw the water frequently bubble
up spontaneously out of the earth, ajid in their ignorance of the sciences
of geology and hydrostatics they very naturally concluded that beneath
the earth mas an unlimited quantity of mater. It is quite reasonable
therefore to suppose that a person in those times, writing to account for
a universal deluge, should add to an increased fall of rain from heaven,
an increased flow of the springs of the earth, and colored with his in-
correct belief, call it the breaking up of the fountains of the great deep.
The passage being so concise and indefinite in itself and unexplained by
the context, it is impossible to state positively the writer’s meaning; the
utmost that we can tlo on this point is to conjecture, but we think
that the explanation we have given is the right one.
We are informed that after the flood the waters were dried up from off
the earth by a wind. This idea again appears to have been the concep-
tion of a person unaquainted with natural law; he had seen the wind
dry up water in small quantities again, again, and again, and he natur-
ally concluded that in a good length of time, by means of a strong wind
a large quantity would dry up also—in his opinion, when the water was
dried up it was gone out of existence. In his unscientific simplicity,
he had not the slightest conception, that when the wind dries up water,
it simply goes off in the shape of invisible vapour, and must necessarily
before many days fall again in a condensed form, in some other part, and
that a strong wind might blow for a hundred years, and not waste one
foot of water from off the earth’s surface.


We shall now conclude our argument. Much more might have been
said upon the subject, more especially upon its theological and moral
bearings did opportunity permit. We have dwelt more particularly upon
the scientific objections, and the probable and glaringly apparent ignor-
ance of the originators of the account, because these appeared to us the
most striking and numerous. And here the question may be put, as it
frequently has been:—“Allowing the Noachian deluge to have been a
partial one, grossly exaggerated, or one without the slightest foundation,
absolutely untrue, what harm does it do for the people to believe it ?”
We answer that the same argument could be used with equal pro-
priety, with respect to any, and every other article of man’s belief how-
ever false, and it is surely better that men should believe truths, than
that they should believe falsehoods, A belief in the truth of the deluge,
allowing it to be false, may not of itself so directly or manifestly affect
man’s welfare as the belief in witchcraft, in the efficacy of trial by ordeal,
in the rightfulness and efficacy of human sacrifices, in the lawfulness of
human slavery, or a hundred other glaringly pernicious beliefs ; but we
hold that in the very nature of things the belief of all falsehoods what-
ever, however innocent apparently in the abstract, is in reality perni-
cious—that the belief of a falsehood never yet benefitted man —that it
never can benefit him—that a knowledge of the truth in every respect
is above all others, the one thing needful for man’s welfare—and that
therefore it is the duty of every man to discountenance and attempt to
explode everything which he believes to be false. A profound convic-
tion of this truth is our apology and our justification for the present paper,
—and as a parting word with our readers, in all earnestness and friend-
ship we would add—Let us all persistently strive to realize the motto
placed above. “In practice let us do unto everyone as we would they
should do unto us, and in matters of faith endeavour by every means in
our power to believe the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth” —and then we may rest assured that all will go well.
HABIT AN S IN TERRA.


ATTITUDE OF THE CLERGY TOWARDS
SCIENCE.
The following extracta arc taken from a lecture by the Rev. F. W. Farrar, delivered
to a congregation of ministers of the Church of England, at Sion College, London,
at the request of its President, and published in the “ Contemporary Bevieto for the
month of December, 1868. A lecture which for the admissions and concessions it
makes to the cause of truth and progress, is certainly one of the most remarkable
and telling productions which ever fell from the lips of an orthodox Christian
minister.—lt shews most emphatically the signs of the times, when a minister, after
uttering so much wholesome truth, is still allowed to remain unchallenged within the
pale of the church, and to publish such a lecture in an orthodox review, edited by
the Dean of Canterbury. A review, which wo understand, was actually started to
counteract the too advanced tondences of “ The Fortnightly
There are two main points which the rev. gentleman has attempted to show.
The first is that while the progress of science has done much to civilize the world,
has ever increasingly tended to make “ man’s mind more expansive and his life more
full of joy." Theologians accepting the erroneous science of the Bible writers as
correct, have continually opposed true science and persecuted scientific men, and
still do oppose it, and persecute them more or less. The second is that the Bible
generally is the inspired word of God, but to use his own words, that “ The mere
natural science of the Bible is the natural science of its writers ” —that in fact the scien-
tific statements and references in the Bible partookof the imperfect scientific knowledge
of the writers, that they did not know, but spoke what they erroneously believed to
be the truth. On the above grounds, he in effect suggests that scientific men and theo-
logians should come to an agreement, and for ever end the hostility between the two
—that scientific men should accept the Bible as divine in its doctrinal parts, and
theologians accept its science as imperfect, and so join hands.
Doubtless, many will think that such a compromise is in the nature of things im-
possible ; that an arbitrary line cannot be drawn between the divine and the mere
human utterances of the Bible writers, they will ask, “ If the mere natural science of
the Bible is the natural science of its writers,” is it not exceedingly probable that
the mere doctrines of the Bible are simply the doctrinal opinions of its writers also ?
and as the progress of modern science has proved that the mere natural science of
the Bible writers was at fault; has not the more humane and enlightened outcome
of modern thought and feeling, as plainly demonstrated, that in many cases their
ethical and theological opinions were at fault also.
In any case the rev. gentleman has given a most eloquent, forcible, outspoken,
and above all, eminently salutary address. For ourselves we believe that he is
wrong on one or two points, ( especially in his saving clauses ), but we know that he
is right on others, and we thank him for the truth that he has uttered.
The subject before us is too important to be easily exhausted. It is
nothing' less than the past, present, and future relations between the
teachers of our national religion and the representatives of our scientific
thought. The views of the most numerous clergy will always, by virtue
of their influence, he the views of the most numerous laymen. Looked
up to in thousands of parishes as the natural loaders ol opinion
possessed of an an authority which gives to their utterances an almost
oracular dignity—this great society is the most powerful that could he
imagined to diseminate each fact, which opens he ore the minds of men
a new “ window into the infinite,” and each discovery which sheds a fresh
ray of revelation upon the power of God. It has always, in past times,


been a heavy disaster and a prelude to yet more perilous catastrophes,
when the clergy have opposed the declarations of science till opposition
has become no longer possible, and then have defended and admitted
them on grounds wholly diiferent from those by which they were estab-
lished. That such has been the case in past ages, and that in spite of
an immense improvement, the spirit of those ages in this respect has not
wholly died away, may, I think, be demonstrated by overwhelming evi-
dence. And if this be so, as I sincerely believe, is it not at once our
wisdom and our duty to recognise the fact ? Is it not at once the most
orthodox and the noblest course to read lessons of calmness and -wisdom
for the future by the troubled light which is thrown upon us from the
errors of the past ?
For if any one imagine that I am about to make a vulgar attack upon
the clergy—or, indeed, an attack of any kind, —to deliver an invective
against them, to arraign their conduct and impugn their judgment, then
he grievously misunderstands my purpose, and accuses me of a presum-
tion wholy alien to my character and habits. As one of the humblest of
their order, let me bear my testimony to their conspicuous purity and
holiness of life. Knowing as they do, that to the vast majority of them
the door of ambition is closed for ever—buried as many of them are
in the deep obscurity of country parishes to which their noble poverty
confines them for long years—surrounded as they often are by an igno-
rant peasantry and an illiterate society, they do their work calmly, cheer-
fully, and unremittingly, with a zeal and self-denial which are beyond all
praise, and which will receive no reward, and scant encouragement, until
they hear those lofty words, “ Servant of God, well done.” I should
indeed blush if I could bedim one line of that bright and saintly picture
which was drawn by Chaucer in the fourteenth, by George Herbert in
the seventeenth, and by Goldsmith in the eighteenth century, and which
in all times has justified its fidelity. But men may be upright and pure
in life, yet intolerant and retrogressive in opinion. St Chas. Borromeo,
who visited the plague-stricken with the tenderness of a saint, yet perse-
cuted heretics with the fury of an inquisitor. And, speaking not of the
special work of the clergy, but of their speculative opinions—opinions,
too, which affect a sphere of knowledge outside of and beyond their own
—it must, I fear, be admitted that neither now, nor at any period of the
past, have the relations between science and clerical opinion been what
they might be. It is my present object to point out the fact, to consider
its causes, and to suggest a remedy. I cannot but fear that many alike
of my arguments and my suggestions will be in disaccord with the views
of my brethren ; Ido not think that it ought to be so; Ido not think
that I shall say a word to which just exception can be taken; but, if it
be an indefinitely easier and more pleasant task to glide down the smooth
stream of popular applause, and be carried along by the favoring opinions
of an audience, one is often doing a more useful and a more fruitful work
when running counter to them. I have written in Hooker’s belief that
“ things most truly are likewise most behoovingly spoken.” I have
been encouraged by the consciousness—first, that I am but re-echoing
thoughts and arguments which might have been used, and in spirit have
been used by Fathers, such as St. Gregory of Nyssa, or Clemens of
Alexandria, nay, even by the uncompromising St. Augustine himself;


secondly, that I am speaking- to the freedom of Protestants, not to the
infallibly-bound reason of Roman Catholics; and, thirdly, that I am
addressing the clergy of London—a body who have always been con-
spicuous among their brethren for liberality and candour. Therefore, I
will ask for no indulgence, except the credit of speaking without dis-
guise or equivocation, fearlessly, sincerely, conscientiously, as a clergy-
man ought to speak; the credit fur stating my views respectfully,
courteously, without, passion, and without arrogance; and the credit for
a sincere desire to further in one important respect the high interests of
that great clerical order to which —because of the high ideal of it
which I have seen so many of my brethren attain —it is the chief pride
and honour of my life that I belong
By Science we mean demonstrative knowledge respecting the laws and
phenomena of the universe ; by Religion we mean established facts res-
pecting the relation of God to man. To assert that one can be hostile to
the other, is to assert that the God of the universe can be an enemy to the
God of the conscience, or that the laws which he has written on the
mighty pages of his macrocosm, can give the lie to those which he has
inscribed on the heart of humanity, and on the tablets of the moral law.
A spurious science, indeed, and a false theology, may often clash their
opposing self-complacencies, and truth, in the struggle, may be retarded
for centuries. But “ Veritas lahorat scepe, extinguitur nunquam." On
the one side, let there be but a single thinker, striking out some new
truth in his solitary cell; and on the other side let there be all the
banded forces of prerogative and prejudice —let kings fight against it
with their armies, let priests denounce, let synods anathematise, let
bishops excommunicate, yet in spite of the evidence of men’s senses, in
spite of the cruelty of their powers, in spite of the tyranny of their
leaders, in spite of the inveteracy of their beliefs, Magna est veritas, et
PR^VALEBIT.
Now truth only—fearless of results, indifferent to consequences,
established by infinite, humble, self-abnegating toil —is the very domain
of Science; and the belief in it, the love of it, and the inquiry after it,
furnish mankind with their best and noblest aims. Theologians have
delighted to contrast faith and reason, to monopolise the former, and to
leave the latter, in all its supposed aberrations, to their opponents. The
antithesis should be rejected as mutually injurious, and “ altogether un-
holy.” All theology worthy of the name must appeal to reason for the
very grounds of its acceptance ; and all true science soars upon the
wings of the very loftiest faith. The faith of Science has removed
mountains; the reason of true Theology has outlived all storms. We
believe that by the Word of God the heavens and earth were made; we
believe that from them his eternal power and Godhead may be known ;
the pursuit of science is the study of those works, the result of science
is their interpretation. How can there be any hostility to religion in a
body of truths, whose acceptance is the necessary result of their appre-
hension? Religion, in the words of Locke, “is every man’s duty, and
every rational creature is concerned therewith.” The divine does not
monopolise it, nor can the man of science do without it. Both have
the same needs, both the same intellectual and moral hunger, which
truth only can satisfy. . . Read the annals of science, and they will,
I fear, furnish abundant evidence—evidence which we should be the very


last men to deny—that her children have often been calmer, wiser, greater,
better men than the theologians who attacked them. And to the
physical student no less than to the divine, God has spoken; the one
reads his perfections in the starry heavens above—the other in the moral
law within.
But when I say that Religion and Science can never come into
collision, I do not say the same of Science and Theology. For the
name of Theology is often usurped to signify a multitude of traditional
dogmas, which may be safely excluded from the conception of true
religion
[Speaking of the men of science, and the theologians of the schools
who opposed them, he says] —And which of these two has earned God’s
blessing, —the systematises who have gyrated in contradictory exposi-
tions, or the men of science who have proceeded ever in triumphal pro-
gress, pressing forward irresistibly from fruitful discovery to fruitful
discovery, “ springing from crystal step to crystal step ?” While a self-
styled theology was but infecting Scripture with its own fallibility,
science was revealing God’s grandeur in his works, was ever making
man’s mind more expansive and his life more full of joy. Unaided, and
with no weapon save the prerogative of reason, science has many a
time torn up and scattered to the winds the dearest prejudices of divines,
nullified their haughtiest claims, reversed their most positive assertions,
erected towers of adamant amid their ruined walls of untempered mortar.
The path of science, no less than that of history, is strewn with tho
wrecks of their defeated dogmas, and covered with the debris of their
causeless threats.
If anyone ask what Christianity has clone for civilisation, we can answer
that it made common, in the practice of mankind, an ideal of holiness, so
noble and so saintly, that in all the ages of previous history but one or two
attained to it.. But if we be asked what theology has done, what shall we
answer ? For a thousand years theology had it all her own way ; all
learning did homage to it, and all authorities supported it. Theology had
to herself the undisputed dominion of the world; and what came of it ?
Take any history of doctrine, be it Haag or Hagenbach ; any history of
the Church, be it Giesler or Neander, Milman or Gibbon; and can we
honestly admit that a systematizing or polemical theology has performed
for the world any appreciable service ? Was it not the main task of the
Protestant Reformation to overthrow the pernicious dogmas which had
been imposed upon men’s weary reason by tho interminable array of
theologians and priests ? Was it a satisfactory result for one thousand
years of theology to end in quibbling about “notions, and relations, and
formalitations, and quiddities, and haecceities which,” as Erasmus says,
“ no eye could follow save that of a lynx, which is said to be able, in the
thickest darkness to see things which have no existence ?”
It is certain, then, that these ages of undisputed theology were ages
of darkness, stationariness, superstition. . . “ The same questions, the
same answers,” says John of Salisbury, “ the same difficulties, the same
solutions, sought for, admired, cavilled at, abandoned, repudiated, and
again admired.” “ Behold a school which for five centuries has re-
sounded with disputes,” said the pompous cicerone, who showed Casaubon
over the Sorbonne. “Et qu’a-ton done prouve ?” was the very natural—
if somewhat ironical—reply.


But the chief characteristic of all that theological age was an intense
servility—servility to the mere letter, servility to the Fathers, servility
to Councils, servility to Aristotle, servility to all sorts of Doctors,
angelic, cherubic, irrefragable, and seraphic. Everybody, originating
nothing, was dogmatically commentating on everybody else. The age
avowedly borrowed all the supposed truths which it possessed, and for-
bade anyone to do anything else. Worst of all, it made dissent not only
a necessary error, but even a civil crime—a crime treated with more
atrocity than the most terrible of moral offences. It made ‘‘the grave of
science a step to the gate of heaven.” If it was difficult to answer
those who were not to be silenced by a fragment of Aristotle, it was
comparatively easy to imprison or to burn them. An infallible Papacy,
an ambitious, ignorant, and immoral Priesthood, an Inquisition which
never rested from its work of blood, the doctrine of image worship, the
sale of indulgences, fear, distrust, malice, hypocrisy spread over the
whole surface of society —these, if we may believe the Church historians,
in the fifteenth century had been the nett result of those ages of dispu-
tation.
Only by long and slow degrees came the revolt; the insurrection
from usurping dogma to indisputable experience; the rebellion against
“ Blind Authority beating with his staff
The child that might have led him.”
Against this nightmare that was crushing the reason, against spurious
legends, against monkish disputes, against barren logomachy, against
Aristotelian commentators, against systematizing exegesis, the free
human intellect, illuminated by the spirit of God, began to spring up in
indignant antagonism. The armies of glorious insurrection moved
always along the road of science. And with what results ? These theo-
retical reformers simply revolutionized , and by revolutionizing, redeemed
and ennobled the very theology before the golden image of whose ignor-
ance they had refused to bow. They did infinitely more for true theology
than had ever been done by the writers who usurped her name, and
perishing as the folorn hope of humanity, in the very breach they had
made, they purchased by their tortures that intellectual freedom which is
the highest birthright of mankind.
The fate of men like Virgilius in the eighth century, and Gerbert in
the tenth, —of whom the first was persecuted for asserting the existence
of the Antipodes, and the second was laid under an interdict, and cursed
as a magician because he was a remarkable discoverer —were only
prophecies of what was to come. Next in that noble army of martyrs
came Roger Bacon. Roger Bacon was a Domincian monk. Now let
me pause here to say that of late some clergymen have thought to
prove that theologians have no tendency to persecute science, be-
cause some eminent men of science have themselves been ecclesiastics.
May I say, without discourtesy, that I cannot pretend to understand
the logic of such an argument ? By precisely the same argument it
might be proved that the clergy were never hostile —not to mention
any more modern names —to Wesley, or to Whitfield, dbat in all
ages there has been a few clerics, who, like Copernicus, or Cam-
panella, or Baden Powell, or Professor Sedgwick, have also been
physical students, is a mere commonplace; had it not been so—had not


the few in all ages been wiser than the multitude—the very existence of
the clergy might ere now have become impossible; but these men
have been in general the suspected exceptions. One or two of the
clergy were among the original promoters of the Royal Society, but it
is a mere matter of history that “ an overwhelming majority” of them
did their utmost to discredit and oppose it. But to urge that such men
as Roger Bacon and Campanella were clerics in proof that theology
has not been opposed to science, without adding that such men have
been the favourite victims of theological fury, is truly to slay the
prophets, and then build their sepulchres; to kill the foremost men of
their order, and then lay claim to their credit for the justification of
their murderers!
For how did Roger Bacon fare at the hands of theologians ? Instead
of being held in imperishable honour as one who towered with aston-
ishing grandeur above all his contemporaries, that “ vulgus studentum,”
which, as he said, “ non habet unde excitetur ad aliquid dignum et ideo
languat et asininat circum male translata,” attacked him with unre-
mitting hate. A clamour arose about him of “ magician,” “ heretic,”
“ atheist,” the well-known theological trumpet of internecine war. His
books were burnt, his instruments broken, his person confined in cruel
custody; he was fed on bread and water, he was starved with compulsory
fastings, he was treated, as he himself has told us, with ineffahilis
violentia. While Thomas Aquinas was schoolastieising, and systema-
tising, and commentating with boundless applause—defending persecu-
tion, and settling to his own satisfaction the minutest frivolities about
the nature of angels—this great, heroic, unequalled philosopher was
being hunted by monks and theologians, into a weary grave, till they
wrung from his lips—as they afterwards wrung from the lips of
Descartes—the bitter words, that he repented to have done so much in
the interests of science and of man. * * * * It has been the fatal
tendency of theology in all ages not to face, but to strangle opposition;
to give all independence of thought, even in its own pale, a good set down.
It put down Wickliffe; it put down Roscellinus ; it put down Abelard;
“it put down the Reformation,” says Mr. Mill, “ at least twenty times
before Luther.” It put down Arnold of Brescia, Fra Dolcino, Savon-
arola, Jerome of Prague, the Albigeois, the Vaudois, the Lollards, the
Hussites. Down to the end of the sixteenth century it was stigmatised
as a rationalistic tendency—a belief which made orthodox people shake
their heads—to hold the simple opinion that burning one’s opponents
was a crime and a mistake, in fact, theology at this period had sub-
stituted a ghastly terrorism for manly and faithful inquiry. Not one
independent thinker but suffered for it. Columbus was long prevented
from discovering the New World, and so conferring on mankind an in-
estimable blessing, by theological committees who tried to argue him
down out of the Psalms and Prophets, nay, even out of Augustine and
Lactantius, In 1543, Copernicus, lighting up the universe by a Hash
of prescient genius, dare not publish his theory save as a mere hypothesis,
and, in fear, as he himself says, of vain babblers, who perversely
wrested scripture against him, delayed his book so long as only to
receive a copy on the day of his death. In 1503, Telesio, though he
prostrated himself abjectly before the clerical majority, had his work
forbidden and suppressed. Yesalius, the anatomist, sent by the Inquisi-


tion on a penal pilgrimage to Jerusalem, died of starvation on an island
where he was shipwrecked. Campanella, “ accused of rebellion and
heresy,” for his physical doctrines, was fifty times imprisoned, and seven
times unspeakably tortured. Peter Ramus, rejecting the ecclesiastically
established dialects of Aristotle, was condemned by a decree of the
Sorbonne, as “ rash, impudent, ignorant, and arrogantand was
murdered by the infuriated scholars of a rival professor. Vanini was
burnt at Toulouse, on a false charge of atheism. And in the very first
year of the seventeenth century the brave and fearless Giordano Bruno
was burnt to death in the Roman forum ; and “ that the stars are seen
shining by their own light, and that each has its revolving planets,”
were among the enormous paradoxes and capital offences which were
laid to his charge. Well may the historian of the Inductive Sciences
observe, that “it is impossible not to be struck by the series of misfor-
tunes which assailed the theoretical reformers ” during this long period.
But these martyrs of science perished not in vain. By slow degrees
their deaths and sufferings were emancipating men from those false and
cruel bonds which were forced upon#men’s minds by an ignorant intol-
erance. For the seventeenth century was the century of Galileo Galilei,
whose name shines out among the very brightest benefactors of humanity,
and whose sentence should have been written in terrorem before all
those divines who, to use the words of Bishop Jeremy Taylor, have
been “ fools upon record, by hastily condemning what they slowly
understood.”
From the day when Galileo, a boy of eighteen, discovered the
isochronism of the penduldm, as he watched the great bronze lamp
swinging in the cathedral of Pisa, to that supreme moment ia the his-
tory of humanity, when the satellites of Jupiter swam into the focus of
his rude telescope, his life was one long series of splendid triumphs, for
which no gratitude was adequate, for which no honours were excessive,
which no gold could pay. He “ enlarged the universe one thousand
times beyond the belief of past ages in the words of Castelli, “he
saw more than all who had gone before him, and opened the eyes of all
who were to come.” To bring home to us the idea of Infinitude, to
add to the conception of Divine power a magnificence which no imagi-
nation of theology could have illustrated, —this was God’s revelation
through the genius of Ga ileo. And what was his reward ?To be
harried by the clergy at every step, to be charged with pride of human
reason, to have his divine discoveries censured as diabolical illusions, to
he branded as an infidel, and a rationalist, because of a false theological
tenet —this was his fate. The old man of seventy, broken with sickness
and infirmity, after rigorous examination, which some believe to have
been the torture of the cord, clad in a scanty shirt, terrified by a merci-
less tribunal, was compelled, as an examined and confessed criminal, to
abjure, curse, and detest upon his knees, as contrary to Scripture, philo-
sophically false, and formally heretical, the inestimable discoveries of
a most glorious life. His books were burnt and prohibited; he was
consigned to a prison; he was ordered once a week for three years, to
recite the seven Penitential Psalms; his will was disputed; his monu-
ment denied ; his right to be buried in consecrated soil barely granted ;
and the family confessor was permitted to burn all that he considered


objectionable, which was in all probability all that was most new and
valuable, in his remaining MSS !
Such was one of the many crimes of theology against science, —a
crime for which theology has not duly repented, but for which humanity
itself “ should mourn in sackcloth and ashes.” Is there in all history a
spectacle more terribly disgraceful . . . than this of religion arraying
her awful sanctions and sacred energies in the very van of retrogression
and falsehood ? I say that theology has not repented, because theologians
still extenuate the crime, and commit others like it
But it has been the fashion to say of late that Galileo would have
escaped if he had but shown “ a decent duplicity” in “ formulating” his
opinions. Thank God he did not! and would that theologians in this
respect would imitate him ! What physicists and divines have alike got
to do is to see truth as clearly, and to state it as unmistakeably as they
possibly can: and if I shall not be beheaded or imprisoned for reading
this paper, I owe it in part to the fact that Galileo, with his burning
love of honesty and intense abhorrence of spiritual despotism, disdained
to juggle with the majesty of truth. The duty of a scientific man is to
inquire, and not to formulate, tS arrive at what is granted him to
see and to demonstrate, not to consider the bearing of it on this or that
saying of Isaiah or St. James. He, too, is studying a great Book of
God, which requires an intense truthfulness in him who studies it.
Nothing has ever come of an attempt to construct a Biblical Science ;
the Bible, as Hugh Millar said—than whom no man ever loved or
reverenced it more—has never led to the discovery of a single scientific
truth ; and the attempt to use it as a handbook of science has ended in
nothing but mischief. It led to the assertion by Ambrose of » solid
heav en ; it led to the denial by Augustine, and hosts of other fathers,
of the Antipodes; it led to the confident vagaries of Cosmas Indico-
pleustes; it entangled Tycho Brahe all his life in an erroneous hypo-
thesis; it led to the ‘‘New theory of the Earth” of Whiston, and the
“ Turris Babeli” of Hooke, —and the many portentous physical sugges-
tions of a crowd of modern pamphleteers. It was by independent
truthfulness, no less than by transcendent genius, that Galileo won the
first battle in the long strife between pseudo-religious ignorance and real
scientific knowledge. In his case the edge of the theological axe was
dashed on iron, and since then, however vigorously wielded, it has
barely been able to cut wood.
Time forbids me from giving any continuity to this brief outline, by
showing how nearly all great discoverers have been similarly persecuted—
how Kepler was excommunicated, his library sealed up, his books put !n
the Index, his safety only secured by imperial protection ; how Descartes
found among theologians his bitterest persecutors, and was fined,
worried, embittered, and charged with atheism, after exhausting his
genius in the demonstration of a God; how Pyrerius, though a pro-
found believer in revelation, yet because he tried to deduce from the
Bible a plurality of races, had his room entered by armed men, his book
burned, the continuation of it prevented, and himself imprisoned until
forced by terror to recant. But so the guilty and miserable tale goes
on. The great men were crushed by persecution, and the thousands
whose silent thoughts they represented were forced into lifelong dis-
simulation and remorseful graves.


But perhaps you will say, “We are not Romanists.” Alas ! the sin
lies at the door of theologians, and of Protestant theologians hardly less
than Papist. The terribly mistaken and suicidal duty of coercing
heretics was preached as strongly by the one as by the Other. If Rome
burned Savonarola, Geneva burned Servetus. If Serenus accused Galileo,
Voetius worried Descartes. If Roman Catholicism warred with the
Vaudois, Protestants persecuted the Anabaptists. Luther stormed
against the impiety of the Copernican hypothesis no less violently than
Caccini. If the Jesuits opposed the Lyncean Academy, the English
clergy disliked and thwarted the Royal Society. It was the Protestant
Aconcio who said that “if the clergy once got the upper hand, all
knots would be cut by the knife of the executioner.” Not to Luther,
or Beza, or Knox, or Cranmer, or Melancthon—for these men all
all approved of what they little recognised to be the crime of murder for
“heretical” opinion—but, unfortunately, to Socinus and to Castellio we
owe the first assertion of the doctrine of toleration; and for preaching
it they were, on supposed Scriptural grounds, denounced by Beza as the
emissaries of Satan, and Castellio, pursued by the furious hatred of
Calvin, is said to have died of absolute starvation
But once more you will say “ These have been our sins in the past
only ; we are not intolerant or persecutors now.” We are impotent
now, but we often show ourselves just as angry. We have lost the
power to persecute, we still show the will to annoy. Publicly we do not
(often) excommunicate, but socially we ban. We do not brand with hot
irons, but many of us sear men’s lives with social stigmas. Be it
observed, I am not now speaking of the truth or falsehood of certain
opinions, but solely of the manner in which we still treat opinions hos-
tile to our own- In this very age, in this very generation, we have seen
exhibitions of theological intolerance as disgraceful in spirit as those of
the Inquisition. We have seen learned and honest men denounced,
deposed, excommunicated, reduced to poverty, and treated like social
pariahs. From pulpit and platform, as in the days of Priestley, we
have seen men of science held up in theological discourses to the hatred
of an unreasoning mob. We have seen discovery after discovery treated
at first as an insult to verbal inspiration, though afterwards it was un-
hesitatingly accepted. We still unhappily live in an age of persecutions,
prosecutions, deprivations, excommunications, ejections for mere differ-
ences of theoretical opinion on matters of Biblical exegesis. And one
consequence is that on almost all subjects there is perhaps less of defined
and independent thought in England than in any country of the world.
Charges of neology, charges of rationalism, charges of scepticism,
charges of heresy, in pulpits, and pamphlets, and religious periodicals
are everlastingly ringing in our ears.
For what, very briefly, have been the main new sciences of this
generation which can by any possibility intersect the orbit of theology ?
They are of course geology, ethnology, pre-historic archaeology, physi-
ology in some of its branches, and the science of language. Is it
possible for any one familiar with the contemporary literature of this
century, to deny that every one of those has been ushered in with a
burst of clerical opposition ? If any one does deny it, I ask him, in the
name of common candour, to read the published sermons and pamph-
lets and newspaper articles of every school, of which he may see thou-


sands at the British Museum. A friend of mine, before whom they
come officially, writes to me that “ the mass of theological literature
coming before me abounds in proofs of the suspicion and antipathy with
which scientific inquiries are regarded by great masses of the clergy.”
Geology occupies in this generation an analogous position to that once
occupied by astronomy; it has revealed to us infinite time peopled by
myriads of existences, as astronomy revealed infinite space peopled by
myriads of worlds. And how was it received ? With excited oratory,
with savage denunciation. Dean Buckland and Professor Sedgwick were
clergymen, but how were they treated ? You cannot deny—for the proofs
are patent to every one—that they, and that all the early geologists, were
met with a storm of invective. “ What was God doing before the first of
of the six days of creation ?” asks the clerical and university author of
“ Popular Geology Subversive of Divine Religion,” and he answers the
question to his own satisfaction. “He was decreeing from everlasting a
hell for all infidel inquirers.” If we turn to archaeology,
we find M. Boncher de Perthes attributing to theological prepossessions his
inability for many years to obtain any hearing for his interesting discoveries.
In the science of language we still find clergymen inculcating from the
pulpit on scriptural grounds the ridiculous and exploded hypothesis that
all languages are derived from the Hebrew ; and we find the belief in its
natural origin distinctly characterized as “a materialistic and atheistic
hypothesis.”
In the records of ethnology we find the gentle and illustrious Dr,
Morton worried to death by the attacks of a clerical opponent; and we find
a man so learned and eminent as Dr. Pusey, conscious as he is of past ex-
perience, laying down at the Norwich Congress as matters of faith —
matters which the Bible has decided, and which no science can overthrow
—propositions rejected by such an immense number of scientific men as
these two, that mankind originated in a single pair, and that only eight
people were saved with Noah in the Ark. Respecting the opinions them-
selves I need give no opinion, but respecting the utter unwisdom of staking
the whole credit of religion on the support of such hypothesis, after the
proved and utter fallibility of our scriptural interpretations in so many other
matters, I say that it is most perilous ; I say that it demonstrates how little
as a body we have yet learnt the very simple truth that Science can be
refuted by Science only, and how little right we have to smile at the
fulminations of the Vatican, while our own methods and proceedings are
in spirit so much the same. Let us take, by way of example, the cele-
brated Darwinian hypothesis. From one very small point of view—the
ethnological—l have, in the Transactions of the Ethnological Society,
myself ventured to state some reasons why I think it is not demonstrable,
and that there are powerful arguments on the other side. But no man
can deny that it is a most brilliant and fruitful hypothesis; that it has
exercised a splendid influence over modern science ; that it explains many
remarkable facts and series of facts hitherto deemed inexplicable ; that it
was supported with a genius, a patience, a calmness, and a dignity which
made its author a very needful and a very noble example to its assailants ;
and that the name of Charles Darwin, though it is the reverse of accept-
able to the majority of the clergy, stands perhaps the very highest in the
enthusiastic love, and honour, and reverence of scientific men. Yet how
was the hypothesis received ? We know how it was received at Oxford ;


we know that the pulpits, not of England only, but of Europe, rang with
denunciation of it as subversive of all Scripture, of all morality, and of
the dignity of man ; and I have myself heard it thundered forth before an
enormous meeting by an excited and most influential clergyman, that if
there had been any development it was not from the ape to the man, but
retrogressive from the man to the ape in the persons of those who sup-
ported such a view ! Very recently indeed there has been a stand made
against these deplorable and dangerous methods of arguments. Two
clergymen, at least, at the Wolverhampton Congress had the courage and
good sense to admit—as even Archbishop Sumner admitted long ago—
that there are and must be irreconcilable discrepancies between science and
the mere letter of Scripture ; one of them, without being silenced, actually
ventured, without anger or discourtsey, to express some limited approval
of the hated name of the bishop of Natal. But what then happened ?
The most distinguished leader, the most popular favourite of the whole
body got up, and carrying with him, as he himself asserts, the sympathies
of the vast majority, declared, amid loud cheers—“that in the name of
all humble believers be repudiated the claims of science to have an equal
right with God’s Bible to lay the foundation of truth—that those who
receive the Bible do not investigate truth: they receive it. He really
could not part from the meeting without delivering his humble protest
against the equal claim of science to our reverence, as if we had all to look
for the truth, as if we had not already received it.” Now as far as this
language had any meaning—and for its meaning you must read the
speeches which it was intended to repudiate—l say that it asserts the
right of theologians to be the judges of scientific conclusions, and that it
might have been delivered equally well in the Sorbonne —before the board of
theologians who sat upon Columbus—or at the conclave of cardinals that
humbled Galileo. And this speech was received with loud cheers, and is
asserted to have represented beyond all question the sense of the meeting.
Now much more remains to be said, which would all tend, I think, to
prove the position from which I started, that the relations of the clergy to
science—which I most gladly and thankfully admit have improved of late,
and are gradually improving—are not yet satisfactory. Rut I will con-
clude by laying down three positions, which I fear will be rejected by
many of my brethren, but with respect to which I am ready to appeal to
every scientific man of note in England, whether peace and union between
science and theology is even possible without their frank admission. It
has been said that the leading clergy are eager—are painfully anxious for
peace on the matter, at any price. Will they agree with me in accepting
the conditions on which alone a peace is possible ?
Firstly, then we must give up our schemes of reconciliation, of squaring
our Biblical interpretations into modern scientific moulds, of making the
words of the Bible bear all lands of non-natural senses, and mean what
they never have meant, and never by any possibility could have meant. I
declare unhesitatingly that such Biblicising as that found in Gaussen’s
“ Theopneustia,” and hosts of modern pamphlets, tends as powerfully to
alienate men of science from the Bible, as it tends to revolt the consciences
of many of the clergy themselves. The Protestant endeavour “to bend
Scripture to fact” is hardly less futile than was that of the Romanist “to
bend fact to Scripture.” To interpolate any number of thousands of years
between two consecutive verses, and imply that the writer may have in-


tended it; to twist the plainest prosxwe statements into vision, allegory,
poetry, metaphor, or anything in the world in one place, yet indignantly
to refuse all right to do so in another; to say, when the Bible uses every
conceivable variety of phrase to imply universality, that these are only
Hebraic metonymies for something partial; to interpret, as in a recent
book on language, the story of Babel to imply the gradual growth of three
families of language; to argue that when man is said to be made of the
dust of the earth, “ dust of the earth” was intended to mean oxygen,
hydrogen, and carbon; to take a chance allusion in Solomon as a direct
prophecy of the theory of the winds; and to make a chance expression in
Job a proleptic allusion to the rotation of the solar system round the star
Alcyone;—all this is a style of argumentation which, although it may he
loudly applauded at party gatherings, can never be accepted as satisfactory
by many plain and conscientious minds. To me, at any rate, it looks like
“ lying for God,” while all the while we are fighting against him ; and I
echo the gratitude of Professor Maurice, when he says that “it is a
blessing that the faith of scientific men in the Bible has not wholly
perished, when they see how small our faith is, and by what tricks we are
sustaining it. * * * *
Secondly, I say that we must deliberately abandon that disastrous doc-
trine of Scriptural infallibility in scientific matters—that degrading idolatry
of the dead letter—that doctrine of “ verbal inspiration,” as it is called,
which leads, as Bunsen says, to fetichism in worship, to untruth in philo-
sophy, and to unreality in religious thought. . . . It is a doctrine which
may be refuted by the plainest and most cogent arguments, alike literary,
moral, and historical. It is a doctrine which has been pregnant with deep
disasters; it has been the barrier to science, the bane of ethics, and the
curse of theology. If it be the worst error of the Roman system that it
thrusts priests, and churches, and saints between the soul and God, it has
been the error of many Protestant sects that they have placed the utter-
ances of a book between man and his Heavenly Father, with whom, as
the book itself teaches us, we all live, or ought to live, in direct, immediate,
living, personal communion. It substitutes formal dogmas for the pro-
gressive, incessant, permanent revelation of the Creator in all his works,
and in all his ways, to the spirit of every individual man. By the fruits
of this doctrine you shall know it. The sacred book is the most precious
boon which God over gave to man ; but to this perversion and misuse of
it we owe every error of judgment and cruelty of action of which wo have
spoken this evening. To it we owe the defence of slavery. To it wo owe
the fight for “ passive obedience.” To it we owe the degrading doctrine
of “ the right divine of kings to govern wrong,” To it we owe that crime,
which has been preached as a duty, the murder or persecution of our
opponents for their theological opinions. To it wo owe the burning of
witches. To it we owe the theory of polygamy. There is hardly a tyranny
of kings or priests—hardly an error in sociology or science—which has not
appealed to it, or relied on it. They wore divine lips that told us that
the letter hilleth. From it have flowed forth, as from a fountain, the
turbid streams of falsehood in science, and injustice in conduct—the dis-
turbed consciences of the many, and the terror-stricken faith of the few. If
this truth is to be generally held by the clergy, if it is to be made part
and parcel of our theology, if it be thought that any youthful and perhaps
ignorant clergyman may refute the most veteran man of science, by


quoting against him the literal meaning of some Scripture text, then there
must long continue to be an opposition between the clergy and science,
even if there does not come, sooner or later, an overwhelming catastrophe
to our national religion. And if there be a conflict between the clergy
and science, fian anyone read history and doubt which will win ? After
centuries of conflict the Church, when she has thus mistaken her mission,
cannot claim a single victory. Every burning, every false imprisonment,
every persecution, every calumny, every falsely-attached stigma of infidelity,
every text impressed into the service of error, every attempt to kindle in
the supposed cause of religion the blind excitement of the half-educated
mob, has only rebounded with tenfold force upon those that have used
them—not demolishing the antagonistic discovery, but only giving it fresh
vigour and fresh impetuosity after it has overwhelmed the barrier of a
momentary existence.
Then thirdly and lastly, I say that we must take humbler ground. In
this age, sacerdotalism, priestcraft, theological assumption, are a dangerous
anachronism. Men of science deprecate our opposition, but they will
certainly dislike our pavronage. They claim with us an honourable
friendship, a mutual confidence. A knowledge of divine things is, thank
God, very far indeed from being an exclusive patrimony of the clergy.
Scientific men, for the most part, have shown themselves quite as well
acquainted with anything which can be called theology—ay, even with
technical theology—as nine tenths of the clergy themselves. Science is
constantly performing great services to true religion, but it is only in a
very limited and rhetorical sense that the sciences can now be called the
handmaids of theology. A speaker at a recent Church Congress said,
“ that though they may fly from her, and lose themselves for a time in the
dark wilderness of atheistic speculation, they must in the end return to
their mistress and submit themselves to her hand.” If this means that
the clergy are to legislate for the men of science in their own sphere, it is
not true ; and if it only means that truth must always redound to the
knowledge and glory of God, it is at least expressed in a confused and
declamatory manner, which is, alas ! but too common among us. Again
and again I say that, if theology be only a true interpretation of the revel-
ations of God, then Science is itself one of the noblest forms of Theology.
It has deepened indefinitely our sense of the mysteries around us; it is the
reading of that world which even Plato himself called “ God’s epistle to
man ; ” and which Campanella said was God’s primary autograph; ” and
which Galileo described as “ a great book ever lying open before our eyes,
but which cannot be understood until we first know the language and learn
the characters in which it is written.” Once more I must say that God,
by the discoveries of science has revealed to us more fresh truth respecting
His own glory than all theology has declared for us since the last of the
apostles. The infinitude of space which He inhabits, —the infinitude of
time in which He works, —the majestic onward flow of His mighty laws,
“in the uninterrupted rhythm of cause and effect,” —the long reign of
physical dissolution over untold myriads of vanished organisms,—the in-
finite physical insignificance of the little planet we inhabit in the illimitable
cosmos of suns and systems,—the fact that in that little orb wo occupy
but a thin pellicle of air over a thin film of earth, being but “ the last
holders of a precarious lease in an ancient tenement,” —all these truths
about God and about ourselves, which at once dilate the strong conception


of the Divine with so kindling a majesty, and dwarf the \ ride of the
human with so crushing a dominion, —have been revealed to us, not by
Fathers, not by schoolmen, not by commentators on the Old or New Tes-
tament, but by the hopeful, patient, resolute students of the works of
God’s hands. These men it is who have unclenched from the granite hand
of Nature her magnificent secrets. Those men, in their search for truth,
have, with sheer labour, “ climbed by these sunbeams to the Father of
lights.” And are we the clergy to deny such lessons of God’s works ?
Are we to put out the eyes of these men ? Are we to bid them , who
have been so long our teachers, to sit, forMqth, at our feet, and listen
while by the light of our imperfect and oftemblu/adering exegesis, we lay
down the law to them on their own subjects, and order them to shape
their conclusions thus or thus ? Are we to tell them that, because of our
very limited views of interpretation, this or that casual allusion of Isaiah
or of Genesis is to be a final refutation of all th fir theories, —is to be as
the “flammantia moenia mundi,” which they cannot and dare not over-
leap ? Are me, of all the people in the world, to bid them abandon that
noble, dauntless, burning love of truth which gives shapes to the purposes,
and hopefulness to the struggles of an earnest though perplexed genera-
tion ? Or rather shall we not—in obedience to that pointed finger of
heaven which we see in all history—lay aside, at once and for ever in all
matters of science, our old assumptious stylo of “ Non Ego, sed Domi-
nus,” —bound, as it was, “ by the thunder and denunciation of curses and
anathemas,” —and adopt in lieu of it the infinitely humbler, truer, and
grander tone of the great Apostle of the Gentiles, —“ secundum consilium
meum,” —and “ Ego, non Dominus ? ”
I have said my say. I have said it in all sincerity and humility. I
trust that I have said it without offence. At any rate, in saying it, I
have shown my confidence in the fairness of my audience, and my belief
that they will possess that freedom and fearlessness of mind without
which no search for truth can ever be successful. And although there
may be some who may find it convenient to misrepresent my words as
being disparaging to the Bible, 1 say that I have spoken in the deepest
reverence for it. We do not honour the Bible, —nay, we embase and
dishonour it by constantly running with hands outstretched and cries of
terror to uphold what we, in our faithlessness, may regard as its tottering-
ark. I reverence the Bible too truly to take it for a manual of natural
science ; and to think that it needs such puny and such questionable
aid. “ Deorum injuries Dis curae,” and if we really believed the Bible
to be scientifically infallible, me should not go peeping about for people's
heresies against it; nor should we show all this alarm and sedulity in
squaring and posting up its mere obiter dicta into some simulacrum of
coincidence with the last conviction or discovery of scientific men. The
mere natural science of the Bible is the natural science of its writers ;
and they were men of a country the most scientifically ignorant in a
scientifically-ignorant age.
Printed by R. Bell, 97 Little Colima Street East, Melbourne.
