

AX ENQUIRY
JNTO THE
BE PUTED POISONOUS lATUBE
,03P THE
ARROWS OF THE SOUTH SEA ISLANDERS,
JN DELATION TO THE
OCCURREN.CE OF THREE FATAL CASES OF TETANUS
AFTER WOUNDS BY THEM,
ON BOARD HER MAJESTY’S SHIP “ PEARL,” IN 1875,
Staff Surgeon A. B. MESSER, m.d., r.n.
Published by the Authority of the Right Honourable the. Lords Commissioners of
the Admiralty .
0.119.




AN ENQUIRY
INTO TIIK
REPUTED POISONOUS NATURE OF THE
ARROWS OF THE SOUTH SEA ISLANDERS,
IN RELATION TO THE OCCURRENCE OF THREE FATAL CASES OF TETANUS
AFTER WOUNDS BY THEM,
ON BOARD HER MAJESTY’S SHIP “PEARL,” IN 1875,
By Staff Surgeon A. B. Messer, m.d., r.n.
It has been the popular belief from the earliest times that many of the more PoDUar belief
savage races which Europeans have met in different parts of the world are in j u a,, po ison 1
the habit of using poisonous arrows and darts, both in warfare and in the H
chase. This belief has, in many cases, been accompanied by an amount of
dread of these weapons, which has led to the subject of poisonous arrows being
obscured by numerous mysterious and improbable stories. Nowhere perhaps
at the present day does so much of this sensational and unscientific rumour
exist as among the Islands of the South Pacific, owing partly to the fact that
most of it has been derived from uneducated sailors, and others who have
traded with or lived amongst these islanders, and whose stories as a rule are
more marvellous than consistent with fact. It is therefore to be regretted
that more correct and useful information, on such an important point, has
not been furnished by the various missionaries who have had the best means
and opportunities of learning the customs of the natives, among whom many of
them have spent the greater part of their lives {see Postscript). It would be
useless now to recount even a few of the marvellous stories we have heard
among the South Sea Islands, as to how the natives poison their arrows, and of Marvellous
the wonderful power these weapons are said to have in producing death, stones ‘
madness, and other strange effects, years after the receipt of a wound by them ;
or how the natives, implicitly believing in the fatal nature of the poison, are • t
said, upon being wounded, to rush frantically into the midst of their enemies, Postscript ’
and endeavour to stab as many of them as possible before they themselves die. ’ par ’
Reliable accounts, as well as direct scientific experiment, have established the
fact that some of the substances used by the natives in certain countries for Re,lHb,e
this purpose are of a very deadly nature, while others have been proved to be a ? couat **
innocuous. We must therefore be careful in accepting even a small part of the
marvellous accounts, so commonly associated with the subject of secret
poisoning, many of them having entirely broken down under the test of a more
careful investigation, and the application to them of well-known pathological
facts. Doubtless, too, some natives are known who possess the knowledge
necessary to extract from the plant, and concentrate the poisons, so that a very
small portion of them inserted bv a dart or arrow will s eedilv kill the
.. a larger
VL APR, m
if


Niitives pro-
bably attempt
to poison
arrows.
Na'ive super-
stition, &c.
Information
collected
during visits
of Pearl.
Natives b.-Heve
their arrows to
be poisonous.
Results of
wounds rarely
mentioned.
Endeavour
to persuade
shipmates
fails.
Seven of our
crew wounded
by arrows.
larger mammalia; yet we must bear in mind that even the most powerful
vegetable poisons require considerable skill to render them so deadly in minute
quantities It is also not improbable that other natives, observing that certain
plants produce speedy death when swallowed in considerable quantity, attempt
to render their arrows poisonous by smearing them with a concentrated pre-
paration of these plants. Whether they always succeed in doing so admits of
considerable doubt, although they may believe that such a result has been
obtained, and mistaking other effects, which occasionally follow these wounds,
for those of the poison, they, in their ignorance and superstition, become con-
vinced of the deadly nature of their arrows, and consequently hold them in
such fear and dread, that the nervous system becomes liable to certain diseases
on the slightest provocation. This will appear the more probable when we
remember the peculiar mental constitution of ignorant and savage races, how
they, believing implicitly in superstition, witchcraft, and sorcery in their most
debasing forms, not only attribute all the most ordinary phenomena of nature
to these causes, but especially do they consider disease and sickness to be due to
the direct influence of evil spirits, to whose fierce and inexorable will they sub-
missively bow, lying down and dying, almost, as it were, of their own accord, and
at any hour they choose. Many instances of this species of fatalism, or, as it
is called, want of moral courage to resist disease, are to be found among all the
coloured races, and present striking examples of thS influence and power of the
mind over the body.
During the visits of Her Majesty’s ship Pearl to the New Hebrides, Banks,
and Santa C ruz Islands in the months of June, July, and August 1875, our
attention was naturally called to this subject, and we made constant enquiries
of missionaries, planters, traders, and, as far as possible, of the natives them-
selves, in the hope of obtaining some useful information ; but, beyond being
told numerous improbable stories, we neither succeeded in this nor in securing
any of the substances said to be used as poison on the arrows. Although two
or three trees or shrubs were pointed out, and asserted to be those so used, we
rarely succeeded in identifying them with any known or allied plant of a
deadly poisonous nature. At the same time we must still acknowledge that it
is quite possible that the natives of these islands know and make use of poisonous
plants in this and other ways, and that they firmly believe that the means they
adopt succeeds in making their arrows deadly poisonous, also seems probable,
not only from their own assertions, but also from the careful manner with which
they carry and protect these weapons, and their disinclination to sell the
poisoned ones to strangers, except at a high price, as well as from the reports
of many trustworthy men, who have declared that they have seen the different
processes of poisoning being carried out.
In the writings of the early voyagers numerous instances are given of their
men being wounded among the South Sea Islands “by deadly flights of
poisonous arrows.” At the present day the same thing is frequently happening
to the crews of trading and “ labour ” ships, but it is surprising to remark how
rarely any account is given of the result of these wounds. It is only when
striking and occasional cases of tetanus happen to follow them that the atten-
tion of people is arrested, and the popular mind at once attributes the fatal
result to the poison on the arrows, without taking the trouble to enquire whether
such a result is consistent with the facts, or if it may not be accounted for in
another way.
Having somewhat carefully enquired into many of the well-authenticated
cases of tetanus following these wounds, and having come to the conclusion that
the poison on the arrows had no direct effect in producing this disease, we
endeavoured to persuade our shipmates of this, as during our investigation of
these islands we ran considerable risk of having some of our people wounded.
We imagined, if it were possible to do away with the belief and fear of the
poison, the risks of tetanus following the wounds would be materially dimi-
nished ; but in this we were grievously disappointed.
After safely passing twice through the New Hebrides group, lauding and
making excursions far into the interior of nearly every island, collecting
information on many interesting points connected with the natives and their
homes, wo proceeded in the beginning of August to visit the Santa Cruz group,
the


the natives’of which have, from the very earliest times, been notorious for their
obstinate resistance to the advances of missionaries, traders, and white people
under every guise.
It is not our object here to enter into all tho circumstances connected with
the murder of Bishop Patteson at Nakapu (one of this group), nor the attack
upon Commodore Goodenough and his party at Carlisle Bay, in the Island of
Santa Cruz. It will be sufficient to state that on the latter occasion that
officer and five men were wounded by arrows fired at them by the natives of
that place, in a treacherous and unprovoked attack, while another officer on the
same occasion accidentally received a slight scratch by coming in contact with
the point of an arrow in the hand of one of the natives.
Here, then, was suddenly afforded an opportunity of observing the effects of
these arrow wounds, and testing the truth of their poisonous reputation in seven
cases, two officers and five men. It is worthy of record, that Commodore Good-
enough was an officer of the very highest intelligence, possessed of a most
powerful and deeply cultured mind, free, one would suppose, from any weakness
or dread of uncertain danger, and in whom the mens sana in corpora sano was
most fully illustrated. In the other officer, a different and very highly nervous
disposition, was combined with a weakly and rather delicate body. As for the
five men, every difference in age, disposition, and habit of life was represented.
The wounds themselves were in every case very slight, and had they not been
inflicted by arrows bearing such a bad reputation as those of Santa Cruz, and
occurring in such a climate, little notice would have been taken of them. But
knowing the strength of the prevailing belief in the poison, and the fear of its
consequences, it was deemed advisable to treat them all more or less as if the
wounds were really poisoned, so as to allay the intense excitement which at
once began to prevail on board, and to soothe the minds of the wounded, by
persuading them that the poison was thereby destroyed. Although disbelieving
in the poisonous nature of the arrows, yet we knew, and feared the risk of
tetanus following such wounds under special circumstances ; and remembering
the much greater liability of its occurrence in the tropics, we counselled the
immediate return of the ship with all dispatch to the colder climate of Sydney.
This advice was fortunately at once acted upon. No signs of immediate
poisoning appeared, and beyond a very little constitutional disturbance in some,
all went well with both the wounds and the patients till the fifth and sixth
days, when tetanus set in, in the case of the commodore, and two of the men,
proving fatal in all three within sixty hours (see Epitome).
What was the explanation of this ? What could be clearer proof of the poison-
ous nature of the arrows ? Here were three men out of seven wounded, dying
of tetanus, almost at the same time, just as the men died who were wounded at
Graciosa Bay and Nukapu, both in Bishop Patteson’s party, and on board the
Rosario, just like numbers of cases one had heard of among the islands. In
fact, there could be no doubt about it that these arrows were deadly poisonous,
and nearly all who are wounded by them die, sooner or later, of lock-jaw.
Such was the belief of many on board at this time, and £he belief, too, as we
subsequently learned, of a large majority of the public at home, and in the
Colonies, not only uneducated men, but we fear also of many medical men who
had not taken the trouble to look closely into the subject. We hope, however, to
show that such belief is inconsistent with the facts of the cases, and with all that
science has demonstrated on this subject.
In the meantime we would draw attention to the peculiar effect these cases’
and the belief in the poison, had upon several of the ship’s company. Unfor-
tunately at this time there was in the ship a man who had been in the Rosario
when two of his shipmates had been wounded at Nukapu, one of whom had died
of tetanus. He was accordingly a firm believer in the poison theory, and took
great delight in retailing marvellous stories about it, which tended considerably
to increase the fear and mental excitement which were already prevailing to a
disagreeable extent in the ship.
In the commodore’s case, as before mentioned, we would not have expected to
find that the influence of the mind over the body was of a hurtful nature, but
rather the reverse. Unfortunately, however, from the very first, although ap-
parently disbelieving in the danger of the poison, his mind never left the subject.
0.119. «2 but
Mental and
physical
condition of
wounded.
Nature of
wounds, and
precautions
adopted.
Kenult of
wounds.
Belief in proof
of poison.
Peculiar effects
of the belief
in the poison
on the ship’s
company.


but at once began to look forward to and prepare for a fatal result. This,
however, he did in all outward calmness, and with a courage and resignation
which others have well described. In the case of the other officer wounded, un-
usual and irregular symptoms of tetanus set in very early, his mind becoming
extremely excited, and, affected by the belief that he must surely die, he adopted
strange and eccentric methods to prevent his jaw becoming locked. He nearly
succeeded in inducing real tetanus, and would probably have done so had his
wound been anything beyond the merest scratch, hardly drawing blood. It was
only after a complete change from the ship to his home that he finally got clear
of his painful sensations and belief.
Of the two men who were attacked with tetanus, one was of an extremely
nervous and timorous nature, and dreaded the poison from the very first ;
his wound was one of the more severe, but the other, as severely wounded, showed
no signs of dread. Amongst the men who escaped tetanus little or no signs of
fear were observed. The most strange example of the mental shock which was
observed was in an officer, who having received a slight prick on the finger in
some unknown way, gradually, under the existing excitement, began to believe
that in handling some of the arrows which had been brought on board, he had
wounded himself. His fear and nervousness became so intense, and were
associated with such strange creeping and twitching sensations near the wound,
that he firmly believed he was affected by tetanus; and that he would shortly
die. To such an extent did his morbid sensations lead him, that he was actually
considered insane by more than one medical man, and was ultimately invalided
for the effects of this nervous shock.
Another case occurred in which the sufferer having sucked one of the wounds
at the time of its receipt, became so alarmed and nervous as to be unable to
sleep, eat, or do anything but walk up and down in the expectation of an
early and painful death.
Other slighter cases of nervous or hysterical tetanus appeared at this time,
and showed how powerful was the mental influence in inducing a nervous state,
closely allied to the real disease, and which we think goes far in support of the
theory, that fear and mental emotion are strongly predisposing causes of
tetanus, if not actual producers of it, when they are associated with a wound
under certain conditions of climate and hygiene.
If it can be shown that wounds by these arrows rarely, if ever, produce
poisoning in any sense of the word, and that the tetanus, which has sometimes
followed them is not owing to any poison, but is identical with the traumatic
form of this disease, as seen under circumstances where no poison is suspected,
we may succeed in removing such a bugbear, as the fear of the poison seems to
be, from the minds of many who are frequently exposed to the attacks of the
natives. Further, we believe if this needless dread of the poison were abolished,
we should thereby remove one of the chief factors in inducing tetanus to follow
these wounds. , _ .
With these objects,let us now examine the different views held on this subject,
and test the facts and stories by strict application of the ordinary rules of
reasoning as well as by the authenticated facts of science deduced from
experiment and observation.
The arrows used by the natives of the South Pacific Islands vary considerably
in form, size, and structure ; each group, and even the several islands in the
same group being characterised by some peculiarity in their arrows, so that
people conversant with the South Seas can generally tell from which group or
island any given arrow has been brought.
As a rule they are composed of three pieces ; a shaft, generally made of a
reed or light cane ; a head cut out of some hard heavy wood, and frequently
ornamented by carving and colouring, and a tip or point, which is sometimes
only the sharpened and barbed termination of the wooden head, but more fre-
quently in a separate piece, composed of one or more bits of bone, the spikes of
the sting ray, or even the spines of an echinus. In some the spikes are arranged
in a series of barbs, but more often the point consists of a single piece of human
bone (generally a fibula or ulna), carefully ground down, so as to terminate in a
long, tapering, delicate extremity. This point is neatly secured to the wooden
head, in some casesin such a way that it easily breaks off on striking or entering
a body, and in others the mere tip of the bone is so brittle and delicate that it
breaks


breaks in a similar way, leaving some fragments deeply embedded in the wound
The more highly finished arrows of this class are generally smeared at the P
and head withdifferent substances generally supposed to be po.sonona The
natives, as a rule, carry them carefully wrapped up m some sort
not only observe the greatest precaution m handling them, but exhibit unm s
takable^signs of apprehension when a stranger attempts to T exa ™' ne is Unds the
scrape off any of the substance adhering to the point. In some
natives will hardly part with these arrows even at ahigh price but offerim ! ®
some of a different kind, which they carry loose in the hand, an ' l^ ho ” t a y
precautions, being mostly simply tipped with hard wood a V , ec fi e! ° f J 1
coral. These we have seen them employ in killing birds and fish and po
them they place but little value, being generally of an inferior quality of work-
manship.
The so-called poisonous arrows of the New Hebrides Islands are well known Arrow, of
both from the writings of the early voyagers and from recent information. 1 e e
specimens obtained during our visits in 1875 to the islands of Lrromanga, Yate,
Mallicolo Ambrym, Pentecost, &c., were found to be very similar m construc-
tion They measured about three feet long, and weighed about eighty grains,
bein'* composed of a reed shaft two feet long, on which was neatly secured a
round smooth, slightly tapering hard wood head, eight inches long, which again
was terminated by a delicate, rounded, and sharply-pointed piece of human
bone about three inches long. This bone point was daubed with a dirty blackish
substance adhering to it in small lumps like wet gunpowder dried, while the
-joint and neighbouring part of the wooden head were smeared with green, postscript,
mouldy-looking paint. They were invariably carried with great care, m a par 7.
quiver made of dried banana leaf, and the natives were generally somewhat dis-
inclined to part with them.
The arrows used by the natives of the Santa Cruz group were well Arrows of
known to the old Spanish navigators who visited these islands 300 years SanJaC _
ago but they are not so well known to modern voyagers on account of the
little communication which has been possible of late years with the inhabitants.
They are the arrows, however, with which we are n °wmore imniediately con-
cerned and from specimens procured at Yamkoro, and at Carlisle Bay, in Santa
Cruz both by barter and among those that were fired by the natives during the
attack on the 12th August, and which, without doubt, were the arrows which caused
the wounds in our people. They all, without exception, were of the same de-
scription, viz., large, heavy arrows, four feet long, made of a strong cane shaft
measuring two feet, upon which was firmly fastened a , car J e J®? d dightiy ba bed
piece of hard wood, about twelve inches long, painted red and white, lo t
again was firmly spliced a slender piece of human bone, eight inches long, ter-
imnatin* in a very P fine, straight point, very brittle and sharp The bone and
Se sphee were incrusted with a thick layer of some reddishi brown cement or
gum, which was smooth, hard, and dry, but easily scraped off by the nail. 1 hese
arrows were all carried openly, and none were seen covered up or protected,
while the natives were not very averse to selling them. In this group of islands
we saw no other kind of arrow ; but Lieut Suckling R.N, when m of
Her Maiesty’s schooner llenard, visited Graciosa Bay, m the island of Santa
Cruz described an arrow seen by him there of a different construction, and
which the natives appeared to hold in great respect and dread, signifying o
him that it was poisonous in the extreme, when he offered to scrape it with a
Santa Cruz
knife.
The different processes which the natives of the South Pacific Islands are Different plan
said to employ to render their arrows poisonous, are as follows ; By x usert- of making
in* them in the kidney fat or other parts of a dead, decomposing human body ; arrows
smearing them with some vegetable poison, or by a combination of these two poisonous.
methods.
The first is a very generally believed method, and is said to be used both in Animal poison,
the New Hebrides and Santa Cruz groups. Many writers mention it, while
several men have told us that they have actually seen it put m P rac tice , but
beyond the statement that the arrows are inserted into a dead body, generally
about the region of the kidneys, and allowed to remain until they drop out, we
have as yet failed to find out any other particulars, such as whether any particular
0.119. a 3 ooay


Postscript, body is chosen for this purpose, or whether it signifies what was the cause of
pars. 45, 6. death, or how long the arrows remain poisonous after being so treated, &c.
Effects of Taking it for granted that these islanders really resort to this process in order
animal to render their arrows poisonous, the question naturally arises, what is the known
poisoning from effect of the introduction of putrifying animal matter into the body ? The
experiment, &.c. answer is, the well-known and easily recognised symptoms of blood-poisoning in
its different degrees, as frequently seen in dissection wounds, viz., the presence
of local irritation, followed by marked constitutional disturbance, going on to
typhoid symptoms; diffuse inflammation, &c., of the lymphatics and cellular
tissue ; erythema and pyaemia ; while the 'post-mortem appearances are those of
the morbid effects of poisoned blood. The symptoms also, as a rule, commence
within one or two days of the poison being inserted.
The most recent experiments on the toxic effects of putrifying blood are
those of M. Y. Felty, lately communicated to the Academie des Sciences of
Paris, in which he shows that its injection caused all the symptoms of septi-
caemia, pyrexia, vomiting, haemorrhage, and death in from three to eight days.
If the putrid blood were kept for five months in the sun, dried, &c., rubbed
down into a fine powder, then the powder mixed with water and injected into
dogs, the poisonous effects were not, as in the first case, immediately manifest.
It was not till after a period of four to six day§’ incubation that the animals
showed febrile symptoms, with bilious and bloody discharges, vomiting, and the
above-mentioned signs of blood-poisoning.
Animal poison In these experiments, it will be observed, that the putrifying matter was
on arrows is under very similar conditions to that which would be found on the arrows,
inconsistent Beyond the curious coincidence of the period of incubation of four to six days
with facts, occurring after the injection of the powdered blood, agreeing closely with the
period of incubation in our cases of tetanus, not the slightest similarity in other
respects is to be found between the result of these experiments, and the effects
of the arrows said to be poisoned by putrid animal matter. On the other hand,
the effects generally attributed to these arrow wounds are fatal tetanus or
madness at various periods after the injury. Nowhere have we been able to
hear of anyone so wounded presenting any signs at all resembling those of
blood poisoning, or even suffering more than the usual amount of constitutional
disturbance proportionate to the severity of their wounds.
Postscnp , If ( then, wounds by arrows so poisoned are sometimes followed by tetanus, and
P ar * not by blood poisoning, it is evident either that the poison has nothing to do in its
production, or that this disease can be inoculated by an animal poison, a fact
that pathologists have as yet failed to demonstrate.
Vegetable The second process by which the natives are said to render their arrows
poisons. poisonous, is by smearing them with some vegetable extract, and is very
currently believed to be used both in New Hebrides and the Santa Cruz Islands.
. This plan is more in keeping with the practice of the natives in the other parts
Postscript, of the world, who are known to poison their weapons in this way. Among the
pars, i . best j £nown substances of this class may be mentioned the woorali, or curali, of
Woorali. the South American Indians, but all the experiments made with it prove
that it produces death by paralysis of the muscles of respiration. Its allies
Corroval and corroval, and bao, act by paralysing the heart, and by abolishing both the
aO, voluntary reflex, sensory, and motor functions. The upas poison of Java, pro-
TT cured from the antjar (antiaris toxicaria ) is also a rapidly fatal substance, and
as " when introduced into the body, causes death by paralysis and coma. Chetick
Chetick. or tjettek, procured from the upas tiente ( strychnos tiente ) of Java, is a still more
poisonous substance, and produces its fatal effects by inducing artificial tetanus.
Postscript, This is a large twining shrub, the root and bark of which abound in strychnia,
par. 7. but whether it grows in these islands seems doubtful. The occurrence of
tetanus after wounds by these arrows would at first sight lead to the supposition
that this or some allied plant was the source whence the natives obtain their
' tryc |T a poison. We must not forget that strychnia when introduced into the body either by
ro d e * the mouth, or by inoculation, at once produces symptoms which closely resemble
those of tetanus, but it produces them immediately , and not after several days
incubation. At the same time the tetanus of strychnia poisoning, in its course
and symptoms, is clearly distinguished from ordinary traumatic or idiopathic
tetanus. This was well pointed out in the famous case of Palmer, tried for the
murder


murder of Cook, when it was unsuccessfully attempted to prove that the
tetanus was that of disease, and not of strychnia poisoning.
Strychnia then is incapable of producing tetanus after several days incubation, Vegetable
and we know of no other vegetable poison which will do so, although it is poison is
possible such a plant may exist. Until this is known, and further, that the inconsistent
tetanus so produced is undistinguishable from ordinary traumatic tetanus, we with facts-
must conclude that the fatal tetanus in our cases was not produced by a vege- Postscript,
table poison introduced by the arrows. par. 7.
The third method said to be used to make the arrows poisonous, was the Combined
alternate dipping of them in a dead body, and smearing them with a vegetable poisons
poison. This method founded, as far as we can learn, upon much slighter improbable,
evidence than the two former plans, is probably little more than one of the many
marvellous stories sailors and others have brought from the South Sea Islands.
As regards the effects of such a process of poisoning, we can say but little
from the result of experience or experiment, and can only surmise what would
be the result if such a combination of poisons were inserted into the human
body at the same time. But as no case has ever been recorded which would
lead us to attribute its symptoms to such .a cause, it is needless to pursue the
subject further, beyond stating our belief that this method, even if it were
adopted by the natives, would not account for the occurrence of tetanus after
these wounds.
Having thus shown the difficulties in the way of reconciling the effects attri- Recorded
buted to the different methods of poisoning with known pathological facts, let results of
us now shortly inquire what has really been the result in recorded cases of arrow-wounds,
wounds by these arrows.
As before stated, the general popular belief is, that nearly all who are
wounded by them, die of tetanus sooner or later ; but on referring to the
accounts of cases, we find both in early times and later, that such is very far
from being the case. Mendana, in 1595, in describing the natives of Santa Mendana’s
Cruz, says they were armed with bows and arrows, some of the latter being cases iu 1-695.
pointed with bone, and anointed with some poison which the Spaniards, how-
ever, did not believe to be very deadly. In Burney’s History of Discoveries in Burney's
the South Seas, Vol. 11., page 151, the Santa Cruz arrows are described as opinion,
anointed by the juice of some herb supposed to be poisonous, which, however,
was of little prejudice.” In a foot-note, Burney says, “A great number of
instances occur iu early and late voyagers, which furnish reason for believing
that there is not anything of a noxious quality in the ointment which the
Indians use to their arrows, and it is probably nothing more than an oily pre-
paration to preserve them against the decaying effects of a hot climate.” At
page 156, it is further stated that many Spaniards were wounded by arrows of
the natives, but he does not oven mention the result, which he surely would
have done had even a small proportion of them died from such a horrible and
well-marked disease as tetanus. In fact, the only case he mentions was that of
Don Lorenzo, who died of spasms following a slight wound in the leg from an
arrow.
In 17G7, Carteret, in the Swallow, visited Santa Cruz, when he had several of Carleret’a
his people severely wounded by poisoned arrows, among whom he mentions cases.
that altogether three were mortally and seven severely wounded. Again, neither
the cause of death, nor the particulars of the wounds are mentioned, except in
the case of the master who died, having had three arrows in his body. Had
tetanus caused death, or had they died from the poisonous effects of the arrows,
and not from the severity of the wounds, he surely would have mentioned it
as a peculiarity of a new people, of whom he has otherwise given a careful
account.
Amongst the other early voyagers frequent mention is made of people being Other early-
wounded among the Santa Cruz and New Hebrides Islands ; and although they voyagers’
mostly speak of the arrows being poisoned, yet never is any account given of account,
men dying of the poison, or even of tetanus, although several of them mention
their crews suffering from the effects of poisonous fish they had eaten.
Almost the only direct experiments made to test the poisonous nature of the Experiments
arrows are those recorded in Forster's account of Cook’s A r oyages, Vol. ii., page recorded by
2' *” " here he mentions that the Malicolo (one of the New Hebrides Islands) Forster in
0.119, a 4 arrows Cook’*Voyages.


Postscript,
par. 7.
Dillon's
account, 1827.
Bishop
Patteson’s
cases.
Postscript,
par. 8.
liosario’a cases.
Pearl’s cases.
Other cases in
“labour” ships.
Negative
results hot
noticed.
Hydrophobia.
JnnculaHon
of tetanus
unknown.
Postscript,
par. (>.
arrows are pointed with bone, and daubed with a blaek gummy stuff, and having
wounded a young Taheitian dog in the leg with one of these arrows, no ill
effects followed. Again, at page 214, he states that the natives of Malicolo
declare their arrows to be fatally poisonous, but a little further on he mentions
that fish are not affected by them, as a shark was caught with an arrow-head
sticking in its head ; and he also records that the dog before mentioned, as
wounded by these arrows, recovered perfectly, although it nearly died after eating
poisonous fish. He then goes on to state that he inserted in a wound on this
same dog’s leg some of the gummy substance taken from an arrow, and
supposed to be poison, and secured it thereby plaister, when only some swelling,
lameness, and festering followed. Not satisfied with this he made another
attempt on this dog with some of the green earthy matter taken from a
Malicolo arrow, by inserting it in an incision, but without producing any results
{see Postscript, par. 12).
Captain Dillon, who spent sometime at Vanikoro (Santa Cruz group) in 1827,
mentions that the poison used there is derived from a nut the size and shape of a
mango, the kernel of which is scraped and rubbed up with lime, but ho
acknowledges that a pig wounded by an arrow so poisoned remained in perfect
health (see Postscript, par, 13).
Coming down to still more recent times, we find that on the occasion of the
attack upon Bishop Patteson’s party at Graciosa Bay in Santa Cruz in 18G4, one
Englishman and two Pitcairn Islanders were wounded. The first recovered
without any tetanus following, but both the others died of this disease, one on
the seventh, the other on the twenty-first day after the wounds were received.
In these cases the arrows were not bone-headed, and are said not to have been
poisoned.
On the occasion of Bishop Patteson’s murder at Nukapu (Santa Cruz group)
three men were wounded by arrow's, viz., a white man, a native of San
Christonel, and a native of Mola. The first had an arrow in his shoulder, the
second had six arrows in his shoulders and chest, five of which were cut out,
but the seventh having penetrated the lungs, could not be removed ; both of the.se
men died of tetanus on the seventh and eighth day after, respectively, while
the third man who was wounded in the shoulder seems to have recovered.
In the case of the Rosario, where two men were wounded at this same island,
the first received two arrows in the groin and left breast, and recovered without
any bad symptom ; the other was wounded in the forearm, and the arrow-head
remained in the wound forty minutes before it was cut out ; he died of tetanus
on the 11th day.
In the cases which occurred in the Pearl, out of seven who were all very
slightly wounded, three died of tetanus on the eighth and ninth days.
These, it must be remembered, are all cases which have been particularly
noted and carefully recorded, while a very few more somewhat similar have been
heard of, in which the particulars have not been obtained. There are also very
numerous accounts of late years of the crews of “ labour” ships being attacked
among the islands, and many wounded, in which no word has been mentioned
of any poisonous effects, or even of tetanus following, either among the natives
or the white men wounded. This shows that in this, as in so many other things,
no notice is taken of a negative result, but it is only when some exceptional or
striking coincidence occurs that special attention is drawn to it. We are, there-
fore, of opinion that if a sufficient number of cases of these arrow wounds were
collected, we should find but little evidence that tetanus occurs sufficiently often
after them to make it at all probable that poison has any direct effect in its
production, and we hope presently to show, from the history of this disease
under other circumstances, that such a theory is quite unnecessary.
The only fact at all analogous to this supposed production of tetanus by poison,
after a period of five or six days’ incubation, is the occurrence of hydrophobia, a
somewhat allied disease; and if tetanus were capable of inoculation by putrid
blood, under conditions similar to those pointed out by M. Feltz, we might con-
ceive that arrows poisoned by immersion in a putrid body which had died of
this disease, might after a similar period reproduce it. Until, however, direct
experiments prove this to be possible, we must leave it in the region of suppo-
sition.
The


The next point of enquiry is, whether this occurrence of tetanus after these identical with
wounds is in any way at variance with the well-known facts recorded of its ordinary
occurrence under other circumstances. Writers on this disease, with few excep- traumatic
tions, state that it occurs after any lesion, from a simple blow to the most severe tetanus,
compound fracture and laceration, but that punctured wounds have generally
been considered the most likely to produce it. Sir James McGregor, in his His-
tory of the Peninsular War, states that it supervened on eveiy description and
in every stage of the wounds, while the situation of the wound seems to have
had little to do with its production. The state of the wound before and at the
period of its appearance seems also to be almost indifferent, for although opi-
nions differ on this point, yet facts show that it occurs in all states of the wound.
Dr. Rush, of the United States, mentions in a receqt account of the surgery of
the American Civil War, that in his cases there was invariably an absence of
inflammation in the wound at any period.
The period of accession varies from a few hours to many days. Mr. Curling, Period of
in his Essay, stating, that in eighty-one cases the symptoms began between the accession.
4th and 14th day, and in nineteen on the 10th day. It occurs, too, at any age, Postscript,
but is most common between the 10th and 30th years, and next between the par. 9
30th and 50th.
Among the predisposing causes usually assigned, Dr. Henan thinks that terror, predisposing
while Willan considers that anxiety of mind, often play an essential part in in- causes.
ducing the traumatic, as well as the idiopathic form of the disease, as seen in its
frequent occurrence after battles, earthquakes, &c. Climate and race are well Climate and *
known to be among the most certain causes of its production ; the negro race, as race.
well as all natives of warm climates, being much more susceptible than the white
races. Hunter says, that “ Climate is the first of the predisposing causes, and Postscript,
that which can probably produce it without any other cause. In warm climates pars. 9, 10, II
it is most frequent, for warmth seems to have a peculiar effect in producing
a particular disposition in the nerves, and when there is an immediate slight
cause such diseases readily take place ”
As regards the effects of constitution, habits, and state of health, no satisfac- Constitution,
tory evidence is to be had on this point, although Hunter thought “ that it &c.
arises from an irritable habit, and that there must be a predisposition for the
disease.” Habits of life, such as temperance, and the reverse, have no apparent
connection with its production, but despondency and exhaustion by some are
believed to help its production.
On examining into all the circumstances of the cases which occurred in the Cases of
Pearl, and comparing them with the above-mentioned recorded facts of the oc- tetani, . s in
n . . -i . i . • • . in i . i . i • Doovl irlon
currence of tetanus under other conditions, it will be seen that there was nothing identical
, . .. - . 1 . . . . « . . , ° with troimnitm
tUUCIIbC Ui ucuauuo nuuei uuuci wuuuauuoj xu vv xxx uu ocvii l/xxoiU uuvi o »v cto .
in them at all peculiar, either in the nature, situation, or state of the wounds, tan y™ UmaUC
nor in the period of accession of the symptoms, to remove them from the category
of ordinary traumatic tetanus (see Epitome). On the other hand, there were
present many of the most favourable conditions for its production, viz., punc-
tured wounds, appropriate age of wounded, an unusual amount of excitement
after an attack, together with much anxiety of mind, fear of poison, and con-
sequent despondency. To these must also be added an exceedingly hot, damp,
relaxing climate, which alone, in the opinion of Hunter, is almost sufficient to
produce this disease, when an immediate slight cause is also present.
It now only remains to inquire whether the symptoms in any of our cases Symptoms in
were peculiar or different from those usually observed in cases where no sus- Pearl’s cases
picion of poison existed. The premonitory symptoms in recorded cases of not peculiar,
ordinary traumatic tetanus are generally stated to be uncertain, rare, indefinite,
and, in fact, there are none special or peculiar to it.
Amongst the wounded in the Pearl, on the day of injury, there were no indi- Absence of all
cations whatever of poisoning or other constitutional disturbance. On the fol- Signs of
lowing day, however, there appeared, in five of the seven wounded, slight head- poisoning,
ache, a little nausea and vomiting, but no rigors ; three of these were not
attacked by tetanus, and these symptoms lasted only during that day. Beyond a
little anorexia in one, and some pain and swelling about the wounds of other
two, no decided signs of mischief appeared, either in the wounds, or constitu-
tionally, in any of the others till the fifth day. Then want of sleep and uneasi-
ness about the wound began in one case. On the following day spasms began,
0.119. b in


in this case to radiate from the wound, and the disease might be considered
established. At this time the same ominous want of sleep, and with pain and
spasm near the wound, appeared in the second case. In the third case, stiffness
of the jaw and pain in the wound were the signs which appeared first on the
seventh day. Among the other four wounded, one of which was the most
severely hurt, no tetanus took place, although one of them presented many sus-
picious symptoms, which, however, proved to be merely hysterical or nervous.
Spurious signs We may, therefore, say that the premonitory symptoms, when present in these
of poisoning. cases, did not present any peculiarity, except the slight nausea, vomiting, and
headache on the day after the injuries were received. These symptoms might,
by some, be considered as a sign of poisoning, were it not that they appeared in
five out of the seven cases,, two only of which got tetanus, while they were
absent from one in which tetanus followed. Again, this constitutional disturb-
ance was very slight in the case of the severest wound, but very well marked,
and accompanied on the same day by an epileptiform seizure in one of the cases
most slightly wounded, and which was not followed by tetanus.
General course The symptoms in ordinary cases of traumatic tetanus after the disease is once
of symptoms. established are pretty constant and quite characteristic. Although it is gene-
rally asserted that the first decided symptom is almost invariably an uneasy
sensation and stiffness in the muscles of the lower jaw and tongue, yet Mr. Morgan
relates cases where the spasms commenced in the muscles of the parts injured.
This took place in two out of the three cases, and in them it then spread to
most of the voluntary muscles. Severe spasms of the diaphragm were present
towards the end in a great or less degree in all; opisthotonos and spasm of the
muscles of the legs, ankles, and feet were also present in all, while the wrists and
fingers remained free. Death took place in the spasms in two, and by exhaus-
tion in the other case. The symptoms in all began in a mild form, gradually
Duration of getting stronger and the spasms more frequent, being markedly progressive
symptoms. without any complete intermission, and they lasted between fifty and sixty hours
in each case.
Tetanus in It will thus be seen that the symptoms were clearly identical, in almost every
Pearl’s cases respect, with the symptoms of ordinary traumatic tetanus, and differed most
distinct from _ distinctly from tetanus produced by strychnia or any other known poison,
that of strychnia
poisoning. Having thus endeavoured, at considerable length, to clear up the mystery at-
tached by popular consent to the supposed poisonous effects of the arrows used by
the natives in many of the South Pacific Islands, examining the various rumours
and stories, and testing them by the well-established facts of science, as well as
showing that the results of the wounds, usually attributed to poison on the
arrows, can be satisfactorily explained by a different and well-known cause, we
may be justified in drawing the following conclusions :
Conclusions.
1. That until more trustworthy and certain information is obtained we must
acknowledge it probable that the natives of many of these islands deliberately
attempt to render some of their arrows poisonous.
2, That the different plans which they are said to adopt for this purpose are
not followed by effects consistent with known scientific results of similar pro-
cesses.
3. That direct experiments, as far as they are recorded, with these arrows on
the lower animals show them to be innocuous.
4. That in the numerous cases in which men have been wounded by these
arrows, no recorded instances are known of poisonous effects following.
5. That tetanus or “locked jaw” has followed these arrow wounds in com-
paratively few of the total cases wounded, and not more frequently than it
does after similar wounds in like condition where no question of poison has
existed.
G. That


6. That the “locked-jaw ” is not the result of a poison on the arrows, and as
this disease is the only cause of fatal results after these wounds, the arrows
themselves are not in any way dangerous beyond the severity of their wounds
and the conditions under which they are received.
7. That tetanus or “ locked-jaw ” being a very common result of all kinds of
wounds among the black races and in hot climates, and these people being
peculiarly susceptible to mental and superstitious influences, they have
erroneously connected this occurrence of such a marked disease with the effects
of different poisons.
8. That these ignorant races probably endeavour to produce this disease by
smearing their arrows with various irritating substances, thereby increasing the
superstitious dread of these weapons, and producing a nervous irritability in
themselves conducive to the occurrence of tetanus.
0.119.


( 12 )
Epitome
of Seven Cases of Punctured Wounds by Arrows of Santa Cruz , in which fatal Tetanus followed in Three of them.


All the Wounds were received on the 12th August 1875, at 2.30 p.m., and treated
August. 4th Day,
17 August. sth Day.
18 August. 6th Day.
Symptoms.
’ulse. T* in P e " Symptoms,
rature.
Tempe-
rature.
Symptoms.
Slept well; no pain.
Evening, stiffness in
wound of side felt.
Mor. Morn. No sleep last night; un-
-76 98 - 2 easiness in wound; no
pain or swelling; no
Even. Even. pus; tongue white;
76 98'2 amorexia; pain in back,
Morn.
98-2
No sleep; pain darting
from wound of side in
spasms to belly and
back; little pus; wound
red, laid open.
Slept well; little more
pain and inflam-
mation at wound;
anorexia.
Mor. Morn. Slept well; more pain
60 98'6 and swelling; wound
opened.
Even. Even.
Morn.
100-
No sleep; pain and spasms
in ann, near wound;
opened wound fully.
Even.
100-6
60 98-2
Slept well; more dis-
charge; no head-
ache; tongue coated
white.
Mor. Morn. Slept well; wound healthy
60 98 - 6 appetite good.
Slept well; some pain and
puffiness of scalp; wound
opened.
Even. Even.
60 98-2
Slept well; less pain
in wound; doing
well.
Mor. Morn. Slept well; less pain in
72 98'2 wound ; discharging
freely.
Morn.
98-2
Slept well; wound dis-
charging and healing.
Even. Even,
80 98-8
Slept well; appetite
good; no pain.
Mor. Morn. Slept well; doing well
72 98-2
Wound healthy; doing
well.
Even. Even
80 98-2
Slept well; very little
pain in wound.
Mor. Morn. Doing well
76 98-2
Morn,
98-2
Doing well
Even. Even,
76 98-2
Slept well; no pain
in wound.
No sleep ; pain in
shoulder; is very ner-
vous.
Doing well: evening, com-
plains of twitching in
arm and neck.
0.119.
( 13 )
within
half an hour afterwards.
August. 7th Day
Pulse, Te “P e
rature.
Symptoms.
Morn,
Even.
98-4
No sleep without medi-
cine; spasms more se-
vere and frequent, ex-
tending to chest and
neck; wound adhering;
great sweating.
No sleep without medi-
cine ; spasms of arm up
to jaw and back increas-
ing in severity.
Slept well; wound un-
healthy; stiffness of jaws,
and pain; thirst; tetanic
expression.
Less discharge; doing well
Doing well
Doing well
Pulse.
Slept well; very excited
and alarmed; stiffness
in arms and neck.


( H )
Postscript.
Her Majesty’s Ship Pearl, Auckland,
8 April 1876.
Since arriving at the foregoing conclusions, the following interesting and
valuable information on the subject of the inquiry has been received.
In reply to a series of questions addressed to the various missionaries in the
South Sea Islands, the Reverend Mr. Selwyn, of the Melanesian Mission,
informs me:—
1. The natives of the North New Hebrides and Banks’ Islands do not put
much faith in the poison as such, but depend chiefly on the human bone at the
end, and on the “ Mnna" or power of the man who shot, and on the efficacy of
his prayers and sacrifices. When a man is wounded, his friends get the arrow
and put it in a pot of water to keep it cool, which they think renders the wound
less liable to inflame. Mr. Selwyn saw a case of this at Mota, where a boy shot
another with a bird (or non-poisonous) arrrow.
2. There seems to be no doubt that the poison on the arrows makes the wound
inflame.
3. As far as is known, the poison used in these islands is exclusively derived
from vegetables.
4. The only animal part of a poisoned arrow is the human bone, which is
always put at the end, but only for the sake of sharpness.
5. We know of nothing to account for the rumour that the arrows are
poisoned by being soaked in a dead human body, unless it be that bodies arc
sometimes kept above ground for a long time for the purpose of getting the
bones with which to make arrow points.
6. The natives treat bodies killed by poisoned arrows in the same way as in
other cases of death. They never eat them, nor do they use them for poisoning
other arrows.
7 The poison used in Banks’ Islands and at Aurora Island, in the New
Hebrides, is prepared from two plants, viz., “ Toe ,” a spectes of Euphorbia, and
“ Lake ” a climbing plant, of which the root is used. It is said to be a species of
Strychnos*. The root is scraped and boiled with the root of the Pandanus to
give it consistency, they then smear the arrow heads, which are of human bone,
with one or other of these, but generally with both preparations. The arrows
are then dried and put away, wrapped up, for five days. The “ Lake'' prepara-
tion, at the end of these five days, splits a little and becomes of a light-green
colour.
8. At Mota, Mr. Codrington saw two men wounded the same day ; one died
of tetanus ; the arrow in this case was poisoned with “ Toe ” only, but the man
was very excited; the other recovered, he was of a very placid temperament.
A leaf was put on the wound and he was left to himself. John Nonono,
wounded at Nukapu at the time of Bishop Patteson’s murder, recovered without
tetanus, but was very ill.
9. The symptoms which follow wounds by arrows so poisoned, are inflamma-
tion of the wound, and after a time twitching comes on, gradually increasing m
intensity ; but we cannot say whether these symptoms follow m every case The
natives believe that if nothing occurs during the first five days tne patient will
probably recover, or at least they no longer fear tetanus. In Banks Islands the
natives keep the wounded man awake for five days lest he should w ake up in
a fright and bring on tetanus. The duration of the symptoms depends mainly
on the strength of the patient.
10 The natives of Banks and New Hebrides Islands arc very subject to
tetanus after wounds not produced by poisoned arrows. Mr. Nobbs of Norfolk
Island has had many cases of tetanus, either threatened or established, among
his people (Pitcairn Islanders), but not always fatal. This liability has of late
much decreased. 11. Tetanus
• This may be the Chctick of Java. A.B.M.


11. Tetanus is common among the natives of the South Sea Islands, inde-
pendent of wounds causing it.
12. I am also indebted to Professor Halford, of Melbourne University, for the
following facts, He says“ Some time ago I procured four different sets of
poisoned arrows, chiefly from the Solomon Islands. I could not discover that
the filth they were covered with at the tips was in any way poisonous. I in-
serted the stuff beneath the skins, made decoctions, solutions, weak extracts, &c.
of it, and none of the animals died or were affected by it. I therefore con-
cluded that the arrows themselves, by wounding vital parts, and by their diffi-
culty of removal, would be sufficient to cause death ; the filth with which they
are covered of course irritating and preventing healing. My experiments were
made on dogs and pigeons.”
Note.
A nut, corresponding exactly with that described by Captain Dillon, is
common in the South Solomon Islands, which the natives use for a cement in the
construction of their canoes. It is not unlikely that this is the brown cement
with which arrows of Santa Cruz are smeared, to protect them from the
weather, as Burney suggests.
0,119.


Ikff
iUbUO
Fix.e&tb
P 6 eafUj


,■ •
#


