

JAPANESE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE SYDNEY AND 1
£ c S
. • y . '
' *
AN ENDEAVOUR TO THROW LIGHT ON
THE PRESENT TROUBLE IN NORTH CHINA
Our Chamber gave some explanation in our last circular concerning the cause and
development of the present trouble in North China. The purpose of this additional statement
is to answer various questions which have been brought up since the issue of our last pamphle,
regarding recent developments, and a possible forecast of this event.
' 'f
(I) THE REASON WHY THE JAPANESE GOVERNMENT ULTIMATELY DECIDED SO IAKE
DRASTIC MEASURES.
[a) Ihe struggle for power among Chinese military leaders.
Present-day China suffers from continuous struggles between the Nanking Government
and local military leaders. This may be well illustrated by the relationship existing between the
Nanking Government and General Sung Cheh-Yuan, Chairman of the. Hopei-Chahar Political
° UnC The Nanking Government will not countenance the growing power of thejatter In North
China, and Is trying to undermine his authority by embroiling the latter's army in conflict with
powerful Japanese forces, under the pretext of the furtherance of an anti-Japanese policy.
In this manner they hope to weaken Sung Cheh-Yuan and prevent him from becoming a menace.
Sung Cheh-Yuan, however, is aware of the motive underlying the action ot the Nanking
Government, and is doing his utmost to minimise his losses and exerting every possible effort
to reach a settlement satisfactory to himself. , ,
Unfortunately, the common Chinese soldier is, as a general rule, uneducated, and does
not implicitly obey his officers; will frequently act on his own initiative.
Take, for example, the proposal put forward by the Hopei-Chahar Political Council on
July 19th, which promises:—
(i) The expulsion of those persons who Impede the friendly relations between Japan
and China.
(II) The complete suppression of the Communist Party.
(iii) The suppression of various anti-Japanese organisations and the cessation ot anti-
Japanese education. ... . ,
This proposal sounded very satisfactory to the Japanese viewpoint, but was entirely
disregarded. Not one clause was faithfully observed, owing to the lack of control by those in
authority over the rank and file.
Under these circumstances how can we expect peace between Japan and China. Cut-
Chamber Is of the opinion the Japanese Government_ has been too lenient, and has attached
to much importance to the promises of the local Chinese authorities. This leniency has been
inspired by the respect for, and adherence to, the principles of internafional justice always
dominant In our people. ....
(b) China's Unfaithful Attitude.
On the other hand, the unfaithfulness on the part of China in respecting treaties and
agreements Is well accounted for by fhe following facts:
(i) Lu-Kou-Chiao.
The 37th Division of the 29th Route Army, which clashed with the Japanese Army
near Lu-Kou-Chiao, on July 7th, capitulated during the engagement and proposed a truce.
They nevertheless suddenly attacked our troops under cover of that truce, causing many
casualties.
(ii) Langfang,
With regard to the Langfang incident, (July 25th), the Chinese were "clearly In the
wrong," as Mr. Woodhead (Special Correspondent to the "Sydney Morning Herald in China)
put It. But a statement appearing In a recent Issue of a Sydney newspaper alleged ™at the,
Japanese had no right to occupy Langfang. This Is to entirely disregard the Final Protocol, 90!
concerning the Boxer Rising, In which It is clearly stated that any signatory Powers are sniffled
to station their troops at Langfang, or else a complete lack of respect for the International
Agreement. jC’
to station
Agreemen
L fYd
At. A


The actual trouble, however, arose not from the occupation of Langfang, but from
the fact that the ; Chinese troops, without justification, attacked the Japanese Signal Corps,
which were effecting repairs to the telegraph wires illegally cut down by the Chinese, notwith-
standing the promise given by the Commander of the Chinese troops that they would not
interfere.
We say illegally because this Protocol definitely stipulates communication between
Peiping and the sea to be under international control.
(iii) Peiping or Kwang-an Gate Incident.
Our troops marched into the city of Peiping on July 26th to protect our people resident
There, after obtaining permission from the Hopei-Chahar Political Council. When about
Two-thirds of the Japanese soldiers had passed through the gate, it was suddenly closed by
The Chinese troops, who opened fire without warning, on the Japanese soldiers.
This action was in direct contravention to the above-mentioned Protocol, which stipulates
The right of any interested nation to station her army in Peiping for the protection of her
nationals.
With the above three incidents as examples, It will be quite clear that our Government
could no longer tolerate these continual distressing occurrences, and was forced to take punitive
measures against those responsible.
China has recently improved In her internal organisation, and Is over-estimating her power,
while claiming that Japan is guilty of over-estimating hers. We wonder If the Chinese Army
is strong enough to cope with a combined attack from Japanese troops. If we may be
permitted to say so, it is China who is guilty of over-estimating her strength rather than
Japan.
(2) JAPANESE FOREIGN POLICY.
The Japanese Prime Minister, Prince Konoye, stated at a session of the diet: "If Japan
were hungry for territory she could have occupied North China long ago." The Foreign
Minister, Mr. Hirota, echoes this sentiment in the following speech delivered by him on
July 27th:—
"Our national policy aims at securing Japan's position as a stabilising force In East Asia
and contributing toward the establishment of true peace In the world. In order to carry out
this policy, we should consider relations between Japan, Manchoukuo, China, and the Soviet
Union. Our Government profoundly regrets to note that anti-Japanese sentiments and
movements have been encouraged and systematically exploited for the purpose of unifying
public opinion and arousing nationalistic consciousness, and that untoward Incidents, evidently
resulting therefrom, are taking place In various quarters In China.
"Japanese policy In East Asia is directed solely toward realisation of the stability of East
Asia through conciliation and co-operation between Japan, Manchoukuo and China, and by
stopping a Communist invasion of the Orient.
"The Japanese Government, therefore, earnestly hope that China will, as soon as possible,
come to have a full understanding and appreciation of our basic policy. However, to-day
in China, not only is such understanding or appreciation absent, but anti-Japanese sentiments
have been still more intensified, of which the Lou-Kou-Chiao incident of the 7th was only the
logical consequence. As regards the present Incident, the Japanese Government have
maintained, as announced In their official statement of July Nth, the policy of seeking a
settlement on the spot and the non-aggravation of the situation. Accordingly, the Government
have been doing their best to effect a peaceful solution on the spot, and at the same time,
to induce the Nanking Government to take proper steps for an early settlement. It Is my
earnest hope that prompt reconsideration on the part of the Chinese authorities will lead to
a faithful execution of the terms of settlement arrived at on the night of July I Ith."
We trust that the above will give the reader an understanding of the conditions that
forced our Government Into taking punitive measures, much against their wishes and Inclinations,
to protect our Interests in North China, and to ensure safety for the lives and property of our
nationals, resident In that district, for which, it appears, the Chinese civil authorities are not
powerful enough to provide complete protection.
It will be of interest in this connection that prior to the occurrence of the present
trouble, one of the leading powers in Europe solicited our garrison In North China to protect
tier nationals, with which request our Government complied.


It is not our intention to regard the Chinese people as our enemibs, but rather to offer
them our sympathy. They are a fundamentally peaceful nation, and have behind them a history
of culture rivalling that of the powers of the present day. Unfortunately, they lack a well
organised Government and disciplinary code, and are subject to ambitious self-interested military
Leaders. Japanese residents in North China are constantly faced with menace to life and
property during the period of this turmoil, whereas Chinese residents in Japan, some 60/70,000,
are receiving full protection from the Japanese police and civil authorities. For them there is
no need to return to the dangers and constant turmoil of their unhappy country, They enjoy
a happy and peaceful existence, while their trade flourishes as before, without fear of
■detrimental action on the part of Japanese citizens.
We may add that even as matters stand at present, our Japanese Government Is still
•endeavouring to prevent the expansion of this unhappy event, and still hope to reach a satisfactory
agreement without the horror and misery that war will inevitably bring In Its train. It is our
hope that the Chinese will co-operate with us to expedite a settlement as quickly, and with as
little bloodshed, as possible.
30th July, 1937.
We would like to point out to the Australian public the inadvisability of paying any
attention to certain statements regarding the present trouble between Japan and China which
have appeared in the newspapers, supposedly based on "private source."
Firstly, at the outbreak of the trouble, it was stated that the Chinese Army was united
and strong. But this does not justify the Chinese Army firing upon the troops of a friendly
nation without any provocation.
Secondly, that the present trouble would afford the Soviet Russia an opening she had
been awaiting. However, even if China receives any support from Soviet Russia, that has nothing
to do with the Illegal attack made upon the Japanese Army.
Thirdly, the existence of any agreement between the Japanese Army and the Chinese
authorities in North China regarding an amicable settlement of the affair, which In fact existed,
was denied. Had the Chinese kept their promise, the whole affair would have been settled
long ago. However, the Nanking Government Interfered, and encouraged the Chinese In North
China to break their promise.
Further, an unpardonable blunder was committed when mention was made of His
Majesty, the Emperor of Manchoukuo, on July 22nd ("Sydney Morning Herald, July 23rd).
This was nothing but a figment of the Imagination.
Regarding the Kwang-an Gate Incident, the statement published in the "Labor Daily, on
July 29th, does not make sense, it says: "The Japanese soldiers who were 'disarmed' by the
Chinese, 'begged the Chinese to save their lives,' etc." In this case, the words Japanese
and "Chinese" should be transposed.
The Nanking report states, In regard to the fighting on July 28th, that the Chinese
captured "300" Japanese aeroplanes, while the "Sydney Morning Herald states, on July 29th,
that "the arrival of 30 more aeroplanes has doubled the Japanese Air Force. It is wonderful
how the Chinese could capture "300" aeroplanes from a mere 60. Certainly the Chinese
have a sense of humour—if not an accurate sense of calculation.
After repeated Inquiries from Interested parties about the reported Chinese victories,
our Chamber approached the Japanese Consulate and, of course, found them to be a mere
fabrication. Possibly just another excuse to play with their fireworks! With all these victories
China may yet develop into a serious menace (?) to world peace; perhaps the dragon will replace
the lions at the base of Nelson's Column, and the statue of Chian Kai-Chek that of Nelson!
a chance for more fireworks.
It is doubtful whether the Chinese imagination will be able to cope with the necessity
of supplying a continuous stream of victories. Mr. H. G. Wells, or the late Jules Vernes, would
prove a wonderful asset.


/ •
.
THE LANGLEA PRINTERY PTY. LTD., 433 KENT ST., SYDNEY
