

O. D.
AN ESSAY
ON THE
MYTHOLOGICAL AND SYMBOLICAL
HISTORY
OF THE
ROSE
FROM THE GERMAN
BY C. w.
REPRINTED FROM THE ORIGINAL
(ONLY ONE HUNDRED COPIES PRINTED)
EDITED IN LONDON BY TRUBNER AND Co.
60, PATERNOSTER ROW, UNDATED.
(NOT TO BE SOLD)


THE ROSE:
WITH ESPECIAL REFERENCE TO ITS CULTIVATION
AND USE IN ANTIQUITY.
Although modern times have introduced a mul-
titude of most beautiful specimens to Horticulturists,
which, unknown to our predecessors, delight us with
their fragrance, or claazle our eyes with their brilliancy,
or astonish us by their size, the Rose still remains
1 There In a tolerably complete collection of literature of
the subject, up to 1817, in 1?. J. Redoutd, Los Roses, Paris, 1817,
Pol, In the section, Bibliotheca botanica rosarium, page 148, ss. The
oldest monograph on the rose is by Nicol Mouard.es, a physician,
who died at Seville about .1577, which, was published by the
celebrated Oluslns, at Antwerp, 1868, under the title “De Rosa
ot parblbus ejus” I only know It hy quotations. The essay
“Deßosa”, hy J. Hermann, is also known to mo only by extracts
in Beckmann on Arisfcotel. do mirab., p. 828. I regret that I
have not at hand a work which, hy its title promises much,
“ Ilommage rendu ii la. Rose, par les pontes anciens et modernes,
prdcddd de I'hiatoire de cette reine des fleurs chen tousles
peuples, orne de 18 planches colorides", Paris, 1818,


Queen of the Mower-world, 8 and Goethe 8 has rightly
distinguished it as the most perfect which Nature, in
our German land, produces. 4 It may, therefore, not
be without interest to consider the questions:
What progress the ancients had made in the cultivation
of this gem of the garden; 2nd. What, advantages
they derived from the multifarious uses of it; and,
lastly, what symbolical applications they made of it
in the wide field of poetry and art.
So far as our knowledge extends, the Rose was,
from the earliest time, a native of the world, known
to the Romans. 8 In the dim pre-historio epoch, they
3 The ancient authors vie with each other hi praise of the
Roue. The eulogy which, is put into the mouth of the charming
Lenkippe (in Achilles Tatina, 2. 1, vol. 1., p. 26, Ft, Jao.) is very
graceful“lF Zeus had willed to give the flowers a Queen, the
Rose would have been she. It ia the gem of the* earth, the pride
of the world of plants, the crown of flowers, the purple of the
meadows, the reflection of the beautiful. It is full of love, it
la the servant of Aphrodite, it is decked with Iragant leaves, it
cradles itself on its nodding stalk and plays with the smiling
Zephyrs, ” So sang the maiden on whose lips the flower had
taken its abode. The Greek authors are rich in similar praises.
The sth of the Ode of Anacreon is well known. The Sophists
have equally laid hold of the subjet.
8 In Eokemanu's “Conversations”, ill. 86.
4 The Rose is known to bo a native of the northern hemi-
sphere, and to have been carried thence to the south.
6 The principal passages on the cultivation, of the Bose among
the ancients, are Theophrastes, 1, 16, 21, 22, 0,2; Rlin. N. H.,
21, 4, and an its use in medicine, 21, 18. As to the etymology,
1 remark as follows: 1 regard the derivation attempted, both
by Greek and Roman grammarians, as very doubtful. Doederlein
(Etymol. and Synou. vi. 807) finds hi russus a link between poßov
and rosa. An etymological friend recognises a connection between
poSov and rosa with paaiv and mere, whence also rota, rotun-
dus, so that i;osn moans the full flower that rounds itself. Rosa
is used not only for the bush, but for the flower as in german;
but amongst the Romans it had ft groat width of signification.
It means a wreath of roses, e. g. Cicero, Time, 811; also rose


perhaps grew most commonly, and flourished most on
the island of Rhodes, to which, according to the old
legend, they gave its name. 0 They were diffused at
a later period through all the countries which the
loaves, e. g. in the expression "potare, fa acre in rosa" (of
which more below); also rose-water rose-oil, rose-sap, rose-oint-
ment, and in general almost all preparations of roses; and this
even in authors from whom one would expect more accuracy, as in
medical writers such as Coisus (see also Scheller in the German
edition of this author, i. 245). Rose-wine is not called rosa
however, but rosaium, with or without vimtm; roseum vinum
in Isidor, Origg, 20, 18, is rosy wine. It scarcely need be said
that Latin has also special terms for all these articles. The Bose,
as a flower, is called flos roseus (Plin. N. H., 12, 11, 28, 80)
or flos rosm, rosarum, (Hor, Od, 8, 29, 2); the rose-wreath,
corona rosacea (Plin. N. H., 21,3,6,8); rose-01l oleum rosaeeum,
and rosaeeum simply (Plin. N, H., 24,10, 47, 75), in commerce,
rhodinum oleum (Plin. N. H,, 18, 7,7, 7), rose-ointment, oe-
raPum rosaeeum (Plin. N. H., 24, 18, 74); rose-pomade, tm-
guentum rhodinum (Plin. N. 11,, 18, 1,2, 9). I observe further,
that roses folia is generally used for the petals of the flower
(Oelsus do Need,, 6,7), hut sometimes of the leaves of the bush.
On the distinction between rosarium and rose turn, see below.
The use of rasetum for rosa belongs only to the later poets
(Wernsdorf on Reposlan, Oonnub. Mart, ot Ven, 88, in Poet. Lat,
Min., t, iv., p. 828; and on Bpithal. Laur, et Mar. 82, t. tv;, 491).
I farther remark that, in many passages, flos flares stand
for roses, even in opposition to other flowers; the simple u flos"
means the rose, e. g. Lamprld. Hellog., 21, p. 842, violae atejue
flores, violets and roses. In the same way mvOoq was used
among the Greeks, par exellenoe, os the Bose (Bodaous on
Theophrast. de Cans. Plant., 6,6, p. 645; Pasahalius (Joron., 8, B,
p. 147). It must be mentioned, also, that rosa occurs on
inscriptions for the rose-month, the time of roses (Grater In-
script, 7,8, 4). .'Finally, Jt is to be remarked, in order to avoid
troublesome misconceptions and confusion, that rosa Is also used
for a kind of honey-apple, or quinoe-apple, which is now called
in Italy, rnela rosa (Poroell, in Lex., § v.); Schuoh, in his second
essay on the herbs and salads of the ancients (68), where how-
ever, these u rosae” are less properly called a kind of citron,
(compare below),
9 Bhodus Is derived from poBov. Creusser (Mythol. and Sym-
bol,, iv. 583) maintains the converse, that the Bose on the coin


Romans conquered. It flourished equally in Africa,
Asia, Greece, Italy, and Spain.
"With regard to the varieties of the Rose, known
to the ancients, the number is very small, in compa-
rison with those we have. When we reckon the kinds
described, 7 in so far as they are different in form, colour,
and fragrance, we find there were only the four sorts H
of the island owed its origin to the similarity of the name of
the island to that of the flower. The coins bear, on the obverse,
the head of Apollo with the crown of sunbeams; on the reverse,
a pomegranate blossom (balanstium), or more frequently a rose
in various forms, and joined with a variety of symbols, Spanheim
(de usu et praost, numism., ii, 815) sees only the pomegranate
blossom on the Rhodian coins; 'Wiukelrmum (Works, il. 589,
Dresd.), Rasohe (Lex. R. Num., iv. i. 1,279), Bestial (JDoscr. Num,
Vett,, 882 seq.), Gerhard (Ausorl. Qrieoh, Yaaenb., 1.180, Not. 168),
recognise the Rose only, IDokhel (JJootr. Rum., 11, 602) takes a
middle course, and sees on some the one, and on others the ■
other. The error of the former is caused by tire fact that it is
not the oeutifolia, bub the single rose full blown, which is re-
presented, so that Eokhel compares the flower to a tulip. Accor-
ding to Havoroamp (Ad Mor. Bam., 81-82), the Oassil had roses
struck on their denarii for the conquest of Rhodes. Several
cities in antiquity have roses on their coins, of which wo shall
give examples presently, It frequently appears on modem coin-
age also. We refer students of numismatics to a piece struck
by the (somewhat mystical) .Countess Rosamund of Ortenhurg,
on the reverse of which an ecclesiastical building is represented,
with a half bow honeath, in which there is a rose, See the
description and plate of it in W. Gt. Becker’s “Two Hundred
Rare Coins of the Middle Ages.” Dres, 1818,66.
7 Theophrast. do Cans, Plant. 6,6.; Pli. N. H., 21, 4.
8 Fifteen hundred years later, there were bub few more
known. Oar, Stephanua, in his Praedlum Rustionm, in quo cnlusqo
soli vel oultl vel Inculti plantarmn vocalmla ac descriptioaes earum-
que conserendarum atque excolendarum Instruments sue ordine
desorlbuntur, p. 27. The great Llnneeas distinguished only seven-
teen kinds of roses at the beginning of last century. To show
this by examples: The damask rose was brought to Prance about
1100; the Bengalese rose, which is a native of China, came to
us from India, and was first grown in England in 1798, the
monthly rose, rosa somperflorens, descends from it; the tea-rose
was first introduced in England, from China, in 1828,


which, are ab present natives of Greece: 0 namely, the
Rosa oynosbatus (or dog-rose), of which the Rosa
moschata, or musk-rose of Cyrene, 10 is a variety; the
Rosa canina 11 cynorrhodon, in Pliny, the wild rose;
the Rosa pimpinellifolia, or pimpernell-rose; the Rosa
gallioa, or sugar-rose; la and the Rosa centifolla, or
gardon-rosa, of which Pliny alone enumerates ten va-
rieties. We shall principally refer to the last of these.
The white was considered to be the oldest; 18
there were besides a bright yellow, 14 dark yellow, 15
bright red, and another of burning red. 18 The early
0 Blbthorp’s “Mora Gxtooa”, Lend. 1815, and 0, Maas “Sy-
nops. Plant. Floral. Class. ”, Munich, 1948, p, 74,
10 Plln. N. H m 21, 4,10,19. Gyrouis odoratlsslma ost, Ideoqua
Ibi unguenfcum pulohoridmum. According to Billerbeok, “More
Olassica”, p. 185, it is the Q-raeoula of Pliny. The roses of
Gyrene wore widely diffused; a rose is sometimes seen on the
Oyrenian coins, according to Eascho (Lex E. H., iv. i. 1279).
The Sllphium or Laserpitium is well known to be as peculiar
to the Oyrenaio district as the lotus is to Egypt, and hence,
forms tiro usual sign on the money of Gyrene. Eokhol, 100. oit.,
and Creuzer Symbol., 1, 149.
11 Commonly called among the ancients rosn sylvostres, or
sylvatica, I find the now common name, rosa oaniua, for the
first time in Sorlbon, Larg, Medioam 21, 85, an author supposed
to bo of the first century A. D. The style however, wears many
marks of a much later date, and in the passage quoted, the ad-
dition “ quam oanlnam quidam vooant.", evidently points to a gloss.
13 According to Praaa. Synops. PI. I’lor. class 76 did not
distinguish rosa gallioa and centifolla as sorts, but it is only
gallica which is now common and wild In* Greece. Centifolla is
seldom found there, even in gardens. See Volz “ Contributions
to the History of Cultivation’’. Leipzig, 1852,75.
w Plln. N. H„ 21, 4, 10, 16.
w Pallad. E., 1, 87, 2.
16 Columell. E, E., 9,4, 4.
10 PHn. N. H,, 21, 4, 10, 16, MUesia, oui sit ardontlssimus
color.


rose was a native of Campania; 17 the Milesian bloom
ed later, and last of all those of Prameste. The
Oarlhagena rose had the excellence of blooming - in
every month. 18 The simplest in regard to the number
of petals was the five-leaved: the contifolia was na-
turally the favourite; it grew wild in Campania. 111
« Bin. N. IT., 21, 1, 10, 19,
18 Tho words of Pliny, loc. 0i1,,, “Cartlingino Hispanists hiome
tota preacox", clearly say that this rose bloomed through, the
whole winter, consequently in each month,
18 The passage of .Pliny shows this, "genus ejus, qunm cen-
tifoliam vacant qu® eat in Campania Italho, Gnccho voro circa
Philippos, sod ibi non sine terras proventu”. The latter words
are clearly antithetical to the previous “eat" which is therefore
to be token in the sense of "is” or "grows by nature", Pliny
baa perhaps taken the last note from Tlieoprhast de Cans,
Plant., 6, 6. This author (a contemporary of Alexander) la, so
far as I know, the first who mentions tho centifolia proper; he
had found it in gardens at Philippi, Tho true habitat of tho
centifolia is perhaps Schirvnn, where it la found wild: Sprengels
"Hist. Eel”, 1. 90. Rosea with many petals occur in antiquity,
Herodotus (8, 108) tells us that ho saw in the garden of a cer-
tain Midas, Macedonia, some with sixty, which surpassed all
others in frogonce. This garden of Midas was so famous in
in later times that Tertulllan (De Palllo, 2, 507, Oehlor), when
he wants to describe the blessed abodes of earth after the
extermination of evil, says such a place "will be fairer than the
orchard of Alcinous and the rose-garden of Midas ”, Compare "De
Goran.", 14, 244, Oehler, where the centifolia is called in later
Latin "roaa ceuteuaria”. I may take the opportunity of noti-
cing that tho centifolia was one of tho few filled out flowers
(or double flowers) known to the ancients; there wore besides
only stocks, violets, lilies and pomegranates, that, is, flowers
naturally double. Since double flowers need scientific horticul-
ture for their production, it la in vain to look for them in an-
tiquity, Au indication of the low condition of gardening in the
middle ages is famished by tho fact that the centifolia had
become rare in Germany. The well-known botanist,. Carolus
Olusius, who in 1588 planted potatoes as botanical curiosities at
Vienna and Frankfort, mentions as something remarkable in the
year 1589 that there were centifolia in Holland, and adds that
he had himself seen them in the same year in the gardens of
some men of importance in Frankfort.


Those of Prroneste and Campania were considered as
the most beautiful ; those of Malta an were most used
for their perfume and their oil; but the rosea of Pro-
stum, which is visited now for its mighty ruins, were
especially famous. 81 There the beneficent mother, Na-
ture, permitted her darlings to grow to greater size, 88
and twice in the year to blow. a,!
*’ Omitted In the German original.
m According to Sprengel (Hist. lie!, I. I'M), the rose of
Preshun was our damask-rose. Tliis opinion seems to be erro-
neous, as the latter was first brought to Europe in the middle
ages,
aii Virgil (Georg, 4, 119) has made us acquainted with
“ biferi rosariu Pn'ftU ”, See also Under on Martial Epigr.
0, 27,8; Wernsdorf in Poet. Lot Min,, vl., 1., 40; Kopp on
Martian Gapell., 0, 641, p. 822. That Peestum (or Posodonin.)
was Itself proud of its roses is shown by its coins, on which a
rose and a rose garden are figured (Basohe Lex, H. N., iv., L,
1279); but the flower does not occur on the money described
by Eckhel (Doctr. Nuxu., 1. 158).
8,1 The roses of Samoa also bloomed twice according to
JEthllus (the Samian In A then, Deipn., 14, GB, p. 658, ill, 1455,
Dindorf,) It is to bo noticed, however, that Athen,, 14, 68,
p. G5O d, (iii, 1477, Dindorf), questions the genuineness of JSthlius,
It is singular to observe how tire climate of a district alters,
as if nature would withdraw from its inhabitants enjoyments
of which they made themselves unworthy; it is in vain that
we look at the present day for roses round Paeatum. When
Mourns (Works, ill, 124) travelled to Syracuse In 1802, he visited
it, but found no trace of the flower; not even a single bush in
the bishop’s garden. The former glory was forgotten. In order
to stimulate the indolent Inhabitants to plant them (roses), and
so to provide for later travellers the pleasure which was denied
to him, he told Iris guide that he would willingly have given
him a piastre for a rose, and that others who came after him
would do the same. But even the desire for profit was appealed
to in vain. The most recent traveller In that district, to whom
we owe a charming narrative of his journey (Adolf Stahr, “A
Year In Italy” 1. 404, 2nd ed), found no more roses than his
predecessors, hut on the contrary a pestilential air, which brooded
with leaden wings over this once happy and healthful plain and


The ancients were acquainted with the raising of
the flower from seed, 8 * but they preferred multiplica-
tion by suckers and slips.
The method of grafting on wild stocks was known
to them. 26 They also practised pruning, in order to
strengthen the tree and improve its bearing. A kind
of treatment by burning is also mentioned, but as a
knowledge of the thing was presupposed by the wri-
ters, the expressions are too brief to be quite intelligible.
It is the opinion of some commentators that a fire was
kindled round the tree, and the useless branches burn-
ed, and that then a good dressing was afforded by
the ashes.
Roses were either planted singly or in clumps on
poisoned the bodies and the spirits ot its inhabitants. Prostum
in fact, lies there (to avail myself of what Anderson, the Swedish
traveller, says of another region Rio Janeiro in his voyage
round the world, 35 Germ, Travs.), like a garden of Ed on from
which the avenging Angel with his flaming sword has driven
Flora and her beloved children.
84 Theophraat. de Cans, Plant., 6,6; Plin. N. H., 21, 4, 10, 20.
“Tai'dissime provenlunt semlne, quod In ipso oortlce eat, sub ipso
flora opertum lanuglne; ob id potlna oaule conclso insorotur et
ocellls radiois”. I cannot adduce passages in proof that the an-
cients employed grafting on wild stocks, although it is not im-
probable that they did. Tall rose trees are a familiar ornament
of our gardens. I may refer as an Instance of one of unusual
height, to a tree which a court gardener at Suns Soucl had
trained to the end of his house. Zelter (correspondence with
Goethe) tells us (iv. 186), that it was about thirty Rhenish feet
high, and that yon went up more than fifty steps In order to
reach the window, in the end of the house, where you could
see and admire the noble top, with its blooming rosea.
SB To interpret the words of Pliny, which have been mis-
understood by translators, “unum genus Inseritur pallldae, spi-
nosse, longisslrals quinque-foliss”.


beds. Sometimes there were whole gardens 20 and
plantations 27 of them, at which we need not wonder
when we remember the love of the ancients for this
flower, aa and its proportionately extensive use. 2 ' 1 The
» Gardens of roses have always been, favourites with the
natives of the south. We have already quoted ancient examples,
and the modern habits are like them. Who does not remember
the charming Qulohline, which has obtained European notoriety
by the well known Hatti-scheriff.
27 I make the distinction between garden and plantations,
that the former were for pleasure, the latter for profit. The
Latin, makes the same distinction between rosarium and ro-
setum (.Force!!, in Lex., s. v.) But the distinction is not al-
ways preserved by the prose writers on the subject, Horace
complains (Od. 2, Ip, B) of the luxury which was practiced In
laying out myrtle groves, violet beds, and rose plantations, and
Which took away room for the cultivation of useful herbs, All
tire fruit-hearing land in Italy had by that time been turned
Into pleasure-rounds, which, even as early as Cicero and Bompey,
had caused high prices for grain. The sober Yarro says, 11 Sa-
tmi samus ex Sardinia efc Africa” (R, E. 2,1).
* Many witnesses, of whom we may be allowed to quote
a few, show bow diligent the ancients were in the cultivation
of the Rose, Wo read of the bequest of a considerable sum,
which made grateful children, on condition of a rose-tree being
planted on the anniversary of the death of the parents (Zell.
Epigr. h, 107, 926). A soldier sets aside a sum of money in order
to plant roses yearly, to commemorate his return from a cam-
paign (Ibid,, .121, 1052). In the same way a client in memory
of his patron (lb., 889, 1778). It was provided In one will that
throe myrtles and throe rose-trees should he yearly planted on
the birthday of the deceased (Ibid., 92, 774).
2I) Namely for crowns and garlands, for adorning and delights
tag revellers, for docking temples, altars and graves, in honour of
the dead. For the preparation of rose-water, oil, pomade, oint-
ments and essences, for culinary and medical purposes, of all
which we shall further treat below. It is not surprising that,
with this immense consumption, whole ship-loads of roses were
brought to Rome, and there were shops solely for their sale.
The latter were called rosarii, and are mentioned in glossaries.
While they traded in wholesale, simple peasant girls were satis-
fied with bringing woven baskets-full into the city for sale.


writers on agriculture give us detailed accounts of the
laying out and cultivation of rose-gardens. A be-
ginning should be made, according to Palladius, 80 in
February, If seed is employed, it is to be sown in
furrows; if scions, boles are to be dug. In an old gar-
den trimming and pruning the trees should take place
in the same month, as also the renewal of worn-out
stocks. Should early flowers be desired, a trench a
foot deep should be drawn round the roots, and fre-
quently filled with tepid water. 81 If all these opera-
tions have not been attended to in the beginning of
the year, they must be effected early in March. 82
Palladius 88 says that in warmer climates the prepa-
ration of the gardens can he begun in November with
suckers, which are to be set dose together, and the
next year may be planted out.
The ancients agreed with our modern experience
in preferring a moist loam for the cultivation of roses,
which should be well manured with cow-dung. I must
notice it as an observation peculiar to the ancients
Garland weavers and garland-sellers too (coronarira and co-
rollarice, see fclie dictionaries) found high wages in Home. There
was a flower-market in the city, where ready made gar-
lands were exposed for sale. (Ovid, East, 0, 791). The first gar-
land-weaver of antiquity was Glycero of Slcyon, who also carried
on a profitable trade with garlands, She has become celebrated
by the portrait of her which her lover, Pansies, painted, and
which was valued so highly that Luc. Lucullua paid 2000 thaler
(Lb 8000) for a copy (Plin, N. H. 85, 11, 40, 125), This picture
was known as Stephanoplocos and Stophanopolis, (On the latter
names see Lobeck ad Phryuioh. Ecolog. 651).
“ De E. E. 8, 21.
81 Pliny agrees with this, N. H., 21, 4, 10, 21.
88 Pallad. de E. E., 4, 5.
88 Ibid,, 12, 11.


that the flowers would have a stronger perfume if
garlic were planted near," 4 They further remark that
roses grown in dry and sunny places have a. more
powerful odour. 85
In order to get early blowing plants in spring,
they planted young stocks in pots in autumn, and
forced them in the early year. As soon as the weather
was mild enough the pots were broken, and the stocks,
with the ball of earth round them, were planted in
the ground. 88 As the Romans could not do without
roses, even in winter, they had artificial means of
procuring them. The mild climate of Italy allowed
them, indeed, to blow late in the open air, and the
single late flowers were eagerly sought for. 87 But in
w Plutarch de capieud. ex lulmio. utillt., p. 92, 6; Geopon.,
11, 18, or 111., 817, edj .Nloltis,
•» Plin. N. IL, 21, 4,6, 10. Plutarch (Vifc. Alexan. B, (566)
gives the reason for the stronger odour of flowers in warm
climates. (Theophm. de Onus. Plant,, 6, 27), follows him.
,il! This plan is only mentioned in Geopon. (11, 18, iii. 818,
ed, Nidus), but there is no doubt that it is derived with many
authors from Homan writers.
117 The temperate .Horace is satisfied with a myrtle wreath,
but the words which he addresses to his servant (Od. 1, 88, ‘1),
show that the others were not of the same mind: “mitta seoturi,
rosa quo locornm sera moretur” e, trouble not thyself to
seek a rose blooming late here and there—in the garden, that
Is to say, It is in the highest degree prosaic to think, as Ovell
does, of “going to the weaver of garlands”. And such a
meaning does not suit the language, as the poet could not in
that case have said either “quo locorum” or “mororl”. Pnschnlius
(Coron,, p. 150), has also misunderstood the passage in think-
ing of spreading the meal in some other place planted with
roses. The late blowing roses are properly "hlbernae rosuo,"
as "hiberna pirn” (Plin. N, 11,, 16, 26, 40, 10(5) are pears ripe
in winter. In most southern lauds there are Lite blowing roses
in plenty so King Autioohus could have them In his camp even
at that season. (Plor. Epit,, 2,8, 9),


a hard winter only a few solitary rosea could be
expected, and even in milder weather no great supply
was _to be looked for. 88 A resource was found in
foreign countries. Whole ship-loads of roses came in
winter from Alexandria, 80 and probably also from
New Carthage, 40 districts which, from the superior
mildness of their climate, were smiling with flowers
in the coldest season. But the Romans called all their
skill into exercise, in order to have them blooming in
their own land during the winter. As early as the
time of Horace it is plain that they were acquainted
with such an art. 41 At a later period they had evi-
dently made considerable progress in it, 4a and it is
118 When it: is said in Geopon. (11, 18, Hi. 817, Nidus) that
roses may ho grown in the open air all the year round, if planted
in succession every month, and well manured, there can bo
reference only to tho climate of Greece,
™ Martial, Eplgr, 6 (6, 6) 80, and Rader, p. 430.
10 I cannot quote any passage in proof of this, but it is
highly probable; for the industry of the commercial class in
'Rome was too great to allow of their leaving unemployed the
rich produce of that district. (Plin, N. H,, 2.1, 4, 10, 19).
41 Droll! correctly observes on Od. 8,10, 22, that there could
be no roses in the open air in such cold as Is presupposed in
“Peligna frigora”.
48 They had glass houses, as is plain from Martial, Eplgr;
4, 21, 5; Oondita sic pure numerantur lllia vitro, sic prohibet
tenuis gemma latere rosas. .“Rein In Beckers Q alius”, lii. 84,
where Bottiger's false opinion in “Sabina”, 1. 288 is sufficiently
contradicted, and my “Treatise on the Horticulture of the An-
cients” p. 27, There seem to have been no other artificial means
of heating than the simple heat from the glass. They merely
protected tho plants from cold by such coverings as we use at
present in the green-houses in the botanical garden at Palermo,
where the winter temperature is never lower than three degrees
above zero, and where even tropical plants are sufficiently pro-
tected by simply: dosing the windows. The same thing is seen
in the botanical gardens at Bio de Janeiro and Hydnoy (Ander


quite certain that in Rome they were able to ensure
a supply from the neighbourhood ‘ adequate to even a
groat demand.* 8
The ancients had the following plans of preser-
ving out flowers: Especially the Rose was to be ga-
thered before it was full blown. It was then to be
put in a slit cut in a reed, which remained on the
stem until the Rose was required to blow fully. The
slit was to be bound with matting. 44 Or the flowers
may be placed in an unglazed vase,' 15 fastened up
closely, and buried in dry sand or earth.
Another plan is to put barley, plucked up with its
roots, in an unpitched cask, and to lay the rose
amongst it. 40
We thus see that Romans, favoured in climate
as they wore, still expended no small trouble in pro-
curing their floral pleasures, and that they had Adopted
many plans which can be but of slight use to us in
our very different climate.
son, “Voyage round the World", 84, 244). The first orangeries
in which artificial heat was applied wore probably built in Ger-
many. Llobaut, one of the most celebrated horticulturists of
the 16th century, saw such an orangery lor the first time with
the greatest astonishment in the garden at Heidelberg. Hum-
boldt is of the same opinion as to forcing-houses. (Cosmos, 1. 181).
4a Martial Epigr. 6, 80, 8, shows this, “Tonslllbus sortis
omne ruhehat iter”; hut it is still clearer from many passages
where a great demand for roses In winter is spoken of, without
any reference to importing. Macrob, Saturn., 7, B, (p, 888, eel,
Jul. Capitol,, ver, 5, p, 419; Mamertin Panog. Julian, il Latin
Pacat Paneg. Theod. 14,
4,1 Pallad. do II It., 6, 17; more fully Geopon., 11,18, vol, lit,
p. 820, ed. Niclas.
48 So I interpret “olla rudis” in Pallad.
,l ° Geopon,, 11, 18, t. 3, p. 819, Nicl.


But though there may, bo no direct gain, there
is always a peculiar charm to a cultivated mind in
learning to know the conditions of an epoch long
passed away; and from this point of view I have to
ask yon to receive the following observations on the
many uses which the ancients made of the Rose:
The principal use of the Rose was for garlands.' 17
However different the flowers might be of which they
were composed, varying according to the season of
the year and the intention of the chaplet, roses were
always added. 48 The commonest union was violet,
myrtle, and rose. 411
According to Oaijpio, who lived, under Tiberius,
the centifolia was less fit for the body of the garland,
perhaps because of its sisso and weight, and ought,
only to be used as an ornament at the end. 50 It was
an especial refinement of luxury when not only the
flowers were woven in, but when the loaves wore
laid scale-wise on each other, so as bo form a thick
mass, winch was plaited on a strip of linden bark to
give it a hold. 151
* l7 There Is rich material for this pari of our subject in Pas-
ohalius, Ooron,, ill, 5, 147, 1,68. The statement that roses were
used by preference for garlands, is not at all contradicted by
Pliny (F. H,,. 21, 10, 4, 15): “XJsns ejus in ooronls, prop© mini-
mas ost”; nor do I avail myself ol'llarduin’s conjecture, “iiimlus”;
for after the author has said “pancisalma nostri genera corona-
mentorum inter hortensia novere, ac paene violas rosasque tan-
tura”, ho adds, that roses are used for other things In much
greater quantities.
48 Helm in Becker’s Q-allus, ili. 82.
4n Mitscherlloh on Hor. Od., 1,88; Kopp on Martian, Capell
2, 218, 248.
60 .Plin, F. H., 21, 4, 10, 18.
M Plin, F. H., 21, 8, 8,11; Battiger’s Habina, 1. 242, 2nd ed,


Garlands/ 2 especially rose garlands/ 18 were worn
by the ancients on all festal occasions/* especially at
sacrifices and feasts; voluptuaries did not content
themselves with one, but hung doubled wreaths round
their heads and nocks, because they were universally
considered preservatives against intoxication/ 8
But the Romans used these wreaths on other oc-
casions also. Beneath her purple veil 50 the bride wore
a wreath of myrtles, roses, and other flowers. The
statues of the gods 57 or men were similarly adorned:
if the head could not be readied, tho feet were de-
Ba Of course we are only speaking of the festal wreaths used
on joyous occasions, not of tho crowns of honour made of other
material.
88 A .wreath of roses was believed to drive away headache,
and give a certain coolness (Athenal. .Delpn., 18, 18, p. 676 e,
or t, Hi. 1505, Diud.) The same power is also ascribed to wreaths
of spina alba (Film JN. H., 24, 12, 66, 108). If wo are to be-
lieve tho graceful romance of Apuleius, the perfume of a rose-
wreath had miraculous power, Lucius, the hero, was, because
of his sensuality, transformed into an ass, but was restored to
the human form by swallowing a garland of roses (Metamorph.,
xi. 268, Blrnenh), Lucian, who was condemned to the same
misfortune, was similarly re-transformed (Luc. give aslnus, 54).
M Garlands ware not allowed at all times, such as periods
of public danger. A money-changer who appeared on his bal-
cony during the second Punic War with a wreath, was impri-
soned by order of the Senate, and not released till peace was
made (Pllu. N. H„ 21, 3,6, 7),
M BBttiger’s Sabina, 1. 240, 2nd od, According to Plutarch
(Sympos., 11. 647), tho simple rose-wreath had such power.
8(1 Postua s, v, Corolla.
w Columell. de cult, hort., 860. The statues of Venus were
especially so decorated (see notes on Ovid. Past,, 4, 188). Who
has not heard the story of Aspasia? She, when a child, had a
wart upon her cheek, which resisted all medical skill, Seeing
herself In a, glass she was much troubled; hut In her sleep a
dove of Venus told her to taka the withered leaves from tho
statue of the goddess and lay them on her cheek. She did so;
the wart disappeared, and she became the model of femine
beauty for all Greece: so says Aelian,


oorated, 58 and the portraits of loved friends wore
decked 50 with, festoons. Rose-garlands were showered
on the chariot of the prince on his solemn entrance, 80
and the victor 01 returned through gates gay with
twining flowers, and passed to his triumph amidst
roses that fell around him. 80
Graves were adorned with roses, 88 and a beau-
tiful custom, consecrated a certain day, on which the
festival of roses was held for the departed. 04 As the
68 Properfc. El eg., 2, .10, 21,
«» Martial Epigr., 10, 82.
80 For tills custom we have only the authority of a passage
In a Greek poet (Stosiohor. Helen, in poet, Mello. Bevgk., Lips,,
1854); but it was undoubtedly transferred to the Romans,
»i Gaos, de 8011. Gall., 8, 51; Curt,, 5,8; Justin. Hist,. 24, 8.
82 Ovid, Trist., 4,1, 60. Joaoli. Gamorar. relates in his Sym-
bol. et Emblem., Cent, 4, Mogrent,, 1677, 8, p, 96, that when
Soipio returned in triumph from Africa, he permitted the sol-
diers of the Bth legion, who had been the first to storm the
enemy’s camp, to carry a bouquet of flowers (roses) on the day
of the entrance, and to bear a rose on their shields, in memory
of the day. In the same way, Soipio the younger permitted the
soldiers of the lith legion, who had formed the storming party
at the capture of Carthage, to enter Romo with him with roses
on their arms and shields. Ills own triumphal chariot was n-
dorned in like manner. There seems some doubt whether this
account is strictly historical, as my most diligent investigation
has failed to discover any confirmation of lb in any classic author.
m Inscriptions frequently mention this custom. Money for
the constant decoration of the tombs was frequently left by
will (Orelli. Inscript., 4107, 4108, t. i., p. 286, 4415, t, 1,, p. 287,
Zell. Epigraph,, 488, t. i., p. 68). Money was also left for a
festival on occasion of decking the tomb (Orelil, Inscript. 4418,
t. 11, 288; Zell. Epigr. 1052).
This festival was called Rosalia (Inscript. Apud. Maff,
Mus, Yerou., 146, 8; Zell. Epigr,, 886, p. 50): the day on which
it was held, Rosationis (Marin, ae Frol. Arval., 582; Furlanett.
in Forcell. Thes. s. v., Rosaria and Rosado), The day varied in
different places, The 19fch April (Marin.); the 7th May (on on
inscription at Oapua, Mommsen Insorlpt, R. Neap., 875, 1, p.
188); the 11th May (Orell. Inscr. 2417, 420); 19th June (on an
inscription at Oapsola, Mommsen 212, p. 14),


Romans understood the art of enjoying to the full
every pleasure of life, they knew how to extract
especial delight from the perfume of the garlands
at the festal board. When the mirth had risen high,
they plucked the leaves and flung them into the wine,
which thus acquired a pleasant taste; they then drank
the whole. 115 Pliny tells us in his Natural History 00
an anecdote from the life of Cleopatra, which is
worth repeating. When Anthony was preparing for
the decisive battle with Augustus, he grew distrustful
of her, and gave orders that the viands and wine of
which he partook in her company, should be previously
prepared by his own servants. He was cured of his
suspicion, which could not remain concealed from the
Queen, in the following manner. She ordered the flow-
ers of a garland she wore on her head to be sprink-
led with a strong poison. When the enjoyment reach-
ed its height, she proposed to Antony that they
should drink the garlands, that is, oast the leaves into
the wine, and drink it. 67 Who would suspect any
guile in that? She flung the roses into the goblet,
but held her hand before the mouth of Antony when
he lifted it to his lips. “ It is I, dear Antony, ” said
she, “ whom thou fearest too much to trust my viands
and my vessels: but see how easy it were for me to
harm thee if I could live without thee. ” She then
had a convict who was condemned to death brought
in, and commanded him to drink of the goblet, when
he immediately expired.
68 BSttiger, Sabina, I. 248, 2nd ed,
no 21, 8,9, 12.
01 Pliny’s expression, “ bibere coronas, ” is to bo so under-
stood,


An abundance of rose-leaves was scattered over
the table, and the dishes were surrounded with them. 08
An ingenious contrivance showered them on the guests
while they sat at table. 00 Heliogabalus, in his madness,
had violets and roses poured in such profusion on his
guests that some of them who could not struggle
through were suffocated among the flowers. 70 The
guests reclined on cushions or beds which were 'staffed
with rose-leaves, 71 Roses strewed the floor. 78 At a
«8 Ovid, Fast, 5, 888.
M Ovid, East, B, 859, Amiuit et motls (lores oeoidere oa-
pillis, acoidore in mensas ut rosa miaaa solot. Oommontators
have incorrectly referred these words to the leaves which foil
from the garlands of the revellers; but this is toadmissable, on
account of the particle of comparison, If the history of Nero
had been remembered the true meaning would have been, found.
That Emperor had flowers and perfumes sent down on the
guests through an opening In the roof, Sueton. Nor. 81.)
70 Lamprid. Heliogab. 19, p. 842.
71 Lucian (Luc. sive Astons, 7) describes a feast where the
conches were covered with rosea as they grew on the bush, with
plucked rose-leaves, and with some which were ingeniously
fastened to one another with matting, This is the proper “po-
tare in rosa, ” which has been often misunderstood, A couch
of roses, or at least a heaped up mass of them, must be sup-
posed In Horace. Od, 1. 86, 18, 2,8, 18. A collection of passages
will be found in Paschal, Ooron. 8,5, p, 1B4; Gronoo on Se-
neca, de vit. beat. 11. Erk. Jacobs treats this subject at length
In his miscellaneous writings, v. 376. Verres used on his jour-
neys a litter, In which he lay on a cushion stuffed with roses;
he had besides two garlands, one on his head, one round his
neck, In addition to all this ha had a net woven with close
meshes which was filled with roses, and which he often smelt
at. (Clo. In Yorr., 5, 11), It was customary to rest In spring
and summer on a bed of roses. The tyrant Dionysius had couch-
es of roses prepared tor him (Aelian. Var, Hist. 9,8). It was
common among the Sybarites to sleep on rose-leaves (Id. 9, 28).
The frequency of this custom is shown by poets drawing their
Images from it (Oppian. Cyneg. 2, 85), As was natural, it was
transferred to the gods, Venus, for instance, rests on a couch
of roses In the grotto where she seeks refreshment in coolness
and sleep (OJaudian, Eplth., 81, 1-4),
72 At the feasts of the gods, the Hours strew the floor with
flowers. Appul, Metam., 6, 188, 18, Elm.


feast which Cleopatra gave to Antony she expended
immense sums in procuring roses, which covered the
floor of the banqueting-room to the depth of a yard,
and over which nets were stretched, so as to give e-
lasticity. 78 Heliogabalus had not only the banquet-
ing-hall but the porticoes leading to it covered with
roses, lilies, violets, hyacinths, and narcissi and on
this flowery pavement he walked. 71 One of his suc-
cessors, Oarinus, had whole loads of roses brought
from Milan, and covered the floors of his room and
banqueting-hall with them. 75
But it was not enough to fill the houses with
roses; the very roads were covered with them. Even
in the good old times, when the greatest simplicity
prevailed, it had been a habit to strew with roses the
way by which the statues of the gods were carried
in solemn procession. "We find the oldest example of
this kind in the service of Oybele, the mother of the
gods, 70 in which, not only the statue of the goddess,
but also the troop of attendant priests, had roses show-
ered over them. 77 At a later period, the same hon-
our was paid to Princes and Generals who made a
public entry into the city. 78 This custom, as a matter
of course degenerated among the Romans, at a later
period, into mere empty ceremonial. 70 With such pro-
78 Atben, Deipu., 4, p. 148. 6.
74 Lamprid. Hellog., 19, p. 842.
7B Vopisc. Garin., 1.
70 Luoret, de nafc. dear,, li, 627.
77 The pnet has beautifully said, “ Nlngunt rosarum floribus
nmbrantea mafcrom comltumque catervaa ”.
78 See above for this usage.
70 Tacitus, Hist., 2, 70, tells us that when Yltellius visited
tiro field alter the battle of Bedriacum the Inhabitants of Cremona
strewed a great portion of the way with bays and roses.


fusion, it excites no wonder if, at Bairn, where the
greatest luxury prevailed, the very sea was strewed
with roses, where the merry companies of revellers
sailed. 80
Thus the Rose was a constant companion through
life; present at every feast, at every time of mirth;
and, for the dead, it was twined with myrtle, in to-
ken, as some would say, of the future life with new
youth aud power. The corpse was adorned with it
to show a last service of love to the departed, 81 and
if the body was burned, there were rose-leaves and
spices mingled with the wine with which the ashes
were sprinkled before being placed in the urn. 82
In addition to all these uses of the flower in the
public and festal life of the ancients, it was extensively
employed in the preparation of perfumes, as an ad-
dition to many kinds of food, the preparation of
drinks, and in medicine,
The chief medicinal use was in the preparation
of rose-water, of which much was employed as a re-
medy for diseases of the eye, as it is with us. It was
ordinarily used for the sake of its perfume, and if
flo lb is only necessary to consider the facts cited in connec-
tion, in order to find the true explanation in Seneca (Epist, 51,
12), “ adspicoret tot genera oymbarum varlis coloribns picta et
flultantmn toto lacu roaam." The usage of language requires
that these words should bo taken in their literal meaning. Zell
understands them so (Perlenaohr., i, 152). Compare my review
of Becker’s Gallas, in Kioto; and Dietsch’s Year Books of Phllol.
and Paldag., vol. 57, number 2, p. 147. Becker In Callus, 1,141,
Rein’s edition, refers them only to the crowned company and
the decorated boats.
81 Statius (Theb., 10, 788) had evidently the Roman custom
in Ids mind in describing the obsequies of the hero Menoekeus.
82 Anson, Epit. Her., oarm. 86,


there is not so prominent mention made of this ap-
plication of it, the reason is, that the stronger rose-oil
was in universal use. Amongst other notices, a pas-
sage in Suetonius 88 renders it, in my opinion, most
probable that the enormous expenses to which Nero put
the hosts to whose houses he invited himself, arose
from having the fountains to play rose-water.
The perfume was preserved in oil, ointment, and
powder, better, than in water. For this purpose the
■flowers of most fragrance were selected. 84 The oil
was principally used for the purpose of giving the
artificial flowers 85 the odour of the natural, 88 as is
now done with what are called Italian flowers. There
is no comparison, however, between this and the fax-
more valuable rose-oil, which we procure pure from
the Fast. It is known that the latter is obtained by
slamming off, with a perforated spoon, the oily trans-
parent globules which form during the coolness of
the night on the rose-water which has been obtained
by distillation, and placed in porous earthen vessels.
80 Suetonius, Nero, 27.
84 The rosea of Cyreuian Africa were especially used for
this purpose. According to Aristotle (ProMem 12, 8) rough-
stalked roses have a stronger odour than the smooth-stalked
Compare Sprengel, Hist. .Rei. Herb., fc. i,, p. 89.
Bli Whether it bo true or no that the Chinese are the in-
ventors of artificial flowers, it is certain that the ancients had
made considerable progress In the art. At a very early time it
was the custom to make such out of thin sheets of horn, which
wore coloured like the natural flower. (Plin, N. H., 21, 8,8, B).
Silk was afterwards used, The rich Crassus was the first who
gave wreaths to the victors in the games, made of very thin
gold and silver leaf, The bows or knots wore of silk spangled,
later of brocaded ribbons,
80 Salmas. Exercitatt. Plin., p. 892, seq The oil of lilies
was employed for the same purpose on artificial lilies,


The preparation of rose-oil among the ancients was
much more simple, but, perhaps, less efficacious than
with us. The leaves were steeped in oil for a consi-
derable-time; more leaves were frequently added, and
then, after the oil had been charged with a sufficient
quantity of odour, it was drawn off. 87 This sort of
rose-oil was known at the time of the Trojan war,
according to Homer. 811 At a later period, the best
was (on the testimony of Apollonius Herophileos) 811
prepared in the days of Berenice, in Oyrene, and af-
terwards in Phasalis, Naples and Capua. In the time
of Pausanias, 1,0 the manufacture of oils from roses, li-
lies, narcissus, and iris, was extensively carried on in
Ohroronea. The oil was used for ointments and em-
brocations, 111 but was also mixed with wines in order
to scent these." 8
Pomade of roses was also much in use. 118 It
seems to have been at first prepared merely by addi-
tion of extract of roses to grease. Luxury afterwards
invented more refined compounds, consisting of wine,
with olive sap and line salt; saffron, cinabar, the ex-
« Pita. N. H., 21, 4, 10, IB; Pal lad. H. K 0,15, where the
process is described.
88 Ilias, 28, 186, quoted by Athen. Detpn., 18, 87, p. 688,
or vol. 111., 1888, Dtadorf,
80 Athen, loc. oit.
w Pa us an. Desoript, Grtoc, 9, 41, 6, p. 79.
01 Also as an antiseptic (in Homer. 11. 28, 116). Aphrodite
anoints the body of Hector with oil of rosea, to prevent cor-
ruption. According- to Pausanias (loc. oit) rose-oil preserves
wooden statues from decay. It is also useful against a certain
kind of beetle. iElian, Hist. Anim„ 3,7, 4, 18; Bin. N. H.,
11, 58, 115, 279; v. Beckmann on Aristotle de mir. 159, p. 828
M Hikesios in Athen., 15, 89, p, 689, vol. Hi., 1585, Dindorf.
»« Pita. N. H., 18, 1,2, 9,


tract of a sort of reed, rushes, ox-tongue, 94 and honey.
A powder of roses, called diapasma, 98 was pre-
pared from the leaves which were pressed and dried,
for other purposes. This powder was sprinkled on
the head after bathing, and then washed off with cold
water. It gave the skin an agreeable fragrance,
The odour of the rose was used as a spice in
many dishes; 9 " the leaves were preserved for this
purpose like sorrel," 7 but, from the danger of their
decaying, considerable care was needed.
A kind of conserve of roses was also made.
Quinces preserved in honey were cooked, and then
mixed with, boiled rose-loaves. This preparation was
used as a remedy in stomach complaints. 98
At a later period gastronomy made great advances,
and in Apicius, 99 to whom we owe a complete cook-
ery-book with all the receipts, we find the directions
for making a rose-pudding, which, as a curiosity, may
be given here. You are to take (so goes the pre-
scription) washed rose-leaves, out off the white 100 at
the lower end, bruise the leaves in a mortar, and
1,4 A herb called Anohusn,
»» riln, N. li, 21, 19, 73, 126,
«“ Bin. N. H., 21, 4, 10, 15.
17 Ibid,, 21, 19, 78, 125.
«8 Bin., 23, 6, 54, 102.
00 'Ibid, de Be. Ealin., 4,2, p, 110, Lister. Sohach. correctly
remarks that Apic, de He. Gulina, 4,3, cannot moan roses
Tbo Melarosa, a sort of honey apple (but not a citron, ns
Schuch thinks), is meant there: as also in Edict. Dioolet., G, 68,
in Mommsen, p, 16, where the price of 100 pieces is fixed as 6
denarii. Compare jPoroell. in Lex., s, v,
100 Called Album, Comment on Aplc, de Be. Cul., 1,4, p.
12; List, and unguis in Pliny KC. H., 21, 28, 78, 121. The
white was removed because it gave a bitter flavour. ,


keep pouring in a piquant sauce: 101 then add a glass
and a half of this sauce, and pass the whole through
a sieve: then take the brains of four calves, skin them,
and sprinkle a drachm of pepper on them; bruise the
whole in a mortar, moistening with the above men-
tioned sauce; then beat up eight eggs with a glass
and a half of wine, a glass of possum, 108 and a little
oil. 108 Rub the mould with oil, and take care that in
baking the heat, is applied equally above and below.
Then serve it up hot. 10 ' 1
Rose-leaves were used for the preparation of
drinks as well as of dishes, especially of the rose-wine,
which was so much liked by the ancients. The sim-
plest method of making it, is the one given by Pliny. 100
It runs as follows; Take forty drachms of leaves,
pound them, put thorn into a linen cloth, and press
them down with a heavy weight; add twenty pints
of must, and lot the whole stand for three months.
According to Pallndius, the proper season for making
rose-wine is May, when the (lowers bloom in the great-
est beauty, 100 Take five pounds of rose-leaves, clean
thorn, and pour ten pints of old wine over them. Let
tho mixture stand for thirty days, and then add, ten
101 Liquameu, for the preparation of which the commenta-
tor on Apiciuß given minute directions,
I(,a A peculiar kind of wine made from dried grapes,
ton Oil was a substitute for butter among the ancients, as
among the Italians.
11,4 A then ul. Doipn,, 9, 70, speaks of a similar pudding un-
der the name of poSomct Kok«;, It was made thus : Leaves were
bruised in n mortar, and the brains of boiled cocks and pigs,
with the yolks of eggs, oil, piquant sauce, popper, and wine,
were added. The whole was carefully stirred, put into a new
pot, and heated over a slow fire,
■ “ Nat, Hist., 14, 16, 19, 106.
™ Do Be. Bust, 6, 18.


pounds of well skimmed honey. The wine is then fit
for use. We find a considerable improvement in the
preparation of Apicius, as was to lie expected. 107 He
directs the leaves to be strung on a thread, put into
wine, and allowed to remain for a week; this is to
bo done twice, and then the wine is to be strained
and honey added. It is especially recommended that
the. leaves should be thoroughly dry, and unmoistened
with dew. A further refinement was invented by He-
liogaballis, who made the wine piquant by the use of
fir-cones. 1 ™ The same Emperor used it as a bath, and
even carried his extravagance so far as to have the
public swimming-baths 100 filled with wine of roses and
absinth. 110
We have thus far seen how the Rose contributed
to the enjoyments of life among the ancients. It was
also much used medicinally, 111 and considered to he
most useful in the preservation of health.
In general it was employed as a cooling and
107 De Re. Culin,, 4, I, p, 12, Lister. I do not; understand
liow Biittiger (Sabina, 1. 248, 2nd ed.) can call this a compote
of roses.
IHB Lnmprld, Heliog., 13. The poetess Eucheria describes
an ill-assorted marriage as the union of aseafoetida with rose-
nectar. Womsdorl, Poet. Lat., Hi, 101.
imi 'l'he Piscinal, Lamprid. Heliog., 21, 840. "Wo follow Cu-
saubonua, proposed punctuation, Lamprid., 24, 855.
110 Tltis luxury must have been very expensive. We have
the price of rose-wine settled* in an edict of Dioolesiau (301 A.
D.) as 20 denarii for a pint; Mommsen, The Edict of Diodes,
do protils rorum venalium, p. 10 (Zell. Epigr., i. 317). It is, how-
ever, difficult for us to fix the price according to our money,
™ The principal passage is Plln. N, H., 21, 18, 78. Oolsus
in many passages, Scheller. 1. 245.


astringent agent, the operation of which lia was con-
sidered to bo gentle and continuous. 11 * Wo do not
here enter on tin enumeration of the diseases of which
it was supposed to bo a euro, as such a task belongs
more properly to a physician, but simply remark as
follows: The leaves were either made into pills, after
having boon dried and pulverised, or into ointment
by the addition of fat, or into plasters, or burned and
made np with some corrosive substance, prepared as
a cosmetic for colouring tins eyebrows. ll4 An-extract
was also made of them. For this purpose they are
either to bo taken with the stalk and pressed, by
which moans the juice is preserved, or else the heads
axe carefully cut off, and the loaves sot in a glass
vessel, with oil or wino, to distil in the sun. Some-
times a little salt or ox-longue, lin or rose-wood, 111 ’ or
fragrant rush is added; and in this manner rose-oint-
ment or pomade is manufactured. Another way of
preparing it is this; to lay the leaves in a linen cloth,
and put them in an iron mortar; thou to put the juice
thus obtained to simmer over a slow lire until it comes
to the consistency of honey. This was called the
honey-juice.* 17 Even the dew-drops from the roses
were gathered with a clean feather, and dropped into
m In Hippocrates the roan cauina alone appears at) a me-
dicine (Spreugel Hint. Roi. Herb., 1. 43). This, however, would
hardly bo true of later Union.
1111 80 I understand I’liny’a words, “ emplaalria alxpie col-
ly rils luaorlfcur mordncl subtilltatc," N. 11.,'21, 4, tO, 15.
111 Callibloplmrum,
m A herb called aiuvhuaa,
11,1 Aspaktbus.
117 .Dloscor. do lac. par., 1, 31.


a corner of the eye as a remedy against inflamma-
tion. 11 "
In addition to those various uses which the an-
cients made of this flower in daily life, we moot it
in other relations which it will be interesting to con-
sider. Follow mo, then, to the Hold of poetry and
art, on which the fairest fruits are gathered by the
student of antiquity.
Let mo prolix a reminiscence of my youthful
clays to the remarks which I shall make on this branch
of the subject. When I was a student at Gottingen,
in tho elevating time which followed tho war of li-
beration, a young man was much spoken of who had
gained universal esteem, both for his moral and in-
tellectual character, but who died in tho bloom of his
youth. This was Ernst Schulze, tho author of “Oiici-
lio”, a romantic poom and also of tho “ Magic Rose
Few knew how familiar he was with the Rose as a
them© for pootry. Ho had devoted his life to the
study of antiquity in all its provinces, and he, like
myself, was so happy as to possess a teacher who
know how to communicate a true enthusiasm to his
students. In the little circle which, gathered round
him, we wore in the habit of conversing, after the
good old fashion - in Latin - on the various subjects
connected with antiquity, which were generally intro-
duced by an essay road before us by its author. A-
mong these was a paper written by Schulze at the
suggestion of Bissau (for that is the name of my
excellent instructor, whose memory I bless to-day), in
which ho had collected all tho passages of Greek and
n« Gteopcm., 11, 18, ii. 819, Nic),


Roman authors where the Rose was introduced as the
subject of imagery or simile, I still remember with
pleasure the impression which the reading of this little
essay made on me when I found it among the manu-
scripts of our society, where it is still preserved. l,B
The purpose of the present paper does not per-
mit of entering upon the individual passages of the
poets, or of examining them philosophically. I must
content myself with recalling soma of the significant
myths as to the origin of the Rose, and its allegorical
use in poetry and art.
The Rose is the flower of grace and youth, of
love and joy, and fruitfulness in nature. It is there-
fore sacred to Aphrodite. 180 According to a widely-
spread legend, 181 it sprang from the blood la " which
flowed from the wounds of her beloved Adonis, whilst
the tears of the goddess, weeping over the hapless
youth, produced the Anemone. According to others 180
the Rose existed before, bub was while and without
fragrance until the goddess trod on the thorn of a
nu If I am not mistaken, the transactions of this Society
are in the hands of Dr. Beck, In (Mtttngon. It was oatahllahad,
in 1811, and Its first members were Schulze, Bunsen, Becker,
Laobmaun. It existed till Dtssen's death.
120 Several other Hovers were sacred to Aphrodite, in her
character of the goddess of love. “Engel, Cyprus, a Monograph".
Berlin, 1811, 11. 191; Gerhard. Select. Greek; the same author’s
Greek Mythol, 1. 415; Broiler's MythoL, I. 217.
131 JBion. Bucol., 1,05 j SprengeTs Hist. Bel, Herb., t, 1, 84,
whore the myths of the origin of several other flowers are also
given.
133 The Mahomedans believe that the flower sprang from the
blood of the Prophet, The faithful wore therefore careful never
to tread upon a rose-leaf, and always lifted it from the ground
to prevent others from desecrating It (Busbequ. Epiat,, 1, 86)
» Nicks on Geopon., 11, 17, HI, 815,


rose-bush, and some drops of her blood trickled upon
it; whence the flower received its colour and its sweet
odour. Others said that Eros lot some nectar fall
upon it, and so dyed it, In. any case the flower be-
longed to Aphrodite, and the Cupids gathered it in
her garden. m The Rose was also sacred to Dionysos,
the god not only of wine but of all the productive
forces of Nature, 180 and for the same reason, to Ar-
temis of Ephesus, the typo of fertility in Nature. 18 '’
The fragrance of the Rose is emblematical of the
delight which flows into our hearts from poetry and
i'-’ 1 Homer, Omt. I, 19, p. 800. Tin) garden was called
Rhodope. Woloker, Appendix to the Trilogy of /Eschylus, 189.
The Roman poets of later date for Instance, the author of Per-
vigil. Voner. 211 (Wernsdorf, ill, 4119), and an unknown epigram
writer (lb. vi., 1. 179) are not following a recognized myth, but
the free play of their own fancy, when they say that Amor
gave the rose its grace by bis smile or by a kins and that
Aurora lent the liower her own purple splendour, There la a
beautiful fiction by Libanlos the rhetorician (Boiasonad Anecdot.
Iv. 450, and lu substance repeated as anonymous in the same
author’s Aneo. nov„ 846). When the throe goddesses wont to
Ida for the prize of beauty, Here and Athene refused to enter
on the trial unless Aphrodite laid aside the oesbus, Bho answered
that her rivals had also come with their appropriate ornaments
Here with a golden diadem In her hair, Pallas with a golden
helmet but that she was nevertheless willing to lay aside the
girdle It she might seek for some other ornament. This being
granted, she went to a meadow on the Scamandor, and bathed
there In its pure fountains, She then gathered lilies, violets,
and other flowers, but soon discovered that the sweetest fra-
grance came from the Ease, She laid aside the rest, and wound
a rose-wreath in her hair. So adorned she came back to Ida.
The other goddesses did not wait for the judgment of the shep-
herd, but withdrew after they had kissed the flowers, and taking
the garland from her head had again crowned her with It,
n» Welekor, Appendix to Trilogy, 179; Schwonck, Symbols
of Ancients, 80U,
120 Crenzer’s Mythol. Symbol, 11, 580; Broiler's M'ythoL, 278,


song. Roses and thyme wore therefore sacred to the
muses, 107 and Thalia wore a rose-wreath. 100
The Rose is further the symbol of grace and
youth. On this account it is given to the Graces. In
their temple at Elis they were represented one holding
in her hand a rose, another a spray of myrtle, and
the third a die, the instrument of youthful sport. 1011
In the same way, the Hour of Spring boars a rose,
as indicative of her character. 1110 The Genius of Life,
also, on monuments has a wreath of rosea in her
hand. 1:11 With equal propriety Com os, the god of feasts
(who is not properly a mythological personage, but a
creature of the fancy of the rhectorioians), 1110 bears a
rose-garland.
The Rose might also bo taken as the symbol of
silence. Just as the calyx of the flower is surrounded
by many loaves, which fold themselves with increa-
sing closeness, and withdraws its heart from view,
the word which is entrusted to a friend should remain
deeply buried in the heart. According to Winkel*
mann, 1811 the ancients did, in fact, treat the flower as
lin Thooor. Epigr. 1, 4.
» atftl;. Sllv. 2, 116, Martian Capoll, 2, 218, 2-18. The Muses
appear with twining rosea in their hands and garlands on their
heads.
ISB Pauean. Defier. Grace., 6, 24, 7, 615; Prollor’u Myth., 1.422.
180 Mansa’s Essay, 878; Hirbh’s Mythol. Picture Book, ii. 122.
181 He is so represented on sarcophagus in Mus, Capitol, lv.,
plate 56.
i«a Woloker on Philostrat. Imngg., 212, Jao.
nro Works, li, 566, Dresden, where the custom of hanging
arose over the table at banquets, as a sign that what was
spoken among friends should be sacred, is called a classical
custom. This was maintained before Wiukelmaim by Do la


the symbol of silence, and consecrated it to lliu-po-
crates, the god of silence; but there is no old author-
ity for this opinion. ll1 ’ 1
The use of the Rose in Christian symbolism and
in mediaeval devices, lies beyond the limits of our
subject. 186
We have seen that the Rose is the symbol of
youth, and the freshness of life. If we gentlemen, can
give proof, without committing tho fault of over-valuing
Oorda on Virgil, JEn. 1. 784, and llador on Martial Epigr., p. 057
and 891. I cannot give authority lor the carving of a rose on
a grave-stone as a symbol of early death, of which Wlnkohnanu
speaks. Works, 11. 561.
liU The authors mentioned In the preceding note roly on an
epigram found engraved on marble, which was first quoted by
Do la Cerda (Lor,, dt.) and afterwards by Burnaunu (Anthol.
Lat,, v. 127, 11. 471). It runs thus:
Est rosa lies Veneris, cuius quo fnrta Intercut,
Harper,rati matrls dona dlcavit Amor.
Judo remain monsis hospos Biispondlfc amiois,
Couvivio et sub on dicta Uconda meant,
Wornudorf, however, has ground for doubting (v!., i. 182)
the ancient origin of the epigram, on the ground that tills Is the
only mention of what was peculiarly a Gorman custom. The lan-
guage too, betrays a modern date. Although I. regard the verse
na tlm production of a later time, I. would not maintain with
Meier (on Anthol. ii, J2!!i; hoc epigramma far.tum est, nl pro-
vorbium Hind hoc sub rosa dictum ust oxplinnrctur pootlco. Both
the proverb anil the custom bad undoubtedly an earlier oxta-
teuce among the Borman tribes, and the latter gave occasion
to the former. Tn Agrlcolu Iho proverb runs, 11 Was wlr kosun,
bleib nntor dom Eosen.” Eiseleiu is wrong (On the Proverbs
and Parables of the Berman People, 1808, 502) in deriving it
from Urn confidential intercourse of friends, in which tho Bose
was bo commonly used as a symbol.
,I|n Compare as to the former « Ohriatian Hymlmllam and
Munugraphy,” h’rankfurt, 1889, 29; as In (lie latter the ordi-
nary books on devices and emblems, tor instance, Jac. Camerar.
Symbol, et Conlur. Quatt., p. 96.


ourselves, that we are honestly anxious, each in his
sphere to advance horticulture in our land, and thus
to contribute to beautifying the world of flowers, and
to increasing the delight in the Nature that lies around
us, the Rose may henceforth be to our society the
symbol of the ever fresh vigour with which, we press
towards the fair goal which is sot before us.
