

FEDERATION.
AN # EXPOSURE
OF THE
fSBSSftL t CONSPIRACY.
By S. A. ROSA,
Author of “Oliver Spence, the Australian Caesar.”
f/s~oyo
■Festina Lente.
PRICE-THREEPENCE
SYDNEY
Published by the Author, 308 Parramatta Hoad,
Petersham
189 8.
T. E, Colebrook, Printer, 205 Parramatta Road, Leichhardt.




FEDERATION
AN EXPOSUREof the FEDERAL CONSPIRACY
CHAPTER 1. —THE INCEPTION OF THE CONSPIRACY.
AN IMPORTANT STATE DOCUMENT SUPPRESSED.
“ A people do well to watch and suspect their rulers, and not to be
defrauded of happiness and money by false pretences.”—Sydney Smith.
Of all popular cries, that of Federation is undoubtedly the most
popular. The clerk and the capitalist, the employer and the
workman, all unite in demanding Federation ; and of late there
are many able and earnest Democrats who, disregarding the
many democratic objections to the draft Commonwealth Bill of
1898 are clamoring for Federation in any form. The present
writer, therefore, in venturimg to oppose any scheme of Federa-
tion which is not thoroughly democratic, may be charged with
unwarrantable temerity in thus setting himself up in opposition
to the opinions of so many of his fellow citizens, but he must
plead as his excuse that his action is pro bono publico ; and he
would further remind his readers of the words of the great
English man of letters, John Milton, who in his “ Areopagicta,”
pleaded eloquently for the free expression of all forms of opinion,
because “ so long as truth is in the field ” it must triumph, “ for
truth,” said he, “is strong next to the Almighty.”
Sir Henry Parkes, in one of the first spoeches which he
delivered in 1891, as president of the Federal Convention, stated,
andauthoritatively stated, that thefirst and principal objectof Fed-
eration was the formation of a Federal army in order to guard
against the possibility of invasion by a Foreign foe; and we are
daily reading the reports of speeches by military magnates, in
which the importance of the profession of arms is magnified and
war eulogised. Major-General Hutton and his confreres
assure us that no nation was ever made great without war and
its accompaniments of “ battle, murder, and sudden death.”
/F IFoiO
m-l-n


Now it is a remarkable thing that these demands for the con-
struction of more efficient and powerful human raen-slaying
machines were not heard anything near so loudly prior to the
great strike of 1891. That strike frightened the Australian
plutocracy just as prior to the Federation of the American
colonies, revolts in Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and other
colonies frightened the prosperous classes of America into sudden
and almost hysterical advocacy of that very Federation to which
they had been previously violently opposed. “ History repeats
itself,” and anyone who attentively peruses Bryce’s great work
on the “American Commonwealth.” cannot fail to be struck by
the great similarity of the attitudes of the populaces of both
America and Australia previous to federation. The chief effect
of federation in America was from the standpoint of a radical
democrat the outvoting of such democratic states as Rhode
Island by the more conservative states; and the dragooning of
the populace by the Federal Army in the event of an outbreak.
Rhode Island was a singular little radical state which refused to
permit any of its Parliaments to last more than six months,
enacted the most drastic laws relating to land and finance, and
where necessary, enforced those laws by popular revolt —“ the
sacred right of insurrection.” By the terms of the Federal
American Constitution, however, the governor of a state could
call in the aid of the Federal troops and thus crush any turbulent
movements of the people. It was supposed by those States
which consented to the Constitution that the proviso as to the
request of the State Governor being necessary before the Federal
troops could be used, was a sufficient safeguard against the
arbitrary use of the Federal authority ; but recent events in
Illinois and other States have shown that this so-called safeguard
is useless. A cablegram from America says that:—“ Mr. Hogg,
Governor of Texas, when addressing the State militia, said that
president Cleveland, by illegally despatching Federal troops for
the suppression of a strike (against the wish of the local
authorities), had committed gross invasion of State Rights. The
conflict between capital and labor, by leading to a deliberate
breach of the Constitution, showed that America was on the eve
of a bloody revolt, which threatened the dismemberment of the
Republic.”
When, therefore, we consider that if Federation is brought
about in Australia, it will not only mean a very expensive addi-
tional Government, in a country where there is already too much


Government; but will also mean that Democratic New South
Wales will be outvoted by the more Conservative colonies, while
her citizens may bo shot down by Federal contingents drawn
from Victoria, Queensland, or other colonies; we may well pause
and ask ourselves whether the risk from a foreign foe is so great
as to cause us to abandon our present secure although provincial
liberties in order to pursue the Federal “ Will o’ the Wisp.”
There is no real danger from a foreign foe.
Sir Henry Parkes was once fond of enlarging on the courage,
soldier-like qualities, and generally dangerous nature of the
Chinese, but the complete defeat and impending collapse of
China, owing to the victorious onslaughts of the Japs, have shown
us that we have nothing to fear from the “ heathen Chinee.”
Hav,e w r e anything to fear from any other foreigners ? No ! And
here the writer must refer to a remarkable incident in the history
of New South Wales, which has, curiously enough, attracted
little or no attention. It is no less than the suppression of an
important State document by Ministers of the Crown. The re-
port of the Imperial Commission appointed to consider the de-
fences of all the British colonies stated that their geographical
position was a sufficient protection for the Australian colonies ;
that the transportation of an effective force to Australia would
be so costly that no foreign power would attempt it, and if it did,
with the present mode of communication, and the English war-
ships in these waters, it would be impossible for the force to es-
cape being captured. Sir Henry Parkes received a copy of this
report and locked it up, and took care that it should not be made
public, or seen by Press or Parliament. In Victoria, however,
the Government, having a less Democratic and more tractable
people to deal with, made the report public, and thus let the cat
out of the bag. It is a convincing proof of the degeneration of
public life in these days that this most unconstitutional act of
Sir; Henry Parkes’s attracted little attention and caused less
comment. In the old days of Wentw'orth and Lang, or of Wil-
liam Bede Dailey, such a scandalous and glaring insult to the
people, as the suppression of an important State document, would
have resulted, when made known, in the guilty ministry being
instantly hurled from office. When, therefore, we consider that
there is no danger from a foreign foe, how are we to explain the
enthusiasm of the National Association and kindred bodies for
Federation ? It can only be explained by the fact that the Aus-
tralian plutocracy requires a central “ stable ” Government, re-


sponsible to a Senate or Upper House, backed by a large, well-
trained and ruthless army, and meeting in some country town
remote from the influence and pressure of “ the mob.”
Sham Federation means that in the Senate, the “one man one
vote” of New South Wales will be powerless against the property
votes of Western Australia and other colonies. In Western
Australia no man can vote, much less be elected to any legislative
position unless possessed of a property qualification, and in order
that the rich man shall give all his votes at an election he is per-
mitted to vote by post! Yet, according to the Draft Common-
wealth Bill, that colony is to have the same number of men in
the Senate as New South Wales, Let the people of this colony
“ watch and suspect their rulers,” for assuredly there is a con-
spiracy afoot to still further “ defraud them of happiness and
money, by false pretences.” Undemocratic Federation has never
yet been a success from the standpoint of popular rights, and in
America it led to a most bloody, frightful, and traticidal
civil war. In Germany a Federal system approximating to
unification, has led to the voting down of the intelligent, educated
working Democrats of Saxony, Hamburg, and other provinces,
by the ignorant masses in other parts of the German Empire ;
and in Australia it will, if adopted, have a similar result. The
schemers who form Australia’s Oligarchy wish to place a
military establishment in the land, subject to the control, not of
a Democratic authority within our own borders, but of the
ruling clique and its secret backers, wherever the seat of Govern-
ment may be. Let the democrats of Australia remember not
only that “ eternal vigilance is the price of Liberty,” but that
decentralisation is the basis of true Democracy.
CHAPTER ll THE DRAFT BILLS OF 1891 & 1898.
In 1891 a practically self-appointed Convention met, which for-
mulated a Bill that aroused so much indignation throughout
the length and breadth of Australia as to make it quite evident
that the Bill would never become law. To the Right Hon. G-
H. Reid great credit is due for having in his speeches at the
Protestant Hall and elsewhere, exposed many of its defects. As
a result of this popular antagonism it was decided to arrange
for the election of a new Convention—this time by the popular


vote. All the Premiers agreed to pilot an Enabling Bill for this
purpose through their Parliaments, and all kept faith except
Sir John Forrest (of Western Australia) and Sir Hugh Nelson
(of Queensland). The Nelson Grovernment declined to send any
delegates, while from Western Australia came ten men who
were not elected by the people of that colony, but selected by
the Forrest cabal from its Parliament. It was laughable to
observe how in the Convention Forrest’s co-delegates conducted
themselves like an awkward squad of marionettes. They were
“ men of very few words”—Sir John pulled the strings and the
figures moved, and said “ ditto ” to anything that he said.
After prolonged sittings (paid for at the rate of three
guineas per day) in Adelaide, Sydney and Melbourne, the Draft
Bill of 1898 was produced. This Bill is but little less reaction-
ary than its 1891 pattern, but it is more craftily, drawn up. Thus
while the 1891 Bill expressly states that all the present State
Governors shall be retained (chapter v. clause 7) the 1898 Bill
says nothing whatever about the matter ; in this way leading the
people to believe that Federation will abolish, and save the ex-
pense of, the office of Governor.
Dividing the Spoil.
The salaries of Members of both Houses of the Parliament
are to be four hundred pounds a year “ until the Parliament
otherwise provides “ Provides ” being the inoicative form of
the verb, expi esses, of course, certainty. Had the delegates
any doubt about the matter they would have said “ may other-
wise provide.” In the Bill of ’9l the salaries were fixed at
five hundred a year, and we may therefore be sure that the
gentlemen who in 1891 wanted five hundred will take care, if
they are elected, that the Parliament shall very soon “ otherwise
provide” that the salaries or •‘allowances” shall be five or six
hundred a year.
By the Bill of ’9l the seven members of the Government
were to divide among themselves fifteen thousand pounds as
salaries; by the ’9B Bill the amount is reduced to twelve
thousand pounds, —but only “ until the Parliament otherwise pro-
vides ” —for an increase of salaries.
Civil Service Corruption.
An abominable feature of the Bill of 1898 is that it pro-
poses to restore the old system of patronage, which has proved


such a curse in the United States and in these colonies, Clause
67 states that all civil servants shall be appointed or removed
by the Government. This means that to the “ victors belong
the spoils,” and that the victors will fill the civil service with
their friends, relatives and parasites, their illegiti rate children,
and their mistresses ; with their friends, children and other rela-
tives. The enormous power which the control of the Civil Ser-
vice will give the Government, will be the source of great
profligacy and corruption, and will make it well-nigh impossible
to bring about any reform. Wherever the federal capital may
be placed, it will be the centre of immorality, and the haunt of
men who “live by their wits,” and women who traffic in their
own dishonour.
Rampant Minority Rule.
Rut the most anti-democratic feature of the Bill is un-
doubtedly the proposal to allow each colony equal representa-
tion in the Senate. The Senate will be the t pper House, and
extremely powerful. It may veto any bill, and we may be sure,
considering its constitution, that it will veto anything of a
democratic character. Its veto on any project of political or
social reform that does not propose money appropriation is cer-
tain. The Bill makes a pretence of not allowing the Senate to
amend money bills, but it says that “ the Senate may at any
stage return to the House of Representatives any proposed law
requesting by message the omission or amendments of any items
or provisions therein.” What is this but amending? If the
Representatives will not accept the Senators’ amendments, there
is to be a simultaneous dissolution of the two Houses; and
then if the Houses still disagree, there is to be a joint sitting of
the Senators and Representatives, and whatever may then be
decided upon by a three-fifths majority will become law. Which
means that the Conservative Representatives can combine with
the Senators to block anything in the nature of radical reform.
That the Senators will be conservatives is shown not only by
the fact that the recent elections resulted in the return of con-
servatives to the Convention, but also by the iact that in at
least two of the colonies there is a property qualification for
electors. Here are the votes received by the West Australian
Members of the Convention when they were elected to their own
Parliament; and as they were not elected to the Convention, but


Sir John Forrest ...
• • •
... 262
Sir James Lee Steere
... 215
George Leake, Esq.
... 187
Hon. F. H. Piesse ...
... 196
J. W Racket, Esq.
... 582
W. T. Loton, Esq. ...
... 324
W. H. James, Esq....
... 246
A. T, Hassall, Esq.
... 362
Robert F. Scholl, Esq.
... 24
Hon. J. H. Taylor ...
... 1589
selected by the AY. A. Parliament, we must take it that they re
presented the persons who elected them to that Parliament:—
3987
Some of the above figures, such as the 1,589 credited to the
Hon. J. H. Taylor, and the 582 credited to Mr. Hacket, merely
represent the total number of electors on the roll; the actual
number of votes cast not being given in the Year Book. Sir
John Forrest, Sir James Lee Steere, and others, were returned
unopposed. One of the gentlemen that had this honor con-
ferred upon them was Mr. Robert F. Scholl, who represented a
constituency of 24 electors. A nice little pocket borough. The
vote of this unopposed delegate from twenty-four AYest Austra-
lians, counted in the Convention as equal to Mr. Barton’s, the
latter gentleman having been returned by the votes of 98,540
persons.
If we are to have a Federal Senate we must insist upon the
colonies being represented in it proportionately according to
their populations. This is what our kinsmen in Canada have
done, and it is what has been done in Germany. The
Constitution of the United States is the only important one
which permits equal State representation, and that equality of
representation was conceded at a time of panic and has ever
since proved a stumbling block in the path of Progress.
More Big Prizes for Federal Lawyers.
Six out of our ten delegates to the Convention were law-
yers, and therefore we can understand why it is that the diffi-
culty which a poor person at present experiences in getting jus-
tice is to be increased by the establishment of a highly-paid
Federal Supreme Court, to which the rich litigant may appeal


against the decisions of the State Courts. The right of appeal
to the Privy Council is not to he abolished. The Bill says “this
Constitution shall not impair any right which the Queen (mean-
ing of course the Federal Government) may be pleased to exer-
cise to grant special leave of appeal from the High Court to
Her Majesty in Council.” So that a person who has sufficient
wealth or other influence to induce the Government to grant
him leave, can actually drag his unfortunate victim from the
Federal Court to the Privy Council in London.
The existing right of appeal to the Privy Council has its
advantages as well as its disadvantages. It was before the Lou-
don Privy Council that Mr. A. G. Taylor defeated Mr. Edmund
Barton for his unconstitutional ruling as Speaker ; and there can
be no doubt that had the victims of the “ Hard Cash ” govern-
mental persecutions been able to take their cases to the Privy
Council they also would have reversed the decisions of the
Sydney Courts.* Sir Edward Coke (case of Sutton’s Hospital,
10 rep. 82) says “corporations cannot commit treason, nor be
outlawed, nor excommunicate, for they have no souls”; conse-
quently they cannot legally maintain an action for criminal
libel, and thus on appeal to the Privy Council the whole of the
cruel and unjust proceedings against the “ Hard Cash ’ news-
vendors would have been declared null and void. It is infamous
that the law of this colony should have been so strained as to
prosecute innocent stationers and newsvendors for a libel, of the
existence of which they knew nothing. AV hen a similar action
was attempted against a London newsagent (the Hon. A\L H.
Smith) the case was contemptuously dismissed, and the prosecu-
tion scathingly condemned by the magistrate. Of course the
great objection to the right of appeal to the Privy Council is
that few persons can stand the expense ; but if this Draft Bill
be agreed to, there will be the additional expense of appealing to
the Federal Court, which will no doubt be swayed by class bias,
and influenced by friendly relations with “ the powders that be.’
This Federal Judicature will be exceedingly costly. It is
to be composed of a High Court, consisting of a Chief Justice,
“and not less than tw r o ” (I quote the bad English of the Bill)
other judges, and “such other federal courts as the Parliament
#—Note.— -When the “ Hard Casli ” persecutions were initiated Mr. Barton
was Attorney-General, and Mr. R. E. O’Connor (another Delegate to
the Convention) Minister for Justice.


creates.” It is probable that the Chief Justice will receive a
salary of at least ten thousand pounds a year, and no doubt Mr.
Barton would scorn to accept such a highly-paid permanent
position. As we all know, he has a soul above “ filthy lucr&
(witness the Proudfoot case), and he has a fellow feeling for the
unemployed, for whom his ‘ heart bleeds.’
A Feankenstein’s Monstee.
There is to be an Inter-State Commission, appointed by the
Government, to deal with trade and commerce. Of how many per-
sons it is to consist, and what powers they are to possess, and how
many thousands they are to be paid, we are not told. From
vague hints in the Bill we may surmise that the Commission is
to be empowered to interfere in some way (probably in the in-
terests of the cliques that govern the smaller states), with the
management of the railways and the control of the rivers. Per-
haps, like Frankenstein, the Convention Delegates will (suppos-
ing that they have any consciences) one day regret that they
ever created such a monster. It will probably become as
despotic and unscrupulous as were the Roman Triumvirates.
How THE AeMY WOULD BE USED.
The military cloven-hoof peeps out in clause 118, wherein
we are told that the Commonwealth shall, on the application of
a State’s Executive Government, protect that State against
“domestic violence.” A very similar provision exists in the
Constitution of the United States, and the result is that whenever
a turbulent strike, or other popular disturbance occurs, the Federal
troops are called out to (with or without the permission of the
State Executive) quell “domestic violence ” by shooting down
unarmed men, women, andchildren. It isprobable that Federation
would receive little support from Western Australia w'ere it not
that the Federal army may one day come in useful in that colony
by “dealing with ” the boisterous mining population. The stuff
of which Western Australian public men are made is shown by
the fact that Sir John Forrest, having been hustled by the dissatis-
fied alluvial miners at Kalgoorlie, actually had the irreverent
audacity to parody the words of the crucified Founder of Chris-
tianity—“l forgive them,” said Forrest, “ for they know not
*Some of our Delegates were most discourteous to Queensland. Cun it be
that they wished to drive away Queensland competitors for these fat
judicial “ billets ? ”


what they do.” Sir John has since conceded all the demands o£
the miners: but it he had had the Federal army to fall back upon
he would not, perhaps, have shown so much alacrity in the matter.
It is not surprising that Queenslanders are not federal enthusi-
asts, for should any slight disturbance occur in connection with
their colored labor question, or with the agitation for separation,
it is very probable that federal troops from another State would be
employed to invade Queensland, and massacre Queenslanders,
The Federal troops would certainly be useless as a means of de-
fending Australia against invasion. Our only safety is, and will
be, in the presence of the British warships here. If, however,
any great disaster happened to England, and Russia decided to
invade Australia, the entire federated military strength of the
country could not resist for a week that great power.* AVe have
not population enough. But of course Russia will never bother
about us. It would cost too much, and we are too far away.
Russia has plenty of magnificent land at its own doors, and it
would sooner have a mile of Manchuria than a thousand miles
of Australia.
A Financial Botchert.
The financial clauses are fearful and wonderful. Only the
Supreme Being can tell with certainty how they wiil work.
What, however, seems very probable, and, humanly speaking,
certain is that they will enormously increase taxation. The
clauses actually stipulate that the Federal G-overnment must
collect four times more revenue than it will require! Here is
one of the clauses —“ Of the nett revenue of the Common-
wealth from duties of customs and of excise, not more than one-
fourth shall be applied annunlly by the Commonwealth towards
its expenditure.” The Bill then goes on to state that the three
fourths not required bv the Federal Government, shall be banded
to the State Governments. Bnt Mr. Reid says —“ I must not
say you get it back. I never heard of a financial operation of
that Rind. The Treasury gets it.” It is therefore probable that
the money handed to the State Treasurers, will bo a most
dangerous weapon in their hands, and may even be used by State
Governments to defy their Parliaments, and govern contrary to
the wishes of the provincial electors, of whom this Bill makes
* Russia lias a population of 130,000,000, and can place in the field an
array of 2,500,000.


them financially independent. AVhat will they care for the State
Parliament as long as they can get all the money they need from
the Federal Treasurer ?
The Delegates are assumed, by their friends, to possess the pro-
foundest intellects in Australia ; yet the financial chapter is a
most clumsy production, and full of clauses which contradict
other clauses. Here are some of them arranged in deadly
parallel columns.
“ 82. The revenue of the Common-
wealth shall in the first instance be
applied to the payment of the ex-
penditure of the Commonwealth.”
“ 90. On the imposition of uniform
duties of Customs, the power of the
Parliament to grant bounties on the
production or export of goods shall
become EXCLUSIVE.”
“ 92. On the imposition of uniform
duties of Customs, trade, commerce,
and intercourse among the States,
whether by means of internal carriage
or ocean navigation, shall be ABSO-
LUTELY FftEE.”
“97. The power of the Parliament
to make laws with respect to trade
and commerce extends to railways
the property of any State.”
“98. The Commonwealth shall not
give preference to one State or any
part thereof over another State, or
any part thereof.”
“ 87. Of the net revenue from du-
ties of Customs and of excise, not
more than one-fourth shall be applied
annually by the Commonwealth to-
wards its expenditure.”
“ 90. Any grant of or agreement
for any such bounty, lawfully made
by or under the authority of the
Government of any State, shall be
taken to be good, it made before the
30th day of June, 1898.”
“ 91. Nothing in this Constitution
prohibits a State from granting any
aid to or bounty on mining for gold,
silver, or other metals.”
“ 92. Goods imported before the
imposition of uniform duties shall,
on thence passing into another State,
within two years after the imposition
of such duties, be liable to any duty
chargeable on the importation of such
goods into the Commonwealth, less
any duty paid in respect of the
goods on their importation.”
(See also the “account-keeping
clause and the special danse ex-
empting West Australia).
“ 101. Due regard being had to
the financial responsibility incurred
by any State in connection with the
construction and maintenance of its
railways.”
All this financial blundering is perhaps to be explained by
the fact that most of the Delegates were ignorant of finance.


The only recognised financial expert elected to the Convention
was Mr, J. T. Walker, but the Delegates did not wish for ex-
perts, so they promptly shelved him by placing him on the
Judicial Committee. The Finance Committee they packed with
incompetents, some of whom are known to be ignorant of com-
plex financial operations.
As for the absurd, proposed bookkeeping system, it has been
laughed at and condemned by the most astute financial experts
in Australia, including the very able Mr. R. L. Nash. Mr.
Coghlan, the statistician, says “ no business man supposes that
the bookkeeping system will be taken seriously by the customs
officials.” The bookkeeping system will prove a mere make-
believe, and will certainly not prevent the revenue from being
defrauded to an enormous extent; in which case the machinery
of government may be brought to a standstill. However,
enough of finance. The federal patriots will get their salaries
somehow.
The Practical Impossibility of Altering the Constitution.
Many who have read thus far may exclaim —“ But if we find
in practice that the Constitution does not satisfy us, we can alter
it! ” No, sirs, you cannot! All National Constitutions come to
be regarded with a sort of superstitious reverence by the major-
ity. The Constitution of the United States has inflicted untold
hardship upon the people of that country, and yet the Americans
almost worship it. It is a matter of habit and training. But
the framers of the Draft Constitution Bill of 1898 have made as-
surance doubly sure, and have so drawn the Bill that when once
adopted it cannot be altered without insuperable difficulty. They
declare that any proposed law for its alteration must be passed
by an absolute majority of each House of the Parliament, and
then, some months afterwards, it shall be submitted to the elec-
tors; “And if, in a majority of the States a majority of the
electors voting approve the proposed law, and if a majority of all
the electors voting also approve the proposed law, it shall be pre-
sented to the Governor-General for the Queen’s assent.” With all
these majorities and delays it would be almost as easy to alter the
Constitution as to move a mountain. How the Convention’s ad-
mirable scheme would work out is thus shown by Mr. Henry
Joseph, of Moree :


For altering the Total Votes For Against.
Constitution. say— p
New South Wales ... 300,001 300,000 1
Victoria ... 300,001 300,000 1
Against altering the
Constitution. i
South Australia ... ... 80,001 40,000 40,001
West Australia ... ... 60,001 30,000 30,001
Tasmania ... ... ... 40,001 20,000 20,001
690,000 90,005
“In this case, though 690,000 might be in favour of an al-
teration in the Constitution, 90,005 would render the majority’s
vote nugatory. Though there is no pretension to preciseness in
the figures they serve to point a valuable moral, i.e., the fool-
hardiness of a community that would entertain such a compact,
and the brazen effrontery of those who would tell you the Con-
stitution is democratic.”
CHAPTER 3.—THE UNWISDOM OF HASTY
FEDERATION.
In his “ History of Europe ” Dr. Freeman says:—“ There is
no lesson which history teaches us which we cannot learn from
Grecian history, and this is mainly because in Greece everything
whether forms of government, literature, art or philosophy, is
all quite fresh and not borrowed from any other people. In
these ways Greece, though so small a part of the world, has
influenced all the history of the world ever since.” In some
respects the ancient Greeks resembled the modern Australians.
They lived in a land with a somewhat similar climate to our own,
they were politically self-governing, they were divided into a
number of States ; and for a very long period they were not
federated. Yet Dr. Freeman says that the fact of their being
divided into independent States “not joined under one govern-
ment,” was one of the main causes of their intellectual greatness.
He says on page 13 of his “ History”—“ They were sure not to
join under one government, but to keep apart in small states,
each town or district being, or trying to be, independent of all
others. All these things, division into many small states, a sea-
faring life, and all that such a life leads to, are things that
greatly tend to sharpen the wits. The Greeks had the start of


all other people in literature and art and science, and, above all,
in the art of government. For they were the first people who
made free commonwealths.” For more than six centuries, the
Greeks, who, unlike the Australians, were dangerously situated
geographically, flourished without any federation whatever.
During this period they produced Homer, the greatest of epic
poets, Pindar the lyric poet, HSschylus, the first great tragic poet
and founder of the drama, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristophanes
and other poets, Phidias the greatest of antique sculptors ; the
philosophers Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato an J Aristotle, the
historians Herodotus and Thucydides, the physician Hippocrates,
the orator Demosthenes (Dan. O’Connor’s ancestor), and the
statesmen Solon, Pericles and Lycurgus. In fact all the great
Greeks of undying fame appeared in the pre-federal age. About
280 b.c., the first Greek confederation, which was termed the
Achaian League, was formed ; and the Greeks never afterwards
produced a truly illustrious man ; and about the beginning of the
second century before Christ they were subjugated by the
Macedonians, and, afterwards, completely overwhelmed by the
Homans. History may repeat itself. At any rate we should
not hasten to construct an additional and extremely
powerful and expensive government, without reckoning the cost
and calculating the risks. We have fought many years, and en-
dured much, in order to hand down to posterity a democratically
governed State, in which the majority rules, and intelligence is
counted as of greater value than bricks and mortar. But the
Draft Bill is not based upon manhood suffrage; it permits a
property qualification for electors, and in the Senate establishes
minority rule. The Senate will be master of the situation. Un-
less a deadlock occurs it will never have to face a general elec-
tion, because its members, who will be elected for six years, will
retire, not at once, but in batches at separate periods of time.
In Western Australia and Tasmania they, as well as the Repre-
sentatives, will be elected by the property vote. It is also
worthy of note that the Conservative Party may at any time
neatly strengthen itself by admitting the Northern territory, and
portions of Queensland, and Western Australia, as new states;
and no matter how small the population of those states, the
Parliament may allow them as many members in either House of
Parliament “ as it thinks fit ” (see clauses 120 and 121).
We are in absolutely no danger of invasion while the
British Naval Squadron is here, and as for our troops, it is well-
known that the military commandants have agreed upon a


scheme for the immediate federation of tlie whole of the Aus-
tralian troops in the event of war being declared.
The immediate federation of the Post Offices (which the
agitators for immediate federation loudly demand) would be a
serious injury to the people of New South Wales. Our Post-
master-General, (the Honorable Joseph Cook) says that the rates
are much higher in the other colonies than they are here, and
that the Federal Government will raise the rates to those pre-
vailing in the other colonies. So that one of the' boons of
federation is that we will have to pay twopence postage on a
note addressed to a person in the next street. Truly we shall
have to pay dearly if we are so unwise as to elevate blatant,
demagogic, federal agitators into very high positions.
When we do federate, let us take the existing Federal
Council and elect its members by manhood suffrage, or adult
suffrage, allowing representation to each State according to its
population. Let the members of the Council be paid —say three
hundred a year, and empowered to raise revenue by customs
duties, protective or otherwise ; and to establish intercolonial
Freetrade. Let them also be empowered to deal with questions
of national defence. In time, if out sense of the value and
trustworthiness of the Federal Council increased, we might en-
trust it with the work of federating our railways ; and (if pos-
sible) consolidating our debts; and eventually it could perhaps
bo trusted to carry out vast works for the obtaining and conser-
vation of water, and the irrigation of the soil. This scheme of
federal government is simple, democratic, and—unlike the
Draft Bill —not revolutionary ; but it would not suit the hungry
ambitious lawyers who are howling for the best paid positions
ever obtainable in this or any other thinly-populated country.
Our leading Federalists —always with hungry eyes on the
federal judgeships — sneer at the Federal Council; and yet,
perhaps the greatest period of English history was during
the Commonwealth, and before the Protectorate of the
usurper Cromwell; when Great Britain was most successfully
governed by a Council of State of 41 members. With the
democratization of the Federal Council, such as I have proposed,
there would be no Governor-General at £lO,OOO a year; no
Federal Judges at from five to ten thousand a year ; no Federal
Premiers at three thousand a year; no vastly over-paid Military
magnates; but there would be economy,simplicity of government,
and pure democracy.


Wt>
BlfcLlO
Ofi
F(5070
N (scpj
APPEN
THE SUPPRESSED STATE
JAN 1993 y;
v/ 4 *
The following letter, from the Hon. John Lucas, M.L.C., ap-
peared in the Sydney Morning Herald , of May 13,1891 ;
“ gi r> —Si r Henry Parkes, in one of his first speeches on this
subject (Federation), stated that the first and principal object of
Federation was to protect the colonies from invasion, An Im-
perial Committee was appointed to inquire into and report on
the defences of the whole of the British colonies. The Com-
mittee reported that their geographical position was a sufficient
protection for the Australian colonies ; that the transportation
of an effective force to Australia would be so costly that no for-
eign power would attempt it; and that if they did, with the present
mode of communication and the several English warships in these
waters, it would be impossible for them to avoid being captured.
“ The Imperial Committee disagreed with General {Edward’s
report, and stated that the Australian colonies only required a
few 6-inch guns and about 10,000 of a defence force (not 30,000
as General Edwards reported).
“ Had this report been made public, it would (as The Sydney
Morning Herald stated in its leading articles) have shown that
invasion was impossible, which disposed of Sir Henry’s first and
principal reason for Federation.
“ Sir Henry Parkes received a copy of this report, and locked it
up, and took care that it should not be made public or seen by
the people or Parliament.
“ The Victorian Government also received a copy of the report
and at once made it public, and it was from the Victorian news-
papers that the Herald obtained the information.
“ Having read the remarks in the Herald I asked a number of
questions in my place in the Council about this report. The
answers I received were evasive and unsatisfactory. I was suf-
fering from illness and unable to follow up the question, but
in my absence the Hon John Stewart questioned the Vice-
President on the subject, and was told that the report was a
private document and would not be made public.
“In the early days of responsible government if any government
had concealed such an important public paper they would have
been ignominiously hurled from office; and, if in opposition, Sir
Henry Parkes would have been the first to move a vote of censure.
“ Sir Henry Parkes well knew that if he published the Imperial
Committee’s report it would damage the prospects of the first
Presidentofthe Australian Commonwealth —soitwas suppressed.”




LIBERTY LODGE
OF
FREE & ACCEPTED MASONS
(Grand Orient of France).
Australian Reformers have long been in need of some fraternal organiza-
tion which would protect them from that persecution and slander with
which they are pursued by the ignorant, the malicious, and those who have
a vested interest in maintaining injustice. Men in the Progressive Move-
ment know that in its ranks are to be found some of the noblest, ablest,
and most cultured nainds in Australia. Yet so great is the power of their
reactionary enemies, and so unscrupulous their wicked tactics, that most
true Reformers have felt the pangs of poverty, and in some cases have suf-
fered from the cruelties of social ostracism.
The remedy for the above evils is fraternal organization, sjfid it is
offered to us in Masonry. Not the conservative Masonry which has elevated
so many mediocrities, but the reformed Masonry, the motto of which is
“Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity,” and which is truly cosmopolitan, phil-
anthropic, and tolerant. How tolerant it is can be seen by the following
words spoken at Paris by the President of the Council of the Order ‘ Free-
masonry is neither deistic, atheistic nor positivistic. Thus the doors of our
temple are open to the Protestant as well as to the Catholic, to the Atheis..
as well as to the Deist; all that concerns us about them is that they shall
be conscientious and upright men.” Here are some of the Masonic obliga-
tions :
“ I promise to seek after, and to promulgate Truth.”
“I promise to assist the helpless, to do justice to all men, to perform
ray duty towards my native country, to love my brethren, and to respect
myself.”
It is the duty of a Freemason in all circumstances to assist and ppo-f
tect his brother, even at the peril of his life, and to defend him against all
injustice.
Those wishing to join the Order are invited to communicate with
MR. S. A, ROSA,
308 Parramatta Road, Petersham.
(The above is inserted by constituted Masonic authority).
T. E. Colebrook, Printer, 205 Parramatta Road, Leichhardt.
