

—
1
• y'-y y '• y ?y■y'y'y ■ y'-y -y ■ y' '7' X X' V ‘ ;X y - y' y
X ' ' ' y ' ' "X ' X -' ' 'X 7 : .
SR 827.6 S427
• • ’/X
1
■ - />X
. ’-Ti
•7
I r ■'} • . • i
r. r/«.
(
7 /: 7 1
\'/l
U y > s
.
;xx - - .. -
7f;
|
■ X • rX
7
f
1
$
%
7 ' ; 7
>■ ' 1
S ■, I .• ■■
|, y • y ■■ y ? y •
y y - | ■ y y -■ y ■ y y y; 7 | > y • - x X x
1:|.
joi; mm
I:'!.;.
■f' x:
',•7
■ .
■
'M. ,
f •>
P '
' • i
S'
X.l'
i #■ > i 7-
7 7 ' Sj 6 7 X 7 / '/j 7
. 7 ,2 . X . 7
■ ' . f t
■ : y i/' •
v ' /
f•: y: .■ ■ V " ••• ;
y U '■ . ■ ' , V .
■
Y*\
/■ )■ . 7 -. 7 .7 . 7
i
'.y-./ ;:yvy ■
• . / ■■ '' „-'X '
;• < ... , •' J / X'-X;-v7,
y7y. f. y. y. y,-- yyy; yy \
‘\ a 1 4 '■ r 1 '■ ' 7 ' '■' 7 x / . .
.V . •/ . /■ ■■/ 7 • V - 7 ■ v. 7 .7 . 7 ' , /• /, y :
7
• X , •' /
1
■ • ■■■' / .
yy-y
' y •
; " J w.<
>/. -
' ' ' • ••y
' ■' Jg&ir
• ■ r x :■
‘ ' I VJs
XX
: ' r S y
■ "■ . . ' . . ■ -■
: x/ -
" a
: f y y y
// ■ ■ . ■ . • Y/f
‘ ■' : XX
. 0
■'X . XX ' ’7 .
■
'' xX
■' -xrx ■ •
■ x/' .
: ' X ,
X;f X.r yy
. a XH fi
xxx ,;x . .xx
' y y
:
< t y
i
' ( .
,, f ■ ■ . „
■■
i ■ , X . 1 s' / .
> (
y, %■; %,
' , X . - 7 . ■ ■ , - , ( X ( 7 f •: , - 7 . - ■ • , - X •
•
n,.. xxx i
;/ xX i
.
1








A N
EPISTLE
FROM
OBE REA, QJJEEN of OTAHEITE,
T O
JOSEPH BANKS, Esq,
Tranflated by T. Z. Efq.
Frofeflbr ol the Otaheite Language in Dublin, and of all the Languages of the
undifcovered Iflands in the South Seaj
And enriched with historical and explanatory Notes.
t<r[r||jW . <v|||| ,|, I, t iM „ni> |Wm>nw|-«~r»>lTiMirmfIT¥,rrr--^rTr 1 T¥ , rrr--^rTr- M n I ~^l r ^f^-^,l > iria^.^l n w.*r^l ^^M#^W‘rnlr ^>tin,w ■■,.
LONDON:
Printed for J. Almon, oppofite Burunct on-Ho use, in Piccadilly.
MDCCLXXIV.
[Price One Shilling.!




'.I. b. sooj
INTRODUCTION.
TH E Editor of the following Epiftle has only to
inform the Publick, that he has tranflated it with
all the Fidelity, which the different Idioms of the two
Languages will admit of. He is fenfible that it is im-
polfible in Englifh, to convey any Idea of the Beauties
of the Otaheite Tongue. It abounds with Dipthongs
and Tripthongs, and every Word of it begins with a
Vowel. Upon this Account it is infinitely harmonious,
to which if we add the Beauty and Sublimity of its
Metaphors, we fhall only do it Juftice if we pronounce
it to be one of the nobleft Languages, which has ever
been fpoken fince the Confufion of Tongues.
The Editor is in Hop es that this little Specimen will
excite the Curious to the Study of it; and he takes this
Opportunity of informing them, that he is going to
facilitate their Labours by the Publication of a cornpleat
Grammar and Dictionary. This Work will be printed
on the fame Paper, and with the fame Letter as DoCtor
Hawkefworth’s celebrated Voyages, and will be ready to
be delivered next Spring for the moderate Price of Three
Guineas.


Guineas, It will be highly ufeful to fuch Gentlemen,
as propofe to vifit the South Seas, and to make the
Grand Tour.*
Dublin , Sept. 20 th, 1773*
* If the Imprefllon of this Work fhall not be fold fo foon as the Author
flatters himfelf it will, he engages to publifh it in weekly Numbers, at OnQ
Shilling each.


READ, or oh ! fay does fome more amorous fair
Prevent * Opano , and engage his care ?
I •f* Oberea , Southern main.
Of flighted vows, of injur’d faith complain.
Though now fome European maid you woo.
Of J waifte more taper, and of whiter hue;
Yet § oft with me you deign’d the night to pafs.
Beneath yon bread-tree on the bending grafs.
Oft
NOTES.
* The people of Otaheite could not pronounce Mr. Banks’s name, but called him
Opano.
Perlcgis , an conjux prohibet nova , &c.
f Pcgafts Oenone , Phrygiis celeberrbna phis,
j It appears that Oberea was rather plump and round, and not of the faireft com-
plexion. S ee Hawkefworth’s Voyages. -
§ Sape greges inter requievbnus arbore teSli ,
Mijiaque cum foil is prabuit herb a tor fan,
Sevpe fuper &c,
B


( 6 )
Oft in the rocking boat we fondly lay.
Nor fear’d the drizly wind, or briny fpray.
* Who led thee through the woods impervious fhade.
Pierc’d the thick covert, and explor’d the glade;
Taught thee each plant that fips the morning dew.
And brought the latent minerals to thy view ?
Still to thofe glades, thofe coverts I repair.
Trace every alley—but thou art not there.
Nor -f* herb, nor falutary plant I find.
To cool the burning fever of my mind.
Ah ! J I remember on the river’s fide,
Whofe babling waters ’twixt the mountains glide,
A bread-tree flands, on which with fharpen’d fionc.
To thy dear name I deign’d unite my own.
Grow bread-tree, grow, nor envious hand remove
The fculptur’d fymbols of my conftant love.
To the vafl § main a rock projecting lies.
Where tempefts howl, and roaring billows rife.
Ther©
NOTES.
* uis tihi rmnfifavit faltus venatibus aptos ,
Et tegeret catulos qua fera rape fuos P
t Me miferam! quod amor non efi medicabilis herbls ,
Deficior prudens artis ab arte med,
4. Populus efi (memini) fiuviali confita ripd ,
EJI in qua nojlri litter a fcripta memor ,
Papule vive precor y &c.
§ The South Sea.
Jfpicit immenfum moles nativa profundum 9
Mans fuit y cequoreis ilia refifiit aquis.
Jllic vela tuce cognovi prana caring,
Et mhi per fin Plus impetus ire fecit ,


There firft at eve thy opening fails I fpy’d.
And eager glow’d to cleave the briny tide.
My faithful fenate fat in wife debate.
And weigh’d the dubious interefls of the flate.
Though fome with brandifh’d lance for war declare*
With all the frantic figns of wild defpair;
Yet I more foft to gentle peace inclin’d.
And footh’d the terrors of * Tupia’s mind.
Send them, I cry’d, twice twelve delicious dogs.
And give them cocoas, women, bread, and hogs.. .
’Twas morn, the gallant velfel fleers to land;
On the moifl beach the marfhall’d failors fland.
Then firft the pangs of confcious love I knew,.
My eyes, my longing foul was fixt on you.
To gain thy love I pradlis’d every art.
And gave my kingdom as I gave my heart.
Alas! what flreams of fcalding tears I fhcd.
When you furpris’d Obadee in my bed ;
From;
NOTES.
* Tupia was Prime Minifter to Oberea. She contented' that he fhouid come to
England with Mr. Banks, and thereby gave the ftrongeft proof of her attachment to
that gentleman. Unfortunately this great politician and philofopher died on the
voyage. Lufiuofum hoc fuis ; acerhum pair ice ; grave bonis omnibus, Cic.
f On the 29th, not very early in the forenoon, Mr. Banks went to pay his court
to Oberea, and was told that fhe was ftill afleep under the awning of her boat. Thi-
ther he went, and upon looking into her chamber, he found her in bed with a hand-
ibme young fellow about twenty-five, whofe name was Obadee. Hawkef, Voyages,


From * my chaff’d temples ftrait my locks I twitch.
And with the prickly fhell tataow my breech.
In the foft dance if e’er I chanc’d to move,
How throb’d thy bofom with impatient love !
Now flow I fail’d, and ftple my eafy way
With fweet, reluctant, amorous delay;
Then -f* in brifk circles glanc’d around, and beat
The meafur’d cadence with my quivering feet.
My eyes refulgent beam’d with wanton fire.
And all my limbs were brac’d by fierce defire.
Not Hella’s felf with all her curious pas ,
Her Rigadoons and motley Entre-chas ;
With fuch luxuriant grace difplays her thigh ;
Or J feme redes with fuch eafe as I,
Oft on thy lips, thofe lips of love, I hung.
To hear thee greet me in my native tongue;
§ Meetee atira , fweetly you expreft.
Your eyes all-eloquent explain’d the reft.
Say
NOTES.
* Turn vero rupique fir usy et pediora planxl ,
ht fecui madidas ungue ngente genas. -s**'
t Tunc te plus folito tafcivia nofra juvahat ,
Crebraque mobilitasy aptaque verba jocO'.
I * CmC: f^ ef r the lafcivious dance. See Havjkefivorth's Voyages.
1 had feme difficulty to find out who Oberea meant by Bella, but an ingenious
fnend and critic luggefted to me that it mi be Mademdifclle Heine], whofe (kill and
fame we may tuppofe was highly exaggerated to Oberea by Monf. Bougainville
§ Come here to fcifs me-See the Vocabulary of the Otaheite language,
which may ferve till my Dictionary is publiOied. S L


Say fondefl youth, canfl thou forget the night.
When ftarting from your fleep in wild affright;
Rife Oberea , rife my Queen, you faid.
Some * thief has ftol’n my breeches from my head.
Sorrowing -f* I went befide the billowy main.
Search’d the long-winding coaft, but fearch’d in vain.
My choicefl garment jftrait I fhar’d with you,
And fondly cloath’d you with my own J Perou*
Nor flrove not other fuitors to impart,
A mutual paffion to my royal heart;
My neck, my jetty eye-brows charm’d § Heetee,
And Otapairoo pink’d his bum for me.
Their tears, their warmeft vows could ne’er prevail.
Nor gift of chequer’d beads, nor proffer’d nail*
To thefe fond hands, when firft we went to view.
The magic wonders of thy vaft canoe;
NOTES.
* Upon their viflt to Tootahah, Mr. Banks thought himfelf fortunate in being
placed by Oberea in her canoe. She injijled upon taking his cloaths into her cuftody.
Awaking about eleven he found they were ftolen, upon which he awakened Oberea,
who Halting up and hearing his complaint, ordered lights, and prepared in great hafte
to recover what he had loft. In the morning Oberea brought him (brae of her country
cloaths.
-J- Sxytuv vccfx Siva
X Perou fignifies a petticoat in the Otaheite tongue.
Eque tuis demptos humeris tnihi tradis amifius*
defpefius larhs
Duflorefque alii


A curious * image did Opano give.
Whofe eye-balls gliften’d, and which feem’d to live.
With this I talk beneath the plaintain fhade.
As tho’ it heard, and anfwer’d what I faid ;
In amorous dalliance place it on my knee.
And lavifh all the raptures due to thee.
Oft to my eyes the well-known fcenes appear.
Which image all that part when thou waft near.
Here *f* TPeropoa, wretched widow flood.
And ting’d the ocean with her livid blood.
Thrice with the fhark ftiarp tooth fhe pierc’d her head.
Exclaim’d, J Tebai, and in triumph bled.
There to yon plaintain § Ooraitoa came \;
And paid juft honours to Opano $ name.
NOTES.
* I received her (Oberea) with fuch marks of diftimflion, as I thought would gra-
tify her moft, and was not fparing of my prelents, among which this augnjl Perfonage
feemed particularly delighted with a child’s doll. Vol. 11. p. 106,
lift blanditias , illi tibi delita verba ,
Dicimus , amplexus accipit ilia rneos.
Hanc fpefio tenecque ftnu pro conjuge vero ,
Et tanquam pojftt verba referre , queror.
Crede mihi plus ejl , quam quod videatur , Imago ,
Adds [onum ceres , Prctefdaus erit.
f Tiber a , Tumaida s wife.
% An exclamation of grief which fignifies, where is he! Early in the morning on
the 28th, a great number of women came down to the fort, and Teropoa being ob-
ferved among them on the outfide of the gate, Mr. Banks went out and brought her
in. He favv that the tears flood in her eyes, and as foon as (he entered they began to
flow in great abundance. He enquired earneftly the caufe, but inftead of anfwering,
fhe took from under her garment a fhark’s tooth, and flruck it fix or feven times into
her head with great force. Vol. 11. p. 104.
§ Friday 12th of May was diftinguiflied by a vifit from fome ladies. Having laid
fame pieces of cloth on the ground, the foremoft of the women, who appeared to be
the


Three fcarlet robes her tall attendants bore.
And gently fpread them on the winding (bore
Graceful fhe mov’d, and with majeilic cafe.
Pull’d up her petticoats above her knees;
Then thrice turn’d round with meafur’d fleps and flow.
Proud the curv’d ■* arches of her bum to fhew.
Here J c Tirabaow-diea dar’d to prove.
The impetuous tranfports of Toopuah' s love.
Scarce twelve fhort years the wanton maid had feen.
The youth was fix foot high, or more I ween.
Experienc’d
NOTES.
the principal, and who was called Oorattoa, feepped upon them, and taking up her
garments all round her to the waifl, turned about three times with great compofure
and deliberation. When this was done fhe dropped the veil, and flopping off the
cloth, three pieces more were laid, and fhe repeated the ceremony. The three laft
were laid, and the ceremony was repeated the lame manner the third time. VoL 11.
p. 125.
* The part on which thefe ornaments are lavifhed is the breech; this in both Texes
is covered with a deep black, above which arches are drawn one over another, Thefe
arches are their pride, and are fhewn with great ofte.ntation. Hawkf. Voyages.
t A young man near fix feet high performed the rites of Venus with a little girl
about eleven or twelve, before feveral of our people and a great number of the natives.
Among the natives were feveral women of fuperior rank, particularly Obcrea, who
may properly be faid to have affifted at the ceremony. For they gave inftrudlions to the
girl how to perform her part, which young as fhe was fhe did not Teem much to fland
in'need of. VoL 11. p. 12.
Blanda truces animos fertur molUJfe voluptas^
Conjliterant uno foemina , cirque loco.
facerent ipft nullo didicere magijlro ,
Arte Venus nulla duke peregit opus.
The tranflator intended to have fupprefled all paflages of this nature, which might
offend the chafte ear of a Britifh reader. But as Dodfor Hawkefworth’s very luicious
delc iptions have been confidered rather as (allies of his pruriant imagination, than the
tranfadtions of real life ? he thought it a piece of juflice due to that great man to authen-
ticate hrs narrative.


( 12 )
Experienc'd matrons the young pair furvey’d.
And urg’d to feats of love the felf-taught maid
With fkill fuperior flic perform’d her part.
And potent nature fcorn’d the tricks of art,
Curft be the envious gales that wafted o’er
Thofe floating wigwams to our peaceful fhore ;
With fpecious gifts a crew infidious came.
And left us * bitter pledges of their flame.
’Till then was nature free and love fincere.
Nor generous paflion quench’d by flavifh fear.
No pining maiden knew the vqnom’d kifs.
But all was genuine extacy and blifs.
Oft have I wifh’d, for fuch you love, that I
Were metamorphos’d to fome curious fly;
Beyond the main I’d fpeed my eager way.
And buz around you all the live-long day.
Nor would I not be fome ombrageous tree.
That fhades thy grot, and vegetate for thee;
At thy approach I’d all my flowers expand.
And weave my wanton foliage round thy hand.
Think
NOTES
* I fuppofe this alludes to the introduction of the venereal difeafe among them by
Monf. Bougainville, which they emphatically call the Rottennefs, See Jicnvhefworth’s
Voyages.
fiwSiE ytvoiyav
A Boy OSWX yihwcra, k £{ tsw afyos wotyew'
Theoc,


* Think not I covet what you riches call.
Your houfes, land, edates—l fcorn them all.
I 'f crave no jointure of five hundred Ikins,
Nor twice as many pounds to buy my pins ;
Nor yet lhall I the tardy fates reproach.
Pant for the lozenge on my lacker’d coach ;
Or wafte the produce of your floating will.
At fordid Loo, or Dowager Quadrille*
With you, thrice dear Opano, oft I lay.
Within the wigwam ’till the dawn of day*
Then from my pack, with anxious care, for you,
Chofe the bed: dog, and dew’d the nice ragout*
Ah ! how I drove thy curious tade to hit.
From the bak’d viands carv’d the browned bit;
To grace thy table fpread my fined fmocks.
And pour’d the fragrant J Monoe o’er thy locks.
For thee each morn I cull’d the bread tree’s fruit.
And § with my nodrils blew the dulcet flute.
D Thrice
NOTES.
* Non ego miror opes, nec me tua regia iangit.
It is furprifing that Oberea fhould be fo well acquainted with the manners of
Great Britain; but as fhe appears to have had fuch fine parts, we may eafily imagine
that fhe did not fail to profit by her frequent converfations with Mr. Banks.
t The people of Otahcite have a cuftom of anointing their heads with what they
call Monoe, which is an oil exprefl'ed from the cocoa nut.
§ It appears that mufic is cultivated in Otabeite to no fmall degree of perfection.
Indeed this method of blowing the flute with the noflrils is admirably calculated for the
cromatiu-


Thrice happy youth ! what blifs with thine could vie,
To feed on dog’s fleflvand with Queens to lie!
* Parting you wept, this truth at lead you’ll own.
Nor think that weakness, which was love alone.
Stedfaft I gaz’d, till from my aching view.
\ our lelfening canvafs gradually withdrew.
Then to my tent I ran \n wild defpair.
And e’en in dreams renew’d my anxious care.
Whene’er I drove my flumberirfg eyes to clofe.
Terrific phantoms, dread illuflons rofe.
Now o’er the waters I appear’d to. float.
And fondly clafp you in the *f* crazy boat.
J Culling choice flmples, now I feem’d to go.
O’er barren wafles, a wildernefs of woe I
Where’er I turn’d the dread § Morals appear’d.
And the wild flirieks of frantic grief were heard.
At length you beckon, and I leave the fliore.
Then tempefls ’gan to rage, and winds to roar;
The
NOTES.
cromatic. We have heard, with great pleafure, that the Ingenious Dr. Burney intends
to take a voyage to the South Sea to inform hirnfelf, and afterwards to give ibme ao
count to the public, of the ftate of mufic in thofe parts.
* Flefti difeedens , hoc faltem pares negate
—*— 7" gemuit fnb pondere cyrnha
Suti — Us-
femper longam incomltata videtur
Ire viam —-
§1 he fepulehres of the people of Otaheite are called Morals , See Hawkef, Voyages .


( IJ )
The billowy furges Teem’d to lath the tides.
And Ofaheite vanifh’d from my eyes.
Perhaps * Opano (be the omen vain)
If ere thy fliips fhall reach thefe fhores again ;
Yon’ll feek the wigwam where we fondly lay.
And in its place will find my fad Moral.
Yet think at leaft my copious -f tears you fee,
And fpare one thought from Botany for me.
And when with curious fearch thine eyes explore.
The waving fcreft, or the marfhy fhorej
When in ftrong gin thy fkilful hands (hall fleep.
Some unclafs’d fowl or monfter of the deep ;
Think on the raptures which we once have known.
And waft one figh to Otaheite* s throne.
NOTES*
* Tempo verrd anchor forfe
Ob’ aV ufato foggiorno
Torni la fera , bella e manfueta j
E la , ov' ella mi fcorfe
JSfel benedeito giorno,
Volga la vijla defiofa e lieta
Cercandomi: e o pietd
Gia terra infra , le pietre
Vi den da amor I’infpiri
In guifa che fofpin
Si dolcemente - Petrarca;
f The people of Otaheite are remarkable for their fine feelings which generally
produce a copious effufion of tears upon every affefting occafion. See Dr, Hawkef
worth pajfim.
FINIS;


,* > •• ••/Ti»nr4- .o'. ••• -r-
-- ' . ■■ i ■ • - 1 .
.i -ii , : 1 . it : ’
, 1 . L:. . i 5 -
■ *
J i ■ t., * . i w* iii I ■
" ‘ ,* ■ ' * -? r; r\
r.
■ . .
\* ' ■ 's.Villi S'-no £v/
JSrKmti .
jb ■ / .
» - -i. * U * -
■
la' .i? v . ■r ■
T ». .v, * j. i *■■
■
■
I SC «J




3 1508 02016030 0
V - • - - _




