









AN EXCURSION
DAVID BURN.
TASMANIA:
“Examiner" and “Weekly Courier" Offices,
Launceston


ILLUSTRATIONS,
I.—Port Arthur in 1842.
II. —Penitentiary and Prison Buildings.
111. —Model Prison.
IV.—Chapel, Model Prison.
V.—Eagle Hawk Neck.
Vl.—Relics of Convict Discipline.
Vll.—Chart of Tasman Peninsula.


INDEX,
Fork word
An Excursion to Port Arthur 13
Ihk Scknkrv of Frkdkrick Henry Pay 15
The Convict Railway i-
Port Arthur I 9
Sunday at Port Arthur —The Church 20
Convict Like and Treatment 23
The Hospital 26
Point Puer
27
The Point Puer Workshops 29
The Isle op' the Dead 33
Port Arthur Sunday School Anniversary 35
A Youthful Murderer 36
Dockyard and Government Gardens s 37
Flinders Bay Probation Station 39
Eagle Hawk Neck 40
The Commandant nearly Loses His Life 43
Natural Wonders of Eaglp; Hawk Np;ck 44
The Frenchmen and the: Railway 43
Some: Details op - the System at Port Arthur 46
The Port Arthur Telegraph 48
The Pottery 4 9
Same Historical Notes 49
The Military Barracks c Q
I hp: Commandant’s Energy and Forethought 50
Cascade Probation Station 33
Impression Bay Station 54
Escapes rc
Saltwater Creek Agricultural Station 56
The Coal Mines Station 37


Index to Advertisements.
'T'~HE Publisher begs to confidently recommend the following
Last of Advertisers to the notice of Tourists and Visitors
generally, who can depend upon their wants in the different
business departments represented being reliably fulfilled.
HOTELS AND BOARDING ESTABLISHMENTS.
LAUNCESTON. page
Brisbane Hotel 61
“The Metropole ” 62
HOBART.
Heathorn’s Hotel 63
“The Imperial” 64
“ Woodbourne,” Private Boarding Establishment .... 69
TARANNA.
Tasman’s Hotel 65
CARNARVON.
Tasman’s Villa, Private Boarding Establishment ... 68
KAGLEHAWK NECK.
“ Lufra House,” Private Boarding Establishment .... 78
Peninsula Steamer 66
Port Arthur Mail Coach 67
Peninsula Steamer —Providore 67
Photographic Chemist ;.... 70
Tasmanian Shell Necklaces 71
Tasmanian Jewellery, etc 72
Photographer 73
Overland Route —East Coast and Port Arthur 74
Livery Stables, Brake and Hiring Office 75
Tasmanian Sporting Depot 76
Bookseller and Stationer 77


FOREWORD.
E HISTORY of the convict days
of Tasmania will always have
its focus on Tasman Peninsula,
because the peninsula in general,
and Port Arthur (its chief
settlement) in particular, con-
tained the principal machinery
of the whole convict coercive
system.
The convict system, as a system, may he said to
have commenced in Tasmania with the administration of
Colonel George Arthur in 1824. Previous to his
advent there was, practically, no system at all, but
his wonderful administrative capacity, indomitable will
and iron hand, rapidly changed the position of things,
and the huge prison “ Van Diemen’s Land” (for it was
really a penal colony, and Colonel Arthur regarded it
as essentially a prison) soon assumed somewhat of the
routine and character of a vast penitentiary.


For a long time after the settlement of the colony,
convicts committing fresh crimes received additional
punishment by being sent to chain gangs working on
the roads of the colony, or else were transported to either
Port Jackson, or Newcastle, where harsher measures
for their control were in operation, there being no iso-
lated secondary punishment, or penal station then in the
colony for their reception.
Colonel Sorell, Tasmania's third Governor, realis-
ing the necessity for such an establishment, supplied
the want by creating the Macquarie Harbour station,
on the wild western coast of the island, an establishment
which rapidly became notorious for its severity of
punishment, and was a veritable “hell upon earth,” until
its abandonment. The inaccessability of Macquarie
Harbour induced Colonel Arthur to break it up, and he
decided that Tasman Peninsula should be the future
ultra penal station of Van Diemen's Land, and as soon
as suitable buildings were erected at Port Arthur, the
“old hands” at Macquarie Harbour were transferred
to the new station.
Port Arthur was “born” in September, 1830, and
during the long period of 47 years it passed through all
the phases of a human existence—had its childhood, its
manhood, and its old age, and it died and was buried in
1877. The wrecks of its great prisons are, to-day, just
like the ruinous tombstones of a neglected old grave-
yard. giving evidence of the magnitude of its past, and
creating a longing desire in the minds of the curious to
know something of its wonderful history.


The following account of Port Arthur and its de-
pendencies on Tasman Peninsula, is from the pen of an
old colonist of brilliant attainments—David Burn, Esq.,
of Rotherwood, Ouse, and gives a capital, general idea
of the convict establishment at the time when it was
rapidly assuming vast dimensions, teeming with life and
energy, under the administration of the greatest of its
Commandants, Captain Charles O'Hara Booth, of the
21 st Fusiliers.
To the majority the past of Port Arthur is as a
closed book, and, indeed, no complete history of the
place has been, or ever can be written. Fragmentary
sketches there have been, scattered here and there,
which, if collected, would undoubtedly form interesting
reading, but a reliable history, founded on official re-
cords, can never he compiled, because the records have
all been destroyed, and no one now lives who is in a
position to fill the gaps which these missing records
have left.
Air. Burn's account is the most reliable and best
of the published descriptions of Port Arthur, and I have
pleasure in placing it before the public in a readable
form, with illustrations added, all of which have been
obtained from strictly reliable sources.
J. W. BEATTIE.








AN EXCURSION to
CRT
ARTHUR, the once
penal settlement of Tas-
mania, has furnished a
thousand texts lor a thou-
sand fallacious, if not per-
verted commentaries. It
was a place the economy
of which was little under-
stood even in this colony,
and of course utterly un-
As a faithful description
known to the British public
may lead to good purpose, 1 herewith supply a narrative
which I trust may he found as interesting as it is
authentic.
The principle upon which the administration of His
Excellence Sir John Franklin was based being to afford


every facility of investigation and of information, there
existed no difficulty in procuring from the Colonial
Secretary the requisite visiting permission, together
with an order for a passage in one of the colonial Go-
vernment vessels, the only vessels trading to the port.
Thus furnished, on the evening of Thursday, January
6, 1842. 1 embarked in the schooner Elizaj Captain
Hurburgh, a beautiful craft about 150 tons, built at Port
Arthur in 1835. and named after the wife of the late
Lieutenant-Governor. It was designed partly as a yacht
for Sir George Arthur, and partly as a cruiser to lie em-
ployed in chase of any runaways who might carry off
any colonial shipping. We had several passengers;,
amongst the number the Rev. Mr. Simpson, of the
Wesleyan Mission; John Kerr, Esq., Messrs. Agnew,,
Holman, and Major Robertson, with a party of the 96th
Regiment, and a batch of convicts for disposal at differ-
ent stations.
We weighed anchor and made sail with a gentle
land breeze about 4 o'clock of the following morning,,
the barque Lord Goderich, which had landed her con-
victs, standing down the river in company. It was one
of those delicious mornings which inspire the heart and
enchant the senses. The numerous diversified bights
and bays of the glorious Derwent glanced sweet and
softly to the early sun; the country showing fresh and
verdant after the recent rains. About 8 a.m. a mode-
rate sea breeze sprang up. This obliged us to work
to windward to enable us to round the Iron Pot and
Retsy’s Island, a task we completed in a couple of


hours ; after which the lively Eliza was permitted to run
before a steady increasing breeze, which tempered the
otherwise sultry heat of noon.
The Scenery of Frederick Henry Bay.
Point after point opened to our view in swift and
pleasing succession. The water was of mirror-like
smoothness, the bright sands of many a fair shore
glittered gaily, the air seemed charged with odours,
and all nature breathed harmony and joy; in a word,
it was one of those fascinating moments when mere
animal existence is a bliss of transccndant enjoyment.
The breeze continued to freshen, and we sped along
the shores of Frederick Henry Pay with a flowing
sheet. The characteristics of Frederick Henry Bay
bear a somewhat close affinity to the imposing scenery
which greets the visitor of the far-famed Foch Finne.
In the Scottish waters the deep inland projections
are termed lochs, while the like sea-arms of Tasmania
are designated bays. Both are beautiful; each has
its points of resemblance to the other: the southern
mountains, however, unlike the time-worn, weather-
beaten cliffs of poetic Alorvcn, rise and fall in graceful
undulations, and are divested of the savage precipitous
grandeur of the Scottish hills. They are, moreover,
clothed with living wood, and illuminated by a sun that
rarely chases the cold grey mist from the frowning
peaks of the north.
We skirted Slopen Island, had a distant glimpse of
Pittwater and the Carlton, and shortly after noon


entered the magnificent lake-like sea called by Captain
Minders Norfolk Hay. The prospect on every side
was superb—the view ahead terminating in a glorious
salt-water vista, its apex formed by one of those grace-
ful sugar-loaf hills so common to Tasmania. We were
the centre of a moving panorama of beauty, bight after
bight, channel after channel, glen after glen, presented
themselves in endless tortuous variety ; each new feature
basking in all the ethereal loveliness of a spotless
empyrean, seemed more attractive than the preceding;
for in a picture of harmonious grouping, that which
is seen last is ever apt to be the most esteemed. Of
the present it may be truly said there are few scenes
to surpass it; hill, dale, wood, water, blent in one en-
chanting whole. Every eye beamed with pleasure;
every imagination revelled in the ravishing prospect.
We called to land convicts at several probation
stations on Tasman Peninsula, but as these were sub-
sequently visited I shall pass them over for the present,
simply remarking that our coasting trip made it night
ere we let go the anchor off Woody Island, near the
top of Norfolk Hay. The sunset was in keeping with
the beauty of the day, being one of radiant glory,
unsurpassed by any I ever witnessed within the tropics.
The following morning broke forth in heavenly
sweetness. The Eliza floated gracefully on the bright
quiescent waters, and the beauteous landscape, sunk in
calm repose, conveyed anything but an idea of being
the receptacle of Hritain's off-scourings. Guilt and
its attendant punishment seemed at utter Variance with


scenes and climes sufficient of themselves to excite
gratitude and joy. Lovely land, and still more lovely
water! What might you not now be —what must you
not inscrutably become when the felon race, the only
blot on your fair face, shall be merged in the active,
industrious moral peasantry! And yet, humiliating
as is the spectacle of man's degradation, it is still one
cheering feature of the picture that it leads, in a great
measure, to the ultimate compulsory regeneration.
The Convict Railway.
At 9 o'clock we bade adieu to the staunch and fleet
Eliza, landing on the railway jetty at the head of Nor-
folk Lav. This rail, or rather tramway, is formed
from the hardwood of the country, and passes over
a space of five miles, thereby affording a rapid and
easy means of transit between the heads of Norfolk
and Long Bays, the latter which leads to Port Arthur.
This tramway, the projection of Captain Booth, has
proved to be a work of the utmost utility, shortening
the distance between Hobart Town and Port Arthur,
and ensuring a rapid and certain communication at
times when the long sea passage might be impractic-
able. Like many men of superior intellect, it was the
fortune of Captain Booth to encounter the sneers of
the common herd, who, in their narrow-mindedness,
predicted naught but failure in his enterprise. Nothing
daunted, and possessing the confidence of the Gover-
nor, Captain Booth toiled on till they that came to jeer


went back to admire. The tramway, unlike our English,
railways, follows the natural levels of the ground, the
ascent of a hill being compensated in its opposite
descent.
No horse, no ox. no locomotive traverses its
course; the waggons are propelled by convicts, three
men being generally allotted to do the work of each
waggon, which is capable of conveying half a ton
of goods at each transit. Upon emergency the same
gang have made their three journeys and back, thirty
miles a day, conveying thus half a ton per man either
way. It jars harshly against the feelings to behold
man, as it were, lowered to the standard of the brute,
to mark the unhappy, guilty creatures toiling and
struggling along, their muscular powers exerted to the
utmost, and the perspiration bursting profusely from
every pore, it is a harrowing picture; and yet a little
calm reflection will show that it is rendered more
peculiarly so by place and circumstance. Let us but
tax our memory, and we shall find hundreds of free
British labourers whose drudgery is fully equal to that
on this tramway. This tends in some degree to
dissipate the revolting idea which, nevertheless, still
usurps possession of the imagination, and shocks the
heart. And yet the tramway is a step of the pro-
bationer's advancement, Captain Booth arguing justly
that the convict who cannot resist the greater facility
which it affords of pilfering or absconding, is unfit
to be trusted in the less restricted parts of the Island.


Port Arthur.
Hy noon Major Robertson, Holman, and myself
had traversed the tramway on foot—no passenger-
vehicles were to be had at the moment, owing to the
few in use being engaged to convey Captain Sullivan,
of H.M. sloop Favourite, and a party to the coal mines.
I ransferring the soldiers and their baggage to a launch,
we embarked in a fine four-oared whaleboat, and after
a short pull Port Arthur opened its capacious basin to
our astonished and delighted gaze. “What! this the
pandemonium—this the repository of the worst of
.guilt!" was the natural exclamation bursting from our
lips. \\ hatever the core, the outside is a goodly and
enchanting one.
What lovely bays ! What noble basins ! What
splendid anchorage! An anchorage not whollv un-
conscious of freightage nor the ample means of equip-
ment, for on its dark-green waters floated the Ladv
Franklin, a strong, staunch, wholesome-looking
barque (just launched), of 270 tons burthen, and a few
yards off H.M. 18-gun sloop Favourite was stripping,
preparatory to undergoing a thorough refit. We
landed at the Commissariat Pier, where we were met
by Mr. Cart, the Superintendent of Convicts, through
whose kindness we were quickly enabled to present
our credentials to the Commandant. Captain Booth
welcomed us with the greatest urbanity, presenting
us to his accomplished partner, and courteously in-
viting us to take up our quarters with him—an invita-
tion we gladly accepted, Port Arthur being vet un-


conscious of an hotel, lodging-house, or any place of
entertainment; in fact, every residence is a Covernment
Sunday at Port Arthur —The Church.
Next dav being Sunday, we proceeded after break-
fast to see the convicts mustered prior to their being-
marched to church. They were drawn up in three lines,
each gang forming a separate division —the overseers
(convicts) taking their stations in the rear. ft was
hideous to remark the countenances of the men, to
which their yellow raiment (or half black, half yellow),,
with P.A., and their respective numbers stamped in
various parts, imparted a sinister and most revolting
expression. Scarcely one open set of features was to
be found. To read their eyes, it seemed as though
they were speculating the chance of gain or advantage
to be hoped from us. Crime and its consequences were
fearfully depicted in their visages; and we turned from
the disagreeable caricature of humanity with as much
disgust as pity and regret. Muster over, the men
were marched with the utmost silence to church, whither
we shortly followed, a military guard with loaded arms
being so stationed as to command the entire building.
This necessary arrangement in a great degree
destroyed the solemnity of worship. The crew of
HALS. Favourite were present; their frank, manly,,
jovial countenances offering a striking contrast to the
lowering aspects of the miserable yellow jackets. Ser-
vice was performed by our fellow-traveller, the Rev.


1 i
Rh ,;
■ _ g
#•
if ■ i
Ri ;
► ' A
Be
1
||
<u
/mlffl
111
1
Ilf Mk
Ip -
jl
|| J^T—-».
nil
Ir-HHH# ■ '■
K. wHHP mk J* i
1 ImBI
'1
ftft_,.1F
■p
f mm
w
mil few
9*
V
\k
I
|
■» ? . B'MH
iff
14.
•1:
. i ?■ * 1 * •**. <**
H * « f pTr
:t t?'
Ok i
Hi Bit
fl| >
m , iVlj
B i M
L-~ |p> ■ . '
*1 ■ y
•t| ;H||j|l • ■■ y
B v, |
;l'aAi. '
f. *
E • 4
v v : '
» V") V ;• -f > /-.■.,
I I .
■ i
7 r. i i >V 1
& . iip ■ «■
ft *
1 ,'C:
A
X




Mr. Simpson, and the occasion being- in aid of the
Sunday School, the worthy pastor took the opportunity
of remarking that as cash was a scarce commodity on
the settlement, the lOTT of any individual disposed
to contribute would be gladly received —an observa-
tion which received a general grin, since, however bene-
ficial it might prove to the cause, the expression
seemed more fit for the gaming-table than the pulpit.
The language, however, was soon forgotten in the
motive.
The church at Port Arthur is a beautiful, spacious,
hewn-stone edifice, cruciform in shape, with pinnacled
tower and gables. Internally it is simply but neatly
fitted, affording accommodation for upwards of 2,000
sitters. There is no organ ; but a choir has been selected
from among the convicts, who chant the psalms with
considerable effect. As yet no clergyman of the Estab-
lished Church has been resident, the religious duties
having hitherto been undertaken by those zealous and
indefatigable Christians, the Wesleyans. Mr. Manton
is the present respected pastor, a gentleman who has
devoted himself, not only to call the sinners of Port
Arthur to repentance, but who has erstwhile laboured
earnestly in the same good cause at the now abandoned
settlement of Macquarie Harbour.
Convict Life and Treatment.
After service we accompanied the Commandant
to the cook-house, where the respective rations were
about to be issued. The manner in which this is


arranged is admirable. The messes, varying from 12 to
26 men, are berthed in chambers of the penitentiary,
affording accommodation for their respective numbers.
Each of these messes select, in daily rotation, two dele-
gates, who receive the victuals, and afterwards apportion
each man his share. That this may be fairly done, the
mess," drawn up in double lines before the table, surveys
the partition. They then sit down and consume all the
food that is set before them, it being one of the impera-
tive regulations that nothing shall be laid by, a measure
to ensure the impossibility of husbanding, and thereby
obtaining a provision in case of absconding. So rigidly
is this necessary precaution enforced that eating out of
season becomes a punishable offence, and no food (fish
or kangaroo, for example), caught in the bush is on any
pretext permitted to be consumed there. The meal
r fforded the convict is not only ample but nutritious,
consisting of excellent soup, good wheaten bread (I
tasted both), and beef, mutton, or pork—such a meal,
indeed, as would rejoice the heart and gladden the eyes
of many an honest, hard-working, hungry, Briton.
Breakfast and supper of bread and a pint of skilly. The
clothing of the convicts is of woollen cloth, dyed yellow,
or partly black, partly yellow. They are furnished with
two complete suits, shirts, and boots a year. Their
quarters are clean, well ventilated, and frequently white-
washed. They have a sufficiency of bedding, which
during the day is folded up, each man sleeping in 3
separate berth. In the first ward we entered, Jones, the
Chartist watchmaker, was acting overseer to the mess,


which comprised some refractory lads. He said grace
for them before meat. He appeared to be circumspect
and orderly, although upon his first arrival he wore the
aspect of a sottish, dissipated mechanic, and was dis-
posed to talk rather freely and unwarrantably. A hint,
however, sufficed. He has learned his place, and seems
to be in full health and vigour. When not employed in
trifling repairs in his own trade, he works in the tailor s
shop. Williams is likewise at Port Arthur. In the first
instance, having assumed a specious character, and
being in some degree conversant with mining, he was
sent to the coal mines. There he inveigled some of
his companions, built a boat, and effected a temporary
escape; being re-captured, he was sent to Port Arthur,
where he at present works in one of the chain gangs.
I did not see Williams, who is represented as a bad,
designing man. Some of his associates in flight were
a short while at large. During that period they com-
mitted a murder, for which they were executed, a penalty
they ought never, perhaps, have incurred, but for the
temptation of Williams. From the penetentiary barracks
we proceeded to the silent cells, the rations of whose
inmates are only bread and water. In one we found
a juvenile murderer, of whom more anon. In another
was a man confined for habitual absconding. A short
period only had elapsed since he had been rescued from
death by exhaustion. He was discovered at the last
extremity, conveyed to the hospital, recovered with
difficulty, and no sooner recovered than he again at-
tempted a similar rash and fruitless hazard.


The Hospital.
From the cells we went to the hospital, where we
had a signal opportunity of drawing a wholesome moral
from the sad—the miserable consequences of crime.
There, upon a stretcher, lay Henry Savary, the once
celebrated Bristol sugar baker, a man upon whose birth
fortune smiled propitiously, whose family and kindred
moved in the very first circles, and who himself occu-
pied 110 inconsiderable place in his fellow citizens'
esteem. The forgery (in 1825) and the miraculous
escape from execution of this unhappy man cannot have
escaped the public mind. Acting under the advice of
several magistrates at Bristol, Savary pleaded guilty to
the offence, refusing, although earnestly counselled by
the Judge (Gifford) to amend his plea. He was in
consequence sentenced to death, and his crime occurring
so recently after Fauntleroy’s, his execution was deemed
equally certain. The punishment, however, was com-
muted to transportation for life; and Savary shortly
afterwards arrived in this colony, where he was em-
ployed as a writer in one of the public departments.
Having left a wife in England who was tenderly at-
tached to him, she speedily followed her husband, but
the ship (the Jessie Lawson) in which she had taken her
passage was wrecked on the Hoe at Plymouth. The
passengers, nevertheless, escaped,and Mrs Savary, noth-
ing daunted, embarked in another vessel. She escaped
shipwreck in her second conveyance; but, unless report
be false, made a shipwreck of her husband’s peace of
mind. The domestic affliction here alluded to is painfully


narrated in a tale called “Quintus Servington,” a work
published by Savary in Hobart Town in 1830, and which
■appears to be an authentic memoir so far of his ill-
starred career. Goaded to frenzy, the miserable Savary
attempted his life by drawing a razor across his throat.
Ihe wound, however, was not mortal, and he was
discovered in time to save Jus life. Shortly after his
wife and child returned to England; and Savary subse-
quently obtaining a ticket-of-leave, engaged in farming
became bankrupt—ag'ain had recourse to forgery—
was again .convicted, and subjected to the ordeal of
-Port Arthur. I here he experienced a shock of paralysis,
and there, ere long, in all human probability, the mis-
guided man will terminate his wretched career. (Savary
died shortly after, on February 5, 1842.)
It has been said by the slanderers of the colony that
vice makes converts. I would that His Grace of Dublin,
or even his ally of the “Colonial Gazette,” could have
stood, as I did, by Savary s pallet—could have witnessed
the scarce-healed wound of his attenuated throat—the
lack-lustre glare of his hollow eye. 1 think even they
would have felt inclined to doubt the siren’s blandish-
ments. Knowing, as 1 did at Bristol, some of Savary's
wealthy, dashing, gay associates, I could not contemp-
late the miserable felon before me without sentiments
of the deepest compassion, mingled with horror and
awe. I here he lay —a sad, a solemn warning.
Point Puer.
Embarking in a splendid six-oared whaleboat we
crossed the bay to Point Puer, the boy thief’s establish-


nient. They were busily occupied in learning and re-
peating the catechism. At the penitentiary of Point
Puer we encountered Queen Caroline's celebrated wit-
ness, Lieutenant Flvnn, of the Navy, a miscreant who
was convicted in 1839, at the Old Bailey, of forging
poor widows’ pension tickets. For this fellow Queen
Caroline obtained the third-class order of St. herdinand,
and since his arrival here letters have been actually
addressed to Sir John Flynn. Lights are kept burning
throughout the night in the penitentiary barracks, the
inmates of which are never for a moment sure when
or bv whom they may be visited. We accompanied
the Commandant in one of his tours of inspection, visit-
ing several of the wards at 10 p.m. In one the odour
of tobacco smoke was discerned, and as the possession
of tobacco is an offence against the regulations, notice
was given that the entire ward would be placed in charge
until the smoker was known. When we came away they
had not discovered the offender, and in consequence
every man was made to sleep in a silent apartment. In
passing along the road on the settlement after dark,
every sentry challenges, and without the countersign
even the Commandant would be peremptorily detained.
Every soldier invariably bears loaded arms; the peni-
tentiary yards are commanded in various places. They
are repeatedly visited, and such is the severity of dis-
cipline, such the rigidity of scrutiny, aye, and such the
felons mutual distrust, that anything like concerted
revolt is as hopeless as impracticable. We slept in
perfect tranquility in a house unconscious of window
shutters —guiltless of window fastenings.


The Point Puer Workshops.
Having witnessed the devotional exercises of Point
Puer, we next morning paid a visit to the various work-
shops. In this admirable establishment between 600
and 700 boys are taught the means of obtaining an
honest livelihood. When first received they are in-
structed in the use of the spade, the hoe, and the grub
bing axe. They clear, break up, fence, and cultivate
their own land, the product being principally confined
to potatoes, cabbages, turnips, and other vegetables.
After a term of good conduct the option of trade is
conceded as a boon, five or six kinds of handicraft
being submitted for election. At the head of each
department the necessary instructions are to be found;
and as means and opportunities admit, these are chosen
from among persons arriving free in the colony. The
juvenile sawyers first attracted our notice; of these
there are from 15 to 20 pairs. At present they work
in open pits, but sheds are in progress to shelter them
from the weather. These lads not only cut sufficient
timber for their own buildings, but furnish considerable
supplies to the other work. The boat-builders’ depart-
ment, in which is Kirby, the poisoner of his master at
Lincoln, now a young man of exemplary conduct, comes
next under review. There a beautiful whaleboat of
Huon pine, the timbers of light (a resemblance of rose)
wood, was rapidly attaining completion. At the cooper-
age, tubs, buckets, mess kids, and ship buoys were in
progress of manufacture. About 50 tailors actively cut
out and make up clothing, while there are 75 shoe-


makers equally assiduous in their vocation. Every
scrap of old iron is turned to account in the black-
smith’s shop, where the boys were converting frag-
ments of hoops into nails, rivets, and the like. At the
carpenter's shop they were framing doors and window
sashes, and preparing boards. The bookbinders were
in full employ, having several of Mr. Manton’s volumes
in hand. The turners alone were inactive. I must
here remark that any of the boy or adult mechanics
or labourers performing work for any of the civil or
military officers, a record of the amount of such service
is kept and charged against the employer. Some £SOO
a year thereby finds its way into the military chest.
Ihe stonemasons were next visited. Thev have a great
variety of material prepared and preparing for the pur-
pose of erecting a large and substantial barrack, to-
gether with an extensive range of improved workshops.
At the bakery a large supply of goodly provender, the
production of sundry juveniles, met our eyes, whilst the
savoury steams of the cook-house induced us to take
a peep at the excellent fare, the boys being allowed
an equal ration with the adult. Before dinner the boys
are taught a habit of cleanliness by being obliged to
wash. A short space is also allotted to play, and everv
afternoon half of the youngsters attend school. Al-
though the origin of this establishment be founded in
guilt, it is one of deep interest, for, from the very core
of crime, there springs the cherished hope of fairer,
happier days. Infamy may be lost in industry, sin give
place to grace, and transportation itself may, through






the blessing of God, be the balsam of the reckless. Such
consummation is within the power of all. Many, no
doubt, have, and will again clutch the offered gift; and I
earnestly hope, as I sincerely believe, that many will
bless the hour they saw Point Puer, which, under Provi-
dence, may prove the salvation (body and soul) of
hundreds. Several instructed there are already earning
comfortable livelihoods in various parts of the colony,
and numbers have feelingly acknowledged to Captain
Booth the blessings they thence derived. How many
■of England's poor but virtuous children would be over-
joyed with the full provisions, excellent lodging, and
comfortable clothing—not to say a word of the bene-
ficial instruction—of Point Puer !
The Isle of the Dead.
On our return to the settlement we landed at a
small island named, from its funeral purposes, “Isle des
Morts,” or Dead Men's Isle. Within its sea-girt shores,
almost its first occupant, lies Dennis Collins, the sailor
who threw a stone at King William- the Fourth on
one of the English racecourses. Here likewise repose
the ashes of May, the burker of the Italian boy. Here,
moreover, are monuments to several free persons who
have died during service at Port Arthur, or perished
in its vicinity; of the latter are three seamen wrecked
in the schooner Echo, two seamen of Government
vessels, and several soldiers of the 21st, 51st, and 63rd
Regiments. Over the remains of Robert Young, a
soldier of the 51st, accidentally drowned, his sorrow


mg comrades have reared the recording stone, on which
a poetic private has written the following:—
His melancholy fate doth plainly prove
The frail uncertainty of human life ;
Oh, may his soul attain that blest abode,
Which knows no human misery or strife.
Michael Gibbons, a private of the 21st, who lost his-
wife shortly after child-birth, and who was left with
two infant children, in his own verse thus weeps his sad
bereavements:—
When worth and truth like her descend to dust,
Grief is adept, and sorrow is more just;
Such cause has he to weep who pious pays
The last sad tribute of his love and praise.
Trust he shall meet her on that happy shore,
Where pain and sickness there shall be no more.
Dead Men's Isle is a picturesquely sorrowful spot
—so soothing in its melancholy, so placid in its solitude
that a friend of mine, the late Dr. Macbraire, when
medical officer at the settlement, under the impression
of approaching doom, requested that he might be laid
within its leafy shores. Macbraire, however, was
destined to mingle his dust with that of Albion, where,
my wanderings o’er. I yet look forward to deposit my
own.
It is not alone in funeral verse that Port Arthur
has been sung, Mr. Ellcrman, first lieutenant of H.M.S.
Favourite, having struck the chord in glowing measure.


Port Arthur Sunday School Anniversary.
Port Arthur is a place of wonders. Where naught
but sin and crime are assumed to exist, the seeds of
religion and virtue have been carefully planted, and
the blossoms of goodliness are seen to germinate. Even
the yellow jacket may covCi many a repentant and re-
turning heart. As a kind of guiding star, a spiritual
oasis in this moral desert, a Sabbath school has been
instituted for the children of the officers, soldiers, over-
seers, and others. This day, the 10th of January, the
anniversarv meeting and exmination were held. The
muster was a goodly one, comprising 34 hoys and girls
of various ages. -V number of excellent instructive
books were provided as prizes for the most exemplary
attendants, the most diligent and proficient scholars.
In each branch a hot competition ensued, and in many
instances so earnest was the struggle that Captain
Booth, the patron of the institution, felt some difficulty
in awarding the palm. The examination over, the chil-
dren proceeded to a marquee formed by the Favourite’s
sails and flags, and tastefully adorned with a profusion
of native wreaths and garlands. In this marquee they
enjoyed a fete al fresco, tea, coffee, cake, raspberries,
gooseberries, currants, and other fruits being abund-
antlv supplied. It was an era in their lives, an event
of pleasing contemplation to the spectators. The chil-
dren satisfied, a like refreshment was next provided for
their delighted parents, and after some very apposite
observations from the patron, the Revs,. Messrs. Manton
and Simpson as also Major Robertson (elected a mem-


bei of the committee), the state of the funds were de-
clared. hrom this it appeared that a balance of £1 10s.
remained in hand from last year’s account; that 10s.
had been collected the preceding day; that the tea
tickets (is. each) and one or two contributions amounted
9 r £3 f os. • and that, therefore, there were between
113 and £l4 available for the purchase of next year’s
prizes. 1 o the honour of Port Arthur's contributions
it should be mentioned that only a few weeks had elapsed
since they had subscribed above £\6 in aid of the Wes-
leyan Missionary Fund.
A Youthful Murderer.
( hi I uesday we visited the several artificers’ shops,
which are a mere adult duplicate of Point Puer. At the
irensmiths we witnessed the operation of file-cutting,
i rom the factories we walked to the scene of a recent
atrocious, motiveless murder. It is about three-quarters
of a mile from the settlement, in a lonely, gloomy dell
some of the neighbouring irees are stiU splashed with
the victim’s blood. From the depositions it appears that
the murderer, Belfield, a lad of 18, and Broadman, a lad
of 17, were at work in the vicinity. Belfield complained of
thirst, and Boardman went some short distance to show
the other a creek where he might slake it. Both were
seen to leave the gang, but Belfield alone returned; and,
when questioned by the overseer of his comrade, he de-
dal ed he had bolted, pointing in the opposite direc-
tion of the path they had pursued. Boardman was ac-
cordingly reported as an absconder. A couple of days


elapsed, when a man cutting- brooms thought he heard
groans, which as he approached grew mere distinct,
until, at the foot of a gigantic gum tree, clotted with
goie and fly-blown, he beheld the hapless sufferer.
Shouting for aid and hastening to the creek, he washed
the vermin from the mouth of the mangled creature, who
was so disfigured as to be unknown by his comrade
the person who sought to relieve him. “Don’t you know
me, Tom , J lam Sydney." Assistance having arrived
he was forthwith conveyed to the hospital. He suffi-
ciently recovered to identify his assassin. It appears
that they had no sooner reached the creek than Board-
man was assaulted by Belfield, who dealt him some
severe blows on the head; the stick breaking, Belfield
seized a heavier one, and belaboured the poor fellow until
he became insensible. Xot satisfied, the young monster
jobbed a haftless knife between the spinal process
of the neck, and then fled to concoct the story of ab-
sconding. Boardman lingered until January 2, and Bel-
fEld is now in Hobart Town Gaol. When we saw him
in the cell at Port Arthur, he looked a poor, simple,
well-featured boy, with a countenance anything but
ferocious. He did not attempt to deny his guilt to Mr.
Manton, but wept bitterly. He assigned no reason for
the bloody deed, and as no probable cause can be traced
it is one of utter mystery.
Dockyard and Government Gardens
At the dock-yard we found most of the people
busily prepared to heave down H.M.S. Favourite in


order to thoroughly refit her —another launch for the
Lady Franklin,a lighter.and an exquisitely proportioned
18-ton gnu-boat, calculated to carry a long 32-pounder,
were in a very forward state, and tne timber of a 100-
ton cutter in process of conversion. W e visited the
Favourite, a cruiser of 430 tons and 18 guns, with a crew
of jolly lads that my quondam acquaintances, Monarch
and Vernon, would have leapt sky high at. yrom the
Favourite we made a trip to the Government grounds,
in local parlance styled the garden. Several men were
employed building a rick of well-made hay. 1 his domain
is an enchanting spot, of which the pencil, not the
pen, can convey adequate conception; wood, water,
earth, sky, all contrive to gladden the eye and charm
the sense. Here at some future (perchance not very
distant) day, when penitentiary and penal settlements
have ceased to exist, here in one of the most beautiful
bays, with a shore of tlie purest sand, and waters of
pellucid hue, here the Tasmanian steamers will flock
with their joyous freightage of watering-place visitors,
whilst the present settlement, an easy distance off, will
eventually resolve itself into one or the finest and most
important naval arsenals —a Plymouth of the South.
The security and amplitude of the haven, the facility of
equipment, and the superabundance of choice building
materials, all conducing to the certainty of such result.
On our return we boarded the Lady Franklin, fitting
with the utmost despatch as a troop and store ship.
The brig Tamar shortly afterwards came to anchor, and
in the course of the evening the beautiful Eliza, so that


Port Arthur boasted a larger fleet than I have some-
times, not many } 7 ears back, seen in Hobart Town.
Flinders Bay Probation Station
The following morning (Wednesday, the 12th) we
accompanied the Commandant on a visit to the Proba-
tion Station at blinders Bay, one of the numerous inden-
tations of Norfolk Bay. Our course was by the tram-
way, and a part of the route by which we first reached
Port Arthur. Blinders Ba_v is a new and very primitive
station, under the superintendence of Mr. Smith. There
are 200 convicts under his charge, and a serg'eant and
12 privates of the 99th Regiment. They are as yet
domciled in bark huts; but slab ones are preparing, as
also cottages for the superintendent; Mr. Kilgour, the
surgeon; Mr. Dove, the catechist, and several assist-
ants. It may save repetition if I here remark that a
“complete” probation station is governed by i superin-
tendent, three assistant superintendents, a competent
number of overseers (all freemen), a surgeon, a catechist,
and a military detachment; in addition, a visiting
magistrate is placed in such a part of the country that
two or more stations may come within his inspection.
Mie men are employed in the erection of all the requi-
site buildings, forming roads and bridges, grubbing,
fencing, and cultivating land, which in an unproved con-
dition, will, it is presumed, at some future day, be sold
for the public behoof. As their probationary terms ex-
pire, the convict- are removed to Slopen Island, a
station whence they are subsequently otherwise disposed


of. Flinders Bay party is yet in the earliest of these
stages, being employed in felling, burning off, and clear-
ing land, and providing themselves with the necessary
quarters. It is a magnificent looking location, with an
ample supply (even at this dry season) of water.
The land seems poor and exceedingly stony, but
after the soil I have seen reclaimed and made productive
it would be extremely rash to pronounce Flinders im-
practicable. Its position is one of very great advantage.
Eagle Hawk Neck.
Having made the tour of inspection, we set sail for
Eagle Hawk Neck —a hummocky, sandy isthmus, situ-
ated at the extreme of a deep bight. This isthmus is
about a quarter of a mile in length, and 300 yards in!
breadth. Sentries are posted night and day, and a yet
■lore infallible security, a chain of 13 ferocious dogs is-
placed at intervals across its breadth, these dogs receiv-
ing a regular ration from the commissariat. At night
a row of lamps in the same direction as the dogs is lit up,
a measure which precludes the possibility of escape.
This singular formation is thus the secure key of Tas-
man Peninsula, and what is very remarkable, there is a
like key (East Bay Neck) to Forrestier Peninsula. The
first is a subaltern’s guard ; the latter is only now being
made a post. These singular formations Fad one to
the almost natural conclusion that Tasman and For-
restier Peninsulas were designed for the purpose to-
which they have been applied.






The convicts know the hopelessness of escape; that
the least appearance of smoke would betray their
whereabouts, because its existence would be communi-
cated from every signal-hill; that they could not possibly
ford the cordon on either isthmus; and, therefore, that
being without food, fire, or water, they had but one of
two alternatives—a lingering death, or inevitable sur-
render. Under such considerations it must be self-
evident that no place could be better chosen than Tas-
man and Forrestier Peninsulas. The former comprises
an area of 45.000 acres, the latter of 15.000. nearly one-
half whereof is available, and much of it very excellent
land—land that the probation parties must ere long turn
to good account —land which, whenever the peninsulas
become free settlements, will be the object >'f earnest
competition, intersected, as it will be, by capital roads,
and accessible on so many points to water carnage.
The Commandant nearly loses his Life.
It was on Forrestier Peninsula that Captain Booth,
some three vears ago, had nearly perished. In the
anxious desire to make himself personally conversant
with certain localities, he became entangled in an almost
impervious scrub until at length extrication was heyond
his power. The hammer of one pistol broke in the
attempt to strike a light; the other was so saturated that
it refused to give fire. Quite overpowered, he laid him-
eslf down and slept. He awoke chilly and torpid, again
to sink in a state of exhaustion. In this horrifying state
did this excellent officer witness the fall of four succes-


sivc nights—the dawn of five succeeding days, without
drink, without food, without hope. His toes had begun
to mortify (the flesh sloughed away), and a lingering
and agonising death seemed at hand. Suddenly the
woods echoed to the bugles of his anxious comrades, but
theif commander was too far gone to utter a response.
It seemed a mockery- —an offer of life, but beyond his
power of reach. His two faithful kangaroo dogs clung
to their master’s side. He saw them lick the hoar from
the frozen leaves, a hint whereby he profited, and felt
in some degree revived. God at length was gracious;
the numerous parties in cpiest of the missing com-
mandant drew near. The dogs sprang to greet them;
and, after a hundred hours of famine and horror, Captain
Booth was snatched from death, but with an enfeebled
frame and impaired constitution.
Natural Wonders of Eagle Hawk Neck.
Ensign Wilson, of the 96th Regiment, the officer in
command at Eagle Hawk Neck—a merry, good natured,
generous voting man —was on the look out, and enter-
tained us most hospitably at his quarters. The further
shore of the Isthmus is washed by the mighty Pacific,
which throws its billows into the beautiful sandy cove
called Pirate’s Bay. In this bay portions of the cliff’s base
assume the complexion of natural works, as remarkable
as Stafifa or the Giant's Causeway. This consists in
layers of rock in square, long, oblong, lozenge, tri-
angular, and other shapes, all jointed with the most
beautiful and perfectly regularity—some bound, as it


were, with an iron band, some perfectly smooth on the
surface, some ridged and fluted, some rounded in the
-centre, with a fine cut-down border. Altogether it is a
formation as beautiful as it is singular; and although
dissimilar,yet, in default of a more appropriate definition,
has been styled the Tesselated Pavement. Some of the
•officers of the Erebus and Terror removed a portion,
which may probably find its way to the United Service
Institution. In future times this pavement wifi become
as much the object of Tasmanian, as Staffa. and the
Causeway are of Scotch and Irish pride : and it is paying
Pirate’s Bay no small compliment when I pronounce its
cliffs and promontories to be fully equal to the bold and
varied scenery of the Antrim coast.
The Frenchmen and the Railway.
On onr return to the settlement, we had no idea
of the speed of the tramway. There is a shoot of a
mile and a half near the head of Long Ray, which is
traversed at the rate of 40 miles an hour, ft requires
some little nerve at first to keep one's composure; be-
cause, once in motion, there are no stoppages, and the
least obstruction would, as Jonathan says, “Send
carriages and their contents to immortal smash.” The
officers of the French frigate Artemise were in ecstacies
with this descent, which, on a larger scale, reminded
them of the Montagues Russes of Paris: down they
went, hallooing, shouting, screaming, like madmen.


Some Details of the System at Port Arthur.
The night of Wednesday was a turbulent one, blow-
ing half a gale; but the morning sun that was to light
us on our homeward path broke bright and genial.
However disagreeable to its constrained visitors, we
found Port Arthur a place of beauty, kindness, courtesy,
and goodwill; a place where we enjoyed all the comforts
and many of the luxuries of life ; and these imparted
with cordial welcome devoid of affectation.
To take a summary of our five days’ residence—a
space sufficiently long to see and form a correct opinion
of everything, —we arrived at the conclusion that the
main purposes of its creation were wrought out with
consummate skill and great humanity. The discipline
is, of necessity, rigidly severe; not a fault—no, not the
most trivial is overlooked; the most anxious, the most
searching enquiry ever precedes punishment, and the
offender is made to feel that its infliction proceeds from
no arbitrary capricious tyranny, but is the inevitable
and well-known reward of his own malpractices. The
convicts are distributed as much as possible in various
classified gangs. Upon their arrival they are closely
searched, being prohibited from having money, tobacco,,
or any document. The standing regulations of the
settlement are then read, and an earnest caution to act
in conformity given. They are next taken to the hospital,,
where each undergoes an individual examination by the
medical officer. Labour proportionate to their strength
is then assigned, the physically incapacitated being em-
ployed in stone-breaking. Men are removed from the


more laborious gangs according as their behaviour is
good, or their sentences expire. All new comers sleep
in silent apartments (a sore punishment) for periods
commensurate with the nature of their offence, such
periods increasing in a twofold degree to those who have
previously been at the settlement. The carrying gang
is deemed the most severe. This gang, sometimes 60
or 70 in number, transport on their shoulders immense
spars (the masts and yards of a 300-ton ship, for
■example) from the forest to the dockyards. The
inequality of pressure will at once be obvious ; some men
during the different stages of transit sometimes sustain-
ing a couple of hundredweight, sometimes less than
4olb. The dockyard gang is scarcely less laborious
than the carrying, the men being frequently immersed
in water to the neck while securing naval timber to
the launches for the purpose of transport to the arsenal.
It must be borne in mind that no beasts of burden are
permitted either at Port Arthur or the probation sta-
tions, and that, consequently, all the drudgery of labour
is borne by the convicts. The chain gangs are em-
ployed in carting stone, firewood, or drawing water for
general use. The most habitual absconders, like the
French felons of the Hague, are not only put in irons,
but fastened to a chain, where they are made to break
stones under the eye of every passer-by; a punishment
the most intolerably galling. Every week there is a
muster for medical inspection. Thev strip to the
waist, because a man’s face may greatly belie his bodily
energies. If an individual bv flacciditv of muscle or


other unequivocal token gives evidence of being over-
tasked he is either removed to lighter labour or received
into the hospital, as the urgency of the case may de-
mand.
Exclusive of the gangs already enumerated, there
are- sawyers, splitters, quarrymen, masons, grubbers,
gardeners, watermen, tramway men, and all the different
artisans. Half an hour before evening muster a ball is
suspended at one of the yard-arms of the semaphore as
a signal to those that work in the bush to make their
way to headquarters, any absentee being returned as
absconded.
The Port Arthur Telegraph.
A telescope and a semaphore are excellent tell-tales,
and the telegraphic code of Captain Booth has been
brought to a very high pitch of perfection. By it very
long messages are conveyed to and from Hobart Town
and Port Arthur in an incredibly short space. An answer
to one sent by ourselves, and responded to in a short
space, may suffice, the distance being 50 miles either
way. It was this—‘‘The Commandant is informed there
have been no arrivals from England also, ‘‘That Mr.
W aterhouse is much the same as he was." These sema-
phores are all worked by convicts, constantly liable to
removal. W ere they as they should be, given as a reward
with a small salary to discharged soldiers, they might be
made more efficient, and. if extended throughout the
colony, should give the death blow to every species of
absconding.


The Pottery.
There is a factory, hitherto overlooked, where
bricks, tiles, gutter tiles, flower pots, and other similar
articles are manufactured. From the excellence of the
clay, the commodities are of the most superior quality,
so much so that the use of a pug-mill and a careful selec-
tion of material might prove the means of creating a
pottery of infinite value, whence a ware little inferior
to Wedgwood might be produced. As it is, Port
Arthur brick kilns not only supply all the wants of the
settlement and Point Puer, but exports largely to Ho-
bart Town, both for Government appropriation as well
as for general sale; in fact, the excess of production (in
numerous articles) available for exportation leaves a
large balance to the credit of the penal settlement.
Some Historical Notes.
Port Arthur was at one time the receptacle of edu-
cated convicts, who upon their arrival in the colony were
wont to be ordered thither. The protection system has
now put an end to that, and it is only used as a place
of secondary punishment for re-convicted offenders, and
boys direct from England, who, as far as practicable,
are taught reformation through the iron hand of
coercion. Port Arthur was founded by Colonel Arthur
as an experimental station in 1830. Dr. Russell, assistant
surgeon of the 63rd Regiment, was sent down in the
double capacity of medical officer and Commandant,
with 16 or 17 convicts at his disposal. The present site
was at once fixed upon, and the infant scion increased


under the several rules of Captain Mahon, Major Briggs,
and Captain Gibbons, of the 63rd Regiment. It was
on St. Patrick's Day. 1833, that le present active,
intelligent, and enterprising Commandant assumed the
reins of office, which, during his nine years’ career he
has-wielded with skill and integrity of purpose that
cannot sufficientlv be commended. Much as die colony
itself is the wonder of strangers, as much is Port Arthur
the source of wonder to the comparatively few colonists
who have visited its shores.
The Military Barracks
I have already spoken of its elegant church, but
I have made no mention of its strikingly picturesque
militarv barracks, which are constructed of the finest
hewn stone, and are capable of containing 100 men.
The front entrance is through a handsome castellated,
or rather battlemented round tour, which commands the
settlement. From this we pass through a tolerabh
spacious parade ground leading to an elevated espla-
nade, conducting in turn to a verandah opening to the
different barrack-rooms. Ihere is a large yard in the
rear with a like round tower nearly finished, the bottom
of which is to constitute a magazine, the roof serving
the purpose of a watch post. In a line with the barracks,
and upon a precisely similar plan, a new hospital is
about to be erected.
The Commandant’s Energy and Forethought.
The bay at the head of which the church stands is,
like Sullivan Cove, very shallow. This Captain Booth


RKUCS OF CONVICT DISCIPLINE.
/, W. Beattie , Hobart,




is filling in ; and upon the recovered territory a new
and extensive penitentiary will forthwith be constructed.
All the streets and buildings are laid out with the
strictest care. The future is not overlooked in the pre-
sent —everv edifice is convertible, and whenever Port
Arthur becomes, which it one day must, a flourishing,
free arsenal, the zeal and judgment of Captain Booth
will be fully apparent and duly appreciated. Port
Arthur has never failed to strike every stranger ; even I,
somewhat familiar with the railway pace of penal
■colonies, felt impressed with unmingled surprise. Sub-
stantial stone buildings, tasteful cottages, extensive
factories, luxuriant gardens; all the means and appli-
ances of civilised and social life. And yet this enchant-
ing spot, this beautiful creation, like “a goodly apple
rotten at the core,” is but the guarded receptacle of
Britain’s refuse, and of the civil and military establish-
ments requisite for the working of their purgation.
Cascade Probation Station.
Bidding adieu to Port Arthur we again crossed the
tramway, again embarked at the head of Norfolk Bay,
arriving after a short and pleasant sail at Cascade. This
is an incipient probation station, commenced about six
or seven weeks since under the auspices of a couple of
constables and 25 (who have recently been augmented
to 50) men. The same system is applicable to every
station, with the exception that some are begun with
■only a few hands; but whenever they attain their full
complement they are to be worked in the manner already
•shown. Cascade is a charming locality, embraces a very


considerable area of the richest soil, abounds with the
finest timber, and is admirably watered. The gang is
at present occupied clearing roads, preparing for the
erection of a pier, and in the construction of the neces-
sry buildings for reception of a large accession of
strength.
Impression Bay Station
From Cascade we coasted to Impression Bay, some
five miles distant. This is a beautiful, more advanced,
and fuller manned (too in the gang) station. Three
months have sufficed to clear and cultivate a large space
of ground, to erect a variety of buildings, to establish a
road of some extent, and nearly to complete a jetty.
Mr. Armstrong, the superintendent, seemed to be an
active officer. His men work well; and in another 12
months Impression Bay will have become a place of
some importance. At this place Frost, the Chartist, is
at work, and having promised an acquaintance of mine
and his, a man of fortune in England, who at one time
had unhappily imbibed Chartist ideas, that I would if
possible see Frost, 1 availed myself of the present oppor-
tunity to have an interview. The only indulgence he at
present enjoys is that of being permitted to sleep alone;
he labours in common with the gang. He has been six
or seven weeks at Impression Bay, having been removed
from Brown’s River for insolence to the superintendent,
the only instance of his having demeaned himself with
impropriety. There have been many falsehoods in the
English papers with respect to Frost. For example,,
when first landed, he was sent to Port Arthur, and there


employed without pay as a writer, a mere copier in the
Commandant's office. This simple fact was tortured
into an alleged Government appointment of profit and
consideration, upon which fruitful theme various news-
papers of the day took care to ring the changes. Know-
ing from long colonial experience that such a thing
could not be, I published the matter as it actually stood.
As a further instance of the “undoubted authority of
the Press, three days have barely elapsed since I read
a paragraph in a London weekly, copied from a Glasgow
paper, in which the journalist declares, upon the autho-
rity of a nameless person who “reports” having seen
the man in Van Diemen’s Land, that Frost was engaged
with Williams in the latter's attempt to escape. Pure
fiction, every line, hrost being then at Port Arthur, and
Williams at the coal mines, more than 20 well-guarded
miles apart.
Escapes.
The attempts to escape by’boats, canoes, and cata-
marans are frequent; indeed, Captain Booth showed
us a variety of such contrivances. P'pon one occasion
his own crew made off with his boat. “Who 11 volunteer
in chase?” was the word in the penetentiary at Port
Arthur. In an instant an able crew was at the captain’s
command, and a second boat in earnest pursuit. Ihe
men made their oars spring again, and if the first boat
had not had too great a start, she could not have failed
to capture. She was re-taken shortly after, and the
fugitives transferred to their abandoned quarters. Upon
another occasion a singular device was had recourse to.


This was a sort of packing-case, about Bft. or 9ft. in
length, 2^4 ft. broad, and 9m. deep. It was closed and
caulked both above and below, consequently rendered
air-tight. A couple of light spars were lashed across
either end, and at their extremities pieces of wood like
enlarged bricks were secured. Every precaution had
been taken to guard the two fugitives against the possi-
bility of upsetting. Unhappily, however, there was no
like longitudinal preventive, and the washing ashore of
two corpses, together with the crazy fabric, gave too
clear an indication of the manner in which way they had
met their doom. We also saw several coracles, the
framework of wattle boughs, the covering (to serve for
planking) of cotton shirts. To what desperate expedi-
ents will not men resort for liberty!
Saltwater Creek Agricultural Station.
From Impression Bay we proceeded to Saltwater
Creek, about five miles off. This is a remarkably fine
locality, with extensive penetentiaries accommodating
about 400 convicts, with barracks for a sergeant and 13
soldiers of the 96th Regiment. It is a perfect station,
comprising all the requisite officers, and has been estab-
lished upwards of ten months. Roads have been formed,
piers constructed, land broken up and cleared : upwards
of 50 acres being luxuriantly cropped with cabbages,
potatoes, turnips, etc. The soil is extremely fertile, and
of considerable extent; and as spade is the only hus-
bandry employed, the land is certain to be well worked
and pulverised. Many who are friendly to the intro-
duction of convicts inveigh loudly against the probation
system. It requires a fair trial.


1 he probation gangs are opening up many invalu-
able locations, and creating settlements of infinite im-
portance. I ntil they are placed upon it, Tasman
Peninsula was either unknown, despised, or deemed too
densely wooded for any individual to venture upon.
1 here are now four flourishing stations thereon; roads
are forming to connect them with each other; piers are
constructing for the shipment of produce; and large
openings arc making in the forests, so that, discontinue
the system a couple of years hence, and even then Tas-
mania will have gained a vast accession of richly
productive agricultural territory. Frost's son-in-law,
Geach, is at Saltwater Creek. He was ill in the hospital
in the hands of my clever friend, Dr. Agnew, but,
entertaining no desire, I did not visit him.
The Coal Mines Station
Our Thursday's tour ended at the coal mines—a
station semi-probationary, semi-penal. It contains an
extensive stone penctentiary, to which large additions
are about to lie made; a military barracks for 30 men,
officers' quarters, commissariat store, and sundry other
stone edifices. The scenery around is superb. We
landed at seven o'clock in the evening, dined, and took
up our quarters with Lieutenant Barclay, of the 96th.
Next morning I descended the main shaft along with
Captain Booth. It is 5 2 yards deep. The winch was
manned by convicts under punishment; one stroke of
the knife might sunder the rope, and then—however
it has never been tried, deeds of ferocity being very


infrequent. A gang' on the surface worked the main
pump, and another below plied a horizontal 01 slightly-
inclined draw-pump, which threw the water into the
chief well. The seam has been excavated no yards
from the shaft, having also several chambers diverging
right and left ; the height of the bore is 4ft. Ihe quality
of the coal partakes much more of anthracite than of
bitumen; it dies a good deal, but produces intense hear.
The mines are esteemed the most irksome punishment
the convict <'ncounters, because he is not a practised
miner, and because he labours night and day, eight
hours on a spell. Continued stooping and close atmos-
phere caused our party to be bedewed with perspiration.
I cannot, therefore, wonder at the abhorrence of the
compulsory miner in loathing what 1 conceive to be a
dreadful vocation, a vocation, 1 should think, hat those
who had once been forced to would in future, when re-
licv ed, most earnestly avoid. After breakfast we walked
across the tongue of Slopen Main, and .shaking my
kind host, Captain Booth, cordially by the hand, em-
barked for Ralph Bay Neck, in his boat. After four
hours’ dead pull to windward, against a strong breeze
and heavy sea, we landed on the further shore of Frede-
rick Henry Bay. From this a walk of seven miles
through Rokebv and Clarence Plains conducted us to
Kangaroo Point. Here we again took boat, and, in
another half hour trod the shores of Sullivan Cove,
where I shall for the present call halt, hoping that the
reader may have derived pleasure, if not profit, from
mv excursion to Port Arthur.


5
£
.%r
S
H
05
<
K
O
W
S
o
35
fc
a
H
D
o
35
35
«
<
a
H
t/.
>
o
a
cr.
Cfi
a
2
a
o
a
H
H
O
Q
a
a
£
p
5/}
X.
M
W
d.
£
rf.'.
<
Jh
U-




I'NDKK VICK-RKGAI. PATRONAGE
BRISBANE HOTEL
Launceston.
Best Hotel in Tasmania for Visitors, Families,
and Travellers.
Telephone 149.
F. M. COGNET,
Proprietor,


s METROPOLE.
W. HUNT, Proprietor. (p
For 2S years Chief Steward oj x' N 75 BRISBANE SX.
T.S..W Co. and C.S.S. Co.
Steamers to Victoria.
LAUNCESTON.
Tasmania. C X.S. Wales
One of the Largest Hotels in Tasmania.
Sit nation Central. II ell-ventilated and targe Family Bedrooms (Electric Tight throughout').
Splendid Balcony. Draining. Sitting. Smoking, and Reading Rooms. Excellent Baths
[hot and cold shower). Targe Dining Hall. Tadics' Dining Halt. Sanitation Perfect.
Splendid Billiard Room. -Terms by Day or Week. Bedroom Separately.
Sri-TIAF, arrangements for kamiues. TELEPHONE no.




“THE IMPERIAL”
Collins Street,
HOBART.
150 ROOMS.
Centrally situated, within two minutes of the Post Office and
Electric Trams, and convenient to Wharves and Railway
Station.
Public and Family Dining Rooms, Drawing Room, Reading
and Smoking Rooms, Private Sitting Rooms, and P.very
Convenience for Visitors.
NORTH REES, Manager.


(gasmans Hotel,
■'/(V'
Toranno^
HOTEL is centrally situated between
Eaglehawk Neck and Port Arthur.
Visitors will find the accommodation good
and the terms moderate.
Vehicles are obtainable on hire, and
Fishing and Boating can be indulged in.
The Hotel is pleasantly situated in a
sheltered cove of Norfolk Bay, overlooking
the bay and steamer jetty, and is a quiet,
restful place.
G. BYRNE, Proprietor.


ourist Trips
From HOBART. T
Huon Channel & Peninsula
Steamship Co. Ltd, Steamers.
NUBKENA, nrox, RONNIE, LOTTAH, make Excursions
to Port Arthur, via old Penal Stations, Mondays and
Thursdays, 9 a.in., returning Tuesdays and Fridays. On
Saturdays Day Excursions are made to Eaglehawk Neck.
Fares : Two day Trip, 10s.; Day Trip. ss.
Two Day Trips are made to Huonville, via Huon Ports by
the Steamer HUON, on Mondays, Wednesdays, and
Fridays, returning from Huonyille alternate days.
Fare : ss.
Port Esperance, via Channel Ports, is another capital Two
Day Trip. Steamer RONNIFi leayes Mondays, 4 P-in.,
Wednesdays and Saturdays, 9 a.m., reaching Hobart on
return Monday morning and Tuesday and Thursday
afternoons.
A Popular One-Day Trip is that to Strawberry Land (Wood-
bridge), every morning, 9 a.m. Fare : 3s.
These Steamers leace Brooke .Street Pier, where all infor-
mation is to be obtained, or ’Phone 141.
F. H.
PIESSE, Manager,


Royal Mail, Port Arthur.
/"JOACH starts from Taranna for Carnarvon
(Port Arthur) Mondays and Thursdays,
on arrival of steamer, returning from Carnarvon
next morning to meet the return steamer.
FARES—Single, 2s. 6d.; Return, 4s.
Visitors supplied with Horses and Vehicles.
ALBERT A. McGINNIS,
Carnarvon,
W: - —^
S.S. NUBEENA
cr^. r of the
TIT S.S. NUBEENA
ylv is under the efficient superintendence of
of MR. C. NUROO, who has had large
experience in catering.
Good Luncheon and the best of Wines are obtainable on
board, with every attention and civility from the
stewards to passengers.
PHOTOS OF PORT ARTHUR, and
OLD-TIME CURIOS OX SALE.
C. NUROO, Providore.


asman s'Villa”
Private Boarding
Establishment,
CARNARVON,
PORT ARTHUR.
TV HE house is situated in the historic old settlement of
Port Arthur, within 100 yards of the Post-Office.
Every effort is made by the Manageress to cater
for the comfort and convenience of the Visitor.
Fruit and flowers, from the orchard and garden, are to be
had in season ; and boating, sea-bathing, fishing and shooting
are the every-day attractions.
There are delightful walks all around the Settlement, and
for actual experiences relating to the convict of Port
Arthur, one of its old hands, still alive and residing in the
township, can always be engaged, and will act as guide about
the Settlement.
There is good Stabling on the Premises.
Terms Moderate.
Mrs.
L. FRERK,
MANAGERESS.


I jKadixg Boarding Estatu jshment.
u frnp ” 55 DAVEY STREET >
W UUUUUUI J *C, HOBART, TASMANIA.
Five Minutes’ Walk from Post Office. Close to Trains and Railway Station


PERCY ASH.
KODAK AGENCY CHEMIST,
Films, Papers,
84 Elizabeth Street,
Moums ' e ’ c ' T „ N HOBART.
TELEPHONE No 29.
Importer of Photographic Material, Chemical and
Scientific Apparatus, Fine Chemicals, etc;, etc.
Fresh Supplies regularly received, and any Article not
in Stock promptly procured.
A Large and Varied Assortment of Photographic Mounts,
Albums, Ruby Lamps, Printing Frames, Developing Dishes,
Measures, Scales and Weights, Plate Washers, Print Washers,
etc., etc.
A Large Dark Room, fitted with every convenience,
available for the use of visitors.


rs. M. M. MARTIN,
CASCADE ROAD,
Hobart. Tasmania.
Wholesale Necklace Manufacturer
hstabusiihi> OF KELP. BRONZE and
SILVER SHELLS.
We supply the leading Arts and Curios throughout the
World, also the leading Furriers and Jewellers in the
Commonwealth.
THE SHELL NECKLACES are in various shades and
sizes, and nothing can be
found prettier for the money.
g > s
These Necklaces are guaranteed to please, and
can be had only in Tasmania at the leading
Jewellers or above address.
Sample Cards supplied to British and Foreign Firms
on application.
No connection with any other Shell Manufacturers.
NO SMFXL. NO BLACK TIPS.
Guaranteed to be free of Fish.




PHOTOGRAPHS
OF THE OLD
ort Arthur pays
(9 "SS
“Si
We hold a unique stock of Views illustrating the Penal Days,
and the Scenery of Tasman Peninsula. They are not to be
found in any other establishment in Tasmania or Aus-
tralia, and stand alone as relics of an interesting past.
The Port Arthur Series of Lantern Slides,
accompanied by Descriptive Uecture, prepared by J. W.
Beattie, should be in the hands of every one interested in
old times The set consists of 25 slides. Price, 275. 6d,
Port Arthur Post Cards.
Port Arthur Views as Souvenirs,
tastefully mounted on Plush Boxes, Trinkets, Paper
Weights, Oval Medallions in neat brass rim frames—
a very large assortment.
We sell genuine CURIOS of the old CON\ ICT SYSTEM.
Our PORT ARTHUR MUSEUM is well worth a visit.
There is nothing like it in the States.
J. W. BEATTIE,
52 EbIZfIBETH STREET,
HOBART.


Che Overland to port Arthur
Coaches leave Sorell tri-weekly for Coppington and Dunally
(East Bay Neck).
Conveyances are always available for the through journey
to Kaglehawk Neck and Port Arthur.
Cl\e Cast Coast
This is the most delightful Tourist Trip in Tasmania.
Magnificent Roads. Beautiful Scenery. Tine Beaches, breezy
and bracing. Boating, Fishing, and Shooting.
Coaches leave Sorell at n a.m. on Tuesday, Thursday, and
Saturday for Buckland, Orford, Spring Bay, and Swan-
sea ; returning on intermediate days, and connecting
with trains to Bellerive.
O—<£ 3>— C
Oe Gordon highlander hotel,
(&) SORELL,
rr~H IS is the starting place for Port Arthur and Blast Coast
Trips, and affords good accommodation for visitors.
Best brands of Ales, Wines, and Spirits are kept.
There is Shooting and Fishing in the neighbourhood,,
and convevances and horses can always be obtained.
TERMS :—6s. per day.
C. J. Hill,
proprietor.
Agents in Hokakt:
THOMAS COOK & SON.


HUON ROAD.
ilomekH § Duncans
LINE OF COACHES
TO THE HUON
T EAVE the Office, 86 Collins Street, Hobart, Dairy at
9 a.m. and 4 p.m. for Fern Tree, Longley, Huon-
viLLE, Franklin, and Gefveston. The Morning Coach
returns the same day, giving visitors Three Hours at
Huonville.
Brakes and Char-a-banc, all top seats and facing the
horses, run daily during the season for Fern Tree, Springs,
Round Trip via Brown’s River, Sorell, Derwent Park, and
other pleasure resorts.
The plant is the best and most up-to-date in Tasmania.
Luggage Removed.
Booking Office :
86 Collins Street, HOBART.
(OPPOSITE TATTERSAEE’S.)
Telephone 208.


THE
1 CMpORTSMAN’S
y~'
THE LARGEST AND JhPC J
BEST ASSORTED STOCK
IN TASMANIA OF
ALLCOCK'S, BARTLEET’S, and HARDYS
FISHING TACKLE.
Rods, Reels. Lines, Casts, Flys, Hooks, etc., etc.
“HOLLIS,” CASHMORE and other makes of
SINGLE AND DOUBLE BARREL
BREECH LOADING GUNS.
WINCHESTER, REMINGTON, BAYARD,
Derwent, Pea, and Air RIFLES.
NEW RIVAL, Universal, BALLISTITE,
AMBERITE CARTRIDGES (All Gauges).
MILITARY RIFLE ‘303 ACCESSORIES.
CHARLES DAVIS,
Elizabeth Street, HOBART.


Cbc Oldest established Booksellers in Australasia,
J.Walch & Sons
HOBART: Wellington Bridge and 42 Macquarie St.
LONDON: 29 Ludgate Hill
COROXIAR XtAVSPAP J( R AGENTS. —Sydney Morning Herald, Argus,
Australasian, Age, Reader, etc.
ENGRISH NEWSPAPF.R Axn MAGAZINE AGENTS. —On Sale by every
Mail : Strand, Wide World, Windsor, Pearson’s, Rondon, 'Royal,
Cassell’s, and other Magazines.
THE CORONIAR LIBRARY. —All the Ratest Novels included in THE
CORONIAR RIBRARY are received by every Steamer. Price, 2/6.
THE “RED BOOK” OF TASMANIA. WARCH’S TASMANIAN BOOK
ARMANAC. Published by Authority. The only Official and Complete
Handbook of the State, 370 pages. Bound in Cloth, 4/-. Postage
(Colonial), 4d.; Postage (Abroad), Bd.
TASMANIAN PUBLICATIONS.
WARCH’S REPRINTS OF THE ORD DAYS OF VAN DIEMEN’S
RAND. Postage
I. Martin Cash, the Bushranger of Van Diemen’s Rand, 1843. —1/.
J. A Pioneer Settler, 1817-30 : His Perils and Adventures. By Charles
Rowcroft.—6d.
3. The Convict King : The Surprising Career of Jorgen Jorgenson.—6d.
4. Bush Rife in Tasmania Fifty Years Ago.—l -
TWO FAMOUS STORIES OF ORD VAN DIEMEN’S RAND.
1. For the Term of His Natural Rife. By Marcus Clarke. —2/6.
The Broad Arrow : The Story of a Rifer. —2/6.
MRS. MEREDITH’S “ MY BUSH FRIENDS IN TASMANIA.”
A beautiful Polio Volume containing facsimiles (in colour) of Mrs.
Meredith’s Paintings of Nature—Flowers. Insects, etc., with
Retterpress by the Author. Richly Bound, 30/-.
MARCH’S NEW ARBUM OF 31 TASMANIAN VIEWS, 9x7 inches.
Bound in Colour and Gold. —2/-.
WARCH’S TASMANIAN POST CARDS.
12 Vignetted Views. The Set of 12, 1/-,
WATCH’S TASMANIAN TETTER CARDS.
With Four or More Views and Inset. 12 Assorted, 1/-.
WARCH’S PRAN OF HOBART, showing the Tram Rines, and How
i to Spend a Day in Hobart. —1/-.
WARCH'S ROAD MAP OF TASMANIA, showing the Roads for
Driving or Cycling, with information about the Routes.—l/-.


ILufra, Hawk
Neck.
Q)
most historically interesting (ride ‘ Term of His
Natural Life ”) and beautiful health and pleasure resort
in Tasmania.
Port Arthur, Tasman’s Arch, Bi,ow Hour, Tesseuated
Pavement, etc., within easy reach.
Boating and Excellent Fishing
amid Perfect Surroundings.
Modern House with the Comforts of first-class Plotel.
Recreation Room. Photographic Dark Room, etc.
TERMS MODERATE.
Al>P ' y COOK’S TOURIST AGENCY,
MACQUARIE STREET, HOBART,
«Or by letter or wire, to
MANAGERESS, Infra, Eagle Hawk Neck.




