

T[?]




AN
ESSAY
ON THE
PRIMEVAL LANGUAGE
OF
MANKIND.
BY RICHARD KIRWAN, ESQ.
L.L.D. P.R.I.A. ETC.
DUBLIN.
Gratsberry and Tempbell,
PRINTERS TO THE ROYAL IRISH ACADEMY.
1805.




ON THE
PRIMEVAL LANGUAGE OF MANKIND.
BY RICHARD KIRWAN, ESQ. L.L.D. P.R.I.A. &c. &c. &c.
READ, NOV. 4 th , 1805.
The origin of vocal language, that combination of sounds,
by whieh the thoughts and sentiments of men are commu-
nicated:: to. each other, thus forming the principal link of
their i social intercourse, has always excited the astonish-
ment of .those who have attended to its investigation.
On this subject, two ; opinions have been .proposed.. The
first was held, or. rather suspected, by persons unacquaint-
ed .with! the; most ancient and authentic record ,of the; ori-
gin of our species* They supposed, that men originally
livedo in! a savage unconnected! state, .destitute of any .lan-
guage; that their mutual wants and dangers induced .them
at last to unite; and, that'by-uttering differentsounds; as
■often.'as .they pointed ■at different objects, they gradually
formed a language..-.- Thus! its ’origin ;i$ ,explained by Dio-
dorus,* and by Lucretius.-f*
VOL. x. q At
* Lib. I. cap. Hi. f Lib. V. .vrlo37r‘&c.


At varies linguae sonitus natura subegit
Mittere, et utilitas expressit notnina rerum.
And again,
Postremo quid in hbc rairabile tantopere cst,
Si genus humanum, cui vox et lingua vigerit.
Pro vario sensu, varies res voce notaret.
But we are surprised to see so eminent a critic as P.
Simon,* agree *with these unenlightened heathens, and
abandon, without any necessity, and in opposition to
just rules of interpretation, the literal sense of the second
chapter of Genesis; in which, language is expressly men-
tioned as co-existing with the first pair. Even the cele-
brated Warburton, though he expressly deduces the origin
of language from inspiration, appears to me to have been
too liberal in allowing the possibility of any other origin.-f-
Its impossibility has been demonstrated,: both theoretically,
by the subtle and eloquent Rousseau ;$ and experimentally,
iri the person of the savage of Aveyron. Among many
curious observations, of which he was-' the object,; it was
discovered, not only' that the organs of speech grow tor-
pid by inaction, and can, with great difficulty, utter any
articulate sound; but, what was still more extraordinary,
this savage was, with -equal difficulty, taught to connect
those
* Hist. Crit. du Vienx Tcstam. Lib. I. chap. xiv. et xv.
f Divine Legation, Book IV. §. iv. p. 106, in Svo.
J Sur i’lncgalitl, &c.


those he was enabled to produce, with the objects pre-
sented- to him ’ aS signs to denote them. The Chinese
cannot pronounce the letters B, D, R, X; because, not
being in their language, they were not taught, in their
infancy, to utter the sounds annexed to them.
The second opinion, therefore, namely, that the gift of
speech was originally bestowed on our first parents, by
the great Author of is the only one which
can, with any appearance of reason, be entertained; and is
confirmed by the Mosaic history of the origin of our spe-
cies.; It fulty proves, that the power of communicating
their thoughts’ to each other, was possessed by our first
parents,- and coeval with their existence.*
That the language, thus imparted to man, possessed, at
its origin, that degree of perfection which it afterwards
, •
attained, is a supposition neither necessary nor analogous
to the usual conduct of Divine Providence. The designs of
Providence would be sufficiently answered, by inspiring
such sounds, and. suggesting ,the knowledge of their signi-
fication, as denoted the objects with which .they were ne-.
ccssarily conversant; such as the names of the various ani-
mals, which'they were instructed to use or;to avoid; and the
relations which they themselves stood in, .with respect to
each other. ‘ Accordingly we .find, that Moses, ;notwith-
q 2 standing
* See the learned notes of Dr. Magee, in his Discourse on the Scriptural
Doctrine of Atonement, p. 300, &c.


standing his usual attention to brevity, does not fail to
mention both these circumstances. Gen. chap. ii.
On this foundation, further improvements might after-
wards have been superstructed, either by the invention of
new names for new objects, or by devising such raodificar
tions, as should render the expression and discrimination
of the relations of objects to each other more precise and
accurate, during the long space of time: that intervened
between the Creation and. the .Flood.*
The primeval language must have been, at first, mono-
syllabic, or, >at least, dissyllabic; these being the simplest
enunciations: but, soon after, it, for the; most part, as-
sumed this last form, or became more compound; these
forms being the .most convenient for expressing the . diffe-
rent relations, which objects bear to each other, and to
the various modifications of existence, action, .passion, and;
■adjacent circumstances; as such relations may toe denoted
by‘the variations of the terminating syllables. This .mode
of signifying relations, is much , more natural.'than that
employed in many ancient 1 and modern jlanguages; and,
therefore* ■ must have preceded it. For, as .a.profound phi-
losopher, : the celebrated Adam Smith, hath well observed,
to- express a relation in this “ manner, did not. require any.
“ effort of abstraction. It was not expressed,, as in the,
“ languages
■ ! * 2256 years,-by. Mr. Jackson’s chronology,.which I adopt. It differs little
.from the Septuagint.


“ languages alluded to, by a peculiar word, denoting
“ relation, and nothing but relation, but by a simple va-
-6‘ nation of the correlative term. It was expressed, as it
“ appears in nature; and not as something separate and
detached, (as by our particles of, to, from, &c.) but as
“ mixed and blended with the correlative object,”
The relations of verbs, to person, number, and time,
whether stated as actual or possible, or under the modifi-
cations of interrogation, command, or velleity, are still
more complex; and must have been, with- less effort of
abstraction, denoted by variations or additions to the ra-
dical term, than by any words or abstract signs of such
relations; such as are employed in languages of posterior
origin.
Numbers, while, mankind, and all animals, existed only
in pairs, would naturally be marked by terminations, which
denoted one individual, or both: and, hence, the dual
number must have preceded the plural, which was denoted
only when more than two were, brought into existence.
In the same manner, the sexes, and inanimate objects,
must have been originally distinguished by the termination
of their appellations; but the latter, being of no sex, and
having, in ; their different classes, a strong resemblance to
each other, were naturally considered as an unit, or a
single object.
During the life of Adam, various arts were invented; as
that of agriculture, that of metallurgy, and also architec-
ture,, (as cities were built,) and many more, which these
presuppose;


presuppose; consequently, the sphere of language was much
enlarged, many new radicals being invented.
The numbers of mankind must have prodigiously in-
creased, long before the death of Adam; for it is ridi-
culous to think that he had no more than three sons, or
that they had not'attained'the age of puberty, at the
same period that men do at present. He must have had
many more sons, as well as daughters, though none are
mentioned by Moses; as he intended tracing little more
than the pedigree of Noah, and the remote and imme-
diate causes of the Flood.
Cain, when sentence of 'banishment was pronounced
against him, apprehending he might be put to death by
some of his brethren, retired to a considerable distance
from them; and his family, having little or no intercourse
with the remaining descendants of'Adam, for many ages,
it is highly probable, that, in his family, the primitive
language was gradually altered: at least, it could not re-
ceive the improvements, which that, more favoured by
Adam, had received, fn this, peace was preserved, at
least during 'the life of Adam; 'but; in *the family of Cain,
crimes of every kind appear 'to have been committed; in
s 6 much, that, in the days of Enos, the grandson-of Adam,
the descendants of Seth, and .probably-many *more, who
formed the community in which Adam resided, were dis-
tinguished from the family Of Cain, by the honorable ap-
pellation of'* Sons‘of God. But, in process of time, when
both families had multiplied to a great * degree, arid the
earth


earth had been fully peopled, both unfortunately inter-
mixed with each other; and, as it frequently happens, the
wicked seduced the good, contention soon arose, legiti-
mate governments were subverted; war, violence, conquest,
or anarchy, every where prevailed; nor was even the pre-
sence of God, which was long, at least occasionally, ma-
nifested to Adam, and his favoured family, and emphati-
cally called the Spirit of God, sufficient to repress these
disorders. Hence, the necessity of destroying the whole
race, all to one family, namely, that of Noah.
It is not necessary to suppose, that the whole range of
the primitive language was known to Noah or his family;
but its structure, its idioms, and radical words, might be
retained by, them; and several books, written in that lan-
guage, were certainly preserved by them, as will be seen
in the sequel..
Thus this language subsisted, as we are informed by
Moses, for some generations, (about five hundred years,)
among the greater part of the descendants of Noah > not
but other languages might have arisen, during that inter-
val, among other families, sprung from banished criminals,
as before the Flood. But these, formed without any pre-
concerted plan, in the intercourse of a turbulent and
ignorant multitude, could be nothing more than uncouth
jargons, as defective, and ill connected, as those of the
lowest ranks of society, in. all countries, generally are. The
practice of punishing the mast atrocious crimes, by ba-
nishment.


nishment, was, anciently, the most usual :* and, in those
early ages, such crimes were very frequent.-f* Each new
criminal, with his family, resorting to those of a similar
description, soon forgot his native language, and adopted
that of the tribe with which his family had been incorpo-
rated. How soon a language, spoken by comparatively
few families, is lost in that of the society to which they
are aggregated, appears, in many instances. The Jews lost
theirs, at Babylon, in about seventy years;' and Barrow,
in his highly entertaining and ‘ instructive account of ChE
ha,;|; tells us, the French refugees, at the Cape of Good
Hope, lost theirs in less than seventy years': and so it
must ever 'happen, when communication with the parent
stock is not frequent and easy. Even at present, the
English language has undergone some vafiatidn in
But the great and sudden transition, from the primeval
language to a multitude of heterogeneous languages, hap-
pened, as Moses relates, several centuries after the Flood,
in the plains of Shihaar. Immediately after that catas-
trophe, the children of Noah were ordered to people the
earth: for this purpose, it was necessary they should se-
parate. But, having antecedently associated the idea of
separation with that of exile, they long persisted in re-
maining
* See Le Clerc, in Genes, iv. 2. Diodorus, Lib. 111. cap, iv. 2 Goguet,
2i6. Grotius, in Matth. V. p. 63.
f Thucyd. Lib. I. c. r.
X Page 425.


maining together; and, after passing several years in the
Eastern regions, they removed, in a body, to the Western.
They lived in tents, and led a pastoral life; as appears by'
the ninth chapter of Genesis: if they had cultivated any
tracts, they, most probably, would have been attached to
them. The example of Noah, who was an agriculturist,
does not seem to have been followed by his posterity. The
culture of vines (from the misfortune which their product
had occasioned, and the curse, entailed on some of them,
originating from it, and, possibly, the recollection, that
Cain, the agriculturist, must have been drunk, when he
killed his brother,) appears to have been neglected, for se-
veral ages; for its discovery, in after times, was highly ce-
lebrated: and, to this day, the use of any intoxicating lu
quor is interdicted to the four casts of the Hindoos;* nor
do I find it mentioned in any account of China.
Charmed with the fertility of the Babylonian plains,
they seemed to have designed to proceed no farther, but
•resolved to erect a tower, as high as possible, as a signal,
by.which their situation, in distant rambles, might, at all
times, be determined.. It was, however, evident, that, ex-
tensive as these plains were, their products would, at last,
be insufficient for the maintenance of such multitudes, as
they must, in process of time, amount to; whence num-
berless disorders would have arisen. The gentlest method
of forcing them to separate was employed. Their different
c tribes,
* .Indian Recreations, Vol. 11. p. 284.


tribes, and tlieir subdivisions, were rendered unintelligible
to each other, by obliterating the memory of their ancient
language, and substituting, in its stead, new sounds, diffe-
rent in each tribe, and intelligible only to those that
composed it; or altering the signification of the primitive
sounds. It is not .necessary to suppose, that all these
tribes lost their original language; the views of Providence
would equally be attained, if it subsisted in one tribe
only, or one fraction thereof.
To estimate the degree of perfection, which language
must have attained before the Flood, it will be proper to
examine, what degree oif knowledge men must have pos-
sessed some ages before that catastrophe.
Among the proofs of antediluvian knowledge still exist-
ing, the most incontestible arc, the astronomical tables of
the Bramins; and particularly those of Tirvalore, disco-
vered by Mr. Gentil, about the middle of the last century.
Their epoch coincides with the famous sera of the Caly-
ougham, that is, with the year 3102 before Christ: and
this aera must have been ascertained by observation; as
Mr. Playfair shews, after a strict and masterly examination,
in the second volume of the Edinburgh Transactions. And,
if founded on preceding observations, as is most probable,
these observations must have commenced 1200 years ear-
lier, that is, 4300 years before Christ.* The Deluge hap-
pened
* I am aware, that the conclusions, deduced by Mr. Playfair, have lately
been combated, in the sixth volume of the Asiatic Researches; but, in my
epinion, ineffectually.


pened 3169 years before the birth of Christ, according to
Jackson’s chronology, (which I adopt) ; therefore, the Caly-
dugham commenced sixty-seven years after the Flood;
and the observations, on which it was grounded, com-
menced 1133 years before the Flood: which agrees re-
markably well with the tradition of the Jews; for Josephus
expressly mentions, that the children of Seth addicted
themselves to astronomy before the Flood.*
The learned'Professor farther adds, that the construction
of .these tables implies a great knowledge of geometry,
arithmetic, and'eVen of' the theoretic parts of astronomy;
th r at those who framed them must have possessed a cal-
culus equivalent to trigonometry; and that, upon the
whole, it appears there existed, at that period, a body of
science really astonishing.
That such a body of science could exist, and be com-
igunicated to subsequent ages, without the art of writing,
is incredible: yet these tables afford a sufficient proof,
that astronomical science, at least, had so descended, and
were, consequently,' written. It may also be inferred, that
alphabetic writing had been known before the Flood; for
the Sanscrit writing, in which these tables exist, is alpha-
betic;. and into, this their original language was soon tran-
slated. Moses also informs us, that- a written account (or
rather history) of the descendants of Adam existed; from
this he transcribed, in the fifth chapter of Genesis, the
c 2. names
; Antkj. Lib, I. cap, ii.


names of the ancestors of, Noah. But it certainly con-
tained much more, and related the most important trans-
actions of the antediluvian ages; for St. Peter expressly
tells us, Noah preached repentance to the antediluvians,
120 years before the Plood; a circumstance unnoticed by
Moses.*'
While science was thus, improved, we may conclude
language received similar improvements; as we have al-
ways seen its progress to perfection to keep pace with
that of knowledge: it certainly did so, among the Ro-
mans; and still more obviously, in modern times. Among
the Greeks, indeed, a singular exception occurred; as the
perfection of their language long preceded their improve-
ments in science; the reason of which will soon be seen.
When, therefore, we consider the length of time the pri-
meval language had been, spoken, namely, by the lowest
computation, 1300 years, and, more probably, 2000; the
longevity of those who spoke it, the few generations that
succeeded one another, during that period, not more than
four, and the consequent stability it must have acquired;
it, being impossible to suppose it much altered, during so
short a transmission; the undisturbed state in which the
.more favoured descendants of Adam remained, during the
greater part of that interval; we have, sufficient reason to
conclude, that this language attained a far higher degree
of perfection, than any subsequent language, that could
not
* 1 Peter, iii. 20.


not enjoy the same advantages, was enabled, by any pos-
sibility, to acquire.
Three things are indispensably necessary to the perfec-
tion of a language: l st < That it should be capable of ex-
pressing, with energy and precision, and, consequently,
without any ambiguity, all the various objects, which the
senses may present, the understanding define, the imagi-
nation depict, and the different shades and modifications
of the invisible passions and sentiments which actuate the
human breast.
2%* That melody should exist in the prolation of its
sounds, and, under the direction of genius, in the structure
of its periods, their cadence, and versification.
That its construction should be so unfettered, that
its designation of relations should not require any particu-
lar fixed situation, but be capable, without ambiguity, of
all that variety of position, which melody, either in prose
or verse, may require.
Having thus ascertained in what the perfection of a lan-
guage consists, and the probability that it may justly be
ascribed to the primitive language; and having also indi-
cated the distinctive characters by which, if it still exists,
it may yet be recognised, I now proceed to examine, whe-
ther They apply to any, or to which,, of the most ancient
languages now known to us; being furnished with aiteria,
by which their respective pretensions may be decided.
The principal languages, whose claims have hitherto been
severally insisted upon, are, the Hebrew, the Egyptian,
the


the Chinese, and the Greek; though the claim of this lasi
has, as far as I can find, found only one advocate, name-
ly, John Erick, a German professor; whose proofs, being
chietiy drawn from distorted etymologies, were, by others,
treated with the utmost contempt.*
OF THE HEBREW.
Tur. first distinctive character, .of the primeval language,
namely, the most natural designation of the relations of
nouns, is not found in the Hebrew. Mr. Wilson, in his
Hebrew Grammar,-f- (the best and easiest I have, seen,) tells
us, “ that nice attention to the changes of termination, so
requisite* in acquiring the knowledge of other ancient
“ languages, has here no existence; the relations and de-
“ pendencies of nouns, are not distinguished by termina-
“ tions or cases, but by particles or prepositions prefixed.”
These, it is true, are also incorporated with the word, but
not Only they are general, but they indicate the relation
in the most clumsy manner; for it is often difficult to dis-
tinguish, whether they form the radical, or only denote its
relation, which, Mr, Wilson acknowledges, is , very apt to
perplex the learner, “ as he must strip the noun of these
“ signs, before the primitive form can appear.” +
The
* See Michaeler, de Origine Linguae primaria, p. 300.
f P. 108.
t P. HO.


Thecomparison of adjectives is performed in the same
awkward manner; and is often so ambiguous, as to be
unintelligible.* The superlative is formed, in the, most, in-
artificial and' infantine manner, by a mere repetition of
the positive.
Nouns have but two. genders-, the masculine and femi-
nine; thus inanimate things are not distinguished from
the animate: just so the vulgar, among us, frequently ex-
press themselves. Probably this defect was productive of
idolatry.
There is no dual ;in .the Hebrew, except when things,
which are naturally double, are mentioned; as, the eyes,
the ears, the hands, &c. (hence,' also, it never occurs in
the New Testament). Wilson,'indeed, does not make even
this exception; but I find it mentioned by 33ytlmeiyf* and
Amama.J: Here,. also,' it differs from the primeval lan-
guage: in many instances, the singular and plural .coin-
cide,' and can be distinguished only by the sense, or other
words in the. sentence.j|
Lastly,. in; verbs, neither; persons, moods or tenses, are
marked by the changes ,of their last syllables; but by
means of letters of.a particular order, which appear, some-
times in the ' beginning, sometimes in the middle, and
sometimes at the end of the original word. Another wide
departure from the original language.^
Prom
* For instance, in Gen. x, 21. + P. JB. J P. 24.
H Wilson, 149, ,■§ Id. p. 109.


From these, and many other inherent defects, the learned
Le Clerc, himself a professor of the Hebrew language, de-
clares, that perhaps no language is fuller of ambiguity and
obscurity.* Can such be the language polished and im-
proved for twenty centuries?
To this our late pious and learned Primate, Newcomc,
answers, that the difficulties, respecting these and other
modifications of the Hebrew verb, are considerable, but
not invincible; that it is true, that the substitutions of one
gender, number or person, for others, are bold and,'fre-
quent, but not inexplicable.*!- As .much may be said of
the jargon, spoken by the English in the days of Hen-
ry III.; or in France, during the. reign of Lewis IX.
The advocates of the Hebrew found its claim chiefly on
the two following grounds.
l sf > That many or all the antediluvian .names are signifi-
cant, in the Plebrew language, and derivable from it. But
the learned Mr. Lanigan, lately Scriptural Professor: in the
University of Pavia, in the first volume of his Biblical
Institutions, observes, that these names are. as: easily deri-
vable from the Chaldaic or Syriac, and still more easily
from the Arabic. Grotius,Tluet, and .Le Clerc think, that
the real antediluvian names were translated - into the He-
brew; and they give many instances of similar translations:
thus the translator of Sanchoniatho into Greek, calls Adam,
Proiogon. Mr. Lanigan, indeed, thinks, that many of them
cannot
**- Preliminary Discourse to the Pcntat. §. 6.
t Preface to Ezephiel, p. xxxiv. ami xxxv.


canpqt be ; deemed translations; as their; derivation: from
the Hc|jrew is forced and wiredrawn. It follows, then,
that they arc nqt of Hebrew origin. -We have no reason
to suppose, that Moses Was acquainted with the antedilu-
vian language: -he , found those names in, his family-me-
moirs; and derived them, as he could, from the .'Hebrew,
or from .the- Arabic, which he 'well understood. Of such
names, our learned Professor mentions four, Cain, Tubal
Cain, ISoah, and Babel: the true; derivation of these, and
some others, I shall soon have occasion to-mention. Le
Clerc thinks, that many of these names were given, not at
the time of the births of the Patriarchs, but were rather
by-names, derived from some remarkable event, that hap-
pened in their time. And, indeed, this is evident, with
respect to Phaleg or Pcleg; as Moses expressly tells us, he
was so called, because, in his time, the earth was divided
between the descendants of Noah. Genes, x. 25.
The second ground, on which the advocates for the-lle-
brew rest its claim, is, that a number of words, of Hebraic
origin, are found in many other ancient languages; as the
Chaldaic, Sjaiac, Phoenician, and Persian. These, they
think, are remnants of the ancient primeval language; and,
since these are also Hebrew, they think that language must
also be the Hebrew,.; J3ut this, mixture of Hebrew words,
in those languages, is easily! accounted for. It -is now* ge-
nerally allowed, that the Phoenician, Ganaanitish, and He-
brew, were one and the same language. The Phoenicians
traded to all nations, and must have left them many
o words;


words; as the French do with us at this day. The Medes,
Persians, and other Eastern nations, may have received
many more, from the Israelites dispersed among them. So
the Greek colony, established at Marseilles, it is well known,
communicated many words, which still remain in the French
language.
After what has been said of the ambiguity of this lan-
guage, it is needless to mention its uncouth guttural
sounds, its unsusceptibility of the varieties of position, and
other marks ofi imperfection.
THE EGYPTIAN.
This language exhibits the same defects as the Hebrew,
and still greater. The Copts neither decline their nouns,
nor conjugate their verbs, otherwise than by prefixing par-
ticles, sometimes of one of more syllables, and sometimes
a single letter, which denote the case, gender, number, and
person; several of them being joined together in one word,
and the primitive word usually placed last. So that the
difficulty of their language consists, in the incredible com-
bination of the words and particles, in the change of the
vowels, in transposing the middle parts of the words, and
adding superfluous letters, to distinguish which requires
great labour and skill.*
THE
* Wilkins, De Lingua Coptica, I Uni vers. Hist, folio, p. 226,


THE CHINESE.
Or the Chinese language, a very satisfactory account
has been given, by Our late; accomplished and intelligent
travellers, Sir George Staunton, and Mr. Barrow. The con-
struction of this language, Mr. Barrow* tells us, is ex-
tremely simple: it admits of no inflection -of termination,
either in the verb, or in the noun; each word being the
same invariable monosyllable, in, number, gender, case, or
tense. The cases, they distinguish,, by .general abstract
signs, ,as we do in English; which, alone, as already seen,
plainly shews this could not be the original language of
mankind; men never beginning by abstractions. Compari-
son is also made by adventitious, particles; and the super-
lative is markedj in . the same awkward manner as in
Hebrew, by a repetition of the positive: the: tenses of
verbs, of which there are only three, are, also distinguished
by abstract particles. Sir George, indeed, thinks, that this
language furnishes a practical proof, that the laborious
structure, and intricate machinery, of the, Greek and Ara-
bic tongues, are by no ...means, necessary, either to a com-
plete communication on all the business of life, or even
to the grace of elocution, or the harmony of verse.
d 2 l am
* P 2S-i.


I am much disposed to entertain a different opinion, on
each of these particulars. There are many shades and dis-
criminations of verbs, which cannot be indicated by par-
ticles, suggesting the difference of time merely in the gross.
The difference between definite and indefinite time is lost;
and thus all pretensions to precision, the principal excel-
lence, and the iriost necessary of all the qualifications of
language,: are abandoned. Indeed, of all known languages,
spoken by a civilized nation, the Chinese hath the smallest
pretension to precision. Every-word has, at least, twenty
different significations, besides the different aspirations? and
these significations are only distinguished, by the difference
of tone' or accent; to perceive which, Sir George acknow-
requires a nice ear, and delicate vocal powers, to
render them exactly. How ih'e grace of elocution, and the
harmony of VcrsC, cart subsist, in SuCh a confusion of dis-
cordant sounds? I am at a loss to conjecture: yet, even
this contrivance is riot always sufficient, to express the
sense of a word; recourse must be had to the ultimate
criterion, tracing with the finger, in the air? or otherwise,
the form of the written character of the doubtful sound.
Such a language is, no doubt, very simple; but so is the
Lingua Franca , which, in many respects, resembles it, but
whose perfection, I suppose, nobody will vaunt. Of this
similarity, Mr. Barrow gives some exariiplcs, page 281, and
Sir G. Staunton, page 418, (in 8v6.). Adam Smith justly
remarks, “ that the simplification of the rudiments of lan-
“ guages renders them more imperfect, and less proper,
“ for


“ for the purposes of language: for, if precision be re-
“ quired, (which, indeed, the Chinese does not aim at,)
“ such languages become more prolix; several words being
“ necessary to express what might have been expressed by
“ a single word. Thus, the words Dei, and Deo, in Latin,
“ sufficiently shew, without any addition, what relation the
“ object signified is understood to stand in, to the objects
“ expressed by the other wmrds in the sentence; whereas,
“ in English, and other modern languages, we must em-
“ ploy, at least, two words, and say, of God, to God,
“ and sometimes four; for the single word amavissem, we
“ must say, I would hate loved. This prolixity evidently
“ enervates the eloquence of most modern languages/’
Dr. James Gregory adds, that “ the moods of verbs, like
“ other inflections of words, express, much better than any
“ succession of words can do, the intimate connexion and
“ relation of various thoughts, which are not successive,
“ but simultaneous, or co-existent, and which appear un-
“ naturally disjointed, and, in some measure altered, when
“ they are expressed by a series of words, denoting each
“ of them separately, and in succession.”*
This simplification of the principles of languages,
renders them less agreeable to the ear: the variety of ter-
mination in the Greek and Latin, occasioned by their de-
clensions and conjugations, gives a sweetness to their lan-
guage, altogether unknown to any modern language.
3 d| y> This
* 2 Edinb. Trans, p. 216.


3 il Y> This simplification not only renders the sounds of
our language less agreeable to the ear, but it also restrains
us from disposing the sounds in the manner that might
be the most agreeable; tying down words to a particular
situation, and forbidding almost every kind of inversion or
transposition.
THE GREEK.
In this, and this only, most of the characters of the pri-
meval language are found. It is perfectly original, being
underived, in the opinion of the most profound antiqua-
rian and ablest linguist of the last century,* from any
other Oriental language, with the exception of a few words,
borrowed from the Phoenicians, Thracians, and Scythians;
and in its structure, it totally differs from all of them.
In this, the relation of nouns to each other, and of
verbs to time, person, and number, are denoted in the
most natural manner, and with the greatest precision and
accuracy, by mere changes of, or additions to, the termi-
nation.
It is equally happy, in expressing every modification of
perception, passion and emotion, which may arise in, oc-
cupy, or agitate the human mind.
The dual number, in all cases, it almost exclusively
possesses. Adam Smith, from misinformation, conceived
this
■ Fcmsterhusius; see the French translation of Herodotus, Vol. I. p. 27<i.


this number to exist in the Sclavonic, and in other On r
ental tongues. In the Swedish it certainly exists, and in
languages derived from it; as the Anglo-Saxon and Islan-
dic: but the Swedes borrowed it from the Goths, who
long resided in Thrace, and derived it from the neigh-
bouring Macedonians, who certainly spoke a Greek dia-
lect, though corrupt. In the Anglo-Saxon, and Islandic,
the dual is retained only in the pronouns; as the great
Swedish antiquarian, Ihre, assures us. He denies it to be
found in the Sclavonic, or any other Oriental dialect, with
which he was acquainted.
The plural number of nouns of the neuter gender, being
originally considered, from their similarity to each other,
as one object, admitted a construction with verbs in the
singular number: a mode of construction, which was af-
terwards unwarrantably abused. . Even animated beings,
considered merely as things, were often expressed by neu-
tral nouns.
Again, if we examine the degree of perfection, which
the Greek attained, and still exhibits, we shall find it ac-
knowledged, by the best judges, to exceed that which
any other known language has ever reached. In proof of
a fact, so well known, it is needless to accumulate au-
thorities; one alone, of perhaps the ablest judge of the
delicacies of expression, that has appeared in the last cen-
tury, will be sufficient. It may easily be perceived I
mean the celebrated Voltaire. Of the Greek, he thus
speaks:
“ The


“ The most perfect of all languages must be that, which
“ is, at once, the most complete, the most sonorous, the
“ most varied in its modes of expression, and the most
“ regular in its arrangement; which has most of compound
words, wdiose prosody best expresses the slow or impe-
" tuous emotions of the mind; and whose sounds are most
“ musical. The Greek possesses all these advantages: it
has not the rudeness of the Latin; of which so many
words end in urn, ur, us. It has all the pomp of the
Spanish, and all the sweetness of the Italian; and, by
its long and short syllables, it is superior, in musical
expression, to all living languages: so that, even disfi-
gured as it is, at this day, in Greece, it may still be re-
“ garded as the most beautiful language in the universe.”
Now, if w 7 e compare the degree of excellence, which
this language attained, in the earliest ages after the Flood,
w r ith the state of civilization of those who spoke it in those
ages, w r e shall find the utmost disproportion betwixt them;
the inverse of what happened in any other age or country.
Homer wrote 940 years before the Christian ;era, when
Greece was far from being thoroughly civilized; yet, in
him, it is acknowdedged, the Greek language appears, as
polished and refined as in Sophocles, Euripides, or even
Demosthenes, who wrote in the most civilized periods.
And, if vre pierce higher into antiquity, we find Linus,
who lived 1500 years before Christ, and 300 years before
the Trojan war, and his disciple, the first Orpheus, both
so much admired, that the former, in subsequent ages,
was


was thought the son of a muse; and the latter, of Apollo,
Museus wrote a poem, called The Rape of Proserpine,
1400 years before Christ, according to the Parian Mar-
bles.* Tatian, who flourished in the second century, men-
tions many other poets, who preceded Horner.-f- Nor were
there barely poets, but also many historians, before Homer;
as Corinnus, Dictys Cretensis, &c. who wrote immediately
after the Trojan war; and, consequently, nearly 1200 years
before Christ.J But, if we attend to the state of society,
at the times of Linus and Orpheus, we shall find it highly
barbarous, by the avowal of the most credible Greek his-
torians themselves; and scarcely improved, in the age that
immediately preceded the siege of Troy, and called the
Heroic.
Thucydides, who wrote about 410 years before Christ,
tells us,|| that, in the earliest times, Greece enjoyed little
or no repose. The various tribes, that inhabited it, had
no intercourse with each other: the stronger continually
excelled the weaker from the more fertile parts; these
sought refuge in the territory of Attica, which, being the
most barren, was, at first, thinly inhabited; but, from these
new accessions, became very populous. Yet, its inhabi-
tants did not form a political union with each other, nor
had any common laws, before the reign of Cccrops, about
e the
* See the Appendix to Playfair’s Chronology,
f Euseb. Prepart. Evang. Lib. X. cap. ii.
1 Voss, de Hist. Greeds, Lib. IV. cap. i. p. 428
|J Lib. I. cap. ii. Apollodor. Lib. 111.


the year 1556 before Christ.* In the ages, called Heroic,
robbery and piracy were universally practised; the law of
the strongest was almost the only one which they acknow-
ledged, and openly avowed.f- After the siege of Troy, al-
most all the cities of Greece were disturbed by seditions;
and the return of the Heraclidae, eighty years after that
siege, occasioned new commotions: in so much, that many
years elapsed before peace was restored.:]: This universal
fermentation forced many to migrate to Asia, and join
their countryman, long established in lonia, iEolia, and
Doris: yet it was in this tempestuous period, that Homer
was born and flourished. It does not appear, that any,
either in that, or the preceding ages, applied themselves
to the improvement of their mother tongue; neither, were
Jt requisite, would their ignorance or circumstances permit
them to effect it. When, then, did it attain, or from what
source did it derive, the excellence it possessed in the most
barbarous ages?
This forms a paradox, which can be solved, only, by
supposing, that it originally descended to the lonic race,
from the earliest ages, in the same, or rather in a far su-
perior degree of perfection; for, during that transmission,
it, probably, contracted those defects, which may be ob-
served in the earliest compositions that we now possess.]!
To
* 2 Goguet, 16, 17, 18.
f Thucyd. Lib. I. cap. v. Plutarch. Theseus .
J Thucyd. Lib. I. cap. xii.
|| Mr. Mitford tells us, “ no circumstance, in the history of the Grecian
s£ people, appears more difficult to account for, even in conjecture, than the
“ extraordinary


To explain, more particularly, how this transmission was
effected, we must recur to the information conveyed to us
in the Sacred History; and to a few facts, which occur,
also, in the profane.
Moses relates, that Noah had three sons, who survived
the Deluge, Sem, Cham, and Japhet. Though Japhet is
the last named, yet it appeal's that he was the eldest of
the three, in the judgment of the most judicious commen-
tators; of whom I need name no other, than Bishop. Usher,
and Le Clerc.
531 years after the Deluge, a multiplicity of languages
was supernaturally introduced. During the period, that in-
tervened betwixt the Flood and this event, the posterity
of Noah became very numerous. Japhet had seven sons,
Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, (or Jon,) Thubal, Mosoch,
and Thiras. Javan, in whose line the Greek tongue de-
scended, had four sons, Elisah, Tharsis, Chittim, and Do-
e 2 danim.
“ extraordinary superiority of form and polish, ■which their speech attained,
“ in an age beyond tradition, and in circumstances apparently most unfa-
“ vourahle. For it was amid continual migrations, expulsions, mixtures of
“ various hordes, and revolutions of every kind, the most unquestionable
“ circumstances of early Grecian history, that was formed that language, so
“ simple in its analogy; of such complex art, in its composition and in-
“ flection; of such clearness, force, and elegance, in its contexture; and of
* e such singular sweetness, variety, harmony, and majesty, in its sounds. Al-
“ ready, in the time of Homer and Hesiod, who lived long before writing
“ was common, we find it in full possession of these perfections,” &c,
Vol. I. p. 83 and 8


danim. Sc in and Cham had also several sons and grand-
sons, whose names need not be mentioned; but it may
not be amiss to observe, that the languages, spoken after
the confusion, by the peculiar descendants of each of the
three original Patriarchs, differed more widely, from those
spoken by the descendants of the other two Patriarchs,
than the languages, spoken by the descendants of each,
differed from each other. Thus, the languages, spoken by
the descendants of Japhet, differed more, from those spoken
by the descendants of Sem or Cham, than the Japhetic
languages did from each other. A difference, also, with
each other, but in a lesser degree, betwixt the languages,
spoken by the immediate descendants of each of the sons
of the same Patriarch, may be observed. Thus, a diffe-
rence may be observed, betwixt the languages, spoken by
the sons of Corner, and those spoken by the sons of Ja-
van. But the difference, betwixt the languages spoken by
the descendants of each of these sons, for instance, of each
of the four sons of Javan, is the smallest of all; as some
communication, betwixt persons so nearly connected, would
be suffered to subsist. Thus, the language of the Man-
tchoo Tartars, descendants from Magog, is, as we are in-
formed by Mr. Barrow, and Monsieur I’Eveque, rich, so-
norous, and energetic; and more like the Greek, than any
of the Oriental languages. It is alphabetic, or, more pro-
perly speaking, syllabic; and the different parts of speech
are susceptible of expressing number, case, gender, time,
modes


modes of action, passion, &c. by change of termination,
preposition, or interposition.*
The posterity of Javan gradually descended from the
plains of Shinaar, to the opposite coasts of Lesser Asia,
on the Egean sea; and, from them, the whole country
was denominated lonia; as Josephus attests, Antiq. Lib. I.
cap. 6. But, in process of time, they grew too numerous to
remain together; and, being also pressed upon by the neigh-
bouring barbarians, they passed into many of the islands of
the Egean sea, and thence into Thrace, Macedonia, Greece,
and Epire. Moses expressly tells us, that the islands of
the nations were peopled by them. Genesis, x. 4. And
not
* Barrow’s Travels in China, 270. L’Eveque, Hist. Russ. Vol. VI. p. 282.
The difference of languages consists, either in the difference of sounds, de-
noting the same object, or of constitution, or of utterance. The same sounds
may differ in tone, or duration; or in the abundance or defect of vowels,
their arrangement and aspiration. The difference of constitution consists, in
the various methods by which relations are indicated; namely, by abstract
signs, prefixes, interposition, alteration of termination, or the order of posi-
tion. The difference of utterance arises, from the difference of the organs
by which the sounds are principally emitted; as, the guttural, the oral, and
the nasal. The oral is either palatal, dental, sibilant, or labial. Those, that
ngree in the signification of a great number of words, and have a similar
fundamental constitution, or nearly so, are, more or less remote, kindred
languages, and frequently hybrid, at least, one of them is often so; as, the
English and German; the French, Spanish, and Italian: the three last are
certainly mixed or hybrid languages. When the radical words agree ia
signification, and have the same, or nearly the same constitution, but dif-
fer only in termination or utterance, they are called dialects of the same
common language. Thus, the affinity or discrepance of languages, even
their pedigree, may often be traced, even when history is silent.


not only islands, strictly so called, are to be understood
by that name, but Greece itself; for, being much inter-
sected by the sea, it was, in a loose sense, susceptible of
that appellation.* Tharais appears to have passed into
Thrace,-p Chittim into Macedonia. This is solidly proved
by Lc Clcrc.'l The author of the book of Maccabees
expressly says, Alexander came from the land of Chittim,
cap. i. 1. Dodanim seems to have passed into Epire.
From the invective of Alexander against Philotas,|j one
would be apt to imagine the Macedonian language was
different from the Greek; but it is evident, from Philotas’s
reply, that the Macedonians understood it, and that Alex-
ander himself addressed the army in Greek. It Avas, certain-
ly, the language, introduced by Ptolemy into Egypt; and
exclusively spoken in the court of his successorsHoav-
ever, from a mixture of several barbarian nations, the Ma-
cedonian dialect was much debased: besides, as already
noticed, some difference occurred in the languages spoken
by the families descended from the different sons of Javan.
The Thracians and Epirots, being still more exposed to
the inroads of the neighbouring barbarians, many of Avhom
settled among them, difficultly retained any traces of their
original language; particularly the former. HoAvever, it
Avas long retained in some parts of Thrace; as appears
by
* Greece is expressly so called, l Maccab. xi. 88.
f Le Clerc on Genes, x.
% Ibid.
H Quint, Curtius, Lib. VI. cap. 28.
§ 1 L’Archer’s Herodot. 72.


by the poems of Orpheus and Linus, composed in Greek.
Pieria and Olympus were anciently parts of Thrace,*
though they were afterwards accounted to belong to Ma-
cedonia :-f- from the prevailing mixture of barbarians, the
Thracians w T ere deemed to be also barbarians.:]:
That Epire was also inhabited by Greeks, though in-
termixed with many barbarian tribes, appears by Strabo,j|
who tells us, the Molossi, an Epirotic tribe, were go-
verned by kings of the race of iEacus; as was after-
wards all Epire by Pyrrhus. Besides, we find the Mo-
lossi sent a colony to lonia: now the lonians would cer-
tainly not have received them, if they were not of Greek
origin. It is true, they also received the Pelasgic Arca-
dians ; for this reason only, that the Pelasgi w'ere incor-
porated with the Arcadians, and could not be distin-
guished, see Herodot. Lib. I. cxlvi;| as they were,
also, with the Athenians. Plin. Lib. IV. cap. i. reckons
Macedonia, Epire, and Thrace, as part of Greece; and
so does Homer, Iliad 11, v, 635.
The descendants of Elisah, the eldest son of Javan,
passed into Greece, properly so called, extending from
Macedonia, on the north, to the southern extremity of
Peloponnesus; and from the Eastern to the Western sea,
and the adjacent islands. Thus, we see the territories of
all
* Strabo, Lib. YU. p. 471.
f Ibid.
X Ibid. Lib. VII. p. 321.
I! Ibid. Lib. VII. p. 324.
See l I’Archer, Herod. 119, and the notes and 7 I’ Archer, 221. 23!


all the sons of Jon bordered on each other; and, I be-
lieve, it generally happened, that the progeny of each of
the original patriarchs, Japhet, Sem, and Cham, settled
at a great distance, from that of the other Patriarchs; but
the progeny of each of the sons of the same Patriarch, for
instance of Japhet, settled at a less considerable distance
from each other; and the descendants of each of the
grandsons, for instance the descendants from Javan, set-
tled at a still less distance from each other.
Elisah, in the Samaritan copy, is written Hejlas;* and
from him, after some ages, for reasons we shall presently
mention, the Greeks were then called Hellenes. The Hel-
lenes, then, not being permanently exposed to barbarians,
as the other descendants of Jon were, preserved the Greek
language unmixed. Greece, before the arrival of the Hel-
lenes, was inhabited by various barbarian tribes; as Strabo
informs us from Hecateusof whom the most powerful
were the Pelasgi, who originally dwelled in the maritime
parts, afterwards called lonia..]; Hence, it is plain, by the
testimony of a profane historian also, that the descendants
of Jon passed into Greece, from the continent of Lesser
Asia, after they had expelled the Pelasgi, who inhabited
the coasts afterwards called lonia. The Pelasgi, thus ex-
pelled from lonia, passed, probably, into the country, af-
terwards called Attica, as being nearest to them; but this
being
* See Newcome on Ezechiel, xxvii. Sr.
t Lib. VII. p. 321.
$ Strabo, Lib. XIII. 621, and Lib. V. 220, 221.


being barren, they settled, in greater numbers, in Pelopon-
nesus, and founded the kingdoms of Sicyon and Argos;
the former, 2171 years before Christ,* and the latter i 779-f
Hencc Ephorus, quoted by Strabo, says, Peloponnesus was
anciently called and iEschylus, in Supplices, 598,
600, (or rather 327 and 350, in my edition); and Pliny,
Lib. IV.
Who these Pelasgi were, it is difficult to discover: that
they were originally Arcadians, I think improbable, though
affirmed by Strabo. Arcadia, being a very small territory,
could scarcely contain a tribe so numerous as the Pelasgi
formed in these early ages: besides, it is an inland terri-
tory, and the Pelasgi always chose to inhabit the sea coasts;
and hence, the part of Peloponnesus, which they inhabited,
was often called iEgialea. Strabo, Lib. VIII. p. 384. It
seems more probable, that they were the descendants of
Chanaan, the son of Cham; and were those, who, as He-
rodotus relates, after wandering to the Red sea, settled at
last in Phoenicia,|| Herodot. Lib. I. p. 1; whence they sent
colonies into Greece, and the adjacent islands. He also
says. Lib. 11. §. 51, that, from the island of Samothrace,
p they
* 3 Jacks. 306; or 2164, according to 7 FArcber’s Herodot.; a very near
agreement.
t 3 Jacks. 310 and 313; according to I’Archer, 1986 before Christ.
X Lib. V. 221.
|{ But the expedition, which lie mentions, must have happened long after
the settlement of the Pelasgi in Argos. See FArcher’s note thereon.


they passed into Attica. Now, Sanchoniatho informs fcs,
that the Samothracians derived their origin from Sydoc, a
Phoenician divinity:* that is, a divinised Phoenician. It is
also certain, from Herodot. Lib. I. §. 57, that they spoke
a barbarian language; and were barbarians, §. 58; were the
most ancient inhabitants of Greece, Strabo, Lib. VII. 327:
and had spread over all Greece, Ibid, Lib. V. 220. Their
ianguage, however, was not the Phoenician; else Herodotus
would not have been at a loss to discover what it was;
nor would Cadmus have expelled them from Boeotia.
Hence, the conjecture of the very learned General Val-
lancey, that they -were an Indo-Scythian nation, is not
destitute of probability; and is supported by many respec-
table authorities.
The descendants of Hellas, who afterwards occupied all
Greece, except Etolia and Acarnania, seem first to have
landed in Attica, being the nearest part of the continent;
and, from the name of their particular ancestor, they be-
stowed, on the interjacent rocky and deserted island, the
name Helene . It is mentioned by Strabo, Lib. IX. 612,
and Pausanias, p. 85: but the Greeks themselves could not
know- the reason of that appellation. On landing, they
found the country inhabited, though thinly, on account of
its barrenness, by two Pelasgian tribes, the Aones, and the
Temnices, Many of these fled to the southern promontory
of Sunium, where they are noticed by Strabo, p. 615;
but
* Ewseb. Prepar, Evang. Lib. I. cap. x, p. 36


but many still remained, who submitted to the Hellenes,
and were incorporated with them. The territory they thus
possessed, they called lonia; in memory of their primitive
ancestor, and not from Jon, the son of Xuthus; as the
Greek > themselves, in after ages, falsely imagined. Thus
the testimonies of Herodotus and Strabo should be under-
stood, consistently with each other, and with that of
Josephus.
Herodotus, Lib. VIII. §. 44, tells us, that when the Pe-
lasgi possessed the country, now called Greece, the Athe-
nians (that is, the inhabitants of Attica) were Pelasgi; and
were called Craneans, (from the roughness of the country);
and Cecropidee, under the reign of Cecrops; and Erech-
theidae, under that of Erechtheus; and from Jon, the ge-
neral of their forces, they assumed the name of lonians.
And Strabo, Lib. IX. 608, adds, that Attica was called
Mopsopia, from a great grandson of Cranaus. But these
names were given only by poets; as Kuhnius has well re-
marked, in his notes on this passage. Thus, the Romans
were called Romulidae, by Virgil, iEneid VIII. 638: but
this could not be called their general appellation. Mop-
sopus must have lived under Erectheus the second: he
j.
never reigned in Attica, never performed any memorable
action, and was cotemporary with Jon. His name, there-
fore, could never be given to the country, but by poets.
Again, Herodotus, Lib. I. §. 56, says, the principal na-
tions of Greece were, the Lacedemonians and Athenians;
the one, among the Dorians, and the other, among the
c 2 lonians;


ionians; the one Pelasgic, the other Hellenic: the former
never quitted the country it first settled in; the latter fre-
quently did. And, §. 57, he says, “ the Pelasgi spoke a
“ barbarian, language; and, that being so, that it follows,
that the Athenians, originally Pelasgi, forgot their own
” language, when they became Hellenes, and learned that
”of the Hellenes.” If this account be understood of
those, whom Herodotus called Hellenes, it is evidently
false: those, which he called Hellenes, were inhabitants of
Phthiotis, in Thessaly; as he himself declares. Now these
not only never conquered, but did not even attack, nor
enter into Attica How, then, in his sense, could the Pe-
lasgi of Attica become Hellenes, and forget their own
language? That the Pelasgic inhabitants of Attica did,
however, become Hellenes, is true; but it was by mixing,
and being incorporated with the lonic Hellenes, as above
Hated. It is also plain, that these lonic Hellenes were
much more numerous than the Pelasgi, with whom they
were incorporated; otherwise their language would not
have prevailed; yet, both together could not amount to
any considerable number; since, upwards of 180 years af-
ter the arrival of the lonians, the joint population did not
exceed 20,000.* Herodotus further adds, §, 58, that, in
las opinion, the Hellenes always spoke the same language,
from their very origin; and, that though they w r ere, at
first, few and weak, when considered apart from the Pe-
lasgi,
* See the authors, quoted by Goguet, Vol. 11. p. 20, English.


Sasgi, they, afterwards* -by incorporating several barbarian
tribes, became as corisidfcrable as many other nations: and,
that for this, among many; other reasons, the Pelasgi, who
were barbarians, never became considerable: probably, as
Mr, fArcher remarks, becausei ..they never adopted any
other tribe. From this passage, To think, it may also be
inferred, that the Hellenic or Greek language never re-
ceived any improvement, from the time of the first lonic
descent.
Avery learned and judicious ; translator of Herodotus
thinks, that, if Attica had been originally possessed by
the Pelasgi, it would have .been called Pelasgia; as Pelo-
ponnesus had been. And, probably, it would, if the Pe-
lasgi had been equally there; and had retained
the possession of it, as longnas, they did of Sicyon and
Argos : but most of them had ’ been expelled from Attica,
in the earliest age to which history reaches. He thinks,
also, that the Aones and Tenmices .were not Pelasgi: but,
may not they have been Pelasgic tribes? Strabo tells us,
there were many tribes of them, p- 92f; and quotes Ho-
mer’s 2 d Iliad, v. 840; And, are we not bound, to think
them Pelasgi, by the express testimony of Herodotus, un-
contradicted by any ancient historian? The learned tran-
slator thinks Ogyges to havfc'ibeen king of the-Aones and
Temniccs; and to. have, fled; with them, into Boeotia, at
tire time of the flood, which bears his name, 7 I’Archer,
270. If so, lie must have reigned in Attica, at the time
that the Aones and Tenmices possessed it; and, conse-
quently,


(fiiently, before the arrival.of. the (lonians in Attica. Yet.
t am rather disposed to-'think; lhat he was an lonian
king; and that this Flood happened after the lonian de-
scent; for the Athenians celebrated the anniversary of that
inundation for many centuries; as Plutarch informs us,-in
his Life of Sylla.* Now, it does not appear likely, that
they would commemorate an event, that happened in that
country before they arrived in, and inhabited it. Nor.
would they claim a barbarian king, as Ogyges must have
been, if he reigned only over, the Aones and Temnices:
for these are expressly called barbarians,-f- by Strabo;
Lib. IX. 615. Nay, Afncanus, in Luseb. Prepar. Evang.
488, expressly calls him a native Athenian, that is, lonian.
1 shall now continue to establish the lonian origin of
the Athenians particularly, and, generally, of all the Greeks;
not denying, that several barbarian tribes were incorpo-
rated with them.
Strabo, Lib. VIII. 513, tells us, there were as many
Grecian tribes as there were varieties of Greek dialects;
and, that of these, the ancient Attic was the same as the
lonic; for, that the ancient inhabitants of Attica were
called lonians; from whom sprung the lonians, who after-
wards settled in Asia: and, that the Doric was the same
as the iEolic. Now, let it not be said, the inhabitants of
Attica were called lonians, ■ from Jon, the son of Xu thus;
as
* Vol. IV. p. 148, English,
t That is, they spoke a different language from the Greek.


as Herodotus, who lived about 1000 years after this Jon,
and most other subsequent heathen historians, were led to
imagine; for such a compliment, as the adoption of a
name, derived from that of an individual, was never paid
but to kings, or the first settlers in a country. Now Jon,
though general of the Athenian forces, never reigned over
Attica;* nor is he mentioned in the list of Athenian kings,
■ o 7
given by Pausanias, Attic, p. 7; nor in the more accurate
series, collected by I’Archer, Vol. VII. p. 293. Foreigners
seem to have been better acquainted with the origin of
the Greeks. Thus, the Persian Queen, Atossa, calls all
Greece, and, not the Athenians in particular, rnwycv, Aeschy-
lus, Persae, v. 154. The Aid scholiast, on the Acarnenses
of Aristophanes, says,; that tW Thracians, Boeotians, and
Achseans, were called lonians: and so does Hesychius, in
voce m. For the Thracians, also, were, prior to their mix-
ture with a multitude of barbarians, descendants from Jon
or Javan, as already seen- Hence, the Athenians boasted,
that their community was the most ancient of all the
Greek communities,; and, that they had never abandoned
the territory in which they first settled, Herod. Lib. VII.
§. l6l: that is, they never voluntarily quitted it, nor were
expelled by force. .But they sent out several colonies;
and were, for some, time, expelled, by a natural convul-
sion.
* Conon, indeed, in Photias, p. 438, says, that Jon reigned in Attica: but
he is contradicted by the whole series of events of Jon’s life; and, at least,
by implication, by all otjier historians.


rion, And, Lib. I.•§/ 143, lie calls Athens an lonian city.
He adds, indeed, that the Athenians (in after times, name-
ly, in that of Cyrus) were ashamed of being called lonians.
If this be true, it was, evidently, on account of the weak
state of the lonian colonies, in the reign of Cyrus : -but
Plutarch, in his treatise on the malignity of Herodotus,
§. 21, absolutely denies it. It must, also, be remembered,
that Herodotus was a Dorian; a tribe always jealous of
the Athenians. He owns, that several, if not most of the
lonian colonies, gloried in [that name.
We may date the arrival of the lonians in Attica, 1 from
the reign of Ogyges, who was, probably, their leader, -and
began his reign 1796 years before the Christian sera, see
7 I’Archeds Herodotus-; that is, 848 years after the confu-
sion of languages, and the dispersion of mankind; 374-
years after the commencement of the Pelasgic kingdom of
Sicyon, under iEgialeus; 176 years after the commence-
ment of another Pelasgic kingdom, in Argos, by Inachus.
Tims, we see the Pelasgi, after their expulsion from lonia,
had sufficient time to-Spread themselves all over Greece,
before the arrival of Ogyges. AbOuf thirty-seven years af-
ter his arrival, that is, about the year,' 1759 before: Christ,
he was obliged to quit Attica, by that great inundation,
which still bears his name; occasioned,-most probably, by
the - rupture of the isthmus, which separated the Black
sea from the Mediterranean; whose eiflux, and reaction,
were felt on the shores of Asia Minor, and Attica. He,
his subjects, and his neighbours, the Aones and Temnices,
fled


fled for refuge to Boeotia, This we may infer, (for 1 find
no express proof of it,) from Boeotia having been anciently
called Ogygia. And, as Ogyges had, in Attica, built the
city of Eleusis, Euseb. Prepar. Evang. 489, so, in Boeotia,
there were cities, called Athens, and Elusis, in the age of
Cecrops, which were destroyed by a subsequent inunda-
tion, Strabo, 624, Pausan. 7 56: and, in Thebes, there was
a gate called Ogygia, Pausan. 728. Now Philocorus, an
ancient historian, who flourished in the reimi of Antigo-
nus, king of Macedonia, denies, that any king reigned in
Attica, for 189 years after this deluge; and tells us, that
it remained waste, until the reign of Cecrops, Euseb. Pre-
par. Evang. 490. Since, therefore, Ogyges survived this
deluge, and did not reign after it in Attica, but left so
many marks of his presence in Boeotia, it naturally fol-
lows, that he remained and reigned there, as long as ho
lived. That he survived the deluge, is affirmed by Euse-
bius, in his chronicle.
During the time that Ogyges reigned in Attica, and
while he remained in Boeotia, and before the return of
the greater part of his colony to tho Athenian territory,
that is, during 226 years, we may conclude, that many
lonian families settled in Locris and Phocis; as we find
them in those regions after that interval.
Such, also, of the descendants of Jon, as settled in
Epire, being pressed by the barbarians behind them, dur-
ing this interval, passed into Acarnania and Etolia. Pliny
expressly tells us, that Etolia was peopled by tho Atha-
o manes,


manes, Lib. XV. c. vii; and these, according to Strabo,
p. 495, were Epirots. Thus, the lonic language was intro
duced into the eastern and western regions of Greece
without the isthmus.
Of the successors of Ogyges, in Xloeotia, until the reign
of Cecrops, an. 1582 before Christ,* we have no account.
According to Strabo, p. 6‘24, he reigned in Boeotia: and,
as he led back the Athenians, or the greater part of them,
into Attica, he is generally esteemed the first king of
Athens. It has been said, indeed, that he married Acta,
the daughter of Acteus, king of .Athens, Pausam 7 ; but
tlfis Philocorus affirms to be a fiction. Some say he was
an Egyptian. It is highly probable, that he travelled into
Egypt; bnt not that he Avas an Egyptian: for Euseb. Pre-r
par. Evang. Lib X. c. x, expressly says, he Avas a native
Athenian; and so does Apollodoms, Lib. 111. c. xiii. He
was said to be of a double nature; probably, because he
spoke both the Greek and Egyptian languages.
During his reign, tAVo remarkable events occurred;
namely, the conquest of Thessaly, by Deucalion, an. 1541:
and the inundation, by AYffich it Avas laid Avaste, an. 1529,
.commonly called Deucalion’s Flood.
Deucalion Avas the son of Prometheus, p avlio Avas said
to have come from Mount Caucasus; but, probably, rather
from
* The dates, in the sequel, are to be understood of years preceding the
Christian sera; and, generally, taken from I’Archer’s edition of Herodotus,
Vol. vn.
t Dionys. Halicar. p. 14.


from Caflcasium, in the island of Chios; a port, mentioned
by Herodotus, Lib. V. §. 53, and, consequently, an lonian:
for the Chians were admitted into the lonian assemblies, as
Pausanias attests, p. 532; though he admits, that he was
ignorant of the reason. But Apollodorus, Lib. 111. c. xiii.
6, expressly says, he Was a native Atheniani It is cer-
tain, the name, Prometheus, was well known in Athens;
for Godrus had a son, called Prometheus, Pausan. 523.
Hence, it follows, that Deucalion was also an Athenian.
He fled to Athens, during the flood, Parian Marbles,
epoch 4, and, probably, remained there; for he died, and
was buried there. Pausan. 43.
Thessaly was, when invaded by Deucalion, possessed by
the Pelasgi, who came from Peloponnesus, an. 1727, con-
ducted by Adieus, Phthius, and Pelasgus; from whom
three districts of Thessaly were named, Dionys. Halicar.
p. 14, These Deucalion expelled, an. 1541, at the head of
an army, Composed of Leleges, Curetes, and a multitude
of the inhabitants of tile foot of Parnassus. The Curetes
Were Ltolians; so called from Curium, a city of Efolia,
Strabo, - 657, 692. The LeJeges, Strabo deems a collection
of various tribes of Leucadians and 1 Boeotians, who settled
in Loeris, and 1 joined Deucalion, p. 495, 496, and were
afterwards called Locrialls, Dionys. Halicar. 14. The inha-
bitants of the foot of Parnassus must have been Phocians.
Hence, I conclude, that both Deucalion, and his army,
were lonians, and mostly Hellenes; and thus the Hellenic
language sappUmted the Pdasgic, in Thessaly.
c 2 Deucalion


Deucalion reigned over all Thessaly, and inhabited Cyne,
a city of Locris, Strabo, 660, 651: he had two sons, Am-
phyction, and Hellen. Amphyction reigned over that part
of Thessaly, that lay near Thermopylae, Par. Marbles, and
Pausan. 815; and Hellen, over that part called Phthiotis,
Strabo, 587- Amphyction is celebrated for having formed
a council, consisting of deputies from all the Grecian
states or communities, existing in his time; that is, accord-
ing to the Parian Marbles, an. 1521. These were, the
lonians, Phthiotae,
Dolopes, Dorians, i
Malienses, >
iEnians, Phocians, \
Magnetes, Locri Epicmenides,^
Pausan. 815.
This account of the different states, represented in the
Amphyctionic council, is of much importance to our pre-
sent enquiry; for by it we find,
Ist*1 st * That the tribes therein mentioned, and they alone,
formed the really Greek population, at that period; to the
exclusion of the Peloponnesians, who were then Pelasgi or
JDanai; and of the Boeotians, who were Cadmeans.
2%' That the Athenians were then called lonians; and,
consequently, could not have been so called from Jon,
the grandson of Hellen, (as Herodot. Lib. VIII. §. 44,
and most of the Greek historians, imagined; not knowing
the true reason of that denomination;) for Jon was not
then
* From Thessaliotitis, a district of Thessaly. See I’Archer, 564.


then born. Yet, to this reasoning, many would, perhaps,
object, that the Dorians are here mentioned; who, ac-
cording to Strabo, 587, were so called, from Dorus, a son
of Helen; who, nevertheless, was not then born. But
Strabo was mistaken; for Andro, an earlier historian,
whom he quotes, p. 729, says, they anciently inhabited
a district of Thessaly, called Doris; whence they came to
Parnassus, where Dorus settled, and: governed them: and
hence they were called Dorians; not from him, but from
the territory they inhabited, afterwards called Hestiotis.
3 <]| y> We may remark, that the Hellenes are not even
mentioned, as forming a separate tribe from the rest; as
Herodot. Lib. I. §. 56, asserts: for, if such a tribe then
existed, it could not fail of being enumerated with the
other tribes. He is, therefore, mistaken, in representing
them as a distinct tribe, inhabiting Phthiotis, in the reign
of Deucalion. In one sense, it is true, all the Greek
tribes might, and probably were, even then, called Hel-
lenes; as the greater part of them descended from Hellas,
the son of Javan, as already mentioned. But of this He-
rodotus was ignorant:* as was also Thucydides, Lib. I.
3, who imagined the Hellenes derived their name from
Hellen, the son of Deucalion; and also Pausan. 26'3, who
thought all Greece was called Hellas, from an inconside-
rable
1 Yet, of this, the ancient Greeks seemed to have some suspicionj for,
Couon informs us, some thought Hellen to be a sou of Jupiter Photius, 438;
that a imrson of illustrious but unknown birth.


rable district of that name; so called freto Ho lien, who
built a city, to which it was annexed; but which was,
soon after, deserted by H-ellen himself, the inhabitants re-
moving to Melitaea, Strabo, 660. Hence, no other reason,
for comprehending all the Greeks, under the name of
Hellenes, can be- given but that which I have assigned;.
Thucydides, Li In I. §.3, says, the Greeks were compre-
hended under no common- denomination, even so late as
the days of Homer. Yet, it-is certain, that all. the inha-
bitants of Greece, without the were called Hel-
lenes, before the Trojan war, or shortly after: for Homer,
speaking of Ulysses, say si,- toh&te fame was spread all over
Hellas and Argos., Odyss,- Lib. I. v. 34L Here Peloponne-
sus, which was anciently called Argos, is distinguished from
all the rest of Greece; and not merely from the inconsi-
derable territory of Hellas. It also appears, by the 2 d Iliad,
v. 683, (831, English,) that the town of Hellas was re-
peopled before the Trojan war; for Homer distinguishes
the inhabitants of Hellas froiu those of Phthia,
And Hellas, blest
With female beauty far above the rest.
Strabo, also,- pv 368, shews, that Hesiod, at least as an-
cient as Homer, comprehended ail the Greeks, under the
name Elellenes.
The Enians, Magnetes, Dolopes, and Malienses, were
Thessalian tribes. See 8 I’Archer, under those names. The
two first were afterwards called Eolians, Pan sure 308.
Hellen


Hellen had three sons, Eolus, his eldest, Dorns, and
Xuthus; by -whose migrations or conquests, or those of
their posterity, the Greek language was propagated into
Peloponnesus and Boeotia.
To -Dolus, Hellen left that part of Thessaly, Which he
governed: to Dorus, he assigned a certain portion of his
subjects, to form anew settlement; Xuthus, the youngest,
passed into Attica, where he married Creusa, the daughter
of Erectheus, king of Alliens. Dorus led his people to
the foot of Parnassus, and founded three cities, Conon
in Photius, 438. Yet, Herodotus says, he reigned in that
part of Thessaly, called Hrestiotis; but he probably meant,
that Dorus reigned over the people of that district;
whom, according to Conon, he led to the foot of Par-
nassus, Now Parnassus is a mountain of Phocis. Thus
his account .may, in some measure, be reconciled with that
of Conon; who expressly sa} r s, that Dorus led his colony
out of the dominion of Hellen, and settled at the foot of
Parnassus; and Strabo, .587, agrees with him. But both
are mistaken, as 1 have already shewn, in thinking, that
from Dorns they received the name of Dorians.
How the Greek language penetrated into Peloponnesus,
and gradually supplanted the Pelasgic, 1 snail now shew.
Xuthus, the youngest son of Hellen, had- two sons,
Acheus and Jon. Adieus having committed an involnu-
tary homicide, was obliged to fly from Attica, and took
refuge in Laconia in Peloponnesus, Strabo, 388, about
the year 140?. He there built four cities, Conon in Pho*
tins,


tins, 438. It is then plain, that he was accompanied or
followed by a number of Athenians. The inhabitants,
from him, were called Achaeans; and the country, Achaia.
Laconia was the most southern part of Peloponnesus;
having the Laconic gulph on the south, Arcadia on the
north, the Argolic gulph on the east, and Messenia on
the west.
Shortly after, namely, in 1406, Attica, being over-stocked
with inhabitants, Jon, the younger brother of Acheus,
led a considerable colony of Athenians into that part of
Peloponnesus, then called Egialea, which bordered on the
Corinthian gulph; and, at that time, subject to a Pelasgic
king, called Silinous. This prince, to avoid hostilities,
gave him his daughter in marriage, and appointed him
his heir. In effect, Jon succeeded him, established his
colony, and called the country lonia, Strabo, 588. Pau-
san. 523, An. 1404. Acheus, collecting his forces, from
Egialea and Attica, passed into Thessaly, and recovered
the share, which his father Xuthus should have possessed,
Pausan. 521.
Eolus, the eldest son of Hellen, had several sons; one
only of whom need here be mentioned, namely, Salmo-
ueus, who reigned in Thessaly, Diodor. 397, Apollodorus,
Lib, I, cap. vii. §. 24. Being probably disturbed, by the
invasion of Acheus, he passed, with a great number of
Eolians, into Elis, in Pelopoimesus; and possessed himself
of a considerable part of it, on the banks of the river
Alphcus, and built the city Sahnonea, 1 Diodor. 312. lie
was


was received there the more readily, as Elis peopled
from Etolia, and its first king, Ethiolus, was a son of a
daughter of Deucalion, Pausan. 375.
Sicyon was, for many ages, governed by Pelasgic kings;
but, after the death of Corax, Epopeus, a Thessalian, suc-
ceeded him. His son, Laomedon, married Pheno, daugh-
ter of Cly tins, an Athenian; and also assumed an Athe-
nian, called Sicyon, a grandson of Erectheus, king of
Athens, as his partner in the kingdom, gave him his
daughter in marriage, and named him his successor. From
him, that territory, before called Hgialea, was called Si-
cydn. After him, Janiscus, also an Athenian, reigned: thus
the Hellenic language became predominant. Pausan. 124,
125.
About the year 3374, Archander and Arciteles, sons of
Adieus, passed from Phthiotis to Argos, and married two
daughters of Danaus the second, who then reigned at Ar-
gos; by them, in memory of their father, both Argos and
Lacedemon were called Achaia. Pausan. 522. ! \
Not long after, that is, about the year 1362, Pelops, a
riative of Sipyle, a town on the confines of Phrygia and
Lydia, came, with large treasures, into Peloponnesus, Thu -
cyd, Lib. I. cap. ix. hired a body of Acheans from Phthi-
otis; which, at that time, was also called Achaia. Strabo,
sbl. By marriage with Hippodaraia, the daughter of Oeno-
maus, he became master of Pisa,: irk Elis;' and afterwards
of Olympia. Pausan. 37b. 1 Diodor. 317- His son, Atreus,
obtained the kingdom of Mycenoe; and his grandson,
h Agamemnon,


Agamenmon, became still more considerable: thus the
Hellenic language made a further progress.
Arcadia was originally peopled by the Pelasgi; and an-
ciently called Pelasgia. Pausan. 598, 599. How the Hel-
lenic language was introduced into it, does not clearly
appear. It is certain, it was not by the introduction of
strangers; for Pausan. 375, tells us, it was from its very
origin, inhabited by the same people. It is probable then,
since it certainly adopted that language, that, being a very
small territory, and surrounded by people who spoke that
language, its inhabitants gradually acquired it; as the
people of Savoy did the French. Even if the account,
given by some writers, of its conquest, by Areas, the son
of Orchomenus, were true; yet, as this event is said to
have happened 1834 years before Christ; that is, forty-four
years before the arrival of Ogyges, and, consequently, when
the Pelasgic language was spoken all over Greece, the dif-
ficulty of explaining, how it was supplanted by the Greek,
would still remain.
The Greek language was introduced into Boeotia, at a
much later period than into any other part of Greece.
After the return of Cecrops into Attica, the Aones, Hy-
antes, and other inixed barbarian tribes, remained in Boe-
otia, until the arrival of Cadmus, an 1549, with a Phoe-
nician colony. After some resistance, he obtained the en-
tire possession; of■ that country, and called it Cadmeia.
Strabo, 615. However, after the lapse of many years, the
descendants of Hellen, as appears by Diodorus, obtained
a part


a part of it: for Eolus, the son of Hellen, had several
sons, as already mentioned. One of them, called Mimas,
remained in Eolis,. and had a son, called Hippotes; whose
son, Eolus the second, had a daughter, called Arne; and
she had a son, called Beotus. This Beotus, with a num-
ber of Eolians, invaded Cadmeia, possessed himself of a
part of it, and called it Boeotia. Diodor. 311. Erora these
descended those Boeotians, who assisted the Greeks in the
Trojan war. Diodor, 31,2. Thucyd. JLib. I. cap, xii. But
the Phoenicians continued to occupy the greater part of
Boeotia, until the war with the Epigoni, an. 1307, Strabo,
bid; at the conclusion of which, Thebes was taken, the
inhabitants forced to fly into Illyria, and an Argive colony
settled there; who transferred the government to Ther-
sander, the son of Polynices, by an Argive princess. Pau-
san. 722. At this time, and for upwards of a century
after, the lonic dialect, and no other, was spoken all over
Greece. Pausan. 199? expressly tells us, that, before the
return of the Heraclidae to Peloponnesus, with an army of
Dorians, the Argives spoke the same dialect as the Athe-
nians; that is, until eighty years after the destruction of
Troy. Thucyd. Lib. I. cap. xii. Now it is well known, that
the ancient Attic dialect was the same as the lonic.
Strabo, 513.
Thus I have proved, that the primeval language was.
introduced into Greece, by the lonians, who inhabited
Attica; and shewn how, from them, it Was extended to
the different regions that it.
ii 2 It


It were difficult, however, if not impossible, to conceive
how an entire language, and, particularly, one so perfect as
the Greek, could subsist, among a people so-rude and un-
settled as the early Greeks, and who had so little peaceful
intercourse with each other, if not Committed to writing,
and preserved in books, composed long before their lapsing
into a state so unfavourable to literature. And, accord-
ingly, we do find, that such books existed in the earliest
ages. Diodorus, Lib. Y. p. 376, tells, us, that several lite-
rary monuments existed in Greece, which were lost by a
great inundation, probably, that of Ogyges, by which At-
tica was laid waste; and from which he fled, with preci-
pitation, into Boeotia.* But many may have been saved;
and, certainly, some existed, in the age of Gecrops: for
Tacitus, Lib. XI. Annal. c. xiv. says, that many attributed
the invention of letters to him; wdiich could not be, if
books did not exist in his time.'f- It appears, also, from
Diodorus's account, that these literary monuments existed,
at the time of the inundation, in Attica only; and not in
those parts inhabited by the Pelasgi: for he tells us, that
the Egyptians, claiming to themselves the invention of the
astronomical science,, the Greeks had nothing to reply.
Now, as the inundation reached no other part of Greece
but Attica, they could have replied, if any astronomical
books had existed in the parts inhabited by the Pelasgi.
We
* Mount Helicon was a very proper place of refuge,
t If we credit Cedrenus, p. 81, Deucalion wrote a history of the flood;
namely, that which happened in his time,


We have, also, strong reasons to presume, that the loni-
ans, on the continent, had books, previous to the arrival
of Ogyges in Greece. Where else could those astronomi-
cal observations be made, or those treatises composed,
which the inundation swept away? That the letters they
used, were the most ancient known in Greece, appears
by several testimonies. Tacitus tells us, Annal, Lib. XL
c. xiv. that the Latin letters were formed as were the most
ancient letters in Greece; formes. Uteris Latinis qua veterri-
mis Gracorurn: and, Pliny tells us, these forms were the
lonic; gentium consensus tacitus primus omnium conspiravif ,
ut lonum Uteris uterentur; veteres Gracas fuisse, easdem pane
qua nunc Latina. Histor. Natur. Lib. VII. c. Ivii. and Iviii.
Mr. Astle, than whom no man penetrated deeper into
this subject, tells us, p, 56, of his treatise on the Origin
of Writing, that, “ after the Romans had established the
“ use of the lonic letters, they seem not to have acknow-
“ ledged the Pelasgic and Etruscan to have been Greek
“ alphabets. The most learned of them knew none older
“ than the lonic; as appears, by the Greek Farnese in-
“ scriptions of Herodes Atticus.'* This learned man, out
“ of a sacred regard to antiquity, caused the oldest ortho-
“ graphy to be observed in the writing; and the letters to
“ be delineated after the most antique forms that could
“ be found; and they are, plainly, no other than the lonic,
“ or right-handed characters.” But we shall presently see,
that the Pelasgic and lonic letters were nearly the same.
It
* He was prefect of Asia, A. D- 97.


It has been long and very generally held, on the au-
thority of Herodotus, Lib. V. §. 58, that the Greeks were
unacquainted with letters, before the arrival of Cadmus,
an. 1549; but Mr. LArcher has well shewn, that the text
of Herodotus, on which that opinion is principally found-
ed, has been misunderstood; and that Herodotus does not
say, that letters were brought into Greece by Cadmus, but
only some letters , 4 r Archer, 254. Cadmus introduced only
three letters, Zeta, Theta , and Chi; which, for the facility
of arithmetical calculation, (best understood by the Phoe-
nicians, a commercial people,) were generally received.
Diodorus also, Lib. V. §. 57, says, that it was believed
that Cadmus first brought letters into Greece: but, §. 74,
he says, that the Phoenicians were not the inventors, but
barely changed their form.
Many have also supposed, that the Pelasgic letters were
the first known in Greece, and more ancient than the
lonic: but this is evidently a mistake; for Pliny, Lib.VII.
cap. Ivi. tells us, that the Pelasgi introduced letters into
Latiura. And, in the two following chapters, he tells us,
that the Latin letters were nearly the same as the most
ancient Greek, and were the lonic: which is confirmed by
Tacitus, and Herodes Atticus.
These Pelasgi were either those, who, according to Di-
onys. Halicarnass. Lib. I. §. 18, being expelled from Thes-
saly, by Deucalion, passed soon after into Italy, an. 15391
or those that followed Evander, from Arcadia, into Italy,
an. 1330; or under QEnotrus, also from Arcadia, at a much
earlier


earlier period, an. 1837. Dionys. Halicar. Lib. I. §. 11.
However that may be, it is plain, the Pelasgic and lonic
were nearly the same.
Dionysius expressly says, the colony, conducted by Evan-
der, brought letters into Italy, Lib. I. §.'3l, 33; and this
I think the most probable opinion.
The Pelasgi occupying, in the earliest ages, the greatest
part of Greece, the letters they used, though the same as
the lonians also used, were more generally known under
the name of Pelasgic. Hence it is, that Orpheus and
Linus are said, by Diodorus, Lib. 111. |. 66, p. 236, to
have written their poems in Pelasgic letters. But he con-
founds the first Orpheus, who, according to Solinus, p. 718
and 719 j lived eleven generations before the Trojan war;
and, consequently, in the year before Christ 1633, with
Orpheus, the Argonaut,
The elder Orpheus then wrote long before the arrival of
Cadmus in Greece: for the proof of this I refer to Mr.
Jackson, who, in the third volume of his Chronological
Antiquities, p. 138, has treated this subject very fully.
Mr. I’Archer, also, in the fourth volume, p. 256, of his
translation of Herodotus, has shewn, that the Pelasgic,
and ancient Attic letters, were the same; though he ac-
knowledges, that he is at a loss to account for their iden-
tity, or how they were introduced into Attica; not no-
ticing the lonic descent of the Athenians. Herodotus,
Lib. V. §. 58, expressly tells us, that the lonians of old
had books, written on parchment, called Dipththera.
Lastly,


Lastly, the etymology of antediluvian names is as easily
found in the Greek, as either in the Hebrew, Syriac, or
Arabic; or even more easily. Thus, Adam is derived from
at™, pater; Eve, (or rather Cheva, as Dathe has it,) from
nx tva , peperii Cain, from novus, being anew man;
Abel, from a/3?m, alas; Seth, from zm, queero, being sought
for, in the room of Abel; Noah, from a ship. Tubal
Cain I omit; as this name was given to a remote descen-
dant of Cain, long after his banishment; and, consequently,
when the primitive tongue was probably altered. Babel,
from a starting-post; as it was from thence all man.
kind set out, to settle in different countries. The He-
brew, which is said to contain the roots of many lan-
guages, did nothing more, than strip some primeval words
of their terminations, and thus disfigured them.
