

3%
Sou
UP)
AN EXPERIMENT
IN CO-OPERATION
1935=1945
THE HISTORY OF THE
LIAISON COMMITTEE
OF WOMEN’S
INTERNATIONAL
ORGANISATIONS
J




The \
The ''i >m.
The 1
The \
The \
St. Jo
Interr unbers
Interr '’omen.
Interi
World DONOR , x id Girl
Mrs. Helen (Frazer) Moyas
Assoc:
Federation of American Women’s Clubs Overseas.
AN EXPERIMENT IN CO-OPERATION
Contents :
Foreword .. .. .. Page I
History 1925 to 1945 .. .. Page 3
Chronological Index .. .. Page 19
Showing headings of subjects dealt with by the Committee.
Subject Index .. .. .. Page 22
Showing action taken on subjects dealt with.


OF WOMEN’S INTERNATIONAL
ORGANISATIONS
Organisations Represented:
The International Council of Women.
The International Alliance of Women for Suffrage and Equal
Citizenship.
The World’s Young Women’s Christian Association.
The Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom.
The International Federation of University Women.
The World Union of Women for International Concord.
The World’s Woman’s Christian Temperance Union.
St. Joan’s Social and Political Alliance.
International Federation of Women Magistrates and Members
of the Legal Profession.
International Federation of Business and Professional Women.
International Co-operative Women’s Guild.
OBSERVER SOCIETIES!
World Bureau of the World Association of Girl Guides and Girl
Scouts.
Associated Country Women of the World.
Federation of American Women’s Clubs Overseas.
AN EXPERIMENT IN CO-OPERATION
Contents:
Foreword .. .. .. Page i
History 1925 to 1945 • • • • Page 3
Chronological Index .. .. Page 19
Showing headings of subjects dealt with by the Committee.
Subject Index .. .. .. Page 22
Showing action taken on subjects dealt with.


FOREWORD
by the Viscount Cecil of Chelwood, d.c.1., ll.d.
No system of international Government can succeed which
does not take account of the fact that half the population of the
world is of the female sex. It was the recognition of this
elementary truth which caused the League of Nations commission
of the Peace Conference of 1919 to accept President Wilson’s
proposal that all positions under or in connection with the League
should be open equally to men and women. The Charter of
the United Nations Organisation contains equivalent provisions.
That, however, is by no means all that is wanted. The
purpose of the Liaison Committee of Women’s International
Organisations described in this pamphlet is to secure first that the
international interest of women shall be safeguarded and,
secondly, that women shall have a full opportunity for contri-
buting to the International Peace and Progress of the World.
Particularly is it urgent that they should help in reconstruction
after the desolation of the war. Obviously in such a work women
are at least as much interested as men. To give only one instance,
there is the tremendous problem of the children of all countries
deprived of their homes and family life—unhappy little half-
starved beings whose first and most impressionable years have
been passed amidst slaughter and cruelty. For them women may
be regarded as very specially responsible. But, indeed, it has
always been on women that some of the worst agonies of the war
have fallen.
On the political side no less than on the social and economic
will women have much to do. They will have to secure their
rights and status so far as they had been acquired before the war
and to see that they are duly and properly developed when peace
comes. In many countries there is much wanting. Even in
England such questions as the nationality of married women and
membership of the Second Chamber have not been solved and
England is not the most reactionary of modern States. Above
all, women are profoundly interested in the international
machinery for the maintenance of peace. Not only ought they
to study and, if needed, seek to amend the actual proposals put
forward but they must work their hardest to convince Public


Opinion of the necessity for such machinery and must take care
that it is not allowed to become rusty and ineffective by disuse.
Here is a great field of activity—and much might be added to
it—for all the Women’s International Organisations and for the
Liaison Committee which will combine and stimulate their efforts.
Indeed it is on women with their knowledge of the practical
details of life and their deep spiritual insight into its meaning
that we must largely rely for the establishment and maintenance
of a Real Peace.
CECIL.


An Experiment in Co-operation
THE HISTORY
LIAISON COMMITTEE
OF WOMEN’S
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS
1925—1945
ORIGIN AND GROWTH.
As early as 1921 an informal group of women’s international
organisations had approached the League of Nations for
representation on the Traffic in Women and Protection of
Children Committee and was successful in securing the appoint-
ment of Mme. Avril de Ste. Croix. In 1925, at a Council
Meeting of the International Council of Women, a more formal
grouping was proposed, with wider aims. This was formed as
the Joint Standing Committee of Women’s International
Organisations on the following resolution:
That this International Council (1.C.W.) shall invite other
international women’s organisations to co-operate in forming
an International Standing Committee of Women whose
object shall be to work unitedly for the appointment of
suitable women on Committees or other bodies in the League
of Nations where women’s opinions should be represented.
In 1926 the Standing Committee accepted the following:
That the aim of the Committee be to work for the appoint-
ment of women on Committees or other bodies of the League
of Nations.
In 1927 a formal proposal was made that the office and the
work of the Standing Committee should be centralised in Geneva
and not in London, but this was not accepted.
THREE


In 1928 several national joint Committees had been formed or
were being considered, with Objects similar to the Joint Standing
Committee, notably, Sweden, Norway, Great Britain, Australia.
In 1930 it seemed well to enlarge the scope of the Committee
and in 1931 a second group was formed, to be called the Liaison
Committee of Women’s International Organisations. The two
groups worked largely together, the Standing Committee holding
to its original and limited object, the Liaison Committee working
in a wider field.
In 1932 a Memorandum was drafted on the Functions and
Organisation of the Liaison Committee, with the following terms
of reference:
To secure intercommunication between the member
organisations in cases where it is agreed that co-operation
would be desirable.
In 1934 a proposal to amalgamate the two bodies under the
title Joint Committee of Women’s International Organisations,
with a Sub-Committee to continue the former work of the Joint
Standing Committee was made. Later, the word “ Liaison ”
replaced the word “ Joint ” in the title of the Committee.
In 1936 the Objects were accepted as follows:
1 To serve as a medium of intercommunication and co-
operation between the member organisations;
2 To develop the influence of women in international
affairs.
As the years passed it was thought well to draw up agreed
“ Rules of Procedure ” to guide and to control the members.
These have been adhered to unchanged since their final agreement
in 1936.
The meetings of the Liaison Committee have been held mainly
in London. During the Assembly of the League of Nations and
during 1.L.0. Conferences meetings were held in Geneva.
For specific purposes meetings were occasionally held elsewhere.
Since the outbreak of war all have been held in London, although
meetings have been held intermittently by representatives,
resident in Geneva, of the member Societies.
The Chairmanship passes in rotation among the member
Societies at each meeting.


The Liaison Committee has, now in 1945,11 member Societies,
with 3 Observer Societies, 4 Associated Liaison Committees.
TYPICAL ACTIVITIES.
Some of the subjects dealt with by the Liaison Committee are
here given in more detail. These have been chosen not
necessarily for their intrinsic importance, but because the Liaison
Committee dealt with them most thoroughly, or most lengthily,
or with most success.
When the League of Nations COMMITTEE ON TRAFFIC
IN WOMEN AND CHILD WELFARE was divided and the
Women’s Organisations were successful in maintaining Assessors
to represent them on each Section, Mme. Avril de Ste. Croix re-
mained on the Traffic in Women Committee, Mile. Gourd joined
the Child Welfare Committee.
The Liaison Committee continued' to take an active and
practical interest in both these subjects, notably when the specific
question arose on the Traffic in Women in the Far East, con-
sequent on refugees from Russia arriving destitute in the Far East.
For the WORLD ECONOMIC CONFERENCE, out of the
names sent in by the Liaison Committee at the request of the
Council of the League of Nations, three were appointed as
Delegates; Dr. van Dorp, Dr. Liiders, Mrs. Wootton.
On the general question of the COLLABORATION OF
WOMEN IN THE WORK OF THE LEAGUE OF
NATIONS the continuous work done to this end by the Liaison
Committee resulted in a large measure of success, perhaps best
summarised in two resolutions of the Assembly of the League of
Nations. The first, in 1931, ran as follows:
Convinced of the great value of the contribution of women
in the work of peace and the friendly relations between the
peoples which is the principal aim of the League, requests
the Council to examine the possibility of increasing the
collaboration of women in the work of the League.
The second, in 1932, ran as follows:
Expresses its warm appreciation of the work done by
women in support of the League of Nations, and welcomes
wholeheartedly the efforts made to increase their collabor-
ation. Notes that the women consulted are unanimous in


declaring that equal status between men and women is a
pre-requisite of effective collaboration of women in the work
of the League and that their collaboration can be most
effectively exercised through the competent organs of the
League and of the Governments; reminds all the States
Members of the League of Article 7 of the Covenant which
has in view the possibility:
(a) For the Governments of the States Members to appoint
competent women to Assembly delegations, to Confer-
ences and on Government Committees of the League;
(b) For the Council to appoint competent women on
technical League Committees, as Assessors and experts;
(c) For the Secretary General to include competent women
in the higher posts of the Secretariat.
To the Liaison Committee is due also the successful official
participation in the work of the League of Nations made by
women delegates of many Governments.
On the subject of MANDATES, when the Liaison Committee
came into action, Mrs. Anna Wicksell was a member of the Man-
dates Commission. On her death, the Liaison Committee was
instrumental in obtaining the appointment of Miss Dannevig and
has since maintained a close contact with Miss Dannevig and with
the work of the Commission.
On NATIONALITY, after many years a, subject still quite
unsatisfactory, the Liaison Committee largely passed this to the
Consultative Committee on Nationality, on which many of its
member Societies were represented.
When the Conference on the CODIFICATION OF INTER-
NATIONAL LAW at the Hague was announced, the Liaison
Committee participated in the formation of an ad hoc Committee
to advance the point of view of women at the Conference. This
Committee functioned at the Hague during the Conference and
did much splendid work, with deputations, and a demonstration,
the proposal for which emanated from the Liaison Committee.
A vast amount of work was done by the Liaison Committee
when the League of Nations announced the holding of a DIS-
ARMAMENT CONFERENCE. The Liaison Committee had
always worked in a variety of ways through its member Societies
for the general question of peace, but it now concentrated upon


helping the Disarmament Conference, both in preparation, by
putting forward names of delegates, and by a general programme
of propaganda. Soon an ad hoc Committee took over this work
and gradually built up the Disarmament Committee. This
Committee, as it grew in size, became independent of its parent,
the Liaison Committee, admitted a wider membership and
changed its name to Peace and Disarmament Committee of
Women’s International Organisations.
The Liaison Committee kept a close watch over the work of the
1.L.0. taking action where it seemed to be required, keeping the
welfare of women and their fair treatment always to the fore.
Helpful suggestions were made while the 1.L.0. was deliberating
and strong protests if decisions seemed likely to be taken which
discriminated against women or were detrimental to women.
Another subject, dealt with very fully by the Liaison Com-
mittee, is the wide one of the STATUS OF WOMEN. In 1931,
the League of Nations Assembly passed a resolution “ requesting
the Council to examine the possibility of increasing the collabor-
ation of women in the work of the League of Nations.” The
response of the Liaison Committee indicated their opinion that
the cause of the lack of collaboration was the inequality of status.
In 1932 an enquiry into the Status of Women of all countries was
proposed but eventually rejected. In 1932 the Equal Rights
Treaty was proposed to the Liaison Committee. In 1934 this
Treaty was signed by four States Members of the League of
Nations. The Liaison Committee appointed a sub-Committee to
draft an Equal Status Convention which differed in wording from
the Equal Rights Treaty. At the time of the League of Nations
Assembly of 1937 the Liaison Committee opened a special office
in Geneva, with a paid organiser, to follow this question. The
request for an Equal Status Convention was not accepted but the
League announced the formation of a Committee of Experts on
the Status of Women and the Liaison Committee sent in a list of
suitable members. The Committee was finally appointed and
contained four women and three men. Three of the former were
those proposed by the Liaison Committee, namely: Mile. Kerstin
Hesselgren, Mme. Anka Godjevec, Miss Dorothy Kenyon. The
work of this Committee of Experts has been interrupted by the
war. The Liaison Committee asked to be allowed to send an
“ observer ”to attend the meetings. Mrs. Corbett Ashby was
appointed and went to Geneva in the hope of being able to be
SEVEN


present at the first session. This was not possible, but on that
and subsequent occasions a special meeting of the Committee of
Experts was arranged to which representatives of the women’s
organisations were invited and at which methods of collaboration
were discussed.
A good deal of work was done in collecting and checking
information for the Institute of Public Law in Paris which had
been charged by the Committee of Experts to make enquiries into
the civil and political status of women. Again the Liaison
Committee urged the inclusion in the enquiry of native women.
In 1935 the Assembly of the League of Nations referred the
matter to the Governments for their observations. The Liaison
Committee continued to collect information from its nationals
and urged the extension of the enquiry to include mandated
territories, protectorates and colonies and proposed 1937 as a
final date for the replies. The Liaison Committee continued its
activity and was agreed that an international convention was the
only solution for this problem.
WAR YEARS.
During the first months of the war in Europe there was a forced
pause in the work of the Liaison Committee. The break up of
the League of Nations, the always increasing difficulty of
travelling and of correspondence, as Germany invaded and occu-
pied country after country, all seemed to have a paralysing effect
upon international communications and co-operation of any kind
Quickly, however, the Liaison Committee pulled itself together
and has now (1945) gathered to itself Observers of many of the
United Nations, mainly women who escaped to Britain from their
own ravaged countries. These attend the Committee meetings,
conferences and discussion groups and give valuable help in
arranging deputations to representatives of their countries.
In 1941 an INTER-ALLIED ADVISORY COMMITTEE
was formed which successfully carried into effect practical courses
of training for those wishing to prepare themselves for service in
countries freed from invasion and occupation. The British
Council took over the work of this inter-Allied Committee with
similar courses and the same Tutor Organiser.
Also in 1941/42 a series of CONFERENCES was arranged,
the full reports being later published under the title “ Women and
eight


the Post War World.” The subjects dealt with were as
follows:
Health Problems in the Immediate Post War World.
Education in the Post War World.
Social Assistance in the Post War World.
Women’s Right to Earn.
Protective and Welfare Legislation in War and Peace.
Social Insurance in the Post War World.
Women of other, countries attended and took an active part in
these Conferences.
The question of WAR CRIMES was discussed on several
occasions and in 1942 the following resolution was passed by the
Liaison Committee;
The Liaison Committee of Women’s International
Organisations in the name of common humanity wishes to
record its protest against the crimes that are being committed
during the present war, wheresoever and by whomsoever they
are committed, against:
(a) Individuals (through murder, internment in con-
centration camps, segregation in ghettos, break up of
families, violation of women, debauchery of the young,
forced labour);
(b) Spiritual values (through the destruction of culture, the
closing of schools, religious and racial persecution);
(c) Material values (through theft and pillage, and the
seizure of corporate and private property);
and in general through the establishment of a reign of terror
over the civilian population.
We protest against the inhuman treatment of helpless
populations not only by individuals but as the organised
policy of governments.
We are convinced that only the most explicit and re-
iterated condemnation of such practices can prevent their
blunting effect upon the universal human conscience from
becoming permanent; and we affirm that the eventual peace
settlement must include an endeavour to make such
barbaric practices impossible in the future and to exact such
restitution and reparation as may be most practicable in the
circumstances which will then exist.


In 1942/43 DEPUTATIONS were taken to representatives
in Britain of 39 Allied and Neutral countries. These being
partially confidential no full report of results could be given
outside the members of the Liaison Committee. The main
points brought forward at these deputations are embodied in the
following;
We, the International Organisations whose signatures
appear below, co-operating through the Liaison Committee
of Women’s International Organisations, consider it timely
to express briefly the aspirations as to the status of women
held in common by women in many countries, some of whom
can no longer speak for themselves.
When the League of Nations, in 1937, set up an Experts
Committee to study the question of the Status of Women
throughout the world, it was in response to a widespread
demand by women who felt that their position in the State
was a matter of fundamental importance. Once more war
has provided the opportunity for every community to
recognise the vital part played by women. Even in
countries where, in theory, women are treated as a class apart
within the State with interests entirely domestic, in practice
they are found to be indispensable in a far wider sphere.
We fully realise that it is impossible to foresee post war
conditions for all those citizens who are in any way involved
in the present hostilities, but whatever these conditions may
be, we desire to make plain that we have in no way, in no
slightest degree, changed our conviction that the equalising
of the status of men and women is an essential element if
those conditions are to satisfy the community. We, women
and citizens, will work to obtain that equality.
Whereas the right to earn is one of the essential rights of
human personality, and whereas unemployment, in all its
consequences, physical, social, economic and moral, is as
serious an evil for women as for men, the Liaison Committee
of Women’s International Organisations calls upon all
Governments to ensure that both in immediate and in post
war planning the right to earn and to obtain the rate for the
job and the right to enjoy full opportunities for training and
for promotion should not be denied either because of sex or
of marriage.


The following consequent resolution was widely circulated:
The Liaison Committee of Women’s International
Organisations realises, from a study of the results of the
deputations to representatives of Allied and Neutral
Governments in London, carried out during 1942 and 1943,
that there is little actual hostility to the principle of equality
of status between men and women, but rather that there is
ignorance of the facts as regards the status' of women, lack of
understanding of women’s demands and little recognition of
the fact that in all nations there is a great wastage of woman
power, a wastage highly detrimental to national develop-
ment and prosperity. An immediate example of such
wastage is the exclusion of women in the planning and
organisation of post war reconstruction. The Committee
also realises that apathy among women themselves largely
contributes to the above ignorance and lack of understanding,
and acts also as a bar to the achievement of equal status,
even in countries where the equality of the sexes is recognised
in the Constitution.
In order to counteract the above conditions the
Committee urges upon its constituent members and, more
particularly, upon their national constituents, to redouble
their efforts in the following directions:
1 To make the status of women a vital political issue
immediate and until full equality is achieved;
2 To press for the full representation of women, both in the
permanent administration in their own countries and in
all national and international bodies set up for the
planning and organising of post war reconstruction;
3 To give the widest publicity to the present situation in
order to rouse women to press for equal citizenship and
to infuse into them a stronger sense of the duties implied
in such citizenship;
4 To press for the abolition of all disabilities placed upon
women which may be still existing in their own
country;
5 To work for the recognition for all women of the right to
earn, whether married or unmarried, on equal terms
with men.
ELEVEN


Towards the end of 1943 DISCUSSION GROUPS were
arranged and these proved a valuable clearing house for the
specialised views of women of the United Nations in free
discussion of common problems.
In 1943 the following letter was sent to the British Secretary of
State for War. No satisfactory reply or assurance was obtained.
The attention of the Members of the Liaison Committee
of Women’s International Organisations has been drawn to
public announcements with regard to the work and personnel
of AMGOT. It appears that numbers of men have been
given special training and have been commissioned into the
Service but no women have been so trained or commissioned.
We would point out that the civil problems with which the
Administration will have to deal affect the Social conditions
of the population of the territory they will be administering,
and the daily life and needs of the people, including the
welfare of the children. These are matters which lie
specially within the province of women.
In areas where considerable fighting has taken place,
conditions will closely resemble those of the blitz and post
blitz periods in this country, e.g. the provision of food,
clothing and shelter for the homeless, including large
numbers of children separated from their families. In such
conditions, moreover, serious moral and social questions
inevitably arise.
The part played by the women of this country in dealing
with all these problems has been outstanding. Women—
many of whom have been associated over a long period with
local government —took a responsible share in the organisa-
tion of post raid services, and there is, therefore, in this
country a body of women with unique administrative and
practical experience, including that gained from dealing with
people who may have been unbalanced by their experiences
and who therefore present special problems of morale.
We understand that many of these matters will be dealt
with eventually by the United Nations Relief and Rehabilita-
tion Administration and that a number of women will be
working with the voluntary societies co-operating in that
administration. That organisation is, we understand, not
TWELVE


yet in being and the problems indicated above are immediate.
We urge, therefore, that a number of women with the right
knowledge and experience should immediately be recruited
and commissioned into the AMGOT service, with training
and status similar to that given to men. This will not only
enable the valuable experience of women to be used in
dealing with present problems, but should promote sym-
pathetic co-operation with women eventually working with
U.N.R.R.A.
The services of a woman with some special knowledge of
women’s work, particularly in Civil Defence and the
Women’s Auxiliary Services, would be of great value in
assisting in the recruitment and selection of suitable women
for this work. We, therefore, urge that immediate con-
sideration should be given to such an appointment on the
administrative side of AMGOT at the War Office.
Also in 1943 the following letter was sent to the United
Nations. From information received there seems to be no doubt
that an appreciable number of well-qualified women have already
been appointed to responsible administrative posts in U.N.R.R.A.
We have noted the publication of a draft agreement on
post war relief among the United Nations and we take this
opportunity of again bringing to your attention the vast
reservoir of skill and knowledge available in the women of
the United Nations. Their training, experience and
capacity, whether academic or practical, entitle them to
claim a share in the administration of post war relief. The
problems to be dealt with are those which always fall
especially within the province of women; the provision of
food, clothing and shelter for the homeless, including large
numbers of children separated from their parents, and those
social and moral problems which inevitably arise in con-
ditions such as must be foreseen in every area devastated
and disorganised by war. All reports from occupied terri-
tories have shown the important part played by women in
maintaining resistance and national morale and the co-
operation of these women with the administration will be
greatly facilitated by the presence, in the administration, of
women who will have an intimate knowledge of their
personal as well as social problems.
THIRTEEN


We trust, therefore, that full use will be made of the
services of women who are already experienced in social and
administrative work, and that they will be given all possible
opportunities for further training in the special administra-
tive and practical problems of relief, to deal with which
plans are, we believe, already being made. We feel that
much of the success of these plans will depend on the right
use of women’s knowledge and experience.
By 1944, a new United Nations organisation, unnamed and un-
localised, began to come into being and renewed requests were
made for women to be appointed as delegates to the various
preliminary Conferences and further that women should be
appointed on all Committees and other bodies set up by such
Conferences. ‘This action continued during 1945 as occasion
arose.
In 1945 the following resolution was sent to Mr. Stettinius,
Chairman of the San Francisco Conference:
The Liaison Committee of Women’s International
Organisations considering that the new world organisations
should be based on justice, security against aggression,
respect for international law and for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, urges that the following principles be
incorporated in the proposed Charter of the United Nations.
A. All members of the organisation shall guarantee to
every citizen, irrespective of sex, social standing, creed,
race and birth;
1 Freedom from fear and want.
2 Freedom of speech, writing, opinion, association and
meeting, marriage and worship, and freedom to earn.
3 Equality before the law.
4 Unhampered participation in free election of
national and local governing bodies.
5 Protection of person and family, and of personal
possessions against violence and any kind of
molestation.
6 Protection against imprisonment without trial.
B. All sovereign states are juridically equal among them-
selves and each of them has the right to the respect of
FOURTEEN


its individuality, integrity and independence on the part
of other members of the international community. Re-
calling the Atlantic Charter they adhere to the following
principles:
They desire to see no territorial changes that do not
accord with the freely expressed wishes of the people
concerned and they respect the right of all peoples to,
choose the form of government under which they wish
to Jive and they desire to see sovereign rights and self-
government restored to those who have been forcibly
deprived of them.
C. All members of the organisation agree to respect inter-
national law and faithfully to observe treaty obligations
as the essential rule of peaceful international relations
and to base all procedure of the future world organis-
ation on the principle that no State shall be judge in its
own case.
D. The Liaison Committee of Women’s International
Organisations realising that the creation of peace
demands the steady development of co-operation among
the nations and the emergence of a common inter-
national life at the level of everyday affairs, urges that
the proposed Economic and Social Council should be
given a more significant position in the said Organ-
isation and that it should be included among the
principal Organs enumerated in Chapter V of the
Proposals.
The San Francisco Conference drafted a Charter, now in
process of being ratified by the United Nations. It is heartening
for the Liaison Committee of Women’s International Organisa-
tions to note that in thfs Charter, in the Preamble, there is
affirmed its “ faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and value of the human person, in the equal right of men and
women and of nations large and small ”. In the Chapter on
Purposes and Principles and in several other places, the phrase
“ without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion ” occurs.
In Article 8 it is expressly stated that “ the United Nations shall
place no restrictions on the eligibility of men and women to
participate in any capacity and under conditions of equality in its
principal and subsidiary organs ”,
FIFTEEN


CONCLUSION.
The foregoing account, necessarily brief, curtailed and lacking
in detail, gives the barest outline of the purpose of the Liaison
Committee of Women’s International Organisations.
Of its work, deeds will speak louder than words. Its purpose
is found clearly expressed throughout the years. It began with
the beginning of the League of Nations, with the determination
that women should share in the work of the League. Gradually
it realised that as well as a general demand for such‘opportunity
there must always be made constant specific demands. As the
League of Nations grew, as Committee after Committee was set
up to deal with an ever increasing number of subjects, so had the
demands of the Liaison Committee for the full participation of
women to be as constantly repeated.
War has partially overwhelmed the of Nations and
necessarily curtailed the work it can do. Far other is it with the
Liaison Committee which, in war work, in peace work, in post war
planning, in the rapidly developing new organisations now in
process of formation by the United Nations, still makes its
demand that women of the world shall share in the government of
the world in order to ensure the peace and well-being of the
world.
SUPPLEMENT
Giving the work in Geneva of representatives of member
organisations of the Liaison Committee since October, 1939.
On October 9th, 1939, a meeting of the Committee in Geneva
was called:
(a) to verify the names of the representatives of the Inter-
national Organisations according to a list sent by Miss
Zimmern. It was found that eight of these had repre-
sentatives in Geneva.
(b) to consider Miss Zimmern’s letter to Mrs. Fox of 14th
September, 1939, in which she proposed that, “ as some
of the work of the Committee could under the circum-
SIXTEEN


stances be more easily carried out from Geneva, meetings
should as a rule be held in alternate months in London
and Geneva.” This proposal was accepted. Mrs. Fox
was appointed as liaison officer in Geneva, with Mile.
Gourd as proxy.
From October 9th, 1939, till February 13th, 1945, twenty
seven meetings of the committee were held in Geneva, generally
attended by representatives of six or seven organisations.
The Minutes of the meetings were regularly sent to Miss
Zimmern, who in return sent to Mrs. Fox the Minutes of the
Liaison meetings in London.
Among the subjects dealt with by the Geneva Committee we
note:
1939 Study of the Bruce Report.
1940 Nomination of women candidates for the Central Com-
mittee of Economic and Social Affairs at the League of
Nations. In January a panel of twenty names was estab-
lished and sent to the Liaison Committee who forwarded
the List to the League of Nations.
Having been informed that the League of Nations wished
for other names for the above Committee, the Committee,
in March, nominated Miss Roche (U.S.A.) after the
decision of this nomination had been left by the Liaison
Committee to the Geneva Committee according to a tele-
gram from Miss Zimmern to Mile. Gourd on March 12th.
1941 The Committee pressed for the re-appointment in her
previous position of Madame Thibert in the International
Labour Office.
1942 The Committee decided to form an informal group of
women of different nationalities and international ex-
perience, residing in Geneva, to exchange views regarding
developments of interest to women in different countries.
Several meetings of this group were held during the
following years.
1943 Realising its responsibility towards the intellectual women
refugees in Geneva the Committee organised several
informal teas at which the refugees were informed about
the activities of the member organisations; or some specific
subject was discussed with them. These teas were much
appreciated.
SEVENTEEN


The “ Swedish Questionnaire ” was studied and it was
distributed to the refugees and discussed with them.
As the Social Section of the League of Nations was
temporarily managed by Miss Harris, the Committee felt
it advisable to get into touch with her and invited her to
attend a meeting of the Committee at which its aims and
work were fully explained and her attention drawn to the
great interest it had always taken in the work of the Social
Section of the League of Nations.
The Committee further decided to ask the Liaison Com-
mittee to get into touch with former members of the Social
Questions Committee of the League of Nations living in
Britain, Canada, and U.S.A., in order to prepare post-
war work.
A thorough study was made of Mr. de Felice’s memoran-
dum on the re-organisation of international official action
against the Traffic in Women and related questions. At
the request and with the collaboration of the Committee
the text of the memorandum was simplified, translated
into English and sent to the member organisations for
their consideration.
In answer to Para. 4, No. 1, of Mrs. Corbett Ashby’s
Questionary, a sub-committee of three members was
formed to draft general principles of a Woman’s Charter,
based on resolutions passed by the member organisations
of the Committee.
A draft Woman’s Charter was studied and discussed at
several meetings. On April 24th, 1944, it was finally
adopted under the name “ Declaration de Principes.”
It was decided to send it to the Liaison Committee with a
covering letter explaining that the representatives in
Geneva had signed without engaging their organisations
and asking for the views of the Liaison Committee on the
Declaration.
The “ Declaration de Principes ” was also discussed with
the group of intellectual refugees.
At the Committee meeting of June sth, 1944, one of the
members reviewed the League of Nations Report on
“ Preventive Action against Prostitution.”
The Committee met for the last time in February, 1945.
A few informal meetings were held later.
EIGHTEEN


CHRONOLOGICAL INDEX
Slavery—Codification of International Law—lntellectual
Co-operation—l.L.O. Joint Maritime Commission—
Traffic in Women.
Infant Mortality—Codification of International Law—
Cinematography—Collaboration with Work of League of
Nations—Health.
Peace—Forced and Indentured Labour—-Temporary
Studentships at League of Nations—Assessors —Traffic
in Women and Children—-Welfare and Protection- of
Children Illegitimacy Health Economic Confer-
ence—Communications and Transit—Codification of
International Law—lnstitute of Private Law—Nation-
ality—Migration—Alcoholism—Disarmament—Relief.
Cinematography —Agriculture —Mandates —Codifi-
cation of International Law—lnternational Economic
Conference—Slavery—Health—Environment of Child-
ren—Enquiry re Puberty—Child Marriage—Traffic in
Women and Children—Collaboration with Work of
League of Nations—lnformation Section of League of
Nations—Forced and Indentured Labour.
Assessors—Collaboration with Work of the League of
Nations—Health —Slavery—Codification of International
Law—Mandates —Cinematography.
Traffic in Women in the East—Social Service Section of
the League of Nations.
Spanish Resolution on Collaboration of Women in the
Work of the League of Nations—Employment of Women
at Night—Collaboration with Work of the League of
Nations—Peace and Disarmament—Nationality.
Nationality—Slavery—Opium Traffic—Peace and Dis-
armament—Equal Rights Treaty—Status of Women—
Spanish Resolution re Collaboration of Women with Work
of League of Nations.
Employment of Women at Night—Status of Women—
Peace—Traffic in Women and Children—Welfare and
NINETEEN


Protection of Children —Opium Traffic—Slavery—Inter-
national Economic Conference—Nationality—Penal Re-
form—Refugees—Mandates.
Refugees—Minorities—Rights of Man—Nationality—
Slavery—Opium Traffic—Peace and Disarmament —
Equal Rights Treaty—Status of Women—Employment of
Women at Night Moral Disarmament Indigent
Foreigners.
Employment of Women at Night—Status of Women—
Equal Rights Treaty—Peace—Nationality—Refugees—
1.L.0. Forced Labour of Women—Slavery.
Refugees—lntellectual Co-operation—Assessors—Tech-
nical Education—Native Women—Tickets for League of
Nations Assembly—Peace—Status of Women —Confer-
ence on Textile Industry—Slavery—Traffic in Women.
Refugees—Health—Traffic in Women in the East—
Social Service Section of the League of Nations—
Assessors —Technical Education—Status of Women —
Committee of Experts on Status of Women—Slavery.
Employment of Indigenous Workers —Status of Women —
Peace and Disarmament—Tickets for League of Nations
Assembly—Native Women —Slavery—Unification of
Criminal Law—Nationality.
Social Service Section of League of Nations—Native
Women —Marriage in Mandated Territories—Collabor-
ation of Women in the Work of the League of Nations —
Status of Women—Committee of Experts on Status of
Women —Employment of Women at Night—Bruce
Reports—Technical and Vocational Education.
Employment of Women at Night—Blockade—Bruce
Report—Refugees—Peace and Disarmament—Status of
Women.
Post-War Health—Conferences —Deputations.
International Advisory Committee of International Labour
Office—Status of Women —Traffic in Women in the
East—Conferences—Deputations—Women in Post-war
Planning—War Crimes.
TWENTY


Status of Women—Women’s International Auxiliary
Committee—Appointment of Women to A.M.G.O.T. and
to U.N.R.R.A.
Status of Women —Delegates to 1.L.0. Conference—
Decision to compile History of Liaison Committee—
Discussion Meetings—Letter to Director 1.L.0. objecting
to the placing of women in a “ special category of
workers ” —lndividual member organisations send points
to the League of Coloured People for inclusion in any
Charter for Coloured People—Decision to revise and
bring up to date list of women suitable for service on
international bodies—The words “ male and female ”
successfully inserted in draft Charter for Coloured
People—Report on progress of Social Welfare Training
Courses—Telegram sent to International Red Cross Com-
mittee in Geneva urging investigation into reports of
shocking treatment of women by Germans in Ravensbruck
Concentration Camp—Decision to collect authenticated
official information on the treatment of women by
Germans with a view to possible eventual publication—
Names sent in of women suitable to serve on proposed
1.L.0. Committee on Colonial Policy.
Study Meeting on Dumbarton Oaks proposals for an
United Nations Organisations—Reception for Madame
Thibert (1.L.0.) given by Lady Nunburnholme—Letter
sent to Conference of Allied Ministers of Education
stressing value of work done by International Bureau of
Education—National Council of Women of South Africa
accepted as national Liaison Committee for that country—
Action taken regarding appointment of women as dele-
gates to San Francisco Conference—ln response to request
from Australia for closer link with the Liaison Committee
it was agreed to accept the appointment of an Australian
woman resident in London as Observer and possibly to
invite Australian visitors—Request from National Council
of Women of New Zealand as to how to keep in touch with
the Liaison Committee—Resolution sent to Mr. Stettinius,
Chairman of the San Francisco Conference—Resolution
on War Crimes, passed in 1942, re-affirmed and sent to
Mr. Stettinius at San Francisco—National Service.
TWENTY-ONE


SUBJECT INDEX OF WORK DONE
1925—1945
AGRICULTURE.
1926 When possibility of an Agricultural Institute was
rumoured, names were considered.
ALCOHOLISM.
1927 If Commission against Alcoholism was formed by the
League of Nations, it was decided, with the help of
Temperance Societies, to propose names of suitable
women as members.
ASSESSORS.
1927 Period of appointment fixed by League at three years.
1936 Action taken when abolition of Assessors to Child Welfare
and Traffic in Women Committees was proposed—
Memorandum sent to League Council on whole question
of Assessors, also to private organisations having Assessors
and to Assessors—League changed Assessors to Corre-
sponding Members—voluntary organisations are put on
list of Corresponding Members.
1937 International Organisations permitted as Assessors on
League Permanent Committees.
BLOCKADE AND FOOD.
1940 Circular sent to members giving information about block-
ade and food situation in German-occupied territories.
BRUCE REPORT on International Co-operation in Economic
and Social Affairs.
1939 Report received—first list of suitable women to be sub-
mitted.
1940 Study of Report continued and wide publicity and action
agreed—Names submitted to Organising Committee and
to League Secretariat and to various national delegates—
revised list in view of later information about Com-
mittee—Deputation to M. Colijn during his visit to
London.
TWENTY-TWO


CHILDREN.
Welfare and Protection.
1927 Representatives of five organisations on the above Com-
mittee of the League asked the Liaison Committee for
detailed information—woman appointed as Substitute
Delegate for Rumania on above Committee.
1933 Questionary sent out to many countries.
Child Marriage.
1928 Attempt made to arouse interest in the above in 6th Com-
mission on Mandates.
Enquiry re Puberty.
1928 Request made to 2nd Commission for enquiry concerning
puberty in certain countries with varying climatic
conditions.
Environment of Children.
1928 Enquiry as to the above problem by Child Welfare Com-
mittee under Council of League.
Illegitimacy.
1927 Recommendation to nationals to ask for extension of terms
of reference of Child Protection Committee to include
communication with representatives of organisations
appointed to the League.
Infant Mortality.
1926 Names sent in for Sub-Committee under Health Com-
mittee of the League.
CINEMATOGRAPHY.
1926 Names submitted for various Sections of the Institute.
1926 Preparatory list drawn up for probable Cinema Committee
of the League of Nations.
1928 Urged representation by women on International Edu-
cational Cinema Institute—by request of League list of
names sent in—sth Commission resolved that women
should be represented on the Governing Body of the above
Institute—2nd Commission resolved, on relations between
the League and the Institute or bodies set up under its
authority, that “ care should be taken that the nomination
of members, both to the Governing Body and to the
twenty-three


superior Staff, be made without distinction of sex and to
correspond with the international character of the
Institute ” —one woman appointed to Governing Body—
continue to urge the appointment of women on probable
Sub-Committees.
1929 Names sent in when appointments were to be made—
deputation asked for and received—matter referred to
League Council.
CODIFICATION OF INTERNATIONAL LAW.
1925 Names submitted for Commission on the above.
1926 Also for Sub-Committee on Nationality—lists prepared.
1927 Watch kept on discussions in League Assembly—agreed
to pay special attention to Nationality.
1928 Discussed possibility of statement on nationality of
married women—deputation to Legal Section of League
to ask that a woman Technical Adviser should attend the
Conference sent to all Members of Council of League, also
drawing attention to resolution passed by the Assembly, as
follows:
The Assembly considering that the question of nation-
ality is on the Agenda of the Conference, is of special
interest to women and that Article 7 of the Covenant
embodies the principle that all positions under or in
connection with the League shall be open equally to
men and women expresses the hope that the Members
of the League when invited to the forthcoming Confer-
ence will consider the desirability of taking these con-
siderations into account in composing their delegations.
urged nationals to approach their own Governments—
wrote to Preparatory Committee urging the inclusion in
their Report of a recommendation to appoint women—
special stress made on Nationality of Married Women
being put on Conference Agenda.
1929 Request to League that representatives of Women’s
organisations be allowed to address the Conference—letter
to Ist Commission of League to include nationality of
both married and unmarried women—demonstration
planned for the Hague during Conference.
TWENTY-FOUR


COLLABORATION OF WOMEN WITH WORK OF THE
LEAGUE OF NATIONS.
1926 Urged the appointment of women on Committees and
Commissions.
1926 Names submitted for meeting of Press Experts to be con-
vened by Council of League of Nations.
1928 Continued pressure both for permanent and temporary
appointments—Information Section.
1929 Continued pressure—deputation to Secretary-General.
1931 Resolution passed by Asembly of the League regarding
collaboration with Women’s International Organisations
as follows:
Convinced of the great value of the contribution of
women to the work of peace and the friendly relations
between the peoples which is the principal aim of the
League requests the Council to examine the possibility
of increasing the collaboration of women in the work of
the League of Nations.
Council requested the Secretary-General to consult
women’s organisations—a woman was elected President of
the sth Commission of the League of Nations, thus be-
coming one of the Vice-Presidents of the Assembly.
1932 Document A.lO, 1932, embodies replies—6th Com-
mission used A. 10 as basis for discussion and issued
Report A.49—Assembly resolves as follows;
Expresses its warm appreciation of the work done by
women in support of the League of Nations, and
welcomes wholeheartedly the efforts made to increase
their collaboration;
Notes that the Women’s Organisations consulted are
unanimous in declaring that equal status between men
and women is a pre-requisite of effective collaboration
of women in the work of the League and that their
collaboration can be most effectively exercised through
the competent official organs of the League and of the
Governments;
Reminds all the States Members of the League of
Article 7 of the Covenant which has in, view the
possibility;
TWENTY-FIVE


(a) For the Governments of the States Members to
appoint competent women to Assembly Delegations,
to Conferences and on Government Committees of
the League.
(b) For the Council to appoint competent women on
technical League Committees, as Assessors and
Experts;
(c) For the Secretary-General to include competent
women in the higher posts of the Secretariat.
Letter sent to all Members of the League Council request-
ing study of the question—various drafts, inter alia dealing
with Collaboration for Disarmament, General Collabora-
tion, Equal Rights Treaty—Drafting Committee sub-
mitted Memorandum—this set out fully the constitution
of the Liaison Committee and affirmed that the true cause
of the existing lack of collaboration was the inequality of
status as between men and women.
COLONIAL POLICY.
1944 Letter sent to Chairman and members of the Govern-
ing Body of 1.L.0. stressing the importance of appointing
women to the proposed Committee on Colonial Policy.
COLOURED PEOPLE.
1944 Suggestions sent by individual members to the League of
Coloured People for inclusion in their proposed Charter
for Coloured People, in particular that the word “sex ”
be specifically included to obviate interpretations similar
to that once given to the word “ person ”. This was met
by the insertion of the words “ male and female ”.
CONCENTRATION CAMPS.
1944 Telegram sent to International Red Cross Committee at
Geneva asking for investigation of barbarous treatment of
women by Germans in the Ravensbruck Concentration
Camp near Stettin—Decision to collect authenticated
official information on the treatment of women by
Germans with a view to possible eventual publication.
COMMUNICATIONS AND TRANSIT.
1927 Names sent in for League Committee on above.
TWENTY-SIX


CONTACTS WITH OTHER ORGANISATIONS.
1927 Communication on work for peace received from the
Comite International des Syndicats d’Ouvrieres.
1930 An appeal for peace was received from Women of the
World to Statesmen of the World.
1931 Notice was given of a forthcoming Appeal to Women on
behalf of Peace.
1937 Members attended an Inter-American Conference on the
Maintenance of Peace.
1937 Members were asked to protest to President of Ecuador
against a proposed disfranchisement of the women of
Ecuador.
1937 A proposal to hold a Women’s Day simultaneously in all
countries was made but it was agreed that the time was not
opportune.
1937 A special section for women was arranged in the Paris
Exhibition and members of the Liaison Committee joined
in this.
1939 Notice was received of the Pan-American Conference at
Lima, Peru, with particulars of work done by the Inter-
American Commission of Women.
1943 A message was received from Women of Greece, to which
a sympathetic reply was sent.
1945 Reception given to Madame Thibert of 1.L.0.—N.C.W.
of South Africa accepted as a National Liaison Com-
mittee—ln response to a request from Australia for closer
link it was agreed to accept the appointment of an
Australian woman resident in London as Observer and
also to invite Australian visitors—Request received from
N.C.W. of New Zealand for closer contact —Decision to
revise and bring up to date lists of women suitable for
appointment on international bodies.
EDUCATION.
1945 Letter sent to Conference of Allied Ministers of Education
stressing value of work done by International Bureau of
Education.
TWENTY-SEVEN


ECONOMIC CONFERENCE.
1927 Names submitted for members of proposed Conference.
1927 League Council resolved that “ three women with know-
ledge of economic matters ” be added to the Economic
Conference—six names sent in—three of these appoint-
ed—a woman was appointed Vice-President of the Con-
ference—also on the Preparatory Committee and on the
following-up consultative Committee—on a later re-
organisation of the Economic Commission similar
procedure adopted—continued through year—Com-
mission increased from 35 to 56 but with no additional
women—protest to Secretary General.
1928 No answer received so repeated in January—Liaison
Committee invited to send an Observer to Ist Session of
Economic Consultative Committee—accepted.
1933 Nationals asked to work for the inclusion of women in
national delegations to World Economic Conference.
EMPLOYMENT OF INDIGENOUS WORKERS.
1938 Letter signed by ten members sent to 1.L.0. on regulation
of contracts of employment of indigenous workers on
agenda of I.L.O.Conference protesting against restrictions
on women’s right to contract—special reference to women
subsequently omitted from 1.L.0. draft Convention.
EMPLOYMENT OF WOMEN AT NIGHT.
1931 Question of employment of women at night—whether
under Washington Convention supervision and manage-
ment should be included or manual workers only to be
affected—Permanent Court of International Justice gave
Advisory Opinion that these are included—discussions
continued.
1933 Governing Body of 1.L.0. to discuss Court Opinion—
Liaison Committee opposed to above inclusion—letter
sent to Governing Body in that sense—and asking for re-
vision of Convention—matter placed on agenda of 1.L.0.
Conference of 1934.
1934 Letter sent to Director 1.L.0. asking for revision of
Ruling—the 1.L.0. Conference adopted an Article “ Con-
vention does not apply to women holding responsible
TWENTY-EIGHT


positions of management, who are not ordinarily engaged
in manual work
FORCED AND INDENTURED LABOUR.
1927 Request sent to 1.L.0. for the appointment of women on
the Committee of Experts on Forced and Indentured
Labour—names considered.
1928 Continued consideration of names—one woman appointed
to Committee of Experts.
1929 Suggested that women should attend as Assessors.
HEALTH.
1926 Pressed for the appointment of women on Health Com-
mission—deputation to British Minister to urge that the
British representative at League of Nations support in-
clusion of women on Health Commission—at subsequent
Council meeting the British representative called attention
to this exclusion and asked for inclusion later.
1927 British Member of League Council asked to receive a
deputation on the appointment of women on Health
Committee of League.
1927 On proposed re-organisation of Health Commission names
again offered—on League decision to replace Sub-Com-
mittees by Specialist Individuals, list was prepared by
Liaison Committee.
1928 Deputation to Dr. Rajchman who said that the method of
appointment to the Commission made it difficult to in-
clude women—increased efforts made by Liaison
Committee.
1929 Effort decided upon to get subject placed upon League
Assembly agenda.
HISTORY.
1944 Decision to compile History of Liaison Committee.
INSTITUTE OF PRIVATE LAW.
1927 Attempts made to have women appointed to Governing
Body of the Institute.
TWENTY-NINE


INTELLECTUAL CO-OPERATION.
1925 2nd Commission of League of Nations recommends Sub-
Committee of Experts—Liaison Committee submits
names for this.
1936 Sends names of women to fill vacancies on parent
Committee.
MIGRATION.
1927 Names sent in for League Committee on Migration.
MINORITIES.
1934 Some members supported Poland in asking that a General
Convention for International Protection of Minorities
should come before League Assembly —subject watched-
not pressed by Poland.
MANDATES.
1926 Names sent in when a vacancy occurred on Mandates
Commission—woman appointed.
1929 Renewed request for a second woman member.
1934 Memorandum signed by eight member societies sent to
Chairman of Mandates Commission urging that in all
Mandated Territories no marriage contract be made for
any girl under fourteen or, without her consent, over
fourteen; and that Christian marriages, as being mono-
gamous, be recognised in the Courts; and opposing
inheritance of widows; and calling for investigation into
trade in wives; and opposing any form of regulated
prostitution.
1938 Permanent Mandates Commission discussed Status of
Women in Mandated Territories.
1939 Further similar discussion in Commission.
N.B. It is to be noted that, largely due to continuous pressure
from the Liaison Committee the Mandates Commission
discussed the position of women in 1934—35—36—37
38 and 39.
Marriage in Mandated Areas.
1939 Request for Ordinance similar to French for British and
Belgian Mandated Territories.
THIRTY


NATIONALITY.
1927 Names sent in for League Sub-Committee on Laws of
Nationality—Nationality of Married Women proposed for
inclusion at Hague Conference on International Law—
memorandum by C. Macmillan circulated to members—
proposal to ask for Commission of Women on Nationality
of Women—Conference called by Liaison Committee
prefers Memorandum.
1931 Conference called by Liaison Committee to formulate
proposals on the question of the nationality of the married
woman.
1931 Co-operation with Consultative Committee on Nationality
set up by League —objection expressed to separate
Committees of men and women and preference expressed
for joint on same terms.
1932 Activity during League Assembly—deputation to Secre-
tary-General— discussion in Ist Commission draft
report for Assembly (A. 48) —resolution from Committee
of Representatives of Women’s Organisations for with-
drawal of Clauses 8 to 11 of Hague Convention—
observations of Governments (A. 15 and A. 15(a)) —
report of Ist Commission and resolution adopted by
Assembly, resolution asks States Members to bring their
legislation into line with Hague Convention and requests
Council to follow the development of public opinion in
order to determine when international action would be
justified.
1933 Active opposition to ratification of Hague Convention—
International Petition of Catholic Women and Catholic
Men re Equal Nationality Rights. (A 33, 1932.)
1934 Reports from Secretary-General with Addenda on in-
formation obtained in execution of Assembly Resolution—
resolution adopted by Montevideo Conference (A. 19 (b))
discussed in Ist Commission and resolution drafted for
Assembly—question left to Consultative Committee.
1935 Statement from International Alliance of Women for
Suffrage and Equal Citizenship, International Co-
operative Women’s Guild (A. 19), Women’s Committee of
Labour and Socialist International (A. 19 (a)). Inter-
national Federation of Trade Unions, International Com-
THIRTY-ONE


mittee of Trade Union Women (A. 19 (b)), Government
of Chile (A. 18).
1938 Sub-Committee formed to co-operate with Consultative
Committee.
NATIONAL SERVICE.
1945 Memorandum received on compulsory national service—
resolution drafted based on above Memorandum.
NATIVE WOMEN.
1936 Sub-Committee appointed to study methods of dealing
with this problem.
1937 Statement from St. Joan’s Social and Political Alliance
on Status of Women presented to Assembly of League of
Nations (A. 14, 1937).
1938 Agreed to support and co-operate with League investi-
gation—request that “ the Status of Women under such
systems as Muslim Law and Native or Tribal Law be in-
cluded in the Status of Women enquiry ”.
1939 As Assembly Resolution spoke of World Survey,
Committee of Experts on Status of Women asked to
incorporate in general survey laws and ordinances affect-
ing women of primitive communities.
OPIUM TRAFFIC.
1932 Decide to try to secure sufficient ratifications to make
Drug Convention operative—particular attention to be
paid to persuading League of Nations to continue work
against Opium Traffic—Assembly voted money to
continue.
1933 Certain members decided to hold an open meeting on
Opium Traffic—nationals urged to act in regard to traffic
in Manchukuo, outside the Convention, as not recognised
and as a centre for the traffic—report (A. 55) of 6th
Commission adopted.
1934 Possibility of Assessors on Opium Committee—also of
filling long-standing vacancy on parent Committee.
PEACE AND DISARMAMENT.
1927 Request for the appointment of a woman on the Pre-
THIRTY-TWO


paratory Committee of Disarmament Conference—Sub-
Committee appointed to watch the above.
An Appeal from Women to Statesmen of the World
against war sent out and signed by eight members of
Standing Joint Committee.
Joint deputation during Conference proposed by Cause
and Cure of War (U.S.A.) —Conference proposed by
International Women’s Co-operative Guild at time of
Disarmament Conference—proposal to concentrate this
year on Disarmament Conference—various suggestions
for co-operation sent out to members—petition by
Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom—
discussion and consideration of formation within the
Liaison Committee of ad hoc Committee on Disarma-
ment —decision for ad hoc Committee to meet in June and
afterwards just prior to Liaison Committee Meeings—
two members nominated for Disarmament Conference
Committee—proposal to use International Radio on be-
half of Disarmament Conference—letter sent to all
Assembly Delegates asking that women should be
appointed as Observers at Disarmament Conference—
continued efforts for representation of women—extra
meetings proposed—work for peace and' disarmament
largely passing to Disarmament Committee—Dis-
armament Committee decides to include other than
members of Liaison Committee—relation of parent
Liaison Committee with Disarmament Committee dis-
cussed—lnternational Federation of University Women
drafts memorandum on Collaboration of Women in the
Organisation of Peace.
Presentation to Conference of monster petition of over
8 million signatures—circulation of members by Dis-
armament Committee of statement of policy—meeting to
consider this statement —help appreciated by Chairman
of Conference who asked for its continuance—possibility
of moving Liaison Committee to Geneva discussed—later
dropped—co-operation with Disarmament Committee
continued—reports of activities of members—deputation
to Chairman of Conference—financial appeal by Dis-
armament Committee—activity of Disarmament Com-
mittee reported.
THIRTY-THREE


1933 Joint meeting in Geneva of Liaison and Disarmament
Committees—dinner proposed— other activities—further
discussion of relation between Disarmament and Liaison
Committees —independence of Disarmament Committee
. growing.
1934 Appeal for greater national and also financial support-
regular reports from Disarmament Committee to Liaison
Committee—Disarmament Committee changes name to
Peace and Disarmament Committee of Women’s Inter-
national Organisations—Disarmament Committee repre-
sented on proposed International Peace Conference to be
held at Geneva.
1936 Some members co-operate in International Peace
Campaign-.
1937 Report on Peace Congresses and Conferences which are
planned for 1938.
1938 More about the above.
1940 Cable to Cause and Cure of War Committee.
1943 It was reported to the Liaison Committee that the Cause
and Cure of War Committee had been changed to
Women’s Committee for Action and Lasting Peace.
PENAL REFORM.
1933 Letter to sth Commission asking for appointment of
Committee—Assembly passed resolution asking Govern-
ments to report annually on application of rules for
treatment of prisoners drawn up by the International
Penitentiary Commission.
REFUGEES.
1933 Constituent Organisations work with International Com-
mittee for German Refugees.
1934 Discussions in 6th and sth Commissions of League of
Nations on Women Refugees and Russian Women
Refugees in Far East—Assembly referred matter to
Traffic in Women and Children Committee.
1936 Committee of League formed (C2.M2.1936) on Inter-
national Assistance “ for refugees from Germany and
possibly for all refugees ’’ —proposed deletion of
“ possibly ” —urged ratification of existing Convention to
THIRTY-FOUR


ease the situation—urged that League take over and
centralise the whole question.
1937 Urged that that protection must be given until Govern-
ments could agree.
1940 Telegram to League urging an appeal to all Governments,
RELIEF.
1927 League held Conference on possible formation of an
International Relitff Union—names sent in.
RIGHTS OF MAN.
1934 Asked nationals to work for the inclusion of “ sex ” in
the phrase “ without distinction of birth, race, language
or religion ”, in a proposed “ Rights of Man ” Inter-
national Convention.
SLAVERY.
1926 Names sent in for League Slavery Commission.
1928 Call for definition of “ slavery.”
1929 Inclusion of women urged on proposed League
Permanent Committee.
1932 Again urged the inclusion of women on Permanent
Committee —action by nationals invited.
1933 Council of League accepted the request by British repre-
sentative that a woman should be included in the new
Slavery Committee—report (A. 51) from 6th Committee
adopted by Assembly.
1934 Draft Memorandum on “ practices amounting to slavery.”
1936 Certain members signed letter to Chairman of Slavery
Committee of Experts protesting against their decision
that certain systems of marriage were not to be regarded
as slavery.
SOCIAL SERVICE SECTION OF LEAGUE OF NATIONS.
1930 Question of a woman to replace the retiring woman ift the
Social Section.
1937 Request that member organisations be added as Corre-
sponding Members of Advisory Committee—suggestion
from League Committee that Corresponding Members
THIRTY-FIVE


and other international organisations should be formed
into a permanent committee—suggestion passed to all
members—Advisory Committee of League replaced by
Traffic in Women and Protection of Children Com-
mittee Assessors abolished and succeeded by
Corresponding Members.
1939 Proposal by the League to combine Opium, Social and
Health Sections under male doctor—all members urged
to protest —immediate action taken —names suggested as
suitable for post —protest against curtailment of
humanitarian work of League—pressed for a woman to
replace retiring woman on Advisory Committee on Social
questions—proposal to present names of “ experts ” for
1940 Agenda.
SOCIAL WELFARE TRAINING COURSES
1944 Report received on progress.
STATUS OF WOMEN.
1932 Enquiry proposed into Status of Women in all countries,
Document A.lO, 1932, and A. 49, 1932 IV.
1933 Proposal developed—proposal rejected.
1934 Sub-Committees formed to prepare draft on Status of
Women—discussions continued.
1935 Resolution by League Assembly referring the matter to
Governments for observations and information on national
position—Liaison Committee to collect information from
nationals. Document A. 19, 1935, V.
1936 Question of interpretation by 1.L.0. of “ equal rights ”
considerable activity by members reported to Liaison
Committee continued—suggestion of insertion of “ equal-
ity” clause when alteration of League Covenant to be
undertaken—extent of League enquiry urged to include
mandated territories, protectorates, colonies—request that
Government replies be given to 1937 Assembly—
: continued and increased activity.
1937 Continued and increased activity—leaflet drafted—
campaign under way—possibility of joint demonstration
often discussed—agreed that an International Convention
is the only way to solve the equality problem—Sub-
THIRTY-StX


Committee to complete list of women for League Com-
mittee of Experts on Status of Women—draft plan for
future work. Document A. 14, 1937. V.
1938 Names of Expert Committee sent in—Committee of
Experts appointed by League Council—question of co-
operation of Committee of Experts and Women’s Or-
ganisations—a Liaison Officer proposed—letter sent to
Committee of Experts giving views of Liaison Committee
and proposing attendance of members—proposal accepted
by Committee of Experts—also co-operation by organis-
ations—organisations outside Liaison Committee written
to and asked to help—inclusion of native women urged.
1939 Information pouring in and passed to Committee of
Experts—Committee of Experts invited representatives
of women’s organisations to meet it in open session—kind
of information to be submitted by women’s organisations
discussed—typical forms of oriental laws to be included in
survey.
1940 Information still being sought—statement drafted on
immediate position.
1942 Deputations begun in Great Britain include statement on
Status of Women—lnternational Advisory Committee set
up by I.L.O.—statement on Status of Women sent to
above—Sub-Committee named to watch developments—
Women’s Work Service reconstituted by I.L.O.—letter
sent to Chairman of Governing Body and to Director
1.L.0. asking that a fair proportion of qualified women be
appointed to the International Advisory Committee—
letter acknowledged.
1944 Cable sent to 1.L.0. Office at Montreal asking the
Director to remind States Members of the Clause in the
Covenant admitting women to all positions on an equality
with men—Letter on same line sent to all States Mem-
bers—request to national bodies to approach their
Governments to include women in their Delegations to
1.L.0. Conference—letter to Director 1.L.0. objecting to
the placing of women in a “ special category of workers.”
SPANISH RESOLUTION
1931 The following resolution was moved by the Spanish
Delegation and passed by the League Assembly:
THIRTY-SEVEN


Convinced of the great value of the contribution of
women to the work of peace and friendly relations
between the peoples, which is the principal aim of the
League, requests the Council to examine the possi-
bility of increasing the collaboration of women in the
work of the League of Nations.
1932 Expression by Liaison Committee that cause of the lack
of the desired collaboration was inequality of status —first
draft used the phrase “ one paramount cause ” later agreed
in final draft as “ true cause.”
EQUAL RIGHTS TREATY AND EQUAL STATUS
CONVENTION.
1932 Equal Rights Treaty first proposed to Liaison Committee.
1934 This Treaty signed by four States Members of the
League—group of members formed to consider procedure
for forwarding the above Treaty.
1935 Name of Treaty changed to Equal Status Convention—
Sub-Committee formed to consider draft Convention pre-
pared to supersede old wording of Equal Rights Treaty—
discussion on draft continued.
COMMITTEE OF EXPERTS ON STATUS OF WOMEN.
1937 League forms Committee of Experts on Status of Women.
1939 Instances submitted to Committee of Experts when
application of law differed from law—reception to meet
members of Committee of Experts—invitation for meet-
ing received from Committee of Experts—report of
meeting agreed and issued—extension of co-operation of
Liaison Committee with Committee of Experts—letters
to nationals asking for information.
TECHNICAL EDUCATION.
1936 Suggestion as to the advisability of sending a woman to
International Congress on above.
1937 Letter signed by a majority of members expressing the
hope that training for women would be in no way
restricted.
THIRTY-EIGHT


TEMPORARY STUDENTSHIPS IN LEAGUE OF
NATIONS.
1927 Suggestion from League that women’s organisations
should send in names for Temporary Studentships—
nationals asked to submit suitable names.
TEXTILE INDUSTRY.
1936 Japanese women urged to demand a woman delegate to
the Conference on the Textile Industry.
TICKETS FOR LEAGUE ASSEMBLY AND
ARRANGEMENTS FOR SEATING.
1936 Request for interview to discuss this situation and to
propose remedies—draft statement prepared—deputation
received with following result: each organisation card
could only be used for two named representatives—
system of registration left somewhat vague—Committee
appointed to consult with League officials—all
unsatisfactory.
1938 Memorandum sent to League giving opinion—situation
greatly improved.
TRAFFIC IN WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
1927 Advisory Committee appointed by League—publication
of Report of above Committee requested—request for
Agenda of next meeting of same Committee.
1928 Pressed for extension of enquiry to the Far East—also for
inclusion of age of consent and of age of marriage.
1933 Request from above Committee for information on effect
upon children of unemployment of parents —protest
against cut in League Budget for above Committee—letter
sent to 4th Commission stressing the importance of
humanitarian work.
TRAFFIC IN WOMEN IN THE EAST.
1930 Appointment of woman to League Travelling Committee
of Three.
1937 Request to Assembly to vote for Far Eastern Bureau—also
for the appointment of a woman on Staff of same
Bureau —national legislation urged on lines of draft
THIRTY-NINE


“ souteneur ” Convention—continued pressure for forma-
tion of Bureau.
1942 Proposal to send resolution on same lines as that of the
International Bureau for Suppression of Traffic in Women
and Children.
UNIFICATION OF CRIMINAL LAW.
1936 Status of Women appears on agenda of above Conference.
UNITED NATIONS ORGANISATION
1945 Study meeting on Dumbarton Oaks proposals for a
United Nations Organisation—action taken regarding
appointment of women as delegates to San Francisco
Conference—resolution sent to Mr. Stettinius, Chairman
of San Francisco Conference on principles to be main-
tained in United Nations Organisations.
WAR CRIMES.
1942 Unanimous resolution against War Crimes.
1945 The resolution of 1942 was re-affirmed and sent to Mr.
Stettinius at San Francisco Conference.
WOMEN IN POST WAR WORK.
1941 General question of Health discussed—Conferences ar-
ranged—Allied Advisory Committee formed with the
following terms of reference:'—
to consider (1) what practical help in reconstruction will
be needed after the war in the invaded and occupied
countries and (2) what proposals and plans for render-
ing practical assistance through the appropriate bodies
can be made in advance by co-operation between
Liaison Committee and the women of the invaded
countries.
syllabus of courses arranged—good attendance and great
appreciation shown—academic success followed by
financial clearance.
1942 Decision to print full reports of Conferences—study of
reconstruction work continued—urged appointment of
more women to all committees and other bodies dealing
with reconstruction plans and work—further consider-
ation of health plans continued.
FORTY


LIQISOM COMMITTEE OF t TfTEdFI/\l Icfi/AL OEM tin
1943 Mrs. Chapman Catt writes that she is considering
whether a Women’s International Auxiliary Committee is
best way to help in reconstruction—letter claiming capa-
bility of women for administration of post-war relief sent
to 33 United Nations—special reference to U.N.R.R.A.
correspondence with AMGOT on same lines—discussion
Groups initiated between Liaison Committee and Allied
Women.
WOMEN IN PACIFIC.
1928 A suggestion was received from Shanghai that a common
clearing house be formed for a women’s international
organisation in the Pacific.
1942 Correspondence concerning the 1.L.0. Advisory Com-
mittee and formation of sub-committee to watch further
action.
Since going to press, the Liaison Committee of Women’s
International Organisations has received with deep regret the
news of the death of Mademoiselle Emilie Gourd who, as
representative in Geneva of the International Alliance of Women,
worked constantly with the Liaison Committee, sometimes acting
as secretary.
FORTY-ONE


Copies of this booklet may be obtained from the
Hon. Secretary, Liaison Committee of
Women’s International Organisations,
406 Elm Tree Road Mansions, London, N.W.B.
Price is., postage extra.
Published by the Liaison Committee of Women’s International Organisations
and printed by W. Hart & Son, Ltd., 18 King Street, Saffron Walden, Essex.
