

# ■ f*jnp~h
AN ESS AY ■
THE WINES
SENT TO
THE LATE INTERCOLONIAL EXHIBITION
BY THE
COLONIES OF VICTORIA, NEW SOUTH WALES, AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
WITH CRITICAL REMARKS ON THE
PRESENT CONDITION AND PROSPECTS
OF THE
WINE INDUSTRY IN AUSTRALIA.
BY THE
REV. JOHN I. BLEASDALE, D.D.,
FELLOW OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OP LONDON; EX-PRESIDENT OP TUB ROYAL SOCIETY OF VICTORIA;
MEMBER OF THE CENTRAL BOARD, QP HEALTH;
HONORARY MEMBER OF THE MEDICAL SOCIETY OF VICTORIA;
VICE-CHAIRMAN OP THE ROYAL COMMISSI!® FOR TECHNOLOGY;
TRUSTEE OF TUB PUBLIC LIBRARY, MUSEUMS, AND NATIONAL GALLERY OP MELBOURNE;
DIRECTOR OP THE SCHOOL OF MINES, BALLARAT ;
CHAIRMAN OF TUB WINE JURY OF THE LATE EXHIBITION;
CORRESPONDING MEMBER OP THE ROYAL SOCIETY OP TASMANIA ;
HONORARY MEMBER OP THE VIGNERONS’ CLUB OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, ETC., ETC.
“Si bona vina cupis quinque htzc laudentur in illis,
Sint fragrantia, mollia,fortia, frigida, fresca."
MELBOURNE:
F. F. BAILLIERE, PUBLISHER.
1876.


J. A. PANTOK, Esq., P.M.,
ETC. ETC.
AN ESTEEMED FRIEND AND VALUED COLLEAGUE
ON MANY A WINE JURY
THIS ESSAY
IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED BY THE AUTHOR.
Melbourne, 10th April, 1876.


jT/ i rift/r "71‘VU
'aA-'V'-vc*
PREFATORY NOTE.
This essay ought to have formed the Report of the J ury on Wines
at the late Exhibition. Circumstances, however, arose in the course
of the awarding of medals and other distinctions to the successful
Wine Exhibitors by the Executive Section of the Royal Commission
of which I was a member, that caused me to withdraw and decline
to take any part after the lapse of a few minutes either in the
making of awards or the preparing of a Report on the Wines. The
Jury had nothing to do with this. They always worked harmo-
niously. It was purely a matter arising out of the exercise of a
power reserved to themselves by the Commissioners.
The reason of its delay till the present time has been owing
mainly to my inability to write in consequence of a sevex-e accident,
the effects of which on my light hand still continue, and oblige me
to use an assistant. It lays no claim to literary composition. The
aim has been to place before the reader the results of the Exhi-
bition Wine Juxy, and such remarks on the various climates and
soils on which the samples were grown as seem called for on such
an occasion, together with the opinions on some important points
which I have been able to form for myself during a study of wines
extending over more than thirty years.
I would here reiterate what I have often stated, viz., that if the
cellar management in the three colonies were equal to the magni-
ficent produce of the vines, no country on the earth could surpass
in quality and variety of kinds Victoria, South Australia, and
New South Wales. The jury had before them solitary instances of
the absolute perfection to which some, but especially sweet kinds,
had been brought by proper making and careful treatment.
The colony is not merely capable of supplying its own wants, but
of soon becoming an exporter, instead of paying, as we have done
in 1874,n0 less than £170,779 10s. for imported wine, and<£36,2l6
4s. sd. duty on it! Except Champagne, Ido not believe there was
one bottle of all this lot (a trifle only of which came from the sister


colonies) that could not have been produced in Australia better,
purer, and veiy much cheaper.
Recognising the importance of our pure wines in the treatment
of disease and the restoration of the patient to perfect health, as
well as a prophylactic and for general dietetic purposes, the Medi-
cal Society has appointed a permanent committee to judge of and
report upon wines suitable for the above purposes, consisting of
Drs. Blair, Kirkland, Bleasdale and Gillbee, which will be kept by
grocers whose names and addresses will in due course be published,
and the prices fixed at which those recommended will be retailed to
any sick, infirm, or convalescent on a note from their medical
attendant. A few such respectable grocers have already signified
their wish to carry this matter thoroughly out.
The Medical Society have already held two meetings to examine
samples selected during the late Exhibition and reserved till a
favourable opportunity should offer, and a record of their opinions
will be found on the last page.
When writing the essay I forgot to prepare and insert a para-
graph in the body of it for the satisfaction of Teetotallers, Good
Templai-s, Rechabites, and Total Abstainers of all kinds. I now,
however, hasten to lay before them for their consolation, and my
own defence of urging the general use of wine as a grand means of
securing universal sobriety in these hot climates, the following
anecdote:—
A few years ago one of the ornaments colonial bench sent
to me “an old and valued servant,” with a letter requesting me
“ to give him a severe reprimand for occasionally breaking out and
going on the spree, and insist on his taking the pledge “ But,”
added the learned and amiable judge, “ knowing your belief in the
curative effects of colonial wine in cases like his, I trust you will
excuse me for suggesting, if you do allow him any, that you should
impress on him the desirability of his taking it very green, very
young, veiy sour, very cold, and very early in the morning.” That
man preferred to take the pledge, pure and simple.
I do not believe that any human being has kept the pledge
through half an ordinary lifetime, who had previously contracted
intemperate habits.


INTRODUCTORY.
The districts in Australia in which the vine has been cultivated,
or in which wine-making forms an industry of any extent, were
fairly represented in the Exhibition as to both number and
variety of samples. There were 270 exhibits, 155 of which were
from Victoria, 68 from South Australia, and 47 from New South
Wales.
DIVISION AND CLASSIFICATION.
These wines were divided into light white wine, full-bodied white,
and full-bodied red, according as exhibitors considered them to
belong to one or other of the above designations, and, perhaps, no
better division could have been made, when the principal object
both of the Commissioners and the Experts was to select, on the
basis of their intrinsic worth, wines suitable for adequately repre-
senting the produce of this country at the universal Exhibition to
be held at Philadelphia in 1876. And while it was incumbent on
the Royal Commissioners to cause a selection of the best Victorian
to be made, the wines sent from the two sister colonies were sub-
mitted to the same process of examination; not that the Commis-
sioner's had to select samples out of them, or even advise the other
colonies, but for purposes of comparison with the corresponding
produce of Victoria, because the Melbourne Exhibition of 1875
was intercolonial, and in that capacity had power to grant medals
and distinctions, according to the awards of the Experts, without
reference to any particular colony.
EXPERTS.
Rev. J. I. Bleasdale, D.D., Chairman.
J. A. Panton, Esq., P.M., Vice-chairman.
W. L. Bailey, Esq.
Dr. John Blair.
B. C. Burstall, Esq.
Thomas Cooper, Esq.
R. K. Hammond, Esq.
F. C. Klemm, Esq.
Captain Middlemiss.
Lesley A. Moody, Esq.
Dr. William Gillbee. W. J. O’Hea, Esq.
The abovenamed gentlemen are considered to be able judges of
all kinds of our native wines. Drs. Gillbee and Blair paid
special attention to wines peculiarly suited for hospital uses, and
for the convalescent sick or infirm.
WINE-BAR IN THE EXHIBITION.
It will readily occur to any one that wine, as such, cannot be
judged of by inspecting the bottles sent to an exhibition, and
reading the labels upon them. This want of affording the public


easy and certain means of forming an estimate of Colonial wines
has been often felt and sometimes complained of. So, as it is
stated in a paragraph introductory to the samples in the Catalogue,
to be found at page 73, we read :
“A new feature has been introduced by the Commissioners with
“respect to the wine exhibition of 1875. In former years visitors
“to the Exhibition saw the bottles containing the wine, read the
“labels, and had to take for granted that the taste of the Experts
“as to quality was correct. This year the public will be able to
“decide for themselves upon the merits of the various Colonial
“wines exhibited. The Commissioners have made arrangements
“with the exhibitors, by which some of them have provided a
“certain quantity of each variety of wine exhibited to be sold to
“the public at retail prices. For this purpose a handsome bar
“has been fitted up in the Rotunda, to be devoted exclusively to
“the sale of Colonial wine. The Court near the Rotunda, in
“which the fountain is situated, will also be provided with small
“tables placed under the shelter of covering ferns and evergreens,
“so that those who desire may sip the juice of the Australian
“grape at their leisure in the open air. If not able to enjoy the
“ Hermitage and Tokay under the clustering parent vine, this is
“the next best thing to it.”
LIST OP WINES OFFERED
FOR SALE AND PRICES.
■* Pints, 16/.
Red Wines, 18;
f Pints, 11/6.
15; total, 33.
White Wines,
6


NUMBER
OF VARIETIES OP
WINES SENT BY ABOVE
GROWERS.
De Castella
. 3
Brach£
.. 2
Craike
. * •
... 1
Johnston
. 3
Bruhn
.. 2
Bear and Ford ... 1
Greiffenhagen
. 3
Grosse
.. 2
Botten
... 1
Maplestone
. 3
Docker
. 1
—
Gillard
. 3
Schroeder ..
.. 1
32
Pohl
. 2
Greer
.. 1
Crippa
. 2
Francis
.. 1
WINES SOLD
AT
BAR.
— DOZENS.
Friday.
Saturday.
Monday.
Tuesday.
Wednesday.
Thursday.
Total for Week.
Vic-
South
Vic.
S.A.
Vic.
S.A.
Vic.
S.A.
Vic.
S.A.
Vic.
S.A.
Vic.
S.A.
toria.
Australia.
—
—
—
—
124
14
5
6
174
74
—
2
24
2
3
3
24
3
14
—
14
3
11
13
3
4
2
3
1
24
2
24
14
6
1
2
1
10
154
3
2
1
3
24
2
—
1
4
2
H
7
114
*
14
2
24
34
2
2
3
104
24
1
18‘
124
34
2
1
a
1
24
3
2
1
—
14
4
1
9
94
1*
14
1
H
34
14
1
14
1
14
1
—
9
74
1
14
4
1
1
2
1
2
1
4
1
1
2
—
4
64
14
4
14
14
14
1
2
1,
2
1
—
1
2
1
4
6
44
1
1
1
1
24
1
—
4
—
1
—
4i
4
24
l
—
1
2
14
1
1
2
1
14
8
64
2
1
2
2
1
2
1
44
4
109
1024
The intelligent reader will
not
fail to note how South Australia, repre-
scnted by only the wine of a
single exhibitor at the bar, who himself in no
way interfered with the sale, managed to suit the present public taste to
the extent of nearly one-half of the whole which was sold —vide supra.
PRESENT CONDITION OF THE AUSTRALIAN WINE
INDUSTRY.
Some idea of the growth of wine culture in Victoria may be
gathered from the fact that the number of vines in the entire
colony in the year ended March 31st was 8,545,364. From these
were gathered 19,999 cwt. of grapes which were not made into
wine, as against 20,372 cwt. in 1874. The quantity made into
wine and brandy was 90,988 cwt., as against 85,279 cwt. in 1874,
showing an increase of 5709 cwt. The total produce of the vines
for 1875 is thus set down at 110,987 cwt. as against 105,650 cwt. in
1874, or an increase of 5337 cwt. The quantity of wine produced
for the year ending March, 1875, was 577,493 gallons, and for the
year 1874, 562,713 gallons, showing an increase in favour of 1875
of 14,780 gallons. Brandy in 1875 was manufactured to the ex-
tent of 148 gallons, which shows an increase over that manufac-
tured the preceding year by 48 gallons. It is to be borne in mind
with reference to the returns of vines, that whilst the number of
vines are for the year ending March 31st, 1875, the quantities of


grapes gathered, and of wine and brandy made, are for the previ-
ous season. The grape crop comes too late to admit of its being
returned when the statistics for the yearly agricultural return are
collected. At the end of March, 1875, the extent of land taken
up with vines was 3510 acres.
The above figures were obtained from the published statistics ;
but do not represent the total produce of the colony, because no
attention is paid to any vineyard under one acre. Moreover, if
the mere acreage be taken and compared with weight of grapes
obtained per acre, a misunderstanding may readily arise ; because
the whole acreage under vines is given, but no mention made of
the fact that for three years the produce of new plantations is
practically nil. This circumstance should never be lost sight of in
estimating the productiveness of a new country where everything
is presumably in a constant state of progress.
The number of samples exhibited are divided into about thirty
varieties of wine, the most common being Hermitage, Burgundy,
Riesling, Verdeilho and Chasselas. The rarer occurring varieties
are Malvoisie, Esparte, Pineau, Roussette, Muscatel, Tokay, Au-
carot, Ugni blanc and Leverdun (Gloria of Australia).
Having been honoured with the chairmanship of the Jury on
Wines sent to the present Intercolonial Exhibition, 1875, I have
endeavoured while examining the 270 samples sent in by Victorian,
New South Wales, and South Australian wine growers and makers,
to continue that kind of study of this important branch of Austra-
lian agriculture, which for many continuous years has formed the
principal and most interesting source of occupation in my leisure
hours; and now, as far as I can, I wish to record the general
results arrived at, both by myself and my fellow members of the
jury, most of whom have been associated with me in the same
capacity on former occasions. Not a few important considerations
affecting the wine interest arose in the course of testing, and these
I propose to touch on as opportunity offers.
Though by no means were representative samples from all the
more important vineyards, or perhaps the best specimens from the
cellars of some of our wine treaters, brought before the judges, yet
on no former occasion have all the Victorian, and I may venture
to add, New South Wales and South Australian wine districts been
so generally represented in this colony in their peculiar varieties
of produce.
For sake of clearness I intend to follow nearly the same method
of arrangement as I adopted in 1866-7, when drawing the report
upon the collection then exhibited at the first Intercolonial Exhi-
bition.
BOARD OF AGRICULTURE.
Deeming it of interest to the vigneron to be able to compare the
results and remarks at that time recorded with those arrived at on
the present occasion, I may mention, for the information of such


as have not that report by them, that it is incorporated in an essay-
in the first record of the Victorian Department of Agriculture, and
may probably be obtained on application to the Secretary.
After writing the above, I ascertained that the volume contain-
ing my report was out of print, I thereupon wrote to the
Secretary of the Department and offered to re-edit it and my
previous essays and reports, containing as they do the history of
the vine and wine-making in Australia, together with the opinions
of European wine experts hitherto obtained, and also to add to
the volume this present essay, bringing wine matters down to
the close of 1875, on condition that a certain number of copies
were given me for gratuitous circulation. Mr. Gillies, the Minister,
however, declined the offer. And this comes of having for Ministers
of Agriculture men whose knowledge of it extends not beyond, if
even so far as, the capabilities of the soil and climate of their
native north, and who have hitherto not bestowed a thought on
the fact that there are mines of agricultural wealth, needing but
to be worked, situate on each side the equator between 30 and 45
degrees, nxox-e enduring than gold mines, less expensive to work,
and whose produce is less precarious than grain crops. There
lie around our up-country centres of population vast tracts of
worn-out alluvial goldfields, fit for nothing but vines and fruit
trees, and ready for them, dug, drained, and needing nothing but
fencing, that would, under the encouragement of an energetic and
intelligent Minister, in four years more than treble our present
yield of wine, to say nothing of raisins and oil. There these acres
may lie as they have lain for generations for aught I know, and
for aught the present Minister of Agriculture appears to know
or care. Lest any reader should think lam writing about what
I do not understand I would refer him to the vineyard and
orchard of the late Mr. Hirschi, close by Castlemaine.
PROCEDURE OF THE JURY.
As the lax-ger portion of the jxxxy oxx the presexxt occasion who
were able to attend xxearly all the meetings consisted of the same
gentlexnexx as on the former, and as xxo one had any direct means of
knowixxg whose wines were befox’e him, and while every one acted
on his own personal judgment, it was very gratifying at the close
of every sitting, when each had to declax-e the number of max-ks (20
being the highest) he considered evexy sepax’ate sample deserving of,
to find how vexy slightly we had diffex’ed in our opinions. It was
the px-actice of the jurors to stx-ike avex’ages of numbers awarded,
and arrange the awards in classes at the end of each sitting, so that
every one present might enter the resxxlt in his book, and thus the
possibility of ei’X’or or mistake be avoided.
Taking in the first instance the wixxe distx’icts of Victoria, with
the nxxmber of samples fux’nished by each respectively, and the
number of distixxctions ixx the form of medals axxd cex’tificates, the


following tabulated form will afford a sufficiently clear exposition
of their deserts as displayed at the Exhibition.
AWARDS BY THE EXECUTIVE SECTION OF THE
COMMISSION.
Before, however, proceeding to submit the tabulated scheme, I
would respectfully state that I have no intention of criticising
the discrimination made by the secretary and the members
of the executive section of the Royal Commission of which I
am one, in their granting of silver or bronze medals, or certificates
of graduated merit (the exercise of a power taken by the Royal
Commission from the beginning); but regarding the manner of the
exercise of this power I so disapproved, that I declined to act
early after the first meeting of the section to dispose of the wine
awards was opened, and I at once dissociated myself from the
executive section.
As Chairman of the Wine Jury as well as Executive Commis-
sioner, I considered I had a right to be heard very patiently on a
subject with which I am generally supposed to be conversant, and
about an industry to which I have devoted disinterestedly the
leisure of more than twenty years ; but matters seemed clearly to
take another direction, and so I withdrew from the meeting, and
refused to draw a report. I have had nothing to do with the few
paragraphs in the official record on this subject. Reference to the
subjoined tables will enable the intelligent reader to form a com-
prehensive notion of the present position of the wine industry in
all these colonies from 270 different samples, and those considered
best by the exhibitors form a fair basis on which to calculate.
In order to arrive at clear ideas I have in the first instance
taken the districts according to the alphabetical order adopted in
the catalogue, and shown the number of exhibitors in each, the
total number of samples sent by each one, and the number and
value of the prizes they obtained, and the wines for which they
were most successful; their age, and, by inference, the kinds of
grapes, and the nature of the treatment of the wines best adapted
to each several district and vineyard.
Reference for full particulars must be made to the tables.
Ararat District.
Thus it will be seen that the wine district of Ararat is repre-
sented by three exhibitors, who sent in fifteen samples, and gained
three first, one second, and two third prizes; total, six. The
three highest prizes were obtained—one for Hermitage, one for
Burgundy, one mixed grapes. The age of the wine was four
years.
Beechworth District
Is represented by four exhibitors and six samples, four of which
obtained places—one first, one second, one third, one foui’th. Age
of first prize wine, three years.


Castlemaine District
Had six exhibitors and fourteen samples, of which ten gained
distinctions, viz., four first, three second, three third class. This
is a remarkably good proof of the character of the district, and
the management of the wine. Age of prize wines—three of four
years, one of three years.
Echuca District
Had but one exhibitor, Mr. John Vettler, who sent twelve
samples, and obtained eight distinctions, viz., two first, one
second, and five third prizes; first prizes were five years old, just
as might be expected from so warm a locality; the lower prizes
fell to younger produce.
Geelong District.
This, the oldest, and perhaps most extensive as well as most
distinctive of our Wine districts, was poorly represented at the
Exhibition by only four exhibitors, who, altogether, showed only
eight samples, gaining one first, one second, one third, and two
ifourth prizes. Had Geelong district been adequately represented
its wines would have formed a characteristic feature at Phila-
delphia. The samples were all three years old and under.
Goulburn District,
Represented by four exhibitors, obtained seven distinctions out of
ten samples furnished, viz., one first, one second, four, third, and
one fourth. A warm low-lying district, north of the Dividing-
Range,
Melbourne District
Embraces a radius of about thirty-five miles around the city, and
on account of its general southerly exposure, and either clayey or
basaltic subsoil, is, after the Barrabool Hills in the Geelong dis-
trict, the coolest of our Victorian wine districts. It is in this and
similarly situated places that we should expect to find the produce
assimilating mainly to that of central France. And such is the
case both in regard of red and white wines. And though their
bouquet may not yet have been developed to the extent of that of
the rarer crus of the Herault, or the finer Chablis and Sauternes,
yet there is reason to confide that with time, and more thorough
knowledge of the requirements of the climate and cellaring, the
highest perfection in these classes will be obtained.
The character of the white wines, with few exceptions, reminds
one more of Barsac than any other. Yet the Rieslings of both the
large and small variety, and blends of them, have manifested the
true smack of Sauterne, without its roughness; while one from
Berwick, grown on the south-westerly slope of a volcanic hill, and
prepared on the plan common in the Rheingau, was a truly
magnificent Hock.
While the whole district may be described as influenced by sea
breezes and coast rains, the modifications of its climate either by
natural or artificial means are very considerable. The highest


situation of any of the vineyards is at Riddell’s Creek, 1100 feet
above the sea. Perhaps the next highest and coldest situation
will be Yering, in an opposite dii’ection. Yet in both these loca-
lities the very finest of Carbinet Sauvignon is produced, and the
Riesling and Chasselas, and White Hermitage, are delicious in
their kinds, come to maturity soon and keep well. The wines of
Sunbury on an area of less than a mile square vary much, those of
Goonawai'ra being of a full-bodied character, while those of the
lower lands, notably Mr. J. S. Johnston’s, are light and very fine
both in colour and flavour.
Close to Melbourne is the admirably cultivated small vineyard
of Ivanhoe, which has under the extreme care of its owner pro-
duced for several years some of our best red and white wine of
the standard French character. Besides those which I here par-
ticularise, there are in the vicinity others whose produce is second
only to theirs. The whole of the wines of this district that have
come before me at any time have been pure, wholesome, natural,
unfortified wines, and may be recommended and praised for use in
any case where wine can, under any circumstances, be taken with
advantage. There were in all nine exhibitors, and they represented
adequately the capabilities of the whole area, with thirty-two dif-
ferent samples. The prizes were nine first, four second, six third,
four fourth ; total, twenty-three. Of these, seven first prizes were
for White Wine, five Riesling and two Chasselas; for Reds, two
Hermitages. Age of wines, two five years and over, the rest under
five years. Whenever the Victorians throw aside beer and spirits
and take wine as an element of food and enjoyment, wines of the
south side of the Dividing Range will rise to their merited estima-
tion.
Murray District,
i.e., the South or Victorian side, is represented by only two exhi-
bitors, each with only two samples, of whom it will be seen one
obtained a first and the other a second prize ; age of samples, five
and three years; distance from Melbourne, about one hundred and
sixty miles.
Sandhurst District,
The City of Sandhurst is distant 100 miles north of Melbourne,
and has long been one of the principal centres of gold-mining in
Victoria, Wealthy indeed in mines, and surrounded by fertile
agricultural districts, its vineyard capabilities give promise of
enduring wealth when the last grain of gold shall have been ex-
tracted, and the miners and their fortunes become dry matter of
history. North of the Dividing Range, sheltered from the sudden
chills and rains of the coast, and open to the hot north winds, the
district of Sandhurst is in no respect inferior, and in many superior,
to the finest wine districts of Southern Europe. No situation
and known climate can yield richer and more full-bodied wines
than Sandhurst, or as it used to be called, Bendigo District.


Here, spring frosts and autumn showers are unknown, and as
a matter of course the fruit may be gathered safely in any stage,
between naturally ripe and the condition of almost raisins. But
of all our wine districts this, and its nearest equivalent, the
“ Yalley of the Murray,” require other skill than at present is to
be found therein. Neither French nor German systems of wine
making and treating will ever do full justice to the produce of
Sandhurst. Granted that the wines as they are are good, even
very good, yet they do not display the capabilities of the country.
The Rieslings lack the relish and bouquet of Rhein Wines, and
the Hermitages and the Burgundies have little in common with
their French prototypes, while the Yerdeilhos and Pedro Ximenes
that should give us a fair idea of Sherry and Madeira, have little
to recommend them in comparison with those famed products of
Madeira and Southern Spain. Everything in the way of skill and
art seems wanting to make the best of this district, so formed by
nature to yield the great wines of luxury, the regenerators of the
enfeebled frame, and the consoling supports of declining life. This
is the Port and Sherry district of Yictoria, the natural equivalent
of the plains of South Australia, and the sooner the Spanish and
Portuguese first-class vines are introduced, with the methods of
culture and treatment of musts found to have been successful in
Spain and Portugal, the better for the industry throughout the
whole north of our Dividing Range.
Distribution of Awards to Sandhurst.
The number of exhibitors was eleven, and that of samples sent
to the Exhibition forty-six. Prizes fell as follows: —Twelve first,
eight second, nine third, and three fourth prizes. According to
ages of those samples sent ten were but one year old, yet two of
them, a Riesling and a Hermitage, are found in the first class.
Eleven were of two years, of which six are in the first class.
Thirteen were three years, and none in first class. There are
eight samples of from four to six years, both inclusive, of which
only one of six years, and three of four years, are found in the
first class. Of five years, none.
I think no dispassionate reader of the above will disagree with
the remarks already offered, viz., that the juice of the grapes, and
the time they deserve to be called musts x’ather than wines—viz.,
till they are more than two years old—shows plainly a radical
want of knowledge of their after treatment. From fifteen to
twenty years pure wines, originally no better, if so good, as those
of Sandhurst district, are improving in their best vinous properties
in Portugal. But the results of this Exhibition demonstrates the
introduction, of better methods if Sandhurst wines are ever to
become what they ought to be.
Why Daylesford and Campaspe wines should have found their
way among those of Sandhurst in the catalogue I cannot explain,
for the climate they came from differs very much from that of


Sandhurst. These samples seem not to have deserved even the
lowest classification.
WINES OF NEW SOUTH WALES
The parent colony is the first in priority of time in the wine
industry. It was to the enterprise of a few gentlemen, notably
the late Mr. Busby, whose journals may at this day be read with
pleasure and advantage, and the Messrs. Macarthur, of whom now
only Sir William remains, that the vine as well as the sheep was
introduced into Australia for mercantile purposes. All honour to
their names. We can safely praise their foresight and enterprise
to-day when we can look on wool and mutton as our largest
staples; and wine, after gold at present, and incalculably long
after gold shall have ceased to be mined for, as, perhaps, even a
still greater source of wealth, whether as an export or for home
consumption. Experimenters on the introduction of industries
known but little, if at all, to North Europeans, such as that of the
Vine, the Olive, the Chestnut, the Fig, &c., &c., seldom live to
reap even a modicum of their fair reward. Almost always
posterity has the advantage and profit, and there remains to the
real benefactor, the true establisher of a great means of good to
society, but little more than a disputed title to his hard-earned
and just claims. It has not, however, been so with Sir William
Macarthur, and every lover of the vine and its produce, as well as
every intelligent well wisher for the health, morality, and social
happiness of these sub-tropical regions, will hereafter remember the
name of Macarthur with reverence. The present extent and annual
produce of all kinds from the vineyards of New South Wales is, as
far as at present can be obtained from official sources, as follows:
At the close of the year 1873, the number of acres in New South
Wales devoted to the cultivation of the vine was 3168. The
quantity of wine produced was 575,985 gallons, while the quantity
of brandy manufactured amounted to 191 gallons. The acreage
covered by vines, the produce of which was not used for wine-
making purposes, amounted to 5501 acres, while the quantity of
grapes disposed of for consumption and purposes other than wine
manufacture amounted to 617| tons.
The number of samples sent to the present Exhibition was
forty-seven, divided, or rather named, by the exhibitors as light
white and light red, full-bodied white and full-bodied red wines.
Not possessing full local knowledge of the districts whence the
samples had been obtained, it was impossible for me to treat their
peculiarities in detail. I could, for the most part, inform myself
only by deduction drawn from exhibits on this and two or three
previous occasions when samples from them came before me. The
localities whence the samples were derived were nine in number,
viz.: —West Maitland, one, Mr. Parnell; Geo. Wyndham, Branxton,
Hunter River, one; Rosemont Denman, one, J. P. Brecht;
J. C. Serisier, Eumalga, Dubbo; Wadham Wyndham, Bukkulla,


Inverell, one; Alex. Munro, Bebeah, Singleton, one; Carmichael
Brothers, Seaham, Williams River, one; Albury, Messrs. E. Greer
and Co., and Mr. James T. Fallon, two.
The vignerons exhibited a total of forty-seven samples, and
received the following awards.
There is this to be premised, that the exhibits from Albury were
distinguished by a character more strongly marked than those
from the eastern districts ; but I do not here make any comparison
as to specific goodness over any others.
These forty-seven samples gained twenty-four first-class awards,
ten of which were from six to nine years old inclusive ; four got
second class, the oldest not exceeding three years; seven obtained
third class; of which one only was four years old, two of three
years, the rest being under three years. Four only are found in
the fourth class, aged one five years, the rest under three. Total
of prizes of all values, thirty-nine; eight fell below ten marks.
Greer and Co. obtained nine first-class awards for the following
kinds, viz.;—Aucarot one, Muscat one, for white; and for red,
four varieties of Shiraz, one Burgundy, one Malbec, and one
Carbinet. The ages of these first-class samples range from two to
nine years inclusive. Comparing the age of these first-class wines
with that of those of Sandhurst, Victoria, we find at a glance that
there is the greatest possible variance, showing that while none of
the Sandhurst ones that received a first-class were six years old,
nearly all being quite new, those from Albury, the district most
resembling that of Sandhurst, plainly improved steadily with age,
while we mark a little, but gradual, falling off just at the very age
at which the Sandhurst young wines should begin to show signs of
improvement; in other words, the must being the same the treat-
ments are quite different. Neither need I say that the Albury
wines are perfection, though very good for the manner in which
they have been cellared. The Murray has not yet shown a bottle
of white wine equal to Bukkulla, and one or two that I have met
with of Carmichael’s. The red wines of Albury as a stand
far higher than the whites. I may remark here that the wines of
New South Wales had a finish—l would like to say a polish on
them that few else could show, especially in the reds.
WINES OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The following introductory information was obtained from pub-
lished official sources, and is, therefore, pretty reliable,-viz.: —The
acreage of land occupied by vines in South Australia in the year
1871 was 5217 acres. The number of vines bearing in 1874 was
5,106,874, while those not bearing may be set down at 230,391.
This shows a decrease as compared with the year 1872-73 of
81,178 vines. During the year 1871-22 the quantity of wine made
was 733,478 gals., and the quantity of grapes sold and disposed of
for other pui'poses than the manufacture of wine amounted to


44,982 cwt. The quantity of wine made from the vintage of
1874-5 was 648,186 gals.
South Australia is represented by sixty-eight samples, varying
between the ages of eleven years and one year, both inclusive.
The number of exhibitox-s was eighteen.
On making an analysis of the samples according to the kind of
grapes used, and the localities from which they had been sent, the
following results have been obtained. Since the climates of the
present wine districts vary very much within short distances, viz.,
between the hot sunny flat lands and the cool breezy hills, I thought
it worth while to show in this place the opinion of the Wine Jury as
expressed by their awards, at least in the instance of those wines
placed in the several classes.
Commencing with Riesling, that universal favourite on the
Rhine, and the parent of the vine which in Portugal yields the
world-famed Bucellas, I find that not one sample obtained a first
position ; four got a second, two a third, and two a fourth. Their
declax-ed ages ranged from eleven years to three years. They come
from vineyards from seventeen hundred to four hundred feet, and
less, above sea level. There is evidently room for improvement
here, either in the kind of grapes or treatment of their produce.
Next in ordex-, as I have taken them, is the Verdeilho and blends
of it, and hex-e we see plainly the generous nature of climate and
soil, as indeed they are displayed in all the spirituous and full-
bodied wines. This wine slxows two first class, one second, two
third, and three fourth distinctions.
Muscatel obtains three first prizes, which speaks well for this
kind of wine on the hot sunny plains. It was excellent.
Pedro Ximenes got two first classes.
White wines, called mixed , two first, one second, two third
class.
Doradilla, one third.
White Spanish, one third, and one fourth.
I was surpi’ised not to find a single sample of pure Palonimo
Blanco, nor any blend of it, that I could detect. Doradilla, so far
as I have known it in Australia, has been a difficult wine to
manage. I have by me samples that I have been watching for five
years, and 'even yet they have not parted with their tartar;
evidently they had been bottled while yet unripe. Beyond all
doubt the produce of Spanish vines requires Spanish treatment.
So much for White wines.
The three great Red wines of South Australia are Cax-binet, and
blends of it for the high lands; Shiraz, including Hermitage ;
and Mataro, and blends of it, generally everywhere. Fox-
persons having an established relish for wines of the kiixd we
call French Clarets, blends of Carbinet with a wine of more
natural body, such as Shiraz, will always be favourites; just
as judicious blends of Mataro and Shix-az, and perhaps a shade
of sweet Frontignac, will be with the Port wine lovers of the


old scliool, as was most amply shown at the late Exhibition,
when of the whole quantity of all kinds sold at the bar nearly one-
half was of the above character from Mr. Gillard’s cellars, notwith-
standing that the price (duty included) was nearly twice that of
our best kinds offered. I do not mean to applaud this kind of
taste; still it shows how strongly the instinct for full-bodied rich
wine exists at this day in the average Englishman.
Mataro, and blends of it, four first class, one third, and one
fourth place. I have had occasional opportunities during many
years of studying South Australian Malbec, yet I never saw a
sample that was thoroughly good. Eor one thing, it does not blend
well; it often has an earthy taste peculiar to itself, and unless
ripened beyond the chance of any deposit before being bottled
it leaves a fine loose deposit that causes much waste in decanting.
I never saw a firm, hard crust on a bottle of Malbec.
The grape known as Black Portugal (probably the Donzellinho
of the Port wine districts) is a valuable grape, needs to be well
ripened, and blends well with Mataro. Kept by itself, it should
yield in South Australia abundantly an agreeable light wine.
These, and such like, are the true hospital wines, and such as
should be easily obtainable by convalescent patients, and all others
in whose case “ wine” is indicated. I venture, I hope modestly, to
say that they are vastly preferable in such cases to the wretched
hot brandied Port—publican’s Port, which alone the average
labourer ever thinks of buying when <his medical adviser says,
“The patient wants a stimulant and more nourishment, let him
have a glass or two of Port wine every day.” If the patient needs
a strengthening and supporting substance, let it be pure wine—if
a stimulant, then brandy and ammonia.
The awards of the jurors to South Australian wines are as fol-
fows, bearing in mind that the total number of samples exhibited
was sixty-eight: —
Twenty-two, first class. \
Sixteen, second etas. ( Fifl five sam ,, les in a l).
Eleven, third class. l 1 J 1
Seven, fourth class. )
Thirteen samples only obtained nine marks or less. There ap-
pears a slight error in the number; it should be twenty-three first
class. I believe it arose in this way—the judges, when reviewing
the samples that came within a fraction of a higher class, in several
instances elevated such into the next highest class, and I have not
particulars at hand to discover where the error lies. „ There ought
to be only twelve that fell below nine marks, and were conse-
quently rejected.
SOME REMARKS OK VICTORIA.
The Colony of Victoria has now been as well prospected for its
wine-producing as for its gold-yielding capabilities, and confidence


in tins industry ought to be very great. There are here many
hundred thousand acres of the finest wine country in the world,
fit for little else but vines, olive, and fig trees, without as yet a
single vineyard on them; for example, north of the Dividing
Range, in a climate equally removed from the hot winds of Bendigo
and the valley of the Murray on the one hand, and the sudden
chills and coast rains of the Melbourne district on the other;
there is a vast and beautiful tract of vineyard country, with the
rising little town of Mansfield almost in the centre of it.
The flat valley itself is fertile to a wonder, as well it may be,
seeing, as any one can, at a glance, where the creeks and rivulets
have cut their channels through the alluvial soil, that it is filled
up with the richest detritus from old volcanic hills. But those
old volcanic hills, picturesque from whatever side they are viewed,
are of little worth for anything but vines. I made a rough calcu-
lation that the whole ring of them cannot be less than eighteen
miles. They show every possible slope, are of very varied heights,
but none too high; and, of course on such land, either bald or
very light timbered. "What the exent and acreage might be I
could not estimate, but it must be very great. Again, all this
country lies within very easy distance from the North-eastern
Railway station at Longwood. There is here more wealth, and
more enduring wealth, than in any single one of our gold districts.
For the vineyard and olive grove yield steadily their annual crop,
when the gold-mine has become a thing of the past. Yet it is
remarkable that, with about double the population of California,
Victoria does not produce annually half the quantity made in
that State. Wherever the cause is to be sought, there certainly
is something wrong somewhere.
WANT OF UNIFORMITY IN RETAIL SUPPLY.
There is an almost universal complaint among consumers and
purchasers of small parcels of wine, that they cannot depend upon
obtaining uniformity in kind and quality from year to year. In
the instance of consumers, when a taste and relish for some par-
ticular kind has been acquired, and they seek to replenish their
cellars, they are disappointed, and often disgusted, at finding
themselves quite unable to obtain what, they have become accus-
tomed to. And this state of things must continue as long as the
present condition of our Colonial wine industry remains as it is.
Some approach to uniformity in price is another desideratum, the
present ruling retail prices being nearly always too high. One
real drawback to prosperity of Colonial wine lies here.
In Victoria, and as far as I have been able to learn in the
adjacent colonies also, every owner of a vineyard is his own wine-
maker, treater, cellarer, and often merchant also. The produce
of his vineyard begins, progresses, and ends under his own direc-
tion; and the end is not always satisfactory. As a matter of
18


course lie must lose foi‘ very many years a large amount ot money
that ought to be found in his profit account, on account of having
to go on increasing his cellarage, as his stock accumulates from
year to year; and needing to employ more hands upon it, and
those not unfrequently worse than useless in cellar work, such as
sulphuring, racking, fining, and bottling. Then comes the
selling, when customers have been found, “by dribs and drabs”—
six or ten dozen to one, and as much or less to another, and occa-
sionally a hogshead—at a comparatively high price it is true; but
when all kinds of expenses are taken into account, a very narrow
margin of profit remains to the producer.
It is in reality just as absurd of the Victorian—l might say of
the average Australian vineyard proprietor, to become his own
wine treater, in the present knowledge of that delicate art, as it
would be for a squatter to become a butcher and a woollen manu-
facturer, or spend his time and money on utilising hoofs and
horns, and conducting chemical experiments on the after products
of dead cattle, instead of minding breeding, rearing, and feeding.
Who would not split with laughter, or cry with pity, at the insanity
of the wheat growers turning their own millers, bakers, and bread
sellers, and waiting to dispose of their grain in that way 1 ? One
may say the present, and hitherto the past, state of wine-making
was one of necessity either in this fashion or not at all. The
analogy of it has existed in these colonies, but hardly exists now.
In times which we call r emote,, \i a traveller sought hospitality in
the remote bush, it was a hundred to one but he would have to
take his allowance of wheat, and with his own labour grind it in
a steel mill, knead his “damper,” chop his firewood, make his fire,
and lastly superintend the baking of his damper before he could
get his evening meal. He succeeded, no doubt, in the long run;
but his bread, though sweet and wholesome, was not quite so tooth-
some as one of Mr. Perdrix’s or Mr. Cameron’s best loaves. The
reason in this instance lies not so much in the goodness of the
wheat, for none perhaps could excel it; but in the mill, in the
cooking appliances, and the method of using them. In fact,
making good bread is an art as well as a business. There are
little niceties about it known only to the experienced. In the case
of wine the analogy seems to be absolutely perfect; and so long as
our wine growers continue to do as hitherto they have done, the
analogy will continue, and we shall here and there wonder at
a grand result obtained from a particular vintage, or even vine-
yard, as a “happy accident.” The existing drawback on our pure
native wines lies chiefly in this: —The producer has enormous
expense in cellar construction, and cellarage expense; is kept in
anxiety about the way in which his 20,000 gallons will turn out,
or how much of it may easily go bad; to say nothing of the want
of confidence on the part of the banks in advancing on hypothe-
cated wine.


REMEDY.
The remedy here as elsewhere is a few large, wealthy, buying
companies, with plenty of cash, and all requisite appliances for
dealing with young wines and musts, as they are dealt with and
treated in Southern Europe, There the must, when pressed out
and fermented, can be sold at a fair price, just as among us a load
of wheat or oats can be sold. If the agent of the firm and com-
pany does not call at his vineyard, all the proprietor has to do is
to cart his hogsheads to the (Fietoria we may call it) the com-
pany’s establishment, where it will at once be tested, and a note
given him of its quantity and character, that will be honoured
with cash at once by the pay clerk. In other words, wine in
Southern Europe stands on the same, if not a better, level than
wheat, oats, &c., here. And why should our vignerons be deprived
any longer of the obvious mercantile advantages 1
EARTHY TASTE OF WINES.
In the produce of very many vineyards of Victoria, and of a
few in South Australia and New South Wales, a peculiar taste is
met with which has some how or other become generally called
earthy. Why this designation should have been applied to it I
do not know. Of course, it is not a matter for wonder to find
the English language deficient in technical terms expressive of
shades of difference among the characteristis of pure wines. This
term “ earthy” seems to have been obtained by translating a
French word or two into English, “gout de terroir.” But who
knows what clear idea can be conveyed by a word such as
“earthy,” that must vary with every kind of earth 1
But the underlying taste of many of our wines, far more com-
monly of our red wines, is almost always of the same character.
In endeavouring to discover the cause of this peculiar flavour,
I have spent many yeai’S, and have studied hundreds of samples,
and sought the advice of both wine-treaters and scientific
chemists, and induced some of them to institute independent in-
vestigations for themselves, but hitherto without any reliable
results. I could get nothing to lead me to the original cause of
it by direct investigation. Regarded from a chemical point of
view I feel inclined to think it is due far more to the way in
which the fermentation is carried on than to any effect of soil.
This is, of course, only conjecture. But now that we have a
Department of Agriculture, with an agricultural chemist, he might
with advantage take the subject in hand. Could he make out the
substance, its cause, and prevention or remedy, he would confer
a lasting benefit on that branch of agriculture, and add largely to
his public reputation.
BAD CORKS AND DECAYING STAVES.
Among minor matters deserving attention were the corks used
by the exhibitors. Those used by the New South Wales cellar-


men were all that could be desired ; but there were a good many
instances of samples of both South Australian and Victorian
wine that had been manifestly injured by the bad or indifferent
quality of the corks. I know of nothing more easily tainted by
being brought into contact with unclean materials than wine, if we
except milk. A few samples having good corks had been kept in
casks having a decayed stave, the taste and smell were unmistak-
able. And this leads me to remark that the Portuguese practice
is the safest and best in this respect. It is to leave the store
vessels to become coated all over, often to a great thickness with
the natural deposit of bi-tartarate of potassa; and so far from
this tartar being injurious to the wine it is often the saving of it.
Wine exposed for only a short time to a piece of decaying wood
will acquire a taint that nothing can remove afterwards.
BOTTLE STINK.
Some white wines, notably Verdeilho and blends of it, are
hardly ever quite free from what we call bottle stink, an odour
disagreeable to most people. This, however, can easily be
removed, or very much reduced, by simply rolling the cask into
the yard when the sun is warm, and placing it in the sunshine,
and removing the bung for five or six hours, then driving it home
and rolling the cask about for a minute, allowing it to remain till
next day, and repeating this treatment every day for four or five
days, when it is all but absolutely certain the peculiar offensive
smell will have disappeared. Drinkers of Madeira (a Verdeilho)
for the most part draw the cork and place the bottle near the fire
for a minute or two, really only to remove any remnant of this
odour.
THE BLENDING OF WINE.
There is no operation in the wine-press or the cellar demanding
so much study, care, and attention as blending, nor any upon
which success so much depends. For, whereas a given kind of
grape may yield an unusually fine wine one year or two, it can
never be depended on for a uniform supply. The universal com-
plaint among ourselves is that by the time a gentleman lias acquired
a taste and relish for a particular growth he is unable to obtain
the equal of it again. Now, when the Spanish or Portuguese
feitor hits on a blend that suits a market, he can continue to supply
it as long as there is a demand. Duff, Gordon and Co.’s Golden
Sherry, for example, wherever met with since it was first produced,
and of equal age, is recognised in a moment. So with the Ports,
and the wines known as Lisbon Sweet and Lisbon Dry. But all
these are the result of judicious blending; and here be it said that
blended wine is pure wine, so long as nothing else is added
to it.
It will be probably matter of surprise to readers, who have never
seen any of the great cellars of Southern Europe, to be told that


next after the proprietor himself the most important personage is
he who superintends the blending. The art of blending cannot be
taught to one man in ten thousand. It requires a sense, or rather
several senses, each perfect in a high degree—an eye for the exact
shade of colour required—an acute sense of smell for bouquet—
and lastly, a detective palate. But it requires yet more, and I
hardly know how to describe it, unless I may call it an instinctive
apprehension of the result of a blend of two, three, or half a dozen
kinds even before mixing them together. There are men without an
ear for music, to whom music is “the least disagreeable of sounds;”
some men are colour-blind, and we not unfrequently meet indivi-
duals who have no sense of smell. None of these classes could
ever learn wine-blending any more than he who had no ear for
music and no conception of harmony could ever become a great
singer or composer. It is the same with the subject lam treat-
ing of.
DIFFICULTY OF OBTAINING SPANISH AND
PORTUGUESE WINE TREATERS.
It will now be clear how difficult is is to obtain for these remote
countries even a very few thoroughly trained wine-treaters. I have
only mentioned above the natural acquirements of the man, but
must add he has to serve a long apprenticeship in the cellar, and
acquires his knowledge by observation and experience, and his
standing by good conduct and perseverance. And perhaps after all
he may be master of only one special department of the cellar, e.g.,
that of young white or young red wines, and know vexy little about
fining, and preparations for exportation.
The most we can hope for would be to secure for these colonies
about half a dozen who would, while operating in some of our lai'g’est
cellars, act as instructors of qualified young men. If we are ever
to find markets for the rich strong wines pi-oduced everywhere in
Victoria north of the Dividing Range, in much of New South
Wales, axxd all over South Australia, wine-instructors of the above
description must be obtained. As to all our country south of the
Divide, we have plenty of French and German vignerons to manage
its produce. En passant I would remark that the Germans make
the best white, and French the best red wines here.
WINE COMPANIES.
Some two years ago the Yictoi’ian wine interest had risen to
such dimensions as to indicate a want of two or three companies,
for the purpose of purchasing for cash any wine whatsoever that is
offex-ed. For as long as it is wine it is worth as much as the
brandy it contains. Distillation would necessaxdly form a feature
in the scheme. Now we have already several small companies in
existence, but what I am advancing is quite another thing. The


very least to start with would be an available cash capital of from
£75,000 to £IOO,OOO (one hundred thousand pounds). Cellars
would be constructed near water-carriage, on the Portuguese plans,
for which about four acres of land might suffice for one such com-
pany. These cellars, or stores, need not be at all expensive; wood
walls and clay floors being sufficient, but they must be roomy.
Beyond one or two dug-out or brick-walled rooms for young wines,
nothing more of that kind would be required.
All wines should be bought for cash at per gallon, even the
poorest musts, and older and riper wines according to estimated
value. Thus the owner of a vineyard would be able to empty his
cellar every year; his produce would be converted into cash, and
all his heavy expenses and risks in cellaring put an end to.
When a wine-grower can send in a load of hogsheads with the
certainty of obtaining a fair price in cash at once, as he could for
wheat, the wine industry will flourish as in France and Southern
Europe, and become a true, not a precarious, source of wealth
in Victoria.
As to the operations of companies such as I mention, it would
take me out of my way too far to go into the details. Suffice it to
say here, that the public, the wine shops, and individuals would be
soon able to obtain uniform kinds for daily consumption, while the
more valuable kinds would be matured for special consumers or
or foreign markets.
I feel confident two or three such companies, all not necessarily
in Melbourne, would pay very well indeed; and, indirectly, pay
none better than the growers.
In the absence of such a market as I am describing, the wine-
growers are placed at every disadvantage; at present indeed inevit-
able. But if they had such a market, and persisted in being their
own cellarers, they would become objects fit for pity, ridicule, and
satire. '
CONCLUSION.
In concluding this lengthy essay I would add that it is pleasing
to witness the almost utter absence of drunkenness in the streets
of our cities, at least during those hours that respectable people
frequent them ; that whatever the “larrikins” may be, they do not
drink intoxicating liquors so as to affect them ; that the wine-
shops are numerous, and on the increase, and that we may claim
for them at least this advantage—that they supply tathe foreign
portion of our population what they have been most accustomed
to from their youth, while our own people, whether native or
otherwise, patronise them in an increasing ratio, to the benefit of
their health and enjoyment, and, I believe, to their morals also.


|ii ||| ill .
oo ” 'So«S g.olgjg
l||| B||| i|l |
■g .9 .S 3 H *rt 9 *43 w
S|l« l||“ Si|?
h l.ii yn § .s i
02
H
£
H
£
£
3
M
Pi
c
H
O
i—i
>
c 4
.... . . •
: ::: : : W : : : *’S
li i :!: i : K 3 :: : : S s s
6 W -*
o O-HfHIJ S
°td Ej £ B £ 02 £ 8
a 3 § S) -rd O : : 5
i 3 ~~ s - ~ g b o o% § .a
PQ W go O
” 50 Er 22 2® S o 21$ «§ oSr^St2St<
n3om«o « gg|| g « 22 2 2 22222 2 2 2
•ox anSojBSBO


§cl a
®||t
.2 H «
cc '§S 3 fe
g.g.3
fii
.H o^3
g o a)^
x -M -*-»
.5 w
M, gl|
q-3 3
fii
,fc q "o
l|l|
g-S-S 13
.ta s®
§.33
' , 9AT9A\T •n3A3[a;
-moj 1
_ _ J |
pTo" o fMONrt . ~
CO rH CO 13 ~
«rt tuo <M
: : '. :::::::: • • • • • IS'IS" *o o _T n
n . e 3 o
50 co _______ -S S 5 So 3 t&'O
co'lOtO oo'i3'oo't3't3'o6' ST co~'S-^T*a -cti c© eo oo <o
S~S~(yi in oo h
•ano^j
H r-H f-l | O | HHHHHHHH | 00 | HHHH J I | H | HHHHHrtH
i~ri r- i---- i : : : ; ? i
i—( rH
: ; ; \ : \
£0 HHN CO CO CO CO Ol CO rH
(M
2 £ £ £ £ .•§
5 5 £ ,2t>
C3 g
o
& ::::;:
: : : = : = : : | ! : ::: : : :
c 3 O
0)0 0) f/} . 0) 0)0)
Ma>t>D oSl« ® M M rrt* . 08 |P
c 8 -S o 3
S 3 V, S 3 S 3 S 3 « -o d 9 S 3 13 S 3 „a S 3 , § gPQ £ a
6 “ S 1 1 '"m I " ”3 EHi
£§ £ £ g 3 S .s| 3 .2m3.2
W >KO 31QCQ W oM PhH g w&B^
in ; :::::::: :<m<m :<m <m :t- : ;hhh
A : : S S : : ;: : : ; :
.-S u £ H « g *®
S & « «vq i£ ti o
2
»| = £ BasßBss 2 **a g 8 8 B >.g
|5 a |I || s 11*.
ho a m fe'QM
<u ....
: a s o
.« li -3 »
3 a o® M
eg <1 izi P 3 •§ g
5§ g 9-~riP w - - - -
P iJSS 3r« fcfl - - -.'i - -
S 3 S H S 3 O 03
oomo j S o h
bo H'eq io»»OH«)«h 2 2 S ts
O4 (M(NC4C4C4(M(NCI <M<MCOCO<MCO CQC^C^stj^^^
HHH HHHHHHHH H H H H H H ,


£
<
t—i
pH
O
H
O
I—l
k
26


Muscatel
Red
Shiraz
>»
Yerdeilho
White
Carbinet
Red
Hermitage
99
Carbinet
99
Hermitage
99
99
» ... •••
99
99
Carbinet & Hermitage
99
99 99
99
Yerdeilho
White
99
99
99
Riesling
99
Burgundy
Red
Hermitage
99
Riesling
White
Yerdeilho
99
Mataro
99
Red
Carbinet & Hermitage
99
Hermitage
99
Yerdeilho
White
Hermitage
Red
Carbinet
99
Riesling
White
Yerdeilho
99
,,
99
Murray.
igunyah. ...
'awingee ...
Sandhurst.
thfieldsaye
J)
»
99
99
>»
99
99
99
99
99
99 •"
9»
99
99 •••
99
99
99 •••
99
99
99 *•*
99 •••
99
99 ••
99
99
■sii Mil
UU i§ l,2
o-91 a |.§||
*.2Bj OS o «'43 g s
H, gS> *|S«a
q. 9 5 o *l3 03 03
,
o <N <M OCOJO O o
(M H CO -*t* '■+* CO
CD CD CD __ CD^__
75“'s~ o" S' S' So' S' S' S' S' L"- NOb*NO^N»OI>?0?OCOOC
r—l p—l rH i-H rH rH
• i—( * * * • |H H
— * - 7 , _ . 7~_u . I TT_, . . • __, f—l r—t rH * ! »—< rH
rH | I I
IQ CQ Nd^HO^N^'DOCOHCO^NCOHCOHHI^HWNNHINH
»cq :eo ; ; : : ; : • j i 00 • • i 10
Pi
_ CJ
a bo :::::: : .
,-y • •
a A .d 2 oj A
£3 C M 0 rO W S
m -g g § a ® .22
. di Cni >H std 2
a:'® ..d - - --s = r ~W - ~ s r, :
<U 4> rd *" "'(P »j
O S -a S,
o o o 'C £ 2d
(Dcu'dD t-
Q Q C Q JE . - ....
2 ~
-+J
H m
-o O^TO<M^»o(M<oco^tit^ooeo-^i(Ni»coi-
'£ | CO XCOCOOiCiOSOOIO
mm wmmmmmwmmmwmmkwmmwwkwmwmwkmk
Hr4HHrtHpHHrtrtrinrHrtnrirtnrinfHHpinr(MfF<


£ a v *3
•S S-S? I
C 3 £ <33
i s|l|
a} JSP-3 8 a
yjl
UIOJJ
saidmig iv'jox
- —— . g. _ § sS-
g 8 § 2SS2 • • J s’® " a _-2
fi U « s ■r —. t* o o --,
“ (C 03 —.O o<M ea C 5 K g
K. Vn oa b£co oownm -S__j - ? P
?P • -,HH ~ O cS.aJ . •;
a &2 2* 5 2 M o 3l
” Q IQHHattHOQH CO
•jojjjsid uioaj ’Oni kj
Ph saoqtqitixa jo / *— . _ , , *-- —'
S _ -S3ZUJib?ox i^ r ~ l '~ l :: : : :I w | HHHHr.HHrtn
1— 1 9 . ;: —: —: ; ; : ~ : • '• : ■ ••;;• ; .
<1 bB # w : : • : : : • •-•
Cfi P 22 , '. • : • • •• r-i rH • • * *rH * *
td c§ s ’P J B ;::::: : * :: : : •. j
tj . • rH • • • • i-H • ! ! ; .
g !•£ 'i )n s _: :;r : ; ; : :: : • •• • •
0 5 ~ -!>sx : ; :: $ : : : : ' l-1 : :
_ « h H ■# 10 ft 10 W CC MNHIOCOMI>C6tOtO^
Q ’OUIAV JO dSy
% s I sl_l 1 „ .1
m 1 % = •• 2 s - E .3> p, ;s p? e * s 8 s | £ s s
H O P 3 t-3 !> Ph !>
H ——T ::;::: : i :::::::: : : :
: : :
£
trj a
K
D «H
/•s ® fl} O
<l3 hn bo
m g * r „ P to« 8 t«g
§ -§ .s o ,-s H s
55 a ——| =S g g § S IL s 2 2■'S-Sl-S
@ « |c«oj 3.2 o lsS®h2w
a o g w a?p-i Pi
A uojiqiqxg Aq juos ;;-t h h :?) ; cc ; ; ;ci c/D co ; ;
saidnißg jo ’Oil • ’ ’ ' ’ * '
1 g
§ • «3 03 . pH
§ s 2“cScirdss ,u
? * u • • : • : : a g^o^pc
I £ 3 pp «
ri * S2 > r l3 PP -h Ph
B J E -S - I- : | ;|
$ | I i“N a t- S I I B*l I
5 a o a
Oh •:::::::: i :::S3 : : : « : :
i 1 I gs ! 5 al
t* |. I o : : *3 2
-Efi* fe 1 S bc:::: 2 ::(:l ®s''§
V "-h J 2 o 3 w -<*■ Q hH r-H CO
Ss pI Pi g, As k«lk 1
§| gsl'i I* 03 -§ I ? fc.il .»
g 2 s sjj § |J --g
J “ & S
£ SoSO O PQ re PQ<jtfcc....g
— ooOiOOnOHp l>-
Ci Ci 00 05 Oi N b« N I'-
*OSJ SUSoTUItJn CCCOCOCOCCCCCOCO CC
aX 1 rH HHHHHHHrrrr


• 00* N • d
s.fto S - . ©
O r—< _ rrt O ».»—i £>
a ~ - - a? £ ~03 -£ n
—. be .. be ’—< bD
O . ift eft O o
<MOOOO~<>I M _J i-h ~<M (M oO w g
N ~»" H rH rH cO T ft! T 1
o h r-j a „ s: £ £bo 0 d-H 0 r r r r - P
np c 3 c 2 +j - - - ~ ft bflc3 -7:
CO GO ZD go GO GO CO_rH & *-H >—l IQ —* CQ SD_CO GC_ _ . . fr A
•o.v\x
t- 50 ft
© 2
la eeeeeeeeee r, eeeeeeee -r, - - -- r?
, PS ft
: i
ft a
.... • • • ; ,ft : : :
I;::::::::::::-:: r a ...
■*-> a t 3
a a ai a
©.a©© © a . a
O EC ft. Cf be bo ft> bo 5
be *>S <0 HJ© -o|a | a
p p p<o . <P ■3 .h -H 2 p-t .f» 3J< tq N 03 p p N.p .£3 „
Me S 3 I? -a- © £ =Sg 3 'SSSS3a|2 s 2 3 2-P 'A ~ '
CO CD r) li - O CO -_. r( !h 8 H r “3 .ri «S r Ta ?H »tft 03
.2 .5.2 S’o a s © .a *5 >2 r «5 3
P 3 £o3<3 h <1 £> aWhiWMwagco vi<r, OCQcc O P
; ; ; ; ;N
B
3 a . ft p,a a . 0
| 38 6| Ml I 0 t
J ■§ I afl 2 = |
• 3 ” |=? S S §..
a -ft eh ----<■* - - -ft* -t3 aft -H roj - E- -TJ- r. e
ip *B,s § * “ « |
« Ss ■ -a S'SS s 0 §
| $4 w eg w £ .
■ ’.S § ’ ’ ’ ' <
Ph 0 "©
_j 53 S :|::|i■ : : ; : ! I i < \
a s'a s a ’ ©
a a - m H -a
ft hh ft re £
•a ft a a a
ft a o ft
« -I {? . - -:# • : S sfl t?,SH Eb E E E E E E E E E £
S 3 -g-Sg 5 r %
*s. £<j tf PP CQ 03 < !TL
§s S
29


strict and
ity.
Name of Grower
ia — cont.
rk
neyard ...
«
Joseph Gilbert
W. B. Bonn Seville
J. W. Richman
99
William Jacob
Isabella Baker
George White
)>
rk
neyard ...
G. L. Barnard
R. D. Ross
Joseph Gilbert
W. B. Rounseville
R. D. Ross
J. W, Richman
)>
Thomas Hardy
»
J. D. Holbrook
Magill ...
99
William Jacob
E. W. Wright
»>
99
£|jf I
.*32 .
o ,a«S
.o « 3
J |
fl P
g--S g a
i
ft
8
P 3
toojj
saxdraos l«n°X
§5 I I §5 § S ||
r§ 'T} v:
“ ST “ o'“ 0~0- 5.9
0) 0) <M 0) cq (M „
.9 . r~s „ . „.g N r. 2 . N „.H . ,
pH r-H *» ~ Ph »> O (-H pH ~ ■ I O •* •* c 8 •'•'
,P*& bo P* TJ ft c 8 •'•'•* • be
rs - tic__ . be be
§>►s 0005 CO *o 0000 o —o
O r-H r-H t - »0 I— r-H H CO W W H !D M
g
ti
(2*
bfl
c
I
uiojj
sjojiqiqxg; jo -or
d -sazua nnox
•| £ •ui?
| s T^S
rH * • »—1
S
*♦2
£
I
m
S
H
£
(2*
I
H
◄
Ph
H
m
P
::ofl;::u; : ; ? q : ; ; :
.111 ..1 . ,|s .. . .
: : -S :: » I : : *.L - : : S-S :: : :
m B ~tS r - a
B S* 9 rri 3 >S a* JS
O O.OJ 2|jjm j ri os <u 9 o o
mco f, mo pS «>ts -s u -a «*i3 2 5 5 3
•55.9 ®<£.S-B 8 r.S.g §sf s o|-S-|’S|
'HsigSsS'SiiS'S'S.s.ti
s bos i £ QQtf oo|l_s S
i*g ,pus
O *^Sl
rH ; ; ;hh ; ; r-i ; (r-t ;rH ;hh
•oai.A\. jo aSy
B
'o
O
« s
"3 - - - -Vi
r - -- -- -- - - u - - - •rr
Es
ffi
H
P
O
co
ifq (juas
•CO O ;(NCO (M
saidiußg jo *o^;
•8
|i-
-5 p
M o
•W O
C (d
0)
g
•S*' CD % .9 •*
o £,2 « t> « -a
h d"3 002 dS *3 r§ d 0
ks q > 5r273 srl o 00 > 12
h a-P _ o »-h 1 2 Q-> O (D O _ p_( w i-t „ O (D
cr, >* <D 0 d , q c/3 h>d3 •* U *■ d •‘O rj
§gs -s§fc a 'S si
x 'ftOg£ 6ft M ft
H^HNiI^OHCiIiONMIOHNOiOnWWOiSCIN
10IO(0!CN»OOOnl0l010HHiC!0®e!0!Ot.t-0C
r-H f-H rH r-H rH rH rH i—i rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH r*
•ok; 0u8oIu!}«o
30


ii .Hi. a j* I
S ® S s ~ o' o'o' o' ~
V _J ,—J N *rH N <—J
_! -5 - *3 S S S S £,fi J »<3 „ „ O £ K Q «3 £ s £
(3 rSp, -8) o 3 £ £ 5I M . ft -C M
° _o'‘s'o't2
gQ~aO rH r-< rl &toip ZD tQ HN rH H IQ N o>_
•aoa^q^pa
,-h r-» rH i—( ,—( rH r—IHH i-Hr—l r-H i-H »—irHr—li-Hi-Hi-H HHH
H i • • • • • • •
to 50 go
<x>
-4-J
~ r d - -
~ a •*
PS
■ » » « « m » *f-i • * * Till 'O I • P • • • •r 3 * ! ! •
:::: : -| : S ’'2’’ , '| ) ‘'|’
co id § •>. o 3 N 5 O 5 §
b-S & £. . § B ..a . .| .11 £.§
: : ; :o £ “ • |S | | i J 5 9 i :-2 : i 2 !ftl -3
'*’ ’ a -a -S O |g)§ § “ “
*-§ 3 'E 9 gj gj-’g § cs sfl « g d
° °E> 3 +3 S g< * d :acs a 9 aos
c 3 rja O CD j§ bo*b Co o
I =ll uplill llFlHlllljl II
g gPhOOO 33 CQ WcCCS CQ^E^OCIEd^J^CQ
• • •co * ! ! ! I I H I • | 1 I !!!*•••* •
■e sp
o n
n n. >« § ►» >* o' J'S
<u i* t 3 __, ~ 2 r Cco® a) m 2 n 3 d>HcS
9 § gS 2 fe 9-3 9 S -
eS d 3 2 j 3 dd co w kS 3 d .-P -i
« '3 < < r a 3|-S W ’3 9 « *O „ „ 3 'g W * .
42 S S*K k 9 s ~£m - 'Wh Sj -
I i’ll*! | fi >’ I*°' I II I
43 k? P 3 Pi C 5 pj >4 Hbb c o “i-i P-i
t 3
. . . os ;
: : : S? : : ::::::=
£® a s
2 'o cd 42 "o' I ► I 2o c £.22 §
H s I “ s'! & “ r r§
§ 592 8 S.SP| S Jo 9 ||||
!z; <! «3j (S CQ <tj & M g !zi <! g: <3 !zj
HN«teN® CO «o}o«s®dt;at;d
ffi QO 00 Ci Cl O h-COOIOOOi CiOIOOOCOOI
Hr |HHHH 1-imHHHHHHHH HHHrtHHHHrtHrtH
31


32
LIST OF PRIZES AWARDED FOR WINES EXHIBITED
IN MELBOURNE,
1875.
1
Class.
Victoria.
No.
New-
South Wales.
No.
South
Australia.
No.
Totals.
Light White
1st Prize ...
7
1st Prize ...
2
1st Prize ...
i
10
V ♦> •••
2nd „ ...
3
2nd „ ...
1
2nd „ ...
3
7
>• » •••
3rd „
7
3rd „ ...
2
3rd „ ..
5
14
>> •••
4th „ ...
4
4th
—
4th „ ...
4
8
Totals
21
5
13
39
Light Red
1st Prize ...
2
1st Prize ...
1
1st Prize ...
3
6
2nd „ ...
3
2nd „ ...
1
2nd ,,
2
6
3rd „ ...
9
3rd
—
3rd „ ...
—
9
» •••
4th „ ...
3
4th „ ...
—
4th „
—
3
Totals
17
2
6
24
Full Whites
1st Prize ...
6
1st Prize ...
10
1st Prize ...
9
24
' ?>
2nd
7
2nd ...
—
2nd „ ...
4
11
?? » •••
3rd
3
3rd „ ...
4
3rd „ ...
2
9
» >>
4th „ ...
3
4th „ ...
2
4th „ ...
2
7
Totals
18
1G
17
51
Full Reds
1st Prize ...
21
1st Prize ...
11
1st Prize ...
9
41
2nd „ ...
11
2nd „ ...
2
2nd „ ...
6
19
>> >> •••
3rd „ ...
10
3rd „ ...
1
3rd „ ..
4
15
M » •••
4th „ ...
1
4th „ ...
2
4th „ ...
1
4
Totals
43
16
20
79
Totals of Prizes )
1st Prize ...
35
1st Prize ...
24 1
1st Prize ...
22
81
in the Four >
Classes )
2nd „ ...
3rd „ .,
24
29
2nd „
3rd „ ...
4
7
2nd „ ...
3rd „ ...
15
11
43
47
4th „ ...
11
4 th „ ...
4
4th
7
22
Grand Totals
99
29
55
193


A KARAT. Exhibits.
Trouette and Blampied 3
J. Best 1
BEEC'HWORTH.
F. G. and J. B. Docker ... ... 1
H. Evans ... ... ... ... 1
CASTLEMAINE
F. Mellon 2
W. Botten ... ... ... ... 1
Otto Jung ... 2
E. Schroeder ... ... ... 1
F. Crippa ... ... ... ... 1
ECHUCA.
J. Vettler ... ... ... ... 4
GEELONG.
J. Weber ... ... 1
J. Deppeler 1
J. Ritchie 1
Districts, 9;
GOULBURN. Exhibits.
F. Egli 1
MELBOURNE.
F. Schmitt .. ... 1
C. Francis 2
St. Hubert’s Vineyard Company... 3
J. S. Johnston 4
C. Maplestone 3
0. Brachfi ... ... ... ••• 1
E. G. Snowden 1
MURRAY.
G. S. Smith 1
SANDHURST.
C. Pohl 6
A. Bruhn ... 4
A. Fuchs .. 3
A. Fischer 3
F. K. Shaw 1
F. Grosse 3
W. Greiffenhagen 2
Exhibits, 59.
Exhibitors, 29;
WINES
FOR
PHILADELPHIA
FOR PHILADELPHIA.
UNDERMENTIONED
WINES
SHIPPED
c>
£
I
1
Ps
<D
P
bo .
O o
0)
O
a?
|f *
a ]2
S
Locality and District.
Name of Wine.
T 3
C
0
1
Name of Exhibitor.
Riesling, large & small 1870 1
Do. 1869 1
1328 Maplestone, Charles
626 Ivanhoe Lodge
601 St. Hubert’s
603 Do.
1335 Castella, Hubert de
Chasselas 1871 1
1337 Do.
Do. 1869 I
1336 Do.
602 Do.
604 Sunbury t
605 Do.
611 Berwick ...
609 Strathfieldsaye
607 Do,
1323 Johnston, J. S.
Riesling 1871 1
Do. 1871 jl
1341 Brach6, —
1318 Schmitt, Franz
Do. 1872 1
Verdeilho «. ... 1873 1
1393 Grosse, Fredk.
1397 Fischer, August
1287 Vettler, John
1289 Do.
UCiiliU ••• tUI u a
Do. 1874 1
639 Echuca ...
640 Do.
621 Bendigo ...
606 Tabilk
618 Strathfieldsaye
Hermitage 1870 1
Grenache 1870 1
Carbinet 1873 1
1366 Fuchs, A. W.
Hermitage 1873 1
Do. 1871 1
1306 Egli, F.
1364 Pohl, Carl
1271 Mellon, Francis
615 Dunolly,
628 Sunbury
Castlmne
1871 1
1871 1
1322 Francis, Charles
33


Philadelphia— continued.
Wines
6
A
I
Ph
I .
°S
r
o
Name of Exhibitor.
Locality and District.
Name of .Wine.
1387 Bruhn, A. •
1388 Do.
1300 Ritchie, .
1248 Best, Joseph.
1326 Johnston, J. S.
1394 Grosse, Fredk.
1352 Smith, G. S.
1372 Greiffenhagen, W. ..
1357 Fuchs, A. W.
1269 Crippa, Fabrizzio
1298 Weber, Jacob
1366 Pohl, Carl ...
1266 Evans, Henry
Francis, Charles
1327 Maplestone, Charles
1342 Snowden, E. G.
1361 Pohl, Carl
1355 Fuchs, Adolph W. ..
1285 Vettler, John
1385 Bruhn, A
1384 Do
1264 Docker, F. G. & J. B,
1363 Pohl, Carl
1292 Vettler, John
1282 Jung, Otto
1375 Greiffenhagen, W. ..
1272 Mellon, Francis
1365 Pohl, Carl
1399 Fischer, August
1296 Deppeler, Jacob
1369 Pohl, Carl
1281 Jung, Otto ...
1324 Johnston, J. S.
1325 Do.
Schroeder, E.
1331 Maplestone, Charles
1392 Grosse, Fredk,
1390 Shaw, F. R.
1275 Botten, Wm.
1396 Fischer, August
1260 Trouette & B lam pied
612 Strathfieldsaye
613 Do.
627 Murgheboluc,Gelg.
608 Great Western ...
600 Sunbury
610 Strathfieldsaye ...
614 Wahgunyah, Mury.
633 Strathfieldsaye ...
635 Bendigo
634 Hepburn, Castlme.
637 Geelong
619 Strathfieldsaye ...
630 Beech worth
617 Sunbury ...
622 Ivanhoe Lodge
645 Boroondara
623 Strathfieldsaye
636 Bendigo ...
638 Bchuca ...
631 Strathfieldsaye
632 Do.
643 Wangaratta, Bech
625 Strathfieldsaye ..
642 Echuca
646 Castlemaine
644 Strathfieldsaye
616 Dunolly ...
624 Strathfieldsaye
629 Do.
620 Gheringhap, Geelg.
641 Strathfieldsaye ...
647 Castlemaine
648 Craiglee, Sunbury
649 Do,
660 Castlemaine
6002 Ivanhoe, Heidelbg.
6003 Toorongo, Bendigo
6004 Goornong, Sandhst.
6005 Loddon R., Castlm.
6020 Strathfieldsaye ...
6019 Great W., Ararat
Do. do.
Do. do.
* Special.
Carbinet & Hermitage 1873 1
Hermitage 1874 1
Do. 1874 1
Do. 1871 1
Do. 1869 1
Do. ... ... 1873 1
Muscatel 1869 1
Riesling 1871 1
Hermitage 1873 1
Do. 1871 1
Do. 1874 1
Do. 1874 1
Shiraz 1872 1
Gouais 1870
Riesling, large & small 1872
Riesling do. ... 1871
Yerdeilho 1874
Do. 1873
D,i, 1872
Do. 1872
Mataro 1874
Shiraz 1869
Hermitage 1870
Carbinet Sauvignon ... 1871
Hermitage * 1871
Do. 1872
Pineau ... ... 1872
Hermitage 1873
Do. 1874
Do. 1874
Carbinet & Hermitage 1868 1
Roussette 1871 1
Riesling 1872
Yerdeilho 1871
Riesling 1870
Hermitage & Carbinet 1870
Carbinet 1873
Hermitage 1871 1
Burgundy 1869
Yerdeilho 1873 1
Riesling 1874
1871 1
1871 -
Burgundy
Mixed Claret.
*7i a A
n *t*o
