

PRIZE ESSAY.
AN ESSAY
SCAB IN SHE E P :
CAUSES, SYMPTOMS, PATHOLOGY ; BEST MEANS OF
TREATMENT; AND PRACTICAL HINTS FOR ITS
AVOIDANCE AND EXTERMINATION, &c.
EDWARD M. CURR,
CHIEF INSPECTOR OF SHEER.
«
REPRINTED BY ORDER OF THE GOVERNMENT OF TASMANIA.
Cass mania:
JAMES BARNARD, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, HOBART TOWN.
1 8 70.
PRICE SIXPENCE.




PRIZE ESSAY.
AN ESSAY
SCAB IN SHEEP:
CAUSES, SYMPTOMS, PATHOLOGY; BEST MEANS OF
TREATMENT; AND PRACTICAL HINTS FOR ITS
AVOIDANCE AND EXTERMINATION, &c.
EDWARD M. CURE,
CHIEF INSPECTOR OF SHEEP.
REPRINTED BY ORDER OF THE GOVERNMENT OF TASMANIA.
JAMES BARNARD, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, HOBART TOWN.
1 8 70.




i55-/rg«rr
' K-5-77
It has been announced in the Assembly by Mr.
Snodgrass, Chairman of the Board appointed to
ADJUDICATE ON THE ESSAYS SENT IN TO COMPETE FOR
THE PREMIUMS VOTED SOME MONTHS SINCE, THAT THE
SUM OF £l5O HAS BEEN AWARDED TO Mr, CuRR,
Chief Inspector of Sheep, for the best Essay on
Scab.— Argus.




AN ESSAY ON SCAB.
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
It is hard to believe that the prosperity of a people, or
even of an important section of a community, can be
materially affected by the ravages of a little parasite, of a
frame so minute as to be scarcely visible to the naked eye;
or that the results of the study of the nature, constitution,
antipathies, or economy of an insect, which could readily
pass through the eye of a small needle, might materially
affect the interests of a class of proprietors whose annual
exports cram the ribs of many huge vessels.
It is curious to remember that the little parasite of
which I speak (as the investigators of his doings say)
should have attracted the attention of Celsus and of
Aristotle, and that his ravages, which were sung by Virgil,
should be under the ban of the Legislature of Old Eng-
land, as well as of Young Australia.
Perhaps amongst no energetic mercantile people exists
there a tax, levied by ill-thrift, equal to that in which the
wool-growers of Victoria have until lately been amerced
by the disease known as scab in sheep. To point out
elsewhere a loss of equal magnitude, so patiently, so
apathetically, I had almost said so cheerfully borne, and
yet comparatively so easy of cure, would perhaps be diffi-
cult. To find in any other country a class which could
support such a pecuniary loss, and yet thrive, and con-
tinue even to be the envy of a community itself prosperous
beyond example, would, I believe, be impossible; whilst
to instance any other kingdom, or colony out of Australia,
which can point to a class, and that numerically a small
one, whose annual loss from one source alone amounted
to something like one-seventh of the whole revenue of such
colony, would I believe, puzzle those who are best ac-
quainted with the mercantile statistics and anomalies of
nations.


That such loss has really been consequent on scab in
sheep I had long suspected, and careful enquiries into the
matter have confirmed me in my opinion by the discovery
that it is participated in by many persons who have had
good opportunities of judging of the matter. As far as
can be gathered from data necessarily imperfect, the
depreciated value of sheep infected with scab, and the loss
consequent on that disease, seems to be recognised more
or less fully, not merely by owners of stock and traffickers
in stations, but by that section also of the commercial
public who are in the habit of estimating these sorts of
properties as securities for money loans, whose judgments
of the matter will probably be both coolly formed and
tolerably correct. I now allude not only to those through
whose hands the sales of such properties are continually
passing (who frequently knowing little of the management
of stock are still learned in its results), but to bankers,
merchants, wool-brokers, and money-lenders, whose esti-
mates of the relative value of clean and scabby sheep may
easily be gauged by the unequal cash advances they are
in the habit of making upon them.
The loss which I attribute to scab, I shall endeavour in
the next chapter to substantiate. If I only succeed in
showing that my estimate approximates to truth, I shall
still have said enough to draw attention to a subject of
vast importance to Victoria.
THE ANNUAL LOSS TO VICTORIA ARISING
FROM SCAB IN SHEEP.
Before entering on the topics which form the immediate
subjects of this Essay, I wish to say a few words of what
has been until lately the annual cost of scab to Victoria—a
cost which appears to the writer so great, as to entitle it to
the fullest consideration of our legislators and of the public
generally. Nor is this a subject about which it is un-
necessary to remind people. Up to this moment indeed,
many persons would seem to be under a hazy impression,
that if any loss does actually arise from scab, that it is one
which falls on sheep-owners alone, who are well able to
bear it, and is no concern of anyone’s but the immediate
sufferer’s. By those who noticed our latest legislation on


this head, I think I shall be borne out in asserting that
there is ample ground for these remarks. On that occasion
might have been seen the little interest that was felt in a
Bill for the Prevention of Scab in Victoria ; how its intro-
duction was postponed to the fag end of a long session ;
how its consideration was continually made to give way to
the discussion of such matters as the amount of salary to
be paid to a curator of intestate estates, or other subjects
of comparatively little real moment; how when it did
come on for discussion, it was read to all but empty
benches; how the weary legislator, sick of argument and
indifferent to the subject on hand, permitted interested
persons to mould matters in a way suited perhaps, at the
moment, to their own particular circumstances, but cer-
tainly adverse to the real interests of dock-owners in
general, little dreaming of the importance of a measure
which was being so languidly discussed and so smoothly
disposed of. To judge indeed by the scant attention this
matter met with in the past sessions, one might be induced
to suppose that the desire for a Scab Act, good or bad,
was estimated, rather than anything of importance, as a
piece of dilettanteism on the part of certain squeamish
sheep-owners, who having in due process grown dis-
gustingly rich, had become smitten with a whimsical
desire to have what they called “ clean sheep”—a fanciful
caprice ! but one sufficiently harmless for a paternal legis-
lature to make up its mind to smile upon and indulge.
It is to disabuse the reader, not fully conversant with
the pastoral concerns of the colony, of any such ideas, and
to try to convince him that scab is not only an evil of such
magnitude that it must intimately affect the well-being of
the whole community, but is an evil which Victoria, rich
as she is, is not rich enough prudently to disregard, that I
now propose to place before him the results of the enquiries
I have taken some trouble to make on this subject. To
this end, I have made it my business to consult all sorts of
persons who would be likely to assist me in my investiga-
tions, and have now before me letters on this head from
wool-brokers, stock-agents, bankers, and persons in the
habit of lending money on sheep-station security.
Concerning credit given by the banks to sheep-owners,
I am informed that the owner of a scabby flock is always


under serious disadvantage, and can frequently command
only one half the accommodation which would be obtain-
able were his sheep clean.
From stock-agents, on the other hand, I learn that clean
store-sheep are usually saleable at 2s. per head in advance
of what can be obtained for sheep apparently clean even,
hut to which suspicion of scab attaches. With respect to
this reduction of 2s. per head in price, it is also very
important to remember, that it does not represent what,
at the first glance, it would appear to do ; viz., the differ-
ence in value between clean and scabby store-sheep, but
only such difference, less ths risk of injection whilst in pro-
cess of removal—a risk which of late years has unfor-
tunately been very considerable. Stock-agents will also
tell you that there is no worse investment for money than
a station of scabby sheep.
With respect to the difference in value between wool
from a clean and from a scabby sheep, several of the wool-
brokers of Melbourne, whom I have consulted, seem on
the whole to be of opinion that it amounts to about Id.
per fleece.
With individuals who lend money on station security,
the scab seems to act as a more decided drawback than it
does in the case of either banker or wool-broker. The
Victorian capitalist, who does more perhaps than anyone
else in this business, has given it as his estimate of the
desirability of these two sorts of property, that he would
rather own, or lend his money on, say, 10,000 clean sheep
than on 30,000 scabby sheep.
Partly from this data, and partly from my own expe-
rience, I have calculated the yearly cost of scab in Vic-
toria in the years just prior to the late Scab Act coming
into force, in the following way: —In the first place, I
estimate that the number of sheep at that time infected
amounted to five millions, in which number I include all
such sheep as were being continually dressed by their
owners as a precaution against scab, the outlay on them
being very much the same as if they were scabby To
this the reader may add the consideration, that but for the
timely check the scab received from Mr. Mollison’s Act,
the whole of the eight millions of sheep, instead of
five millions, would shortly have had to form the basis of


1846
1850
6,032,783 „
1863
7,974,198 „
any calculations made on this head. To keep these sheep
in profitable condition, to enable them to bring full fleeces
to the shearing-shed, to insure from them a tolerable
increase, and the fitness of a fair proportion of them for
the butcher, a certain dipping plant, together with a
periodical outlay in dressing stuff and labor, were indis-
pensably necessary. From such dressings unavoidably
arOse injuries to the sheep itself, and to its fleece, which I
have also taken into consideration. And lastly, to this
disease I have charged the total loss of our export of
sheep to Central and Northern Australia, which is now
monopolized, to our exclusion, by the flock-masters of
South Australia, New South Wales, and Queensland.
By some gentlemen well calculated to form an opinion on
this subject, it is estimated that we should export yearly,
were it not for the scab, half a million of breeding sheep
and upwards. I have contented myself with putting them
down at a smaller number. In reducing this loss to
figures, I must beg of the reader to bear it in mind, that
the increase of sheep is mainly dependent on, and found
to be in proportion to, the supply of food with which they
are furnished, and may be said to be in inverse ratio to
the number of sheep depastured on each square mile of
country. This principle is so well known to regulate the
increase of all animals, man himself included, as scarcely
to require any comment. Hence I argue, that if Victoria
exported yearly 500,000 sheep, that such outgoing would
not permanently reduce the numbers of her flocks; but
that a lowered rate of mortality and a higher percentage
of lambs, together with an increased impetus given to
breeding, would cover such export. In conformity with
this loss of increase, we find that the rate of augmentation
in sheep in Victoria has of late years very much declined
from what it once was.
Thus there were in Victoria in
so that in the four years between 1846-50, our flocks
more than doubled themselves, we, at that time, having a
small population, and a very large hailing being carried on
in the country ; whilst in the thirteen years following,


Yearly expenditure for dressing 5,000,000 sheep,
at 6c?. per head, to insure unbroken fleeces
Deaths consequent on dressing, at two per cent.,
on 5,000,000 of sheep—sheep valued at 10s. per
head
£
125.000
50,000
125.000
Yearly loss on 5,000,000 fleeces, at 6d. per fleece
Loss on 80,000 Iambs, consequent on dressing-
value of iambs at shearing estimated at 3s. per
head
12,000
Loss of export of rams to Riverina and Queens-
land
10,000
Loss of export of 360,000 ewes yearly to the
neighbouring colonies, at 10s. per head
180,000
with a very much increased population it is true, but also
with a complete cessation from boiling down and an
enormous import of sheep, our flocks have not advanced
in numbers one third. In South Australia, the same law
is being exemplified. There, the pasturage is far in
excess of the stock, and that colony is increasing largely
its numbers of sheep, though exporting heavily. One
telegram in December last, for instance, mentions 250,000
sheep having left that colony for New South Wales.
Bearing this fact in mind, I have set down our loss of
export of sheep, as a complete loss of the value of the
sheep, which we should annually send across the Murray,
were it not for scab. In view of these considerations, I
have assessed the loss which has been suffered by Victoria,
as the result of scab in sheep, at half a million sterling
yearly. The items are as follows :
£502,000
This is the writer’s estimate of what has been for some
years the annual loss resulting from scab to the sheep-
owners of Victoria. As to what the present loss from the
same cause may be, it is (whilst certainly very considerable)
neither very easy nor very essential to our purpose to
estimate ; for it must be borne in mind, that we must
either set to work entirely to eradicate the scab from
or constantly keep in force an inefficient and
irksome penal law, or, as the only alternative, forego all
hope of an export of sheep, and consent to have the
whole of our flocks given up to the ravages of the scab
insect.


Reverting to the question of the cost of scab, my esti-
mate of it, if correct, represents, on the whole of our
population of 580,000 souls, a tax of about 1 Is. per head,
or something more than one seventh of what each on an
average contributes to the general revenue of this country.
Whilst at home, the British ratepayer is heavily taxed at
£2 95. per head for the general revenue, we seem content
to throw away 17s. per head on the mismanagement of
one of our industries alone.
These facts will, I believe, bear out the assertions made
in my introductory pages, and convince the reader that
few subjects of a pecuniary nature of importance equal to
this have come before our legislators, and none which, in
proportion to its magnitude, has met with such scant
attention. Whilst we have been wrangling over the cost
of our defences, deferring their completion from year to
year, we have been letting slip through our fingers
annually a sum which would have defrayed their cost.
We talk of new industries (whilst we mismanage those
which we have) and the employment of labor ! What
might we not have effected in producing raw silk, for
instance, as well as wool, had our yearly wasted half-
million been devoted to. such a purpose, transmuting our
scab acari into silk-worms ? And what labor would not
such an industry absorb ? But these subjects attract little
attention. If the remuneration of the services of a curator
of intestate estates comes to be discussed in our Assembly,
and the question is raised as to whether that gentleman
should be paid £4OO or £BOO per annum, the subject may
be found of interest enduring enough to hang speeches on
for a couple of nights or so. Then our representatives
will allow their eloquence to flow most freely ; whilst on
the next evening, when the Scab Act comes to be amended,
no notice seems to be taken of the matter, and the yearly
half million is left to take care of itself. Your squatter is
apparently a sort of pastoral cat; toss him up as you like,
he is pretty sure to light on his feet !
To this question of the cost of scab it seems to me more
necessary to draw the attention of the public than to any-
thing else connected with the subject. It would be of
little use that we should have pursued to exhaustion all
those enquiries connected with that disease in which the


microscope can aid us ; that we had learned to discriminate
between the sexes of the parasite; that we had counted its
eggs, ascertained where they are deposited, and fixed the
time necessary for their incubation; that our entomological
enquiries on the subject were in fact complete. It would,
I say, be of small use that all such facts have been elicited,
and would amount after all to little more than scientific
trifling, a barren knowledge bearing no fruit, if we should
continue to disregard what is obvious and important—that
which it requires no microscope to make plain, no deep
study of political economy to appreciate; if we fail to
recognise the great loss we annually sustain, —that our
dock-masters are forfeiting their share in the further
colonization of this continent, —that, in this respect at
least, the leading colony of Australia is fast yielding its
place and falling into the back ground.
THE CAUSES, SYMPTOMS, AND PATHOLOGY
OF SCAB.
The disease called Scab in Sheep is the result of the
ravages of a parasitical insect, of the order of Acarina, and
of the family of Acaridae ; an Acarus Scabici, or true itch-
mite. By German naturalists, he is spoken of as the
Sarcoptes ovis, and in Victoria is familiarly called the Scab
Acarus or Scab Insect. The most elaborate observations
and examinations of this parasite were made by Walz in
1810, and more recently by Hertwig. The first know-
ledge however that the scab and other congenerous com-
plaints were caused by an insect may probably be referred
to a very early date, for I believe that Aristotle remarks
on this subject, that the ass, unlike several other animals,
is subject neither to mites nor ticks. Walz’s description of
the Scab Acarus is as follows :
“If one or more female acari are placed on the wool of a sound
sheep, they quickly travel to the root of it, and bury themselves in
the skin, the places at which they penetrated being only dis-
tinguished by minute red spots, about the size of the point of a pin.
On the tenth or twelfth day, a little swelling may be detected with
the finger, and the changes its color to a greenish-blue tint.
The pustule is now rapidly formed, and about the sixteenth day
breaks, and the mothers again appear with the little ones attached


to their feet, and covered with a portion of the shell from which
they have emerged. These little ones immediately set to work, and
penetrate the neighboring skin, burying themselves beneath it,
where they find their proper nourishment, and grow and propagate
until the poor animal has myriads of them to prey on and torment
it—every litter of the parasites comprising from 8 to 15 little ones.”
On the same subject, Kiichenmeister, in his Manual of
Parasites, says, vol. 2, page 56 :
“The Sarcoptes ovis, first correctly described by Walz, is similar
to the horse-mite, but smaller (0, 16-0-22" in length, and 0, 16-0-17"
in breadth), and moderately hard. The male is roundish, the female
more oval. Each of the external posterior feet has two long bristles;
the fourth pair of feet in the male is rudimentary. The horny frame-
work of the feet is reddish-brown. They bore passages beneath the
epidermis, from which the little hexapod brood, which grows
quickly, and becomes octopod, issues in about from eleven to six-
teen days. This mite has been seen but rarely on man. Hertwig’s
experiments in inoculation gave no results.”
In looking for scab, it is necessary to know its symptoms.
The earliest noticeable sign of the scab is a slight dis-
turbance of the wool, resulting from biting on the part of
the sheep, or from scratching or rubbing, according to the
position of the itching spot. On opening the wool so dis-
turbed, if the acarus has been there as long as thirty hours,
there will be seen on the skin a spot of a slightly red or
flushed color, of about the size of a sixpence. On the
centre of this spot may be noticed, in some instances, a
pimcture, such as might be made by the point of a needle,
or a few scattered faint red lines of about the eighth of an
inch in length. After forty hours, if several insects are
together, this spot loses its bright color, and becomes livid
in its look, assuming at times a greenish aspect.
With a view to observing the first symptoms of scab, I
assisted at some experiments made on a six-months’ old
unshorn clean lamb, watching attentively what was to be
seen, and making notes of the results. The matter was
proceeded with in this way : —After satisfying ourselves that
the lamb was free from scab, a patch of wool on its back, of
about the size of one’s hand, was shorn round, and left as
an isolated tuft. Into the centre of this tuft, and down on
the skin, were placed with a pin, in one case eight (for the
experiment was made several times with similar results), in
another ten, and in another sixteen live and active acari,


fresh from the back of an infected sheep. This took place
about mid-day, in the month of October, the weather
being dry and genial. On the following day, at the same
hour, it was at once noticeable that the lamb, in each case,
had bitten, scratched with his foot, or rubbed the spot
where the acari had been deposited. On examining the
skin under the isolated tuft of wool, a faint red spot, of
about the size of a sixpence, was discovered, which, in
forty hours from the first insertion of the acarus, became
somewhat livid and greenish in appearance. This spot was
just where the acari had been placed. On the fourth day,
there was a considerable deposit of purulent inodorous
matter at the roots of the wool where the spot had been,
and a decided scab had been formed.
Later in the course of these experiments, it was notice-
able, that it was in warm and showery weather that the
disease made most progress, that on cold and wet days it
went steadily ahead, and that whilst the weather was dry
and hot it apparently did little more than hold its own.
These are the first stages of scab. Its after progress is
according to circumstances, depending very much on the
age and condition of the animal infected, the length of its
fleece, and the state of the weather. The conditions most
favorable to its progress are, that the sheep infected should
be young, in low condition, with full fleeces, with the
weather moist and warm. At times, the infection spreads
wildly around on the animal from the spot where it was
first established; the wool being gradually pulled off with
the mouth, scratched with the foot, or rubbed off, leaving
the spot bare. These bare patches are in a great measure
deserted by the acari, which will generally be found on
the moist edges of the devastated spot. In places where
the disease has passed over in this way, the skin will be
seen to be dry, scurfy, and somewhat thickened, whilst the
fleece generally will be dry, harsh, irregular, and brittle.
In other cases, there seems to be a good deal of inflamma-
tion of the skin attendant on this disease ; the acari, in
such cases, do not appear to spread evenly onwards leaving
a deserted patch behind them as just described, but the
skin subjected to their attack becomes thickened and as
inflexible as a board, pustules containing a thick greenish
matter being frequently plentiful. This description of scab


is chiefly prevalent in localities where the soil is rich and
damp and grass abundant, and after it has been neglected
for a considerable time. It is noticeable that on dry, salt-
bush plains an absence of moisture and of matter, as
attendants on scab, have been observed.
Though good condition in the sheep affords no pro-
tection from scab, yet the acarus seems not only to pro-
duce poverty, but to flourish in connection with it. Thus
on sheep infected with scab, the disease increases in a
markedly rapid manner, when the flock is exposed to want
of food, bad yards, ill-usage at the hands of the shepherd,
or to any other treatment which produces poverty. On
the other hand, the scab acarus is a parasite whose presence
has never been known to be the result of privation or
poverty. Sheep have constantly been exposed to poverty
and misery of every description for long periods, and yet
when there has not been contact with scabby sheep, the
disease has, as far as is known, always failed to show itself.
It is also noticeable that certain parts of the sheep are
more subject to the attacks of the scab insect than others ;
thus scab is rarely seen on the face, head, thighs, udder,
lower leg, or belly of the animal. This circumstance is
probably attributable to dislike, on the part of the parasites,
to light and to cold—to light, in the case of the udder,
face, and inside of the thighs, and to cold, with respect to
the lower leg, belly, and outside of the thighs, these parts
of the animal being much exposed to cold when lying
down. The dislike of the acarus to a bright light is very
apparent; placed on the reflector of a microscope, for
instance, it exhibits uneasiness and restlessness, often re-
fusing to remain for a moment still; and even on the
palm of one’s hand, he will wander about, as I have
observed, and creep under a bit of paper, if he can find
it or under anything else which will shield him from the
light.
On searching for the scab insect, he will most easily be
found on the lower end of the wool plucked from the
moist edges of the sores, resulting from his attacks ; this
you may either shake over a sheet of paper, examining
the little white bodies which fall from it, or cut oft* its
damp roots, and spread them for examination on the
reflector of a microscope. If the weather be cold, the


exposure of the wool for a short time to a gentle warmth,
as in the palm of your hand, or on a mantelpiece over a
tire, will put the acari in motion, and facilitate their
detection ; at other times, a puff or two of tobacco smoke
will also cause them to move.
When the young acarus first emerges from the skin, he
is, as we have seen, hexapod, or six-footed, and that in a
few days he becomes octopod. Of the Sarcoptes ovis
there appears to be no varieties, as they have been found
to exhibit precisely the same appearance in every country
in which they have been examined.
In looking at plates and drawings of the various itch-
mites, the first point which strikes one is the great similarity
existing between them ; those of the ox, horse, the human
subject, and others being very similar in appearance to the
scab insect of the sheep, differing chiefly in size. In
examining the scab insect itself with the naked eye, one
sees a little object of a dull white color, and roundish in
form, which has somewhat the appearance of a minute
particle of boiled rice ; some portion of its extremities
appears dark, and it gives the impression of being a soft
substance. If placed upon the hand, or upon a bit of
glass, it will on some occasions refuse to move, at other
times it can be seen to travel across the irregularities of
the skin, accomplishing an inch of distance in some three
or four minutes. Whilst one watches its progression, it
seems hard to believe that so minute and fragile-looking a
creature can injure so robust an animal as the sheep.
When however this semi-pellucid speck is observed with
the aid of a moderately powerful microscope, a decided
change is worked in one’s ideas, and the difficulty of
realising his capabilities for mischief disappears. This
shapeless atom then becomes to our perceptions a thing of
well-defined proportions. It is then seen, that in relation
to his size, he is compact and strong of frame ; that his
limbs are active, and his movements decided, well con-
trolled, and vigorous. He is like a crab, and seems
clothed in a shell, or in armour. After a fashion, he is
hirsute, and his look is truculent. Though doubtless of a
very low organization, he seems nevertheless, when mag-
nified, to be highly finished in every part. His perceptions
(whatever sense they may proceed from) appear sufficient


for his wants, and it is noticeable that he sagaciously
av oids obstacles in his road, or resolutely surmounts them ;
Watchin S un(^er the microscope, amongst the
difficulties which beset his path, his instinct seems not only
equal to his emergencies, but scarcely inferior to that of
the ant or beetle. Turning again to look at him with the
naked eye, one fails to realize that an instinct so developed
can have its place in the brain of so tiny an animalcule,
lo the touch, he is somewhat hard, and when squeezed
between the nails, his little frame offers a perceptible
resistance to the pressure.
It is very difficult to say how long the acarus will live
when removed from the sheep, and left on logs, trees, or
pieces of sheepskin. My impression is, that under circum-
stances the most favorable to him, that is, on wool in moist
and warm weather, he would not survive more than forty
days separation from his proper host. A friend of mine
in October last put some acari on wool into a bottle, and
on examining them twenty-two days afterwards, he found
them still alive.
We now come to consider the very important question
as to whether the scab is ever the result of what is termed
spontaneous or equivocal generation, or whether it proceeds
from contact alone. On this subject, A r ouatt says :
“ f'.h® sca -b is often produced by certain exciting causes, as neglect
or mismanagement, as well as conveyed by contagion. In this
respect, it only follows the law by which many other diseases are
governed. W orms will multiply in the intestinal canal, when they
have once begun to have existence there. The fluke will fill every
biliary vessel, when the existence of the rot has established it in the
liver; and the acarus of scab will continue in its cutaneous or sub-
cutaneous dwelling when it has once been placed there; but the
question yet remains unanswered, how came they first to have
existence, for they have not been observed in anv other form or
state ?” J
A few lines further on the same author says :
In like manner, the acarus of scab may be called into existence
by the derangement which our neglect, or unavoidable accidents or
disease, may have made in the skin of the sheep. Scab may be,
and is, of spontaneous origin, as well as the product of contagion ;
and the acarus having sprung into life within the pores of the skin,
obeys the Jaw of all living beings as to its after existence and mul-
tiplication.”
Now all this appears to me very loose and unworthy of
reliance ; for, in the first place, this writer tells us “ 2 hat


the scab is often produced by certain exciting causes .”
Then we hear, “ The question still remains unanswered, how
they first came into existence and finally we are expected
to believe that “ The scab may be, and is, of spontaneous
origin.” In support of these rambling statements are
produced neither instances nor arguments, and of course
the reader will estimate such unsupported assertions at
whatever he may consider them worth. For my part, I
hold them to be of no value whatever.*'
On this subject of the spontaneous generation of scab,
Professor Gamgee is, I believe, of opinion (for I have not
been able to obtain a copy of his work) that it results
from contagion alone.
But however undecidedly Youatt, Gamgee, and others
may have expressed themselves on this head, it is stated by
some sheep-owners in Victoria, roundly enough, that scab
is occasionally the result of spontaneous generation, and
that they know instances of it. As far as my experience
of sheep has gone in this and the neighboring colonies
during five and twenty years, I must acknowledge I have
never been able to hear of scab having appeared in flocks
under circumstances which could not be accounted for
without having recourse to the hypothesis of spontaneous
generation. But on this subject the very loosest ideas
obtain; and to such of my readers as interest themselves
in the matter, I would recommend the perusal of Carl
Theodor von Siebold’s remarks in his opening chapter on
tape and cystic worms, in which he makes some very
pertinent reflections on the whole subject of equivocal
generation.
To finish with this subject then. It is clear that the
scab could not originally, and in the first instance, have
been the result of contact; but that it must either have
been created with the sheep, or have resulted from some
other principle or process of nature. My ideas lead me to
the latter belief, and to the probability of this disease being
eventually traced to some other form of living thing, as
* In the United States it (scab) is comparatively little known, and, so far
as lam able to learn, never originates spontaneously. H. S. Randall.
Practical Shepherd, page 339.
Mr Robert Smith, in his Prize Essay, declares that scab “is never
observed or known to arise spontaneously in a flock” in England. Ibid.,
342.


lias already happened in the cases of other parasites. Be
this as it may, it will remove all reasonable fears of the
frequent occurrence of spontaneous generation of scab by
calling to mind that this question may be considered to
ha\ e been set at rest for all practical purposes by the well-
known and undeniable results of sheep-farming in New
South Wales. Ihere, upon large tracts of country, sub-
ject to many varieties of climate, feed, and other circum-
stances, millions of sheep have been depastured for forty
years, without the occurrence of scab in any one instance
until it was imported from this colony. New Zealand and
Queensland verify the same fact. Hence we may conclude
that the spontaneous generation of scab, if possible, can
only, at all events, be of the rarest occurrence, and that its
consideration may be safely left to the man of science,
postponing the discussion of “ How does spontaneous gener-
ation take place ?" until it be proved that spontaneous
generation has actually occurred.
The transfer of the scab acarus to other animals has
been tried without any permanent results, the parasite
only living for a short time and leaving no progeny to
take his place.* But the great feature which distinguishes
the Sarcoptes ovis from all other itch-mites is the fatal
speed and certainty with which he spreads himself when
once introduced, through a whole flock of sheep, however
numerous it may be. Hie Sarcoptes equi, Sarcoptes boves,
canis, catorum, and others, seem to confine themselves to
hosts in ill-health, whilst w T ith the scab insect the reverse
is the case. Whatever may be the state of the health and
condition of a flock of sheep into which one scabby one is
admitted, contagion (if not activelv checked) is sure to
ensue, and to progress with a rapidity that is wonderful to
contemplate. 1 his may be considered to be the distinctive
feature of the Sarcoptes ovis.
I will conclude this chapter with replying, as far as I
can, to the question proposed for discussion as part of this
essay; viz.—The possibility of determining, by inspection
of the entire or divided animal in slaughter-houses or
* Great pains have been taken by various scientific men to ascertain
whether the itch-mite of any class of animal will live and increase if trans-
ferred to any other species. The result elicited has been that the acari so
transferred live for a few days only, and then die without issue.


butchers’ shops, whether the animal has died or been
slaughtered ; whether it has been the subject of the above
or any other disease, and if so, what are the signs by which
such disease can be recognised,
“ Whether food prepared from such flesh should be con-
sumed, and whether it should be confiscated or destroyed ?”
With respect to this question, and to those parts of it
especially which I have italicised, the reader will perceive
that some mistake must have arisen in asking it, and that
it cannot have been anticipated that a writer on scab
should describe the signs by which all diseases can be
recognized after the animal has been slaughtered, far less
that he should discuss all the particulars which an answer
to the last part of the question would involve.
As far as the question bears upon scab, it may be stated
that Youatt is of opinion that the intestines, liver, and
spleen become, in various ways, disordered from scab. I
must say that except as the result of great poverty, long-
continued, resulting from scab, I have never noticed any
such symptoms; at the same time I have noticed a very
evident symptom of scab which seems to have escaped
that author, namely, that in skinning a scabby sheep the
skin seems to be attached to the body by little white
ligatures which makes the removal of the hide difficult, the
knife having constantly to be employed where the butcher,
in skinning clean sheep, only uses his hand, Except as
producing poverty, the scab does not affect the flesh of
the sheep considered as food for man.
THE BEST MANNER OF TREATING SCAB.
Sheep are cured of scab by ridding them of the scab
acari (and of its eggs), the result of whose presence on
that animal are those symptoms and consequences which
are known as “ scab.”
The conditions practically necessary to the cure of scab
are now so w r ell known, and have been so fully and fre-
quently tested, that without affirming that science holds
in store no better remedy for that disease, or that better
remedies are not at this moment known, it may at all
events be considered to be established that a cure may
safely be calculated on by any one who will take advan-


tage of what is well known on the subject. So full and
conclusive is the evidence on this head, that it may be
inferred, when success has not attended the use of the
remedy to which I allude, that some departure from the
attendant conditions of success has taken place ; in other
words, that the failure is referable, not to the inefficiency
of the dressing, but to its misapplication. Indeed the
knowledge of how to cure scab is not the real difficulty in
Victoria. The difficulty lies in persuading sheep-owners
to reduce their knowledge to practice ; to do themselves
what they would recommend with full confidence to
another ; to go to the expense which they know is neces-
sary to ensure a cure ; to condense into a few weeks, with
the object of cleaning their sheep, the outlay which has
habitually been spread over the year for the purpose of
merely keeping the wool on their backs; and to disregard
some exceptional cases in which fortunate results have
been obtained by means wffiich have, as a rule, been found
to be inadequate.
Before speaking of the ingredients which of late years
may be said to have constituted the favorite antidote to
scab in this Colony, it may be premised that scab has been
cured occasionally (in one instance to a very great extent)
by a great variety of remedies ; but experience has proved,
that in practice these remedies were found to be either too
costly, injurious to the sheep or its fleece, or to entail with
their em ployment some other drawback which has prevented
them from being generally used. It may also be noticed,
that from difficulty in application, ingredients with which
a score or two of sheep, badly scabbed, have been cured,
have failed of success when they have come to be applied
on a larger scale. Under these heads may be instanced
corrosive sublimate, sulphur, kerosene, arsenic, salt, fat
well rubbed into the skin (a remedy which has been a
good deal used in France), a decoction of green gum-tree
leaves, turpentine, and spirits of tar, to which may be
added a host of what have been termed scab specifics,
none of which, up to this moment, have realised the results
expected from them.
We now come to the cure of scab, as at present practised
by those wffio have had most success in the matter.
Without detaining the reader with a description of sheep-


yards, boilers, draining-yards, pumps, crutches, dipping-
tanks, &c. (which are in such general use that any one,
with very little trouble, may make himself more fully con-
versant with their nature and arrangement by actual
inspection than he would be likely to do from reading the
best description of them), it may be well to remark that
the ultimate success of dipping depends very much on the
appliances or plant with which it is to be carried out, since
there are conditions attached to the dipping, dependent on
such conveniences, as essential to a cure as the ingredients
themselves of which the dressing-stuff is composed ; and
that to neglect to provide proper conveniences is to
jeopardize the result of the dressing.
SHEEP-DRESSING COMPOUND.
In dressing sheep for scab, the approved custom is to
allow them to become thoroughly saturated wdiilst swim-
ming in some wash or dressing-stuff prepared for the pur-
pose. That which up to this time has proved the true
scab specific in Australia is an infusion in water of good,
sound manufactured tobacco, and sulphur, in the propor-
tions of one pound of tobacco and one pound of sulphur to
five gallons of water.
PREPARATION OF THE TOBACCO.
To fill the tank in which sheep are to be dipped with
hot dressing-stuff, a number of boilers, proportionate to the
size of the tank, will be requisite. Fill these with water
and boil it. Weigh out such a quantity of tobacco as will,
with the addition of five gallons of water to each pound of
tobacco, fill your tank ; so that if your tank requires 3000
gallons of water to fill it, you will have to weigh out 600
lbs. of tobacco to convert the 3000 gallons of water into
dressing-stuff of the strength needed.
As soon as the water in the boilers boils, and not before,
put in your tobacco (dividing it between your various
boilers in proportion to their size, as above explained) and
at once put on to each boiler a steam-tight lid ; then
remove the fires from under the boilers. In this state
leave the tobacco. When the tobacco has been six hours


in the water, draw off the liquid, leaving the tobacco still
in the boilers ; then fill up your boilers again with water,
and with their lids on simmer gently for two hours ; then
again draw off the liquid. Repeat this operation of filling
and boiling a third time, when the water used in the three
boilings should be in the proportion of five gallons to each
pound of tobacco originally put into the boilers. Then
mix in the tank or other reservoir the whole of these three
boilings. Your tobacco having been infused in hot water,
remaining in it six hours, and gently simmered for four
hours, no steam having been allowed to escape, may be con-
sidered to be exhausted of its curative properties, and can
be thrown away.
PREPARATION OF SULPHUR.
The weight of sulphur used in the concoction of sheep
dressing-stuff is, as I have said, one pound to five gallons
of water. Not less should be used ; a little more will not
be detrimental. It is prepared by being put into water,
either hot or cold, or into some tobacco water, and being
stirred until it becomes of consistency somewhat thinner
than pea soup. It may then be added to the tobacco
water already in the dip, and should then.be stirred until
thoroughly mixed with it.
In this dressing compound of tobacco and sulphur, the
first of these ingredients is the disinfectant or curative
agent —sulphur, the presence of which is apparently
noxious, whilst certainly not fatal, to the scab acarus , being
used as a preservative from re-infeetion when clean ground
is not obtainable, when the sheep comes in contact with
stumps, logs, or other bodies on which the acarus has been
left and is still alive. Long after dressing, the presence
of sulphur in the fleece is very noticeable, and each grain
of it, besides its own powerful odour, having been originally
saturated with the extract of tobacco, tends to preserve on
the skin the taste, smell, and poisonous qualities of that
principal ingredient long after they would otherwise have
disappeared.


THINGS TO BE BORNE IN MIND ABOUT
DRESSING.
Heat and The dressing-stuff having been prepared, particular
duration of / i • i . 11 7 . .
bath. care must be paid to the heat at which it is applied, as
well as to the duration of the bath. The heat of the dress-
ing should be, in winter, about 110 degrees Fahrenheit,
and in summer about 100 degrees; and should never,
under any circumstances, be allowed to fall to lower than
90 degrees Fahrenheit. The duration of the bath must
depend on the heat of the dressing-stuff. With the stuff
at 90 degrees, the sheep should be kept in for fully 60
seconds ;ifitbe up to 110 degrees, half of that time will
be sufficient.
twTdf'i/T 0f these d ip Pi n gs it is essential that there should be two,
ippinss- an interval of about 12 days being allowed to intervene
between them. Attempts to cure with one dressing have
been made times innumerable, and the results have been
in the proportion perhaps of one success to one hundred
failures.
spotting. Rams and sheep very badly scabbed, should be spotted
with a decoction of tobacco of double the strength recom-
mended above, two or three days before they are dipped,
or even one day, if longer cannot be managed. .
Whilst in the dip, the complete saturation of the head
sheep. and neck of the sheep must be attended to. Both the
head, neck, and back of each sheep should be well rubbed
with the crutches, which are always in use at dips,
boiler! Where large numbers of sheep are to be dipped, the
work may be much simplified, and the operation more
thoroughly performed, by heating the dip itself by means
of steam. Not only can the wash by this means be kept
easily at the temperature requisite, but it can also be pre-
pared much more quickly and accurately than where the
water is boiled in the usual manner.
thTdT in h ;iS been found that where sulphur was used in sheep
dressing, that from amongst the first two or three lots of
sheep which passed through the dip, several always died,
Ihis is said to arise from an accumulation of gas in the
dipping-stuff or wash, and is provided against by stirring
it up forcibly with poles for ten minutes or so, before the
first lot of sheep are thrown into it.


To prevent the subsidence of the sulphur in solution in sulphur fails
the dip, to which it has a strong tendency, it is necessary lhedip? m ° f
from time to time to keep it well stirred up from the
bottom, in effecting which a strong broom will be found
very useful.
The person in charge of the dip should see that each Person in
sheep comes out from its bath well saturated, and its fleece charge *
well charged with sulphur.
The efficiency of sheep-dressing is very much impaired t c / r of
by the sheep being exposed to a fall of rain within forty-
eight hours after the dressing.
Scab is more difficult of cure in a damp climate (and in climate,
damp weather) than in a dry climate.
After the discovery of scab in their flocks, sheep-owners Effects of
frequently defer dressing them, for long periods. Besides dressing,
the risk to neighbouring flocks resulting from this neglect,
and the chance of re-infection from these very neighbours
at a future day, such delay of itself enhances the difficulty
of a cure.
It is quite necessary that the conveyance of scab by
means of the clothes of shearers coming from stations shearers/
where scab exists, as well as on the pieces of rag wrapped
round the handles of their shears should be provided
against. Suspicious garments may be made safe by
boiling.
To put sheep after dressing into scabby yards or on to Scabby
scabby folding grounds, is to run a most unnecessary risk
of having them re-infected.
The remedy for scab, the most certain and speedy in its corrosive
, J .... ~ } J sublimate a
effects, and the most simple in its application, is corrosive certain cure
sublimate dissolved in water. The drawbacks to its em- lor scab ’
ployment are a heavy mortality often consequent on its
use, and its injurious effects on the health of those who
make the application of it. As it is very portable, the
weight required being fifteen times less than that of tobacco
and sulphur, it may be recommended on emergencies,
when great delay would take place before tobacco and
sulphur could be obtained. Victoria was formerly all but
cleared of scab by the application of this remedy. In
those days, the sheep being hand-dressed, they did not
swallow any of the liquid in which they were dipped, and
deaths were not, in consequence, excessive amongst them.


They were dressed twice. The strength of the stuff was
half an ounce of corrosive sublimate to one gallon of
water.
The sublimate was prepared by being reduced to a very
fine powder or dust, put into a tub or other wooden vessel,
together with some sal ammoniac, and boiling water poured
upon it, which was stirred until the sublimate was dis-
solved. It was then fit to be mixed with the proper
quantity of hot water.
PRACTICAL HINTS FOR THE AVOIDANCE OF
SCAB, AND THE EXTERMINATION OF THAT
DISEASE FROM THE COLONY.
In my last chapter, I touched upon some of the salient
points, the knowledge of which is indispensable to those
who are endeavouring to cure sheep infected with scab.
On these matters there exists amongst practical men but
little diversity of opinion. We now come to the con-
sideration of a subject about which there is much disagree-
ment ; of one which trenches on, and interferes with, the
freedom of action of the individual sheep-owner; of one
which involves restrictions and penalties ; the surveillance
and coercion of some for the benefit of the entire body of
sheep-owners ; in a word, of legislation concerning scab.
Before entering upon this subject, I will premise that it
is clearly sheer folly to expect that a great work, such as
is the curing of some millions of sheep of scab, can be
carried out, devise what methods you please, without
sheep-owners experiencing more or less inconvenience,
and even loss, whilst such cure is in process ; but that, on
the contrary, each must count upon and be prepared to
make some sacrifice ; and that if legislators are not dis-
posed to make such inconvenience compulsory, I can see
no ground for hoping that their enactments on this head
will lead to the desired results. And I would further
remark, that as the complete eradication of scab from
Victoria is the object of the Scab Act, that a law more
stringent than necessary, but which leads to successful
results, would be merciful compared to one, the mistaken
leniency of which should imperil success, or even con-


siderably delay it. Nor do the grounds on which a Scab
Act is called for differ from those which are the usual basis
of legislation ; for the very nature of legislation amongst
a free people infers compulsory interference with the pro-
perty or action of some for the benefit of all, and a Scab
Act proposes no more. To justify indeed the interference
of our legislators with flockowners, it is only necessary
that it should be understood—lst, That the loss annually
sustained by this colony resulting from scab is so great
as to be an object of national importance ; 2nd, That scab
is easy to get rid of, if re-infection be guarded against;
3rd, That systematically sustained and judiciously regu-
lated action amongst sheep-owners are conditions necessary
to a cure ; and 4th, That such action can only be the result
of legislation.
Before proposing hints for future action with respect to
scab, it may not be out of place to offer one or two
remarks on the results of our past legislation concerning
that disease. These results may be summed up in a few
words, viz., that the Scab Act of 1862, after two years'
trial , has proved a failure. As a whole indeed the sheep
of Victoria have unquestionably very much less disease
amongst them than they had in 1862; but, on the other
hand, the area of absolutely clean country can hardly be
said to have been extended. Hence it is clear that no very
marked progress has been made towards the eradication
of scab—the real object in view. No doubt indeed but
that the Scab Act has been indirectly very beneficial;
to it we owe heavier fleeces and an improvement in the
general condition of the wool of the country, and other
benefits ; but in its direct purpose —its proper aim—it has,
I repeat, utterly failed to effect anything of consequence.
Now this want of success I attribute entirely to the unsatis-
factory nature of the Scab Act itself; to the fact that it
was based on mistaken principles. To come to the
point, its failure, I think, may be traced to the following
defects :
1. The assumption which it embodied that sheep
were clean unless it could absolutely he sworn to
that they were scabby, utterly ignoring the fact
which it is more necessary to bear in mind than
anything else connected ivith the subject, viz.,


that between the moment of infection and the
period when such infection can be detected
several weeks may elapse.
2. The failure to recognise that it is necessary to
deal peremptorily in this matter with risks as
well as with certainties ; that in the absence of
ascertained scab, evident risks of scab should
be compulsorily confined to the flocks which
had been exposed to them.
3. That the penalties provided for the enforcement
of the Scab Act were so unskilfully adjusted
as to defeat its purposes, by enlisting sympathy
with offenders.
4. The attempt to clean the whole country at once,
and to accomplish at a blow, what can only be
effected by degrees.
With respect to these errors of principle in the Scab Act
of 1862, I will remark, commencing with the first, that it
is useless to hide the fact that the owner of sheep always
could, and in some instances (who shall say how many !)
did travel his sheep, knowing them to be scabby, when the
disease was so imperfectly developed as not to be readily
detected, the chances being manifold that his sheep were
not seen by an inspector whilst travelling, or if seen, that
the slight existing traces of disease were not recognized.
That in some cases, sheep, in which disease had become
apparent, were drafted out of a flock, the remainder of the
flock being driven to market, scattering infection broad-
cast on their road. That sheep were driven through
scabby country, and thence into clean neighborhoods ; that
to do these things there often existed a very great pecuniary
inducement; and that there was nothing in the Act by
which they could be prevented. In one case, it is true,
the necessity for obtaining a permit to travel sheep was
provided for; but the condition on which it was obtainable
was such as entirely to nullify its value as a precautionary
feature. For the reader must know that this permission
to travel sheep which had been dressed for scab within
four months, could be demanded of the inspector on pre-
senting a declaration, made before a magistrate by the
owner (owner, by the interpretation clause, meaning pro-
prietor, shepherd, overseer, or any one else in charge of


them) that to the best of his belief the sheep in question
were free from scab.
Now in the first place, it is a fact, that many of the
persons who made this declaration were quite ignorant of
the appearances of scab ; and secondly, it appears to be
open to grave question as to whether it is wise in this
manner to make any man sit in judgment on his own case,
especially where his pocket is so immediately affected; or
whether a law, which is grounded on the assumption that
sheep-owners (the declaration notwithstanding) will prefer
their neighbors’ interests to their own, is likely to be a
success. Let me bring the matter home to the reader.
A sheep-owner has £SOO or £SOOO worth of sheep
which his interest or necessities render it desirable that he
should sell. These sheep are, or he suspects they may be,
tainted with scab. To sell them, they must be removed.
If they are removed, several clean flocks through which
they will have to pass, may, I had almost said must, be
infected by them. The owner can remove them, with
little fear of their diseased condition being discovered, if he
will make the necessary declaration before a magistrate.
Here then it becomes the direct interest of the sheep-
owner to take a very favorable view of the state of his
flock ; either he must certainly suffer, or he must expose
his neighbors to the danger of a heavy loss. The matter
rests entirely with himself; —-W ill he make the declara-
tion, travel his sheep, introduce scab into the flocks of his
neighbors, and pocket his £SOOO, or of his own act submit
to a heavy loss, serious inconvenience, perhaps even to
ruin, as the consequence of his integrity ? Is it wise, at all
events, to put anyone in such a position ? Can favorable
results be anticipated from a law which embodies such
wild provisions ? On the contrary, I believe that it is
reasonable to conclude that no good can ever be accom-
plished in this matter until the power of deciding whetiter
sheep are clean or scabby is taken out of the hands of the
interested proprietor , and lodged with a competent and
impartial administrator of the law.
All this appears simple enough ; my excuse for dwelling
on it is, that heretofore we seem to have unaccountably
overlooked it. We appear to have forgotten that strug-
gling with a contagious disease, the first and most obvious


step should be to preserve the uncontaminated and con-
valescent from infection.
What I have adduced as the third great error of the
Scab Act of 1862 (the difficulty of obtaining convictions
under it) is so well known to all who have interested them-
selves in the matter, as scarcely to call for further comment;
for it is a matter of notoriety that such convictions were
seldom wrung from police benches, if at all, but with the
greatest reluctance on the part of the magistrates—often
expressed in open court—their lenient decisions always
commanding the sympathies of such portion of the public
as was not likely to suffer from them. In these cases, the
public heard of the discovery of scab in the flocks of Mr.
So-and-so by an inspector; that Mr. So-and-so was
likely to be fined £5OO. They were glad to hear, in due
time, that he had escaped being fined—glad, just as if he
had just escaped from fire or from drowning ; but what
never reached the ears of the public were the facts, that
half a dozen of Mr. So-and-so’s neighbours had, through
him, been losers of thousands of pounds; that through his
culpable negligence, the value of their properties had been
very materially depreciated; that Mr. So-and-so had been
an incubus on the well-being of a whole neighborhood ; and
that perhaps the ruin of one or two brother sheep-owners
could be traced to the negligence of the pitied Mr. So-
and-so, These facts never came before the public.
M ith respect to what I have held to be the fourth great
error of the Scab Act of 1862, it would appear clear, that
where so many are concerned, it is Utopian to expect
unanimity in action, equality of skill, or equal good
fortune in result; whilst as matters stood, nothing short of
these features could have led to success. Hence lam of
opinion that a system, to ensure success, must have that
sort of elasticity about it which will admit of, and be pre-
pared to deal with, frequent instances of failure, without
risk or damage to the whole undertaking.
Such are what I deem to have been the most objection-
able features in the Scab Act of 1862, and to be still
existent in the one now in force. It is therefore the
writer’s opinion that fresh legislation on this subject is
necessary, and into an amended Scab Act he would
recommend the introduction of the following features :


Ist. That legislation on this subject shall start
from a correct basis, assuming sheep to be
either clean, scabby, or doubtful, and provide
for these three states.
2nd. That the same proofs of sheep being clean
should be exacted, before they are held to be
clean by law, that any reasonable sheep-owner
would require, in his own case, before he
would accept them as clean.
3rd. That provision be made for dividing the
colony temporarily, for the purposes of the
Scab Act, into clean, scabby, and doubtful
districts.
4th. That under some circumstances, certain sheep
should be placed in quarantine.
6th. That the destruction of sheep under certain
circumstances be provided for.
6th. That dressing for scab be held to be a proof
of scab, and be made finable, when had
recource to without licence, except in cases
where otherwise provided.
7th. That as owners of small flocks of sheep are
but little affected by a fine of 2s. per head,
a special provision, say a minimum fine on
detection of scab of £lOO, be made to meet
their case.
Bth. That in some cases rewards should be given
for informations resulting in convictions.
And here the consideration suggests itself as to whether
the reduction of duty on sheep-tobacco would not be ad-
visable.
These are the principles , the introduction of which I
advocate in an amended Scab Act. I will now place
before the reader the leading features of a system in which
I have endeavoured to embody the principles I recom-
mend.
In the first place then, and to make the matter clear,
let us suppose for a moment the whole country, except
where otherwise provided , subject to the provisions of a
Scab Act, pretty much like the one now in force, and that
in the first instance we start with calling this the Scabby
District. Then let us assume that in certain neighbor-
hoods there exist several contiguous stations free from


scab. These stations collectively, if conveniently situated,
I would proclaim a clean district. I say if conveniently
situated , for my theory is (and I think that on attentive
consideration the reader will approve of it) that our
attempts to exterminate scab must commence on our
northern and eastern frontiers; and that to the large
extent of country already clean there, it should be our
aim to be continually adding, progressing gradually in the
direction of Melbourne. For to proclaim clean districts at
random all over the colony, and to invest them with the
security which I propose for clean districts, would have
the effect, if the law was not evaded, of shutting out from
market large numbers of sheep not yet cleaned, and so
produce much unnecessary hardship; because it is evi-
dently useless to proclaim a district clean, and allow sheep
of even doubtful character to pass through it: neither
would it be possible to give efficient protection to such
isolated districts without a very material increase in the
number of inspectors.
The regulations which 1 would propose to enforce in
districts proclaimed clean are as follows; viz.—
Ist. That sheep should be allowed free exit from
clean districts.
2nd. That sheep coming from or through a district
not proclaimed clean, should not be allowed to
enter a clean district under any circumstances.
3rd. That if in a district proclaimed clean, there
were any flocks infected with scab, or of
doubtful character, that such sheep, as well as
all the flocks on the station where they were,
should be placed in quarantine, and not be
allowed to leave such station, nor clean sheep
to pass through such station, until the Chief
Inspector declared them to be clean,
4th. That sheep in quarantine should not be allowed
to approach the boundaries of their run within
half a mile, except where securely fenced.
sth. That sheep in a doubtful district be kept from
approaching a clean district nearer than half
a mile; and
6th, That sheep in a scabby district, in like manner,
be not allowed to go nearer than half a mile
to sheep in clean or doubtful districts.


I will now pass on to propose regulations for what we
will call doubtful districts :
The district which we will call A, having been pro-
claimed clean, I would give sixty days’ notice
that certain stations bordering on this district
A were, on a certain day, to be incorporated
into the doubtful district B. During these
sixty days in such district, I would allow
dressing without licence. On the expiration
of these sixty days, I would proclaim the
stations in question to be the doubtful district
B, Subsequent to such proclamation, I would
make dressing for scab without licence finable
with £5OO, half of the amount payable to
informant. That licences to dress sheep in
doubtful districts should be of a special
character, and only be in force for thirty days
each. That in the first month after the issue
of the above proclamation, the licence fee
should be one penny per head on all sheep to
be dressed, and in the second month twopence
per head (irrespective of whether a licence had
been obtained during the first month or not),
in the third month threepence per head, and
so on. I would further recommend, that all
stations under licence in a doubtful district
should be placed in quarantine, and so kept
until the Chief Inspector was satisfied that
such stations had become clean. That the
entrance and exit of sheep to and from stations
in quarantine be forbidden, and that the sheep
on such stations be prevented approaching the
boundary of a clean station within half a mile,
as before stated. I would recommend further.
the destruction of all sheep which, after the lapse
of six months in quarantine , were found to be still
scabby. When the Chief Inspector was satis-
fied that certain stations which had been in
quarantine had become free from scab, I would
have him (that the opinion of neighboring
sheep-owners might be heard on the subject)
give fourteen days’ notice in the Gazette, of his
intention to release such station from quarantine.


Such are the features which appear to me to he neces-
sary to an effective Scab Act, offering, I believe, the
minimum of restriction compatible with efficiency. Except
in the matter of destruction of flocks, which the owner
cannot or will not cure, I believe the carrying out of
what I propose would amount to this —the application to
the sheep of the whole colony of the same course of action
which the prudent sheepowner invariably adopts in respect
of his single station. To such a course of action I am
unable to see any reasonable objection. From it would
arise no interference with the supply of our markets; the
sympathy with individual offenders would give place to
sympathy with the sheep-owners of a whole neighborhood,
and convictions for offences under the Scab Act would no
longer be difficult to obtain.
Regarding the adoption of what I call such downright
measures as those which I have proposed, there exists, I
am aware, on the part of some sheep-owners, a timidity
which to me appears groundless and unreasonable. These
gentlemen, if such questions be raised in their hearing,
seem to conjure up for themselves at once visions of heavy
fines; a baneful interference with the disposal of surplus
stock ; a difficulty in purchasing sheep where requisite;
and I know not what amount of hindrances, disabilities,
and immediate expense. Now to me, having maturely con-
sidered, and frequently discussed these matters, it is clear
that no violent interference with the interests of sheep-
owners would result from the adoption of the measures
which I have proposed. For their action would be
gradual, deliberate, and easily understood, giving sheep-
owners full time to comply with the easy and reasonable
requirements of the law; their aim being to preserve from
re-infection districts already clean, and constantly to add
to such districts by gradual and not violent measures.
In the course which I have offered to the consideration
of the reader, a great deal of power, if it were carried out,
would, it is noticeable, be lodged with the Chief Inspector.
Of such power, it is to be presumed, he would know how
to make use ; whilst if matters went wrong, the public
would know to whom the blame was due. Legislate as
you please in this matter, and you will still, I am per-
suaded, find that a considerable discretionary power must,
to render the law efficient, be lodged somewhere. In


dealing too with a great interest, the Chief Inspector
would have to bear in mind that not only should his ap-
plication of the principles of the law be made with
prudence and carried out with vigour and decision, but
that nothing unreasonable or oppressive should be insisted
on by him, as it would be necessary (if he would not raise
a perfect hurricane of complaint about his ears) that he
should, on the whole, carry with him the gradually extend-
ing approval of the sheep-owners ; for in the first instance,
complaint would inevitably be considerable, approval only
gradually growing out of fortunate results. From the
adoption of such measures, I should anticipate the com-
plete eradication of scab from Victoria in about four years.
In discussing the subject of scab in Victoria, I have
noticed that some persons seem to be under the impression
that the treatment of this disease in the neighbouring
colony of South Australia has been very successful, in-
sinuating that if a similar result has not rewarded our
efforts in Victoria, that the failure is traceable in part to
the imperfection of our Scab Act (for which they would
substitute that of Adelaide), and in part to the want of
energy on the part of our inspectors of sheep.
In reply to this, after admitting the complete insufficiency
of the Scab Act of 1862, it may fairly be stated in defence
of the inspectors, that as convictions were all but unattain-
able, and re-infection by travelling sheep all but authorized
by that Act, as I have shewn, that it was quite out of their
power to effect anything of importance. Besides this, it is
well that what really was effected in South Australia
should be known; that, in the first place, it took six
years to free that colony from scab, whilst our Scab Act
has not been yet in force much more than two years ;
secondly, that the scabby sheep are necessarily in much
closer contiguity in Victoria than they w T ere in South Aus-
tralia, and from this cause the danger of re-infection and
difficulty of cure much enhanced ; and finally, that when
the Scab Act came into force in South Australia there
were in the whole of that colony only half a million of
scahhy sheep ; whilst in Victoria we began with no less
than five millions of diseased animals , our inspectors for a
long time being scarcely more numerous than those of the
sister colony.


Hence it will be seen that the two undertakings are
very unequal, both with respect to the numbers of sheep
to be dealt with, as well as in the obstacles to a cure,
irrespective of numbers; for the ease or difficulty of a
cure of scab is in proportion to the sheep being thinly
disseminated over, or closely packed on their pastures.
In conclusion, let me beg of the reader calmly to repass
in his mind those circumstances connected with scab which
I have brought before him : the nature of the disease ; the
uncertainties connected with its becoming visible, and the
correspondent necessity for provision against risks of infec-
tion ; the impossibility of compelling great simultaneous
efforts for its extermination, as proved by our own expe-
rience of the past, as well as by that of South Australia;
and, as a consequence, the importance of being prepared
to deal specially with exceptional cases, so as not to allow
the negligence or want of good fortune in a few to com-
promise the success of the whole undertaking.
As it is easier to find objections to measures than
palatable remedies for evils, let me invite the impartial
reader, who is disposed to view my recommendations, with
respect to legislation against scab, as of too stringent a
character, to recur to the principles on which I think scab
must be (if at all) eradicated from our flocks ; and if he
agrees that these are correct, as I think he will, let me beg
of him to endeavour to devise, in place of wdiat I have
advanced, measures less irksome, and equally efficient,
before pronouncing against me.
From such of my readers as are really desirous that
measures should be taken to eradicate scab, I anticipate in
the main an approval of my suggestions ; whilst from such
as, erroneously enough, imagine themselves to be interested
in a system of non-interference, and the perpetuation of a
great public loss, I am prepared to meet both a resolute
persistence in denying facts which fancied self-interest will
not permit them to see, and in decrying measures the
action of which they would he unable to evade.
JAMES BARNARD,
GOVERNMENT PRINTER, TASMANIA,




