





Price ONE SHILLING and SIX-P E N C E,
[Entered at STATIONS RS-HALL.]
AN
HISTORICAL NARRATIVE
OF THE
DISCOVERY
OF
NEW HOLLAND
AND
NEW SOUTH WALES.
CONTAINING
An Account of the Inhabitants, Soil, Animals, and other Pro-
dudtions of thofe Countries, and including a particular Def crtion of
BOTANY BAY.
ILLUSTRATED
With a Chart of NEW HOLLAND, NEW SOUTH WALES, BOTANY BAY
and the New Ditcovered Hands in the North and South PACIFIC OCEAN from*
30 deg. N. to 50 deg. South Latitude, and from 90 to 225 deg. Longitude’ Fall
from the Meridian of Greenwich.
LONDON:
Printed for JOHN FIELDING, in Pater-nofter Row.


Through the Omiffton of the Engraver, we are
under the Neceffity of requeuing our Readers to
ohferve, that the Figures at the Top and Bottom of
the annexed General Chart , denote the Longitude Eaji
from the Meridian of Greenwich*


A
GENERAL CHART
of
NEW HOLLAND,
including
NEW SOUTH WALES & BOTANY BAY.
V with I
V The Adjacent Countries , J
\ 'And 7
1) i [covered
chaiht
of
BOTANY BAY,
with its
Adjacent Harbours
in
JSTTW SOUTH WAITS.
mttdtrtr R
by J.Fieldmg-, Fatrr-noster Jtotv dmdon .




A N
HISTORICAL NARRATIVE
OF THE
V
r «
Difcovery of New Holland, and New South Wales, &c,
THE determination of the Brltlfh government to eftablilh a
fettlement in the Southern Pacific Ocean, has fhongly excited
the public curiofity. As it is a very natural queftion, What national
benefit can arife from fuch an eflablifhment ? It is apprehended,
that by drawing into one view, a faithful narrative of the progref-
five difcoveries that have.been made of the coafls of that exten-
five country, where the fettlement is propofed to be made, with
feme account of its produ&ions, and a view of its relative fituation,
to thofe other important difcoveries of our late indefatigable circum-
navigator ; will tend, not merely to anfwerthe enquiries of thefpecula-
till, but to prove its utility, in extending the commerce of the
Britilh nation, through thofe extenlive tracts of population, which
the induftry of the prefent age has explored.


Leaving the enquiry how far the denfity, or weight, of land ana. water,,
arc able to counterpoile each other, to the rclearches of the phi-
lofophic mind; we lhall only remark, that fiom time of the
difeoyery of America, it was a pretty generally received opinion,
among geographers, that there was iome vail: undlfcovered continent
ranging up towards the South Pole, to balance thofe amazing
of land that abut upon the North Pole; and that it has for two hun-
dred years, been the ambition of the intrepid navigator, to explore
fuch continent.
The fir ft account we have of this country, is in a memorial deliveied
to the court of Spain, by Don Pedro Fernandez de Quiros, in 1609,
in which he afferts, That, patronized by the Vice Roy of Peru,
he had fpent fourteen years, and travelled 20,000 leagues by land
and fea, in profecuting difeoveries. In this memorial he folicits for
the neceftary means to fettle thofe countries he had difeovered, which
he called a continent, equal in bignefs to Europe and the Leffer Afia;
he deferibes the country as well fupplied with the neceflaries of life,
yielding gold, filver, fpices, and pearls, and filled witn inhabi
tants of different colours. He alfo mentions the difeovery 01 a clump
of about twenty iflands, which he firft fuppofed to be all one country.
Thofe lands, agreeable to the enftom of that age, he took poffeffion of
under the name of La Auftrialia del Efpiritu Santo, and lays them
down as in and about 1 5 degrees of South latitude.
When we confider the length of time that Don Pedro fpent in this
fervice, that he took his departure from the coaft of Peru, and that his
courfe was to the Weft, there is little doubt that the illands he men-
tions, were thofe now called the New Hebrides ; and that falling
in with the North fide of New Guinea, a country nearly anfwering
his defeription, both for produce and population, and being
rant of the ftrait that divides it from New South Wales, he mignt
confider thofe two places, together with New Holland, as one vaft
continent.
From the time of De Quiros to the middle of the 17th cen-
tury, we have no authentic relation of any difeoveries of the I erra
Auftralis, or Southern Continent. We only know in general, that a
Dutchman, in 1616, fell in with a part of its Weft coaft, between


24" and 25 0 South latitude, to which he gave the name of Eendraght
Land. That in 1618, another part of this coaft, nearly 15 0 S. was
difeovered by Zeachen, who gave it the name of Arnheim and Die-
men. In 1619, Jan Van Edels, gave his name to a Southern part
of it, and another traeft of the coaft between 30° and 38 Q received
the name of Leuwen. In 1627, Peter Van Nuitz, gave his name
to a coaft which communicates with Leuwen’s Land to the weft ; and
about the fame time, a great part of the weft coaft, near the tropic
of Capricorn, received the name of De Wits. In 1628, Peter Car-
penter, a Dutchman, explored the great gulph on the North coaft,
named the gulph of Carpentaria, which interfe&s the country near
eight degrees of latitude. In June 1629, Captain Francis Pelfart, was
wrecked on the weft coaft, in about 28° S. latitude, and his fhip’s
company were left in the greateft diftrefs, upon three fmall illands,
until he could go back to Batavia for fuccours, to which place the
majority of them happily returned. There is no doubt but the greater
part of thofe commanders made fome difeoveries in the country ; but
whatever they were, they were fuppreffed, raoft probably, by order of
the Dutch Eaft India Company.
In the year 1642, Captain Abel Janfen Tafman, was fent from Ba-
tavia for the exprefs purpofe of making a perfect furvey of this country,
which by this time had received the name of New Holland. That this
talk was faithfully performed, we have no reafon to doubt, as the
map of New Holland, delineated on the pavement of the Stadt-houfe
at Amfterdam, was made from the lights afforded by his journal ; but as
the journal was never publilhed entire, and probably was never in-
tended to be publilhed at all, we muft be content with fuch extracts
as we have been able to procure.
Captain Tafman failed from Batavia in Auguft 1642, with two Ihips,
and on the 6th of November, was in latitude 49° South, longitude
114 0 56' Eaft*. “At this time,” fays he, “as the weather was
foggy, with hard gales, and a rolling fea from the fouth-weft and
from the fouth, I concluded from thence, that it was not at all probable
* At this time the longitude was reckoned from the pike of Teneriffe, one of the Canary
Iflands, which lies 15 0 zS f weft of London, from whence our late circumnavigators have al-
ways computed the longitude.
* 1


there fhould be any land between thole two points. ’ This determined
him to hand towards the north-eafl:; and ‘on the 24th of
fame month, continues he, being in the latitude of 42 23 South*
longitude 163° 50', I difcovered land, which lay eaft-fouth-eafl, at
the diflance of ten miles, which I called Van Diemen’s Land. The
weather being bad, I fleered fouth-and by-eaft, along the coaft
to the height of 44 0 South, where the land runs away eafl, and
and afterwards north-eafl-and-by-north. In the latitude 43° io', and
longitude 167° 551 anchored on the ifl of December, in a bay,
which I called the bay of Frederic Henry. I heard, or at leaf! fancied
I heard, the found of people upon the fhore; but I faw nobody. All I
met with worth obferving, were two trees, which were two fathoms or two
fathoms and a half, in girth, and 60 or 65 feet high, from the root to the
branches : they had cut with a flint, a kind of fteps in the bark, in or-
der to climb up to the birds nefts: thefe fleps were at the diflance of
five feet from each other, fo that we mull conclude either thofe people
are of a prodigious fize, or that they have fome way of climbing trees
that we are not ufed to: In one of the trees the fleps were fo frefh,
that we judged they could not have been cut above four days. The
noife we heard refembled the noife of fome fort of a trumpet; it feeraed
to be at no great diflance, but we faw no living creature notwithftanding.
I perceived alio in the fand, the marks of wild beafls feet, refembling
thofe of a tyger, or fome fuch creature; I gathered alfo fome gum
from the trees, and iikewife fome lack. The tide ebbs and flows
there, about three feet- The trees in this country do not grow very
clofe, nor are they incumbered with buflies, or underwood. I ob-
ferved fmoke in feveral places; however, we did nothing more, than
fet up a pofl, on which every one cut his name, or his mark, and
upon which I holfted a flag. On December 5, I quitted Van Die-
men’s Land, and refolved to fleer eafl.”
As the remainder of the abflracl of Captain Tafman's journal
relates entirely to his difeoveries in other places, we next take a view of
Captain Dampier’s account of New Holland.
This able navigator failed from Achamack, in Virginia, in Auguft
j 683, on his firfl voyage round the world ; and on the 4th of Jan.
1688, fell in with the coaft of New Holland, in 16 0 50' latitude, and


anchored in a deep bay, where he continued till the 12th of March
following. Of this part of the country he gives the following ac-
count. “It was even, low, and fandy ground, had no frefh water,
except what was dug, but divers forts of trees, among the reft, the
Dragon-tree, which produces the gum-dragon. We law neither
fruit-trees, nor fo much as the tradt of any living animal, except
one, which feemcd to be the footftepsof a bead of the bignefs
* A, K-J
of a mafliff doa;. Some few land birds they have, but none
O O
bigger than a black-bird, and fcarce any water fowl. Neither does
the lea afford any food, except tortoifes and manatees, of both which they
have great plenty. The inhabitants are the moft miferablc wretches
in the univcrfe, having no houfes or covering but the heavers; no
garments, except a piece of the bark of a tree, tyed like a girdle round
the waift, no fheep, poultry, or fruits, but feed upon a few fifh,
cockles, mnfcles, and periwinkles ; without religion or government, but
cohabit promilcuoully. For the reft, their bodies are ftrait, thin, and
ftrong limbed, with great heads and eye-brow r s, and round fore-
heads : their eye-lids are conftantly half clofed, to keep the flies
out, which are exceftively troublefome here: they have hot-
*' » O
tie nofes, thick lips, and wide mouths. Both fnen and women, old
and young, want the two fore-teeth of the upper jaw; but whe-
ther they draw them, lam not able to tell: they have no beards, but
black fhort curled hair, like the African Negroes, and are as black
as thofe. Their weapons are a fort of wooden cutlafs; inftead of
a lance, they have a ftrait pole, fharpened and hardened at the end.
Of their language, I can fay nothing, but that they fpeak pretty much
in the throat. We landed feverai times, and at laft brought them to
fomething of a familiarity with us, by giving them fome old deaths •
but could never prevail with them to give us the leaft aftxftance
in carrying water, or otherwife, they being very much averfe to work-
ing”
In confequence of the reputation Captain Dampier had acquired by
this voyage, he was fixed onto command afhip fitted out purpofely to
profecute difeoveries in the Southern Ocean; and failed from England
on that defign, January 14, 1699, in his Majefty’s fliip Roebuck,
mounting 12 guns, the fhip’s company confifting of fifty men and boys.


On the sth of Auguft in the fame year, he again fell in with New Hol-
land, where he fpent five weeks in ranging along its weft coaft, to the
extent of 300 leagues.
The firft anchorage he made, was in Shark’s Bay, fo named by him
from the abundance of that voracious fiih he found there, in latitude
25 0 South. He defcribes the country about this bay, as pretty high
land, the fhore fteep towards the fea ; the foil, by the fea fide, fand,
producing a large kind of famphire, with a white flower; further in he
found the foil reddifh, mixed with fand, producing fome grafs, fhrubs,
and bufhes, the grafs grew in tufts, about the fize of a bufhel, inter-
mixed with heath.
The trees and fhrubs were of divers forts, but none exceeded
ten feet in height; the bodies about three feet in girth ; the heads
ftruck out at about fix feet from the ground, and were bufhy, tnick fet,
and full of long and narrow leaves. Some of thefe trees were fweet-~
fcented, reddifh within the bark, like faflafras, but fomewhat darker-
Moft of the trees and fhrubs had, at that time, either bloflbms or ber-
ries on them. The blofibms were moftly blue, intermixed with red,,
white, yellow, &c. and fmelt very fweet and fragrant.
There were but few land fowls; of the larger fort only eagles were
feen, and of the fmaller, there were five or fix fpccies, from the fize
of a wren, to that of a lark, but all finging with a variety of fine fhrill
notes. _
The land animals they faw were, a fort of maccroons, but differing
from thofe of the Weft Indies, chiefly in their legs, upon which they
jump as the reft of their fpecies do ; thefe were found very good meat..
There was alfo a fort of guanas, but differing from them in fome par-
ticulars ; “ For thefe,” fays Captain Dampier, “ had a larger and more
frightful head, and had no tail: and at the rump, where a tail fhould
have been placed, there appeared fomething refembling a head, but
without mouth or eyes : their legs alfo differed from other creatures of
the fame kind, by their appearing to befo made, as to carry the body
either way ; which, with the particular before-mentioned, might make
a common fpe&ator apprehend that this creature had two heads.
They are fpeckled black and yellow, like toads, and had fcales on
their backs, like crocodiles; are very How in motion, and when a man


comes nigh them, will ftand hill and hifs, without endeavouring to get
away; and the body when opened, hath a very unfavoury fmell. I
never faw fuch ugly creatures any where but here. The guanas, in
other parts, 1 have obferved to be very good meat, and have often eat
of them, with great fatisfadlion; yet I believe the quickeft fenfe of
hunger would not have tempted me totafte the guana of New Hol-
land.
“ The fea-fifli feen here were, befides fharks, of which there
* 9
are great abundance, fkates, thornbacks, and other fifh, of the prey
kind, (one fort efpecially like the fea-devil) with guard-ffih, bonatos,.
&c. Of fhell-fifh, we got muffels, periwinkles, limpets, oyfters, both
of the pearl kind, and fuch as are eatable, befides cockles, &c. The
fhore was lined thick with many other forts of very beautiful fhells, of
variety of colour and fhape, mod: beautifully fpotted with red, yel-
low, &c. There are alfo fome green turtles.
“ We anchored in three fevcral places in this bay, on the weft fide.
We fearched for frefti water but found none; however, we found fome
wood for fuel. The 14th of Auguft we failed out of Shark’s Bay, ter
the north-eaft, coafting along the fhore. The 18th we faw abun-
dance of whales near a fhoal point, in latitude 22° 22' At noon on-
the 21 ft, bearing in fouth-eaft-by-eaft, the land appeared lilfe a cape,,
but anchoring about five leagues from the Bluff Point, it proved the
eaft end of an ifle, fix leagues in length and one in breadth, being
furrounded on all fides with many other fmall rocky files, which in all
appearance are a range of iflands, ftretching from north-eaft to weft-
fouth-weft, perhaps as far as Shark’s Bay, and nine or ten leagues in
breadth towards New Holland. We went on fhore in the ifle of
Bluff Point, where we found two or three fhrubs, one like rofemary,
whence I call it Rofemary Ifle ; and two forts of grain like beans, one;
growing on bullies, the other on a kind of creeping vine.
“ Auguft 30, we made the land again in latitude 18 0 2i y , and
faw many great fmokes near the fhore. At four in the afternoon I
anchored in eight fathom w'ater, clear fand, about three leagues and
a half from the fhore. On the 3 1 ft early in the morning I went afliore,
with ten or twelve men, to fearch for water. We went armed with
mufkets and cutlaffes for our defence, expelling to fee people there,


and carried aUb fhovels and pick-axes to dig wells. When we came
near the fhore, we faw three tall, black, naked men on the handy bay
a-head of us; but as we rowed in they went away. V* ben we were
landed, I fent the boat with two men in her, to lie a little from the
fhore at anchor, to prevent her being feized, while the reft of
us went after the three black men, who were now got to the top
of a .final I hill, about a quarter of a mile from us, with eight or
nine men more in their company. They feeing us come, ran away.
When we came to the top of the hill, where they hr ft ftood, we law a
plain favanna about half a mile from us. Farther in fiom the fca,
there were feveral things like haycocks Handing in the favanna, which,
at a diftance, we thought were houfep, but we found them to be fo
many rocks. We fearched about thefe lor water, but could find none;
nor any houfe, nor people, for they were all gone. Then we turned
again to the place where we landed, and there we dug for water.
While we were at work, there came nine or ten of the natives, to a
final! hill, a little way from us, and ftood there, menacing and threat-
ning, and making a great noife. At laft one of them came towards
us, and the reft followed at a great diftance. I went out to meet
him, and came within fifty yards of him, making to him all the
figns of peace and friendship I could; but then he ran away, neither
would any of them flay for us to come nigh them, though we tried
three or four times. At laft I took two men with me, and went
in the afternoon along the fea-lide, on purpoic to catch one of them
it I could, of whom I might learn where they got their frefh water.
There were ten or twelve ot the natives a little way off, who feeing
us three going away from the reft of our men, followed us. I thought
they would follow us, but there being for a while a fand bank between
us and them, that they could not fee us, we made a halt, and hid
ourfeives in a bending of the fand bank. They knew we muft be
thereabouts; and being three or four times our number, thought'to
leize us: fo they difperfed themfelves, fome going to the fea-fhore, and
others beating about the land hills. We knew by what rencounter we
had with them in the morning, we could eafily out-run them; fo a
nimble young man that was with me, feeing fome of them there,
ran towards them, and they, for fome time, ran away before him.


but he foon overtaking them, they faced about, and fought him. He
had a cutlafs, and they had wooden lances, with which, being'many
of them, they were too hard for him. When he fir ft ran towards them,
I chafed two more, that were by the fhore ; but, fearing how it might
be with my young man, I turned back quickly, and went up to the
top of a fandy hill, whence I faw him near me, and clofely engaged
with them. Upon their feeing me, one of them threw a lance, which
narrowly miffed me. I difcharged my gun to fcare them ; but avoided
fhooting any of them, till finding my young man in great danger, and
myfelf in fome, and that though the gun had a little frighted
them at firft, they had foon learnt to defpife it, tolling up their hands,
and crying, pooh, pooh, pooh, and coming on a-frefh with a great
noife, I thought it high time to charge a-frefh, and fhoot one of
them, which I did. The reft, feeing him fall, made a ftand; and
my young man took the opportunity to difengage himfelf, and come
off tome. They took up their wounded companion.; and my young
man, who had been ftruck through the cheek by one of their lances
was afraid it was poifoned, but I did not think that likely. His wound
was very painful to him, being made with a blunt weapon; but he
foon recovered of it. Among the New Hollanders whom we were
thus engaged with, there was one, who by his appearance and car-
riage both in the morning and afternoon, feemed to be the chief of
them, and a kind of prince or captain among them. He was a young
brifk man, not very tall, nor fo perfonable as fome of the reft, though
more adlive and courageous. He was painted, which none of the reft
were at all, with a circle of white pigment; a fort of lime, as we
thought, about his eyes, and a white ftreak down his nofe, from his
forehead to the tip of it; and his breaft, and fome part of his arms,
were alfo made white with the fame paint; not for beauty or orna-
ment, one would think; but as fome wild Indian warriors are faid to
do, he feemed thereby to defign the looking more terrible, this his
painting adding very much to his natural deformity, for they all of
them have the moft unpleafant looks, and the worft features, of any
people I ever faw, though I have feen great variety of favages. Thefe
New Hollanders were probably the fame fort of people as thofe I met
with on this coaft in my voyage round the globe ; for the place I then


touched at was not above forty or fifty leagues to the north-call of tnis f
and thefe were much the fame blinking creatures j but we had not the
opportunity to fee whether thefe, as the former, wanted two of their
fore teeth : the lances alfo of thefe, were fuch as the former had.
The want of frefh provifions and water, with the progrefs of the
feurvy among his people, obliged Captain Damprer to leave this coafl
after having in about five weeks, ranged down it to the extent of about
300 leagues ; and he leaves us this general defeription of the country t
“ The lands are fo fenced by a chain of fand-hills- towards the fea,
that there is no fuch thing as difeerning what lies beyond themat
high-water the tides rife fo furprizingly aiong this coafl, that the l<md
appears very low j but at low-water it appears of an indifferent height ;
but then the fhore is fo rocky that there is no fuch thing as landing
with a boat j but at high-water a boat may very eafily come in over all
thofe rocks to the fandy bay which furrounds this coafl. The land
for about five or fix hundred yards from the fea, is of a dryilh, fandy
foil, with nothing but a few fhrubs or bufhes, which, when I was
there, feemed to be in bloom, bearing flowers of feveral colours, fuch
as yellow, blue and white, of a very fragrant fmell; and as to then-
fruit, they feem to be a kind of peas or beans. Farther within land
the country feemed to be low and level, partly favannas, and partly
woodland j the former affords a coarfe kind of grafs, and the lattei
groves of trees, that are fmall, and not above twelve or fourteen feet
high. There are very tew land-animals; fome lizards I law; and
fome of my feamen faw two or three creatures not unlike wolves, but fo
lean, that they looked like mere fkeletons. As for land-fowls, there
are crows, hawks, kites, and turtle doves, that are fmall, but very
plump and fat. The fea-fowls are pelicans, boobies, noddies, curheus,
fea-pies, in great numbers. There are abundance of whales in thefe
feas, and thofe of the large kind. We faw alfo green turtle, and fome
fharks, and caught, with hooks and lines, fome rock-fifh and old
wives. Of fhell-fifh we found here oyflers, of the pearl kind, and
fit for eating j with wilks, muifels, limpits, periwinkles, and many
other forts ; and I gathered fome curious fhells on the fhore.”
Hitherto we have been confined to the weflern coafl of New Holland,
and are obliged to Captain Dampier for the principal part of our know-


ledge of its foil, productions, fifheries or inhabitants. Not that we
are to fuppofe, that other commanders, who vifited it, were deficient
in their inquiries. The contrary is clearly the cafe, efpecially with re-
fpeCl to Captain Carpenter, who difcovered the great bay or gulph
of Carpentaria, and made a very fuccefsful voyage •, and; alfo of Cap-
tain Tafman, who, failing along the weft and fouth coafts, and doub-
ling the fouthern point of the country, called by him Van Diemen’s
Land, moll probably vifited a part of the eaft coaft of New- Holland,
before he proceeded to the fouth end of New Guinea, which country
he paffed on the north-eaft-fide on his return to Batavia. The fa£t is,
that the difcoveries of their own countrymen have been fupprefled by,
and even the property feized, and the perfons imprifoned, of thofe of
them who have failed in thefe latitudes without permiffion, of the Dutch
Eaft-India Company. “ It has appeared (fays that judicious collec-
tor Dr. Harris *) very ftrange to fome very able judges of voyages,
that the Dutch fhould make fo great account of the fouthern countries
as to caufe the map of them to be laid down in the pavement of the
Stadthoufe at Amfterdam, and yet publifh no defcriptions of them.
This myftery was a good deal heighthened by one of the fhips that firft
touched on Carpenter’s Land bringing home a rich cargo of gold,
fpices, and other rich goods : in order to clear up which it was laid,
that thefe were not the produdt of the country, but were fifhed out of
the wreck of a large ftiip that was loft on the coaft. But this ftory
did not fatisfy the inquifitive, becaufe not attended with the circum-
ftances neceflary to eftablith its credit; and therefore they fuggeftcd,
that inftead of taking away the obfcurity, by relating the truth, this
tale was invented in order to hide it more effectually. This fufpicion
gained ground the more, when it was known the Dutch Eaft-India
Company from Batavia had piade fome attempts to conquer a part of
the fouthern continent, and had been repulfed with lofs.”
The north-eaft fide of New Guinea has been often vifited by Euro-
peans, and there are extant feveral accounts of it, as the imperfect
one of De Quiros, before-mentioned ; Schovten has left a much fuller
defeription of it j and Dampier, after he left the coaft of New Hoi-
* See his Colle<stion of Voyages and Travels, Vol. I. p. 320,


land ranged along it for about twenty-five degrees of longitude keeping
a fouth-eafterly courfc, till having furrounded the ifland of New-
Britain he returned back to Timor to refit. But to return to our nar-
rative.
The late Captain Cook has left us the full eft description of this
country of any European who has vifited it. In his Voyage round the
World, after exploring a great number of places, ’till then unknown,
and having made fome ftay among the New Zealanders, he failed
from Cape Farewell in New Zealand on the 31ft of March, 1770,
and fell in, on the x 9th of April, with the Eaft Coaft of New Holland
in lat. 38° fouth, about 6 degrees to the northward of Van Diemen’s
Land, or the fouth cape of this extenfive trail of country.
From this time to the end of Auguft, Captain Cook fpent in making
an accurate furvey of the coaft, to the latitude of xo° 39' a courfe of
upwards ot zooo miles. During this run he frequently let up the
Britifti flag on the Ihore, and, with the ufual folemnities, took pof-
fellion of it for his Majefty King George 111, under the name of New
South-Wales. He fays, this country is of a larger extent than any
ocher in the known world, not bearing the name of a continent, its
fquare furface being much more than equal to all Europe.
The land to the fouthward of 33 0 or 34 0 is in general low and
level ; farther northward it is hilly, but in no part can be called moun-
tainous, and the hills and mountains, taken together, make but a
fmall part of the furface, in comparifon with the vallies and plains.
It is upon the whole rather barren than fertile, yet the riling ground
is chequered with woods and lawns, and the vallies and plains are in
many places covered with herbage; the foil is frequently fandy, and
many of the lawns and favannas are rocky and barren, elpecially
to the northward, where, in the bell fpots, vegetation was lefs vi-
gorous than in the fouthern part of the country. The grafs in gene-
ra], is high, but thin ; and the trees, where largeft, are feldom lefs
than forty feet afunder. The banks of the bays are covered with
mangroves to the diftance of a mile within the beach, under which
the foil is a rank mud, that is always overflowed by a fpring tide.
There are fome bogs farther in the country, where the grafs is thick
and luxuriant, and forne vallies clothed with underwood. The coaft.






at leaft that part which lies to the northward of 25 0 abounds with tine
harbours and bays, where veffels may lie in perfect fecurity from all
winds.
The country has the appearance of being well watered, as there arc
innumerable fmall brooks and fpiings, though no great rivers; yet thefe
brooks probably might be confiderably increafed in rainy weather, it
being the height of the dry feafon when Captain Cook vifited it.
There is little variety of trees, and only two that can be termed tim-
ber ; of thefe the iargeft is the Gum-tree, which grows all over the
country ; it has narrow leaves, not much unlike a willow, and the gum,
or rather refin, which it yields is of a deep red, and refembles the
Janga'is draconis. The other timber tree, is that which grows fome-
what like cur pines. The wood of both trees is extremely hard and
heavy. Here are alfo trees covered with a foft hark, which is cafily
peeled off, and is the fame that is ufed for caulking (hips in the Eaft-
Indies.
They found the palm of three different forts, the firft has leaves plait-
ed like a fan ; the cabbage fmall, but exquifitely fweet; and the nuts,
which it bears in great abundance, is good food for hogs. The fecond
fort bears a much greater refemblance to the true cabbage-tree of the
Weft Indies, its leaves large and pinnated, like thofe of the cocoa-
nut, thefe alfo produce a cabbage, which though not fo fweet as the for-
mer, is much larger. The third fort feldom grows more than ten feet
high, has fmall pinnated leaves, like thofe of fome forts of fern ; it bore
no cabbage, but a plentiful crop of nuts, about the fize of a large chef-
nut, but rounder. Befides thefe there are feveral fmall trees, and
fhrubs, altogether unknown in Europe ; ot which one bears a very poor
kind of fig ; another a fruit refembling a plumb in colour, but not in
fhape, being flat on the fides, like a little cheefe ; and a third bears a
kind of purple apple, which, after It has been kept a few days, be-
comes eatable, and taftes fomewhat like a damafeene.
Of the great variety of plants produced here, few feerii of ihe'efcu-
lent kind : there is one refembling the cocco; of the We ft-Indies, and a
kind of bean ; to which may be added, a fort of parfiey, and purfe-
lain, and two kinds of yams, one lb aped like a radilh, and the other


round, and covered with dingy fibres; both forts are very final! but
fweet.
The quadrupeds obferved lathis country are but few ; confiding of
dogs; and an animal called by the natives kanguroo, which, when
full grown is as big as a Iheep ; the head, neck, and thou lexers very
fmall in proportion to the other parts of the body ; the tail nearly as
long as the body, thick near the rump, and tapering towards the end
the fore legs of one that was killed by Mr. Gore, which was a young,
one, and much under its full growth, meafured only eight inches, while
the hinder ones were two-and-twenty inches long ; it goes in an eredt
pofture, and its motion is by fuccefiive leaps, or hops, of a great length;
the fore legs are kept bent clofe to the bread, and feenied to be of ufe
only in digging ; the fkin is covered with a fhort fur, of a dark moufe,,
or grey colour, excepting the head and ears, w'hich bear a dight re-
femblance to thofe of a hare : There is alfo an animal of the opoflum
kind, refembling the phalanger of Buffon ; and one refembling a pole-
cat, which the natives call quoll, the back of which is brown,
with white, and the belly wdiite unmixed. Some of Captain Cook’s
people affirmed they had alfo feen fome wolves.
The land-birds are crows, parrots, paroquets, cockatoos, and other
birds of the fame kind, of exquifite beauty; eagles, hawks, cranes,
herons, budards, quails, doves, and innumerable docks of pigeons..
The water-fowl are gulls, fhaggs, foland geefe, or gannets, of-two
forts ; boobies, noddies, curlieus, ducks, pelicans, and many other
forts.
Among other reptiles, there are ferpents of various kinds, fome
noxious, and fome harmlefs ; fcorpions, centipieds, and lizards. The
infedls are but few ; the principal are the mufquito and the ant. Of
the ant there are feveral forts; fome are as green as a leaf, and live
upon trees, where they build their neds of various fizes, between that
of a man’s head and his fid. Thefe neds are of a very curious druc-
ture, being formed by bending down feveral of the leaves, each of
which is as broad as a man’s hand, and gluing the points of them to-
gether, fo as to form a purfe ; the vifeus ufed for this purpofe, is an
animal juice, which nature has enabled them to elaborate. Another


fort are quite black ; their habitations are the infide cf the branches of
a tree, which they contrive to excavate by working cut the pith, al-
moft to the extremity of the twigs, the tree at the fame time flourifh-
ing, as if it had no fuch inmate. A third fort is found nefted in the
root of a plant which grows on the bark of trees in the manner of mifle-
toe, and is about the fize of a large turnip ; this root they perforate,
and yet the vegetation of the plant does not appear to fuffer any injury.
Thefe three forts are all furnilhed with ftinss, forne of them not lefs
o y
powerful than that of a bee, but the pain foon fubfides. There is a
fourth kind, which are perfectly harmlefs, and almoft exadlly refera-
ble the white ant of the Eaft-Indies; whofe architecture is fail more
curious than that of the others.. They have houfes of two forts,
the one is fufpended on the branches of trees, and the other is ereft-
ed on the ground. Thole upon the trees are three or four times as
big as a man’s head, and are built of a brittle fubftance, which feems
to confift of fmall parts of vegetables kneaded together with a glutinous
matter, which their bodies pnobably fupply ; upon breaking this cruft,
innumerable cells, fwarming wnth inhabitants, appear in a great va-
riety of winding directions, all communicating with each other, and
with feveral apertures that lead to other nefts upon tire fame tree;
and alfo one large avenue, or covered way, leading to the ground,
and carried on under it to the neft or houfe that is conftruCted there.
Thefe houfes are generally at the root of a tree, but not of that upon
which their other dwellings are conftrudted; they are of different
fizes, are formed like irregular-fided cones, and fometimes of more than
fix feet high. The outfide of thefe is of well tempered clay, about
two inches thick, and is proof againft any wet that can fall ; within
are the cells, which have no opening outwards, but communicate
only with the fubterranean paflage to the houfes on the tree, and to
the tree on which they are conftrutfted, where they afeend up the trunk
and branches, under covered ways of the fame kind as thole by which
they defccnded from their other dwellings.
The fea is much more liberal of food to the inhabitants than the
land. The filh are of various forts ; but, except the mullet, and
fome of the fhell-filh, none of them are known in Europe, but moft
of them are palatable, and fome are very delicious. Upon the Ihoals


and reefs there are incredible numbers of the fined: green turtle Jn the
world, and oyfters of various kinds, particularly the rock-oyfcer and
the pearl-oyfter ; there are alio cockles of a gigantic fize, and fea
cray-fifh, or lobfters, and crabs. In the rivers and fait creeks there
are alligators
The number of inhabitants appears to be very final! in proportion
to the extent of the country. • Captain Cook never law fo many as
thirty of them together, but once, during his whole range down this
. extenfive coaft. It is true the internal part of the country, remains
unexplored ; but as, with all his refearches, he did not meet with one
foot of ground in a ftate of cultivation, he concluded thole of the in-
habitants with whom he converfed to be ignorant of that art, which
could hardly have been the cafe, had they had any communication with
any body of people, living in land, as thefe latter could not fubfifi, with-
out feme mode of cultivating the earth.
The only tribe of inhabitants with whom Captain Cook had any
intercourfe was in Endeavour river, where the fhip was careened, which
confified of twelve men, feven women, one boy, and one girl. The
men were of a middle fize, and in general well made, clean-limbed,
end remarkably vigorous, afiive, and nimble; their countenances not
altogether without expreffion, but their voices remarkably foft and ef-
feminate. Their colour is nearly that of chocolate ; their features far
from difagreeabie, their nofes not fiat, nor their lips thick ; their teeth
are white and even, and their hair naturally long and black, but uni-
verfally cropped fiiort; their beards are of the fame colour as their
hair, bufiiy and thick, but not fuffered to grow long. From their
want of fiiarp inftruments, and fome particular appearances, Captain
Cook concluded, that they kept the hair, both of their heads and
beards, fiiort by fingeing.
Both foxes eo ftark naked, and feem to have no more fenfe of in-
decency in difcovering the whole body, than Europeans exprefs in
leaving the hands and face uncovered. Their principal ornament is a
bone, which they fhruft through the cartilage that divides the noftrils
from each other. As this bone is as thick as a man’s finger, and
nearly fix inches long, it reaches quite acrofs the face, and fo effcfin-
ally ftops up both the noftrils, that they are obliged to keep their


mouths wide open for breath, and when they fpeak, they fnuffle fo
that they are icarcely intelligible to each other. Captain Cook’s Tea-
men lihmcurofly called this bone, their fpritfail-yard. Belides this
nofe-jewel, they had necklaces made of Shells, very neatly cut and
ilrung together ; bracelets of fmall cord, wound two or three times
about the upper part of the arm, and a firing of plaited human hair,
tied round the waift ; feme of them had alio gorgets ot fliells hang-
ing round the neck fo as to reach crofs the bread:. But though thefe
O • 0
people wear no clothes, their bodies have a covering, for they paint
them both white and red. The red is commonly laid on in broad
patches upon the fhoulder and bread;; and the white in ftripes, feme
narrow and fome broad; the narrow are drawn over the limbs, and
the broad over the body, not w ithout fome degree of taffe. The w hite
is alio laid on in fmall patches upon the face, and drawn in a circle
round each eye.
There is not the lead: appearance of a town or village in the whole
country. The bed: of their heufes, if they may be termed homes,
are juft high enough to fit upright in, but not large enough for a man
to extend himfelf in any direction; they are built with pliable rods,
about the thkknefs of a man’s finger, in the form of an oven, by dicking
the two ends in the ground, and are covered with palm leaves, and fmall
pieces of bark: the door is nothing but a large hole at one end, op-
pofite to which the fire is made. Under thele houfes, or fheds, they
deep, with their heels coiled up to their heacs, and in this pofition one
of them may hold three or four perfons.
The only furniture belonging to thele houfes is a kind of oblong veflel
made of bark, by the Ample contrivance of tying up the tw o ends
with a wfithv, w r hich not being cut ort, ierves ior a handle. 1 in-
habitants have .abb a fmall bag, about the dze of a moderate cabbage-
net, w r hich the man carries on his back, by the help of a fmall diing
which paifes over his head ; it generally contains a lump or two of
paint and refin, fome fifh-hooks and lines, a Ihell or tw’O, out cf which
their hooks are made, a few points of darts, and their ufual orr aments,
which includes the whole treafure of the riched; men among them.
The only weapons found among thefe people are fpears or Unces,
fome of which have four prongs, pointed with bone, and barbed the


points are fmeared with a hard refin, which gives them a pohfh, and
makes them enter deeper into what they itiikc. Other lances
have hut one point, the (haft is made of cane, or the (talk of plant
fomewhat refembling a bulrufh, very Irrait and light, and fiom eight to
fourteen feet long/ Thefe (hafts confift of leverai joints, where
the pieces arc let into each other,, and bound together; to them
are fitted points of different kinds, feme being of a hard heavy wood,
and others of the bones of fiftv. Thefe weapons are thrown with great-
force and dexterity; if intended to wound at a (hort diftance, as from
ten to twenty yards, limply with the hand, but if at the diftance or forty,
or. fifty yards, then with a throwing flick, with the affiftance or which
the lance flies with incredible fwiftnefs, and with fo good an aim that,,
at the diftance of fifty yards, the natives are as fure of their mark, as
the molt expert markfman can be with a Angle bullet.
The canoes of New Holland are as mean as their houfes. Thofe
on the fomhern part of the coaft are nothing more than a piece of
bark, tied together at the ends, and kept open in the middle by fmall
bows of wood ; yet in thefe veffels there are foraetimes three perfons.
In (hallow water they make ufe of a pole, Ln deeper of paddles, about
eighteen inches long, one of which the boatman holds in each hand.
More to the northward, the canoes are made of the ti unk or a
tree, hollowed out, moft probably by fire; are about fourteen feet
in length, and, being very narrow, are fitted with an out-rigger,
to nrevent their over-fetting ; the outfide Is wholly unmarked by any
tool, but at each end the wood is left longer at the top than at
the bottom, fo that there is a projection beyond the hollow part,,
like the end of a plank; the fid.es are tolerably thin. Thofe are
worked with paddles, that are fo large as to require both hands to
manage one of them.
The principal food of the inhabitants, is fifh, though they fome-
times contrive to kill the kanguroo, and birds of various kinds. Thofe
they' drefs by broiling upon coals, or by baking in a hole, by the help
of hot ftones, for there is no appearance of their eating any ahima
food raw. The only vegetable that can be confidered as an article of
food is the yam ; though they poffibly may eat of thofe few fruits the
country produces.


Botany Bay, where the Intended fettlement is to be made, lies
in latitude 34. ° fouth, longitude from Greenwich 151 0 23', call:. “It
is, in the words of Captain Cook, capacious, fafe, and convenient,
and may be known by the land on the fea-coafi, which is nearly level,
and of a moderate height ; in general higher than it is farther inland,
WJ o o
with deep rocky cliffs next the fea, which have the appearance of a
long illand lying clofe under the fhore. The harbour lies about the
middle of this land, and in approaching it from the fouthwaid, is dis-
covered before the fhip comes a-breaft of it; but from the northward,,
it is not difcovered fo foon : the entrance is a little more than a quarter
of a mile broad, and lies in W. IST. W. To fail into it the fouthem.
fhore fbould be kept on board, till the fhip is within a fmall bare illand,..
which lies clofe under the north fhore ; within this illand the deepelt
water on that fide is feven fathom, fhallowing to five a good way up.
At a confiderable difiance from the fouth fhore there is a fhoal, reach-
ing from the inner fouth point, quite to the head of the harbour ; but
over towards the north and north-wefi fhore there is a channel of twelve
or fourteen feet at low water, for three or four leagues, up to a place
where there is three or four fathom, but here I found very little frefh
water. We anchored near the fouth fhore about a mile within the en-
trance, for the convenience of failing with a foutherly. wind, and be-
caufe I thought it the befi: lunation for watering ; but I afterwards
found a very fine fiream on the north fhore, in the firfi Tandy
cove within the illand, before which a fhip might lie almoft land lock-
ed, and procure wood as well as water, in great abundance. Wood
indeed is every where plenty, but I faw only two kinds which may be
confidered as timber. Thefe trees are as large or larger than the Eng-
lifh oak, and one of them has not a very different appearance, this
is the fame that yields the reddifh gum, like and
the wood is heavy, hard, and dark-coloured, like lignum ;
the other grows tall, and firait, fomething like the pine ; and the wood
of this, which has fome referablance to the live oak of America, is alfo
hard and heavy. There are few fhrubs and feveral kinds of the
palm; mangroves alfo grow in great plenty near the head of
the bay. The woods abound with birds of exquifite beauty, particu-
larly of the parrot kind; we found alfo. crows here, exadily the


Inns with thofe in England. About the head of the harbour, where
there are I age flats of hand and mud, there is great plenty of water-
fowl, mofr of 'which were altogether unknown to us : one of the mod;
J O
remarkable w r as black and white, much larger than a fwan, and in
fhape fomewhat refembling a pelican. On thefe banks of fand and
mud there are great quantities of oyfters, muftels, cockles, and other
fhell- iiih, which feem to be the principal lubfiftence of the inhabitants,
who go into ftioal water in their little canoes, and pick them out with
their hands,”
As it was in this bay that Captain Cook, and his company had
the greateft opportunity of obferving the manners of the inhabi-
tants, as well as of exploring the adjacent country, we final I here
prefent our readers with a narrative of their tranfadlions during their
flay in it, from the captain’s journal.
“ April 28, 1770. The. place where the fhip had anchored, was
a-breaft of a fmall village, confiding of about fix or eight houfes; and
while we were preparing to hoift out the boat, we faw an old woman
followed by three children, come out of the wood; fhe was loaded
with fire-wood, and each of the children had alfo it’s little burthen;
when fhe came to the houfes, three more children, younger than the
others, came out to meet her: fhe often looked at the fhip, but
exprefTed neither fear nor furprize: in a fhort time die kindled a fire,
* /
and four canoes came in from fifhing. The men landed, and having
hauled up their boats, began to drefs their dinner, to all appear-
ance wholly unconcerned about us, though we were within half a
mile of them. We thought it remarkable that of all the people we had
yet feen, not one had the leaft appearance of clothing, the old wo-
man herfelf being deflitute even of a fig-leaf.
w J O
“ After dinner the boats were manned, and we fet out from the
fhip, having Tupia of our party. We intended to land where we
faw the people, and began to hope that as they had fo little regarded
the {hip’s coming into the bay, they would as little regard our coming
on fhore: in this however we were difappointed ; for as foon as we ap-
proached the rocks, two of the men came down upon them to difpute
onr landing, and the reft ran away. Each of the two champions was
anmd with a lance about ten feet long, and a ftiort ftick, which he


feemed to handle as if it was a machine to afllfl in managing or throw-
ing the lance : they calling out to us in a very loud tone, and in a harfh
difldnant language, of which neither we nor Tupia underflood a fingle
word : they brandifhed their weapons, and feemed refolved to defend
their coafl to the uttermofl, though they were but two, and we were
forty. I could not but admire their courage, and being unwilling hol-
tilities fhould commence with fuch inequality ot force between us, I
ordered the boat to lie upon her oars: we then parlied by iigns for
about a quarter of an hour, and to hefpeak their good-will, I threw them
nails, beads, and other trifles, which they took up and feemed to be
well pleafed with. I then made figns that I wanted water, and by all
the means that I could devife, endeavoured to convince them that we
would do them no harm ; they now waved to us, and I was willing to
interpret it as an invitation ; but upon our putting the boat in, they came
again to oppofe us. One appeared to be a youth, about nineteen or
twenty, the other a man of middle age : as I had now no other refource,
I fired a muiket between them. Upon the report, the younger dropped
a bundle of lances upon the rock, but recollefiling himfelf in an in-
flant, he fnatched them up again in great hafle ; a Hone was then thrown
at us, upon which I ordered a mufket to be fired with final Ifhot, which
flruck the eldefl upon the legs, and he immediately ran to one of the
houfes, which was diflant about an hundred yards : I now hoped that
our contell was over, and we immediately landed ; but we had fcarcely
left the boat when he returned, and we then perceived that he had left
the rock only to fetch a fhieldor target for his defence. As foon as he
came up, he threw a lance at us, and his comrade another; they fell
where we flood thickcfl, but happily hurt nobody. A third mi fleet
with fmall fhot was then fired at them, upon which one of them threw
another lance and both immediately ran away : if we had purified, we
might probably have taken one of them.; but Mr. Banks ifiggeflmg
that the lances might be poifoned, I thought it not prudent to venture
into the wood. We repaired immediately to the huts, in one of which
we found the children, who had hidden themfelves behind a fhield and
fomc bark ; we peeped at them, but left them in their retreat, without
their knowing that they had been difeovered, and, wethrew into the houfe,
when wc went away, fome beads, ribbons, pieces of doth, and other


prefents, which we hoped would procure us the good-will of the inha-
bitants, when they fhouid return; but the lances which we found ly-
ing about, we took away with us, to the number of about fifty: they
were from fix to fifteen feet long, and all of them had four prongs,
in the manner of afifh-gigg, each of which was pointed witli fifh-bone,.
and very fbarp :we obferved that they were fraeared with a vifcous
fubftance of a preen colour, which favoured the opinion of their being
poifoned, though we afterwards difcovered that it was a mifiake: they
appeared, by the fea weed that we found flicking to them, to have been;
ufed in ftriking fifli. Upon examining the canoes that lay upon the
beach, we found them to be the worfl we had ever feen; they were
between twelve and fourteen feet long, and made of the bark of a-
tree in one piece, which was drawn together and tied up at each end,,
the middle being kept open by flicks which were placed acrofs them
from gunwale to gunwale a-thwarts. We then fearched,for frelh
water, but found none, except in a fmall hole which had been dug in
the fand.
“ Having reimbarked in our boat, we depofited our lances aboard,
and then went over to the north point of the bay, where we had feen;
feveral of the inhabitants when we were entering it, but which
now found totally deferted.
“ April 29th.. In the morning I fent a party of men on fliore, in
order to dig holes in the fand where the water might gather; but
going aflhore myfelf with the gentlemen foon afterwards, we found,
upon a more diligent fearch, a fmall ftream more than fufficient for our
purpofe.
“ Upon vifiting the hut where we had feen the children, we were*
greatly mortified to find that the beads and ribbons which we had left'
there the night before had not been moved from their places, and that
not an Indian was to be feen.
“ Having fent fome empty water-calks on fhore, and left a party ot
men to cut wood, I went myfelf in the pinnace to found and examine
the bay; during my excurfion I faw feveral of the natives, but they all
fled at my approach. In one of the places where I landed I found fe-
veral fmall fires, and frelli muflels broiling upon them; here alfo 1
found fome of the largeft oyfler-ihells I had ever feen.


As foon as the wooders and vvaterers came on board to dinner, tern
or twelve of the natives came down to the place, and looked with
great attention and curiolity at the calks, but did not touch them : they
took away however the canoes which lay near the landing-place, and
again dhappeared.- In the afternoon, when our people were again on
Ihore, lixteen or eighteen Indians, all armed, came boldly within aoout an
hundred yards of them; and then Hopped : two of them advanced fome-
what nearer; and Mr. Hicks, who commanded the party on fßore,
with another, advanced to meet them, and cxpreHing kindnefs
and amity by every lign he could think of. but all without effedt;
for before he could get up with them they retired, and it would have
anfwcred no purpofe to purfue.
“ April 30th. The next morning, before day-break, the Indians
came down to the houfes that were a-breaH of the Ihip, and. were
heard frequently to fhout very loud. As foon as it was light, they
were feen walking along the beach; and loon after they retired
to the woods, where, at the diHance of about a mile from the Ihore,.
they kindled feveral fires.
“ Qur people went on Ihore as ufual, and with them Mr. Banks-
and Or.- Solander, who, in fearch ot plants, repaired to the woods.
Our men, who were employed in cutting giafs, being the tartheft lemov-
ed-from the main body ofthe people, a company ot fourteen or fifteen In-
dians advanced towards them, having flicks in their hands, vvhi .h, ac-
coiding to the report of the ferjeant of marines, fhone like a muiquet.
The grafs-cuiters, upon feeing them approach, drew together, and
repaired to the main body. The Indians, being encouraged oy this ap-
pearance of a flight, purfued them; they Hopped however, when they
were within about a furlong of them, and after (Routing feveral times
went back into the woods. In the evening they came again m the
fame manner. Hopped at the fame diHance, (Routed and retired.
I followed them myfelf, alone and unarmed, for a confiderabie way
alono- the Ihore, but I could not prevail upon them to Hop. _
“ May 1. This day we refolved to make an excurfion into the
country. Mr. Banks, Dr. Solander, myfelf, and (even others, pro-
perly accoutred for the expedition, fet out, and repaired : r to t e
huts near the watering place, whither forne of the natives contm *d
A™ tn refort: and though the little preients wmch we left tl - e


"before were not yet taken away, we left others of fomewhat more
value, confifting of cloth, looking-glaffes, combs, and beads, and
then went up into the country. We found the foil to be either fwamp
or light fand, and the face of the country finely diverfified by wood
■and lawn. The trees are tall, ftrait, and without underwood, hand-
ing at fuch a distance from each other that the whole country, at leaf:
where the fwamps do not render it incapable of cultivation, might be
cultivated without cutting down one of them •, between the trees the
ground is covered with grafs, of which there is great abundance, grow-
ing in tufts about as big as can well be grafped in the hand, which
'hand very dole to each other. We faw many houfes of the inhabi-
tants, and places where they had flept upon the grafs without any
Ihelter ; but we faw only one of the people, who the moment he dif-
covered us ran away. At all thefe places we left prefents, hoping
that at length they might produce confidence and good-will. We
had a tranfcient and imperfect view of a quadruped about as big as
a rabbit: Mr. Banks’s greyhound, which was with us, got fight of it,
and would probably have caught it, but the moment he fet off he lamed
himfelf, againfl: a ffump which lay concealed in the long grafs. We
afterwards faw the dung of an animal which fed upon grafs, and which
wejudged could not be lefs than a deer; and the footlleps of another, which
was clawed like a dog, and feemed to be about as big as a wolf: we alio
tracked a fmall animal, whofe foot refembled that of a polecat or
weafel. The trees over our heads abounded with birds of various kinds,
■ V *
among which were many of exquifite beauty, particularly loriquets
and cockatoos, which Hew in flocks of feveral fcores together. We found
fome wood which had been felled by the natives with fome blunt in-
ffrument, and fome that had been barked. The trees were not of many
fpecies, but in fome of them Heps had been cut at about the diftance
of three feet from each other, for the convenience of climbing them.
“ From this excurfion we returned between three and four o’clock,
and having dined on board, we went alhore again at the watering-place.
o o y
where a party of men were filling calks. Mr. Gore, the fecond lieu-
tenant, had been fent out in the morning with a boat to dredge lor oyifers
at the head of the bay ; when he had performed this fervice, he went
alhore, and having taken a midlhipman with him, and lent the boat


away, let out to join the waterers by land. In his way he fell In
with a body of twenty-two Indians, whofollowed him, and were often not
more than twenty yards distance : when Mr. Gore peceived them fo
near, he flopped and faced about, upon which they flopped alfo; and
when he went on again, continued their purfuit: they did not howe-
• ver attack him, though they were all armed with lances, and he and
the midfhipman got in fafety to the watering-place. The Indians,
who had flackened their purfuit when they came in fight of the main
body of our people, halted at the diflance of about a quarter of a mile,
where they flood Hill'. Mr. Monkhoufe and two or three of the wa-
terers took it in their head to march up to them ; but feeing the Indians
: keep their ground ’till they came pretty near them, they were feized
with a hidden fear, very common to the ralh and fool-hardy, and made a
hafly retreat: this flep, which enfured the danger that it was taken to
avoid, encouraged the Indians, and four of them running forwards
difeharged their lances at the fugitives, with fuch force that, hying no
lefs than forty yards,- they went beyond them. As the Indians did not
purfue, our people, recovering their fpirits, flopped to colledl the lances
when they came up to the place where they lay upon which the In-
dians, in their turn, began to retire. Jufl at this time I came up,,
with Mr. Banks, Dr. Solander, and Tupia; and being defirous to con-
vince the Indians that we were neither afraid of them, nor intended
them any mifehief, we advanced towards them, making figns of ex-
poflulation and entreaty, but they could not be perfuaded to flay till
we could come up. Mr. Gore told us,, that he had feen fome of them
up the bay, who had invited him by figns to come on fhore, whicn lie,
certainly with great prudence, declined.
“ May 2. In the afternoon we made another excursion along the fea-
coafl to the fouthward ; Mr. Banks and Dr. Solajider gathered many
plants, but befide thefe we faw nothing worthy of notice. At our
firfl entering the woods, we met with three of the natives, who in-
flantly ran away : more of them were feen by fome of tne peopie, but
they all difappeared with great precipitation, as foon as tney lound that
they were dilcovered. By the boldneis of tneie people at ou. fill
. landing-, and the terror that feizeo. them at tiie figiit of us afterwards,
it appears that they were fufficiently intimidated witn out fitc-ainis


not that we had any reafon to think the people much hurt by the final!
fhot we were obliged to fire at them, when they attacked us at our
coming out of the boat ; but they had probably feen the effeCts of
them from their lurking places, upon the birds that we had fhot. Tu-
pia, who was now become a good markfman, frequently ftrayed from
us to fhoot parrots; and he had told us, that while he was thus em-
ployed, he had once met with nine Indians, who, as foon as they
perceived he faw them, ran from him in great confufion and terror.
“ May 3. Twelve canoes, in each of which there was a fingle In-
dian, came towards the watering-place, and were within half a mile
of it, a confiderable time : they were employed in ftriking filh, up-
on which, like others that we had feen before, they were 10 intent, that
they feemed to regard nothing elfe. It happened, however, that a par-
ty of our people were out a fhooting near the place, and one of the
men, whofe curiofity might at length perhaps be roufed by the report of
the fowling pieces, was obferved by Mr. Banks to haul up his canoe upon
the beach, and go towards the fhooting party : in fomething more
than a quarter of an hour he returned, launched his canoe, and went off
in her to his companions. This incident makes it probable, that the
natives acquired a knowledge of the deftruCtive power of our fire-arms,
when we knew nothing of the matter; for this man was not feen by
any of the party whofe operations he had reconnoitred.
“ While Mr. Banks was gathering plants near the watering place, I
went with Dr. Solander and Mr. Monkhoufe to the head of the bay, that
I might examine that part of the country, and make farther attempts
to form feme connection with the natives. In our way we met with
eleven or twelve finall canoes, with each a man in it, probably the fame
who were afterwards abreafl of the fhore, who all made into fhoal water
upon our approach. We met other Indians on the fhore, the firft
time we landed, who inftantly took to their canoes and paddled away.
We went up the country to feme diftance, and found the face of
it nearly the fame with that which has been defcribed already, but the
foil was much richer; for inffead of fand, I found a deep black mould,
which I thought very fit for the production of grain of any kind.
In the woods we found a tree which bore fruit that in colour and fhape
fefembled a cherry ■, the juice had an agreeable tartnefs, though but


little flavour. W e found alfo interfperfed fome of the fine ft meadows
in the world : fome places however were rocky, but thefe were compa-
ratively few : the ftone is fandy, and might be ufed with advantage for
building. W hen we returned to the boat, we law fome fmoke upon
another part of the coaft, and went thither, in hopes of meeting with
the people, but at our approach, thefe alfo ran away. We found fix
fmall canoes, and fix fires very near the beach, with fome muffels roafting
upon them, and a fewoyfters lying near : By this we judged that there
had been one man in each canoe, who having picked up fome fheli-filh,
had come on ihore to eat it, and made his feparate fire for that purpofe :
we tafted of their cheer, and left them in return fome firings of beads,
and other things which we thought would pleafe them.
Ma y 4* f ent feveral parties into the country to try again whe-
ther fome intercourfe could not be eftablifhed with the natives. A mid-
fhipman belonging to one of thefe parties having ftraggled a
long way from his companions, met with a very old man and wo-
man, and iome little children ; tliey were fitting under a tree by the
water fide, and neither party faw the other till they were clofe to-
gether . die Indians fhewed figns of fear, but did not attempt to run
away. The man happened to have nothing to give them but a par-
rot that he had ihot ; this he offered, but they refufed to accept it,
withdrawing themfelves from his hand either through fear or aver-
fion. His ftay with them was but fhort, for he faw feveral canoes near
the beach filhing, and being alone, he feared they might come afhore
and attack him : he Hud that thefe people were very dark coloured,
but not black; that the man and woman appeared to be very old,
being both grey-headed ,• that the hair of the man’s head was bufhy,
and his beard long and rough ; that the woman’s hair was cropped
fhort, and both of them were ftark naked. Mr. Monkhcufe the fur-
gcon, and one of the men, who were with another party near the water-
ing-place, alfo ftrayed from their companions, and as they were com-
ing out of a thicket, obferved fix Indians Handing together, at the diftance
of about fifty yards. One of the n pronounced a word very loud, which
was fuppofed to be a fignal, for a lance was immediately thrown at
him out of the wood, which very narrowly miffed him. When the
Indians faw that the weapon had not taken effect, they ran away with


die greatefl precipitation ; but turning about towards the place whence
the lance had been thrown, he faw a young Indian, whom he judged to
be about nineteen or twenty years old, come down from a tree,
and he alfo ran away with fuch fpecd as made it hopelefs to follow him.
Mr. Monkhoufe was of opinion, that he had been watched by thefe
Indians in his palTage through the thicket ; and that the youth had been
flationed in the tree, to difcharge the lance at him, upon a lignal, as
he Ihould come by ; but however this be, there could be no doubt but
•that he was the perfon who threw the lance.
; “ In the afternoon I went myfelf, with a party, over to the north
ihore, and while fome of our people were hauling the feine, we made
an excurlion a few miles into the country, proceeding afterwards in the
direction of thecoaft. We found this place without w 7 ood, andfome-
what refembling our moors in England 3 the furface of the ground,
however, was covered with a thin brufh of plants, about as high as
the knees: the- hills near the coaft are low, but others rife behind
them, increaling by a gradual afcent to a confiderable diftance, with
mar flies and morafles between. When we returned to the boat, we
found that our people had caught with the feine a great number of fmall
fifli, which are well known in the Weft-Indies, and which our failors
call leather jackets, becaufe their Ikin is remarkably thick. I hadfent
the fecond lieutenant out in the yawl a ftriking, and when we got back
to the fliip, we found that he alfo had been very fuccefsful. He had
obferved that the large fling-rays, of which there is great plenty in
the bay, followed the flowing tide into very fhallow water ; he there-
fore took the opportunity of flood, and ftruckfeveral in not more than
two or three feet water: one of them weighed no lefs than two hun-
. r - V > f- ♦ - ■ -- »
dred arid forty pounds after his entrails tvere taken out.
“ May 5. The wind ftill continuing northerly, I Tent out the
yawl again, and the people flruck one ftill larger,
:
were taken out he weighed three hundred and thiity-fix pounds.
* « May 6. At day-break we fet fail froth Botany Bay, With a
light breeze at north-Weft,
<< During my ftay in this harbour, I caufed the Englifh colours to
be difplayed on ftiore every day, and the (hip’s name, and the date of
the year, to be inferibed upon one of the trees near the watering-place.


“ It is high water here at the full and change of the moon about
eight o’clock, and the tide rifes and falls perpendicularly between four
and five feet.”
Onr-Captain Cook’s laft voyage he again vifltcd the coafl of New
Holland, which he approached from the fouthward. Onjthe 24th
of January 1777, he fell in with Van Diemen’s land, and the 26th
anchored in Adventure Bay, in latitude 43 0 21' S. being about five
degrees more to the fouthward than that part of the land which he firfl
faw on his courfe from New Zealand in the year 1770.
The ufual employments of wooding and watering took them up till
the 28th ; in the afternoon of which day, they were unexpectedly vi-
fitedby eight men and a boy,, who approached them with the greatefl
confidence, none of them having any weapons, except one, who had
a fhort flick, pointed at one end. Thefe appeared of a middling fix-
ture, and fomewhat (lender ; their hair black and woolly, and their fkin
alfo black. They were entirely naked, with large pundlures or ridges,
fome in curved, and others in flrait lines ort different parts of their bo-
dies ; their lips not remarkably thick, nor their nofes very flat ; their
features on the contrary, being not unpleafing, their eyes pretty good,
and their teeth tolerably even and regular, though exceeding dirty.
Some of them had pad painted their faces with a red oint-
ment, and meft of them had fmeared their hair and their beards with
the fame cornpofition. When prefents were offered them they received
them without any apparent fatisfadlion. As the Captain wifhed to-
know the ufe of the flick which one of the Indians held in his hand, he
made figns to them to fhew him ; on which one of them look aim at a
piece of wood placed as a mark, at the distance of twenty yards, but
after feveral eflays, he went flill wide of it.
After they retired, Captain Cook ordered two pigs, one a male, the
other a female, to be carried about a mile within the wooas, and he
hirnfelf faw them left there, taking the utmofl precaution that the na-
tives fhould not obferve what was paffing,. as he feared they would de-
flroy them, if foon found ; and as fwme foon become wild, and aie
fond of being in woods, it is probable they were preferred. ;
A dead calm preventing the fhips from failing, Captain Cook the
next day, fent fome parties on fhore to cut wood and grids, who were


loon joined by about twenty of the natives. Some of thefe had a flip
of the fkinof a kangooroo round their ancles, and others wore, round
their necks, fome fmall cord, made of fur. Thev feemed not to value
iron, but were apparantly pleafed with the-medals and beads given
them. Juft after Captain Cook had quitted this part, feveral women
and children were introduced by the men to lieutenant King. Thefe
females wore a kangooroo fkin over their (boulders, the only ufe of
which feemed to be, to fupport their children on their backs, for it left
thole parts uncovered, which modefty diredfs us to conceal. Their
bodies were black, and marked with fears, like the men, from whom,
however, they differed in having their heads fhaved ; fome of them
being completely fhorn, others only on one fide, while the reft of them
had the upper part of the head fhaved, leaving a very narrow circle of
hair all round. The people now feen, differed in fome refpeeft, parti-
cularly in the texture of the hair from the natives of the more northern
part of this country, whom Captain Cook met with in his firft voyage.
During the ftay of the fhips in this bay, Mr. Anderfon, the furgeon
of the Refolution, employed himfelf, with his ufual induftry, in ex-
amining the country; and we fhall here give our readers his account
of its natural productions, and remarks on the inhabitants.
“There is a beautiful fandy beach, about two miles long, at the
bottom of Adventure Bay, formed, to all appearance, by the particles
which the fea wafhes from a fine white fand-ftone. This beach is
very well adapted for hauling a feine. Behind it is a plain, with a
brackifh lake, out of which we caught, by angling, fome bream and
trout. The parts adjoining the bay are moftly hilly, and are an entire
foreft of tall trees, rendered almoft impaffable by brakes of fern, fhrubs,
&c. The foil on the flat land, and on the lower part of the hills, is
fandy, or confifts of a yellowifh earth, and in fome parts of a reddifh
clay; but further up the hills, it is of a grey tough caft. Th is coun-
try, upon the whole, bears many marks of being very dry, and the heat
appears to be great. No mineral bodies, nor ftones of any other kind
than the white find ftones, were obferved by us; nor could we find
any vegetables that offered fubfiftance for man. The foreft trees arc
ail of one kind, and generally quite ftrait: and bear clufters of fmall
white flowers. The principal plants we obferved, were wood-forrel.


milk- wort, cudweed, bell-flower, gladiolus, famphire, and feveral kinds
of fern.
“ The only quadruped we faw diftindly, was a fpecies of opoflum,
about twice the fize of a large rat. The kangooroo, found further
northward in New Holland, may alfo be fuppofed to inhabit here, as
fome of the inhabitants had pieces of the fkin of that animal.
“ The principal fort of birds, in the woods, are brown hawks, or
eagles, crows, large pigeons, yellowifh paroquets, and a fpecies, which
we called metacilla cyanea, from the beautiful azure colour of its head
and neck. On the fhore were feveral gulls, black oyfler-catchers, or
fea-pies, and plovers of a hone colour.
“We obferved in the woods fome blackifh fnakes, that w r ere pretty
large, and we killed a lizard which was fifteen inches long, and fix
round, beautifully clouded with yellow and black.
Among a variety of fifh, we caught fome large rays, nurfes, lea-
ther-jackets, bream, foies, flounders, gurnards and elephant-fifh ; be-
sides a fort which we did not recoiled to have leen before, and which
partakes of the nature both of a round and a flat fifh. Upon the rocks
are mufiels and other fhell-fifh ; and, upon the beach, we found fome
pretty medufa’s head- The moll troublefome in feels we met with were
the mufquitoes, and a large black ant, whofe bite infiids extreme pain.
“ The inhabitants Teemed mild andchearful, with little of that wild
appearance, that favages in general have. They arc almofi totally de-
void of perfonal adivity or genius, and are nearly upon a par with the
wretched natives of Terra del Fuego, They difplay, however, fome
contrivance in their method of cutting their arms and bodies in lines
of different directions, railed above the lurface of their fkin. Their
indifference tor our prefents, their general inattention and want of cu-
riolity, were very remarkable, and teflified no acutenefs of under-
fianding. Their compledion is a dull black, which they fometime-s
heighten by fmutting their bodies, as we fuppofed, from their leaving
a mark behind, on any dean fuhftance. '1 heir hair is perlcdtly woolly,
and is clotted with greafe and red ocre, like that of the Hottentots.
Their nofes are broad and full, and the lower part of their face protects
confiderably. Their eyes are of a moderate fize, and though they are
not very quick or piercing, they give the countenance a frank, chearful


and pleafing cad. Their teeth are not very white, nor well fet, and
their mouths are too wide: they wear their beards long and clotted
with paint. They are, upon the whole, well proportioned, though their
belly is rather protuberant. Their favourite attitude is to dand with
one fide forward, and one hand grafping, acrofs the back, fhe op-
pofite arm, which on this occafion, hangs down by the fide that pro-
jects,
“ Near the (bore in the bay, we obferved fome wretched conftruc-
tions of flicks, covered with bark ; but thefe feem to have been only
temporary, and they had converted many of their larged: trees into more
comfortable and commodious habitations. The trunks of thefe were
hollowed out to the height of fix or feven feet, by the means of fire.
That they fometimes dwell in them, was manifed, from their hearths in
the middle, made of clay, round which four or five perfons might fit.
Thefe places of dicker are rendered durable,, by their leaving one fide of
the tree found, fo that it continues growing with great luxuriance.
“ That the natives of Van Diemen’s Land originate from the fame
flock with thofe who inhabit the northern parts of New Holland,
feem evident. Though they differ in many refpeCts, their diffimilarity
may be reafonably accounted for, from the united confiderations of
diifance of place, length of time, total reparation, and diverfity of
climate.”
When we confider the number of populous iflands, in the Southern
Ocean, which have been vifited by the Britidi flag, under the aufpicices
of our mod gracious Sovereign ; the importance of a permanent fettle-
ment in that part of the world, in order to continue the friendly inter-
courfe we have already had with the inhabitants, as well as to enable
Us to enter into fome commercial connections with them, will im-
mediately appear to the mind of every intelligent perfon. Botany Bay
having been fixed on for that pupofe, we fhall endeavour to point out
a few particulars to fhew its importance in that view.
Whoever takes the pains to examine the chart of the late Capt. Cook’s
difcoveries, will find there is an open fea from the Bay to the duller of
iflands called New Zealand, lying fomewhat to the fouthward of the
eafl, at the diftance of above four hundred leagues. At about the fame
didance from the north-ead, lay the New Hebrides, a very mo-


derate diftance from them, and under the fame degree of latitude are
the Friendly Iflands, the Society Iflands, and, the Marqueias I Acs.
From thefe latter the run to the Sandwich Iflands does not exceed eight
hundred leagues , lb that this whole tour fcarcely equals a voyage irom
Great Britain to the Carrlhbee Iflands and back. Its fltuation is we.
adapted for carrying on a trade between Nootka Sound and Cooks
River, on the American coaifl, and-the ifles of Japan and
nefe Empire, in fea-otter’s Ikins j as alfo to per fed the ditcovenes wine a
have hitherto been made in that part of the globe, a matter which
the late Captain King had much at heart*. Its neighbourhood alio to
New Guinea, and the adjacent ifles. may conduce to feme ditcovenes,
which in time may reinftate this country in a lhare of the fpice trade ;
a trade which the Dutch Eaft India Company have monopolized tor
near two centuries. c
Should a war break out with the court of Spam, crmzers,irom
Botany Bay might much interrupt, if not deftroy, their lucrative com-
merce from the Philippine iflands to Aquapulco ; beiides alarming
and diftrefling their fettlements upon the weft-coaff of south America,
In the foregoing accounts the country about the bay is represented
as producing timber and ftone for building, as alfo wood for firing ;
its foil as fit for the production of any kind or vegetaole food j ; n
the feas to abound with the moil delicate fiih. Should any objeeft
to the paucity of quadrupeds, it muft be remarked, that a friendly
intercourfe with the tropical iflands will not only procure a lupp y °
hoys for food, but alfo for ftock. And as moft of our navigators have
afferted that the iflands lying eaft ward of Borneo, are well ftocnea wua
cattle of the buffalo kind, a breed of thofc, who are endemial to the
climate, may be introduced, and in a few years, with the affiftance of
the hogs, there may be a fufficient lupply of animal food, not on y .
the me of the fettlers, but alfo of thole who may be induced to vm
them.
* See Capt. Cook’s laft voyage, vol. 4- P- 246. Fielding’s octavo edition.
FI N 1 S.


This Day was
By JO HN FIELDING, No. 23, Paternojicr-Row,
Two beautiful Editions of CAPTAIN COOK’s laft Voyage, one in
Four Volumes Odtavo, embeilifhed with Sixty fine Copper Plates,
and a large Chart, exhibiting all the Difcoveries made in this and
his two preceding Voyages, with the Tracts of the Ships under his
Command. Price il. 7s. in Boards.
A VOYAGE to the PACIFIC OCEAN, undertaken by the
Command of his Majefty, for making Difcoveries in the Northern
Hemifphere. Performed under the Direction of Captains Cook,
Clerke, and Gore, in the Years 1776, 1777, 1778, 1779* and
1780.
Written by Captain JAMES COOK, F. R. S.
And Captain JAMES KING, LL. D. and F. R. S.
The ABRIDGEMENT of COOK’s Voyage, in One Volume,, is
embeilifhed with the Eight following Copper-Plates :
1. A Whole Length Portrait of CAPTAIN COOK. 2. The
Infide of a Hippah in New Zealand. 3. A Dance in Otaheite. 4. A
View of Huaheine. 5. A View of the Habitations in Nootka Sound.
6. Captain Cook’s Death. 7. Summer and Winter Habitations in
Kamptfchatka. 8. An engraved Title-Page, with a beautiful Vignette
of the Arms granted to the Captain’s Defcendants. —Price only 3s. 6d.
fewed, or 4s. neatly bound.
The Public are requefted to afk for FIELDING’s Edition,
as no other are faithfully abridged, or have any of the fine Plates.




