

ft &?>¥&.
Printed at Chronicle Office, 198 King-street, Newtown.
• IV
'• V


■
'
- .
.
'
", A •'
\ 1 ‘ '%& ■ & miliMfc. £mUbß .
\ ’ *. .


An Historical Sketch
—OE —
ST. PETER’S CHURCH,
COOK’S RIVER, SYDNEY
(CHURCH OF ENGLAND).
SOUTHERN .ELEVATION.
By the Revd. Edward D. Madgwicic, Incumbent (formerly of St.
Thomas’s, Balmain, and St. Michael s, Surry Hills).


HISTORICAL SKETCH
ST. COOK’S f^IVER
1839-189 S.
——o«o®o»o®
PT. Peter’s, Cook’s River, as it is always officially designated,
is one of the oldest churches in the suburbs of Sydney. It
was built in 1839, and consecrated on the 20th November
ejy in that year by Bishop Broughton, the first and only bishop
x bearing the title of Bishop of Australia. It is situated in
the Parish of Petersham, is older than St. Stephen’s, New-
town ; All Saints, Petersham : Christ Church, Enmore; St.
Clement’s, Marrickville; Holy Trinity, Erskineville; and St.
George’s, Kogarah; and, indeed, the parish of St. Peter’s,
Cook’s River, is the mother parish and comprised several
of these now subdivided parishes. Many years before
the spire of St. Stephen’s rose as a landmark amid the
mass of houses and inhabitants including some of these parishes
in vhat is now practically one town, that of St. Peter’s was the
only familiar object of the kind to be seen on its own side of
Sydney. Prior to the erection of the permanent structure, there
was a temporary wooden building erected within a short distance
of the present church, on the portion of ground now known as
the new part of the cemetery, and that temporary building did
service as a church until the permanent structure was ready for
use. On the 7th of December, 1837, the late Robert Campbell,
Esq., executed a deed by which the block of land consisting of
six acres and fourteen perches, and on which now stand the
Church, Parsonage, Glebe, and burial ground, was conveyed as a
gift to the Bishop of Australia and his successors in trust for the
purposes of the Church in the parish of St. Peter’s, Cook’s River.
The Campbell family are well known for their great generosity
to the church in many parts of the colony. In this case Mr,
Robert Campbell gave of his best to God, for the site he gave to
this parish for a church and other ecclesiastical purposes is one
of the most commanding and pleasant in the district.


Extenop Views.
As one stands at the present Tram Terminus on the Enmore
Load and looks in the direction of Botany Bay, one obtains a
most picturesque view of this charming English-looking church.
The coast lines and blue waters of the bay form a brilliant back-
ground to the scene. Eying amongst its Glebe lands and
surrounded by its monuments, marking the resting places of the
departed in its burial ground, is the old church with its embattled
gables and tower out of which rises the spire, surmounted by a
golden globe and cross. There is nothing more peaceful and
beautiful to be seen in any part of the land or in England itself
than this view of St. Peter’s. Leaving the busy thoroughfare
of King street, Newtown, the person, who may happen to be a
visitor from the metropolis, comes to the suburb known as St.
Peters. That the suburb should be known by the name of St.
Peters at once suggests the thought that before the locality be-
came much populated or obtained any designation, the name of
the church was applied to the place which is really the fact and
accounts for the rather tautological postal address of the church,
‘ Peter s Church, St. Peters.” It has this, however, in its
favour that it is at least historical. About half way through the
suburb our visitor comes to a turn in the Cook’s River-road
along which he is now travelling and he sees on his right hand a
burial ground out of the midst of whose monuments and ever-
green trees the venerable pile of St, Peter’s rises into view. A
few steps further and he comes in front of the gates and broad
avenue of trees leading up in stately form to the main entrance
which is in a square tower surmounted by a dwarf octagonal
tower and copper-covered octagonal spire on which are the golden
globe and the cross, before mentioned. Here it is noticable that
the cross leans back at an angle of 45 degrees and when he in-
quires the reason of this strange position of the Christian symbol,
he is told that the lightning conductor attached to the cross has
sunk and drawn the cross aside with it, and the people are so
poor that they cannot undertake the many repairs that are need-
ing to be done to this historic building. It then becomes manifest
that the tower, the walls, and the roof are sadly in need of repairs
and of paint, and that to do it all would require a large sum of
money. A little to the left of the church is the plain cottage
parsonage, with its ample slope of beautiful ground fronting the
road. The effect of this view is pleasing and once more revives
those recollections of an English Church and its surroundings
which follow everyone who comes from the Old Country. When
the visitor reaches the church he finds himself standing on a level
from which he can see most of the suburbs of Newtown, Stan-
more, Enmore, Petersham, and Marrickville. So much for the
exterior; now let us take a


View Inside.
The idea at once strikes the visitor again “ How English
looking ! ” The ceiling is high and groined like the roof of a
Cathedral and is supported by twelve (six on each side) lofty,
perfectly straight pillars, not of stone, but of iron-bark trees, all
of the same height and diameter. They were obtained from a
spot about a mile and a half further on than the church. That
spot was richly timbered 50 or 60 years ago, and was called
“ Gannon’s Forest.” Now the stately trees are all gone and
houses crowd the scene. The family of Mr. Gannon has outlived
the forest called by his name. In this district as well as in other
parts of the colony numerous branches of the well-known family
name are to be found. On some of these pillars are painted in
old English letters the names of “ pillars of the church.” On the
left of the Holy Table is the name of Broughton and on the right
is the name of Barker-Episcopal pillars. In the body of the church
there are the names of Incumbents Steele and Nixon, Bull and
Uzzell, all departed to receive the crown of righteousness from
the Chief Shepherd. The next feature that strikes attention is
the windows. They are all coloured and would be beautiful in
a church of greater architectural pretensions. They are lofty,
admit a cheerful light, but they are so toned as to produce a
reverential feeling as soon as you step inside. The east window
over the Holy Table is a vividly coloured picture of the Ascension.
The others are nearly all memorials of old families, identified with
the church in days when there were many wealthy parishioners
to take an interest in the House of God—Way and Johnson and
Bull; the children baptized in 1884 and Barden, Talbot and
Breillat, Reilly and Chalder, Metcalfe and Smith, Cook and
Harber, and Stanley Howard (a former curate of saintly memory).
The pulpit, reading desk and lecturn are of carved cedar; the two
first were presented by a former Incumbent, the Rev. A. H. Bull,
and the last by the late Mr. Michael Metcalfe in memory of two
of his children. There are many living who remember the days
of old fashioned high-backed pews and “three decker” pulpit
reading desk and the clerk’s pew. They see nothing of the kind
now, but in their stead modern pews ; even the days of “ appro-
priated ” and “free” sides are passing away. The class who
rented pews is becoming every year smaller, and the class who
resort to the “ free ” side larger. The days of the “ sheep ” and
the “ goats ” are numbered. Mural tablets are not wanting to
remind us of the dignity of the old parishioners. On the north
side is one to the memory of Captain Ebhart, of H.M. 45 Regt.
of Foot, who died the same year as the church was consecrated.
On the south side are two, also to military men, one to Dr.
Radford, Surgeon to H.M. 62 Regt,, 1836, the other to John


Ernest Robberds, first Lieutenant of the Newtown Company of
N.S.W. Volunteer Rifles, 1862. There is another to Mrs. Bull,
wife of the Incumbent of that name: she died in 1862. From
the window, also to her memory and that of her husband, we
gather that she was the Dorcas of her husband’s parish, as the
act of Dorcas distributing clothing to the poor is illustrated in
the half of the window dedicated to her memory, while in the
other half, dedicated to the memory of her husband, there is a
picture of St. Paul preaching at Athens. Looking round again
to the west end there is a gallery in which is the organ, an in-
strument of no mean capacity, and another instance of the
liberality of wealthy persons in days gone by. . Wherever one
turns one sees some sign of better days when wealthy and liberal
men took an interest in church work, but those days are no more.
Many of the things outside and inside 'would now be beyond the
reach of the people.
Former Incumbents
A church’s life owes much in all cases to its Ministers. The
first Incumbent of St. Peter’s was the Rev. Dr. Thomas Steele.
He was a fine old Irish gentleman, and reminiscences of him
linger to this day among old parishioners who remember the time
and the man. He was often to be seen riding along the bush
tracks leading to the homesteads of his scattered flock. He ever
wore “ Hessian boots ” with tassels in front and was a stately
figure on horseback, managing his steed in the style of a gentle-
man used to equestrian exercises. But he was a zealous pastor.
During his ministry the church, parsonage, and school were
built; day and Sunday schools formed ; and Bible classes held
in the parsonage. All speak of him as a faithful minister of
Christ. He resigned in 1857 and returned to his native land
where he died. His is the longest record in the list of Incum-
bents, having occupied the parish for about 20 years (1837-1857).
He was followed by the Rev. Edward John Nixon, M.A., whose
tenure of office lasted only two or three years (1857-1860) when
death called him away and his tomb is in the churchyard. Then
came the Rev, Augustine H. Bull, M.A., whose tenure of office was
equally short and was brought to an end by the death of his wife who
was a niece of Bishop Barker and her tomb also is in the church-
yard. The Rev. George King, M.A. (now Dr. King, living in re-
tirement at Strathfield), followed Mr. Bull and laboured for the
comparatively lengthy period of nine years (1863-1872). He
was succeeded by the Rev. Charles Baber who removed to Peter-
sham in 1879 and is remembered for his Christian deportment
and useful work. He is now settled in an Eng’ish living. From


1879 to 1885 the Rev. W. F. B. XJzzell filled the incumbency.
His estimable wife, the sister of the Revs. J. D. Langley and H.
A. Langley, Archdeacons of Cumberland and Melbourne respec-
tively, is remembered as a model clergyman’s wife In Mr.
Uzzell’s time the church underwent great alterations; the organ
and windows were put in, and the exterior painted and the in-
terior decorated. The respect in which he was held is seen in
the handsome marble obelisk, erected by the parishioners to his
memory, in the adjoining burial ground. He died in 1885. The
rest is all too recent to make history, but the church can look
back on a long line of worthy Incumbents. Among the
Other Clergy
whose names are in the records as having officiated in St. Peter’s
are some of the most notable of the last 50 or 60 years. Bishops
Broughton and Barker were frequent visitors. The names of
Bishop Short (Adelaide), of the present venerated Dean
of Sydney, of Canons Allwood, Stephen, Smith and Moreton,
and the Rev. W. B. Clarke (the. famous geologist) and
the Rev. Dr. John Woolley (of Sydney University renown)
cannot be read without being reminded that this church
was filled with the sound of their voices as they proclaimed the
gospel that brought life and immorality to light. Next to the
clergyman in the building up of the spiritual and intellectual
fabric comes in importance—
The Schoolmaster.
Before the present school house in the Cook’s River road was
erected a slab building at the rear of the site of the present
schoolroom was used for educational purposes. Here a parochial
day school was established until the present schoolroom was built
in 1848-9 on land purchased by the parish from the old Australian
Trust Co. The names of the oldest schoolmasters are still remem-
bered by some—Mr. Marks and Mr. Crawford both English
trained teachers. Mr. Richard William Guille, however, was
destined to be the teacher whose name was to remain as a house-
hold word among the generations then growing up in 1860
when he took charge. For 30 years Mr. Guille was the leading
instrument in the education of the young of this parish. He
continued to hold the denominational school of St. Peter’s
Church until 1880, when it was merged into the present Public
School of the place, and retained the position of head
teacher until he finally retired in 1895. For five years
after that the old school house was used for girls and
infants attending the newly-founded public school. For years
Mr. Guille was also the choirmaster of the church from which he


retired recently to the great regret of all. From the days when
Bible classes were formed by Dr. Steele in the parsonage until
this St. Peter’s has been instrumental in the education of the
youth of the place in religious and secular knowledge. The Sun-
day school attached to the church numbers 500 children and a
large staff of teachers. There are two branch Sunday schools in
the parish—one at Tempe, numbering 120, and another at Holm-
wood (Newtown) numbering 80. There is a good school-church
at the former and one is in prospect at the latter, Mrs. James
Dickson having given a valuable site on which to build one.
Nor has higher education been absent from this centre of light.
In the institution now known as Bay View House formally con-
ducted by Dr. Tucker and now by Dr. Vause (both churchmen
interested in this parish) and before they occupied it the Rev.
Wm. Savigny kept a grammar school there and often officiated in
the church. The late Rev. Charles H. Garnsey, of Christ Church,
Sydney, was one of the teachers in that school and from thence
entered Holy Orders. Thus St. Peters has taken a large
share in the work of education in the historic half century or
more of its existence.
Fashionable Congregations
were the rule in St. Peter’s in those days. This may be gathered
from the memorials in the church as well as from monuments in
the churchyard, and the recollections of those remaining to tell
the tales of the past. It was a leading parish of the diocese. To
hold it was to hold important preferment. Many of the leading
families of this land as well as of the locality were in some way
or other connected with it. The Mannings, the Josephsons, the
Duguids, the Raymonds, the Wentworths, the Icelys, the
Heydons, the A’Becketts, the Wises, the Terrys, the Bonds,
the Metcalfes, the Talbots, the Reillys, the Burdett-Smiths,
the Cooks, the Bardens, the Ways, the Hills, the Unwins, the
Lendons, and the Kings (of clerical circles) and many others
might be mentioned. With a few exceptions all these have
gone : some to the long rest, others to different parts of the
world, Instead we have a poor community left. Where once
there were well kept homesteads there are now estates fallen into
disrepair or streets filled with artizans’ dwellings—a working
community mostly out of work.
Another 1 Era.
The high chimney stacks of the numerous brickyards in close
vicinity to the church tell of another period that intervened be-
tween the time when Dr. Steele and some of his successors at-
tended to the spiritual wants of their well-to-do congregations and


the present time. It was an era when the building trade
flourished and railway construction was going on apace and the
demand for bricks was huge. The brickyards were like hives of
bees, finding employment for hundreds of brickmakers and their
families. Wages were high ; all lived well, perhaps too well for
their future benefit, some families earning as much as £lO per
week. Nevertheless strikes ensued, labor-saving machinery and
“ patent kilns ” w r ere introduced, hundreds of families were
thrown out of employment and left the district, and now great
brickyards are worked with scores of men where hundreds once
found employment. Those also were prosperous times for the
church from a financial standpoint, for working men support the
church well when they have it in their power, but we have not
even the “brickmakers” in sufficient numbers to sustain the
church. With comparatively few exceptions they also are gone,
and it is worthy artizans insufficiently employed who fill the
houses. What an object lesson is this on the changeableness of
human plans ! “ What can we do ” ? we have asked ourselves,
and the reply comes
Appeal
to the wealthy churchmen at large and especially to those who
were once identified with the church here or to their descendents
who possibly may remember the old church with fondness. This
we do with the approval of our beloved Primate. God’s House
here has to be maintained in decency and repair as well as the
ministry of His word and sacraments supported. The walls need
painting; the tower needs to be repaired to save it from fuither
damage; the plastered ceiling needs much attention, for it is
falling piece meal from its position ; the interior walls are stained
by damp arising from the foundation. We cannot if we would
alienate the land bestowed upon the church by its generous
friend mentioned above, and the people are too poor to support
the ministry without getting into arrears. One scheme is to send
broadcast this sketch of an historical church with many prayers
that the hearts of those whom it may reach will be moved to help
with funds in its time of need, St. Peter’s Church, Cook’s River.
Printed at the “ Chronicle ” Office, 198 Kino St., Newtown.




