

IRENICUM:
George Robertson and Co.,
gYDNE Y— M ELBO URN E—A DE LAI DE BRISBANE - A UC K LAND
1 8 8 5.
PRICE
SX jCPENCS.




-A. IST
IRENICUM-
to dvTO (ppovtire, etpr]i>eveTe.
2 Corinthians, xiu„ 11.
publishers;
George Robertson and Co.,
SYDNEY—MELBOURNE—ADELAIDE—BRISBANE—AUCKLAND
18 8 5.
PBICE
SIXPENCE.




TO THE READER ,
And especially to the Clergy of all the Churches.
Ix 1659, Edward Stillingfleet, then a young Clergyman, acting as
Tutor to Mr. Pierepoint of Nottingham, published a quarto volume,
entitled “ IRENICUM, a weapon salve for the Church’s wounds, or
the Divine right of particular forms of Church Government discussed
and examined, according to the principles of the law of Nature, the
positive Laws of God, the practice of the Apostles, and the primitive
Church : and the judgment of reformed divines, whereby a founda-
tion is laid for the Church’s peace and the accommodation of our
present differences.” The author became Bishop of Worcester in
1689. The present tract consisting mainly of extracts from some
of our great theologians, having the same object in view, claims the
right of using the same title. From a recent correspondence in the
Sydney Morning Herald , it is obvious that there are men in New
South Wales, in the of grace 1885, who need a renewed reminder
of the great principles of Christian Tolerance advocated in 1659.
Sydney , 9th November, 1885.
,\'X I
rtszsyr/o &/4
/f s nn




CONTENTS.
-No Form of Church Government Prescribed in the New Testament—
I.—Dr. Stilling-fleet ... ... ... . ... ... ... 7
2. —Archbishop Whately ... ... ... ... ... ... 7
The Grand Ideal of the Christian Church in the New Testament—
Bishop Lightfoot ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
The Extraordinary Gifts and Agencies of the Transition Period of the
Church to the First Decade of the Second Century—
I.—Bishop Horsley ... ... ... ... ... ... ... H
2.—The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles 12
3.—Bishop Lightfoot ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
The Development of the Episcopacy, from the Anglican Standpoint—
-I.—Bishop Lightfoot ... ... ... ... .. ... ... 14
2.—Edwin Hatch ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17
•The Development of the Episcopacy, from the Presbyterian Standpoint—
-I.—Mosheim ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... 19
2. —Neander ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20
3.- Dr. Schaff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20
The Rise of a Sacei’dotal Caste—a Priesthood—
I.—Neander ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
2.—Bishop Lightfoot ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
3. —Archbishop Whately ... ... ... ... ... ... 24
4. —Anonymous... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24
■The Fiction of the Apostolical Succession—
L- —Archbishop Whately ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
2. —Jeremy Taylor ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26
3.—Dr. Henry Rogers... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
The tendency towards Ritualism, characteristic of the Tractarian
party in the Anglican Church—
1. —Dr. Henry Rogers... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
2. —Dr. W. B. Pope 30
3. —Anonymous... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31
■A formal Union of the Churches, neither probable, nor desirable :
Unity in Christian feeling absolutely required in all
Christians ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31
X.—Toleration not merely a State policy, but a Christian principle ... 33
XI. —The visible Church of Christ ... ... ... ... 34




AN IRENICUM.
I.—NO FORM OF CHURCH GOVERNMENT PRESCRIBED
IN THE NEW TESTAMENT.
I.—Dr. STILLINGFLEET, afterwards Bishop of Worcester,
in his “IRENICUM,” published 1659, had for his object the union
of all parties in one Broad National Church ; “ The fact that a
Divine origin was claimed for widely different forms of Church
Government was held a sufficient proof that Christ had never
intended one uniform Government for all times and places. We
do not know with any certainty what form of Government prevailed
in the Primitive Church, and if we did, it would not follow that
the. same form should be adopted by us. Matters of polity are left
to the ordinary reason of the Christian community. Different
forms of Church Government were said to be of Divine origin, in
the sense that they are derived from the light of reason, and the
general principles of the Word of God.” (Sec John Hunt’s Religious
Thought in England, Yol. 11., p. 116-7.) I have used this abridg-
ment, rather than my own, for obvious reasons.
2. RICHARD WHATELY (Archbishop of Dublin), in his
Kingdom of Christ, Bvo., 1851, contends that the Apostolical reticence
in reference to Church Government and other matters necessaxy to
the constitution and maintenance of a Separate Society requiring
officers and by-laws, was Divinely arranged, and for an important
end. “No such thing is to be found in our Scriptures as a Catechism,
or regular Elementary Introduction to the Christian Religion : nor
do they fui'ixish us with anything of the nature of a systematic
creed, set of articles, Confession of Faith Nor, again, do they
supply us with a Liturgy for ordinary Public Worship, or with
forms for administering the Sacraments, or for Conferring Holy
Orders : nor do they even give any precise directions as to these


and other ecclesiastical matters—any thing that at all corresponds
to a Rubric, or set of Canons Now these omissions present
a complete moral demonstration that the Apostles and their
followers must have been supernatu rally withheld from recording
great part of the institutions, instructions, and regulations which
must in point of fact have proceeded from them—withheld on
purpose that other Churches in other ages and regions might not
be led to consider themselves bound to adhere to several formularies,
customs, and rules that were of local and temporary appointment:
but might be left to their own discretion in matters in which it
seemed best to Divine wisdom that they should be so left.”
Neither are General Councils of Churches possessed of authority over
the Churches to govern or decide on points of Faith. “We find in
the narrative (of the pretended first Council at Jerusalem) that certain
persons coming from Jerusalem to Antioch, endeavoured to impose
on the Gentile converts the yoke of the Mosaic law (Acts xvi.)
pretending to have the sanction of the Apostles for this :
nothing could be more natural than the step which was thereupon
taken—to send a deputation to Jerusalem to inquire whether these
pretensions were well founded. The Apostles, in the midst of an
Assembly of the Elders (or Clergy, as they would now be called) of
Jerusalem, decided that no such burden ought to be imposed, and
that their pretended sanction had not been given. The Church at
Jerusalem, even independent of the Apostles, had, of course, power
to decide this last point; i.e., to declare the fact whether they had
or had not given the pretended sanction : and the Apostles, con-
fessedly, had plenary power to declare the will of the Lord Jesus.
There is no hint throughout of any summons to the several Churches
in Jud;ea and Galilee, in Samaria, Cyprus, Cyrene, &c., to send
deputations, as to a General Council: nor any assumption of a right
in the Church of Jerusalem, as such, to govern the rest, or to decide
on points of faith.” Nor did any special authority on the part of
Peter, or his supposed successor the Pope at Rome rest on Scriptural
authority. “With respect to ‘the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven’
which our Lord promised (Matt, xvi., 19) to give to Peter, the
Apostles could not, I conceive, doubt that He was fulfilling that
promise to Peter and to the rest of them conjointly, when He
‘appointed unto them a Kingdom,’ and when, on the Day of


Pentecost, He began the building of Ills Church, and enabled them,
with Peter as their. leader and chief spokesman, to open a door for
the entrance of about three thousand converts at once and that
this Society or Church was that ‘Kingdom of Heaven’ of which
the keys were committed to Peter, and which the Apostles had
before proclaimed as ‘at hand,’ they could not doubt; They could
not have been in any danger of cherishing any such presumptuous
dream, as that they or any one else, except their Divine Master,
could have power to give or refuse admittance to the mansion of
immortal bliss There seems good reason to believe that
Peter really was the Chief of the Apostles: not, certainly, in the
sense of exercising any supremacy and absolute control over them
but as the chief in dignity, taking precedence of the rest, and
acting as President, Chairman, or Speaker in their meetings. Peter
and James and John, and sometimes Peter and James—always
with Peter placed foremost—were certainly distinguished from
the rest of the Apostles. He was, apparently, the chief spokesman
on the Day of Pentecost, when the Jewish believers were first
called upon to unite themselves into a Church ; and he was the
chosen instrument in forming the first Church of the (‘devout’)
‘ Gentiles 1 ; opening the door of the Kingdom of Heaven to Cornelius
and his friends. I need hardly add, that to claim on that account
for Peter’s supposed successor such supreme jurisdiction over the
whole Church universal, as he himself neither exercised nor claimed,
would be most extravagant. Moreover, since whatever pre-eminence
he did possess, was confessedly not conferred on him as Bishop of
Rome : his supposed successor in that See cannot manifestly have
any claim to that pre-eminence : any more than the successor of
King William the Third, in the office of Stadt-holder, could claim
the English throne. And to speak of a succession of men, as being,
each a foundation on which the Church is built, is net only
extravagant, but unmeaning.”


lI.—THE GRAND IDEAL OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH
IN THE NEW TESTAMENT.
I.—BISHOP LTGHTFOOT (St. Paul’s Epistle to the Philip-
pians, Bvo., 1868. “ The Kingdom of Christ, not being a kingdom of
this world, is not limited by the restrictions which fetter other
societies, political or religious .It displays this character, not
only in the acceptance of all comers who seek admittance, irre-
spective of race or caste or sex, but also in the instruction and
treatment of those who are already its members. It has no sacred
days or seasons, no special sanctuaries, because every time and
every place are alike holy. Above all it has no sacerdotal system.
It interposes no sacrificial tribe between God and Man, by whose
intervention alone God is reconciled and man forgiven. Each
individual member holds communion with the Divine Head. To
Him immediately he is responsible, and from Him directly he obtains
pardon and draws strength.” To this ideal there is, however, a
necessary qualification. “It must be evident that no society of
men could hold together without officers, without rules, without
institutions of any kind, and the Church of Christ is not exempt
from this universal law.” But while the Christian Church needs
officers, it has no Priesthood. The Jewish priests were the re-
presentatives, the delegates of the people, who were a Itoly nation,
a nation set apart. “ The Christian idea, therefore, was the
restitution of this immediate and direct relation with God, which was
partly suspended by the appointment of a sacerdotal tribe The
covenant people resumed their sacerdotal functions. But the
privileges of the covenant were no longer confined to the limits of
a single nation. Every member of the human family was potentially
a member of the Church, and as such, a priest of God. The
influence of this idea on the moral and spiritual growth of the
individual believer, is too plain to require any comment; but its
social effects may call for a parting remark. It will hardly be
claimed, I think, by those who have studied the history of modern
civilization with attention, that this conception of the Christian
Church has been mainly instrumental in the emancipation of the


degraded and oppressed, in the removal of artificial barriers between
class and class, and in the diffusion of a general philanthropy
untrammelled by the fetters of party or race Consciously or
unconsciously, the idea of an universal priesthood, of the religious
equality of all men, which, though not untaught before, was first
embodied in the Church of Christ, has worked and is working
untold blessings in political institutions and in social life This
then is the Christian ideal ; a holy season extending the whole
year round—a temple oidy confined by the limits of the habitable
world —a priesthood co-extensive with the human race.”
lIT.—THE EXTRAORDINARY GIFTS AND AGENCIES
of the transition period of the Church to the first decade
of the Second Century.
1. These Charismata were confined in their outward mani-
festations to the early intermediate period, which preceded the more
formal constitution of the Churches. They are mentioned in
connection with certain agencies (I Corinthians xil, 8 to 10 and 28,
also in Ephesians iv., 11, 12.) BISHOP HORSLEY, in the
Appendix to the Ist Yol. of his Sermons (2 vols. Bvo., 1829) gives
the following explication. “ The word of wisdom —the talent of
arguing from the natural principles of reason, for the conversion of
philosophical infidels. The Word of Knowledge —the talent of
holding learned arguments from the ancient prophecies, and the
writings of the Old Testament, for the conversion of Jewish infidels.
Faith —a depth and accuracy of understanding in the general
scheme of Christian Revelation, for the improvement and edifi-
cation of believers. The Gifts of Healing , and the Working of
Miracles- for the purpose of making new converts, and displaying
the extent of the power of Christ. Prophecy , or the talent of
foreseeing future events —for the purpose of providing against


calamities, whether worldly or spiritual, that might threaten
particular churches Discerning of Spirits —for the better govern-
ment of the Church ; and, the Gift of Tongues, and the Interpre-
tation of Tongues , which seem to have been very generally
dispersed In these many remarkable passages, the Apostle
reckons up nine distinct gifts of the Holy Spirit, all of the
extraordinary kind. In the twenty-eighth verse, he enumerates
just as many ecclesiastical offices. The gifts and the offices, taken
in the order in which they are mentioned, seem to correspond.”
GIFTS—]. The Word of Wisdom
2. The Word of Knowledge
8. Faith
4. Miracles
5. Healing
6. Prophecies or predictions
7. Discovery of Spirits
8. Tongues
9. Interpretation of Tongues
OFFICES—The Apostles
Expounders of the Scriptures
of the old prophets
Teachers of Christianity
Workers of Miracles
Healers
Helps
Governments
Gifted with Tongues in
various ways
Without accepting, in toto, the learned Bishop’s comment, it is
very ingenious, and not far from the truth. A reference to the
Speaker’s Commentary on Corinthians 1., xil, Vol. 111., New Testa-
ment, will add to the reader’s knowledge of this portion of the
Apostles’ Epistle.
2.—THE TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES, a
work known to the Antenicene fathers, but which was supposed to
be lost, has been recently discovered by Bryennios, Metropolitan of
the Greek Church in Nicomedia (1873). It was found in the library
attached “to the Monastery of the Most Holy Sepulchre ” in the
Phanar or Greek Quarter of Constantinople; portions of this
“ Teaching ” have been incorporated into at least four well-known
products of eaidy Christianity, i.e., the Shepherd of Hennas, the
Epistle of Barnabas, the Apostolic Canons, and the Apostolic Consti-
tutions. In the opinion of the critics, the date of the Treatise, taking
into consideration all that has been yet advanced pro. and con., was
probably not far from the year a.d. 100. In the opinion of the
editors of the work published, Bvo., 1885, Messrs. Roswell and
Hitchcock and Francis Brown, “the Church organization underlying
this treatise, is like the doctrine, of the simplest and most rudi-
mentary character. Christians are indeed to appoint Bishops and


Deacons apparently over the local Church : yet it seems necessary
to insist upon the measure of respect due to them, as if their position
were not fully assured.” Itinerant prophets and teachers, called also
apostles, seem to have conducted the services, but their special ranks
and duties are not discriminated. The appointment of Bishops and
Deacons as local officers appears to have been by the Churches
themselves. The impression left is that the Treatise describes a very
rude and imperfect condition of the Church in the rural districts of
Asia Minor and Syria. The itinerant apostles, prophets, and teachers
were to remain for oidy one day burdensome to the Church, except
“if there be need” a second day, “but if he remain three days, he is
a false prophet. But when the apostle departeth, let him take
nothing except bread enough till he lodge again; but if he ask
money, he is a false prophet.” It seems as if there had been from
the very first imposters who obtruded themselves upon the kindness
of the simple believers scattered far and wide, and distant from the
central sources of light—the larger cities. The Apostle Paul had
occasion to justify himself, and vindicate his own disinterestedness
(11. Corrinthians, xi., 7 to 10) against “ false apostles, deceitful
workers” (verse 13). The Apostle John speaks in commenda-
tion of the Angel of the Church at Ephesus, that “ he had tried them
tohich say they are apostles and are not , and hast found them liars ”
(Revelations, n., 2.)
3.—BISHOP LIGHTFOOT (St. Paul’s Epistle to the Philippians,
Bvo., 1868) : In two passages (I. Cor., xn., 28, and Ephesians iv., 2)
St. Paul sums up the officers in the Church, which chiefly relate to the
temporary ministry : but tin; temporary ministry is not forgotten,
“ for under the designation of ‘ teachers, helps, -governments ’ in the
one passage, of ‘ pastors and teachers ’ in the other, these officers must
be intended.” From the subordinate place which it thus occupies
in the notices of St. Paul, the permanent ministry gradually
emerged, as the Church assumed a more settled form, and the
higher but temporary officers, such as the Apostolate, fell away.
This progressive growth and development of the ministry, until it
arrived at its mature and normal state, it will be the object of the
following paper to trace.”


IV.—THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE EPISCOPACY
from the Anglican Standpoint.
I.—BISHOP LIGHTFOOT’S Dissertation on the Christian
Ministry appended to his Commentary on Philippians, is abridged in
the following lines ; the papers so abridged are from pp. 188 to 242,
also in the Notes, pp. 93 to 97.
The Diaconate originated in the choice by popular election of
seven men, afterwards ordained by the Apostles to meet a special
need. It is substantially one with the later Diaconate, the primary
work being the relief of the poor: the work of teaching must be
traced rather to the capacity of the individual, and not to the function
of the office. The Presbyterate was not a new office, it was adopted
from the Synagogue, and is probably connected with the death of
James, and the persecution which followed (Acts xn., 2 : xi., 19) for
we now read for the first time of Presbyters (Elders) in the Christian
brotherhood at Jerusalem (xi., 30). As Jewish presbyteries existed
already in the principal cities of the dispersion, so also Christian
Presbyteries were appointed by Paul and Silas in every Church
formed by them. The identity of the Bishop and Presbyter in the
Apostolic age appears to be conclusive. (1) In the opening of the
Epistle to the Philippians, St. Paul salutes the Bishops and Deacons.
It is inconceivable that he should recognise only the first and third
oi’der and pass by the second. It seems to follow of necessity, that
the Bishops are identical with the Presbyters. (2) In Acts xx., 17,
St. Paul summons the Elders (Presbyters) of the Church at Ephesus,
and calls them Bishops, or Overseers of the Church (xx., 28).
(3) St. Peter appeals to the Presbyters of the Churches, and then calls
upon them to fulfil the offices of Bishops (1 Peter, v, 1,2). (4) St.
Paul, describing the qualifications requisite in the office of a Bishop,
proceeds to say what is required of a Deacon (1 Timothy, ill., 1-7 ), but
in a later passage, in speaking of Christian ministers, he calls them
Presbyters (v., 17-19). (5) The same identification appears still more
plainly from the Apostles’ directions to Titus, in which Bishops and
Elders (Presbyters) are names applied to the same individuals and
their offices : “ So also St. Clement in his Epistle, section 42-44, used


the term indiscriminately.” The name of the Presbyter then presents
no difficulty .... How, and where was this second name applied
to them 1 To the officers of Gentile Churches alone is the term
BISHOP applied as a synonyme for Presbyter. If we may assume
that the directors of religious and social clubs among the Heathen
were commonly so called, it would naturally occur to the Gentile
Christian, or their Heathen neighbours to call the presiding member by
the same name. The infant Church was to the Jew a synagogue
with Elders , to the Gentile it was a confraternity presided over by
Bishops. It is clear that at the close of the Apostolic age, the two
lower orders of the three-fold ministry were firmly and widely estab-
lished ; but traces of the third and higher order are few and indis-
tinct. Gradual development of the Episcopate from the Preshyterate.
The opinion hazarded by Theodoret (in the fifth century) and
adopted by many later writers as Wordsworth, Blunt, &c, that the
Apostles were the first Bishops is baseless. The fact is, that the
Episcopate was not formed out of the Apostolic order by localisation,
but out of the Presbyterate by election ; and the title Bishop, which
originally was common to all, came at length to be appropriated to
the chief among them. In the mother Church at Jerusalem, Janies,
the Lord’s brother, appeared to occupy a prominent position, but yet
not isolated from his presbytery. The Apostles themselves at first
exercised superintendency over the Churches, either personally or by
letter, or by message, or by trustworthy delegates placed temporally
to re-organise churches where such a re-organisation was necessary.
But so late as 70 a.d., there are no signs of Episcopal government.
Yet it seems vain to deny that early in the second century the Epis-
copal office was firmly and widely established. Thus, during the last
three decades of the first century, and consequently during the life-
time of the latest surviving Apostle this change must have been
brought about. Probable process of the development of the Episcopate
from the Presbyterate. The circumstances attending the change are
involved in darkness,through which we cannot penetrate. Rothc’s
theory is, that after the fall of Jerusalem 70 a.d., a council of the
surviving Apostles (John, Philip, Andrew) and of the first teachers
of the Gospel was held to deliberate on the crisis caused by the
death of Peter and Paul, by the growing bitterness of the Jewish
and Gentile parties in the Church, and by the menacing opposition


of the Gnostic heresies : He supposes this council to he the one
mentioned by Eusebius (book iii., 2) as having met to appoint
Symeon as successor to James the just, over the Church at Jerusalem,
and this conjecture is supported by an obscure fragment attributed to
Iremeus But if the deliberations of such a council had exercised
that vast and permanent influence on the future of the Churches,
which Rothe s theory supposes it is scarcely possible that Hegesippus
(Eusebius’ authority) should have been ignorant of the fact, or that
knowing it, he should have passed it over in silence. The emergency
to which Rothe refers did help to consolidate the Episcopal form of
Government, for the position of James furnished the precedent and
the pattern of the later Episcopate. The opinion of Jerome that
the prevention of schism through the rivalry of the presbyters was
the object aimed at by the placing of one man over the rest may have
been borne out by facts, but it is to the dissensions of the Jewish and
Gentile converts, and to the disputes of Gnostic false teachers, that
the development of the Episcopacy may be mainly ascribed. It is
not improbable that the influence of St. John helped towards this
necessary change, which was fully carried out within fifty years after
the fall of Jerusalem. The development was slower where the pre-
vailing influences were more purely Greek, as at Corinth, Philippi,
and Rome; and more rapid where an oriental spirit predominated, as
at Jerusalem, Antioch, and Ephesus ; thus the maturer forms are
seen first in those regions where the latest surviving Apostles (more
especially St. John) find their abode, and at a time when its preva-
lence cannot be dissociated from the influence of their sanction. The
original relation of the Bishop to the Presbyter was not forgotten in
the early Church. Iremeus, though he views the Episcopate as a dis-
tinct office from the Presbytery, does not regard it as a distinct order,
in the same sense in which the diaconate is a distinct order : There is
one ordination (writes Hilary) of the Bishop and Presbyter ; for either
is a priest, but the Bishop is first ; the language of Jerome is to the
same effect “ with the ancients, Presbyters were the same as Bishops,
but gradually all the responsibility was deferred to a single person,
that the thickets of heresies might be rooted out. Therefore, as
presbyters know that by the custom of the Church they are subject to
him who shall have been set over them, so let Bishops also be aware
that they are superior to presbyters, more owing to custom than to any


actual ordinance of the Lord So also Augustine writing to Jerome
says : “ although according to titles of honour, which the ‘practice oj
the Church has note made valid, the Episcopate is greater than the
Presbytery, yet in many things Augustine is less than Jerome.” The
Bishop of Alexandria was chosen and consecrated by the Presbyters,
a custom traced by the Patriarch Eutychius (933-9-10) to the Apostle
Mark. The power of ordaining was confined to the Bishops after
the fourth century. Causes of the development of the Episcopal power.
The ancient Bishops did not hold the same independent position of
supremacy which was and is occupied by their later representatives :
“ though something must be attributed to the frailty of human pride
and love of power, it will nevertheless appear that the pressing needs
of the Church were mainly instrumental in bringing about the result :
and that this development of the Episcopal office was a providential
safeguard amid the confusion of speculative opinion, the distracting
effects of persecution and the growing anarchy of social life, which
threatened not only the extension, but the very existence of the
Church of Christ. Ambition of office in a society where prominence
of rank involved prominence of risk was at least no vulgar or selfish
passion : this development will be conveniently connected with three
great names, each separated from the other by an interval of more
than half a century, and each marking a distinct stage in its
progress.” ICNA THIS of Antioch, the first of these ;to him the chief
value of Episcopacy lies in this, that it constitutes a visible centre of
unity in the congregation. IP ENEUS regarded the Episcopate as the
depository of Apostolical tradition. CYPRIAN advanced beyond
his predecessors. With him the Bishop is the vicegerent of Christ the
indispensable channel of divine grace, and the indispensable bond of
Christian brotherhood.
2.— DR. EDWIN HATCH, in his Organisation of the Early
Christian Church, Bvo., 1880, compares the early Churches with the
many secular and religious associations which were tolerated in the
cities of the Roman Empire. All of them had their respective
officers, and one important branch of their duties was the relief of the
necessitous members of their several bodies. The Christian Ecclesia
was specially zealous in works of charity, especially towards its
pooi’er members. Hence arose the diaconate, and subsequently other
officers, whose relations to the Christian community were similar to


those of the senate to a municipality, or a committee to an association.
They were known by a name which was common to the Jewish
c TweSpia , and to the members of the Greek yepovuia of Asia
Minor that of Trpecrpvrepoi. They were also known by the name
of enta-KonoL. The existence of a president, and the growth of a
permanent supremacy arose out of the force of circumstances in the
order of providence to satisfy a felt need. This supremacy of a single
officer forced upon the Church for administrative efficiency and for
unity and purity of doctrine was consolidated by the necessity of
unity and discipline. Thus the development of the organisation of
the Christian Churches was gradual, and the elements of which that
organisation were composed were found already existing in human
society. This hypothesis of the slow development of the framework
of the Christian societies, so far from being inconsistent with the
belief in its divine origin, is rather confirmatory of that belief. On
the other hand, it tends to diminish the minuteness of some
controversies which have existed respecting it, and which have
separated one community of Christians from another. Dr. Hatch
has his own plan and process, quite independent of the Acts of the
Apostles and the Epistles. “If we find in the Roman Empire civil
societies with organisations analagous to those of the Christian
societies, civil officers with the same names and similar functions to
those of ecclesiastical officers, the question arises, and must be
considered, whether the causes which are sufficient to account for
them in the one case are not equally sufficient to account for them in
the other.” His work is very ingenious, throwing much light on the
position of the early Churches. See also Hooker’s Ecc. Polity
(Keble’s Ed.), Book hi. Sec. 2 and Book v. Secs. 7, 8.


V. —THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE EPISCOPACY FROM
THE PRESBYTERIAN STAND POINT.
I. —MOSHEIM: Institutes of Ecclesiastical History (Murdoch
and Soames), Yol. 1. “As to the external form of the Church and
the mode of governing it, neither Christ himself, nor his Apostles
gave any express precepts. We are therefore to understand, that
this matter is left chiefly to be regulated as circumstances from time
to time may require, and as the discretion of civil and ecclesiastical
writers shall judge expedient. If, however, what no Christian can
doubt, the Apostles of Jesus Christ acted by divine command and
guidance, then, that form of the primitive churches which was
derived from the Church of Jerusalem, erected and organized by the
Apostles themselves, must be accounted divine : yet it will not follow
that this form of the Church was to be perpetual and unalterable. —
In those primitive times each Christian Church was composed
of the people, the presiding officers, and the assistants or Deacons.
These must be the component parts of every society; the
highest authority was in the people, or the whole body of Christians;
for even the Apostles themselves inculcated by their example, that
nothing of any moment was to be done, or determined on, but with
the knowledge and consent of the brotherhood (Acts 1., 15, vi., 3, xv.,
I, xxi., 22). And this mode of proceeding both prudence and neces-
sity required, in those early times (Yol. i., pp. 76-77). The rulers of
the Church were denominated, sometimes Presbyters or Elders ; a
designation borrowed from the Jews, and indicative rather of the
wisdom than the age of the persons ; and sometimes also, Bishops ; for
it is most manifest, that both terms are promiscuously used in the New
Testament of one and the same class of persons. Acts xx., 17-28 ;
Phil, i., 1 ; Titus i., 5-7; 1 Timothy, m., 1. (pp. 78, 79). In this
manner Christians managed ecclesiastical affairs, so long as their con-
gregations were small, or not very numerous. Three or four presby-
ters, men of gravity and holiness, placed over those little societies,
could easily proceed with harmony, and needed no head, or president.
But when the Churches became larger, and the number of presbyters
and deacons, as well as the amount of duties to be performed, was


increased, it became necessary that the Council of Presbyters should
have a President; a man of distinguished gravity, who should dis-
tribute among his colleagues their several tasks, and be, as it were the
central point of the whole society. He was at first denominated the
Angel (Apocalypse n. and in.), but afterwards the Bishop , a title of
Grecian derivation, and indicative of his principal business. It would
seem that the Church of Jerusalem, when grown very numerous, after
the dispersion of the Apostles among foreign nations, was the first to
elect such a President; and that other Churches, in process of
time, followed the example. Put whoever supposes that the Bishops
of the first and golden age of the Church correspond with the Bishops
of the following centuries, must blend and confound characters that are
very different. For in this century and the next a bishop had charge
of a single church which might ordinarily be confined to a private
house : nor was he its lord, but was in reality its minister or servant :
he instructed the people, conducted ah parts of public worship, and
attended on the sick and the necessitous in person ; and what he was
unable then to perform, committed to the care of the presbyters, but
without power to ordain or determine anything except with the con-
currence of the presbyters and the brotherhood, (pp. 81, 82.)
2.—NEANDER (AUGUSTUS). General History of the
Christian Religion and Church (Torrey). 9 vols., Bvo. 1851.
The Commentary of St. Hilary on Ephes. iv., 12, is quoted, in
proof of the early practice of the Christian Church, when all taught
and all baptized. It is obvious that the Monarchicil (Episcopal) form
oj government was not suited to the Christian community and spirit.
But Christianity freely appropriated to its own use such already
existing forms as were adapted to its spirit and essential character;
for instance, the Elders (Presbyters), and Bishops; the latter term
being in due time confined to the presiding elders, (pp. 248, 249.)
In due time other changes followed. First, the distinction of Bishops
for Presbyters, and the gradual development of the monarcho-episcopal
church government; and second, the distinction of the clergy from the
laity, formation of a sacerdotal caste as opposed to the evangelical
idea of a priesthood; and third, the multiplication of church offices,
(pp. 259, &c.)
3.—Du. SCIIAFF (History of the Apostolic Church, Bvo., Yol.
2: p. 225). “If now we consider, in fine , that in the second century,


the Episcopal system existed as a historical fact in the whole Church
East and West, and was unresistingly acknowledged, nay, universally
regarded as at least indirectly of divine appointment : we can hardly
escape the conclusion, that this form of government naturally grew
out of the circumstances and wants of the Church at the end of the
Apostolic period, and could not have been so quickly and so generally
introduced without the sanction or at least acquiescence, of the
surviving Apostles, especially of John, who laboured on the very
threshold of the second century, and left behind him a number of
venerable disciples: at all events it needs a strong infusion of
scepticism or of traditional prejudice to enable one, in the face of all
these facts and witnesses, to pronounce the Episcopal Government of
the ancient Church a sheer apostacy from the Apostolic form and
a radical revolution. We need scarcely say, that our position here is
not dogmatical and sectarian at all, but entirely historical. The high
antiquity, the usefulness and the necessity of the Episcopal form of
Government in the times before the reformation, does not
necessarily make it of force for all succeeding ages. For we have no
passage in the New Testament which prescribes three orders, or any
particular form of Church Government (excepting the ministry itself)
as essential to the existence of the Church ; and history abundantly
proves that Christian life has flourished under various forms of
government. Presbyterians (of the Scotch jure divine school) and
Episcopalians, in this controversy, very frequently become equally
one sided and pedantic and make the question of outward
Ecclesiastical organization what it evidently is not, the great central
question of the Church.”
vi.—THE RISE OF A SACERDOTAL CASTE—A
PRIESTHOOD.
].—NEAAIDER (AUGUSTUS) Ecc. Hist. 1., Yol. 1, page 265.
“ While the great principle of the New Testament is the unfolding of
the Kingdom of God frond within the re-admission of the Old
Testament position, in making the Kingdom of God outward , went


on the assumption that an outward mediation was necessary in order
to the spread of this kingdom in the world. The universal priestly
character, grounded on that common and immediate relation of all
to Christ as the source of the divine life was repressed ; the idea
interposing itself of a particular mediatory priesthood attached to a
distinct order,” as the Jewish priesthood. The references to the
Epistle of Clement, Chap. 40, 41, to the usages of the old dispensation,
shew the tendency of ecclesiastical thought at the end of the first
century ; “of such a change which had taken place in the Christian
mode of thinking, we have a witness as early as Tertullian when he
calls the Bishop Sunmus Sacerdos, a title certainly not invented by
him, but which had been adopted from a prevailing mode both of
speaking and thinking in a certain poi’tion at least in the Church :
this title presupposes that men had already begun to compare the
presbyters with the priests.” The same Tertullian bears witness in
his work de Baptismo of a “reaction of the primitive Christian concious-
ness of the universal priesthood, and the common rights grounded
therein against the arrogated form of that particular priesthood
he distinguishes with reference to this matter between divine right and
human order. In itself considered (he says) the laity also have the
right to administer the sacraments and to teach the community—But
the question here relates not barely to what is permitted in general,
but also to what is expedient under existing circumstances If we
look at the order necessary to be'maintained in the Church, the laity
are therefore to exercise their priestly right of administering the
sacraments, only when the time and circumstance require it.”
2.—BISHOP LIGHTFOOT. “ The progress of the Sacerdotal
view of the Ministry is one of the most striking and important
phenomena in the history of the Church. It has been pointed out
already, that its sacerdotal functions and privileges, which alone are
mentioned in the Apostolical writings, pertain to all believers
alike, and do not refer solely or specially to the ministerial office.
If to this statement, it be objected that the inference is built upon
the silence of the Apostles and Evangelists, and that such reasoning
is always precarious ; the reply is that an exclusive sacerdotalism (as
the word is commonly understood) contradicts the general tenor of the
Gospel. But, indeed, the strength or weakness of an argument
drawn from silence depends wholly on the circumstances under which


the silence is maintained. And in this case it cannot be considered
void of weight. In the Pastoral Epistles, for instance, which are
largely occupied with questions relating to the Christian Ministry, it
seems scarcely probable that this aspect should have been overlooked,
if it had any place in St. Paul’s teaching. The Apostle discusses at
length the requirements, the responsibilities, the sanctities of the
ministerial office; he regards the presbyter as an example, as a
teacher, as a philanthropist, as a ruler. How then might it well be
asked, ‘ are the sacerdotal functions, the sacerdotal privileges of the
office wholly set aside.’ It is obvious that the metaphorical use of the
terms ‘ offering and sacrifice ’ applied to certain conditions and
actions of Christians. These offerings or sacrifices are described as
spiritual ; they consist of praise, of faith, of almsgiving, of the devo-
tions of the body, of the conversion of unbelievers, and the like.
Thus, whatever is dedicated to Cod’s service may be included under
this metaphor. In one passage also the image is so far extended,
that the Apostolic writer speaks of an Altai- (Hebrews xiii., 10) per-
taining to the spiritual service of the Christian Church. If on this
noble scriptural language, a false superstructure has been reared, we
have only one instance out of many, where the truth has been im-
paired by transferring statements from the region of metaphor to
the region of fact.” If the silence of the Apostles still required
an explanation it is not far to seek. “The Epistle to the Hebrews speaks
at great length on priests and sacrifices in their Jewish and their
Christian bearing. It is plain from this epistle that the one
prominent idea of the priestly office at this time was the function of
offering sacrifice , and thereby making atonement. Now this
Apostolical writer teaches that all sacrifices had been consummated
in the one sacrifice, all priesthood absorbed in the one priest. The
offering had been made once for all : and as there were no more
victims, there could be no more priests. All former priesthoods had
borne witness to the necessity of a human mediator, and this sentiment
had its satisfaction in the person and office of the Son of Man. All
past sacrifices had proclaimed the need of an atoning death, and had
their antitype, their realization, their annulment in the Cross of
Christ. This explicit statement supplements and interprets the
silence elsewhere noticed in the Apostolical writings If therefore
the sacerdotal office be understood to imply the offering of sacrifices,


then the Epistle to the Hebrews leaves no place for a Christian
priesthood It may be a general rule, it may be under ordinary
circumstances a practical universal law, that the highest acts of
congregational worship shall be performed through the principal
officers of the congregation. But an emergency may arise when the
spirit and not the letter must decide. The Christian ideal will then
interpose and interpret our duty. The higher ordinance of the
universal priesthood will over-rule all special limitations. The
layman will assume functions which are otherwise restricted to the
ordained minister.”
3.— RICHARD WHATELEY (Archbishop of Dublin).
“ Christianity a religion without sacrifice, Altar or Temple,'’ (see
Kingdom of Christ, pp. 105 to 107). “The Gospel religion was
introduced by men and among men —whether Jews or Gentiles—who
had never heard of or conceived such a thing as a religion without
a sacrificing Priest —without Altars for Sacrifice- —without Sacrifices
themselves —without either a temple, or at least some high place, grove,
or other sacred spot answering to a Temple ; —some place, that is, in
which the Deity worshipped was supposed more especially to dwell.
The Apostles preached for the first time—the first both to Jew and
Gentile—a religion quite opposite in all these respects to all that had
ever been heard of before :—a religion without any sacrifice but that
offered up by its founder in his own person ; —without any sacrificing
priest(Hiereus or Sacerdos) except Him the great and true High Priest,
and consequently with no priest (in that sense) on earth : except so
far as every one of the worshippers was required to present himself
as a “ living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God; ” and a religion
without any temple, except the collected congregation of the
worshippers themselves.
4.—ANONYMOUS. The term Priest used in the book of Com-
mon Prayer is not used in the sense of one who offers a Sacrifice, but
simply as one leading the worship of the congregation. It is an
abridgment of the longer word Presbyter, and is in reality the same
office. Neither the act of ordination or of consecration is of a
specially spiritual character, confering any mysterious power upon
the recipients : By ordination the individual is admitted into the Or Jo
(see Hatch, p. 38) and by consecration the individual is set apart for
the office of Superintendent (Bishop) over his brethren : primus inter


pares , quite a different thing from “ Prelacy ,” which may have its
utility under certain circumstances, but is merely a comparatively
recent human institution. It is time that all these Church offices
were placed in a right light, and freed from all sanctimonious and
superstitious associations, while justified on the ground of their utility.
The singular reverence for antiquity with all its mischievous conse-
quences may be seen in an article m the “ Nineteenth Century "
(September 1885) entitled “ Reservation of the Sacrament,” in which
the writer advocates the reservation of a portion of the bread and
wine used in the celebration of the Lord’s Supper, for the purpose of
being carried to the sick and other absentees. This custom, common
in the time of Justin Martyr, is described by him—The Deacons
communicate each of those present, and carry away to the absent of
the blessed bread and wine and water ; ” thus an observance prompted
by a sentimental and kindly feeling, backed by a growing reverence
for the material elements in the sacrament, the mere “ creatures of
bread and wine,” is held up to the admiration and practice of the
English Protestant Churches ; the weakness and simplicity of the
Second Century is to be the rule in the Nineteenth! No wonder that
in the same number of the Nineteenth Century, there is an article dis-
cussing the question “ why men will not be clergymen T
VI 1.-THE FICTION OF “ THE APOSTOLIC A I SUCCESSION”
in connection with the hestowment of peculiar spiritual gifts, confined
to the Episcopal clergy , and given by them alone in the Sacrament.
1. The fact of a regular uninterrupted succession of bishops
from St. Peter cannot be proved. That he was ever Bishop of
Rome is a pure assumption; neither can it be proved that he was
ever at Rome personally. The English Church received its bishops
from Rome through St. Augustine, and the successors of St. Augustine
from the Popes of the period. Now when we consider the schisms
in the Papacy, in which rival Popes, sometimes three at a time, claimed
the supremacy, and anathematized their opponents, how is it possible
for any bishop to be certain that the succession has not been inter-


rnpted 'I Besides, since the Church of England cast off’ the Papal
supremacy, the supposed successor of St. Peter regards the Church of
England and its clergy as heretical, and altogether excluded from the
true succession. APtCHBISHOF WHATELY remarks—“ The
fallacy consists in confounding together the unbroken Apostolical
succession of a Christian Ministry generally , and the same succession
in an unbroken line of this or that individual minister (p. 178). In
connection with this improvable claim there is the more serious claim
of the hestowment of certain spiritual gifts upon the Episcopalian clergy
and none other.
2.— JEREMY TAYLOR (afterwards bishop), in his Episcopacy
assailed , 1642, (and published by royal command), makes the following
assertion :—“ The sum of all is this ; that Christ did institute Apostles
and Presbyters, or seventy-two disciples. To the A postles he gave a
plenitude of power, for the whole commission was given to them in as
great and comprehensive clauses as were imaginable, for by virtue of
it they received a power of giving the Holy Ghost in confirmation,
and of giving His grace in the collation of holy orders—a power of
jurisdiction and authority to govern the church; and this power was
not temporary but successive and perpetual , and was intended as an
ordinary office in the church, so that the successors of the Apostles
had the same right and institution that the Apostles themselves had ;
and though the personal mission was not immediate, as of the Apostles
it was, yet the commission and institution of the function was all one.
But to the seventy-two Christ gave no command but to preaching ,
which was a very limited commission for by this account
Episcopacy is not only a Bivine institution, but the only order that
derives immediately from Christ.” “Without (the office of Epis-
copacy) no priest, no ordination, no consecration of the sacrament, no
absolution, no rite or sacrament legitimately can be performed.” Dr.
HOOK to the same effect—“ Unless Christ be spiritually present with
the ministers of religion in their services, their services will be in vain.
But the only ministrations to which He has promised His presence is to
those of their bishops, who are the successors of the first commissioned
Apostles, and the other clergy acting under their sanction and by
their authority, (See the two Sermons on the Church.) So also in the
TRACTS FOR THE TIMES, No. 35, “ A person not commissioned
from the bishop may use the words of baptism, and sprinkle or


bathe with the water on earth, but there is no promise from
Christ, that such a man shall admit souls to the Kingdom of
Heaven. A person not commissioned may break bread, and
pour out wine, and pretend to give the Lord’s Supper, but it can
afford no comfort to any to receive it at his hands, because there is no
warrant from Christ to lead communicants to suppose that while he
does so here on earth, they will be partakers in the Saviour’s heavenly
body and blood. As for the person himself, who takes upon himself,
without warrant to minister in holy things, he is all the while tread-
ing in the footsteps of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, whose awful
punishment you read of in the Book of Numbers : compare Numbers
xvi. with Jude.” If these views be correct, then the natural conclu-
sion (monstrous as it is to suppose) that all the Protestant Churches
in Germany, France, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, with the Protestant
Churches of Scotland, and all other Protestant and Nonconformist
Churches in England and America, and Australia, &c., are not true
Churches, notwithstanding their agreement generally with the doctrines
of the Church of England : while, on the other hand, the Church of
Rome, with her image worship and her errors in doctrine, is, in
spite of these, a true and Sister Church of the martyr Church of
England.
3—HENRY ROGERS (Essays contributed to the Edinburgh
Review, vol. iii., 12mo). “The Theory of‘THE TRACTS’is, that each
Bishop from the Apostolic times has received, in his Consecration, a
mysterious gift , and also transmits to every Priest, in his Ordina-
tion, a mysterious gift , indicated in the respective offices by the awful
words ‘ Receive the Holy Ghost; ’ that on this, the right of Priests to
assume their functions, and the preternatural grace of the Sacraments
administered by them, depends. That a Bishop once consecrated,
instantly becomes a Leyden phial of spiritual electricity, and is invested
with the remarkable property of transmitting the gift to others. That
this has been the case from the primitive age till now ' that this high
gift has been incorruptly transmitted through the hands of impure,
profligate, heretical ecclesiastics, as ignorant and as flagitious as any
of their lay contemporaries; that, in fact, these gifts are perfectly
irrespective of the moral character and qualifications both of Bishop
and Priest, and reside in equal integrity in a Bonner or a Cranmer—
a pastor Adams, or a pastor Trulliber. Numberless are the questions


which reason and charity forthwith put to the advocates of this
doctrine, to none of which will they deign an answer, except the one
already given—that believing is seeing, and implicit faith the highest
demonstration. What is imparted 1 What transmitted ? Is it some-
thing, or nothing 1 Is consecration or ordination accompanied (as in
primitive times) by miraculous powers, by any invigoration of intellect,
by increase of knowledge, by greater purity of heart 1 It is not pre-
tended ; and if it were, facts contradict it, as all history testifies.
The ecclesiastic who is ignorant or impure before ordination, is Just as
much so afterwards. Do the parties themselves profess to be conscious
of receiving the gift 1 ? No. Is the conveyance made evident to us by
any proof which certifies any fact whatever—by sense, experience or
consciousness 1 It is not affirmed. In a word, it appears to be a
nonentity, inscribed with a very formidable name—a .very substantial
shadow Again, who can testify that this gift has been incor-
ruptibly transmitted through the impurities, heresies and ignorance
of the dark ages 'I Is there nothing that can invalidate Orders 1 Yes,
say some other men, “ error in fundamentals will,” others affirm
it will not; but still, with that superstitious reverence for forms
which ever attends neglect of the substance , declare that Orders may
be invalidated if the formalities of consecration have not been duly
observed ! Either answer will serve the purpose. If error in essentials
is sufficient to invalidate Orders, we ask—had the Roman Church so
erred when you separated from her 'I If she had, her own Orders were
invalid, and she could not transmit yours. If she had not, then—as you
all affirm that nothing but heresy in fundamentals can justify separa-
tion—you are schismatics, and your own Orders are invalid
Equally extravagant are the notions entertained by this school on the
subject of the Sacraments. With them they are not simply expressive
rites, symbolical of religious doctrines, and capable of awakening-
religious emotion, through the medium of the senses and the imagina-
tion. They are themselves the media of a supernatural grace—
exclusively communicated, however, through the episcopally ordained
minister As to the Eucharist, if the doctrine of the Trac-
tarian school be true, especially according to the latest development
of it, if it be anything less than the Romish doctrine of Transubstan-
tiation, we confess our inability to perceive it. That there is some great
ineffable change wrought by the formulas of consecration, we are ex-


pressly told, but what is not explained But, as was said
of Apostolical Succession, so may we say of the Sacramental doctrine
connected with it, that no mere arguments can be more conclusive
against it than the feeling that it shocks the whole spirit of the
Christian institute.
4—lt is but just to state that among some of the English clergy
who cling to the notion of the Apostolical Succession as the grand
distinction of Episcopal Churches, there is a reluctance to leave the
non-Episcopal bodies without hope or comfort. We copy from a late
number of the Guardian the notice of a charitable concession of the
minority — i.e., the Episcopalians—to the Presbyterian and other non-
Episcopalians who form the great majority of Protestants now existing
in the world. Has the Editor of the Guardian no sense of the
ridiculous ? Here follows the extract in question, very kindly meant,
but (considering the relative positions of the two parties), rather
serio-comic:—■
“ The belief ‘ that Episcopacy is of Divine origin, and
“ therefore of Divine obligation,’ and that it is therefore of the ease of
“ the Church, no doubt has for its corollary the refusal of the name
“ ‘ Church ’ in its strict and proper meaning to non-Episcopal com-
“ munities. But it is quite unjair to infer from this that members of
“ these communities ‘ have no sacraments, no share in the communion
“of saints, and no right to bear the Christian name.’ ” As Dr. Liddon
reminds his critic, no instructed and believing Churchman would hold
this : —lf the non-Episcopal bodies have no true orders they have
“ unquestionably a true baptism , supposing the matter and words of
“ that sacrament to be duly administered, since lay baptism is of
“ undoubted validity. And surely,” he adds, “ the great sacrament of
“ our regeneration carries with it a share in the communion of saints,
“ and, much more, a right to bear the Christian name. That which, in
“ our belief and to our sorrow, the non-Episcopal communities lack, is
“ participation in those privileges which depend upon a ministry duly
“ authorised by our Lord , and in particular the precious sacrament of
“ His body and blood. Even here, when their dissent from His Church
“ is determined by a motive of loyalty to what they believe to be His
“ will, we may trust that He supplies to them in other ways many
“ blessings which they neglect to seek through the chartered channels.”


ciples.”
Another signal characteristic of the school is its
disposition to villify and traduce reason Reason, they feel, is
VIII.—THE TENDENCY TOWARDS RITUALISM CHARAC-
TERISTIC OF THE TRACT A RIAN PARTY IN THE
ANGLICAN CHURCH.
I—HENRY ROGERS (Essays, &c.). The next characteristic
of the system is that it tends to rob Christianity of its chief
glory as a spiritual and moral institute, and to render it a
system of mere formalism ; to substitute for the worship founded
on intelligent faith, a devotion which is a species of mechan-
ism, and rites, which operate as by magic. Their doctrine of
Apostolical Succession itself is neither more nor less respect-
able than that of the hereditary sanctity of the Brahminical
caste ; while the prayer mills of the Tartars afford a fair illustration
of their doctrine of Sacramental efficacy. The stress laid on rites
and symbols, and outward observances, and the attempt indefinitely
to multiply them, tend the same way Let a man be taught
“to gaze in stupid wonder on an exhibition of rites and symbols,
whether it be on the goi'geous and solid magnificence of the Roman
Church, or the mimic tinsel of the Tractarians. Let him be taught
to make much of wax candles burnt at noonday—the cross or the
crucifix, painted windows, garlands of flowers, triangles and fishes,
vestments black and white, pulpit hangings and altar cloths, postures
and attitudes, and his religion stands a chance of resembling that of
him who was thus eulogised by Dr. Johnson ;—“He never passed a
church without pulling off his hat—this shows he has good prin-
therefore huilt a high wall, to darken all the windows.”
2- DR. WILLIAM B. POPE {Compendium of Theology),
“There is a spirit in worshipping man, or he could not worship
the Invisible; and he is also flesh and blood, or he could
not worship in public assemblies But what is now
conventionally called Ritualism must be entirely condemned : that
their implacable foe, and blinded indeed it must be, before it will
admit their pretensions. “My Lord Understanding’s house,” says
John Bunyan, “ was too light for the Prince of Darkness, and he


is to say, the introduction of symbols not ordained by the
Read of the Church, symbols in the architecture of the building,
in the dress of the officiating minister, and especially in the conduct
of the worship itself It endangers the dignity of the Sacra-
ments, which, as the sole elements of ritual given us in a religion that
closed the ritual temple, should be rigidly guarded in their simplicity,
as the Saviour left them And what is called the ritualistic
spirit dishonours the spirit of devotion, by such numberless and ever
varying appeals to the senses, as distract the soul from its one
function. Concerning such additions of men’s will worship, the Lord
of the Temple says still : Take these things hence (John n., 16).
3—ANONYMOUS. What is Ritualism in the Church of
England 1 It is the outward and visible exhibition of a yearning,
after the full symbolism of Popery, the result of a secret apostacy
from Protestant truth, and a sympathy with Popish errors. It is an
attempt to train the eyes and the imagination of Protestant congre-
gations, and so to familiarise them by a series of ceremonial observances
that there will be nothing in the full Roman Mass to alarm them.
Most, if not all the numerous perverts from among the Clergy of the
Anglican Church to Rome have been trained in the ritualistic school.
Rome looks to these traitors within the camp to open the gates and
admit first her ceremonial, and in due time, a full and complete
union of the two Churches.
fN. A FORMAL UNION OF THE CHURCHES neither possible
nor desirable. UNITY IN CHRIST!A N FEELING absolutely
required of all Christians.
There is one flock (noifivi)) but there are many (aiA;o-)
folds. This we are taught by our Lord. “ And other sheep have I.
which are not of this fold ( avKrjs ). Them also I must bring, and
they shall hear my voice: and there shall he one fold (i.e.,
flock, nmyvr]) and one Shepherd ” (i rotpjr). John x., 16. The


sheep (the Christian people) were never collected in one fold. At
first from the necessity of the case, the scattered Churches, small
companies under their Presbyter Bishop, were practically independent
of each other’s congregations. The union of these Churches under the
Episcopos of a Diocese including many Churches was the work of time.
The outward union of these Churches was attempted by the gathering
together of councils, in which the Churches had their representatives,
and at last the Western Church acknowledged the primacy of the
supposed chair of St. Peter in the person of the Pope of Rome; this
formal union of the Western Churches being the result of favourable
circumstances, long controversies, and the support of political rulers
exerted for private ends. But along with this Roman fold there
were the folds occupied by the Greek and sundry Oriental Churches.
Protestantism has never succeeded in the formation of any formal
union. Its Churches are national, and these national Churches have
not kept in one fold. There are Lutheran, Calvinistic, Presbyterian,
Episcopalian, Independent, Baptist, Wesleyan Methodist, and other
folds. All true Protestants, while attached to their respective folds,
look upon all the folds as portions of the one jiock of which Christ is
the Shepherd. They protest against the corruptions of doctrine and
practice in the Romish and Eastern Churches, while regarding
these imperfect Churches with deep sympathy and anxious to assist
them in the efforts which some among them are making to attain to
the true faith of their forefathers. A unity of all Christian Churches
in the one faith in Christ, and in a feeling of mutual regard and
interest in each other’s prosperity, ought to characterise our
Christianity. It is a duty incumbent upon us, implied in the
prayer of our Lord, “ Neither pray I for these alone (the disciples)
hut for them also ivhich shall believe in me through their woo’d: that
they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me and I in thee , that they
also may be one in us : that the woodd maoj believe that thou hast sent
me ” (John xvil, 20, 21). This oneness or unity of the Churches
for which our Lord prays cannot be a mere formal outward union.
Like the union of the Son with the Father, and the union of the
believer with the Father and the Son by the Holy Spirit, it can only
be a spiritual unity.


X.—TOLERATION NOT MERELY A STATE POLICY RUT
A CHRISTIAN PRINCIPLE.
Toleration as a State policy was forced upon the English Govern-
ment and people by the Revolution of 1688 a.u. The conviction of
its necessity was of slow growth. Up to the civil war of 1642-9, the
belief that the State was bound to settle a definite Church order, to
which all were bound to submit, was too deeply rooted in the English
mind to be easily eradicated. Each party in the State contended for
an Ideal Church, obedience to which they deemed necessary to the
peace and well-being of the State. In the civil wars and in the
events from 1660 to 1688 our fathers sorely expiated their error and
learned the wisdom of toleration. There is some reason to believe that
one Leonard Rusher , a Baptist, was the first advocate of a full and
free discussion of diverse opinions in religion (1610-1614), but his
views attracted no attention at the time. In 1641, Henry Rarton, one
of the sufferers with Bastwick and Prynne in the Laudean persecution
of 1607, but then restored by the Long Parliament to his church in
Friday-street, “ had sketched out a plan of a National Church,
surrounded by voluntary churches, which was accepted by the
Revolution of 1688 as the solution of the difficulty by which two
generations had been troubled.” (See History of England, from
James Ist to the Civil War, by S. R. Gardiner, vol. x., p. 35.)
Lord Brooke, a noble-minded Puritan, about the same time con-
tended for the rights of free thought and action in Church affairs
as well as in that secular government for which the Parliament
was in earnest. Another great man, John Goodwin, the Inde-
pendent minister of Coleman-street, the Ishmael of his day, advocated
in 1644 unlimited freedom of preaching, teaching, and printing,
a few months before Milton published his Areopagitica (November,
1644). The work of Jeremy Taylor (not yet Bishop) the “Liberty
of Prophesying,” published in 1647, has been referred to as the
first public appeal for toleration, a very natural mistake in the
good old times when men limited their reading to the productions
of the writers of their own Churches, a habit too common to most
of us in the Nineteenth Century. Locke’s treatise followed, and


is best known from the literary position of the writer. When, after
1688, toleration had been legalised, the popular Church and King
mobs indicated the narrowness and bigotry of the masses of our
population Within the last 60 years there are painful reminiscences
of the tyranny of Anglican Church feeling upon the opinions and
action of the trading classes and the poor in cathedral country towns,
in which the bigotry and narrowness of the clerical class permeated
through every class beneath them. Happily this state of things is
dying out in England. It never existed in the Australian colonies.
Toleration as a principle influencing feeling and action towards the
members of Churches other than our own is slowly making its way;
Now and then we hear of gratulations on the part of Episcopalians of
their claim to Apostolic -Succession, and of Congregationalists glorying
in their independence and of Wesleyans rejoicing in their peculiar
methodistical institutions, while the Papistical Sect looks with bitter
contempt upon all these heretical assumptions, and proclaims the
Romish Church as THE Church of Australia. Let this sect be to us, in
this and in many other respects, what the Helotry of Sparta was to the
Spartan people— a warning , not a model !
XL—THE VISIBLE CHURCH OF CHRIST.
I.—This is defined clearly in the xix Article : “ The visible
Church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men in which the
pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered
according to Christ’s ordinance in all those things that of necessity
are requisite to the same.” Who may be considered as Christian
ministers are described in the xxm Article. “It is not lawful for
any man to take upon him the office of public preaching or ministering
the Sacraments in the congregation before he be lawfully called and
sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge lawfully
called and sent which be chosen and called to this work by men who
have public authority given unto them in the congregation to call and


send ministers into the Lord’s vineyard.” (See the Articles of the
Church of England, which are to he found in the Book of Common
Prayer.)
There is reason to believe that in all the orthodox Protestant
Churches in these colonies the pure Gospel is faithfully and fully
preached, according to the conscientious views of the respective
ministers. If, however, our work as ministers be judged by the
evidence of large palpable results, there is cause for a deep searching
of heart. (We cannot say with St. Paul, 2 Cor. n., 14.) Our hearers
complain that in some Churches (among all denominations) considered
specially Evangelical there is nothing but doctrinal preaching, a
constant iteration of truths which no Christian doubts, but which
need to be exhibited in their connection with practical duties to excite
the interest of the hearers. And that there is seldom any reference to
sundry recent erratic movements of thought current in general
society. Some are so irreverent as to compare this sort of preaching
to “a whipping of the dead horse,” or “the shaking of a bag of
bones.” It would be well for us to profit even by the most unjust
and exaggerated censures of our hearers. “ Where there is smoke there
must be fire Another complaint is that the clergy of a certain class of
mind and belonging sometimes to that school of thought generally known
as the Broad Church, deal too largely in what are supposed to be profound
disquisitions, or in eloquent and pleasing generalities, to the neglect
of the Gospel message, which, though implied in their discourses, is not
placed in the foreground, and made obvious to the hearers. Fortunately
in the Church of England the morning service is full and explicit on the
great points of repentance towards God and faith towards our Lord
Jesus Christ; thus providentially supplying from the reading-desk
the deficiencies of the pulpit, and sometimes protesting against its
heterodoxy. A word from the editor of the Spectator (a journal which
has for years constantly advocated the interests of the English Church)
“ Evangelism, however feeble in the Church, remains a vast force in the
religious life of England, dominating, as it does almost entirely, in the
Nonconformist bodies. The more it decays within the establishment,
the more formidable will it be found as a hostile force without.”
[Spectator of 9th July, 1884, pp. 597). But why should it decay in
Churches connected with the English Establishment 1 ? Considering
that the Gospel is the revelation of a remedial system by which the


way of Salvation is taught to men, every sermon from a Christian
minister should have some reference to “ God in Christ,reconciling the
world unto himself. Jf not we betray a misgiving as to the reality of
the power of Christianity. Is it, or is it not a fact, that the faithful
preaching of the Gospel is the power of God unto Salvation ? A power
in the Nineteenth Century, as well as in the early centuries, and in the
period of the Reformation, and in the Eighteenth Century. Why not
in our day, the last decades of the Nineteenth Century? Let us deeply
ponder the passage in Ezekiel xxxvil, verses 1 to 14 : 0 ye dry-hones ,
hear the word of the Lord !
2.—The conclusion to which we come is in the motto of this
pamphlet: “Be of one mind; live in peace” (11. Corinthians,
xm. chapter, 11 verse). Why should Protestants dispute about
words, as, for instance, in respect to Episcopacy, upon which
Coleridge remarks on Hooker : —“ Strange it is that he should not
have been aware that it was prelacy, not primitive Episcopacy—the
thing, not the name—which the reformers contended against ” (Notes
on English Divines, vol. 1., p. 5). The New Testament Bishop, is no
more a representation of the Prelatical Bishop, than the New
Testament Publican is the counterpart of the modern Licensed
Victualler. Episcopacy, Presbyterianism, Congregationalism, Inde-
pendency, and the Methodist Itinerancy are all alike the mere
organizations adopted by the Churches for the more efficient carrying-
on of their special work. After all, the main point in the main-
tenance of Christian Truth, guided by the antiquity, not of the
Fourth Century, but the higher antiquity of the First Century, as
exhibited in the Gospels and Epistles. Thus avoiding the heresies
and novelties of the Papistical sect, and its admirers and imitators;
k■. us equally guard against the emasculation of all Spiritual life,
while adhering to orthodox formulas: but hold fast the Spiritual
sense of which the formula is but the vehicle. Again, we may quote
Coleridge : —“ It is not the profession of Socinian tenets, but the spirit
of Socinianism in the Church itself, that alarms me. This, then, is the
dry-rot in the beams and timbers of the Temple ” (Notes on English
Divines, vol. 1., pp. 191-192).
H. T. Dunn and Co., Printers, Queen’s Place, Sydney.


♦


■
t wm w& hns m
