

AN INVITATION TO
47 BERKELEY SQUARE
MAYFAIR, LONDON, W.1


Main Entrance, 47 Berkeley Square


IN THE WEST END....
VISITORS to London from Australia,
New Zealand, and Fiji are invited to make
their headquarters at the centre provided by
the Bank of New South Wales, at its 47
Berkeley Square Branch, in the heart of the
West End.
In this beautiful eighteenth century house,
conveniently situated in the centre ol London’s
most fashionable quarter and within easy reach
of the famous Bond Street and Oxford Street
shopping areas, the exceptional facilities
illustrated in these pages are provided to cater
for the social, travel, and banking needs of
visiting business men and tourists.


The Bank of New South Wales suggests that
you call at 47 Berkeley Square and experience
in England those special courtesies which
customarily distinguish the “ Wales ” complete
banking service.
You can have your letters addressed to you
care of the Branch, which furnishes a poste
restante.
The expert travel staff of the Branch will be
pleased to plan local sight-seeing or extended
tours, book accommodation, make reservations,
arrange travel finance, and generally to give
visitors every assistance in their power.
No charge is made for any of these services.


Entrance Hall - Ground Floor


Ground Floor — Part of the General Office


Ground Floor — looking towards Cashiers’ positions


Sketch Map of Central London, showing location of Bank of New South Wales London Office and Berkeley Square Branch


First Floor — Receptionist’s Desk, Travel Department


First Floor — Part of the Customers’ Writing Room


Second Floor — Part of the Travel Department


Full banking facilities are available at the
Bank’s Berkeley Square Branch.
Travellers’ cheques and drafts drawn under
travellers’ letters of credit can be cashed.
Sterling travellers’ cheques and travellers’
circular letters of credit, dollar cheques, and
other means of payment for use in the other
countries to be visited, can be purchased.
Funds can be remitted to, or received from,
all important cities throughout the world, by
draft and by mail and cable transfer.
Temporary accounts can be opened. Such
an account, in addition to providing a safe
depository for moneys received during the
visitor’s stay, enables him to make local pay-
ments by cheque, so avoiding the risks involved
in carrying large sums of money on the person.
Securities and valuables can be lodged for
safe custody. The Branch also has safe
deposit vaults.


AND IN THE CITY ....
BUSINESS MEN, in particular, may wish
to avail themselves also of the services
of the principal London Branch of the Bank of
New South Wales.
Situated at 29 Threadneedle Street, the City
Office is in close touch with leading financial
and commercial houses in Britain. Contact is
maintained with the chief markets of the world
through over 7,000 oversea agents and
correspondents.
The Management will welcome any
opportunity of discussing with visiting business
executives the ways in which the Bank can
be of assistance to them.
Opposite—Bank of New South Wales, 29 Threadneedle St.




Second edition, published March 1953 by the
BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Established 1817
(Incorporated in New South Wales with limited liability)
Head Office
341 GEORGE ST. SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA
Printed in Australia by
Simmons Ltd., Glebe, Sydney
