

An International Competition
for a
NATIONAL OPERA HOUSE AT BENNELONG POINT
SYDNEY. NEW SOUTH WALES. AUSTRALIA
Conditions and Programme




AERIAL VIEW OF BENNELONG POINT AN D SURROUNDING H A RBOUR FORESHORES LOOKING TOWARDS
THE SOUTHW E ST
Photo by Courtesy oF "Sydney Morning Herald",
1


AERIAL VIEW LOOKING OVER SYDNEY HARBOUR BRIDGE TOWARDS BENNELONG POINT


Conditions of Competition
This Competition has been approved by the Royal Australian Institute of Architects and the International Union of
Architects.
Throughout these Conditions;
“ Promoters ” shall mean the Government of the State of New South Wales.
The “ Secretary ” shall mean the Secretary and Executive Officer of the Opera . House Committee,
c/- Department of Local Government, Bridge & Phillip Streets, Sydney, Australia.
Invitation The Promoters invite all Architects, who are members of their respective Architectural Institutes in any country in
the world, to submit designs in competition for—•
A proposed National Opera House, to be erected on Bennelong Point, Sydney, Australia,
in accordance with these Conditions and the Annexed Appendices, which form part of these Conditions.
The winner of the Competition shall become registered in New South Wales as an Architect under the Architects Act,
1921-1946, before he can be appointed.
The qualifications for registration in New South Wales are set forth in Appendix 1.
2, Register Every intending competitor shall register his name and address in writing with the Secretary, not later than 15th March,
J 956-5 6 -
The register shall be confidential and the names of the competitors shall not be disclosed until the Assessors have made
an award.
Competitors may obtain one set of these Conditions by depositing the sum of £lO os. od. (Australian) or its equivalent,
with the Secretary. This sum will be refunded to those Architects who submit a bona fide design. Remittances to
be made payable to the Government of New South Wales.
Designs will not be accepted from any person other than those whose names appear on the register.


3. Correspondence It is desirable that all correspondence from overseas addressed to the Secretary should be by airmail.
4. Questions Competitors wishing to obtain further information in respect of this Competition, shall forward their questions in
English, typewritten and without name and address, to the Secretary, so as to be received in Sydney on or before
15th May, 1956.
A copy of all questions received and the answers thereto will be posted by the Secretary by airmail to all registered
Competitors not later than Ist June, 1956. Questions received after the 15th May, 1956, will not be answered.
5. Anonymity A competitor shall not communicate directly or indirectly with any Assessor in respect of any matter associated with
this competition, or with any member of the Opera House Committee, in respect of this competition, if he does so,
he shall be disqualified.
6. Assessors The Assessors in these Conditions and Annexures thereto, mean:
Professor Henry Ingham Ashworth, M.A. (Arch.), F.R.1.8.A., F.R.A.1.A., M.A.P.1., Sydney.
Cobden Parkes, Esq., F.R.1.8.A., F.R.A.1.A., Sydney.
Dr. John Leslie Martin, M.A., F.R.1.8.A., London.
Eero Saarinen, Esq., A.1.A., Michigan, U.S.A.
or a majority of them.
In the event of any assessor being unable to act, the Promoters may appoint a substitute approved by the Royal
Australian Institute of Architects in his place.
The Assessors reserve the right to call upon specialist consultants for advice.
The Assessors shall advise the Promoters on the conduct of the Competition, shall adjudicate on the designs submitted
and shall make the award
The Assessors, or any partner or associate, or any employee of any of them, shall not be eligible to compete or assist
a competitor, or act as architect, or associate architect, or consulting architect for the work.
7. Award to be Binding The award of the Assessors shall be final and binding on the Promoters and all the competitors.


8. Premiums The following are the premiums which shall be paid by the Promoters within twelve weeks after the publication of
the award.:—
To the author of the design placed first by the Assessors —£5,000 (Australian).
To the author of the design placed second by the Assessors—£2,ooo (Australian).
To the author of the design placed third by the Assessors—£l,ooo (Australian).
9. Competition No restriction is placed upon either the number of drawings or the size of the sheets, but all sheets submitted by
Drawing each competitor must be of a uniform size and delivered unmounted and preferably flat.
Requirements
Drawings shall be in black and white (ink, pencil or photostat reproductions). The Assessors do not require
elaborate drawings and would prefer them to be unrendered line drawings finished in black ink or pencil or black
and white reproductions of such media.
The title should be placed at the bottom of each sheet, and should read—
“ National Opera House, Sydney, Australia.”
No other title or identification marks are required except those necessary to identify the various drawings. Area
and room names in English should be placed within the area or room, not outside of it. Only important areas
require identification.
10. Drawings Required i. A site plan showing proposal for development of the whole site to a scale of 1/40' =x' o", or 1/500 full size
metric.
2. All floor plans necessary to ensure an understanding of the scheme, at a scale of 1/16" = 1' o", or 1/200 full size
metric.
3. Diagram, or diagrams, showing principles which would be followed in obtaining satisfactory acoustics in the
auditorium.
4. A diagram, or diagrams, demonstrating that the sight lines are satisfactory from all parts of the auditorium for
different types of programmes.


10. Drawings Required 5. A longitudinal and cross-section through the auditoriums at a scale of 1/16" =l' o", or 1/200 full size metric.
—continued Principal levels are to be indicated.
6. Four main elevations at a scale of 1/16" = i' o", or 1/200 full size metric.
7. Perspective drawing of such elevation as the competitor may select as his main elevation and/or approach to
the building. The perspective drawing may be presented in any medium and any form the competitor may
desire ; the area occupied by the actual drawing shall not exceed 18" x 15" and should be mounted on one of
the uniform size sheets.
8. A or 1/25 metric, detail illustrating any portions of both the exterior and interior of the building, and as
selected by the competitor, to fill one sheet of the drawings submitted.
g. A schedule of the principal materials proposed for the structure and finishes, to be shown on one of the drawings.
11. Report Every set of drawings shall be accompanied by a report, which shall be in English and which should be as concise
as possible, explaining only matters which cannot be readily explained on the drawings.
The report must not be enclosed in an envelope, but must be securely tied or otherwise fastened to the site plan.
12. Cost The Assessors feel that the cost of the building cannot be limited to a specific amount. It is stressed that although
the contemplated project is one of national standing and character, funds are obviously not unlimited. Thus while
extravagance cannot be entertained, competitors are allowed to use their discretion in submitting a design of the
character and dignity associated with this type of building. At the same time, they should bear in mind the necessity
for sound judgment as to the financial implications.
13. Guarantee of Each design shall be accompanied by a declaration, signed by the competitor, or joint competitors, stating that the
Authorship design is his or her or their own work, and that the drawings have been prepared under his or her or their own
supervision.
This declaration shall be inserted in an opaque envelope, endorsed “ Identification,” wax sealed and containing only
the name and address of the competitor and also a tracing of portion of the ground plan for identification purposes.


14. Submission and The Competition shall close on 3rd December, 1956, and competitors must despatch their drawings on or before this
Closing Date date. The drawings must be sent by airmail, unsigned, to the Secretary. Competitors must also inform the Secretary
by airmail of the despatch of their drawings and enclose the consignment note. Assessing will commence early in
January, 1957.
Drawings shall bear no distinguishing mark and be delivered under cover to the Secretary.
The cover itself shall bear no distinguishing mark other than the name of the Competition. Where delivery addresses
are necessary, the package, without distinguishing mark other than the name of the Competition, shall be enclosed
in a separate external wrapping for delivery purposes. The envelope referred to under “ Guarantee of Authorship ”
is to be attached to the external face of the inner package, so that it may be detached as soon as the outside wrapping
marked with the delivery names and addresses is taken away and before the inner package is passed to the Assessors.
Where drawings are delivered the responsibility for the delivery of the designs not later than 1700 hours on
3rd December, 1956, rests with the competitors. The Secretary will receive the packages and each package will be
numbered and the • same number will be placed on each drawing, the report, and the envelope containing the
identification and guarantee of authorship, which must be included in the package.
The envelope containing the identification and guarantee of authorship, will be kept in safe custody under the personal
control of the Secretary and will not be opened until after the Assessors have made their award.
15. Disqualification A design shall be disqualified if—
(a) It exceeds the limit of the sire as outlined on the site plan,
(b) If, in the opinion of the Assessors, the cost of the scheme, as submitted, is excessive.
(c) It does not provide substantially the accommodation prescribed.
(d) It is despatched when forwarded airmail or received where delivered after the 3rd December, 1956: accidents
and delays arising from causes beyond the control of the competitor (of which the Assessors shall be the sole
judges) excepted.
(e) If it is not drawn and submitted substantially in the manner prescribed in the Conditions and Appendices.
(f) Its author shall disclose his identity or attempt to influence the decision of the Assessors or any of them.
The decision of the Assessors that any design or competitor is disqualified from the Competition shall be absolutely
final and binding.


16. Publication of The award will be published within eight weeks from the date of the closing of the Competition, or as soon thereafter
the Award as possible.
A report by the Assessors will be sent to all competitors who have submitted designs as early as possible after the
announcement of the award.
17. Exhibition of The designs will be exhibited in Sydney for at least two weeks and within eight weeks after the award has been made.
Drawings
18. Return of The designs, except the design placed first, will be posted to competitors free of charge within four weeks after the
Drawings closing date of the exhibition.
The design placed first and any copyright thereto will become the sole property of the Promoters. The Promoters
reserve the right to illustrate or publish any of the designs submitted.
19. Liability The Promoters will take reasonable care of the drawings and will insure them whilst in their custody, for an amount
of £4OO os. od. (Australian) per set of drawings, but they undertake no further liability in the event of loss or damage.
20. Appointment of The author of the design placed first shall be employed as Architect of the work, unless the Assessors shall be satisfied
Architect that there is some reasonable objection to such employment, in which case the author of the design placed first shall
be required to enter into an agreement with some other Architect selected by him, and approved by the Assessors, for
the joint design and supervision of the work.
Such association as may be required shall in no way increase the fee which will be paid for the execution of the work.
Should the author of the work placed first, fail to enter into such agreement within a reasonable time to be determined
by the Assessors, he shall forgo all right of employment as Architect for the work, and the Promoters shall be at
liberty to make other arrangements for the carrying out of his design, providing always that in making such other
arrangements, the Promoters shall give consideration to any recommendation of the Assessors concerning the other
competitors in order of merit.
In consideration of the magnitude of the project and of the special technical problems involved, the winning
Architect(s) if necessary, and at no expense to the Promoters, will be required to submit to the Assessors proof of the
adequacy of his, her, or their qualifications to organise and carry out the commission.


21. Remuneration of The Architect employed to proceed with the work shall be engaged and remunerated according to the Conditions of
the Architect Engagement and the Scale of Minimum Professional Charges of the Royal Australian Institute of Architects. His
remuneration shall be exclusive of any premium awarded.
22. Delay in Building If, before any further drawings are made, and within two years of the publication of the award, the Promoters shall
not proceed with the building and such delay be not caused by any act or default of the competitor placed first, the
Promoters will pay to the competitor placed first, the sum sufficient to increase the first premium to I per cent, on
the cost of executing the building as estimated by the Assessors. Should the work subsequently be proceeded with,
the amount of such additional payment shall be merged in the total remuneration to be paid in respect of the design
and execution of the building.
23. U.I.A. The Assessors awards are final and binding. In the event of any dispute arising other than in connection with the
Assessors awards, then the Promoters will seek the advice and assistance of the Union Internationale des Architectes
in the settling of such dispute.


1. VIEW FROM THE NORTHERN END OF MACQUARIE STREET SHOWING APPROACH AND EXISTING BUILDINGS


2. VIEW FROM THE EAST


3. A VIEW FROM THE WEST


4. VIEW LOOKING ACROSS BENNELONG POINT TOWARDS THE HARBOUR


5 . VIEW FROM BENNELONG POINT LOOKING TOWARDS THE REAR OF THE EXISTING TRAMSHED




6. VIEW OF THE SITE FROM THE HARBOUR LOOKING PROM THE EAST


7. VIEW OF THE SITE FROM THE HARBOUR LOOKING TOWARDS BENNELONG POINT


8. VIEW OF THE SITE FROM THE HARBOUR LOOKING FROM THE WEST


Appendix 1
Extract from the Architects Act, 1921-1946, covering Registration in the State of New South Wales, Australia.
Section 12
No person shall be entitled to be registered as an architect unless
he has attained the age of twenty-one years and satisfies the
Board • that he is of good fame and character.
Section 13
(i) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a person shall be entitled
to be registered as an architect who —
(a) has passed the prescribed examination ; or
(b) holds a prescribed degree, diploma, or license of
competency from the University of Sydney or the Sydney
Technical College ; or
(c) holds a prescribed degree, diploma, or license of
competency from some university, institute, college, or
school outside New South Wales approved of by the
Board, and also either passes the prescribed examination
or shows to the satisfaction of the Board that in the
country or state where such degree, diploma, or license
was issued persons registered as architects under this Act,
are entitled to practise architecture by virtue of such
registration and without further examination ; or
(ci) holds a degree, diploma, or license of competency,
approved of by the Board from some university, college,
school, institute or other authority, and also satisfies the
Board that he possesses the requisite knowledge and skill
for the practice of architecture ; or
(d) holds a degree, diploma, or license of competency from
some architectural college, school, or public institution in
a British possession, or in some foreign country approved
of by the Board, and also satisfies the Board that he
possesses the requisite knowledge and skill for the practice
of architecture ; or
(e) has, prior to the commencement of the Act, completed
a term of not less than five years as an articled pupil or
assistant to a practising architect in New South Wales,
or, has prior to the first day of November, one thousand
nine hundred and twenty-one, practised as an architect
in New South Wales as his sole or main source of
livelihood ; or
(f) satisfies the Board that he is engaged in the acquirement
of professional knowledge in architecture and passes within
three years of the commencement of this Act the prescribed
examination ; or
(g) satisfies the Board that, during four years preceding the
commencement of this Act, he has been a competent
teacher of Architecture.
(2) No person shall be entitled to be registered under the provisions
of paragraphs (d), (e), (f) or (g) of subsection one of this
section unless he applied to the Board to have his name
recorded as a person entitled to the benefit of this section
within six months from the commencement of the Act.
Provided that the Board, if satisfied that for some sufficient
reason such person was unable to make such application
within the said six months, may permit such application to
be made at a later date.
The Board referred to in the above extract means the Board of
Architects of New South Wales, Daking House, Rawson Place,
Sydney, New South Wales, constituted by the Architects Act for
the purpose of issuing Certificates of Registration and keeping a
Register of Architects as called for under the Act.


Total number of persons of both sexes
combined which such section of the
building is designed to accommodate
Males
Females
Water
Closets
Urinals
Water
Closets
Not exceeding 50 persons
1
j
2
Exceeding 50 but not exceeding 200 . .
2
2
3
Exceeding 200 but not exceeding 400
2
4
4
Exceeding 400 but not exceeding 600
2
6
5
Exceeding 600 but not exceeding 800
2
8
6
Exceeding 800 but not exceeding 1,000
2
IO
8
Exceeding 1,000 but not exceeding 1,200
3
12
9
Exceeding 1,200 but not exceeding 1,400
3
TO
Exceeding 1,400 but not exceeding 1,600
4
16
I I
Exceeding 1,600 but not exceeding 1,800
4
18
12
Exceeding 1,800 but not exceeding 2,000
4
20
12
Appendix 2 — A Summary of Relevant Regulations to be Observed
Competitors must comply with the Building Regulations set out below.
1. It will be necessary for the buildings to be of “ Framed Fire-proof
Construction
This means that the walls and structural members have fire
resistance ratings as determined by the Standard Fire Test of not
less than four hours for external walls, fire walls, isolated piers
and columns ; of not less than three hours for beams, floors, roofs,
walls and girders other than as hereinbefore specified and of not
less than two hours for fire partitions.
Mote. —The above does not preclude the use of materials of a non
fire - resisting type being applied to any part of the structure
after the necessary fire-proof construction has been attained.
2. Auditoriums, restaurants, kitchens, bars, dressing rooms, toilet rooms,
and other spaces used for any purpose other than storage must be
adequately ventilated either by natural means or a mechanical
system.
3. No portion of the building used for any purpose other than for
housing plant or for storage must exceed 150' in height from
ground level.
4. Glazed windows may be used in the external walls of fireproof
buildings, provided that the space between the heads and sills of
those above is not less than 3' o" and that such space is constructed
of fireproof material having a 4-hour rating.
5. Exits shall consist of stairways, passageways or doorways. The
dimensions and capacity of exits shall be proportioned to the
number of persons which the building is designed to accommodate
on any floor served by such exits. It may be assumed that the
number of persons which the building is designed to accommodate
on a floor shall be that as ascertained by taking the gross floor
area devoted to each occupancy and applying thereto the scale
hereunder;—
Auditoriums and other places of assembly —one (1) person to
every 8 square feet of floor space.
Restaurants and rooms not otherwise provided for —one (1)
person to every 40 square feet of floor area.
Offices—one (1) person to every 80 square feet of floor area.
Number of Exits. —Every room which is designed to be occupied
by more than 60 persons shall have at least two (2) doorways
as remote from each other as practicable.
No exit shall be more than 100' distant from another.
6. Exit Passageways. —Where exit stairs discharge into a passageway
the width of such passage shall be not less than 4' o" or three-
quarters of the aggregate width of the stairs.
7. The minimum toilet facilities to be provided in each section of the
building shall be in accordance with the number of persons
estimated to occupy such section in accordance with the following
schedule ;
For a greater number of persons than 2,000 the requisite number
of conveniences shall be calculated pro-rata with those set out
above for 2,000 persons.


Adequate wash basins are also to be provided in each toilet room.
It may be assumed that the number of persons of each sex will be
equal.
8. Exits and Staircases. —Each hall should have independent staircases
and exits which must discharge directly on to an open space on
at least two sides of the building.
The minimum width of staircases shall be s'. Staircases from
gallery or circle shall be based on the following :
300 persons —2 staircases of a total width of 11' with an
additional width of T for every 30 persons or fraction thereof
in excess of 300.
Exits from stalls or ground floor for 1,000 persons would be
4 or more exits of an aggregate width of 27'.
Persons Exits Aggregate Width
1,100 to 1,200 4 or more 30 feet
1,200 to 1,300 4 „ 33 „
1,300 to 1,400 5 „ 35 „
1,400 to 1,500 5 „ 38 „
i,s°° to b 6o ° 5 » 40 „
1,600 to 1,700 6 „ 43 „
1,700 to 1,800 6 „ 45 „
1,800 to 1,900 6 „ 47 „
1,900 to 2,000 7 ~ 50 ~
and for more than 2,000 persons there shall be an increase of
T 6" for each additional 50 persons or fraction thereof.
9. Ventilation. —All parts of the building should be properly and
efficiently ventilated by means of an approved mechanical plant
so as to provide for the complete change of air in the building
approximately 8 times in an hour.
10. Capacity of Respective Halls. —The approximate capacity of the
respective halls would be based on the figure of 5.8 to 6 square feet
per person inclusive of aisles and cross overs.
11. Seating Accommodation. —
Aisles to be a minimum width of 3' 6".
Cross overs to be a minimum width of 4'.
Maximum number of seats between wall and aisle —7.
Maximum number of seats between aisles —14.
This may be varied in the case of seating set out in concentric
circles where there may be as many as 18 seats between aisles and
8 between aisles and wall.
12. Gallery Platform. —No platform in galleries formed to receive seats
shall be less than 30" in width and no such platform shall be
nearer than 8' from the ceiling or 20' higher than the top of the
proscenium opening.
13. Proscenium Wall. —Shall be of fire resistant construction and fitted with
an approved rigid-frame fire curtain.
14. Stage Smoke Escape. —A smoke escape having an area of at least
1 /1 oth of the total area of the stage shall be constructed over the
centre of the roof at the rear of the stage.
15. Dressing Rooms. —Dressing rooms, etc., for Artists and Musicians
shall not be placed under the stage or under the auditorium.
They should be arranged in a section separated from the stage by
fire-proof walls and construction.
All dressing rooms shall be connected with independent exits.
Escapes from the dressing rooms and the stage are to be provided
at both sides.
16. Ventilation and Generating Plants , etc. —All heating and generator plants
and the like shall be isolated from the auditorium, the stage and
the exit areas.


Appendix 3—Description of Site
The Site
The site selected is the promontory projecting into Sydney Harbour
and known as Bennelong Point.
It is an outstanding site and should prove a worthy setting for an Opera
House possibly unrivalled anywhere in the world.
Mt fulfills all the requirements of size, spaciousness and beauty of setting,
so essential to the type of building to be erected upon it.
The site is well located with regard to public transport. The approach
is possible by train, bus and ferry to Circular Quay adjacent to the
site. Private cars would approach mainly via Macquarie Street, and
less frequently via Circular Quay which discharges into lower Macquarie
Street. There is no vehicular approach from Farm Cove.
It is anticipated that the east side of Bennelong Point will be served
by a ferry.
Ample parking space can be found within easy walking distance of the
site and only a limited amount of parking accommodation is required
on the site itself. See paragraph No. 7 under Site Requirements.
To all intents and purposes, the site is a level one. All existing buildings
on the site will be removed.
The site is bounded on the west by existing wharves and wharf
buildings —competitors are at liberty to offer suggestions as to the
possible development of this front, on the assumption that the existing
wharves and wharf buildings are demolished.
The boundaries of the site are indicated upon the site plan, together
with the results of trial borings and levels.
The Soil
The results of borings shown on the site plan would indicate that it
is undesirable to contemplate any excessive excavation. Bearing capacity
of the rock may be taken at 15 tons per square foot.
The Weather
1. Average annual rainfall for Sydney—46.93 inches.
2. Wettest months in Sydney are April (5.27"), May (5.05") and
June (5.05"). Driest months are September to December.
3. Average daily hours of sunshine vary between 7.6 in November
and 5.3 in June. Clearest months are September to January
inclusive, when average hours of sunshine equal or exceed 7.3 per
day throughout.
4. Snow and frost conditions may be disregarded.
5. Lowest temperature recorded 35.7 0 F. Highest maximum reading
113.6° F. Greatest diurnal range of temperature 42.2° F.
6. Average wind speed 8.2 m.p.h. Highest gust recorded 95 m.p.h.
Wind gusts of 58 m.p.h. or over have been recorded in all months.
7. Prevailing wind direction for the year is west, but varies between
east and north-east from November to March.
8. Strongest wind gusts come from directions between W.N.W. and
S.S.E.


Appendix 4—Site Requirements
The following requirements form a part of the design considerations and must be related to the design of the Opera House for this reason,
competitors are asked to submit a layout and development of the site which they consider appropriate to their scheme.
The principal design requirements are:
1. The building may be located anywhere upon the-site, but should
not be placed right on the boundary of the site, either on the east
or the west. Location of the building and landscaping of the
remaining site are left entirely to the discretion of the competitors.
2. A landscaped forecourt or square with considerable paving and
forming an attractive setting and approach to the building from
Macquarie Street. The competitor has an opportunity here of
suggesting the general “ townscape ” which he considers would add
most to the setting of the Opera House.
3. A corresponding landscaped area on the northern promontory of
Bennelong Point, overlooking the Harbour, should the scheme so
permit.
4. It should be assumed, insofar as the Competition is concerned, that
on the west side a Boulevarde link external to the boundaries of
the site will be provided between Circular Quay and the Opera
House. Facilities for ferry services approaching the site on the
east will also be provided.
5. Service areas for kitchens and stages together with proper unloading
and loading facilities.
6. Adequate areas for people arriving and departing by motor transport.
7. Accommodation for approximately too cars is required on the site.
Primarily, these cars will belong to members of the orchestra,
administrative staff and invalid persons attending performances. The
major parking areas are available elsewhere within reasonable walking
distance of the site.
8. Garage accommodation for the public within the building itself, is
not required.


Appendix 5 — Building Requirements
The Competition is intended to select an Architect and a design for the proposed new Opera House. Competitors should appreciate that it is
unlikely that the winning scheme would be erected without variation and that in consequence, the Promoters seek a sound basic scheme by a
competent Architect.
For this reason, mandatory requirements are limited and are listed below in Items 1 and 2 in order of their importance.
1. There shall be two halls —one large hall and one small hall. The
large hall should seat between 3,000-3,500 persons. The small hall
should seat approximately 1,200 persons.
The large hall to be designed for use for the following purposes :
(a) Symphony Concerts (including organ music and soloists).
(b) Large-scale Opera.
(c) Ballet and Dance.
(d) Choral.
(e) Pageants and Mass Meetings.
2. The small hall to be designed for use for the following purposes :
(a) Dramatic Presentations.
(b) Intimate Opera.
(c) Chamber Music.
(d) Concerts and Recitals.
(e) Lectures.
The requirements under 1 and 2 above, have been listed in order of
priority with respect to the attention which should be given to their
specialised building needs.
It is expected that ideal conditions will be provided as far as possible
acoustically, visually and in connection with stage and orchestral
facilities. Compromises which will prejudice the entirely satisfactory
performance of a function with a higher priority in the above list should
not be made.
Competitors must provide adequate accommodation as follows:
1. A large organ for use in the main hall. The siting of the organ
must not, of course, prove detrimental to stage facilities for opera.
2. Separate rehearsal rooms for orchestra, choir and other performances
to be provided for each hall.
3. Broadcasting centre —which may be located anywhere in the building
and which will be used to control and operate the broadcasts and
television. An area of not less than 500 feet is required. Except
for wiring, no other facilities are needed.
4. Full stage facilities for both halls and a small projection booth in
the .small hall.
5. Access to the small hall independent from access to the large hall.
The public areas of both halls may be linked at some point, but
this is not mandatory.
6. A restaurant to seat approximately 250 people with lounge, cloak-
rooms, bar and all the usual accoutrements, easily accessible from
the exterior for day-to-day use.
While these restaurant facilities may well be associated with the
patrons attending the Opera House, it is also intended that the
restaurant should form a separate revenue producing element and
an amenity to the general public.
7. Adequate light refreshment rooms and separate bars for theatre
patrons within the building. Competitors should give consideration
to the type of programmes to be given in the halls, and that some
of these will last for a considerable time with numerous and some-
what lengthy intermissions.
8. Two meeting rooms. One to seat approximately 100 people and
the other, 200 people. These are to have raised platforms and a
level floor. They are intended to be used for formal meetings of
groups interested in general cultural subjects as well as for dances,
exhibitions and such similar functions. It would be an advantage
if they could be adjacent to each other and be separated by movable
partitions. If food could be served in these areas, it would increase
their value.
9. Necessary foyers and public areas, circulation, public amenities, stage
and back-stage facilities, service rooms, ticket offices and administra-
tive offices, etc., as needed for the functions which are anticipated
to take place in this building.
The proposals made by competitors in connection with the foregoing
will contribute substantially to the evaluation of the schemes submitted.


Appendix 6 — Schedule of Dates Associated with Competition
15th February, 1956 i. Competition programme and requirements will be available in Sydney.
15th March, 1956 2. Latest date for registration as a competitor.
15th May, 1956 3. Latest date on which questions from competitors will be received in Sydney by the Secretary.
Ist June, 1956 4- Answers to questions will be posted from Sydney by airmail to all registered competitors.
3rd December, 1956 5- The closing date of the Competition and the latest date on which drawings may be despatched by airmail or
delivered in Sydney.
Early January, 1957 6- Date of commencement of adjudication.


A. H. PETTIFER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER
SYDNEY AUSTRALIA
12-55
