









AN
ILLUSTRATED MONOGRAPH
OF THE
GRASSES OF QUEENSLAND,
ISSUED BT
THE BOARD APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF QUEENSLAND IN 1675
TO INQUIRE INTO THE CAUSES AND THE VARIOUS DISEASES
AFFECTING LIVE STOCK AND PLANTS.
BY
F. M. BAILEY, F.L.S., COR. M.R.S. TASMANIA, L.S. NEW SOUTH WALES, ETC.
ELECTROTYPED BY
Tv. T. STAIGEIi, F.L.S., Government Analytical Chemist* Etc.
VOL. 1.—1878.
BRISBANE:
LITHOGRAPHED BY WARWICK A SAP3FORD, QUEEN STREET.
MDCCCLXIIX.




PREFACE.
The object the Hoard hope to accomplish hy the publication of an Illustrated monograph of the
Queensland Grasses is that of bringing them individually more prominently under the notice of both
Agricultural and Pastoral Farmers , to the great majority of whom a letterpress, however well written ,
without an illustration would be of little or no use.
Ike illustrations will he found faithful representations of the species, but often a small portion or
plant has had to be used to suit the size of the plate. The first impression being obtained hy the process
called Nature-printing .
The descriptive letterpress, without which it would be impossible to correctly determine any one species,
is principally made up from the 7th volume of Benfham\s Flora Australiensis, the descriptions being
modified to more fully mark the Queensland forms , and some further notes added which it is hoped may
he of service.
Queensland, extending on both sides of the Southern tropic, presents such a combination of climatic
influences that there are no well defined wet or dry seasons, and the heavy rains and droughts occur in all
months, consequently the time of growth and seeding of grasses is governed more by the rainfall than the
period of the year. And especially in the level country of the interior a long period of dry weather, followed
by a few days heavy rain , causes an immediate spring in the grass, which arrives at maturity in six to
eight weeks.
Neat the Fast coast, which is subject to the influence of the South-east trade winds, those species of grass
which are reproduced from the roots are most prevalent, while those which grow annually from seed are mote
abundant in the interior.
Ihe value of grasses for pasture' appears in some degree to he contingent on the quality of the soil, for
though the more fertile lands generally produce the best species, there are many grasses which afford excellent
pasture when grown on basaltic or calcareous soils, which on sandstones and silaceous slates do not appear
capable of maintaining stock in a healthy state for any long period.
Note. —Seventeen of these plates are of a former issue.
Warwick A Sapsford, Steam Litho Brisbane




CONTENTS.
Names as given in Descriptive Letterpress.
Andropogon, Linn.
bombyciuus, P. Pr.
erianthoides, P. Muell.
refractus, 22. Pr. /
sericeus, P. Pr.
Anthistiria, Linn .
ciliata, Linn.
frondosa, P. Pr.
membranacea, Lindl.
Astrebla, P. AT.
elymoides, P y. M.
pectinata, P. y. M.
Bromus, Linn.
arenarius, Labill.
Chlorus, Linn.
scariosa, P y. Af.
ventricosa, P. Pr.
Deyeuxia, Clarion.
Forsteri, Kunth.
Dichelachne, Endl.
crinita, Hook.
Dimeria, P, Pr.
tenera, Trin.
Ectrosia, P. Pr.
Gulliveri, P. y. Af.
Eleusine, Ooertn.
segyptiaca, Pers.
Eragrostis, Beauv.
Brownii, Nees.
chsetophylla, Steud.
tenelia, Beauv.
Eriachne, It. Br.
obtusa, P f Pr.
Eriochloa, 2T. P. 2T.
punctata, 22. P. et K.
Isachne, P. Br.
australis, P. Pr*
Leersia, Pty.
hexandra, Sw.
Microlsena, P. Pr.
stipoides, P. Br.
Neurachne, P. Br.
Mitchelliana, Nees.
Panicum, Linn.
crus-galli, Linn. *
distachyum, Linn.
flavidum, Hetz.
ieucophoeum, H. B. et K.
macractinium, Benth.
Myurus, Lam.
parviflorum, P, Pr.
Pappophorum, Sehreb .
nigricans, P. Pr.
Paspalum, Linn.
distichum, v. littorale
Rottboellia, Linn .
ophiuroides, Benth.
Setaria, Beauv.
macrostachya, H. P. et K.
Sporobolus, P. Br.
actinocladus, F. v. M.
diander, Beauv.
indicus, P. Pr.
Stenotaphrum, Trin.
americanum, Schrank.
Thuarea, Pers.
sarmentosa, Pers.
Names according to former list of Grasses of
Queensland, &c.
A . laniger , F. v . Muell .
annulatus , P. Muell.
Danthonia elymoides, F. v. M.
pectinata, JLindl.
Agrostis , Solandri y F. v. M.
Stipa , Dichelachne y Steud.
Chloris pumilio , 22. Br.
(a mis-placed label)
E. cruciata, Lam.
Foa Brownii, Kunth .
tenella , Linn.
Chloris ventricosa, P. Br.
(a mis-placed label).
Helopus annulatus, Nees.
Panicum atrovirens , Trin.
P. brizoides, F. v. M.
Brownii . P.
P. commune, F. v.M,
\
Andropogon rottboeloides, Sieud.
Pennisetum italicumy F. v. M.
Warwick & Saps ford , Steam Li t ho. Brisbane ,




GENERA.
Andropogon, Linn. —Spikelets one-flowered or empty,
in pairs.in the alternate notches of the articulate rhachis of
simple spikes, I sessile hermaphrodite (or rarely female), and
fertile, the other pedicellate and barren, either male or empty,
the spikes either solitary, or clustered and sessile, or very
shortly pedunculate at the end of the common peduncle.
Glumes in the fertile spikelet 4, the outer one the largest,
awnless, several-nerved, but often 2 nerves near the margin
much more prominent than the others ; 2nd glume keeled,
rarely produced into a short, straight awn; 3rd much smaller,
very thin and hyaline, always empty ; 4th or terminal glume
under the flower very slender, flexuose and stipes-like at the
base, or, if dilated, very thin and hyaline, entire or bifid at
the top, with an awn either terminal or from the notch, rigid
and twisted in the lower part, bent back and very fine above
the middle. Palea small and hyaline, or none. Glumes of
the barren spikelets 4 or fewer, the outer one the largest and
many-nerved, the 2nd keeled, the 3rd and 4th, when present,
small, thin, and hyaline, all awnless Styles distinct. Grain
enclosed in the glumes, but free from them. Grasses usually
tall, and often scented.
Anthistiria, Linn. —Spikelets 1-flowered or empty, 7
rarely 6 in a spike or cluster, 4 male or barren, either sessile
or pedicellate in a whorl at the base of the hairy rhachis, 2
or sometimes 1 pedicellate and male or barren on the top of
the rhachis, with an intermediate sessile fertile one. Glumes
in ihe barren spikelets usually 2, the outer one several-nerved,
the inner thin and hyaline, in the male spikelets usually a 3rd
smaller hyaline one ; in the fertile spikelet 4 glumes, the two
outer ones nearly equal, usually rigid and coriaceous, the outer
one obscurely 5 or 7-nerved, the 2nd with two prominent
nerves, the central one v,ery faint; 3rd glume much smaller,
very thin and hyaline; 4th very narrow and thin at the base,
thickened into a long twisted awn usually bent above the
middle. Palea very small and hyaline, sometimes scarcely
conspicuous. Styles distinct. Grain free, inclosed in the
hardened outer glume. Erect, leafy, branching grasses, the
spikes or clusters singly pedunculate within sheathing bracts,
or sessile in the bracts and collected many together in com-
pound clusters, forming short almost cyme-like leafy panicles.
Astrebla, F. v. Muell . —Spikelets few-flowered, sessile or
nearly so in the alternate notches of the continued rhachis of
one or two simple second spikes, the rhachis of the spikelet
articulate above the two outer glumes. Outer empty glumes
2, glabrous, acute, many-nerved, unawned. Flowering glumes
silky-hairy, 3-lobed, the central lobe with a broad base, taper-
ing into a straight or curved not twisted awn, the lateral lobes
erect, rigid, 2 or 3-nerved. Palea with 2 prominent ciliate
nerves or keels. Styles distinct; very short.
BromUS, Linn . —Spikelets several-flowered, oblong or
lanceolate, pedicellate, erect or drooping, in a more or less
branched panicle, the rhachis of the spikelet articulate between
the flowering glumes, glabrous or scabrous-pubescent. Outer
empty glumes acute or fine-pointed, unawned. Flowering
glumes convex on the back, 5 to 7-nerved, the hyaline apex
usually shortly bifid, the midrib produced into a straight or
curved awn free from a little.below the apex. Palea nearly as
long as the glume, the two prominent nerves usually scabrous-
ciliate. Ovary obovate, crowned by a hairy membranous
appendage, the very short distinct styles more or less lateral.
Grain flattened, adhering to the palea, and often more or less
to the base of the glume.
ChlorlS, Linn. —Spikelets 1-flowered, awned, singly ses-
sile in 2 rows on one side of simple spikes, either solitary or
digitate at the end of the peduncle, the rhachis of the spikelet
articulate immediately above the outer glumes. Outer empty
glumes 2, keeled, persistent, awnlese. Flowering glume pro-
duced into a fine, straight awn, entire, or with a tooth-lobe or
short awn on each side of the terminal awn. Paloa folded,
or with two prominent nerves Khachis of the spikelet
produced behind the palea, and bearing 1 or more empty
glumes, all awned and usually with their ends on a level with
that of the flowering glume.
Deyeuxia, Clarion. —Spikelets 1-flowered, pedicellate or
rarely sessile, in a panicle either loose *and spreading or narrow
and spike-like, the rhachis of the spikelet articulate above the
outer glumes, usually bearing a tuft of hairs round the
flowering glume, and usually produced beyond it in a small
ciliate or rarely glabrous bristle, very rarely bearing an empty
glume or imperfect flower, sometimes very minute, rarely
deficient. Glumes 3, two outer ones persistent, keeled, un-
awned ; flowering glume shorter and very thin, about as long
or rarely longer and membranous, broad, enclosing thHlower,
5-nerved, with a fine dorsal awn usually bent and twisted,
rarely short and straight, or very rarely deficient. Palea
thin, more than half as long as the glume, faintly or pro-
minently 2-nerved. Styles distinct, short. Grain enclosed in
the glume and palea. and sometimes partially adhering to
them.
Dichelachne, Endl. —Spikelets 1-flowered, numerous in
a narrow usually dense panicle, the rhachis of the spikelet
articulate immediately above the 2 outer glumes, and not con-
tinued beyond the flower. Glumes 3, narrow, the 2 outer
°nes persistent, membranous, acute, keeled. Flowering glume
raised on a short hairy stipes (rhachis of the spikelet)
membranous at the time of flowering, hyaline and entire, or
2-lobed at the end, with a fine scarcely twisted dorsal awn a
little below the end, slightly hardened round the fruit. Palea
2-nerved. Stamens 3 or fewer ; anthers glabrous. Styles dis-
tinct. Grains enclosed in the glume and palea, free from
them.
Dimeria, B. Br. —Spikelets l-flowered, almost sessile,
inserted singly on the alternate notches of slender, unilateral
spikes, which are either solitary or more frequently 2 or 3
together on a terminal peduncle; the rhachis not articulate,
and frequently a tuft of short hairs under each spikelet.
Glumes 4, .two outer empty ones linear, rigid, keeled, not
awned ; the 3rd also empty, but smaller, thin, and hyaline;
terminal glume thin and transparent, entire or two-lobed, with
a slender awn either terminal or in the terminal notch, twisted
at the base, and bent back at or below the middle. Palea
minute or none. Styles distinct. Grain free, narrow, enclosed
in the outer glumes.
Ectrosla, JR. Br. —Spikelets with 1 or rarely 2 fertile
flowers, and 2 or more male flowers or empty glumes above
them, in a terminal panicle, the rhachis of the spikelet articu-
late above the two outer glumes. Outer glumes, unawned;
the 2nd rarely with a short point; glume of the perfect flower
with a prominent point or short awn, the upper glumes taper-
ing into fine, straight awns. Styles distinct. Grain enclosed
in the thin or scarcely hardened glume and palea.
Eleusine, Qcovin ~ Spikelets several-flowered, flat, im.
bricate in two rows along one side of the digitate or scattered
branches of a simple panicle, the rhachis of the spikelet arti-
culate above the outer glumes. Glumes spreading, keeled,
and complicate, thin, but rigid, the two outer empty ones
usually shorter, unequal, obtuse, acute, or tapering to a short
point. Flowering glumes obtuse, or less pointed, the terminal
one usually empty, or rudimentary.. Palea folded. Styles
short, distinct. Seeds rugose within a loose, membranous
pericarp, which either persists round the ripe seed or breaks
up and falls away, or otherwise disappears as the ovary en-
larges.
Eragrostis, Beauv. —Spikelets several, usually many-
flowered, pedicellate or sessile, in a loose and spreading or
Warwick & Sapsford, Steam Litho. Brisbane


narrow and clustered panicle, the rhachis of the spikelet
usually glabrous and articulate under the flowering glumes,
but often very tardily so, and sometimes inarticulate. Outer
empty glumes unequal, and rather shorter than the flowering
ones, keeled, without any or only faint lateral nerves. Flower-
ing glumes obtuse or acute, unawned, 3-nerved, the keel
prominent, the lateral nerves in a few species very faint.
Palea shorter than the glume, with 2 prominent nerves or
keels, often persisting after the glume atld grain have fallen
awav. Grain free; ovoid or oblong, not furrowed.
Eriachne, R. Br. —Spikelets two-flowered, usually not
very numerous, in aloose or dense panicle, the flowers both
hermaphrodite and similar, the rhachis of the spikelet articu-
late above the outer glumes, and hairy round the flowering ones.
Empty glumes 2, persistent, acute, or tapering into a point or
short awn, many (usually 9to 11) nerved. Flowering glumes
with fewer nerves, with long, spreading hairs on the back or
margins, awnleas, or tapering into a fine, straight, or curved awn,
not twisted. Palea very fiat, often hairy on the back, with two
prominent almost marginal nerves. Styles distinct, short.
Grain more or less flattened, enclosed in the glume and palea
free from them.
•
Eriochloa, 11. and K. —Spikelets, one-flowered, without
protruding awns, with a callous annular or almost cuplike
base, articulate on a short pedicel, in 1 or 2 rows along one
side of the slender branches of a simple panicle. Glumes 3,
two outer ones empty, usually membranous, equal, or nearly
so, the 3rd or flowering glume shorter, of a firm, coriaceous
texture, obtuse, but tipped with a point or short awn not
exceeding the outer glumes. Palea within the flowering
glume coriaceous and involute. Styles distinct, rather long.
Grain enclosed in the hardened palea and flowering glume,
and free from them.
Isachne, R. Br. —Spikelets two-flowered, both flowers
hermaphrodite, or the upper female or the lower male, small,
iu loose panicles, the rhachis of the spikelet articulate above
the empty glumes, glabrous, anl not produced above the
flowering ones Glumes unawned, convex, faintly nerved, 2
outer empty ones nearly equal; flowering -ones of a firmer
consistence, closely sessile, or the upper one slightly raised.
Palea as long as the glume. Styles distinct. Grain enclosed
in the hardened glume and palea, free from them.
Leersia, Sw. —Spikelets one-flowered, flat, articulate on
short pedicels along the filiform branches of a terminal panicle.
Glumes 2, complicate and keeled, the outer one the largest.
No 2-nerved palea. Stamens 0, or in species not Australian,
8 or fewer. Styles short .distinct. Grain enclosed in the
slightly hardened glumes, free from them.
Microlsena, R. Br. —Spikelets one-flowered, on filiform
pedicels in a narrow, loose panicle, the rhachis of the spikelet
articulate above the two outer glumes. Glumes 6, 2 outer
short and persistent, 3rd and 4th long, narrow, and awned,
sth and Gth acute, unawned, all keeled. Flower terminal.
No palea. Lodicules large, very thin. Stamens 4 or 2.
Styles distinct. Grain enclosed in the larger glumes, but free
from them.
Neurachne, R. Br. —Spikelets with one terminal her-
maphrodite flower, and very rarely a second male one below it,
sessile along the continuous rhachis of a simple ovoid or
cylindrical spike. Glumes 4, the 2nd the largest, fringed on
each side, at least in the lower half, with long, spreading cilia
on the intramarginal nerve ; 3rd glume smaller and thinner,
usually with a small palea in its axil. Fruiting glume smaller,
thiu, and often hyaline, the palea also very thin, as long as or
longer than the glume. Styles distinct. Grain enclosed in
the thin palea and glume, free from them.
Panicum, Linn. —Spikelets with one terminal herma-
phrodite flower, and occasionally a male or rudimentary flower
below it, rarely awned ’; variously arranged along the branches
of a simple or compound panicle, rarely reduced to a simple
spike, the partial rhachis very rarely produced beyond the last
spikelet; barren, awnlike branches none, or very rarely a
single one. Glumes usually 4, the outer one smaller than the
others, not awned, often very small, deficient only in P. gib-
bosum, the 2nd and 3rd very variable in relative proportions, the
3rd occasionally with a palea, with or without 3 stamens in its
axil; 4th or fruiting glume smaller, or as long as the 3rd, of a
firmer consistence, enclosing a palea and hermaphrodite flower.
Styles distinct or very shortly united at the base. Grain
enclosed in the hardened fruiting glume and palea, but free
from them.
Pappophorum, Schreb.— Spikelets with one hermaph -
rodite flower and one or more male or rudimentary flowers or
empty glumes above it, in a short, dense, and spikeiike or nar-
row and loose panicle, the rhachis of the spikelet articulate
above the outer glumes, and around the flowering glume.
Outer glumes membranous, many nerved, awnless, as long as
the spikelet. Flowering glume broad, membranous, with 9,
or in species not Australian, more nerves produced into more
or less plumose awns. Palea 2-nervcd, as long as the glume,
or longer. Styles distinct. Grain enclosed in the glume and
palea, free from them.
Paspalum, Linn. —Spikelets one-flowered, not awned,
not callous at the base, .in 1 or 2 rows along one side of
slender spikes, either forming the branches of a simple panicle,
or rarely solitary. Glumes 3 - , 2 outer ones empty, usually mem-
branous, and equal, or nearly so, the 3rd flowering, of a firmer
texture. Palea within the flowering glume smaller and more
involute. Styles distinct, rather long. Grain enclosed in the
hardened palea and flowering glume, and free from them.
Rottboellia, Linn, f partly. —Spikelets in pairs in the
alternate notches of the articulate rhachis of a simple spike,
1 sessile and embedded in a cavity of the rhachis, with one
hermaphrodite flower, and sometimes a male one below it, the
other on a closely appressed pedicel, but often spreading, with
a male or raiely a hermaphrodite flower, or reduced to 1 or 2
empty glumes, the spike single on each peduncle above a
sheathing bract, and cylindrical, or nearly so. Glumes in the
sessile spikelet 4, the outer one coriaceous, closely covering
the cavity of the rhachis, the 2nd thinner, but often rigid,
concave, or keeled, the 3rd and 4tn, and the palea very thin
and hyaline, all awnless. Styles distinct. Grain enclosed in
the glumes, but free from them.
Setaria, Benuv. —Spikelets with one terminal hermaph-
rodite flower, and sometimes a second male one "below it,
crowded in a cylindrical, dense, or rarely interrupted spikelike
panicle, not awned, but surrounded by numerous awnhke,
barren branches, persistent on the main rhachis, the spikelets
sessile near the base of the branches, and falling away from
them. Glumes 4, the outer one small, the second usually
shorter than the 3rd. A palea, and sometimes 3 stamens in
the axil of the 3rd. Terminal or fruiting glume of a firmer
consistence, with a perfect flower. Styles distinct. Grain
inclosed in the hardened glume and palea, but free from them.
Sporobolus, R. Br. Spikelets small, one-flowered,
nearly sessile or pedicellate, in a narrow, spikelike, or loose
and pyramidal panicle, the rhachis of the spikelet very short,
glabrous, scarcely articulate, not continued beyond the flower.
Glumes 3, persistent, or separately deciduous, unawned,
.slightly keeled or convex, and obscurely nerved, 2 outer empty
ones usually unequal; flowering glume as long, or longer.
Palea about as long as the glume, with two nerves usually
prominent, and readily splitting between them. Styles very
short. Grain free, readily falling away from the glume, the
pericarp loosely enclosing the seed, or very thin and evan-
escent. In wet situations, the panicle often attacked by the
black fungus — Helminthosporium Ravenelii Curtis.
Stenotaphrum, Trin. —Spikelets with one terminal
hermaphrodite flower, and a male or imperfect onb below it y
usually 2 to 4 together in very short spikes, embedded in the
alternate notches of the broad rhachis of a spikelike panicle,
the rhachis of the partial spike usually produced into a short
point beyond the insertion of the spikelets, and the common
rhachis often disarticulating transversely between the notches
when old. Glumes 4, the lowest empty and very small, the
2nd empty and the largest, membranous, but rigid, 3 or 5-
nerved, the 3rd and 4th flowering, rather smaller, with the
nerves less prominent and of a somewha/t firmer texture.
Palea within both glumes of a «imilar consistence. Styles
distinct. Grain enclosed in the rather rigid but thin palea
and flowering glume, aud free from them.
Thuatea, Pers. —Spikelets monoecious, in a simple one-
sided spike, enclosed in a spatha-like bract, the upper (4 to
(5) spikelets with 2 male flowers, the Ist and 2nd lower ones
with one female or hermaphrodite fhAver, and a rudimentary
or male one below it. Glumes 4, the outer one small and
hyalipe (or sometimes wanting), flowering ones, when perfect
with a perfect palea. Styles distinct, slender, with very
densely plumose, brush-like stigmas. In fruit, the bract
under the spike falls away, the lower part of the rhachis be-
comes much dilated, envelopes the fruiting spikelet, and is
said to bury itself in the sand, the fruiting glume and palea
stiffened, but scarcely hardened, the grain enclosed, but free
Warwick A Saps ford , Steam Lit ho Brisbane




ANDROPOGON BOMBYCINUS, R. Br.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., Vol. VII, 533.
WOOLLY-HEADED GRASS.
An erect, rigid, perennial grass, 2 to 5 feet, usually glabrous (without hairs), except a
little silky pubescence (downiness) on the lower leaf-sheaths, the nodes (stem-joints)
glabrous, or shortly bearded. Leaves narrow, flat, when old, rigid and much curled; the
ligula (scale-like projection at base of leaf blade), very prominent, entire. Panicle shortly
branched, 3 to 0 inches long, with sheathing bracts (panicle leaves) of 1 to 2 inches under
the branches. Peduncles (stalk of inflorescence) usually shorter than the bracts, bearing
cacb a narrow sheathing bract and two very densely wolly-hairy spikes of -to 1 in.; at first
erect, but soon spreading or reflexed (turned back). Sessile (stalkless), spikelets 2to 5,
concealed by the silvery-silky hairs. Outer glumes (flower scales) acute, many-nerved, but
the 2 lateral nerves much more prominent, especially as the flowering advances, and the
intermediate ones becoming almost obliterated or visible only towards the end of the
glume ; 2nd glume thin, with a prominent keel produced into a short point; 3rd very thin,
faintly 3-nervcd ; terminal flowering glume very thin and hyaline (transparent), shortly
bifid (divided in two), with a very fine awn scarcely exceeding the spikelet, or entire with-
out any awn. Pedicellate (stalked) spikelets reduced to a single narrow, many-nerved
glume of 2i to 3 lines. This strong grass, which is generally spoken well of by graziers,
seems to love a somewhat strong soil, and is often found among the rocks on hill sides. It
is very abundant about Springsure. The bases of the stems of this species, like several
others of the genus, are highly aromatic.
F. M. B.
Warwick A Sapsford, Steam Litmo.Brisbane


ANDROPOGON BOMBYCINUS, R. Br.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S
Warwick & Sapsford, Steam Litho. Brisbane .


ANDROPOGON ERIANTHOIDES, F. v. Muell.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 529.
SATIN-TOPPED GRASS.
An erect glaucous (bluish-green) grass of 3 or G feet, spreading at the base, somewhat
creeping, and producing a large quantity of good nutritious herbage, glabrous (without
hairs), except the inflorescence, the nodes (joints) not bearded. Leaves at base of medium
size, but those of the flower stalks having rather broad sheaths terminated by a somewhat
narrow lamina (blade). Spikes usually 3 or 4, nearly sessile at the end of a peduncle
without sheathing bracts, erect or scarcely spreading, about 4 inches long, the spikelets
concealed under the very copious long silky hairs surrounding the sessile (stalkless)
spikelet on the pedicels, and a few on the outer glumes (flower scales). Sessile spikelets
about 3 lines long, the outer glume nearly equally many-nerved, with a short scarious
(thin dry) often notched tip ; 2nd glume rather shorter, keeled, 3-nerved, acute; 3rd
glume thin and hyaline (transparent), awn or terminal glume fine, not above twice the
length of the spikelet, contracted at the base into a flexuose stipes (stalk of flower) with
sometimes a very slight hyaline dilatation. Pedicellate spikelet reduced to 1 or 2 empty
glumes.
This is an excellent grass, and highly prized by some graziers, and were an opportunity
alforded it of seeding would be more plentiful, but the herbage is so relished by stock that in
many parts it is fast being eaten out. Naturally it has a wdde range, being met with in
N. S. Wales, D. Downs, Peak Downs, Warrego, Springsure, &c., &c. The specific name
is given from the resemblance it bears to another grass— JErianthus .
P. M. B.
Warwick & Saps ford . Steam Li t ho. Brisbane


Aadropogon erianthoides, F. v. M.
It would be hard to find a a superior grass to this
for even when eaten close to the ground stock
are said to do better on it than on any other of
our indigenous species. It has a rather wide
range. It produces a heavy crop of rich, sweet,
sueclent herbage; spreads freely from the roots
and also seeds freely.
F.M.BAILEY.F.L.S.
K.T.STAIGER.F.L.S.


ANDROPOGON REFRACTUS, R. Br.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., Vol. VII, 534.
BROKEN SPIKED GRASS.
A glabrous (hairless), often glaucous (bluish-green), erect grass of 2to 4 feet. Leaves
narrow tapering to long filiform (shread-like) points, margins rough, midrib prominent,
ligula scarious (dry stiff), jagged. Panicle long narrow, often over a foot in length with
leafy sheathing bracts. Branches 2or 3 within these sheathing bracts or floral leaves.
Spikes 2 together \ to 1 inch long on short bracteate peduncles (footstalks), at first erect,
then spreading, after which closely reflexed, having the appearance of being broken (hence
the specific name), glabrous except a small tuft of short hairs at the base of the sessile
(stalkless) spikelets. Sessile spikelets 3t08,3 to 4 lines long ; outer glume (flower scale)
acute, many-nerved; 2nd narrow and keeled, 3rd thin and hyaline (transparent); terminal
or flowering glume hyaline, narrow, either 2-lobed with an awn (bristle) slightly exceeding
the spikelet, more frequently entire or nearly so and awnless. Pedicellate spikelets neuter
or rarely with a male flower, the outer glume many-nerved. This is one of the commonest
grasses of Queensland, rather coarse, but produces a large quantity of summer herbage
only found in sheltered places to make a growth during the winter months.
F. M. B.
Warwick A Sapsforo. Stiam Litho Briiiank


Andrppogon refractus, R Br.
An excellent grass for posture or hay ; produced
a heavy crop during summer, hut makes but
little growth in winter except where it is well
sheltered ; has a strong aromatic flavor at the
roots.
F.M.BAILEY, F.L.S.
K.T.STAIGER.F.L.S.


ANDROPOGON SERICEUS, R. Br.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 529.
BLUE GRASS.
Stems numerous erect, branching at the base, 2 to 4 feet high, glaucous (bluish green)
leafy, the nodes (joints) bearded. Spikes in the typical form 2 or 3, or rarely twice as
many, sessile (stalkless), at the top of a slender peduncle (stalk of inflorescence) without
sheathing bracts, all about 2 inches long, and densely clothed with long silky hairs on the
outer glumes (flower scales) as well as on the rhachis (axis) and pedicel (flower stalk).
Spikelets scarcely 2 lines long, the pedicellate one reduced to a many nerved silky-hairy
glume enclosing a second small hyaline (transparent) lanceolate one. Outer glume of the
sessile (stalkless) spikelet rather rigid, obtuse or nearly so, about 5-nerved, with long silky
hairs on the back and a short scarious (dry stiff) ciliate (fringed) tip; 2nd glumes keeled
acute, glabrous ; 3rd very small, broad, thin, hyaline; awn or terminal glume fto inch
long, without any hyaline dilatation at the base. This excellent pasture grass has a high
reputation with graziers, but with not being permitted to seed, as it requires to do every
few years on some runs, it is now becoming scarce. It loves a rich soil, and is seldom met
with on poor. Its near ally— A . affinis , R. Br . —is the species usually found on dry, poor
soil.
F. M. B.
Warwick * Salford, Steam Litho Brisbane.


ANDROPOGON SERICEUS, R. Br.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STATGER, F.L.S
Warwick A Sapsford, Steam Ljtho.Brisbane


ANTHISTIRIA CILIATA, Linn .
BENTH. FLORA. AUSTR. VII, 542.
KANGAROO GRASS.
Stems Ito 5 ft. high. Leaves very narrow, with, or without hairs; midrib often
whitish and prominent; ligula (scale-like projection at base of blade); membranous;
sometimes ciliate (fringed). Spikes or clusters of spikelets not numerous ; sessile (stalkless)
or the lower ones pedunculate (having stalks) in a short or long terminal leafy panicle, the
leafy bracts (leaves of panicle) subtending each spike, sheathing at the base, and tapering
into points longer than the cluster, the short rhachis (axis) bearded with long hairs.
Spikelets narrow, 4to 5 lines long; 4 male or barren sessile at the base of the bearded
rhachis ; 2or 1 pedicellate (stalked) at the top, glabrous, or sprinkled with a few long hairs ;
outer glume (Bower scale) 4he largest, acute, many-nerved. 2nd shorter, thin, and 3to
5-nerved. 3rd thin and hyaline (transparent). Fertile terminal spikelet glabrous (without
hairs), or shortly pubescent (downy) at the end; outer glume broad, obtuse, rather thick,
about 7-nerved. 2nd rigid, rather shorter and narrower, with 2 prominent nerves and a
faint central one. 3rd narrow-oblong, very thin and hyaline (transparent); awn or 4th
glume very long and rigid; the attenuated base not dilated. •
This common grass, so abundant throughout Australia and Tasmania, varies much in
form and color; its favorite situation is the hill sides, where it forms tussacs, which habit,
combined with its nodding clusters of flowers, probably procured its local name. As a
fodder, it is not so well liked in Queensland as in the Southern Colonies. The northern
form, which is probably the true A. ciliata of Linnaeus, is not so tussacky, sprouts more
from the stem joints, thus matting much together; very leafy, and on the alluvial soil of
about 4to 5 feet in height. But this excellent grass seems unable to hold, for it gradually
disappears as the country becomes occupied.
F. M. B.
Warwick A Sapsford. Steam Litho. Brisbane


ANTHISTIRIA CILIATA, Linn.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S.


ANTHISTIRIA FRONDOSA, R. Br.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR. VII., 542.
BROAD-LEAVED KANGAROO GRASS.
A more robust grass than A. ciliata. Stems somewhat flattened and more cane-like.
Leaves not so hairy, but usually hairy near theligula (a scale-like projection at base of blade),
broad, without the long, narrow points of A. ciliata. Panicle leafy, dense, nodding, the
*
leafy bracts (panicle leaves) ciliate (fringed) on the back, with long, spreading hairs, the
outer ones 3to 6 inches long. Spikes or clusters, as in A. ciliate, with the four involucral
(outer whorl) spikelets sessile (stalkless) ; the outer glume (flower scale) of the fertile
spikelet very rigid, scarcely nerved, obtuse, pubescent (downy) at the top, with short, rigid
hairs. Awn often longer than in A. ciliata. Many of the spikes reduced to the four
involucral barren spikelets surrounding a rudimentary one.
Mr. Wm. E. Armit, to whom I am indebted for my only specimen of this fine species,
found it on the Etheridge, as far as known, its only Queensland habitat. The following is
bis note : —“ A useful grass, to judge by the manner stock feed it down when young.”
F. M. B.
Warwick & Sapsford , Steam Litho. Brisbane


ANTHISTIRIA FRONDOSA, R. Br.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S
Warwick A Sapsford. Steam Litho. Brisbane


ANTHISTIRIA MEMBRANACEA, Lindl .
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTE. VII., 543.
LANDSBOROUGH GRASS.
Quite glabrous, procumbent, forming an intricate mass, the branching stems often
several feet in length. Leaves fiat, appearing almost jointed on their flat, often colored,
short, prominently striated sheaths. Floral leaves, or bracts, with coriaceous (tough)
sheaths, and short lanceolate laminae (blades). Panicle small, dense, with very numerous
small spikes or clusters, each subtended by a scarcely longer bract. Spikelets scarcely 2
lines long, glabrous (without hairs), the four involucral (outer whorl) ones pedicellate
(stalked), the fertile one rather longer than the two pedicellate barren ones beside it.
Glumes (flower scales) all thin, the outer one acute, with several nerves ; the second with
1 to 3 nerves; the awn very fine, scarcely more than as long again as the spikelet. A
remarkably brittle grass when dry, produces seed freely, and is highly spoken of for its
fattening qualities. This annual northern grass produces a good summer crop in the
Brisbane district, but will not stand the winter.
F. M. B.
Warwick & Sapsford,Steam Litho. Brisbane


ANTHISTIRIA MEMBRANACEA, Lindl.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S
Warwick A Sapsford.Steam Litho. Brisbane


ASTREBLA ELYMOIDES, F. v. Muell.
MITCHELL GRASS.
A somewhat tufty glabrous grass, at times forming large leafy tussacs of 2 to 3 feet.
Stems slender, weak, falling and lying along the ground. Leaves rather long, narrow,
tapering to fine points, sheaths loose. Panicle 6 inches to 1 foot or more long, spikelike.
Spikelets, those in the lower part of panicle, in pairs, one about \ line higher above the other,
an angle of the rhachis dividing them, closely sessile (stalkless) in distant alternate notches
along the somewhat twisted flexuose rhachis (stalk of inflorescence). Outer glume sto 8 lines
long, thin, almost hyaline (transparent), acute, nerves numerous, 12 or more, with hyaline
margins. Flowering glume (flower scales) glabrous, 3-lobed, lateral lobes lanceolate, erect,
rigid, faintly nerved, margins skinlike, the central lobe tapering into a straight awn longer than
the lateral lobes, and somewhat spreading. Rhachis of spikelets articulate only above the
outer glume, woolly at the base only, Palea (inner flower scale) hyaline, with prominent
ciliate nerve just within the edge. Grain oblong, very obtuse, 2to 3 lines long, like small
grains of wheat. This species seems to have been overlooked, as no notice is taken of it in
the Flora, and I cannot find where Baron Mueller described it, but it has been described
by him under the above appropriate name. The description I have given is from some
few specimens I have received from North Queensland, and from meeting with it in the
Warrego in 187 G during the long drought, where it was almost the only grass showing any
vitality. It is this species referred to by northern squatters under the name of Mitchell
grass, although the true seed is seldom gathered, the heads of the other erect growing
species being usually gathered in mistake.
F. M. B.
Warwick & Sapsford,Steam Lit ho. Brisbane


ASTREBLA ELYMOIDES, F. v. Muell.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S
Warwick A Sapsford, Steam Litho.Brisbane


ASTREBLA PECTINATA, F. v . Muell
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII, 602.
COARSE MITCHELL GRASS.
An erect glaucous (bluish-green) grass of 1 to 2 feet, hairy about the orifice of
sheaths and bottom of leaf-blades. Leaves flat, somewhat scabrous (rough, ending in
long points). Spikelets sessile (stalkless) in the alternate notches of a secund spike 2to
5 inches, closely imbricate (overlapped) and turned to one side. Outer glumes (flower
scales) 4 to 5 lines long, glabrous (hairless), acute, 9 or 11-nerved, with scarious (thin dry)
margins. Flowering glumes 3or 4, the entire part scarcely 1 line long, densely villous
(hairy) outside, as well as the broad base of the middle lobe; lateral lobes semilanceolate,
glabrous, rigid, 4 to 5 lines long, acute, 2 or 3-nerved, with the outer margin broadly
scarious; central lobe broad, ovate, keeled, tapering into a slender, straight awn,
about as long as, or rather longer, than the lateral 'lobes. Rhachis (stalk) of spikelet
articulate (jointed) only above the outer glumes, very hairy between the flowering ones,
continued and less hairy above the perfect flowers, with one or two glabrous glumes and
palise (inner flower scales) empty, or with rudimentary flowers. A. triticoides , F. v. M. t
and its var. lappacea might both be placed here as varieties, as they only differ in their
moie robust growth. It may be mentioned that in A . pectinata there is often a tendency*
to form 2 spikes, which are at times much elongated, showing an approach to A. elymoides.
As a pasture grass this is often very highly spoken of by northern squatters.
F. M. B.
Danthonia pectinata, Lindl ., on plate.
Warwick & Sap«ford . Stiaw Litho. Briibamk


F.M.BAILEY.F.L.S.
K.T.STAIGER.F.L.S.
Danthonia pectinata, Lindl.
Another Mitchell grass, but coarser and more
upright in its growth than the last.


BROMUS ARENARIUS, Labill.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII, 661.
BROME GRASS.
An annual grass of Ito 2 ft. Leaves flat, flaccid, softly hairy, or pubescent (downy).
Panicle at first erect, at length drooping, the capillary (hair-like) branches clustered; the
longer ones 2to 3 in. long, with Ito 4 spikelets on capillary pedicels (stalks). Spikelets
lanceolate, \to f inch long without the awn (bristle), flat, 5 to 9 flowered. Glumes all
pubescent or glabrous (hairless), the lowest about 3 lines long and 5-nerved; the 2nd longer
and 7-nerml, both empty and acute, flowering glumes rather longer, about 7-nerved, convex
on the back, the awn free from a little below the scarious (thin dry) tip, ito f in. long.
In the Mitchell District of Queensland and throughout the southern colonies this species
bears a high character as a pasture grass.
F. M. B.
vou * ,L 4*sd r4US V//^^ t srt?.t r rs*
' C ‘ : ' / X 7 yc
Warwick A Sapsford, Steam Litho. Brisbane


K.T.STALGER.F.L.S.
F.M.BAILEY.F.L.S.
Bromus arenarius, Labill.
A very rare grass in Queensland ; an annual,
only growing during the winter and spring
months. This grass is highly spoken of by
Mr. W. H. Bacchus, of Victoria, a writer on
grasses.


CHLORIS SCARIOSA, F.v.M.
FLOR. AUSTR. VII, 614.
GRACEMERE STAR GRASS.
Stems erect, slender, but rigid, Ito 2 feet high. Leaves narrow, with subulate (awl-
shaped) points, or almost entirely flat in the larger specimens, glabrous (without hairs);
spikes, 4 to 6, dense, 1 to 2 inches long. Spikelets sessile, 3 to 4 lines long. Lowest
glume (flower scale) narrow, hyaline (transparent), almost obtuse, scarcely keeled, about 2
lines long, the 2nd rather longer, with a more prominent keel. Flowering glume (scale)
raised on a hairy rhachis (axis) of about 1 line, rather above 1 line long, very broad and
concave, prominently 3-nerved, ciliate (fringed), with long hairs at the end, with a fine awn
of 2to 3 lines. Terminal empty glumes, several 4to 7, the lowest two broader than the
flowering ones, 5 to 7-nervedat the base, hyaline (transparent), and not ciliate; very spread-
ing, and at length rigidly scarious (thin, stiff), the upper ones gradually smaller, sessile
(stalkless), and not exceeding the outer ones. A,fair pasture grass, but rather scarce out
of the Rockhampton district.
F. M. B.
Warwick & Sapsford, SteamTitho. Brisbane


CHLORIS SCARIOSA, F,V.M.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S
Warwick a Sarsforo, S t eam Litho Br.sbanc


CHLORIS VENTRICOSA, R. Br.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 613.
TALL STAR-GRASS.
A tall grass, stems branching, leafy, often 3to 5 feet high. Leaves flat, tapering to
fine points, sheaths loose. Spikes 5t07,3 to 5 inches long, usually of a dark color.
Spikelets cuneate (wedge-shaped) and obtuse, from to 2 lines long, and often of a very
dark color. Flowering glume broad, very obtuse, embracing the much smaller terminal one,
which is raised and truncate (cut off square), usually emarginate (notched). This is a tall,
dark-panicled grass often met with on the borders of scrubs, but when sown out on open
land produces a fair crop.
F. M. B.
Warwick A Sapsford. Steam Litho. Brisbane


K.T. STAIGER.F.L.S.
F.M.BAILEY.F.L.S.
Chloris ventricosa, R. Br.
A tall star gruass, found along the borders of
scrubs; produces a fair amount of feed.


DEYEUXIA FORSTERI, Kunth.
BENTH. FLOR, AUSTR., VOL. VII., 579.
WINTER GRASS.
An annual grass of very variable habit; erect or decumbent, 2 or more feet high,
leaves of a lively green, flat flaccid, very numerous, but sometimes narrow —almost
filiform (threadlike). Panicles usually large, loose, and spreading, a foot or morelong, with
long, capillary (hair-like), divided branches in distant whorls or clusters. Spikelets very
numerous. Outer glumes, narrow, very pointed, 1 to 1| line long, or in some forms
nearly 2 lines. Flowering glume about half as long, thin and almost hyaline (transparent),
broad, enveloping the flower, truncate (cut off square), or very shortly and unequally 2 or 4-
toothed, sprinkled or densely covered with hairs on the back, rarely almost glabrous (hair-
less), surrounded by the hairs of the rhachis (stalk of spikelet), with a fine twisted awn
attached about the middle of the back. Palea (inner flower scale) very narrow. Rhachis
produced into a bristle, usually very short and ciliate with a few long hairs. W. H.
Bacchus, Esq., a writer on fodder plants in Victoria, speaking of, this grass, says : —“ It is
the first grass to spring after summer rains, and keeps up a supply of nutritive herbage during
winter, which is equally true of it in Queensland.”
F. M. B.
Agrostis Solandri, F. M . on plate.
Warwick & Sapsford. Steam Litho Brisbane


F.M.BAILEY.F.L.S.
K.T.STAIGER.F.L.S.
Agrostis Solandri, F. V. M.
This is one of our best winter grasses ; the
herbage is sweet and succulent, but it dies away
on the approach of summer.


DICHELACHNE CRINITA, HOOK
BENTH FLOR, AUSTR., VOL. VII., 574.
Sterns erect, slender, or stout, 2to 3 feet high. Leaves flat, glabrous (without hairs),
or softly pubescent (downy) in the stout form, the upper ones rather long with long
sheaths. Panicle very dense and spikelike, 4 to 8 inches long, the spikelets imbricate
(overlapped) on the short erect branches, but concealed by the numerous long hairlike
awns. Outer glumes (flower scales) very narrow, hyaline, with a slightly scabrous (rough)
keel, nearly equal, about lines long. Flowering glume shorter, glabrous (without
hairs), the hyaline (transparent) tip entire but readily splitting. Awn (bristle) dorsal (on
the back) very slender, bent but scarcely twisted, above 1 inch long. An abundant and
variable grass, found from Moreton Bay south to Tasmania, Western Australia, and also in
New Zealand, and generally looked upon as a good pasture species on account of its quick
growtli in spring, as well as its continual growth during the winter months.
F. M. B.
Warwick A Sapsford. Steam Litho Brisbane .


DICHELACHNE CRINITA, Hook .
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STARGER, F.L.S
Warwick A Sapsford Steam Litho. Brisbane


DIMERIA TENERA, Trin
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 523.
A-flaccid decumbent grass, branching at the base, with filiform (thread-like) stems
6to 12 inches high, nodes (joints) bearded, with short-spreading silky hairs; leaves
flat, tapering to fine points ; ciliate (fringed); sheaths also sprinkled with long-spreading
hairs ; ligula (a skin-like projection at top of sheath) truncate (cut off square), or slightly
jagged. Spikes, 2 falcate (curved), flat; the filiform, flexuose , rhachis (stalk) bordered by
a green nerve, 1 to 2 inches long ; spikelets narrow, linear about a line long, with a small
tuft of hairs at the base. Outer glume very narrow, complicate, not bordered, the keel
minutely serrated; 2nd glume rather longer; very thin ciliate on the keel, with broad
hyaline margins. Terminal flowering glume shorter than the others, hyaline, shortly
2-lobcd, with a twisted capillary: bent awn 4 lines long from between the lobes ;
stamens 2. Abundant on low sandy soil about 4c Cairns, Trinity Bay,” forming a fine,
close, soft, leafy bottom. Worthy .of trial on sheep pastures.
F. M. B.
Chloris pumilio, B, Br., on plate.
Warwick & Safefokd, Steam Lithoßhieiane,


Chloris pumilio, R. Br.
A dwarf delicate grass makes a close bottom.
Found on sandy soil, Cairns, Trinity Bay.
F.M.BAILEY. F.L.S.
K.T.STAIGER.F.L.S.


ECTROSIA GULLIVERI, F.V. Muell.
BENTH. FLOR., AUSTR., VOL. VII., 634.
A slender, erect, annual grass, of from 6 to 18 inches in height, with narrow, somewhat
stiff bristle-like leaves. Panicle narrow but loose, with spreading branches ciliate (fringed)
as well as the very short pedicels with a few long hairs. Spikelets spreading or reflexed.
Outer glumes membranous, very pointed, about a line long. Flowering glumes 1 or 2, at
first very similar to the outer ones, but in the fruiting spikelet rigid, ovate, 3-nerved at the
base* tapering into a fine, very spreading point, giving the spikelet a squarrose aspect.
Terminal, empty glumes 2 to 4, with longer points or awns but rarely exceeding 1 line.
This is an annual grass from the Norman River, and useful for covering stony ridges in
dry, exposed places.
F. M. B.
Warwick & Sapsford, Steam Litho.Brisbane.


Ectrosia Gulliveri, F. V. M.
A fine pasture grass.
K.T.STAIGER.F.L.S.
F.M.BAILEY.F.L.S.


ELEUSINE AEGYPTIACA, Pers.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 615.
EGYPTIAN FINGER GRASS.
Stems tufted, or creeping and rooting at the base, and shortly ascending like the couch
( Cynodon dactylon), or rarely above 1 foot high. Leaves flat, ciliate (fringed), flaccid,
with long points. Spikes usually 3to 6, digitate, under i in. to 1 inch long, the angular
rhachis (stalk of spike) prominent on the upper or inner side, the spikelets regularly and
very closely packed at right angles to it on the opposite side. Outer glume (flower scale)
about 1 line long, acute; the 2nd broader, obtuse or emarginate (notched)y the keel produced
into a short dorsal awn, the rhachis of the spikelet produced above the outer glumes, but
glabrous (hairless). Flowering glumes broad, complicate (folded), tapering into short
spreading points. Pericarp loose over the enlarged ovary, disappearing from the ripe
rugose (wrinkled) seed. This common grass of warm countries is widely spread over
tropical Australia, and although not as yet tried, would be likely a valuable addition to
the southern pasture.
F. M. B.
E. cruciata, Lam., on plate.
Warwick & Sapsford, Steam Litmo. Brisbane .


Eleusine cruciata, Lam.
This is a line dwarf, succulent, open pasture
grass, deserving of extensive cultivation.
F.M.BAILEY.F.L.S.
K.T.STAIGER.F.L.S.


ERAGROSTIS BROWNII, Nees.
BRNTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 646
COMMON LOVE-GRASS.
A very variable plant in stature, and also in habitat, being found on all kinds of soil,
*
on rich lands often 3or 4 feet high, but on dry, poor soil seldom over a foot high. Leaves
long, narrow, flat, without hairs, except the few that fringe the orifice of the sheaths.
Panicles sometimes simple and dense, a few inches long, with numerous, small, densely-
clustered spikelets (the form figured), sometimes with short, spreading branches and few
spikelets, or a foot long with distant branches and long spikelets, singly scattered or in dis-
tant clusters. • Spikelets nearly sessile (stalkless), flat, Jto inch long with 10 to 40
flowers, the rhachis (axis) very tardily articulate (separating). Glumes often purplish,
flowering ones closely distichous, the lateral nerve nearly central on each side and prominent.
Palea (inner flower scale) shorter than the glume, incurved, the keels usually minutely
ciliate (fringed), stamens usually 3, but sometimes only 2, even in the larger spikelets. Grain
ovoid, oblong, smooth. One or other of the many forms of his fine pasture grass will be
met with in all parts of Australia, producing sweet herbage nearly throughout the year.
F. M. B.
Poa Brownii, Nets, ou plate
Warwick A Sapsford, Stiam Litho Brisbane


Poa Brownii, Nees.
There are several varieties of this fine pasture
grass ; it is one of the best to stand through
summer and winter.
K.T.STAIGER.F.L.S.
F.M.BAILEY.F.L.S.


ERAGROSTIS CHAETOPHYLLA, Steud .
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 648.
BRISTLE-LEAVED LOVE GRASS.
Stems from a shortly thickened, almost bulbous, slightly woolly-hairy base, densely
tufted, slender, but rigid, 6 inches to 1 foot high, often leafy to the inflorescence. Leaves
very narrow, convolute (rolled in), or setaceous Cbristle-like), glabrous (without hairs).
Panicle narrow, to 3 inches long, shortly branched. Spikelets usually rather numerous,
shortly stalked, scattered or crowded, flat and thin, 2 to 4 or rarely 6 lines long, 1 to 1J
lines broad, 6to 30-flowered. Glumes closely distichous (two-rowed), or rather loose, f
line long, obtuse, or almost acute, hyaline (transparent), or purplish, the lateral nerve
prominent on each side of the base. Palea (inner flower scale) nearly as long, glabrous
(without hairs). Stamens, 3. Grain small, ovoid-oblong. This is one of the beautiful
close-graining grasses of the western districts.
F. M. B.
Warwick A Sapsford, Steam Litmo. Brisbane


ERAGROSTIS CHAETOPHYLLA , Steud .
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S
Warwick A Sapsford, Steam Litho. Brisbane


ERAGROSTIS TENELLA, Beauv.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 643.
.DELICATE LOVE-GRASS.
An erect annual, 6 inches to 2 feet high. Leaves flat, narrow, glabrous (hairless).
Panicle usually occupying the greater part of the plant, with very numerous capillary
(hairlike) much divided branches, the lower ones in distant whorls or clusters. Spikelets
pedicellate (stalked), minute, rarely J-line long, with 3or 4 or rarely 6 flowers. Glumes
(flower scales) thin, almost hyaline, obtuse, about long, the lateral nerve on each
side almost marginal, very loosely imbricate (lying over each other), the rhachis (stalks
articulate (jointed). Palea (inner flower scale) glabrous (hairless), as long as the glume.
Stamens varying Ito 3. Grain very small, ovoid.
This delicate and fine sheep pasture grass is met with throughout Queensland and
Central Australia, usually on open country.
F. M. B.
Poa tenella, Linn., on plate.
Warwick A. Sapsford, Steam Litho.Brisbane.


F.M.BATLEY.F.L.S.
K.T.K.T.STAIGER.F.L.S.
Poa tenella, Linn.
A fine sheep pasture grass of our Western districts.


ERIACHNE OBTUSA, R. Br.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 632.
A variable usually rigid grass, 1 to 2 feet high, often much branched at the base.
Lea res narrow, flat or subulate (awl-shaped), glabrous (hairless), or the lower sheaths
sprinkled with rigid hairs. Panicle loose, sometimes much branched and 4 inches long,
sometimes almost reduced to a raceme of half-a-dozen spikelets. Spikelets ovoid, about 2
lines long, appearing acute when young, assuming the obtuse aspect when in fruit. Outer
glumes membranous, acute, with usually 5 nerves, sprinkled on the back, and ciliate
(fringed) with a few long hairs, rarely quite glabrous (hairless). Flowering glumes about
as long, more obtuse, rarely with a minute point, densely ciliate to the top, and sprinkled
on the back with spreading hairs. Palea (inner flower-scale) entire, slightly hairy. Grain
very much flattened. This is a harsh, dry kind of grass, yet has been highly spoken of by
inland squatters.
F. M. B.
Chloris ventricosk, B. Br. on plate (printer’s error.)
Warwick A Sapsford, Steam Litho. Brisiahs


F.M.BAILEY.F.L.S.
K.T.STAIGER.F.L.S.
Chloris ventricosa, R. Br.
A tall star grass, found along the borders of
scrubs; produces a fair amount of feed.


ERIOCHLOA PUNCTATA, H. and Kunth.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 463.
DAIRY GRASS.
An erect glaucous (bluish green) grass, 2 to 3 feet high, glabrous (without hairs), except
the inflorescence, and sometimes a slight pubescence (downyness) in the upper part.
Leaves narrow, flattened as well as the open loose sheath. Spikes or panicle branches about
5 to 8 distant, erect, secund (one-sided), the lowest often above 2 inches long, the others
gradually shorter, the rhachis (stalk of spike), as well as the main axis, pubescent (downy)
or hairy. Spikelets all pedicellate (stalked), but often rather close, the pedicles Ito 2 lines,
long, usually bearing a few long hairs, the spikelets ovoid, acute or shortly acuminate,
rather above lines long, seated on a thick annular or almost cupular (cup-shaped), dark-
coloured disk, articulate on the pedicel (foot-stalk). Empty glumes (flower scale) mem-
branous (thin), broad, and usually 5-nerved, or the inner one rather narrower and some-
times only 3-nerved, both more or less hairy outside and sometimes rather densely covered
with long hairs. Flowering glume much shorter, coriaceous (leathery, firm), faintly 3or
5-nerved, obtuse, but the midrib produced into a point or awn (bristle) as long as the outer
glumes. The central figure is a more slender grass —Kriochloa annulata Kunth . Both are
excellent pasture grasses: this latter species is usually found on the poorer soils, and at all
seasons is readily known by its lively green foliage. The first species is more often met
with on rich, alluvial soils, and is considered most excellent for dairy cows. These are also
the two most hardy grasses of the colony.
F. M. B.
Warwick &. Saps ford. Steam Lit ho. Brisbane


ERIOCHLOA PUNCTATA, H.and Kunth.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, E.L.S


ISACHNE AUSTRALIS, R. Br.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR. VII., 625.
Stems rather slender, decumbent, creeping, and rooting at the lower nodes (joints),
ascending to lor 2 feet. Leaves lanceolate, rough, with a minute pubescence (down)
i
Panicle loose, spreading, ovoid in circumscription, usually dark-colored, 2 to 3 inches
long, with numerous filiform (thread-like) branches. Spikelets all pedicellate (stalked),
nearly 1 line long. Outer glumes quite glabrous (free of hairs). Lower flower usually
male, with a glabrous glume, the upper female, shortly stipitate (stalked), with the glume
usually minutely and slightly pubescent, the rhachis (axis) slightly dilated, and articulate
immediately under the upper glume. This not uncommon creeping grass in its favourite
habitat, low, w r et soil, produces an abundance of feed. It is abundant about Toowoomba.
F. M. B.
Warwick & Sapsford. Steam Litho.Brisbane


ISACHNE AUSTRALIS, R Br.
ELECTROTYPED BY K, T, STATGER, F.L.S


LEERSIA HEXANDRA, Sw.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR. VII., 549.
RICE-GRASS.
An erect though weak scabrous (rough) grass, attaining several feet, often falling,
rooting at the nodes (joints), thus extending over low-lying localities, as well as by the
stems, which extend beneath the soil. Leaves rather narrow, flat, mostly erect. Panicle
oblong, 2 to 4 inches long, with erect or slightly spreading filiform (thread-like) flexuose
branches. Spikelets narrow-ovate, about lines long. Glumes (flower scales) mem-
branous, acute, the outer one with a prominent nerve on each side beside the marginal
one; the inner glume nearly as long, hut narrower, with only one nerve on each side near
the margin. Stamens, 6. This grass is met with along most of the Queensland water-
courses, and greedily eaten by stock. It is of rapid growth, especially during the summer
months. A new species of Fungus—Thecaphora glohuligera, B. and Br.—is at times
found on the panicles of this grass, the properties of which are as yet unknown.
F. M. B.
Warwick A Sapsford, Steam Litho Brisbane .


LEERSIA HEXANDRA, Sw.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S
Warwick A Saps ford , Steam Lit ho Brisbane


MICROLAENA STIPOIDES, R. Br.
BENTH. FLOR. VUSTR. 552,
NODDING FEATHER GRASS.
Stems from a perennial root, eiect, Ito 3 ft. high. Leaves rather short, flat, and very
acute, and slightly hairy, of a light green color. Panicle narrow, nodding, 3to 8 in. long,
with filiform (thread-like) erect branches and pedicels (stalks); spikelets narrow, 4to 5
lines long without the awn, 2 outer persistent glumes (flower scales) minute ; 3rd and 4th
glumes narrow, rigid, with 3 prominent scabrous (rough) nerves, tapering into a fine awn,
with a tuft of hairs at their base on the slightly elongated rhachis (axis) ; the 4th rather
longer than the 3rd, and its awn sometimes much longer ; sth glume rather shorter, acute,
but not awned, the nerves not prominent; 6th shorter, very narrow and thin, but stiff;
stamens 4. It is found in Southern Queensland, all the other Australian Colonies, also
Tasmania and New Zealand, and generally well spoken of. On our hill sides it is but a
delicate-looking grass, but on open downs it produces a heavy crop. Its quick growth,
both in summer and winter, points it out as a valuable kind.
F. M. B.
Warwick A Sapsford. Steam Litho.Brisbane.


MICROLAENA STIPOIDES, R. Br.
ELBCTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S
Warwick &. Sapsford, Steam Litho.Brisbane


NEURACHNE MITCHELLIANA, Nees.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL VII., 508.
MULGA GRASS
Stems creeping knotty, sending up erect branches, leafy to the short inflorescence,
woolly at the base. Leaves flat, short, spreading, ciliate (fringed) with a few long hairs, or
the lower ones woolly—hairy. Spike narrow —cylindrical, Ito 2 inches long. Spike-
lets about 2 lines long, with a tuft of hairs at their base. Outer glume (flower scale) as
long as the others, many-nerved ciliate, marked in the centre on the back with a transverse
callosity, bearing long, rigid, horizontally-spreading hairs, with a broad cavity underneath
it, very thin, and almost hyaline, bordered by a prominent nerve on each side ; 2nd glume
broad to above the middle, pubescent (downy) on the back, and densely fringed on each side
by long spreading hairs, the upper part narrow and glabrous (or without hairs), or nearly
4
so; 3rd glume shorter, thin, faintly nerved and not ciliate, either empty or enclosing a
small palea (thin inner flower scale). Fruiting glume and small palea almost hyaline.
This grass enjoys a high reputation in the Warrego district for keeping up a growth
when most other kinds are dried up. It derives its local name from being often found
growing under a species of acacia, called Mulga by the natives.
F. M. B.
Warwick A Sapsford, Steam Litho.Brisbane


NEURACHNE MITCHELLIANA, Nees.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S


PANICUM CRUS-GALLI, Linn .
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 479.
THE LARGE COCK’S-FOOT.
A large annual grass from 2 to 6 feet high; leaves broad, without any ligula (scale-
like projection at base of leaf blade). Panicle dense and usually secund (one-sided),
of simple branches or sessile (stalkless) spikes, the lowest 1 to 2 inches long, the upper ones
gradually shorter, the whole panicle sometimes densely hispid (rough) with long purplish or
green awns (bristles). Spikelets about lines long, more or less pubescent (downy),
acuminate or awned, crowded and clustered along the branches, the rhachisji (the axis, or
stalk bearing the flowers) usually bearing numerous cilia or capillary (hair-like) bristles
amongst or below the spikelets. Outer glume (flower scale) very short and broad; 2nd and
3rd glumes nearly equal and 3-nerved, usually ciliate on the margins, the second produced
into a rather short awn (bristle), the 3rd with an awn varying from 2 or 3 lines -to over an
inch, and a thin palea (inner flower scale) and very rarely a male flower in its axil. Fruit-
ing glume smooth and shining, without any or only a very short point. This fine, succu-
lent grass is well adapted for sowing on damp land for cutting like sorghum for fodder.
If cut early it will make a second growth; the panicles of this growth are frequently awnless.
Horses are particularly fond of this species of fodder.
F. M. B.
Warwick A Sapsforo, Stiam Litho.Brisbane


PANICUM CRUS-GALLI, Linn.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S
Warwick A. Sapsford, Steam Litho. Brisbane


PANICUM DISTACHYUM, Linn.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., Vol. VII, 478.
ROCKHAMPTON HAY GRASS.
An annual grass, stems decumbent or creeping, and rooting at the lower nodes (joints),
and ascending to 2or more feet. Leaves flat, glabrous, or with a few hairs, especially at the
orifice of the sheaths. Panicle of few (usually 2to 4, but occasionally 6or 7) distant
simple secund (one-sided) branches, 1 to 2 inches long, at first erect, at length spreading or
reflexed (directed down), the rhachis (axis, or stalk of branch) slender or slightly dilated,
often sprinkled with a few hairs. Spikelets sometimes loosely alternate along the rhachis,
almost in a single row, sometimes more numerous and approximate in 2 distinct rows, sessile
(stalkless) or shortly stipitatc (stalked), ovoid (egg-shaped), rather acute, line long,
quite glabrous (without hairs). Outer glume (scale of flower) scarcely half the length of the
spikelets), thin, very broad, the margins overlapping each other; 2nd and 3rd glumes
nearly equal, prominently 3-nerved; a narrow palea (inner flower scale) in the 3rd. Fruit-
ing glume nearly as long, very ohtuse, hardened, but the 3 nerves very visible. This is one
of the several indigenous grasses tested at Gracemere, near Rockhampton, and considered
best for the purpose of hay-making. Besides Australia, the species seems widely distributed
over East India, &c.
F. M. B.
Warwick A Saps ford . Steam Li tho Brisbane ,


PANICUM DISTACHYUM, Linn.
ELECTROTYPED BY K, T. STAIGER, F.L.S.
Warwick & Sapsford, Steam. Litho. Brisbane


PANICUM FLAVIDUM, Retz.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL VII., 474.
VANDYKE GRASS.
Stems densely branching at the base, weak though stout, very leafy, 1 to 3 feet high,
erect, when able to obtain support from surrounding herbage, failing which they are unable
to hold erect the usual long heavy inflorescence, and therefore lie along the ground. Leaves
acute, sometimes rather broad, glabrous (without hairs), except a few hairs at the orifice of
the sheath. Panicle 4to 9 inches long, of several often numerous erect distinct branches
or sessile (stalkless) spikes, the lowest sometimes above an inch long, the upper ones
shorter; the rhachis (axis of inflorescence) flexuose, slightly dilated. Spikelets sessile, in
about two rows, in the typical form very oblique, ovoid, about lines long, or rather more
in some specimens. Outer glume (flower scale) very short, broad, and obtuse; the second
glume the largest, broad, several-nerved, very concave and incurved; the third smaller,
flat on the back, enclosing a palea (inner flower scale) large and broad in the typical form,
but no stamens. Plowering glume usually shortly acuminate. This is a heavy seeder, of
quick growth, and bears a great quantity of succulent herbage, and has been noticed to be
the dominant grass at some of the carriers’ favorite camps. A small variety is abundant
on the high land about Brisbane. I recommend the above local name on account of hav-
ing seen the large variety in great luxuriance at Vandyke, beyond Springsure.
F. M. B.
Warwick &. Sapsford. Steam Litho. Brisbane


PANICUM FLAVIDUM, Retz.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S


PANICUM LEUCOPHOEUM, H. B. and k.
BENTH. FLORA. AUSTR. VII., 472.
WEEPING COTTON GRASS.
Stems erect, branching, 2to 4 ft. high. Leaves rather narrow, long, usually glabrous
(without hairs). Panicle of few long, slender, at first erect, spike-like branches, very
unequal, and sometimes reduced to 2 nearly equal ones, or a single one, often 5 in. long;
secondary branches short, slender, erect, the lower ones with 4 or 5 sessile (stalkless) or
pedicellate (stalked) spikelets, the upper ones with only lor 2. Spikelets scarcely lines
long, rather acute, densely covered with long, silky, silvery, or purple hairs, often spread-
ing when in fruit. Outer glume (flower scale) scarcely line long, obtuse, 2nd and 3rd
glumes nearly equal, and empty, both densely hairy, the 2nd usually 3-nerved, the 3rd
5-nerved. Fruiting glume shorter, smooth, rather acute, and often slightly gibbous
(swelled) at the base. Is widely distributed in Queensland, N.S. Wales, &c.; and this
fine grass is also found in Tropical America and Africa. In Queensland it is one of the
best, being prolific both of seed and herbage. Its favourite soil seems to be a sandy
loam. It thrives well even on poor, dry soil near Brisbane.
F. M. B.
Warwick & Saps ford . Steam Litho Brisbane


PANICUM LEUCOPH[?]EUM, H.B. and K.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S


PANICUM MACRACTINIUM, Benth.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 468.
ROLET-POLEY GRASS.
Stems from a spreading base, Ito 3 feet high. The large spreading panicle occupy-
ing the greater part; branches simple (not again branched), rigid 6to 12 inches long, the
the lower ones in a dense verticil (whorl), the upper ones alternate and distant. Spikelets
in distant pairs, one almost sessile (stalkless), the other on a rather long pedicel (foot
stalk), both fertile and similar, narrow, acute, about lire long. Outer glume (flower
scale), \ to f line long,.ovate —oblong, obtuse, 2nd nearly as long as the 3rd, 3 or 5-nerved,
the margins ciliate (fringed), the third prominently, 3-nerved, ciliate, with rigid hairs
proceeding from a row of prominent tubercles. Flowering glumes narrow, acute.
This is one of the kind whose panicles, when dry, break off, and are blown about by the
wind, and on which account it has got into bad repute, but when not in seed it makes such
excellent bottom feed, that it has been thought well to illustrate it. Although it is often
found on rich downs country, it is often met with on the poorest sandy ridges.
F. M. B.
Warwick k Sapsford, Steam Lump Brisbane


PANICUM MACRACTINIUM, Benth .
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S


PANICUM MYURUS, Lam .
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL VII., 480.
A tall grass often growing in water and rooting at the nodes (joints), quite glabrous
(without hairs). Leaves flat, the lower ones sometimes inch or more broad. Panicle
cylindrical, dense, and spike-like, or lohed and interrupted at the base, 8 inches to above 1
foot long. Spikelets crowded along the short, erect branches. Outer glume (flower scale)
thin and hyaline (transparent), 1-nerved, mucronate-acute (sharp-pointed), under a line long,
inserted at some distance below the others; 2nd glume 2 lines long, 3-nerved, tapering to
a fine point; 3rd still longer, with a longer point, 3 or 5-nerved, usually with a
small palea (inner flower scale) in the axil. Flowering glume shorter, thin and hyaline at
the time of flowering, slightly stiffened hut not hardened round the fruit. Only as yet
been met with in Australia on the borders of the Barron River, but is a common tropical
grass. Stock seem particularly fond of this grass, finding it out and feeding it down
where plenty of other good kinds are growing.
F. M. B.
Warwick & Saps ford , Steam Lit ho. Brisbane


PANICUM MYURUS, Lam .
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S


PANICUM PARVIFLORUM, R. Br.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 470.
SMALL-FLOWERED FINGER-GRASS.
A tall, slender, usually glabrous (without hairs) grass, 2 to 4 feet high. Leaves
numerous, long and narrow, ligula (the scale-like projection at base of leaf blade) scarious
(dry, membranous), often long, jagged at the end. Panicle-branches, two or three to
numerous, erect at first, at length spreading and nodding, filiform (thread-like), 2to 8
inches long, the lower ones distinct, the upper ones often crowded. Spikelets ovoid,
glabrous, \ to f lines long, mostly in pairs along the flexuose rhachis (axis, or stalk of
inflorescence), one on a longer pedicel than the other; but in the lower part of the branch
often clustered, the longer pedicel (flower-stalk; bearing 2to 3 spikelets. Outer glume
(flower scale) very small, ovate, usually 1-nerved; 2nd and 3rd glumes nearly equal, both
empty, membranous, obtuse, the 2nd usually 3-nerved, the 3rd 5-nerved. Fruiting glume
as long, more acute, smooth. There are several forms of this fine grass. That on the dry
ridges is somewhat wiry when in flower, but makes a good tufty bottom. The tall form is
usually met with near watercourses, and on rich scrub land. A very hairy variety is also
met with in 1 both situations. It grows more or less throughout the year ; ripe seed may
be obtained anytime during summer; seed dark-colored.
F. M. B.
Warwick A Sapsford, Steam Litho. Brisbane .


PANICUM PARYIFLORUM, R. Br.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S


PAPPOPHORUM NIGRICANS, R. Br.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL VII., 601.
PURPLE-TOPPED GRASS.
Stems from under 1 foot to 2 feet high. Leaves narrow, sometimes quite setaceous
(hristle-like), glabrous (without hairs), downy or hairy, the nodes (stem joints) bearded.
Panicle dense and spike-like, varying from ovoid-oblong, and under £ inch long, to narrow
cylindrical and 3 inches long, or broader, more branched, and 2 or 3 inches long, hut
always dense, pale, or dark-colored. Outer glumes varying from Ito rather above 2 lines
long, obtuse or acute, striate (streaked) with usually 7 or 9 nerves, but sometimes,
especially on the lowest glume, reduced to 5, and 2 of those short. Flowering glume not
above 1 line long, more or less hairy outside, especially at the base, with 9 fine spreading
plumose awns varying from the length of the glume to twice as long. Above the flowering
glume (flower scale), and enclosed in it, is usually a similar smaller one, with a male or
rudimentary flower, and lor 2 still smaller empty ones. The above includes 6of Robert
Brown’s species. The form figured is P. purpurascens, R. Br. Prod., a grass well spoken
of in the western districts. The form on the Barling Downs is that with the long, narrow
panicle.
F. M. B.
Warwick A Sapsford. Steam Litho.Brisbane ,


PAPPOPHORUM NIGRICANS, R. Br.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T, STAIGER, F.L.S
Warwick A Sapsford. Steam Litho. Brisbane .


PASPALUM DISTICHUM, Linn., VAR. LITTORALE.
BEMTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 461.
SALT MARSH COUCH.
A salt isarsh grass. Stems creeping, erect branches, Ito feet high. Leaves almost
subulate (awl-shaped), glabrous (hairless), with sometimes a few hairs at the orifice of the
sheath. Sheaths broad, loose* striated. Spikes 2 close together, or the lowest at a distance
of Ito 2 lines, 2 inches long, quite glabrous, the rhachis (stalk) not above line broad.
Spikelets sessile (stalkless), in 2 rows, oval—oblong, acute, or acuminate, flat, to nearly
2 lines long. Outer empty glumes equal and distinctly 3-nerved. Fruiting glume hardened
and very faintly 3-nerved, or the central nerve alone perceptible. This is a very distinct
variety, although not noticed as such in the Flora, and in its favorite habitat no other kind
is equal to it for nutrition.
F. M. B.
Warwick A Sapsford, Steam Litho Brisbane


F.M.BAILEY.F.L.S.
K.T.STAIGER.F.L.S.
Paspalum distichum var littorale.
Somewhat like the species, but this variety is
only found in or near salt marshes ; both are
excellent fattening grasses.


ROTTBOELLIA OPHIUROIDES, Benth.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 514.
BARRON RIVER FODDER GRASS.
A tall branching, leafy-stemmed, glabrous (hairless) grass, sto 7 feet high. Leaves
often \ inch or more broad, the upper ones with long sheaths passing into sheathing bracts.
Peduncles (stalks of inflorescence) crowded on the short erect branches of a large
terminal leafy panicle, each branch within a sheathing bract, and a narrow sheathing bract
on each peduncle. Spikes slender, simple, 2to 4 inches long, quite glabrous and very
brittle. Spikelets to 2 lines long, both the sessile (stalkless) and the pedicellate
(stalked) ones with a hermaphrodite flower, or the pedicellate with a male flower, or re-
duced to empty glumes (flower scales). Glumes all obtuse, awnless and smooth, the outer
one with the marginal nerves, and the second with the keel winged at the top. This fine
species stands the climate of the Brisbane district well, as may be seen by its growth in
V
the Brisbane Botanic Garden, and it may be safely stated to be the best of all our indi-
genous kinds for cutting as green food.
F. M. B.
Andropogon rottboellioides, Steud. ou plate
Warwick & Sapsforo. Steam Litho Bribbane.


F.M.BAILEY.F.L.S.
K.T.STAIGER.F.L.S.
Andropogon rottbaelloides, Steua.
This is a large grass found along the rivers of
Northern Queensland ; it produces a large quan-
tity of fodder relished by stock.


SETARIA MACROSTACHYA, H. B. et K.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., Vol. VII,, 493.
BARLEY GRASS.
A tall stout grass 2to 4 feet high. Leaves broad, flat, rough, with prominent midrib
and wavy margins; the ligula (scalelike projection at top of sheath) short, ciliate (fringed).
Spikelike panicle 3 to 6 inches long, compound, usually very compact and cylindrical, or the
lower branches longer. Spikelets numerous on the lower branches, few on the upper ones,
in dense clusters moie or less interspersed with awn-like barren branches, ovoid, acute,
fully lines long, glabrous (hairless). Outer glume (flower scale) about half the length
of the spikelet, the 2nd shorter than the 3rd but variable in proportion, all membranous
with prominent nerves. Fruiting glume often oblique or gibbous (swelled), always marked
with prominent transverse wrinkles. This fine grass is usually met with throughout
Queensland along river banks, &c., where the soil is rich. It has been tried at Gracemere
and found to stand well on dry ridgy land.
I have given the name “ Barley Grass’’ to this kind on account of the resemblance it
bears to Barley grasses, being far greater than that of any of the numerous other grasses
called by that name in Queensland
F. M. B.
Pennisetum Italicum, R v. M, on plate.
Warwick A. Saps ford , Steam Ljt ho. Brisbane


Pennisetum italicum, F. v. M.
Found in a wild state along the banks of rivers,
but is found to stand dry weather on high dry
land. This kind is well worth cultivating.
F.M.BAILEY.F.L.S.
K.T.STAIGER.F.L.S.


SPOROBOLUS ACTINOCLADUS, F. v. Muell
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 623.
Stems Ito 2 feet high. Leaves flat, tapering to fine points, glabrous (without hairs).
Panicle pyramidal, 3 to 6 inches long, of a dark color, the branches numerous, spreading,
the lower ones, or nearly all, verticillate (arranged regularly round the stem) at regular
intervals, the upper ones scattered, all capillary (thin like hairs), and shortly bare at the
base, but bearing narrow, dense spike-like partial panicles of to 1 inch long. Spikelets
sessile (stalkless) and crowded, nearly 1 line long. Outer glume (flower scale) very small,
hyaline (transparent), almost obtuse; 2nd very acute, keeled, \to J line long; flowering
glume similar, but longer. Palea (inner flower scale) divided into two from the base, even
at the time of flowering. Seed enclosed in a loose skin or pericarp. This is one of the
many probably annual glasses which obtain for the Diamantina its excellent character for
pasture.
F. M. B.
Warwick & Sapsford, Steam Litho Brisbane .


SPOROBOLUS ACTINOCLADUS, F. v . Muell
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S


SPOROBOLUS DIANDER, Beauv.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 622.
An erect glabrous (without hairs) grass of from 2 to 4 feet, at times forming large
tussacs. Leases chiefly at the base, narrow, the upper sheaths not covering the stems.
Panicle narrow, but loosely pyramidal, 6 inches to above 1 foot long, the branches scattered,
at length spreading. Spikelets very shortly pedicellate, or almost sessile, fto 1 line long.
Outer empty glume (flower scale) very obtuse; hyaline (transparent), the upper one above
line, the other shorter. Flowering glume longer, slightly keeled, obtuse, or almost acute.
Palea (inner flower scale) broad,*obtuse, faintly 2-nerved, and not so readily splitting as
in the other species. Grain broadly obovoid, the pericarp not readily separable. Found
throughout Southern Queensland into New South Wales; produces a large quantity of
most excellent feed said to be much liked by horses. Usually found on rich or damp land.
F. M. B.
Warwick & Sapsford . Steam Litho Brisbane .


SPOROBOLUS DIANDER, Beauv .
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S


SPOROBOLUS INDICUS, R. Br.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR , VOL. VII., 622.
RATSTAIL GRASS.
An erect, tufted grass, 1 to 3 ft., glabrous (hairless), except a few long hairs at the
base of the leaves. Leaves numerous, chiefly at the base of the stems, narrow, ending
in fine points, the upper ones few, with long sheaths- Spikelike panicles, dense,
3to 8 inches long, continuous throughout, or slightly interrupted at the base. Spikelets
very numerous, crowded along the very short, erect, almost imbricated .( over l a PP e( i),
branched. Outer glumes (flower scales) almost hyaline (transparent)/obtuse, 1-nerved,
the lowest about i-line, the 2nd f-line long; flowering glume about 1 line, of a firmer
consistence, broad, but almost tapering to a point, 1-nerved. Palea (inner flower
scaled nearly as long, faintly 2-nerved. Grain broadly obovoid, the very thin pericarp (st
skin enclosing the seed) sometimes appearing loose, though often evanescent, or undistift-
\
guishable in the dried stare. S. elongatusv B. Br. } is a tall form of this species, haring a
much more lax panicle, often over a foot long, the lower branches of which are distant
and sometimes spreading ; the leaves arc also much narrower, and the plant never forms
the strong tufts of the former. Although often found together the latter form is more fre-
quently met with on high land, the former on rich alluvial flats; both arc found in other
tropical and sub-tropical parts of the globe.
F. M. B.
W*aw.ck A Sapspopd, Litho Br.sbane


Sporobolus indicus, R. Br.
A grass of similar growth to Sporobolus diander,
but bearing a close spike of seed. This species
forms the principal food of many small birds.
The fodder is greatly relished by stock.
F.M.BAILEY.F.L.S.
K.T.STAIGER.F.L.S.


STENOTAPHRUM AMERICANUM, Schrank .
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 500.
BUFFALO GRASS.
A coarse creeping grass rooting at the nodes (joints), ascending to 1 foot, or more with
flattened broad stems. Leaves obtuse, fiat or involute (rolled inwards), the sheaths usually
broad and flat, ciliate (fringed) at the orifice. Spikes, solitary and terminal, 2to 4 in. long
the rhachis (axis of spike) flat and flexuose, 1 to 2 lines broad, readily disarticulating
transversely between the notches when old, though apparently continuous when in flower.
Spikelets, 2 or 3 together, on very short, flat, or angular branches in the alternate notches
of the common rhachis, the partial rhachis continued beyond the insertion of the upper-
most spikelet, but not usually exceeding it; the spikelets sessile (stalkless), oval, oblong,
acute, or acuminate, 2to lines long, all half immersed in the notches. This well-known
grass is an introduction, so far as the form, known about Brisbane as Buffalo Grass, but
may be indigenous as to the North Australian. habitat. It produces an abundance of
rich, green feed, but there seems to be a difference of opinion with regard to its nutritive
q ualities.
F. M. B.
Warwick & Saps ford . Steam Li two. Brisbane


STENOTAPHRUM AMERICANUM, Schrank.
ELECTROTYPED BY K. T. STAIGER, F.L.S
Warwick &. Sapsford. Steam Litho. Brisbane


THUAREa SARMENTOSA, Pers.
BENTH. FLOR. AUSTR., VOL. VII., 502.
BEACH—COUCH.
Stems creeping and rooting to a great extent, shortly ascending under the inflorescence.
Leaves flat, lanceolate, broad or narrow, 1 to 2 inches long, minutely but densely, or some-
times sparingly, silky-pubesoent (downy) on both sides. Sheaths loose, ligula short
ciliate (fringed). Spike usually about 1 inch long, the spikelets about 2 lines; 2nd and
3rd glumes (flower scales) of the lower fertile, one nearly equal, 7to 9-nerved. Fruiting
glume more rigid, but thin and glabrous (hairless). In the male spikelets the small outer
glume often deficient, the 2nd hairy, the 3rd and 4th rather longer glabrous, each enclosing
male flower. Along our tropical coast this grass may often be seen binding the sand
together by ics long running stems, from the joints of which arises tufts of herbage eaten
by stock.
F. M. B.
Warwick & Sapsford, Steam Litho. Brisban*


Thuarea sarmentosa, Pers.
Of little value for fodder, but its running habit
makes it valuable for binding the sand together
along the sea beach, &c.
K.T.STAIGER.F.L.S.
F.M.BAILEY.F.L.S.










