

AN OPEN LETTER
From the Fiji District Meeting to the Ministers of
the Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Church .
Dear Brethren,
You have probably heard the suggestions that
have been made to meet the diminished income of our
Foreign Missionary Society by reducing the number of
Missionaries in Fiji. The proposals are several. One
is to reduce the number of missionaries to seven;
another, to reduce the number to three. At our Fiji Dis-
tant Meeting, held in the month of October in the pre-
sent year, the whole question was thoroughly considered,
with the result, that the meeting unanimously resolved
that any reduction of the number of missionaries, at this
time, would be fraught with the gravest peril to our
mission. The matter was deliberated by the meeting
composed of the English Missionaries themselves, and
also by that in which the native representatives
take part, and in both the resolution was against the
proposed reduction. The reasons urged were as follows :
First—That the Roman Catholic Mission has
this year largely increased the number of its priests, and
is making strenuous efforts to augment the number
of its adherents. Various means are adopted to gain
this end. Our people are pressingly invited to attend
the papist services, and our workers are the objects of
many attentions. The number of Romish priests at pre-
sent in Fiji is twice that of our own missionaries. To
reduce the latter now, would expose our people to the
onslaughts of Rome. These might be all the more suc-
cessful because the removal of our missionaries would pro-
bably alienate the chiefs of those districts from which


they were withdrawn. We cannot overstate this danger,
at the same time, we do not wish to exaggerate it. With
twenty or more priests of Rome, assisted by, we know
not how many nuns, endeavouring to draw away our peo-
ple, we cannot but earnestly deprecate any reduction of
the number of our missionaries.
. Another fact emphasized, was the danger that,
in the absence of English Missionaries, some of the chiefs
would overawe and unduly influence our native ministers.
A great deal has.been said about the native ministry of
Fiji, and some persons recommend that the management
of our church should, to a great extent, be left in their
hands. We do not wish to write a syllable in disparage-
ment of our native brethren. They are a fine, earnest
body of men, who are anxious for the salvation of souls.
But we cannot disguise the fact, that they are not fitted
to take sole charge of an important mission, or to be left
without the active superintendence of an English Mis-
sionary. In the first place, our native brethren could
no.t;'alone withstand the preponderating influence of the
chiefs, and it would often be extremely difficult for them
to enforce church discipline. It would often be that the
laws now rigidly and impartially enforced, in all cases
and classes, would be enforced only in cases of persons
of inferior rank. This danger was forcibly expressed by
the native ministers themselves. The following are some
of the expressions used. One said, “ The chiefs hear
our word but do not regard us.” Another said, “ Many
things we dare not say to our chiefs we refer to you for
you to say.” A third said, “ The chiefs will not accept
our judgment,” and a fourth, “We are strong because
your presence makes us strong ;” while a fifth, proposed
that the native ministers’ stipends should be reduced, to
prevent a reduction in the number of missionaries. Then
there is another fact that cannot be overlooked, viz., the
tendency of the native ministers to lord it over the
teachers and people under them. It is a very pronounced
feature of Fijian life, that every man desires to exercise
authority over some other man inferior to himself. The
native ministers are not free from this tendency, as
as may be seen from the fact, that, of the native ministers,
who, at various times, have been disciplined, a large pro-
portion has been for taking advantage of their position
to exercise lordship over others. Only those who have


had experience in Fiji, can really understand the extent
of this tendency, and the danger to our work that lies in it.
It is for these reasons that we consider the time
too early to entrust the guidance of our work solely to
native agents.
But that would be necessitated by a reduction
of the mission staff on account of the extent of the cir-
cuits. A glance at the statistics of each circuit, and at
the map of the islands, will show this.
In the Rewa circuit there are now over 27,000
hearers, besides a large number of foreign labourers,
whom the missionary strives to bring under the sway of
the Gospel. Viwa circuit returns 21,388 hearers, besides
a large number of foreign labourers. Bau circuit returns
11,407 hearers and includes the most influential district
in the whole group. Kandavu circuit returns 7271
hearers, and is completely isolated, being over 70 miles
by sea from the centre of any other circuit. The circuit
of Lakemba and Lomaloma, which returns 7094 hearers,
comprises twenty-five inhabited islands and extends over
an area 200 miles long and 150 wide. This is a most
difficult circuit to manage on account of its vastness, and
could not be efficiently superintended by fewer than two
missionaries. Bua circuit returns g 118 hearers, and in-
cludes a large part of Vanua Levu, and the group of
islands known as Yasawa. Cakaundrove circuit returns
10,285 hearers, and includes the larger part of Vanua
Levu and the whole of Taviune. The farthest boundary
of this circuit, in one direction, is 140 miles distant by
water from the missionary, and its whole coast line ex-
ceeds 300 miles. It is difficult to understand how fewer
men could effectively superintend these large circuits. To
withdraw men would result in the isolation of the native
ministers, and their isolation is not at all to be desired.
Another matter referred to in our District Meet-
ing, was the alterations in stations that a reduction of
staff would necessitate, and the extreme difficulty of ad-
justing them. Fiji is a country of chiefs, who are very
jealous of each other, and very sensitive to any thing re-
sembling a slight on their provinces. To reduce the
mission staff would necessitate the withdrawal of stations
from some provinces, and the removal of others. This
could, not be effected, without alienating some of the most


influential chiefs. We give one example. Suppose the
missionary to be withdrawn from either the Cakaundrove
or Bua circuit. Then, without reckoning the Yasawan
Islands, one missionary has charge of one island, 115
miles long and averaging 25 miles wide, and of a second
island, 24 miles long and nine wide. It does not matter
which missionary is withdrawn, be it from Bua, or from
Cakaundrove, neither of the present stations is conveni-
ent, and a more central position should be chosen. The
inevitable conseqence will be, that the most influential
chiefs of two provinces, if not of three, will be alienated.
It the missionary be stationed in the Cakaundrove pro-
vince, the chiefs of Bua and of Macuata will all be jealous.
If Macuata be chosen, the chiefs of Cakaundrove and ot
Bua will be offended; if tl>e station be at Bua, the same
will happen in the case of the chiefs of Cakaundrove and
of Macuata.
It would be a disastrous policy to ignore the feel-
ings ot the chiefs in a country where the Government is
carried on through them, and where they have so great
influence. At this time especially, with Romish priests
waiting to take advantage of any discontent, it would
be suicidal to create oy withdrawing missionaries.
Of late years, the foreign labour population has
been largely increased. These people are from India and
the Pacific Islands. They are, for the most part, heathen,
and have degrading and disgusting habits and customs.
Their influence on the native population is bad, and in-
creases the difficulty ot our work.
The Fijians themselves are in a transitional
state. It is only fifty years since the Gospel was intro-
duced, and nothing like so long since it was generally
accepted by the people. We cannot pretend that in fifty
years, and for the most part in less, a whole nation has
been so far removed from its old heathenism as to be able
to administer its own church government, and that,
too, in the presence of the baneful influence of the foreign
labour population. We are never weary of praising God
for what He has done for, and in Fiji, but we do not think
that the people ought to be left without the guidance of
the English Missionaries, or that the number of the latter
should be so reduced that they shall be crippled by the
very magnitude of their work and responsibility.


New South Wales
5 s *
8d.
8fd.
Victoria
2 s.
8jd.
5d.
Tasmania
4 s *
5 id.
6fd.
South Australia
IS.
id.
4id.
New Zealand
IS.
3fd.
2 |d.
It was also freely said by our native brethren
that if the missionaries are too few we may expect a re-
petition of the Tongan difficulty in Fiji.
It is for these reasons, among others, that the
Fiji District Meeting opposes the proposition to reduce
the number of missionaries, and resolves to address itself
to the ministers of the Australasian Conferences. The aim
of this letter is to so arouse the sympathy of our breth-
ren that they will more thoroughly press the claims of the
Foreign Mission Fund, and render unnecessary any re-
trenchment in the way of reducing the number of mission
agents. In suggesting the feasibility of making such re-
duction the Board of Missions is only yielding to the
force of circumstances and endeavouring to save itself
from an incubus of debt, and in this it has the sympathy
of every member of our church.
A review of the average contributions of the
various colonies, and the knowledge of colonial work
that some of us possess, lead our District Meeting to fear
that the Foreign Mission Fund does not receive the at-
tention it deserves. For your information we subjoin the
following table of average contributions, including Fiji:—
Per member. Adherent.
Fiji (average for 5 yrs.) 2s. 9|d.
In the case of Fiji, the contributions have de-
creased during the last two years solely on account of
the general severe depression of the colonjr, which has
been greatly aggravated by the disastrous hurricane that
swept over the group in March, 1886. We would also
mention, that, in addition to the large sum now contri-
buted to the General Fund, the people assist to support
their native ministers, entirely support their 2550 tea-
chers, and build their churches and teachers’ houses.
In the case of the Australasian colonies, we
would respectfully ask, whether in all our circuits the
claims of the Foreign Mission Fund are earnestly and
systematically urged upon the congregations ? Do any


Btiuo
f- A
ministers content themselves with merely holding* the
meeting ordered by Conference, and that in a half-
hearted, perfunctory manner ? Do not some superinten-
(jQoK/ dents contribute from their own purses and hold no meet-
i - ings, and make no effort to awaken interest in the minds
of the people ? Is it not often the case that the Foreign
Mission Fund is so half-heartedly advocated by the
ministers, that many of our people think that it is the
Fund they may help last, or perhaps not at all ?
We appeal to you, dear brethren, to avert what
may be a disaster to Fiji. Fifty years ago our common
parent, the British Conference, sent its agents to preach
the Gospel in these, then, savage and bloodstained islands.
God blessed His Word, until Fiji has become the most
spiritually prosperous mission of modern times. The care
ot that mission has devolved upon the Australasian
Colonies. Shall it be said that the trust has been mis-
placed ? That such was the apathy of our people that it
became necessary to inflict an injury on the mission itself
to meet the deficiency of a few hundred pounds, that
might have been raised by a more earnest and systema-
tic advocacy of the objects of the Foreign Missionary
Society r
"Will you lay this matter before your congrega-
tions, and urge upon them the duty and high privilege of
participating, to a larger extent, in the evangelisation of
these islands of the sea ? Will you also endeavour to form
in your circuit, if not already done, an Auxiliary to our
Foreign Missionary Society, and secure members of the
same ?
We, for our part, shall never cease to pray that
God will pour out the Spirit of cheerful giving on all our
people, and that retreat may never be so much as talked
of among us, but rather, that we shall continue to advance
until all the islands of the Pacific have heard and believed
“ The old, old, story,
Of Jesus and His love.”
Frederick Langham, Chairman.
Wm. Weir Lindsay, Secretary.
Fiji, November, 1888.
Printed at the Mission Press, Viwa, Fiji.
