

of the Discover*? of
flew ffolland and
New South Wales*
BY AN OFFICER.
Price —One Shilling.
mi.
HOBART, TASMANIA
BLO Tit STORY
fkt\ *Historical N*rrati\>e
DAVIES BROTHERS LIMITED, MACQUARIE STREET,.




OLD TIME STORY
f\n flistoric&l N&rr&titf?
of the Discovery of
New ffoll&nd And
New South Wales-
BY AN OFFICER.
DAVIES BROTHERS UNITED, MACQUARIE STREET,
HOBART, TASMANIA








Old Tup j&oflj.
RE-PRINTED FROM “THE MERCURY,”
HOBART.
Mr. W. Legrand, the well-known
book collector, of Collins-street, has
recently become possessed of an old
time volume bearing date 1789. It is
entitled “An Authentic Journal of
the Expedition under Commodore
to Botany Bay, with an ac-
count of the Settlement made at Port
Jackson and a description of the in-
habitants, etc., with copy of a Letter
from Captain Tench, of the Marines, to
which is added an Historical Narrative
of the Discovery of New Holland, or,
New South Wales. By an Officer.
Illustrated with a general chart of
New Holland and Botany Bay, with
the adjacent colonies, arid new dis-
covered islands.” The chart, it may be
mentioned, ignores the existence of
Bass Strait, and makes Tasmania a
southerly extension of the mainland,
then termed New Holland. Strangely
enough, though the Strait and Flinders
Island are uncharted, Furneaux
Islands, Barren Cape, Eddystone Point,
St. Patrick Head, the Schoutens, and
Maria Island are marked.
The Journal is of interest,
purpose reproducing it as opr
offers.
Journal of the Expedition mn
modore Phillipl to ,
with the Sirius and^upply


war and transports under his com-
mand, having on board the convicts
destined to form a colony at that
place, with the progress made there-
in, and an account of the produce
thereof, with respect to animals,
birds, fish, rivers, soil and climate,
its inhabitants and manners.
On the arrival of this squadron at
Botany Bay, the destined spot was
found not to have water sufficient for
the supply of the new settlement. A
council was in consequence held, and
the ships weighing anchor, stood away
for Jackson Bay, where nature’s gifts
appeared equal to all their wishes —
the verdure strong and rich, and the
springs of the best water ; the face of
the country, too, possessing great
variety, and well clothed with wood.
The moment Governor Phillips had
made good the landing of the marines,
and some lines of limitation were
marked out, the convicts were put
on shore, and the artisans among them,
with those belonging to the ships, pro-
ceeded to cut down wood to form their
habitation. This task continued for
some time, during the hours of day,
and in the evening the workmen and
others returned on board the shipping,
leaving only the marines and a detach-
ment of the seamen to guard the works
as they advanced towards completion.
The natives, when they discovered
the preparations on foot, and that their
visitors were likely to become sta-
tionary, appeared so dissatisfied that
several pieces of ordnance were
on the lines to awe
thenp-K'they, however, kept at a
distance, and though they did not


provoke a fire, they declined all com-
munion.
Of the convicts and others, from the
departure of the squadron from Ports-
mouth, to the time the ship which
brings the advice left Jackson Bay,
only forty appear to have died ; and to
compensate for this loss, forty-two in-
fants were born.
Three of the convicts were induced
to try their fortunes among the natives,
where they hoped to have a favourable
reception. Two of these were in this
expedition killed, and the third, after
subsisting on roots for some time in
the woods, returned, almost perished
through hunger. This operated to
deter further adventures of a like
nature.
The cattle fared very unpropitiously;
some of the cows died during their
passage; and others, after their land-
ing, strayed so far into the woods as to
be irrecoverably lost. The sheep did
not thrive—the herbage did not afiord
the nutriment of their native pasture,
and no flock, it is feared, will ever be
reared from them. The pigs were in a
state of better prosperity ; and most of
the poultry promise to be beneficial.
When the Prince of Wales transport
quitted Jackson Bay, which was on
the 15th of July, last, a very fine crop
of grain was presented to the eye. This
occupied twelve acres of ground, all
that could possibly be cultivated be-
fore the season was too far gone, for a
crop of greater extent.
The fish immediately on the coast
arefoundtobe very indifferent. The
natives live chiefly on testaceous fish,
and the small quadruped which Cooke


describes, the hind legs of which are
much longer than the fore ones. The
skins of several of these animals have
been stuffed and brought to England.
An attempt was made to bring some of
them alive, but the attempt failed-
The Prince of Wales is said to have
continued her course through the South
Sea after she left New Holland, and
passed through the Straits of Magellan.
She parted company with the Burrow-
dale on the 15th of August last, but fell
in with her at Bio Janeiro ; they sailed
from that place together, but lost com-
pany again on the 24th of December
last. Captain Mason, the master of the
Prince of Wales, died on his passage
home, and Mr. Moore, the mate, suc-
ceeded to the command. Four of her
seamen also died.
Governor Phillips, and Major Boss,
the Deputy Governor, together with
Captain Hunter, Lieut. Ball, of the
Supply tender, and Lieut Long of the
marines, were all well when the trans-
port above named sailed for England.
Governor Phillip* having made the
Cape of Good Hope with the ships of
war, transports, and victuallers, used
the most unremitting diligence to sup-
ply the squadron with provisions and
water, live stock for the ships’ use, and
cattle, sheep, and hogs for the benefit
of the intended colony To these we
may reckon a large quantity of poultry,
in addition to some which was carried
from England.
On the 16th of November, 1787, the
signal was given, and the squadron got
under way, and continued their course
for a time, with favourable winds, for
New Holland. Some short tempests


interrupted their course. Governor
Phillipt removed to the Supply and
proposed going ahead to prepare a re-
ception for the rest of the fleet at the
place of destination. Three transports
—the Friendship, Alexander, and Scar-
borough-sailed in company, but re-
tarded the Governor’s course so much,
that he did not come in sight of land
till the 14th of January, 1788. Three
days after he made Botany Bay, and
on the 18th of January landed with
Lieut. Shortland, agent for transports,
and Lieut. King. The natives, who
had in small bodies witnessed their ap-
proach, appeared in great consternation
on seeing these officers on their terri-
tory, and after setting up a yell fled to
the woods. They returned soon after
more composed, and from the signs
made by Governor Phillip!, w 7 ere pre-
vailed on to receive some presents of
beads, necklaces, and other trifles ; but
they were deposited on the ground and
the Governor withdrawn to a distance
before they would venture to take
them. After this, they appeared so
friendly as to conduct, by signs, the
officers to a rivulet where they found
some excellent water, though not in
a very abundant supply. In the even-
ing the Governor, with his party, re-
turned on board, and the next day the
three transports which he had out-
sailed, came to an anchor, on which
the Governor went again on shore
principally to cut grass for the use of
the cattle and sheep, the hay on board
being nearly all exhausted. On the
dawn of the day following, the Sirius
(Captain Hunter) with the remainder
of the transports under his convoy,


appeared in sight, and three hours
after brought to and anchored in the
bay.
Captain Hunter immediately waited
on the Governor, and these gentlemen,
with a small party of officers and men,
went on shore again towards the south
coast of Botany Bay, the former visits
having been made to the north of the
bay. Here, as in most of the early
interviews with the natives, Governor
Phillip! usually laid his musket on the
ground, and advancing before it, held
out presents. A green bough held
aloft, or their lances thrown down,
were like signs of amity in them. It
was a practice with the seamen in
these intercourses, to dress up the in-
habitants with shreds of cloth and tags
of coloured paper, and when they sur-
veyed each other, they would burst in
loud laughter, and run hollowing to
the woods. The marines one day form-
ing before them, they appeared to like
the fife, but fled at the sound of the
drum, and never more would venture
near it.
The appearance of this part of the
country was not, on examination, so
favourable as was hoped, and in con-
sequence the Commodore, with a party
and two boats, skirted along the coast
for about 12 or 14 miles, and having
landed in Sydney Co\e, within the
points of Port Jackson, found the aspect
of the country so promising as to in-
duce the Commodore, after a council
with his officers, to fix the settlement
here. Accordingly, on the 23rd, the
whole squadron weighed anchor, and
brought to in good moorings at the en-
trance of the cove.


The ground being marked out, as we
have already not iced, a portable dwell-
ing house for the Governor, and a
hospital, both of which had been con-
structed in England, together with the
officers’ marquees and tents for the
artificers, were fixed out of hand, and
storehouses and habitations were
planned out and proceeded on.
On the convicts being landed the
Governor assumed his office, and caused
the commission given him by the King
to exercise such authority to be read,
and also the abridgment of the code of
laws by which he was to govern. By
this the settlers were informed that
four courts would occasionally be held,
as the nature of the offence required,
namely : —A Civil Court, a Criminal
Court, a Military Court, and an Ad-
miralty Court.
The settlers w 7 ere then told that
nothing could draw these laws into
exercise but their own demerits, and as
it was then in their power to atone to
their country for all the wrongs done
at home, no other admonitions than
those which their own consciences
would dictate, it was hoped, would be
necessary to effect their happiness and
prosperity in their new country.
But such is the inveteracy of vice,
that neither lenient measures nor
severe whipping operated to prevent
theft; rigorous measures were there-
fore adopted, and after a formal trial
in the Criminal Court two men were
hung in one day, and soon after two
others suffered in a like way.
The Governor, besides the above
settlement, formed a colony on Norfolk
Island, consisting of Lieut. King, two


petty officers, nine men, and six
women, with six months' provisions.
In their passage to this island Lieut.
Ball, of the Supply, discovered a new
island, which he named Lord Howe
Island.
It is here necessary to observe, that
while the squadron were under way
from Botany Bay to Jackson port,
two strange sail appeared, with their
hulls just in view ; and soon after
Governor Phillipf had landed in
Sydney Cove, he was waited upon by a
party bearing a French flag. These
ships proved to be two french frigates,
which sailed from Europe in August,
1785, under the command of Mons.
La Perouse, on a voyage of discoveries
to the South Seas. They were in some
distress for stores and provisions, but
the Governor could not contribute
much to their relief. However, they
remained five weeks in Botany Bay,
and during that time visits were con-
tinually reciprocally made, as the dis-
tance from that place to Sydney Cove
was but ten miles across the land.
The convicts, during this interval,
were employed in cutting wood for
fences, and to collect provender for the
cattle and sheep, as the soil produced
very indifferent pasture, although it
was the middle of the New Hollanders’
summer. An aversion to labour, how-
ever, induced some of the new settlers
to project an escape for Europe, on
board the French ships ; these efforts
were, however, in a measure, frus-
trated ; the officers of the French ships
would not hearken to any proposals
except those made by the fair ; for it
was discovered two days after Mons


La Perouse had sailed, that two women
were missing. Mons, La Perouse lost
two boats’crews in a storm, and had
fourteen of his people murdered at
Navigator Island.
THE INHABITANTS.
The men and women go without the
least apparel, or fence against the
weather. The men are upright, but
not gracefully made ; the women
stoop very much, and in their gait are
particularly awkward. This arises,
both in the women and men, from a
practice of standing a long time on one
leg, with the foot of the other limb
resting on the joint of the knee, and
in this posture they stand for a long
time, and then change the limbs as if
for relief. Their colour is of a dingy
copper. Their features are broad and
ill-formed ; their nose is broad and flat;
their lips w ide and thick ; and their
eyes circular and large. From a prac-
tice they have of rubbing themselves
with fish oil, they smell so loathsome
that they cannot be approached but
with disgust. The men have bushy
beards, and the hair on their heads is
furzy, and stuck full of fish teeth and
bits of shells, which are fastened
with gum, and this is the only orna-
ment they assume, except another still
more preposterous, namely, a bone
fastened in the cartilage of the nose ;
but this is worn only by a few of the
distinguished, as those who had
them were pointed out to the Governor
with looks of significance. Some had
also a belt of coloured clay smeared on
them : and women out of number were
observed with two joints cut from off


the little finger, apparently a mark
either of honour or disgrace. They
appear, however, from their unreason-
ing manners, to have few ideas of
order among themselves ; and if they
have notions of worship, they are more
than could be ascertained. They seem,
however, to regard a black bird of the
raven kind with particular veneration;
for on one of the gentlemen pointing
his fuzee at a bird of this sort, one of
the natives ran and threw himself in
the way of the piece, although he was
aware it would have killed him had it
gone off.
Their huts are formed of boughs, and
covered with bushes. Their canoes
are made of bark. Their weapons con-
sist of a long spear of hard wood,which
they jerk with such skill as sometimes
to kill a bird ; they have a shield
made of the bark of a tree, which can
hardly be penetrated. They have a
lance also, with which they strike fish,
and seldom fail to kill. Their tackle
consists of a hook made of shell, and a
line formed of bark, beat into thread ;
and their wants being few, these are
all the instruments they have occasion
for, except an adze made of stone, with
which they cut wood.
Fish is their principal food, and this,
as well as flesh, they eat scarce warm
through ; although they sit round a
fire at all times a t their meals. They
d® not appear to have any disposition
to steal, but certainly were dissatisfied
on finding their visitors likely to abide
among them.
They killed three of our men in the
woods, two of whom were gathering
bushes for thatching ; but they did not


eat them, as their bodies were restored
and buried. After this hostility, they
became very shy, and did not for some
time approach the colony.
ANIMALS.
The kangaroo is the quadruped ; it
is as large as a sheep : the head, neck,
and shoulders are very small in propor-
tion to the other parts of the body ;
the tail is long, but thick near the
rump, and tapering towards the end ;
the forelegs in general measure only
eight inches in length, and the hind-
legs twency-two : the progress is by
successive leaps or hops of a consider-
able length, in an erect posture ; the
fore legs are kept bent close to the
breast, and seemed to be of use only for
digging. The skin is covered with
short fur of a dark mouse or grey
colour, excepting the head and ears,
which bear a slight resemblance to
those of the hare. One of these
animals, of uncommon magnitude, is
on board the Prince of Wales ; a live
dog from New Holland is also brought
to England ; and besides these animals,
there are no others to be noticed ex-
cept the opossum and the polecat.
BIRDS.
Some large birds sometime appear,
but hawks, doves, pigeons, plovers,
quails, ducks, and teal, besides a few
birds of showy feather, and crows are
more numerous, but very shy.
FISH.
Bream and mackerel are in great
plenty; the other fish is inferior to
those caught in the European seas.


Some pyramidical shell fish are found,
and thesQ the inhabitants appear very
fond of. There are also a few sharks in
these seas, and sometimes whales are
observed.
SOIL AND CLIMATE.
The variations of climate in tie
course of 24 hours, sometimes occasion
30 degiees of difference in the
barometer. Storms of lightning and
sudden squalls are also common. Tie
soil is quick ; but none of the European
plants, or those purchased for cuhi-
vation at Eio Janeiro, or the Capeof
Good Hope, came to maturity, and the
seed failed still more ; though much
care was taken of a plant of peas. Some
rice, wheat, and barley are sowed in the
ground the settlers have already
cleared, and it is said it promised
well.
No rivers have yet been discovered,
but small rivulets and shallow streams
are found in various parts of the
country round the Cove.
Of the natural grass, it grew so thin
that of 40 sheep of the public flock
that were landed only six were alive
when these accounts came away. The
cows, which were reduced during the
voyage to three, strayed for food into
the woods, and though 500 men pene-
trated 15 miles up the country, the
utmost excursion made, they could not
trace them ; the opinion, therefore,
was that the natives had killed them.
The hogs, as we have already observed,
appear to thrive pretty well.
The trees afford no great variety;
three or four different kinds grow to
50ft. high. The cabbage tree is to be
reckoned first in respect to utility, this


affords sustenance which is much
needed. Fur such was the aspect of
affairs when the, Borrowdale left Port
Jackson, that the Fishbourne and
the Golden Grove victuallers were pro-
ceeding for the Cape of Good Hope to
procure fresh provisions for the colony.'
Of the other vessels the Scarborough
and Charlotte sailed to China to take
in tea for the East India Company ;
the Lady Penryn sailed to the north-
west coast of America on the fur trade ;
and the Frince of Wales, Borrowdale,
Alexander, and Friendship are either
arrived or hourly expected. They all
came round Cape Horn, and the only
one expected to pass through the
Straits of Magellan is the Lady Penryn
Several of the women were noticed
with two joints cut off the middle
finger. To this peculiarity it may he
subjoined that frequently large as-
semblies of the men were noticed to-
gether, all of whom had one of their
front teeth out. One inference made
from their appearance was that these
marks distinguished the particular class
to which the parties belonged, but of
this thdre were many doubts. Al-
though the women appear always with-
out the least covering, the men seem,
notwithstanding, to possess some
jealous notions, fur thuugh they per-
mitted our seamen to decorate their
wives with gilt and coloured slips of
paper, they never would leave them
behind when they were about to de-
part. In the early interviews between
the settlers and natives the wom c n
always appeared defended by strong-
parties of men in the front, armed with
lances. Captain Cook relates thatafew T


of these people presented themselves,
and therefore it was concluded the
country was thinly inhabited ; but in
this he was mistaken, as frequently
tribes of 300 and 400 came down
together. Towards evening they have
often been seen, sometimes to the
amount of 70 or 80, sitting round a fire
in the open air ; and numbers of these
fires were nightly near the coast, on
Governor Phillips’ first arrival, but
they were lighted at a greater distance
soon after.
Several huts, formed of boughs, had
been seen ; but in the greatest extent
up the country that was ever made,
small bodies of the natives were noticed
under hollow banks, and in caverns.
They generally fled as the English
parties approached, and when these
places of refuge were examined, heaps
of rushes and long dried grass appeared
to be their beds. The rocks upon the
sea-shore afford many of them a like
asylum ; but those were at some dis-
tance from Sydney Cove.
The women who had infants carried
them generally on their shoulders ; but
few of these came very near the English
lines of limitation, according to the
state the ground was in, when the
Borrowdale left that coast.
Fish is their principal food, and the
women are as expert as the men in
catcliing them, and tinders cand manag-
ing the canoes full as well; they also
can dive ; but in this the men are
astonishingly dexterous, and frequently
go to a depth of seventy and a hun-
dred feet, to bring up shell-fish, or a fish
wounded by their lances. In the winter
the fish quit those seas, and go to the


northward for warmth. In their ab-
sence, how such improvident inhabi-
tants can subsist justly excites as-
tonishment !
When Governor Phillipf and his
officers presented these people with
necklaces, pieces of cloth, and handker-
chiefs, they greedily took them ; but so
temporary vas the pleasure of posses-
sion, that they scarce ever kept the
gift beyond a day, and all their finery
was found from time to time scattered
about the woods, and unregarded. One
man submitted to be shaved, and have
his hair dressed. They frequently ad-
vanced in a formidable array,but always
lost their courage as the approach
became nearer. The terror of our guns
killing so precisely the object aimed at,
is the great source of awe. Of the
three men who were killed in the woods,
one was found covered from head to
foot with short darts or arrows. They
once threw a spear at a party of the
seamen ; but as it failed in effect, they
seemed anxious to disown any hostile
intent, and struck the man by whom it
was thrown. In their fits of levity,
they will laugh for a long time, from
no evident cause.
The natives never appeared in such
consternation as one morning, when
they beheld Captain Hunter, of the
Sirius, on horseback—they had never
seen such an animal ; and, like one of
the barbarous nations of antiquity, they
imagined the rider and the horse one
animal only ; for when dismounted,
their shouts were more violent than
before.
The following were the live stock
landed on the colony, on the public


account: -1 stallion—3 mares —3 colts.
1 bull—3 cows —1 calf-strayed in the
woods and lost, except 1 cow. 4 rams
—4O sheep—all dead but 6. 2 boars —
26 sows —five killed by lightning.
The horses thrive, on account of their
being regularly worked, and carefully
attended at night The cow that still
remains, being taken care of by reason
of her being in calf, escaped the fate of
the rest—she has since calved.
The very same lightning storm that
killed the pigs, killed also some sheep
belonging to the Governor’s private
stock. That the sheep died, was owing
to the want of proper feed ; where the
pasture was good, there was scarce any ;
and in other place", it was strong, sour
grass.
In clearing the earth, more was ap-
propriated for garden ground than for
farming. Baddishes and turnips pro-
mised better than other vegetables.
The beans and peas wore a bad aspect.
Parsley, balm, a sort of sage, and other
European herbs, were found of natural
growth. Besides the cabbage-tree,
which we formerly noticed, there is an
uncommon tine gum-tree, and also a
tree, which, when cut down, distils for
a time a sap which hardens like a
cement, and afterwards falls into dust;
when thrown in the fire, it neither
blazes nor burns, and has nothing of
the bitumen quality in it
The effects of the lightning were p°r-
ceptible on every hill ; every other tree
appeared shivered by it. Three earth-
quakes were felt in the first six months
of the colony being established,
In digging to try the soil, they found
an earth from which they made such


excellent bricks, that several houses are
already built. They have also found a
dry marie or chalk, from whence lime
has been produced.
The poor convicts were in a wretched
state for want of bedding-a very
shameful improvidence at home !
Some of those who were placed at the
head of the different classes of workmen
(a regulation made by the Governor),
behaved extremely well. One of the
four who was hanged, after his con-
demnation fled to the woods ; here he
remained for several days. At length
he returned almost starved to death, to
meet his fate, and the Governor ordered
his instant execution ! A rock at some
distance from the shore, is fixed upon as
a sort of bastille; here some offenders are
sent, exposed to the weather, and with
no other food than bread, this some-
times produces reformation.
Among the curiosities expected to
arrive is a stuffed black swan, which is
said to have been shot by Major Ross,
the Lieutenant - Governor ; several
stuffed kangaroos are also coming
over, but it was impossible to take any
alive of a growth to send. A young
one is, however, in Major Ross’s pos-
session, and intended as a present to
His Majesty, whenever it can be con-
veyed with safety to England.
COPY OF A LETTER FROM CAPT. TENCH,
OF THE MARINES.
Sydney Cove, Port Jackson, Cumber-
land County, New South Wales, 1788,
Sir, —Perhaps the unlooked-for delay
for an express from our side will,
before this letter can arrive, have in-


duced you and the rest of my English
friends to conclude that a disastrous
fate has happened to the forlorn ex-
pedition on which I am engaged.
A variety of difficulties not easily to
be surmounted have so entangled and
retarded our progress, that perhaps
even now we part with our shipping
too soon, and that we may not have
their absence to deplore is what we
rather wish than expect. When we
left England, Government was san-
guine enough to believe that a very
few weeks delay of the transports would
serve to put matters into such a train
after our arrival here as would be
amply sufficient for us to proceed
upon.
To drop, however, the difficulties of
the moment I write at, and to take a
retrospect of those we have overcome,
let me inform you that we arrived at
Botany Bay in three divisions on the
18th, 19th, 20th of January last, having
separated thus, by order, at sea, for the
purpose of effecting the passage
quicker. Nothing could be more for-
tunate than the winds and weather w y e
met with in the whole of our voyage ;
nor did a more healthy fleet ever ren-
dezvous in port, after having come so
far. We had no sooner dropped anchor
than every means of exploring and
seizing a knowledge of the country was
set on foot. Our researches, however,
ended so little to Governor Phillips’s
satisfaction, that he set off almost im-
mediately to examine the opening to
which Mr. Cook, in passing along this
coast, had given the name of Port
Jackson. The experiment well re-
warded his Excellency’s pains, for he


discovered a tiarbour, superior to any
other that we know of in the world,
and our removal to the place where I
date was tiie consequence of this
discovery a few days afterwards.
Since this period, our endeavours to
fix ourselves, and establish our motley
community, have been indefatigable.
Store houses have been erected ;
barracks for the troops are in a state of
forwardness land for cultivation
cleared from the woods which grew on
it ; and temporary habitations sprung
up like mushrooms, to shelter their
owners from the inclemency of the
seasons. To attempt a description of
our tumultuous disembarkation, and
subsequent attempts at system and
regularity, are far beyond the reach of
your friend. Figure to yourself the
landing of a number of convicts, many
of whom, for years before, had been
strangers to the luxury of even setting
foot on shore. To that these
wretched creatures would of them-
selves conform to discipline and order
were an insult to common sense ; and
yet so supine, or so parsimonious, had
Government been, that not a single
person in tie line of director or over-
seer, had been appointed to superin-
tend them. An attempt was, indeed,
made to saddle the officers of the
Marine Battalion with this pleasing
duty, but they rejected it to a man ;
and the consequence of a want of
proper appointments has been, that
not half the progress which, from our
numbers, might have been expected, is
achieved.
Methinks [ hear you ask, what steps
have been taken to provide for your


security, both from the convicts and
natives? None at all, my dear sir.
People in England were romantic
enough to believe, that we should find
it requisite to enclose our troops, stores,
and provisions, with an entrenchment,
by way of preventing surprises and
depredations. But those schemers
erred in their reckoning ; and that no
such necessity existed, I humbly pre-
sume to believe, from every plan of this
nature being rejected and set aside.
Considering the description of men
we have had to deal with, our public
executions have been comparatively
few. Lenity, indeed, is a leading
feature in the character of Governor
Phillips.
Offences of a degree not very
atrocious, are usually settled by one or
more Justices of the Peace, who ex-
amine into the business before them,
and order the criminal, when guilty,
to be immediately taken away and
receive a stated bodily punishment, by
flogging. In matters of a more serious
nature, a Court, consisting of six
officers, and the Judge of the Settle-
ment as president, sit for the trial of
offenders brought before them. To
liken this Court to any other that we
know of were impossible; its institu-
tion is new, though its verdict is
directed to be given according to the
laws of England, “or as early as may
be, allowing for the circumstances and
situation of the settlement.” Were it
not for this necessary and saving
clause, the wisest among us would be
now and then puzzled how to act ; but
this solver of difficulty unites every
Gordian knot, and levels every impedi-


merit which might otherwise obstruct
the career of justice, in her most ex-
emplary form. For how long a period
it may, however, be found requisite to
continue this convenient system, I do
not take on me to determine ; and how
far adventurers, who may intend to
settle here, will approve of it, I know
not. At all events, it behoves Govern-
ment either to continue hi office our
present wise and able expounder of the
laws, or, in case of his removal to a
higher post, to supply his place by such
a successor as may recommend refor-
mation by his private example, and awe
crimes by the dignity of his public de-
meanour.
Previous to our expedition sailing
from England, I recollect to have
frequently heard warm debates about
the probable advantages or disadvan-
tages which might attend our pro-
jected settlement; the returns it could
make to the mother country. That a
residence of seven months here should
not have enabled me to adopt some
opinion on this head, may appear
extraordinary. But I honestly declare,
that I get so bewildered in conjecture
and futurity, whenever I sit down to
think seriously on this matter, that I
am farther from a conclusion at the
close, than at the commencement of
my lucubrations. Will it not form a
depot, I hear someone say, for naval
stores, whence the East Indies may be
supplied ? I well remember such an
idea prevailing at home ; and 1 was once
myself sanguine enough to believe the
plan a feasible one. You, will, how-
ever, easily conceive that I cease to
think so, when I inform you, that


every species of wood, hitherto found
in the country, is so execrably bad, as
to utterly forbid every intention of
converting it to nautical purposes.
That of Norfolk Island (which place we
took possession of in the latter end of
February) is uncommonly fine_ in its
quality, and valuable from its size, but
the difficulties wdiich will attend
removing it from that place, for want
of a harbour, are such as will render it
cheaper to supply Madras with masts
from Norway. In addition to these
discouraging circumstances, it is with
regret I tell you that not a single plant
of the New Zealand flax can be dis-
covered, either here, or on Norfolk. To
what then are our labours to tend 1 If
to secure a receptacle for convicts is
all that is meant by Government, no
better place could have been pitched
upon. Dominion may be stretched to
almost any extent ; and the soil, though
but indifferent just around where we
are fixed, in many parts is such as will
yield its cultivators every necessary
and convenience of life.
To effect, however, even this, must be
the result of unwearied exertion, and
constant protection by an armed force
for some years to come. For thenatives,
whom at our landing, and for some
time afterwards, we regarded as equally
unwilling and unable to commit hostil-
ities upon us, have lately given some
proofs that their wooden spears, when
properly used, are as efficacious as a
musket-ball, no less than three men
having fallen victims to their brutal
and undistinguishing ferocity, _ and
many more have either met a similar
fate, or perished in the woods from


hunger. Of these Indians I shall give
you no further description than by
saying that Mr. Cook, in the few
days he remained at Botany Bay, was
able to draw their character as well
as we can at the day I write. They
are equally shy and savage, nor can
all our efforts bring about an inter-
course, though it would be injustice to
the Governor were I not to say that
his private conduct and public orders
respecting them have been invariably
such as might be expected to effect
it.
From our feelings and state of health
hitherto, we have every reason to con-
clude the climate of this country
superior to any other we know of. The
summer is by no means so hot as under
the same parallel of latitude in your
hemisphere ; and the winter is beyond
description, pleasant and delightful,
indeed, I know but of one exception to
the position I set out with, which is, the
thunder and lightning, now and then
severe and tremendous in the fall of the
year, beyond any other I ever heard.
Thus, my dear sir, have I stated to
you the heads of everything most
remarkable in our little, distant, for-
lorn community. That it may in any
shape afford you private amusement,
or public materials, is my earnest wish.
I am, dear sir, yours etc., W. Tench.
The following is the copy of a letter
from an officer on board Governor
Phillipt’s fleet on the Botany Bay
Expedition, to his friend in London,
dated Norfolk Island, 7th March,
1788.
Dear Sir,—We had a very favourable


passage from Rio to the Cape, where
the fleet arrived the 13th October, 1787,
and healthy beyond expectation,
having only lost 25 upon our passage
from England. The transports, etc.,
completed their water, took in pro-
visions, wdne and stock,which consisted
of horses, cows, sheep, goats, hogs, and
poultry, all for the public service at
Botany Bay, bub every article was at a
very extravagant rate. I had frequently
heard great encomiums bestowed on
the Cape, and I expected to have found
everything very plentiful and reason-
able, but I assure you I was very much
disappointed, having found it quite the
reverse. They have no taverns, but
every family takes lodgers, and you
eat and drink with them in the family
way, which costs you two rix-dollars
per day (or Bs. sterling). The country
round the town has a most sterile and
barren appearance to strangers; the
only thing worth notice is the com-
panies gardens, and they are rendered
beautiful by the greatest industry ;
there is a small menagerie in them, but
the variety is so small that it is scarce
worth mentioning. They seemed very
much alarmed at the Cape when we
were there, and were working very
hard upon the forts, as if they expected
a rupture shortly.
The fleet sailed the 12th of November,
and upon the 7th of January, 1788, at
two o’clock p.m ,we made the South
Cape of New Holland. The land is
very high and mountainous, and upon
the tops of some of the highest we
could discover snow. We w r ere from
the 7th until Sunday, 20th of January,
upon the coast, but were generally out


of sight of land, having contrary winds
most of that time. The fleet arrived
all safe, and very healthy at Botany,
Sunday, 20th January, having only lost
about 10 upon the passage from the
Cape, which makes in all 35 ; 30 of
which are convicts, the rest mariners
and supernumerary women on board
the different ships. During our stay at
Botany I had several opportunities of
seeing the natives, who came almost
every evening to the place where our
people were working on shore ;
sometimes 10 or 12, and from that to
20 ; and further up the bay they were
seen to the number of 50. After we had
made them sensible of our intentions of
amity towards them (by signs),they ap-
proached us with the greatest confi-
dence, generally giving their spears to
their children to hold, whom they made
stay some paces behind them, making
signs to keep back our marines with
their arms. They received any pre-
sents we chose to give them very good
naturedly, and with some degree of
satisfaction, and we could observe that
they kept them during our stay there,
as we had an opportunity of seeing them
wear them every day. We used to
make one of the fifers play to them now
and then in the evening, when they
danced and seemed much pleased, as we
could observe by their laughter. Their
manner of dancing is much like the
negroes in the West Indies, which is
performed by various twistings and
attitudes of the body. I never saw
any of them painted, nor did I ever
perceive but one with the tish bone
through the nose They seemed to
live chiefly upon fish. We gave them


some bread and some beef, which they
took, but seemed not to like it.
The country about Botany is a sandy
barrendooking soil, intersected with
marshes and morasses, and appears
much like the moors or downs in Eng-
land. There are three different kinds
of the green tree yielding gum of
various colours and odour. As to
animals and birds, we saw none, but
what has been described by Captain
Cook. Upon finding the soil so sterile
at Botany we sailed on the 26th
January for Port Jackson, where the
colony is settled ; it lies out about
three leagues farther to the northward,
and is perhaps one of the finest harbours
in the world. It extends upwards of 20
miles into the country, and has from 10
to 6 fathoms water ; and there are
great numbers of little runs of fresh
water that empty themselves into it at
different places. The harbour is two or
three times land-locked before you get
to the place where the colony is fixed,
which is not above five or six miles up
the bay. The country seems far pre-
ferable to that of Botany, having a
very fine rich black mould in many
places, and the trees are at a much
greater distance from each other, and
less brush wood, which renders the
cultivation much easier.
The inhabitants seem by far more
numerous than at Botany ; for our
people have seen, while surveying the
upper part of the harbour, between 250
and 300 assembled together—men,
women, and children included. Since
our settling here we have killed a
kangaroo, and a lizard of an enormous
size ; it measures from the extremity of


the head to the tip of the tail 4ft. 2in.,
is 6in. or Sin. in circumference, and its
skin is covered with a kind of scale,
and mottled black and yellow. If I
had continued at Port Jackson I should
have been able to have given you a
more distinct account of the country,
etc., but I left that place on the 14th
February, with Mr, King and a party to
settle upon Norfolk Island. We took
our passage in the Supply brig, Lieut.
Ball ; and on Sunday, 17th, we dis-
covered a small island in lat. 30deg.
12min.; it is about four or five miles
long, and has a bay which forms a
crescent. Mr. Ball has called it Howe
Island after his lordship. We arrived
at Norfolk Island 29th February ; and
Mr. King, after a great deal of fatigue,
discovered a bay to the south-west,
where he landed the stores, provisions,
etc., on 6th March. We find Captain
Cook’s description of the island very
erroneous. The pines are beyond any-
thing of the kind I ever saw, measuring
from 27ft. in circumference to any size
you please below it, and as straight as
timber can possibly be, without a bough
upon it for upwards of 50ft, high. I
measured some of them that were fallen
by age and decayed, notwithstanding
which they were 144 ft. in length. The
island is overrun with a kind of under-
wood, that nearly renders it impossible
to make your way through it, but if
that was cleared away it would be a
delightful place ; the soil is as good as
any possibly can be, and there are
plenty of different kinds of fish ; the
wild fowl you have only to be at the
trouble of catching them. We have
caught wood pigeons, quail, and a kind


of garnet, which is very plentiful along
the coast. In all our perambulations
we have not discovered any quad-
rupeds ; there are some animals that
burrow ; but we have not seen any of
them as yet.
I am, dear sir, etc.
JOURNAL OF THE EXPEDITION
UNDER CAPTAIN PHILLIPS TO
BOTANY BAY.
Copy of a Letter from One of the Con-
victs to a Female Friend in London.
Agreeable to the promise I made you,
on my bidding you and my native land>
a sad adieu ! I seize the earliest oppor-
tunity that has offered, for writing you
some few particulars of the voyage I have
had, which curiosity may probably lead
you to wish to be acquainted with,
however painful it may be to you to
recollect the wretched individual that
relates them, and the misfortunes his
misconduct has heaped upon you.
Not to dwell, however, on the sub-
ject thereof, permit me to inform you
that we had a pleasant passage of three
weeks to Teneriffe, where we regaled
ourselves for a week with all the re-
freshments the island afforded ; pro-
vided a good stock of wine, water,
fruit, etc., and sailed on Sunday, the
10th of June, for the island of St. lago,
it being Governor Phillips’ intention to
stop there a few days, for the purpose
of again laying in water, fruits, etc.
However, when we got off the place, on
the 19th of June, the wind was un-
favourable for going into Port Praya


Bay ; and Governor Phillipf, being
apprehensive that the ships might re-
ceive some accident by turning in, he
made the signal to stand out to sea,
and by night we were out of sight of
the island ; we steered with a fine
trade wind for it, where we arrived on
Sunday, the sth instant. It is, without
exception, the pleasantest and most
fruitful place in the whole universe : it
was the middle of their winter ; yet we
had oranges, lemons, limes, olives,
coffee, etc., in blossom and in fruit at
the same time ; oranges were only
fourpence per hundred, and even the
lowest of the convicts had a dessert
after dinner.
It would not ‘be doing justice to
Governor Phillipl’ humanity, lenity,
and attentive regard to our health and
happiness, was I not to mention par-
ticularly the manner he treated and
continues to treat us. He gave us
fresh beef every day when in port, and
procured us fruits, when to be had. He
liberated all the convicts from their
irons a week after they left England ;
in short, he allowed them every indul-
gence which prudence and discretion in
our present situation would authorise.
It is to this clemency and attention
that I must ascribe the extraordinary
good health they have enjoyed ever
since we left England. The sick list
was not above 30, and those all trifling
complaints; and I will further take
upon me to say, that you have not a
village in all England, wherein there
are an equal number with us, more
healthy.
It is, however, to be lamented, that
there always will be found, in all situa-


tions, some capable of abusing a confi-
dence reposed in them, even for their
own ease and happiness; and lam
sorry to add, that, notwithstanding the
claim that Governor indul-
gence might be supposed to have on the
gratitude of the convicts, one of them
attempted his escape at Teneriffe, and
effected it so far as to land by the help
of a small boat, about 10 miles from the
ship, round the S W. part of the island ;
he was taken the next morning by a
party of marines, sent on shore for that
purpose. I was happy to find that
Governor Phillips would not allow this
conduct to affect the liberty or treat-
ment of the rest. They, in general,
behaved peaceably, but no situation or
climate seemed to alter their grand
principles which occasioned their
voyage ; and when opportunity offered,
they did not hesitate to show their
skill and ingenuity in every possible
way. Such is the force of ill habits,
and the effects of a long and successful
intercourse with the manners of a de-
praved and dissipated life !
A circumstance, not at all wanting in
singularity, or traits to render it
curious, may be found in the following
fact, of the truth of which you may
depend, to illustrate the beforegoing
reflection.
One of the convicts felt an inclina-
tion, partly allured by the opportunity
and partly to keep in his hand, to try
an experiment for the purpose of hav-
ing a little trade with the Portuguese,
and to enable him to lay in his in-
vestments, for which he found a little
ready money would be an article very
necessary to be produced on his part,


and not being in possession of any, he
determined upon a new coinage of
dollars, and set his mint to work for
that purpose ; the production of which
was some of the best counterfeited
dollars I ever saw ; they were so in-
geniously executed, as to render them
passable ; he coined them out of pewter
spoons, and a something that _ gave
them the solidity and lustre of silver ;
however, an end was soon put to his
plan, and on account of the circula-
tion of his dollars being stopped, and his
credit not being good in the island, his
intended investments could not be
made, and he only got heartily cursed
by the sailors for depriving them of
their spoons.
As you will, no doubt, have the
particulars of our landing, and new
colony, from the despatches sent by the
Governor, I shall not trouble you on
the subject thereof, any further than
to acquaint you, that we are as happy
as any persons can be supposed to be
who have nothing to make them so. At
present, all is barren except our
thoughts !—at least it is so with me ;
for in spite of the good usage I receive,
and the prospect of a full enjoyment of
my personal liberty, I cannot help,
every now and then, comparing my
present situation to what it ; and
then what a train of reflections must
rush on my mind, and overwhelm it,
may be better imagined than described.
—You have known my better days, and
can judge how hard it must be, to bear
the sad reverse of fortune to which I am
doomed.
I could indulge in these reflections,
for we have nothing here to break in


upon our serious moments. Everything,
it is true, that our worthy Governor
can do, or cause to be done, may be
expected for our accommodation. But
we have nothing ready to our hands ; a
new world as it were to raise ! and
even admitting that everything to be
wished for could start up—that the
produce of art and nature could be
showered down upon us at once : nay,
that we could instantaneously
possess everything that fancy could
body forth to the most luxuriant
imagination—then, even then, I could
have nothing worth enjoying, while
deprived of you. Blessed with every
thing besides, without you, I should
have nothing ! all would be despair and
wretchedness. As the most rapid pro-
gress is making in rearing our new
settlement, 1 hope in my next to give
a better account of it; and probably
a few years hence, when things may be
more prepared to receive you, I may
venture to hope for life and happiness
in a visit from you.
The following is a correct account of
the Civil and Military Establishment
on the departure of Governor Phillipfi
from England :
Captain Arthur Phillipf of the navy,
Governor and Commander-in-Chief
of the territory of New South Wales,
and of his Majesty’s ships and vessels
employed on that coast.
Major Robert Ross, Lieut.-Governor
Richard Johnson, Chaplain.
Andrew Miller, Commissary.
David Collins, Judge Advocate.
John Long, Adjutant.
James Furzer, Quarter Master.


George Alexander, Provost Marshal.
John White, Surgeon.
Thomas Arndell, Assistant ditto.
William Balmain, Ditto ditto.
His Majesty’s ship Sirius, Captain
Arthur Phillip, Captain John Hunter.
His Majesty’s armed tender supply,
Lieutenant H. L. Ball.
Six transports carrying the convicts.
—Alexander, 210 men convicts ; Scar-
borough, 210 men convicts ; Friendship,
80 men convicts, 24 women convicts ;
Charlotte, 100 men convicts, 24 women
convicts ; Prince of Wales, 30 women
convicts; Lady Penryn, 102 women
convicts. Each transport had a
detachment of marines on board.
Three store ships.—The Golden
Grove, Fishburn, and Borrowdale, with
provisions, implements for husbandry,
clothing, etc., for the convicts. Lieu-
tenant John Shortland, agent for the
transports.
The garrison is formed from the
marines.
Distribution of the detachment of
marines for New South Wales, with the
number embarked on board of each of
the transports upon the service: - Lady
Penryn, Captain Campbell, Lieut. G.
Johnson, Lieut. William Collins ; Scar-
borough, Captain Shea, Lieut. Kellow,
Lieut. Morrison ; Friendship, Captain
Lieut. Meredith, Lieut. Clarke, Lieut.
Faddy ; Charlotte, Captain Tench,
Lieut. Cress well, Lieut. Poulden;
Alexander, Lieut. J. Johnson, Lieut.
Shairp ; Prince of Wales, Lieut. Davy,
Lieut. Timmins, Provost Marshal.
Forty women, wives to the marines,
permitted to go out with the garrison.


AN HISTORICAL NARRATIVE OF
THE DISCOVERY OF NEW
HOLLAND AND NEW SOUTH
WALES, Etc.
The determination of the British
Government to establish a settlement
in the Southern Pacific Ocean has
strongly excited the public curiosity.
As it is a very natural question, what
national benefit can arise from such an
establishment 1 ? it is apprehended that
by drawing into one view a faithful
narrative of the progressive discoveries
that have been made of the coasts of
that extensive country, where the settle-
ment is proposed to be made, with some
account of its productions, and a view
of its relative situation, to those other
important discoveries of our late inde-
fatigable circumnavigator, will tend
not merely to answer the inquiries of
the speculatist, but to prove its utility
in _ extending the commerce of the
British nation through those extensive
tracts of population which the industry
of the present age has explored.
Leaving the inquiry how far the
density, or weight, of land and water
are able to counterpoise each other to
the researches of the philosophic mind,
we shall only remark that from the
time of the discovery of America it was
a pretty generally received opinion
among geographers that there was
some vast undiscovered continent
ranging up towards the South Pole to
balance those amazing tracts of land
that abut upon the North Pole; and
that it has for 200 years been the ambi-


tion of the intrepid navigator to ex-
plore such continent.
The first account we have of this
country is in a memorial delivered to
the Court of Spain, by Don Pedro
Fernandez de Quiros in 1609, in which
he asserts that, patronised by the Vice-
roy of Peru, he had spent 14 years, and
travelled 20,000 leagues by land and
sea in prosecuting discoveries. In this
memorial he solicits for the necessary
means to settle those countries he had
discovered, which he called a continent,
equal in bigness to Europe and the
Lesser Asia ; he describes the country
as well supplied with the necessaries of
life, yielding gold, silver, spices, and
pearls, and filled with inhabitants of
different colours. He also mentions
the discovery of a clump of about 20
islands, which he first supposed to be
all one country. Those lands, agree-
able to the custom of that age, he took
possession of, under the name of La
Australia del Espiritu Santo, and lays
them down as in and about 15deg. of
south latitude.
When we consider the length of time
that Don Pedro spent in this service,
that he took his departure from the
■coast of Peru, and that his course was
to the west, there is little doubt that
the islands he mentions were those now
called the New Hebrides ; and that
falling in with the north side of New
Guinea, a country nearly answering his
description, both for produce and popu-
lation, and being ignorant of the strait
that divides it from New South Wales,
he might consider those two places,
together with New Holland, as one vast
continent.


From the time of De Quiros to the
middle of the 17th century we have no
authentic relation of any discoveries of
the Terra Australis, or Southern conti-
nent. We only know in general that
a Dutchman, in 1616, fell in with a part
of its west coast, between 24deg. and
25deg. south latitude, to which he gave
the name of Eendraght Land. That in
1618 another part of this coast, nearly
15deg. south, was discovered by Zeachen,
who gave it the name of Arnheim and
Diemen. In 1619, Jan Van Edels gave
his name to a southern part of it, and
another tract of the coast, between
30deg. and 38deg., received the name of
Leeuwen, In 1627, Peter Van Nuitz
gave his name to a coast which com-
municates with Leeuwen’s land to the
west; and, about the same time, a great
part of the west coast, near the tropic
of Capricorn, received the name of De
Wits. In 1628, Peter Carpenter, a
Dutchman, explored the great gulf
on the north coast, named the Gulf of
Carpentaria, which intersects the
country near Bdeg. of latitude. In
June, 1629, Captain Francis Pelsart was
wrecked on the west coast, in about
28deg. south latitude, and his ship’s
company were left in the greatest dis-
tress upon three small islands, until he
could go back to Batavia for succours,
to which place the majority of them
happily returned. There is no doubt
but the greater part of those com-
manders made some discoveries in the
country ; but whatever they were, they
were suppressed, most probably, by
order of the Dutch East-India Co,
In the year 1642, Captain Abel
Jansen Tasman was sent from Batavia


for the express purpose of making a
perfect survey of this country, which
by this time had received the name of
New Holland. That this task was
faithfully performed we have no reason
to doubt, as the map of New Holland,
delineated on the pavement of the
Stadt-house at Amsterdam, was made
from the lights afforded by his journal;
but as the journal was never published
entire and probably was never intended
to be published at all, we must be con-
tent with such extracts as we have
been able to procure.
Captain Tasman sailed from Batavia
in August, 1642, with two ships, and on
November 6 was in latitude 49deg.
4min, south, longitude 114 deg. 56min.
east. (At this time the longitude was
reckoned from the pike of Teneriffe,
one of the Canary Islands, which lies
15deg. 28min, west of London, from
whence our late circumnavigators have
always computed the longitude.) “At
this time,” says he, “as the weather
was foggy, with hard gales, and a
rolling sea from the south-west and
from the south, I concluded from
thence that it was not at all probable
there should be any land between those
two points.” This determined him to
stand towards the north east ; and “ on
the 24th of the same month,” con-
tinues he, “ being in the latitude of
42deg. 25min. south, longitude 163 deg.
50min., I discovered land, which lay
east-south-east, at the distance of ten
miles, which I called Van Diemen’s
Land. The weather being bad, I
steered south and by east, along the
coast to the height of 44deg. south,
where the land runs away east, and


afterwards north-east and by north.
In the latitude 43deg. lOmin., and
longitude 167 deg. 55min., I anchored
on the Ist of December in a hay which
I called the bay of Frederic Henry. I
heard, or at least I fancied I heard,
the sound of people upon the shore ;
but I saw nobody. All I met with
worth observing were two trees which
were two fathoms or two fathoms and
a half in girth, and 60ft. or 65ft. high
from the root to the branches ; they had
cut with a flint a kind of steps in the
bark in order to climb up to the birds’
nests ; these steps were at the distance
of sft. from each other, so that we must
conclude either those people are of a
prodigious size, or that they have some
way of climbing trees that we are not
used to. In one of the trees the steps
were so fresh that we judged they
could not have been cut above four
days. The noise we heard resembled
the noise of some sort of a trumpet; it
seemed to be at no great distance, bub
we saw no living creature notwith-
standing. I perceived also in the sand
the marks of wild beasts’ feet resembling
those of a tiger or some such creature ;
I gathered also some gum from the
trees, and likewise some lack. The tide
ebbs and flows there about 3ft. The
trees in this country do not grow very
close, nor are they encumbered with
bushes, or underwood. I observed
smoke in several places ; however, we
did nothing more than set up a post, in
which everyone cut his name, or his
mark, and upon which I hoisted a flag.
On December 5 I quitted Van Diemen s
Land and resolved to steer east.”
As the remainder of the abstract of


Captain Tasman’s journal relates
entirely to his discoveries in other
places we next take a view of Captain
Eampier’s account of New Holland.
This able navigator sailed from Acha-
mack, in Virginia, in August, 1683, on
his first voyage round the world ; arid
on January 4, 1688, fell in with the
coast of New Holland, in 16deg. symin.
latitude, and anchored in a deep bay,
where he continued till the 12th of
March following. Of this part of the
country he gives the following
account: - “It was even, low, and sandy
ground, had no fresh water, except
what was dug, but divers sorts of trees,
among the rest, the dragon tree, which
produces the gum-dragon. We saw
neither fruit trees, nor so much as the
track of any living animal, except one,
which seemed to be the footsteps of a
beast of the bigness of a large mastift
dog. Some few land birds they have,
but none bigger than a blackbird, and
scarce any water-fowl. Neither does
the sea afford any food, except tor-
toises and manatees, of both which they
have great plenty. The inhabitants are
the most miserable wretches in the uni-
verse, having no houses or covering but
the heavens; no garments, except a
piece of the bark of a tree, tied like a
girdle round the waist, no sheep,
poultry, or fruits, but feed upon a few
fish, cockles, mussels, and periwinkles ;
without religion or government, but
cohabit promiscuously. For the rest,
their bodiesarestraight,thin, andstrong-
limbed, with great heads and eyebrows,
and round foreheads ; their eyelids are
constantly half closed to keep the flies
out, which are excessively troublesome


here; they have large bottle noses,
thick lips, and wide mouths. Both
men and women, old and young, want
the two fore-teeth of the upper jaw ;
but whether they draw them, I am not
able to tell : they have no beards, but
black short-curled hair, like the African
negroes, and are as black as those.
Their weapons are a sort of wooden
cutlass ; instead of a lance they have a
straight pole, sharpened and hardened
at the end. Of their language I can
say nothing, but that they speak pretty
much in the throat. We landed several
times, and at last brought them to some-
thing of a familiarity with us, by giving
them some old clothes ; but could
never prevail with them to give us the
least assistance, in carrying water, or
otherwise, they being very much averse
to working.”
In consequence of the reputation
Captain Dampier had acquired by this
voyage, he was fixed on to command a
ship fitted out purposely to prosecute
discoveries in the Southern Ocean ;
and sailed from England on that
design, January 14, 1699, in His
Majesty’s ship Boebuck, mounting 12
guns, the ship’s company consisting of
60 men and boys. On August 5 in
the same year, he again fell in with
New Holland, where he spent five
weeks in ranging along its west coast
to the extent of 300 leagues.
The first anchorage he made was in
Shark Bay, named by him from the
abundance of that voracious fish he
found there, in lat. 25deg. south. He
describes the country about this Bay,
as pretty high land, the shore steep
towards the sea ; the soil by the sea


side sand, producing a large kind of
samphire, with a white flower ; further
in he found the soil reddish, mixed with
sand, producing some grass, shrubs,
and bushes, the grass grew in tufts,
about the size of a bushel, intermixed
with heath.
The trees and shrubs were of divers
sorts, but none exceeded 10ft in
height; the bodies about 3ft. in girth ;
the heads struck out at about 6ft. from
the ground, and were bushy, thick set,
and full of long and narrow leaves.
Some of these trees were sweet
scented, reddish within the bark, like
sassafras, but somewhat darker, Most
of the trees and shrubs had, at that
time, either blossoms or berries on
them. The blossoms were mostly blue,
intermixed with red, white, yellow,
etc., and smelt very sweet and fragrant.
There were but few land fowls ; of
the larger sort only eagles were seen,
and of the smaller, there were five or
six spieces, from the size of a wren to
that of a lark, but all singing with a
variety of fine shrill notes,
The land animals they saw were a
sort of maccroons, but differing from
those of the West Indies, chiefly in
their legs, upon which they jump as
the rest of their species do; these
were found very good meat. There
was also a sort of guanas, but differing
from them in some particulars; “For
these,” says Dampier, “ had a
larger and more frightful head, and
had no tail ; and at the rump, where a
tail should have been placed, there
appeared something resembling a head,
but without mouth or eyes: their legs
also differed from other creatures of


the same kind, by their appearing to
be so made as to carry the body either
way ; which, with the particular before-
mentioned, might make a common
spectator apprehend that this creature
had two heads. They are speckled
black and yellow, like toads, and had
scales on their backs, like crocodiles ;
are very slow in motion, and when a
man comes nigh them, will stand still
and hiss, without endeavouring to get
away ; and the body when opened hath
a very unsavoury smell. I never saw
such ugly creatures anywhere but here.
The guanas, in other parts, I have
observed to be very good meat, and
have often eat of them, with great
satisfaction ; yet 1 believe the quickest
sense pf hunger would not have tempted
me to taste the guana of New Holland.
“ The sea fish seen here were, besides
sharks, of which there are great abund-
ance, skates, thornbacks, and other
fish of the prey kind (one sort
especially like the sea devil), with
guardtish, bonatos, etc. Of shell fish,
we got muscles, periwinkles, limpets,
oysters, both of the pearl kind and
such as are eatable, besides cockles,
etc. The shore was lined thick with
many other sorts of very beautiful shells
of variety of colour and shape, most
beautifully spotted with red, yellow,
etc. There are also some green turtles.
“Weanchored in three several places
in this bay, on the west side. We
searched for fresh water, but found
none ; however, we found some wood
for fuel. The 14th of August we sailed
out of Shark Bay, to the north-east,
coasting along the shore. The 18th we
saw abundance of whales near a shoal


point, in latitude 22deg. 22min. At
noon on the 21st, bearing in south-east
by east, the land appeared like a cape,
but anchoring about five leagues from
the Bluff Point, it proved the east end
of an isle, six leagues in length and
one in breadth, being surrounded on all
sides with many other small rocky
isles, which, in all appearance, are a
range of islands stretching from north-
east to west-south-west, perhaps as far
as Shark Bay, and nine or ten leagues
in breadth towards New Holland. We
went on shore in the isle of Bluff
Point, where we found two or three
shrubs, one like rosemary, whence I
call it Rosemary Isle ; and two sorts of
grain like beans, one growing on
bushes, the other on a kind of creep-
ing vine.
“August 30. —We made the land again
in latitude 18deg. 21min., and saw
many great smokes near the shore. At
four in the afternoon I anchored in
eight fathom water, clear sand, about
three leagues and a half from the
shore. On the 31st early in the morn-
ing I went ashore, with 10 or 12 men,
to search for water. We went armed
with muskets and cutlasses for our
defence, expecting to see people there,,
and carried also shovels and pick-axes
to dig wells. When we came near the
shore, we saw three tall, black, naked
men on the sandy bay ahead of us, but
as we rowed in they went away. When
we were landed I sent the boat, with
two men in her, to lie a little from the
shore at anchor, to prevent her being
seized, while the rest of us went after
the three black men, who were now
got to the top of a small hill, about a


quarter of a mile from up, with eight or
nine men more in their company.
They seeing us come, ran away. When
we came to the top of the hill, where
they first stood, we saw a plain savanna
about half a mile from us. Farther in
from the sea, there were several things
like haycocks standing in the savanna,
which, at a distance, we thought were
houses, but we found them to be so
many rocks. We searched about these
for water, but could find none, nor any
houses, nor people, for they were all
gone. Then we turned again to the
place where we landed, and there we
dug for water. While we were at work
there came nine or ten of the natives to
a small hill, a little way from us, and
stood there, menacing and threatening,
and making a great noise. At last one
of them came towards us, and the rest
followed at a great distance. I went
out to meet him, and came within fifty
yards of him, making to him all the
signs of peace and friendship I could,
but then he ran away, neither would
any of them stay for us to come nigh
them, though we tried three or four
times. At last I took two men with
me, and went, in the afternoon, along
the sea side on purpose to catch one of
them if I could, of whom I might learn,
where they got their fresh water.
There were ten or twelve of the natives
a little way off, who, seeing us three
going away from the rest of our men,
followed us. I thought they would
follow us, but there being, for a while,
a sand bank between us and them
that they could not see us, we made a
halt, and hid ourselves in a bending of
the said bank. They knew we must bo


thereabouts, and being three or four
times our number, thought to seize us ;
so they dispersed themselves, some
going to the sea shore, and others
beating about the sand hills. We
knew by what encounter we had with
them in the morning we could easily
out-run them ; so a nimble young man
that was with me, seeing some of them
there, ran towards them, and they, for
some time, ran away before him, but
he soon overtaking them, they faced
about and fought him. He had a cut-
lass, and they had wooden lances, with
which, being many of them, they were
too bard for him. When he first ran
towards them, I chased two more that
were by the shore, but, fearing, how
it might be with my young man, I
turned back quickly, and went up to
the top of a sandy hill, whence I saw
him near me, and closely engaged with
them. Upon their seeing me, one of
them threw a lance, which narrowly
missed me. I discharged my gun to
scare them, but avoided shooting any
of them, till finding my young man in
great danger, and myself in some, and
that,though the gun had alittle frighted
them at first, they had soon learnt to
despise it, tossing up their hands, and
crying, pooh, pooh, pooh, and coming
on afresh with a great noise, I thought
it high time to charge afresh, and
shoot one of them, which I did. The
rest, seeing him fall, made a stand, and
my young man took the opportunity
to disengage himself, and come off to
me. They took up their wounded
companion, and my young man, who
had been struck through the cheek by
one of their lances, was afraid it was


poisoned, but I did not think that
likely. His wound was very painful to
him, being made with a blunt weapon,
but he soon recovered of it. Among the
New Hollanders whom we were thus
•engaged with, there was one, who by
his appearance and carriage, both in
the morning and afternoon, seemed to
be the chief of them, and a kind of
prince or captain among them. He
was a young, brisk man, not very tall,
nor so personable as some of the rest,
though more active and courageous. He
was painted, which none of the rest
were at all, with a circle of white pig-
ment, a sort of lime, as we thought,
about his eyes, and a white streak
down his nose, from his forehead to
the tip of it ; and his breast, and some
part of his arms, were also made white
with the same paint ; not for beauty
or ornament one would think, but as
some wild Indian warriors are said to
do,he seemed thereby to design the look-
ing more terrible, this his painting ad-
ding very much to his natural deformity,
fer they all of them have the most un-
pleasant looks, and the worst features
of any people I ever saw, though I
have seen great variety of savages.
These New Hollanders were probably
the same sort of people as those I met
with on this coast in ray voyage round
the globe ; for the place I then touched
at was not above forty or fifty leagues
to the north-east of this, and these were
much the same blinking creatures, but
we had not the opportunity to see
whether these, as the former, wanted
two of their fore-teeth ; the lances also
of these were such as the former hadi ”
The want of fresh provisions and


water, with the progress of the scurvy
among his people, obliged Captain
Dampier to leave this coast after
having, in about five weeks, ranged
down it to the extent of about 400
leagues ; and he leaves us this* general
description of the country : “ The
lands are so fenced by a chain of sand
hills towards the sea, that there is no
such thing as discerning what lies
beyond them ; at high-water the tides
rise so surprisingly along this coast,
that the land appears very low, but at
low water it appears of an indifferent
height, but then the shore is so rocky
that there is no such thing as landing
with a boat, but at high water a boat
may very easily come in over all those
rocks to the sandy bay which sur-
rounds this coast. The land for about
five or six hundreds yards from the sea
is of a dryish, sandy soil, with nothing
but a few shrubs or bushes, which,
when I was there, seemed to be in
bloom bearing flowers of several
colours, such as yellow, blue, and white,
of a very fragrant smell, and as to
their fruit, they seem to be a kind of
peas or beans. Farther within land the
country seemed to be low and level,
partly savannas, and partly woodland ;
the former affords a coarse kind of
grass, and the latter groves of trees
that are small, and not above twelve
or fourteenfeet high. There are very few
land animals ; some lizards I saw, and
some of my seamen saw two or three
creatures not unlike wolves, but so
lean that they looked like mere
skeletons. As for land fowls, there are
crows, hawks, kites, and turtle doves,
that are small, but are very plump and


fat. The sea fowls are pelicans,boobies,
noddies, curlieus, seapies, in great
numbers. There are abundance of
whales in these seas, and those of the
large kind. We saw green turtle also,
and some sharks, and caught, with
hooks and lines, some rock fish and old
wives. Of shellfish we found here
oysters,,of the pearl kind, and fit for
eating ; with wilks, mussle, limpits,
periwinkles, and many others sorts ;
and I gathered some curious shells on
the shore.”
Hitherto we have been confined to
the western coast of New Holland, and
are obliged to Captain Dampier for the
principal part of our knowledge of its
soil, productions, fisheries, or inhabit-
ants. Not that we are to suppose that
other commanders who visited it, were
deficient in their inquiries. The con-
trary is clearly the case, especially with
respect to Captain Carpenter, who dis-
covered the great bay or gulf of
Carpentaria, and made a very success-
ful voyage; and also of Captain
Tasman, who, sailing along the west
and south coasts, and doubling the
southern point of the country called
by him Van Diemen’s Land, most
probably visited a part of the east coast
of New Holland before he preceeded to
south end of New Guinea,which country
he passed on the north-east side on his
return to Batavia. The fact is, that
the discoveries of their own country-
men have been suppressed by, and even
the property seized, and the persons
imprisoned, of those of them who have
failed in these latitudes without per-
mission of the Dutch East India Co.
“It has appeared (says that judicious


collector Dr. Harris) very strange to
some very able judges of voyages, that
the Dutch should make so great ac-
count of the southern countries as
to cause the map of them to be laid
down in the pavement of the Stadt-
house at Amsterdam, and yet publish
no description of them. This mystery
was a good deal heightened by one of the
ships that first touched on Carpenter’s
Land bringing home a rich cargo of
gold, spices, and other rich goods ; in
order to clear up which it was said, that
these were not the product of the
country, but were fished out of the
wreck of a large ship that was lost on
the coast. But this story did not
satisfy the inquisitive, because not
attended with the circumstances neces-
sary to establish its credit ; and there-
fore they suggested that, instead of
taking away the obscurity, by relating
the truth, this tale was invented in
order to hide it more effectually. This
suspicion gained ground the more
when it was known that the Dutch
East India Co. from Batavia had made
some attempts to conquer a part of the
southern continent, and had been re-
pulsed with loss.”
The north-east side of New Guinea
has been often visited by Europeans,
and there are extant several accounts
of it, as the imperfect one of De Quiros,,
before-mentioned ; Schovton has left a
much fuller description of it; and
Darapier, after he left the coast of New
Holland, ranged along it for about
25deg. of longitude, keeping a south-
easterly course, till having surrounded
the island of New Britain, he returned
back to Timor to refit. But to return
to our narrative.


The late Captain Cook has left us the
fullest description of this country of
any European who has visited it. In
his voyage round the world, after ex-
ploring a great number of places, till
then unknown, and having made some
stay among the New Zealanders, he
sailed from Cape Farewell, in New
Zealand, on the 31st of March, 1770,
and fell in, on the 19th of April, with
the east coast of New Holland, in
latitude 38deg. south, about six
degrees to the northward of Van
Diemen’s Land, or the south cape of
this extensive tract of country.
From this time to the end of August
Captain Cook spent in making an
accurate survey of the coast, to the
latitude of lOdeg. 39min., a course of
upwards of 2,000 miles. During this
run he frequently set up the British
flag on the shore, and, with the usual
solemnities, took possession of it for
His Majesty King George 111., under
the name of New South Wales. He
says, this country is of a larger extent
than any other in the known world,
not bearing the name of a continent,
its square surface being much more
than equal to all Europe.
The land to the southward of 33deg.
or 34deg. is in general low and level
further northward it is hilly, but in no
part can be called mountainous, and
the hills and mountains, taken to-
gether, make but a small part of the
surface, in comparison with the valleys
and plains. It is, upon the whole,
rather barren than fertile, yet the
rising ground is chequered with woods
and lawns, and the valleys and plains
are in many places covered with her-


bage. The soil is frequently sandy, and
many of the lawns and savannas are
rocky and barren, especially to the
northward, where, in the best spots,
vegetation was less vigorous than in
the southern part of the country. The
grass in general is high, but thin ; and
the trees, w here largest, are seldom less
than forty feet asunder. The banks of
the bays are covered with mangroves to
the distance of a mile within the beach,
under which the soil is a rank mud
that is always overflowed by a spring
tide. There are some bogs farther in
the country, where the grass is thick
and luxuriant, and some valleys
clothed with underwood. The coast,
at least that part which lies to the
northward of 25deg,, abounds with fine
harbours and bays, where vessels may
lie in perfect security from all winds.
The country has the appearance of
being well watered, as there are in-
numerable small brooks and springs,
though no great rivers ; yet these
brooks probably might be considerably
increased in rainy weather, it being the
height of the dry season when Captain
Cook visited it.
There is little variety of trees, and
only two that can be termed timber.
Of these the largest is the gum tree,
which grows all over the country —it
has narrow leaves, not much unlike a
willow, and the gum, or rather resin,
which it yields is of a deep red, and
resembles the fauguis draconis. The
other timber tree is that which grows
somewhat like our pines. The wood of
both trees is extremely hard and
heavy. Here are also trees covered
with a soft bark, which is easily peeled


off, and is the same that is used for
caulking ships in the East Indies.
They found the palm of three differ-
ent sorts, the first has leaves plaited
like a fan ; the cabbage small, but
exquisitely sweet, and the nuts, which it
bears in great abundance, is good food
for hogs. The second sort bears a
much greater resemblance to the true
cabbage-tree of the West Indies, its
leaves large and pinnated, like those of
the cocoanut ; these also produce a
cabbage, which, though not so sweet as
the former, is much larger. The third
sort seldom grows more than 10ft.
high, has small pinnated leaves, like
those of some sorts of fern ; it bore no
cabbage, but a plentiful crop of nuts
about the size of a large chestnut, but
rounder. Besides these there are
several small trees and shrubs, alto-
gether unknown in Europe, of which
one bears a very poor kind of fig ;
another a fruit resembling a plum in
colour, but not in shape, being flat on
the sides like a little cheese, and a
third bears a kind of purple apple,
which, after it has been kept a few
days, becomes eatable, and tastes some-
what like a damascene.
Of the great variety of plants pro-
duced here, few seem of the esculent
kind ; there is one resembling the
coccos of the West Indies, and a kind of
bean, to which may be added a sort of
parsley and purselain, and two kinds of
yams, one shaped like a radish, and the
other round, and covered with stringy
fibres ; both sorts are very small, but
sweet.
The quadrupeds observed in this
country are but few, consisting of dogs


and an animal called by the natives
kangaroo, which, when full grown, is
as big as a sheep, the head, neck, and
shoulders very small in proportion to
the other parts of the body, the tail
nearly as long as the body, thick near
the rump, and tapering towards the
end. The fore legs of one that was
killed by Mr. Gore, which was a young
one, and much under its full growth,
measured only Bin., while the hinder
ones were 22in. long ; it goes in an
erect posture, and its motion is by suc-
cessive leaps or hops of a great length.
The fore legs are kept bent close to the
breast, and seemed to be of use only in
digging. The skin is covered with a
short fur of a dark mouse or grey
colour, excepting the head and ears,
which bear a slight resemblance to those
of a hare. There is also an animal of
the opossum kind, resembling the phal-
anger of Buffon, and one resembling a
polecat, which the natives call quoll,
the back of which is brown, spotted
with white, and the belly white un-
mixed. Some of Captain Cook’s people
affirmed they had also seen some
wolves.
The land birds are crows, parrots,
parroquets, cockatoos, and other birds
of the same kind, of exquisite beauty
eagles, hawks, cranes, herons, bustards,
quails, doves, and innumerable flocks
of pigeons. The waterfowl are gulls,
shaggs, soland geese, or gannets, of
two sorts—boobies, noddies, curlews,
ducks, pelicans, and many other sorts.
Among other reptiles, there are ser-
pents of various kinds, some noxious,
and some harmless ; scorpions, centi-
pedes, and lizards. The insects are but


few ; the principal are the mosquito
and the ant. Of the ant there are
several sorts ; some are as green as a
leaf, and live upon trees, where they
build their nests of various sizes, be-
tween that of a man’s head and his fist.
These nests are of a very curious
structure, being formed by bending
down several of the leaves, each of
which is as broad as a man’s hand, and
gluing the points of them together, so
as to form a purse ; the viscus used for
this purpose is an animal juice which
Nature has enabled them to elaborate.
Another sort are quite black ; their
habitations are the inside of the
branches of a tree, which they contrive
to excavate by working out the pith
almost to the extremity of the twigs, the
tree at the same time flourishing as if it
had no such inmate. A third sort is
found nested in the root of a plant
which grows on the bark of trees in
the manner of mistletoe, and is about
the size of a large turnip. This root
they perforate, and yet the vegetation
of the plant does not appear to suffer
any injury. These three sorts are all
furnished with stings, some of them
not less powerful than that of a bee,
but the pain soon subsides. There is a
fourth kind, which are perfectly harm-
less, and almost exactly resemble the
white ant of the East Indies, whose
architecture is still more curious than
that of the others. They have houses
of two sorts, the one is suspended on
the branches of trees, and the other is
erected on the ground. Those upon
the trees are three or four times as big
as a man’s head, and are built of
a brittle substance which seems to


consist of small parts of vegetables
kneaded together with a glutinous
matter which their bodies probably
supply. Upon breaking this crust, in-
numerable cells swarming with in-
habitants, appear in great variety of
winding directions, all communicating
with each other, and with several
apertures that lead to other nests upon
the same tree; and also one large
avenue, or covered way, leading to the
ground, and carried on under it to the
nest or house that is constructed there.
These houses are generally at the root
of a tree, but not of that upon which
their other dwellings are constructed ;
they are or different sizes, are formed
like irregular-sided cones, and some-
times of more than 6ft. high. The
outside of these is of well tempered
clay, about 2in. thick, and is proof
against any wet that can fall ; within
are the cells, which have no opening
outwards, but communicate only with
the subterranean passage to the
houses on the tree, and to the tree
on which they are constructed, where
they ascend up the trunk and branches,
under covered ways of the same kind
as those by which they descended from
their other dwellings.
The sea is much more liberal of food
to the inhabitants than the land. The
fish are of various sorts ; but, except
the mullet, and some of the shell-fisn,
none of them are known in Europe,
but most of them are palatable, and
some are very delicious. Upon the
shoals and reefs there are incredible
numbers of the finest green turtle in
the world, and oysters of various
kinds, particularly the rock oyster


and the pearl oyster ; there are also,
cockles of a gigantic size, and a sea
crayfish, or lobsters, and crabs. In
the rivers and salt creeks there are
alligators.
The number of inhabitants appears
to be very small in proportion to the
extent of the country. Captain Cook
never saw so many as 30 of them
together but once during his whole
range down this extensive coast. It is
true the internal part of the country
remains unexplored ; but as, with all
his researches, he did not meet with one
foot of ground in a state of cultiva-
tion, he concluded those of the in-
habitants with whom he conversed to
be ignorant of that art, which could
hardly have been the case had they had
any communication with any body of
people living inland, as these latter
could not subsist without some mode
of cultivating the earth.
The only tribe of inhabitants with
whom Captain Cook had any inter-
course was in Endeavour River, where
the ship was careened, which consisted
of 12 men, seven women, one boy, and
one girl. The men were of a middle
size, and in general well made, clean-
limbed, and remarkably vigorous,
active and nimble ; their countenances
not altogether without expression, but
their voices remarkably soft and
effeminate. Their colour is nearly that
of chocolate; their features far from
disagreeable, their noses not fiat, nor
their lips thick, their teeth are white
and even, and their hair naturally long
and black, but universally cropped
short; their beards are of the same
colour as their hair, bushy and thick,,


but not suffered to grow long. From
their want of sharp instruments, and
some particular appearances, Captain
Cook concluded that they kept the
hair, both of their heads and beards,
short by singeing.
Both sexes go stark naked, and seem
to have no more sense of indecency in
discovering their whole body than
Europeans express in leaving the
hands and face uncovered. Their
principal ornament is a bone, which
they thrust through the cartilage that
divides the nostrils from each other.
As this bone is as thick as a man’s
finger, and nearly 6in. long, it reaches
quite across the face, and so effectually
stops up both the nostrils, that they
are obliged to keep their mouths wide
open for breath, and when they speak,
they snuffle so that they are scarcely
intelligible to each other. Captain
Cook’s seamen humorously called this
their spritsail yard. Besides this nose-
jewel, they had necklaces made of
shells, very neatly cut and strung
together; bracelets of small cord,
wound two or three times about the
upper part of the arm, and a string of
plaited human hair, tied round the
waist ; some of them had also gorgets
of shells hanging round the neck so as
to reach across the breast. But
though these people wear no clothes,
their bodies have a covering, for they
paint them both white and red. The
red is commonly laid on in broad
patches upon the shoulder and breast ;
and the white in stripes, some narrow
and some broad ; the narrow are
drawn over the limbs, and the broad
over the body, not without some


degree of taste. The white is also laid
on in small patches upon the face, and
drawn in a circle round each eye
There is not the least appearance of
a town or village in the whole country.
The best of their houses, if they may
be termed houses, are just high enough
to sit upright in, but not large enough
for a man to extend himself in any
direction ; they are built with pliable
rods, about the thickness of a man’s
finger, in the form of an oven, by
sticking the two ends in the ground,
and are covered with palm leaves, and
small pieces of bark; the door is
nothing but a large hole at one end,
■opposite to which the fire is made.
Under these houses, or sheds, they
sleep with their heels coiled up to their
heads, and in this position one of them
may hold three or four persons.
The only furniture belonging to these
houses is a kind of oblong vessel made
of bark, by the simple contrivance of
tying up the two ends with a withy,
which not being cut off serves for a
handle. The inhabitants have also a
small bag, about the size of a moder-
ate cabbage net, which the man carries
on his back, by the help of a small
string which passes over his head ; it
generally contains a lump or two of
paint and resin, some fish-hooks and
lines, a shell or two, out of which their
hooks are made, a few points of darts,
and their usual ornaments, which in-
clude the whole treasure of the richest
men among them.
The only weapons found among these
people are spears or lances, some of
which have four prongs, pointed with
bone, and barbed; the points are


smeared with a hard resin, which gives
them a polish, and makes them enter
deeper into what they strike. Other
lances have but one point, the shaft is
made of cane, or the stalk of a plant
somewhat resembling a bulrush, very
straight and light, and from Bft. to
14tt. long. These shafts consist of
several joints, where the pieces are let
into each other, and bound together ;
to these are fitted points of different
kinds, some being of hard heavy wood,
and others of the bones of fish. These
weapons are thrown with great force
and dexterity ; if intended to wound
at a short distance, as from 10yds. to
20yds, simply with the hand, but if at
the distance of 40yds. or 50yds., then
with a throwing stick, with the assist-
ance of which the lance flies with
incredible swiftness, and with so good
an aim that, at the distance of 50yds.,
the natives are as sure of their mark as
the most expert marksman can be with
a single bullet.
The canoes of New Holland are as
mean as their houses. Those on the
southern part of the coast are nothing
more than a piece of bark, tied together
at the ends, and kept open in the
middle by small bows of wood ; yet in
these vessels there are sometimes three
persons. In shallow water they make
use of a pole, in deeper of paddles,
about 18in. long, one of which the boat-
man holds in each hand. More to the
northward, the canoes are made of the
trunk of a tree, hollowed out, most
probably by fire ; are about 14ft. in
length, and, being very narrow, are
fitted with an outrigger to prevent
their over-setting ; the outside is


wholly unmarked by any tool, but at
each end the wood is left longer at the
top than at the bottom, so that there is
a projection beyond the hollow part,
like the end of a plank ; the sides are
tolerably thin. Those are worked with
paddles that are so large as to require
both hands to manage one of them.
The principal food of the inhabitants
is fish, though they sometimes contrive
to kill the kangaroo and birds of
various kinds. Those they dress by
broiling upon coals, or by baking in a
hole, by the help of hot stones, for
there is no appearance of their eating
any animal food raw. The only vege-
table that can be considered as an
article of food is the yam, though they
possibly may eat of those few fruits
the country produces.
Botany Bay, where the intended
settlement is to be made, lies in lati-
tude 34deg. south, longitude from
Greenwich Isldeg. 23min. east. “It is,”
in the words of Captain Cook,
“capacious, safe, and convenient, and
may be known by the land on the sea
coast, which is nearly level, and of a
moderate height; in general higher
than it is farther inland, with steep
rocky cliffs next the sea, which have
the appearance of a long island lying
close under the shore. The harbour
lies about the middle of this land, and
in approaching it from the southward
is discovered before the ship comes
abreast of it; but from the northward
it is not discovered so soon : the
entrance is a little more than a quarter
of a mile broad, and lies in W.N.W.; to
sail into ib the southern shore should be
kept on board till the ship is within a


small bare island, which lies close under
the north shore ; within this island the
deepest water on that side is seven
fathom, shallowing to five a good way
up. At a considerable distance from
the south shore there is a shoal, reach-
ing from the inner south point quite to
the head of the harbour ; but over
towards the north and north-west shore
there is a channel of 12ft. or 14ft. at
low water for three or four leagues, up
to a place where is three or four
fathoms, but here I found very little
fresh water. We anchored near the
south shore about a mile within the
entrance, for the convenience of sailing
with a southerly wind, and because I
thought it the best situation for
watering ; but I afterwards found a
very fine stream on the north shore, in
the first sandy cove within the island,
before which a ship might lie almost
land locked, and procure w r ood as well
as water in great abundance. Wood,
indeed, is everywhere plentiful, but I
saw only two kinds which may be con-
sidered as timber. These trees are as
large or larger than the English oak,
and one of them has not a very different
appearance ; this is the same that
yields the reddish gum, like fanguis
araconis, and the wood is heavy, hard,
and dark coloured, like lignum vitoa ;
the other grow r s tall and straight,
something like the pine, and the wood
of this, which has some resemblance of
the live oak of America, is also hard
and heavy. There are few shrubs
and several kinds of the palm ; man-
groves also grow in great plenty near
the head of the bay. The woods abound
with birds of exquisite beauty, particu-


larly of the parrot kind ; we found also
crows here, exactly the same as those
in England. About the head of the
harbour, where there are large flats of
sand and mud, there is great plenty of
waterfowl, most of which were alto-
gether unknown to us : one of the most
remarkable was black and white, much
larger than a swan, and in shape some-
what resembling a pelican. On these
banks of sand and mud there are great
quantities of oysters, mussels, cockles,
and other shell fish,which seem to be the
principal subsistence of the inhabitants,
who go into the shoal water in their
little canoes and pick them out with
their hands.”
As it was in this bay that Captain
Cook and his company had the greatest
opportunity of observing the manners
of the inhabitants, as well as of explor-
ing the adjacent country, we shall here
present our readers with a narrative of
their transactions during their stay in
it from the captain’s journal.
“ April 28, 1770. —The place where
the ship had anchored was abreast of a
small village, consisting of about six or
eight houses ; and while we were pre-
paring to hoist out the boat we saw an
old woman, followed by three children,
come out of the wood ; she was loaded
with firewood, and each of the children
had also its little burthen ; when she
came to the houses, three more children,
younger than the others, came out to
meet her ; she often looked at the ship,
but expressed neither fear nor surprise ;
in a short time she kindled a fire, and
four canoes came in from fishing. The
men landed, and, having hauled up
their boats, began to dres‘s their dinner,


to all appearance wholly unconcerned
about us, though we were within half a
mile of them. We thought it remark-
able that of all the people we had yet
seen not one had the least appearance
of clothing, the old woman herself being
destitute even of a fig-leaf.
“ After dinner the boats were manned,
and we set out from the ship, having
Tupia of our party. We intended to
land where we saw the people, and
began to hope that as they had so little
regarded the ship’s coming into the
bay they would as little regard our
coming on shore ; in this, however, we
were disappointed, for as soon as we
approached the rocks two of the men
came down upon them to dispute our
landing, and the rest ran away. Each
of the two champions was armed with
a lance about 10ft. long, and a short
stick, which he seemed to handle as if
it was a machine to assist in managing
or throwing the lance ; they called out
to us in a very loud tone, and in a
harsh dissonant language, of which
neither we nor Tupia understood a
single word ; they brandished their
weapons, and seemed resolved to de-
fend their coast to the uttermost,
though they were but two and we were
forty. I could not but admire their
courage, and being unwilling hostilities
should commence with such inequality
of force between us, I ordered the boat
to lie upon her oars ; we then parleyed
by signs for about a quarter of an hour,
and, to bespeak their goodwill, I threw
them nails, beads, and other trifles,
which they took up, and seemed to be
well pleased with. I then made signs
that I wanted w’ater, and, by all the


means that I could devise, endeavoured
to convince them that we would do
them no harm ; they now waved to us,
and I was willing to interpret it as an
invitation ; but upon our putting the
boat in, they came again to oppose us.
One appeared to be a youth about 19 or
20, the other a man of middle age ;
as I had now no other resource, I fired a
musket between them. Upon the re-
port, the younger dropped a bundle of
lances upon the rock, but recollecting
himself in an instant, he snatched them
up again in great haste ; a stone was
then thrown at us, upon which I
ordered a musket to be fired with small
shot, which struck the eldest upon the
legs, and he immediately ran to one of
the houses, which was distant about
100yds.; I now hoped that our contest
was over, and we immediately landed ;
but we had scarcely left the boat when
he returned, and we then perceived
that he had left the rock only to fetch
a shield or target for his defence. As
soon as he came up, he threw a lance at
us, and his comrade another ; they fell
where we stood thickest, but happily
hurt nobody. A third musket with
small shot was then tired at them, upon
which one of them threw another lance,
and both immediately ran away ; if we
had pursued, we might probably have
taken one of them ; but, Mr. Banks
suggesting that the lances might be
poisoned, I thought it not prudent to
venture into the wood. We repaired
immediately to the huts, in one of
which we found the children, who had
hidden themselves behind a shield and
some bark ; we peeped at them, but
left them in their retreat, without their


knowing that they had been discovered,
and we threw into the house, when we
went away, some beads, ribbons, pieces
of cloth, and other presents, which we
hoped would procure us the goodwill
of the inhabitants when they should
return ; but the lances, which we found
lying about, we took away with us, to
the number of about 50 ; they were
from 6ft. to 15ft, long, and all of them
had four prongs, in the manner of a
fish-gigg, each of which was pointed
with fish-bone, and very sharp ; we
observed that they were smeared with
a viscous substance of a green colour,
which favoured the opinion of their
being poisoned, though we afterwards
discovered that it was a mistake ; they
appeared, by the seaweed that we found
sticking to them, to have been used in
striking fish. Upon examining the
canoes that lay upon the beach, we
found them to be the worst we had
ever seen; they were between 12ft,
and 14ft. long, and made of the bark of
a tree in one piece, which was drawn
together and tied up at each end, the
middle being kept open by sticks,
which were placed across them from
gunwale to gunwale athwarts. We
then searched for fresh water, but
found none, except in a small hole
which had been dug in the sand.
“ Having reimbarked in our boat, we
deposited our lances aboard, and then
went over to the north point of the
bay, where we had seen several of the
inhabitants when we were entering it,
but which we now found totally de-
serted.
“ April 29. —In the morning I sent a
party of men on shore, in order to dig


holes in the sand where the water
might gather ; but going ashore myself
with the gentlemen soon afterwards,
we found, upon a more diligent search,
a small stream more than sufficient for
our purpose.
“ Upon visiting the hut where we had
seen the children, we were greatly
mortified to find that the beads and
ribbons, which we had left there the
night before, had not been moved from
their places, and that not an Indian
was to be seen.
“ Having sent some empty water
casks on shore, and left a party of men
to cut wood, I went myself in the
pinnace to sound and examine the
bay ; during my excursion I saw
several of the natives, but they all fled
at my approach. In one of the places
where I landed I found several small
fires and fresh mussels broiling upon
them ; here also I found some of the
largest oyster shells I had ever seen.
“ As soon as the wooders and waterers
came on board to dinner, 10 or 12 of
the natives came down to the plaee,
and looked with great attention and
curiosity at the casks, but did not
touch them ; they took away, however,
the canoes which lay near the landing-
place, and again disappeared. In the
afternoon, when our people were again
on shore, 16 or 18 Indians, all armed,
came boldly within about a hundred
yards of them, and then stopped ; two
of them advanced somewhat nearer ;
and Mr. Hicks, who commanded the
party on shore, with another, advanced
to meet them, and expressing kindness
and amity by every sign he could think
of, but all without effect; for before he


could get up with them they retired,,
and it would have answered no purpose
to pursue.
“ April 30. —The morning, before
daybreak, the Indians came down to
the houses that were abreast of the
ship, and were heard frequently to
shout very loud. As soon as it was
light, they were seen walking along the
beach, and soon after they retired to
the woods, where, at the distance of
about a mile from the shore, they
kindled several tires.
“ Our people went on shore as usual,
and with them Mr. Banks and Dr.
Solander, who, in search of plants, re-
paired to the woods. Our men, who-
were employed in cutting grass, being
the farthest removed from the main
body of the people, a company of 14 or
15 Indians advanced towards them,
having sticks in their hands, which,
according to the report of the sergeant
of Marines, shone like a musket. The
grass-cutters upon seeing them ap-
proach drew together, and repaired to
the main body. The Indians, being
encouraged by this appearance of a
flight, pursued them ; they stopped,
however, when they were within about a
furlong of them, and after shouting
several times went back into the woods.
In the evening they came again in the
same manner, stopped at the same dis-
tance, shouted and retired. I followed
them myself, alone and unarmed, for a
considerable way along the shore, but I
could not prevail upon them to stop.
“May 1. —This day we resolved to
make an excursion into the country.
Mr. Banks, Dr. Solander, myself, and
seven others, properly accoutred for


the expedition, set out, and repaired
first to the huts near the watering
place, whither some of the natives con-
tinued every day to resort; and though
the little presents which we left there
before were not yet taken away, we
left others of somewhat more value,
consisting of cloth, looking - glasses,
combs, and beads, and then went up
into the country. We found the soil to
be either swamp or light sand, and the
face of the country finely diversified by
wood and lawn. The trees are tall,
straight, and without underwood,
standing at such distance from each
other that the whole country, at least
where the swamps do not render it
incapable of cultivation, might be cul-
tivated without cutting down one of
them ; between the trees the ground is
covered with grass, of which there is
great abundance, growing in tufts
about as big as can well be grasped in
the hand, which stand very close to
each other. We saw many houses of
the inhabitants, and places where they
had slept upon the grass without any
shelter ; but we saw only one of the
people, who the moment he discovered
us ran away. At all these places we
left presents, hoping that at length they
might produce confidence and good-
will. We had a transcient and imper-
fect view of a quadruped about as big
as a rabbit ; Mr. Banks’ greyhound,
which was with us, got sight of it, and
would probably have caught it, but the
moment he set off he lamed himself
against a stump, which lay concealed in
the long grass. We afterwards saw the
dung of an animal which fed upon
grass and which we judged could not


be less than a deer ; and the footsteps
of another, which was clawed like a
dog, and seemed to be about as big as a
wolf ; we also tracked a small animal,
whose foot resembled that of a polecat
or weasel. The trees over our heads
abounded with birds of various kinds,
among which were many of exquisite
beauty, particularly loriquets and
cockatoos, which flew in flocks of
several scores together. We found
some wood which had been felled by
the natives with some blunt instru-
ment, and some that had been barked.
The trees were not of many species,
but in some of them steps had been cut
at about the distance of 3ft. from each
other, for the convenience of climbing
them.
“ From this excursion we returned
between 3 and 4 o’clock, and haying
dined on board we went ashore again at
the watering place, where a party of men
were filling casks. Mr. Gore, the
second lieutenant, had been sent out
in the morning with a boat to dredge
for oysters at the head of the bay ;
when he had performed this service he
went ashore, and having taken a mid-
shipman with him, and sent the boat
away, set out to join the waterers by
land. In his way he fell in with a
body of 22 Indians, who followed him,
and were often not more than 20yds.
distance ; when Mr. Gore perceived
them so near, he stopped and faced
about, upon which they stopped also ;
and when he went on again, continued
their pursuit ; they did not, however,
attack him, though they were all armed
with lances, and he and the midship-
man got in safety to the watering


place. The Indians, who had slackened
their pursuit when they came in sight
of the main body of our people, halted
at the distance of about a quarter of a
mile, where they stood still. Mr.
Monkhouse, and two or three of the
waterers, took it in their head to march
up to them, but seeing the Indians
keep their ground till they came pretty
near them, they were seized with
a sudden fear, very common to the
rash and foolhardy, and made a hasty
retreat; this step, which ensured the
danger that it was taken to avoid,
encouraged the Indians, and four of
them running forward discharged their
lances at the fugitives with such force
that, flying no less than 40yds.,
they went beyond them. As the
Indians did not pursue, our people,
recovering their spirits, stopped bo
collect the lances when they came up
to the place where they lay; upon
which the Indians, in their turn,
began to retire. Just at this time I
came up with Mr. Banks, Dr. Solan-
der, and Tupia, and being desirous to
convince the Indians that we were
neither afraid of them nor intended
them any mischief, we advanced
towards them, making signs of expos-
tulation and entreaty, but they could
not be persuaded to stay till we could
come up. Mr. Gore told us that he had
seen some of them up the bay, who had
invited him by signs to come on shore,
w'hich he, certainly with great prudence,
declined.
“ May 2. —In the afternoon we made
another excursion along the sea coast to
the southward ; Mr. Banks and Dr.
Solander gathered many plants, but,


besides these, we saw nothing worthy
of notice. At our first entering the
woods we met with three of the natives,
who instantly ran away ; more of them
were seen by some of the people, but
they all disappeared with great pre-
cipitation as soon as they found that
they were discovered. By the boldness
of these people at our first landing, and
the terror that seized them at the sight
of us afterwards, it appears that they
were sufficiently intimidated with our
firearms ; not that we had any reason
to think the people much hurt by the
small shot we were obliged to fire at
them, when they attacked us at our
coming out of the boat ; but they had
probably seen the effects of them from
their lurking places upon the birds that
we had shot. Tupia, who was now
become a good marksman, frequently
strayed from us to shoot parrots, and
he had told us, that while he was thus
employed, he had once met with nine
Indians, who, as soon as they perceived
he saw them, ran from him in great
confusion and terror.
“ May 3. —Twelve canoes, in each of
which there was a single Indian, came
towards the watering-place, and were
within half a mile of it a considerable
time: they were employed in striking
fish, upon which, like others that we
had seen before, they were so intent,
that they seemed to regard nothing
else. It happened, however, chat a
party of our people were out shooting
near the place, and one of the men,
whose curiosity might, at length,
perhaps be roused by the report of the
fowling-pieces, was observed by Mr.
Banks to haul up his canoe upon the


beach, and go towards the shooting
party; in something more than a
quarter of an hour he returned,
launched his canoe, and went off in her
to his companions. This incident
makes it probable that the natives
acquired a knowledge of the destructive
power of our fire-arms, when we knew
nothing of the matter ; for this man
was not seen by any of the party
whose operations he had reconnoitred.
“ While Mr. Banks was gathering
plants near the watering-place, I went
with Dr. Solander and Mr. Monkhouse
to the head of the bay, that I might
examine that part of the country, and
make farther attempts to form some
connection with the natives. In our
way we met with II or 12 small
canoes, with each a man in it, probably
the same who were afterwards abreast
of the shore, who all made into shoal
water upon our approach. We met
other Indians on the shore, the first
time we landed, who instantly took to
their canoes and paddled away. We
went up the country to some distance,
and found the face of it nearly the
same with that which has been
described already, but the soil was
much richer ; for, instead of sand, I
found a deep black mould, which I
thought very fit for the production of
grain of any kind. In the woods we
found a tree which bore fruit that, in
colour and shape, resembled a cherry
the juice bad an agreeable tartness,
though but little flavour. We found
also, interspersed, some of the finest
meadows in the world ; some places
however were rocky, but these were
comparatively few ; the stone is sandy


and might be used with advantage
for building. When we returned to
the boat, we saw some smoke upon
another part of the coast, and went
thither, in hopes of meeting with the
people, but at our approach these also
ran away. We found six small canoes*
and six fires very near the beach, with
some mussels roasting upon them, and
a few oysters lying near ; by this we
judged that there had been one man in
each canoe, who having picked up
some shell-fish, had come on shore to
eat it, and made his separate fire for
that purpose ; we tasted of their cheer,
and left them, in return, some strings
of beads, and other things which we
thought would please them.
“ May 4. —I sent several parties into
the country to try again whether some
intercourse could not be established
with the natives. A midshipman
belonging to one of these parties,
having straggled a long way from his
companions, met with a very old man
and woman, and some little children
they were sitting under a tree by the
water side, and neither party saw the
other till they were close together ;
the Indians showed signs of fear, but
did not attempt to run away. The man
happened to have nothing to give them
but a parrot that he had shot ; this he
offered, but they refused to accept it,
withdrawing themselves from his hand
either through fear or aversion. His stay
with them was but short, for he saw
several canoes near the beach fishing,
and being alone, he feared they might
come ashore and attack him ; he said
that these people were very dark-
coloured, but not black ; that the man


and woman appeared to be very old,
being both grey-headed ; that the hair
of the man’s head was bushy, and his
beard long and rough ; that the
woman’s hair was cropped short, and
both of them were stark naked. Mr.
Monkhouse, the surgeon, and one of the
men, who were with another party
near the watering-place, also strayed
from their companions ; and as they
were coming out of a thicket, observed
six Indians standing together, at the
distance of about 50 yards. One of
them pronounced a word very loud,
which was supposed to be a signal, for
a lance was immediately thrown at him
out of the wood, which very narrowly
missed him. When the Indians saw
that the weapon had not taken effect,
they ran away with the greatest
precipitation ; but turning about
towards the place whence the lance
had been thrown, he saw a young
Indian, whom he judged to be about 19
years or 20 years old, come down from
a tree ; and he also ran away with such
speed as made it hopeless to follow
him, Mr. Monkhouse was of opinion
that he had been watched by these
Indians in his passage through the
thicket ; and that the youth had been
stationed in the tree, to discharge the
lance at him, upon a signal, as he
should come by ; but however this be,
there could be no doubt but that he
was the person who threw the lance.
“In the afternoon I went myself,
with a party, over to the north shore ;
and, while some of our people were
hauling the seine, we made an excur-
sion a _ few miles into the country,
proceeding afterwards in the direction


of the coast. We found this place
■without wood, and somewhat re-
sembling our moors in England ; the
surface of the ground, however, was
covered with a thin brush of plants,
about as high as the knees ; the hills,
near the coast, are low, but others rise
behind them, increasing, by a gradual
ascent, to a considerable distance, with
marshes and morasses between. When
we returned to the boat, we found
that our people had caught, with the
seine, a great number of small fish,
which are well known in the West
Indies, and which our sailors call
leather jackets, because their skin is
remarkably thick, I had sent the
second lieutenant out in the yawl a
striking, and when we got back to the
ship we found that he also had been
very successful. He had observed that
the large sting-rays, of which there is
great plenty in the bay, followed the
flowing tide into very shallow water.
He therefore took the opportunity of
flood, and struck several in not more
than 2ft. or 3ft. of water. One of them
weighed no less than 2401 b. after his
entrails were taken out.
“ May 5. —The wind still continuing
northerly, I sent out the yawl again,
and the people struck one still larger,
for when his entrails were taken out he
weighed 3361 b.
“ May 6. —At daybreak we set sail
from Botany Bay, with a light breeze
at north-west.
“ During my stay in this harbour I
caused the English colours to be dis-
played on shore every day, and the


ship’s name and the date of the year to
be inscribed upon one of the trees near
the watering-place.
“It is high water here, at the full
and change of the moon, about 8 o’clock,
and the tide rises and falls perpendicu-
larly between 4ft. and sft.”
On Captain Cook’s last voyage he
again visited the coasc of New Hol-
land, whieh he approached from the
southward. On January 24, 1777, he
fell in with Van Diemen’s Land, and
the 26th anchored in Adventure Bay
in latitude 43deg, 21min. S., being
about sdeg, more to the southward than
that part of the land which he first saw
on his course from New Zealand in the
year 1770.
The usual employments of wooding
and watering took them up till the
28th, in the afternoon of which day
they were unexpectedly visited by
eight men and a boy, who approached
them with the greatest confidence, none
of them having any weapons except
one, who had a short stick pointed at
one end. These appeared of a middling
stature and somewhat slender, their
hair black and woolly, and their skin
also black. They were entirely naked,
with large punctures or ridges, some in
curved and others in straight lines, on
different parts of their bodies ; their
lips not remarkably thick, nor their
noses very flat; their features, on the
contrary, being not unpleasing, their
eyes pretty good, and their teeth
tolerably even and regular, though
exceeding dirty. Some of them had
painted their faces with a red ointment,
and most of them had smeared their


hair and their beards with the same
composition. When presents were
offered them they received them with-
out any appar3nt satisfaction. As the
Captain wished to know the use of the
stick which one of the Indians held in
his hand, he made signs to them to
show him, on which one of them took
aim at a piece of wmod placed as a mark
at the distance of 20 yards, but after
several essays he went still wide of it.
After they retired Captain Cook
ordered two pigs, one a male, the other
a female, to be carried about a mile
within the woods, and he himself saw
them left there, taking the utmost
precaution that the natives should not
observe what was passing, as he feared
they would destroy them if soon found,
and as swine soon become wild and are
fond of being in woods it is probable
they were preserved,
A dead calm preventing the ships
from sailing, Captain Cook the next
day sent some parties on shore to cut
wood and grass, who were soon joined
by about 20 of the natives. Some of
these had a slip of the skin of a kan-
garoo round their ankles, and others
wore round their necks some small cord
made of fur. They seemed not to
value iron, but were apparently pleased
with the medals and beads given them.
Just after Captain Cook had quitted
this part several women and children
were introduced by the men to Lieut.
King. These females wore a kangaroo
skin over their shoulders, the only use
of which seemed to be to support their
children on their backs, for it left those
parts uncovered which modesty directs
us to conceal. Their bodies were black,


and ’narked with scars, like the men,
from whom, however, they differed in
having their heads shaved, some of
them being completely shorn, others
only on one side, while the rest of them
had the upper part of the head shaved,
leaving a very narrow circle of hair all
round. The people now seen differed
in some respects, particularly in the
texture of the hair, from the natives of
the more northern part of this country,
whom Captain Cook met with in his
first voyage.
During the stay of the ships in this
bay Mr. Anderson, the surgeon of the
Resolution, employed himself with his
usual industry in examining the
country : and we shall here give our
readers his account of its natural pro-
ductions and remarks on the inhabi-
tants :
“There is a beautiful sandy beach,
about two miles long, at the bottom of
Adventure Bay, formed, to all appear-
ance, by the particles which the sea
washes from a fine white sandstone. This
beach is very well adapted for hauling
a seine. Behind it is a plain, with a
brackish lake, out of which we caught
by angling some'bream and trout. The
parts adjoining the bay are mostly
hilly, and are an entire forest of tall
trees, rendered almost impassable by
brakes of fern, shrubs, etc. The soil on
the flat land, and on the lower part of
the hills, is sandy, or consists of a yel-
lowish earth, and in some parts of a
reddish clay ; but further up the hills
it is of a grey, tough cast. This
country, upon the whole, bears many
marks of being very dry, and the heat
appears to be great. No mineral bodies.


nor stones of any other kind than the
white sandstone were observed by us ;
nor could we find any vegetables that
afforded subsistence for man. The forest
trees are all of one kind, and gene-
rally quite straight, and bear clusters of
small white flowers. The principal
plants we observed were wood sorrel,
milk wort, cud weed, bell flower, gladi-
olus, samphire, and several kinds of
fern.
“ The only quadruped we saw dis-
tinctly was a species of opossum, about
twice the size of a large rat. The
kangaroo, found further northward in
New Holland, may also be supposed to
ihhabit here, as some of the inhabitants
had pieces of the skin of that animal.
“ The principal sorts of birds in the
woods are brown hawks, or eagles,,
crows, large pigeons, yellowish paro-
quets, and a species which we called
matacilla cyanea , from the beautiful
azure colour of its head and neck. On
the shore \vere several gulls, black
oyster-catchers, or seapies and plovers
of a stone colour.
“We observed in the woods some
blackish snakes that were pretty large,
and we killed a lizard which was 15in.
long and six round, beautifully clouded
with yellow and black.
“ Among a variety of fish we caught
some large rays, nurses, leather-jackets,
bream, soles, flounders, gurnards, and
elephant fish, besides a sort which we
did not recollect to have seen before
and which partakes of the nature both
of a round and a flat fish, Upon the
rocks are mussels and other shellfish ;


and upon the beach we found some
pretty medusa’s heads. The most
troublesome insects we met with were
the mosquitos, and a large black ant,
whose bite inflicts extreme pain
“ The inhabitants seemed mild and
cheerful, with little of that wild appear-
ance that savages in general have.
They are almost totally devoid of per-
sonal activity or genius, and are nearly
upon a par with the wretched natives
of Terra del Fuego. They display,
however, some contrivance in their
method of cutting their arms and
bodies in lines of different directions
raised above the surface of their
skin. Their indifference for our
presents, their general inattention
and want of curiosity were very
remarkable, and testified no acuteness
of understanding. Their complexion is
a dull black, which they sometimes
heighten by smutting their bodies, as
we supposed, from their leaving a mark
behind on any clean substance. Their
hair is perfectly woolly, and is clotted
with grease and red ochre, like that of
the Hottentots. Their noses are broad
and full, and the lower part of their face
projects considerably. Their eyes are
of a moderate size, and though they are
not very quick or piercing, they give
the countenance a frank, cheerful, and
pleasing cast. Their teeth are not very
white nor well set, and their mouths
are too wide ; they wear their beards
long and clotted with paint. They are,
upon the whole, well proportioned,
though their belly is rather protuber-
ant. Their favourite attitude is to
stand with one side forward, and one
hand grasping across the back the


opposite arm, which, on this occasion,,
hangs down bv the side that proiects.
“ Near the shore in the bay we ob-
served some wretched constructions of
sticks, covered with bark, but these
seem to have been only temporary, and
they had converted many of their
largest trees into more comfortable and
commodious habitations. The trunks
of these were hollowed out to the height
of six or seven feet by the means of fire..
That they sometimes dwell in them was
manifest from their hearths in the
middle, made of clay, round which four
or five persons might sit. These places
of shelter are rendered durable, by
their leaving one side of the tree sound,,
so that it continues growing with great
luxuriance.
“ That the natives of Van Diemen’s
Land originate from the same stock
with those who inhabit the northern
parts of New Holland seem evident.
Though they difier in many respects
their dissimilarity may be reasonably
accounted for, from the united con-
siderations of distance of place,length of
time, total separation, and diversity of
climate.”
When we consider the number of
populous islands in the southern ocean
which have been visited by the British
flag under the auspices of our most
gracious sovereign, the importance of
a permanent settlement in that part of
the world, in order to continue the
friendly intercourse we have already
had with the inhabitants, as well as to
enable us to enter into some commercial
connections with them, will immediately
appear to the mind of every intelligent


person, Botany Bay having been fixed
on for that purpose we shall endeavour
to point out a few particulars to show
its importance in that view.
Whoever takes the pains to examine
the chart of the late Captain Cook’s
discoveries will find there is an open
sea fromthebay to the cluster of islands
called New Zealand, lying somewhat
to the southward of the east, at the dis-
tance of about 400 leagues. At about
the same distance to the north-east lay
the New Hebrides, a very moderate
distance from them, and under the
same degree of latitude are the Friendly
Islands, the Society Islands, and the
Marquesas Isles. From these latter
the run to the Sandwich Islands does
not exceed 800 leagues ; so that this
whole tour scarcely equals a voyage
from Great Britain to the Cari-bbee
Islands and back. Its situation is well
adapted for carrying on a trade between
Nootka Sound and Cook’s River, on
the American coast, and the isles of
Japan and the Chinese Empire, in sea-
otter’s skins, as also to perfect the
discoveries which have hitherto been
made in that part of the globe, a matter
which the late Captain King had
much at heart. Its neighbourhood also
to New Guinea, and the adjacent isles,
may conduce to some discoveries, which
in time may reinstate this country in a
share of the spice trade ; a trade which
the Dutch East-India Company have
monopolised for near two centuries.
Should a war break out with the
Court of Spain, cruisers from Botany
Bay might much interrupt, if not
destroy, their lucrative commerce from
the Philippine Islands to Aquapulco ;


besides alarming and distressing their
settlements upon the west coast of
South America.
In the foregoing accounts the country
about the bay is represented as pro-
ducing timber and stone for building,
as also wood for firing ; its soil as fit for
the production of any kind of vegetable
food ; and the seas to abound with the
most delicate fish. Should any object
to the paucity of quadrupeds, it must
be remarked that a friendly intercourse
with the tropical islands will not only
procure a supply of hogs for food, but
also for stock. And as most of our
navigators have asserted that the
islands lying eastward of Borneo are
well stocked with cattle of the buffalo
kind, a breed of those, who are
endemial to the climate, may be intro-
duced, and, in a few years, with the
assistance of the hogs, there may be a
sufficient supply of animal food, not
only for the use of the settlers, but
also for those who may be induced to
visit them.
“Mercury” Print, Hobart


sft
FiK - 4k
Kj




'. i■■ |
iMII
Mg
wmm
immk.M.
| fiIWM- \ii|
mi
I■; ■ = /'/. ji ' v - /
i ' ■ t i ' J
I r f ■ V;!:i $. pM
'% "fIW 'Mi 4(l®!i ; :: A, mtf'i
1% fe atea r
'
■
ipf# Vi,
j * k ; * fV/i \m i\
‘ ill mEi///M Hi
