

BuloDlography ol Capiala niclam Berry
BEING THE
♦ of the East End city Mission
Adelaide, south Australia-^
Whillas & Ormisiun, Printers, 24, Flinders Street.


Preface.
|BP|he following pages make no pretence to literary
‘iHis excellence. They are simply a narrative of
Jk incidents—all facts—which happened in connec-
tion with my own life and the lives of others with
whom I have been in some way connected, and of
which I had perfect knowledge to enable me to vouch
for their truth.
I give these pages to the public hoping and
praying that they may by the blessing of God prove
useful to some at least of those who may read them.
The incidents at sea will throw some light upon
the cause of many of those sad occurrences which so
frequently happen to the destruction of life .and
property to “they that go down to the sea in ships, that
do business in great waters.”
The details of Missionary and Benevolent Opera-
tions may prove interesting and helpful to any taking
an interest in such work, and especially to younger
fellow-workers.


AN OLB TAR'S YARN
BEING
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY
CAPTAIN RICHARD BERRY.
W *
was born in the seaport town of Ilfracombe, in
PP Devonshire, England, on the 25th March, 1824.
fw 1 ? The street in which I was born was called Water
*!» Street, as a perennial stream of water ran through
it. When quite a child I delighted in sailing boats
on this stream. I watched these tiny ships, made
fast to the bridge, rolling and tumbling and capsizing.
Some of them were steamboats, having paddles going
round with the current. I frequently had my boats
under sail, and some of them went so fast that it was
difficult to catch them with a proper boat. I sold
some of my toy boats to other boys, and handed most
of the money to my mother, whom I dearly loved.
In play I was very venturesome; rather than lose a
game I would risk my life. On one occasion, when I
would have been caught and the game lost—as one
boy running down the quay and another running up
were coming upon me—l jumped off at a depth of
fourteen feet; they looked over at me but did not venture
to follow. On another occasion, I said to my com-
panions, “If you place some seaweed under the highest
horse I will jump off it.” This horse was a wooden


structure with four long legs and cross bars to lay
planks on, and was used as scaffolding for caulking the
upper part of the sides of vessels. They did not think
I had sufficient courage, but they collected the sea-
weed, and a number of others congregated to see the
feat. I mounted and jumped, but the violent shock
sent the blood to my head and I lay for a while as
dead. At another time a bet was laid as to who would
climb the highest up a precipice at the back of one of
the adjacent hills. When very far up, a tuft of grass
which I held by gave way and I fell to the bottom,
and was again taken up as dead and carried home, my
head being badly cut and bleeding. My companions
felt very sorry at the accident. At another time I
narrowly escaped drowning. A brig was discharging
timber and I was running over the blocks, which
always float on their edges, when my foot slipped and
I went down between two pieces. The mate of the
vessel, who had just left her and was on the quay, saw
me slip, and throwing off his jacket jumped to the
rescue.
When about ten years old I was so ill that the
doctor gave me up, but my eldest sister would not give
me up ; she took me up in her arms of faith and
prayer, and for thirteen times she went to an upstairs
room and poured out her heart to God for my recovery.
The answer came, and God has been glorified thereby,
and I know not how much I am still indebted to her
prayers, for she still lives and never forgets me.* But
at that time, after my health was restored, I often
grieved her by calling her an old Methodist. She and
* Since the aboye was written I had notice that she has departed this life.


several others had been brought to God through the
labors of a pious schoolmaster, who always opened his
school with prayer. The schoolroom joined the
Methodist chapel, and the girls and boys obtained
the use of the chapel for a prayer meeting instead of
playing at the play hour.
As I was always fond of the sea one of my uncles
took me with him for a voyage or two. When I was
about thirteen years old another uncle bought a small
vessel, which had been a packet to Swansea. My
father and I, along with the owner, formed the crew.
The owner had also a public-house, kept by his wife. I
was noted among the men as a boy that would not
drink, and on one occasion, when spoken of as such
among a few men that were drinking, one of them
wagered that I would drink a glass of beer if a penny
were offered me. I was got hold of, and a penny was
offered me to drink a glass of beer. I refused, and the
penny was raised to a shilling, but without effect, and
so the man lost his wager. The only thing I liked to
drink was sweet cider. At that time my two twin
brothers were serving their apprenticeship at Newport,
and when our vessel went there they were as glad to
see me as I was to see them. One of them treated
me to a drink of sweet cider, but when going on board
over a plank from the stage I nearly fell off, and from
that time I abjured sweet cider also. About that time
a temperance society was formed in the place; I joined
it, and have continued an abstainer through life. lam
now seventy-one years of age.
When about fourteen years old I had an illness
which confined me to bed when our vessel was leaving,
and a younger brother, with reluctance, went in my


place. The chief thing that induced him to go was
the prospect of seeing our brothers at Newport. The
vessel traded at other ports for two months before
returning home. When aware that she was coming in
I went down on the Lantern Hill and saw her in the
offing. A strong gale was blowing from the east.
When about five miles out they changed jibs. I ran
home to tell my mother and three sisters to get up and
make breakfast for father would soon be in. This crew
always took their food at their own homes when at the
home port. I ran down again, hoping to go on board
to see father, brother, and uncle, and to get a biscuit
and a scull in the boat. When I got down on the hill
about twenty men were standing to the west of the
lighthouse. My cousin, a big strong man, standing
close by me, cried out, “O God ! the vessel is sinking.”
I trembled all over, and looking earnestly at the vessel
I saw the mainboom and the mainsail trailing in the
water, and my father standing just before the mast
waving his hat, when the vessel went down head first.
I fainted, and was taken home by my cousin. The sea
was running so high, and the vessel sunk so quickly,
that it was impossible to save them ; but if they had
known that the water was so shallow they might have
saved themselves by going aloft, as the doublings of
the mast and topmast were above water. Thus my
brother, about thirteen years old, was lost in my
clothes. Two of my companions were also lost on
their first voyage. “ One is taken and another left.”
Looking at these events I cannot fail to recognise the
gracious providence of God towards me in sparing me
and granting me so many opportunities for improvement
and for service. Three weeks after the wreck the


remains of my father and uncle were picked up at
Lynmouth, very much disfigured, and were buried in
Lynton churchyard.
After the loss of my father a gentleman connected
with the Customs took an interest in me, and intended
to befriend me. He allowed me to go in with his
daughters for lessons when their tutor came to teach
them. When a child I had attended an old dame’s
school, and afterwards a school connected with the
Church of England (the National School); but being
so fond of sailing boats and other plays I usually
played truant when father was at sea. But when he
came home and found it out he watched me and
caught me, though I ran through the stream and into
the sea. He threw me on his back and carried me up
the hill about half a mile to the school, while I cried
and kicked. He handed me over to the schoolmaster,
who placed me on a high stool and ordered me to
learn some words to be repeated every half hour, the
penalty for failure being a stroke over the fingers.
There were strokes enough that day to cure me of
truant playing. This occurred before the Wesleyans
had commenced their school at Ilfracombe.
After my father’s death, my mother and sisters got a
mangle and resorted to washing and ironing in order to
earn a living. Knowing that they had hard work to
accomplish this, and after being a few months at the
gentleman’s house, I resolved to leave and go to sea
again, in order to earn something to help them. I
went to sea with the feeling that if I should be drowned
it would be in the endeavor to do my best for my
mother. After being a summer at sea, I—at the re-
quest of mother and sisters —spent the winter at home.


This I did for three summers and winters. Before
leaving for the second summer’s seafaring, I said to my
eldest sister, “ Now, Ann, I am going away, but before
going I desire to give my heart to God. We will go
into that room of yours to do it.” We went in together,
and there on our knees we prayed and cried to God,
and I can never forget how that then and there the
Lord Jesus comforted my troubled spirit. This de-
cision was brought about by my sister’s tears, which I
could withstand no longer. I had, however, when
young, been deeply impressed by the lessons in the
Sabbath School. My teacher, a ship-carpenter, was
very anxious for the salvation of his class. On one
occasion the subject was the Pascal lamb and the
application of its blood to the door-posts and lintels of
the dwellings of the Israelites in Egypt, when the
teacher spoke very impressively on the need of the
blood of the Lamb of God being applied to our hearts
and consciences. I always feared an oath, and the
nearest approach to one was an expression frequently
used by me, namely, “ Bother the thing,” or, “ Bother
it.” The first vessel I sailed in from Bristol was nearly
lost. Leaving Cork with a cargo of oats, the master, a
fast young man, had neglected the lading. There was not
sufficient ballast, and a partition of flour having been
made to keep the white oats separate from the black
oats, the vessel was top heavy, and when opening out
the channel, she fell over on her port side and the fore-
scuttle was washed off and was nearly overboard. I
caught it, restored it to its place, set a kedge-anchor
upon it, and held it fast. The vessel was small and the
crew only numbered three, namely, owner, master, and
man, and as a great quantity of water had got into the


hold while the scuttle was off, they had to keep at the
pumps all night. I was completely drenched with the
spray that came over the bow, and was in a fearful state
of mind, thinking my time was come to follow my
father and brother to the unseen and eternal world.
The mere drowning of the body seemed nothing in
comparison to the loss of the soul. Truly that was a
dreadful night, with heavy clouds, gusts of wind, plun-
ging of the vessel, and distress of soul. I never forgot
to say my prayers, but that night I prayed earnestly
and constantly, and resolved to do better if God
should spare me. Next day we got into Milford
Haven, but the chill of the previous night laid me up
in the forecastle, and death seemed to stare me in the
face, and I despaired of ever again seeing mother or
sisters or brothers ; but once more God raised up a
friend in the person of a captain belonging to my
native town, who kindly visited me, and gave me
medicines, which, by the blessing of God, were instru-
mental in restoring me to health. When we arrived at
Bristol I w T ent home to see mother and sisters, and
remained with them a fcw r months.
I was about sixteen years of age when I went back
to Bristol to look out for a vessel. I soon got one, a
schooner, in which I made several voyages, namely,
to Lynn, Paingstone, Torquay, Oporto, London, St.
Michael, and then back to Bristol. On the last voyage
the master gave me man’s wages; I w’as then seventeen
years old. This last voyage w T as a memorable one
The captain, hitherto a sober man, had run out
of spirits, and at St. Michael’s he got white rum,
w r hich had such an effect upon him that, during our
stay there at anchor, he was nearly always intoxicated.


There vessels took their turn of loading on Sabbath
as well as on other days, and our turn came on a
Sabbath. In the morning, a number of men came on
board and threw out the ballast; then tw'o barges
loaded with oranges came alongside, and the oranges
were rattled into the hold, and by 6 o’clock p.m. the
vessel was fully loaded. The master being intoxicated
could not sign his bill of lading, but the mate signed it.
The crew consisted of the master, the mate, a man, a
boy (the master’s son), and myself. I was in the
captain’s watch, and was always at the helm when on
watch. All being ready we lifted the anchor and made
sail, and stood out on the larboard tack in a heavy sea,
the wind blowing strongly from the west and dark
clouds passing over the moon. About 10 o’clock p.m.
the captain appeared on deck and came to me at the
helm, and said, “ Dick, the basket under the cabin
ladder is full of devils.” This gave me such a surprise
that for a moment I laughed, and then' trembled, not
knowing what was the matter with the captain. He
then said, “ Let me take the helm to try to drive them
away.” He took the helm, but shortly after, while I
was standing near, he cried, “ There they are aloft on
the crosstrees; take the helm, I shall be dead in ten
minutes.” I knocked up the mate, and the captain’s
son came up with him. The captain fell on the
deck and lay on his back, his legs and arms rattling,
and his head striking like a large fish newly taken out
of the water. His son stood crying. After lying a few'
minutes he got to his knees, caught hold of the
w r eather-rail, and prayed. Then looking up at the
fleecy clouds, he cried, “ There are the chariots and
angels coming for me.” The mate said, “ I know what


is the matter with him.” By this time the other man
had come aft, and he assisted the mate in taking the
captain down to his stateroom, where they fastened
him and locked the door; they then retired to rest,
while I kept my post at the helm. Tn a few minutes
the captain thumped on the deck ; I called down the
companion, “What is the matter?” He answered,
“ A big eagle is wanting to pick out my eyes.” The
moon was shining down through the bullseye, which I
covered with a piece of canvas, at the same time giving
the deck a kick with my foot; this quieted him. We
all ate our meals in the cabin, and next morning at
breakfast I was sitting opposite the captain, when,
casting his eyes into the hold, the bulkhead being
partly taken down, he cried, “There they are,” meaning
the devils. I laughed, but was soon quieted by an
angry look and word. He got better, and for some
time took to bible-reading and prayer. We made a
long voyage; the storm having carried away our top-
sail-yard, we went into Milford Haven for a new one.
The other man and I went ashore with the captain,
and were told to wait for him ; the day passed, and at
night he came down, again under the influence of
drink. The weather being stormy we could not venture
to take the boat out until daylight; but then we got
out and under way, and in a few days arrived at
Bristol. Being so long on the voyage, a large portion
of the oranges were rotten. I left the vessel and spent
a few months with my mother and sisters at Ilfracombe,
To please them, I sailed next summer out of our own
port at fifteen shillings per month less wages than I had
in the last vessel. The following summer, when leaving
home and bidding good-bye, I said to mother and


sisters, “ I can never get on this way, always taking my
winters at home,” I got a vessel at Newport, called
“ The Triton,” and had for shipmates a most rowdy
lot. We had bad weather going down the channel,
and twice had to put back to Pennarth Roads.
Here, during my anchor watch, my soul experienced
seasons of refreshing. Tears of joy were running
down my cheeks while thinking of my Saviour’s love.
On the deck of that brig I felt as alone with Jesus,
while the wind and sea were roaring, so as to shelter
me from the sound of cursing and turmoil in the
forecastle. I left this brig at Southampton, and worked
my passage to London, where I joined a little schooner
in the butter trade, sailed to Leare, in Hanover, and
back again to London, where I joined another vessel
in the Liverpool trade. When lying at the Swinging
Tear, just below London Bridge, a meeting was held
on the deck of our vessel by Mr. Day, of the Liverpool
Seamen’s Mission, who happened to be there on leave
of absence. A few weeks after this, being discharged
from this vessel in Liverpool, I was anxious to secure
reputable lodgings, and seeing Mr. Day on the quay I
went up to him and made enquiry, when he gave me
his own address —No. 18, Sparling Street. Thus I
was guided to the house of a real man of God. At
that time I was longing for spiritual food, and while
there I got it in good measure. It was a delightful
and profitable time, and helped greatly to fit me for
future service.
Funds getting low I again took ship, and while
sailing from port to port I availed myself of every
opportunity of attending prayer meetings and taking
part in conducting them. When in Liverpool I always


took up my abode at No. 18, Sparling Street. Arriving
there in the “ John Padget,” I joined a brig called
“The Horatio,” of Maryport, bound for Ichabo.
Here I had for a companion a sober, pious young
man who left Ilfracombe with me. There were
fourteen men and four apprentices before the mast,
besides officers, cook, and steward. The vessel had
just been discharged of cotton, hence the forecastle
deck was only laid down, not nailed, and the bulkhead
was not put up, so that we had plenty of open hold
and fresh air. Placing my chest, hanging up my
hammock, and hanging my hook-pot on the locker, I
made my berth as cosy as possible. We were towed
out, and came to anchor in the river. When the
anchor watch was set one of the senior apprentices
came to me in the forecastle and said, “ Mate, will
ye have a drink ? ” I said, “ No, I am a teetotaller.”
He said, “ I beg pardon, for I have filled your pot
with whiskey.” I replied, “ Throw it out then,
quickly.” He did so, and asked me to say nothing
about it. That night my companion and I were the
only sober persons on board. The apprentices had
broached the stores, and hence the drunkenness.
Had the vessel gone to sea and a gale arisen both
she and all her crew must have been lost. My
companion and I had agreed between ourselves that
we would conduct worship night about, and so the
following night, when under sail running down the
Channel, the question arose—Shall we begin to-night
or not ? My companion thought it better to defer it
till next night, but 1 thought it best to begin at once,
and so I took the first service that night. Some
laughing and jeering followed, but the service had


its effect. The officers were nominal Christians, and
had no objection to the services, and so we continued
them, reading the Word, making remarks on it, and
praying in turn. We had a small hymn-book and a
number of written hymns, and some of our tunes
were lively and so were appreciated—for sailors must
be lively. One result was that some who possessed
profane songs and a pack of cards threw them
overboard, thus showing that they saw the incongruity
of mixing up card playing and profane song singing
with hymns and prayer. These services were con-
tinued every night for three months, and were heard
by the officers in the cabin as well as by the men in
the forecastle. I never spent a happier three months
at sea, and during all that time no sail had to be taken
in on account of wind.
On a Sabbath morning we arrived at Ichabo.
When the anchor was let go, and the sails furled, the
mate gave orders to man the boat. There was a rush
for it, and I succeed in getting in. Now for the shore.
What unbounded joy to the sailor is the shore ! Yes,
the shore ! Any shore! even though, as on the
present occasion, only an island of muck—guano.
About three hundred vessels were at anchor, with
yards pointed fore and aft. They were of all sorts —
from the schooner to the full-rigged ship. There were
thirty or forty stages running out over the rocks for
taking the guano on board boats to be conveyed to
the different vessels. Leaving one man in charge of
our boat the rest of us landed on the island by one of
these stages, and visited the inhabitants. These were
all of one colour —yellow, like the guano. About a
hundred tents were dotted about between the piles


of bags and heaps of guano. A number of the tents
were named thus —“The House that Jack Built,”
“The Paddy’s Fiddle,” “The Black Lion,” “The
Who’d a Thought It,” &c. At the entrance of many
of the tents was a penguin tied by the leg, which
loudly intimated our approach. Thousands of these
birds were found in the pits when we arrived, but
they soon disappeared. The day was fine, and an air
of quiet repose pervaded the hundreds of seamen,
who were occupied in sailor’s Sunday fashion—
smoking, mending clothes, playing cards, swinging
in their hammocks and yarning. But this was the
last Sunday and the last night that sailors and their
tents were allowed on the island. This change was
made on account of the men plundering during night.
The island is about three miles in circumference, and
the guano on it was about sixty-two feet deep. It was
dug out in pits, making it like a honeycomb, which
rendered it difficult to get vessels supplied with their
cargoes. But, for a little grog, Jack would, during
night, help to load the ship from some other more
convenient pit, or lump, or pile of bags. But now, at
6 o’clock p.m. every night, all were ordered off to
their ships, and then there was a lively time of song
singing on the way and on board after tea. About
three thousand sailors visited the island daily, and
worked with pick and shovel, or carried or wheeled
loads along the stages and dropped them into the
boats. Here lynch-law reigned nearly universal.
Twice a day—at 11 o’clock a.m. and 3 o’clock p.m.—
sounded the word, “Block O.” Instantly barrows
stopped and bags off backs were thrown down, and in
a few minutes a thousand men were sealed smoking


and yarning, and so they continued until “John Bull”
came and broke up the block. The mate of “ The
Procter” was king during our stay, and not one dare
leave the block until he came. He knew the arrange-
ments so well that he timed his coming very evenly.
But sometimes he was thought to come too early, and
then more time was asked ; at other times he was
thought to stay too late, and then a body of men went
down to the stage and brought hhn up shoulder high,
amid laughing and shouting. Then there was a short
speech, and “ God save the Queen,” and three cheers
for “John Bull,” and off to work. It was very
dangerous to work under these hills of guano. One
day a crew of seven were smothered by a fall. Our
captain came ashore in a sad state of excitement,
thinking it was us. A boy was pulled out between two
of the men, and the two poor fellows being jammed
and crushed under the fall only received a drink of
water before they died. They were all buried on
the island. Our evening worship was discontinued
during our stay here, so great was the demand for
time to keep ourselves clean and whole. The most
fashionable coat here was a bag with a hole in the
bottom for the head to go through. Strange dress
this for a blue-jacket!
It was reported on the island that the captain of
the brig “ Blue Bell ” had been cruel to his crew on
the passage, having kept men in irons and practised
other cruelties. This report having spread among the
three thousand men, they asked the crew to let them
know when the captain came on shore. One day
he appeared in his white shirt sleeves and got up
into the centre of the works, and in live minutes he


was surrounded by about two thousand men. A tall
fellow got on the top of a pile of bags of guano and
addressed the crowd. He pointed to the blackleg in
their midst, spoke of the crime he had committed in
the treatment of his crew, and of the punishment
which such conduct deserved, and then pronounced
the following sentence —“ Let each man take a dead
penguin or a piece of guano, and when I say throw,
throw' it, and open a way for him to flee from the
island and pelt him all the way off, and should he
come on shore again we will give him the same
treatment.” The word was given, and a dense cloud
of dust surrounded the central object, and when it
cleared off we saw that his shirt was torn to shreds,
and the blood was streaming from his face. A way
was opened and he ran. The crowd followed, throwing
at him all the way to the end of the stage, and where
clods and dead penguins were scarce they used stones.
He jumped off the stage into the sea, where they
nearly killed him, so that he almost sank before he
reached his boat. This was a specimen of the
administration of law on the island of Ichabo. I
took no part in the execution of that sentence, but
frequently cried (t Shame” to those who were doing so.
It was with difficulty that we obtained a cargo,
even after loading another vessel and paying one
hundred pounds for a stage, and when we did get
loaded and were leaving it was not easy to steer clear
of the other vessels. While we were there there was
a brig that got across the bow of a schooner named
“ The Rob Roy,” and as she rose to the sea and
plunged she knocked the mast down with her bowsprit.
We sailed from Ichabo and called at St, Helena,


where we got a holiday. The master being ill we
remained there two days. The mate’s watch had the
forenoon and the second mate’s watch the afternoon
for visiting the island. My companion and T being in
the mate’s watch went on shore in the morning, and
w r alked off to visit ‘Buonaparte’s grave ; but the day
being very hot and oppressive we did not carry out our
intention, but stopped by the w r ay, and having bought
some fruit w r e sat down and ate it, sang some hymns
and prayed, and then returned in good time to go off
to let the second mate’s watch come on shore. We had,
however, to take the boat off ourselves, as the mate
and two men were not back in time ; they did not get
off before the next day. The men got outside the gates
minus coat and boots, and the mate got dowm to the
stage about 9 o’clock p.m., and hired a boat to take
him off. But when his fare was asked he told them
that he would pay them w r hen they took him to the
vessel. They would not take him without the pay.
He having no money, and being a bit of a bully, would
make them take him. Then they pushed off the stage,
pulled round the point and landed him at the entrance
of a large cave, into which the sea run and made a
dreadful roaring noise ; there he was all night. Tn the
morning he looked up at the hill, which was nearly
perpendicular and w T as surrounded by the sea; trembling
with fear, he tried to climb, and being strong he
succeeded in reaching the top, and w r as brought off a
poorer and, I trust, an humbler man than when he
w r ent ashore. On the voyage home, as he and I were
one day on the quarter-deck mending sails and yarning,
he said, “ If ever you visit St. Helena again give my
best respects to my boarding mistress, and tell her she


must make less noise the next time I visit her,” —
referring to the noise of the sea running into the cave.
He belonged to Maryport, and often spoke in praise of
his minister, the Rev. William Bookless, of the United
Presbyterian Church there, so that before seeing or
hearing this minister I felt drawn to him, and when we
landed at that port I was not disappointed in regard to
him. If the ministers of Christ were more highly
esteemed and more frequently spoken of and prayed
for by their people it would be better for the Church.
In the choir of that church I met the young
woman who afterwards became by wife. Her father, a
builder, had just finished a new bridge across the river
at the upper end of the harbour. As we were coming
up it was blowing a gale into the harbour; notwith-
standing this, an old rusty cannon had to be lashed in
position and loaded to fire a salute announcing our
arrival. Although we run in under double-reefed
topsail we knocked off the bowsprit of a schooner, and
if we had had another half foot of water we would have
cut in two two other vessels lying at the quay. The
stamper brig ran by us and right through the new
bridge, taking it away. These circumstances formed a
kind of connecting link between my wife and me.
I became a member of Mr. Bookless’s church, and,
along with my companion, took part in prayer at the close
of the evening service ; numbers came to the church in
order to hear the praying sailors. But I have spoken
of our landing before mentioning that our homeward
voyage was trying, and at one time rather dangerous.
The mate caused too much head canvas to be carried,
which strained the vessel about the bows and made it
difficult to keep her afloat. About a hundred tons of
C


guano had to be thrown out and the water baled and
pumped up by placing one of the pumps down the
fore-scuttle. Having arrived at Maryport, as already
mentioned, and being paid off and in boarding house,
my companion and I arranged for two cottage prayer
meetings, which were kept up until we sailed again in
the same vessel. There was a change of officers.
The former chief mate, being a relative of the owner,
was appointed master; the senior apprentice on our
last voyage having finished his apprenticeship was
appointed chief mate, and I became second mate.
The new master was not improved by his promotion,
but rather gave more free expression to bad temper
and bad language. The chief mate was a quiet
inoffensive young man. I, the second mate, longed
for more of the fellowship of my former companion,
and, to obtain this, I ultimately left the cabin and took
up my abode in the forecastle. For this the captain
persecuted me. At Quebec, when loading with timber
and clearing up the decks, he ordered many things to
be thrown down into the forecastle in order to provoke
me. The men all grumbled at it, but could do no
more; but when he was throwing down a grappling
anchor I put on my coat and went on shore to get the
water police, but did not succeed. Meanwhile, the
pilot being on board, they got the vessel under way.
Seeing this, I hired a boat and went off to her, got on
board and went below, and was picking up my clothes
in order to leave when one called down, “ Dick, the
boat is gone ” I went on deck and found that I was
left on board against my will. This being the case I
would not turn to work, and did not do so* for a few
days. Afterward, however, I did resume work, and in


due time we arrived at Maryport, where we came to
anchor for a few days until the top of the tides.
Meanwhile die deck cargo was discharged and floated
to shore. My companion and I rowed the master
ashore, and as he did not return at the appointed time
my companion lay down in the boat and fell asleep,
and I, after spending a few hours with my sweetheart,
went to my lodgings and did not return to duty till
just before the vessel was to enter the harbour. I
felt quite fresh after my few nights quiet rest. The
whole crew were so exhausted for want of sleep that
they were walking the deck in a half dead half alive
sort of condition. The cook, fast asleep, walked
against the captain who, with an oath, awoke him in a
very uncomplimentary manner. The wind began to
blow hard, and a heavy sea snapped the cables, and
then what a confusion ensued. Orders were given
by the captain—“ Get the spare anchor over the
rail,” “Go aloft,” “Reef,” &c. “Tackle quickly,
or we shall be ashore on Robin. Rig.” I then took
it upon me to say, “Come, all hands take hold;
let us lift the anchor on the rail and bend on the cable
and throw it overboard.” Master, mate, and men all
followed my advice, and, to the great delight of all,
when the anchor was let go it brought the vessel up.
So much good came out of a few good nights sleep.
The gale still continued, and about two hours after the
vessel was brought up the order was given to make
sail. The anchor was fitted with a slip buoy and left.
Now for in or on, —and it proved to be the latter, for
on entering the channel the vessel struck, lost her
steerage way, and went ashore at the back of the
breakwater. Orders were now given to send down the


royal yards. I being in the captain’s watch went aloft
with another man and succeeded in sending ours down
first. But every time the sea struck the vessel she
heeled over so much that if the mast had given way
both it and all upon it would have fallen on the many
people standing on the platform of the breakwater.
She was got off some time after, and repaired at
considerable cost, many of her bilge timbers having
been broken.
I now attended a navigation class tor a few
months, but the courting interfered somewhat with the
study. After thus spending the winter a captain came
seeking my companion and me; he found us at tea
with an aged man and his daughter, members of the
United Presbyterian Church. He asked me for mate
and my companion for man before the mast. I,
however, did not feel competent to take the position of
mate, but recommended my companion for it as he was
a good scholar, and I went before the mast. “ The
Nestor” was the name of our vessel, and the voyage
was somewhat trying, especially the homeward part of
it. Yet here am lin the forecastle of this old brig
with slate and epitomy intent on learning navigation
under the instruction of my companion, the mate of
the vessel, so that if a chance should again occur I
might be able to take the position of mate. I now
felt the benefit of the navigation class formerly
mentioned.
Shortly after this a captain asked me to be his
mate, and gave me the job to strip the vessel, and with
apprentices to refit her for the spring voyage ; this was
a great lift every way; but ere we sailed a hitch
occurred in the arrangements which kept me from


being mate. The owner having a brother in want of a
situation told the captain that he was going to send
him as mate. The captain was very angry, and said if
I would go as second mate he would make it hot for
the low scamp. I agreed, and he did make it hot for
him. We went to Quebec, and there our captain
formed the acquaintance of a Captain Noble, who
wanted a mate. I was recommended for the office,
and was engaged at a salary of six pounds per month,
with the promise of being raised to a captaincy if I
should remain for a time in the service of the firm.
The owner’s son, a young gentleman, was on board;
he had come out to purchase a cargo of timber in
order to stock a yard for its sale. The captain was an
old servant of the firm, and had been requested to
leave an East Indiaman to go this voyage; he was
very high-minded and irreligious, and while I was
anxious to let my light shine it was strongly opposed by
the old spirit of darkness in him. When just out
of the Gulf, and during my watch, suddenly there
appeared land ahead. The various shades of hills and
plains and the sea breaking on the rocks seemed so
near that to go on as we were going for another five
minutes would be to go ashore. The captain coming
on deck charged me with having deviated from the
course he had given me to steer. I affirmed that I
had not. Orders were being given to put the helm
down when suddenly the land vanished and nothing
but the far stretching sea was seen ahead. The captain
had not the courtesy to apologise for his rashness and
fault-finding. When we arrived at Sunderland I
declined to stay longer in that service, and the strong
desire to get married made me very urgent to get


away ; so that the day or two I had to stay waiting for
wages and passage money as agreed upon appeared
like a month, and even the train did not seem to go
fast enough for me. But Maryport was reached at
length, and after a few weeks preparation I was in
possession of my better half.
Now with a wife and little cash on hand and no
employment the situation began to look cloudy, but
my heavenly Father showed his kindness in again
raising up friends. A Captain Show asked me to go a
voyage to Dublin with him in the coal trade to put over
the winter, and I consented; but the captain of a small
brig, in conversing with Captain Show, said that I
would make more money to go with him, and it w'as
arranged that I should do so. Went to Dublin in the
“ Arab,” Captain L. Peat, where we stayed six weeks.
During this time there were four regular attendants at
the Poolbeg Bethel every night, viz.:—a Miss Paterson,
Charles Crosby, Robert Gambles, and myself, and we
took part in the services. We had one very special
object of prayer for which we all prayed very earnestly;
it was that God would deliver Miss Paterson from the
evil influences and painful experiences of a low public-
house her parents were keeping on the Coal Quay.
The Lord did answer this oft-repeated earnest prayer
in a very trying manner : her father was missing for
three days, and during that Lime her mother died; her
father’s remains, much disfigured, were picked up on
the north side of the river, and both her parents were
buried together. Now she had control of the situation;
a sister wished to carry on the business, but she would
not agree to it, but sold off everything and left the
place to take a situation. She and Robert Gambles were


to have been married, but the Lord called him home
very suddenly ; he was before the mast in a brig of
which Charles Crosby was the mate ; their cargo was
discharged and they had returned to Workington for
another cargo while we were still in Dublin. Before
they left Dublin, one night as we were returning from
the prayer meeting, Robert caught hold of my arm and
said, “ Ah ! man, there is a bright star right ahead of
me.” They left Workington with a fair wind ; he was
seized with cholera, and his pain was severe, but when
a little easier he would say to the mate, “ Charlie, do
sing ‘ I love Jesus, yes I do.’ ” They arrived at
Dublin twenty-four hours after leaving home, but
Robert had gone to the better land to join in the
heavenly song. He had frequently given out in the
Bethel the hymn beginning—
“ How happy every child of grace
That knows his sins forgiven ;
This earth, he cries, is not my place.
I seek my place in heaven.”
A number of seamen followed his remains to the grave.
I bought a table at Miss Paterson’s sale and brought it
to Australia many years after. This season of six weeks
prayer had a wonderful effect on me ; it was truly a
green spot in the wilderness.
On our next voyage, while in Dublin, the vessels
there that were going to America were engaging their
hands. Our captain told me that Captain Adam Duff
wanted a mate, and asked if I would go with him, as I
would get much higher wages. I readily agreed to go,
and immediately entered on duty. We left Dublin for
Liverpool to take in a general cargo for Montreal. I
did not see the captain from the time we left Dublin
Bay till we sighted the Bell Buoy at the mouth of the


Mersey. We arrived safely at Liverpool, and were
there a little over a week. My wife met me there, and
I received a letter from the owner of a galiot named
“ The Fox,” asking me to take charge of her at five
pounds per voyage. I knew her to be a good money-
making collier and so accepted the offer, and along
with my wife left Liverpool for Maryport and took
charge of the vessel. Thus, within two weeks, I am
man before the mast, mate, and master at the age of
twenty two years and a few months. For crew, I
engaged an elderly man as mate and other two men—
four of us in all, for a vessel of one hundred and fifty-
two tons burthen.
We arrived at Dublin on our first voyage, cleared
out our cargo, and was ready for sailing again on a
Saturday night; other two vessels were also ready at
the same time. The wind, however, was blowing up
the river, but by the morning it had changed and was
blowing from the north-west. I had now to decide
whether to go to sea or to remain over the Sabbath : I
prayed for direction, and the impression on my mind
was that I should remain and attend chapel in the
morning and the Bethel at night. But one vessel
inside ours was wanted out; we let her out, then
fastened ours and enjoyed the Sabbath. Next morning
the wind still blew down the river, but as we got out into
the channel the wind came right ahead. The vessels
that left on Sunday were at Maryport. We kept
tacking about for four days until the wind changed to
the south-west, with rain. Running into Maryport we
saw the vessels that left us in Dublin loaded and ready
for sea. We got loaded without delay, and although
the wind was still blowing from the south-west, with


rain, we reefed the topsail and went to sea, leaving the
two other vessels moored in the deep.
A week after, having been favored with a north-
west wind when under the Irish coast, we got into
Dublin; and no other vessels being there, we got
quickly cleared, and, needing no ballast, we run back
to Maryport, and saw the two other vessels still there.
Acknowledging God, who holds the winds in his fists
and the sea in the hollow of his hand, we got loaded
again, and did as before, still looking up to God for
his blessing. Thus the second voyage was made and
the third entered on and completed before the vessels
that sailed on that memorable Sabbath morning had
completed their first voyage. To God be the praise!
My house, and the houses of two of my men, were
furnished by the money made on these quick voyages.
All our meals were taken in the cabin, and at each
meal we all knelt for prayer, which was conducted by
each of us in turn. We had truly a floating Bethel,
Every port I entered, I took part in prayer in
meetings, and sometimes addressed meetings in
chapels, in the Bethel, and on the quay. I was full of
work for the Master, anywhere and everywhere—in
Dublin, Belfast, Ayr, Troon, Maryport, and elsewhere.
In Dublin I took a deep interest in the vessels lying at
the Coal Quay. A great number of vessels were lying
there about Christmas, when I, along with other three,
obtained permission to hold a tea meeting in a new
Bethel which was being erected, but not finished.
It was a two-story building. The upper story was fit
for use, but not the lower story, as there were no
windows in it, and heaps of bricks, lime, and sand
were lying on the floor. But we went to work, putting


up sails instead of windows, and clearing the fire-place
and centre of the floor, and placing the old tables,
chairs, and forms in position.
A number of ladies and gentlemen came to help
to make the meeting a success. The Rev, Mr. Rylie,
Superintendent Wesleyan Minister, was asked to attend
and to try to get other ministers to take part with him
in addressing the meeting. I got some of my fellow-
seamen to sell the tickets, charging—captains, is;
mates, pd.; men, 6d; and boys, 3d. About two
hundred seamen were thus secured ; and a number of
land people also came to the meeting ; and all made a
hearty tea. When tea was over and the tables cleared,
the after meeting commenced. This after meeting was
our main object in getting up the tea. I asked Mr.
Rylie to take the meeting in charge. This he did, and
in a very polite manner he told the audience that as
the sailors had managed everything so well up to that
point, he and his friends were going to leave the
addresses and prayers also in their hands. This rather
took us aback, but we proceeded. I gave the first
address; then a hymn was sung; then a cousin of
mine gave an address ; then some short prayers were
offered and another hymn sung. An invitation was
now given to any persons present who wished to be
spoken to or prayed for, to come to the front form.
Twenty-one came forward. Among these was a young
captain, whose father—also a captain—was present.
The dear old man wept for joy at seeing his son on his
knees seeking pardon, for he had been a backslider.
The scenes witnessed this night made it a time of
rejoicing with us as well as among the angels; and this
new Bethel became dear to many as the old Poolbeg
Bethel had been.


At Belfast, too, we sailors had many happy
seasons. One of these I can never forget. Captain
John Gambles, William Robinson, Isaac Gambles
(brother to Robert Gambles, whose death by cholera
I have already mentioned, and which had been the
means of Isaac’s conversion) and I, having met on
Belfast Quay, agreed to go to a Primitive Methodist
Meeting-house, situated among the factory workers, as
we heard that there were some lively people there.
It was on a Sunday evening when we first went, and
we got all seated together. The minister, the Rev.
Samuel Dawson, occupied the pulpit. He had pro-
ceeded as far as the first division of his sermon, when,
looking at us, he addressed the audience thus : “As
there are some sailors here, I shall take out the legs,
and let the form tumble, and have a prayer meeting.”
This was what we wanted, and I hailed it with delight.
Short, pointed prayers, interspersed with lively singing,
followed in quick succession. The minister was a
splendid singer. That was the first time I heard the
hymn, “Am I a soldier of the cross,” &c., sung with
the refrain,
“ Let us never mind the sneers or the jeers of the world,
For we’ve all got a cross for to bear ;
The cross will make the crown the brighter to shine
When we’ve all got the crown for to wear.”
A week’s meetings were given out to be held in
the chapel and in private houses, and such a week we
had. There was one meeting held in a private house
where the but and the ben were both packed with
factory girls. These girls, when on their knees, were
crying over each other, and urging one another to
believe in Jesus. During that week a number of
those saved were added to the Church. A tea meeting


was held, at which we attended ; but the provisions
were such as we had never seen at a tea meeting,
neither before nor since. There were no currant cakes,
which sailors always like, but plates of bread without
butter. For fun I handed a crust to Isaac Gambles,
which raised a laugh, and the crust was handed from
one to another. In the morning Isaac’s vessel went to
sea, bound for Ardrossan, and when off the point of
Corsell a large steamboat ran into her, and nearly cut
her in two. Isaac was mate, and he and his watch
were on deck at the time. He called the captain and
the other men, and he and his mates caught the steam-
boat’s head-gear and got on board, just in time to see
the captain and other men on the deck in their drawers,
calling for help, when their vessel went down, and they
were seen no more. Such is the life of the sailor—
rejoicing at night, and in danger and death on the
morrow. The sad news soon reached Belfast.
On another occasion, I had promised, if in port, to
address the meeting in the Primitive Chapel on Sunday
night; but being ready for sea, and the wind being
favorable, we left on Saturday evening, hoping to be in
Maryport to attend church with my wife on Sunday.
All went well till we entered the Solway Firth, when
the wind came down on the top of the tide. Standing
across for Maryport, I could not weather it, though I
could have knocked the lantern off the pier. So I hove
round, and standing in again I was a good distance to
leeward. The mate being an old hand, and having
been often in Workington, I gave him charge of the
vessel to take her in there, as it mattered little where
we loaded, for we purchased and sold our own coal;
but in taking the harbor he kept too far to windward,


and put her ashore on some great boulders, one of which
entered her bottom. When the tide left her, all hands
had to work as hard as possible to get the boulder out
of her bottom and a piece of deal fixed over the hole
in time for the next tide. It was well for me that
Captain Gambles and some other friends were in port
at the time, and came to our help. The vessel floated
off all right the next tide, when we loaded and made a
good voyage to Dublin.
The spiritual lesson learned by me from this event
was never again to go against conviction, which I did
in leaving Belfast when the voice of conscience said,
“ Stay over Sabbath and conduct the service.”
Some time after this the vessel was sold, and I was
out of employment. I said to my wife that I would
take a mate’s place if I could not get a master’s. An
old acquaintance of my wife’s father asked me to go as
mate in a ship called “ The Lady Gordon,” and I
consented. The master was engaged for the voyage,
as the owner, who usually acted as master, remained at
home, expecting to be made Harbormaster at Troon.
We went to Quebec. The second mate was
brother-in-law to the owner, and he, in order to
celebrate his birthday, distributed spirits among the
crew, and made nearly all of them drunk.
I reproved him sharply for his conduct, and threatened
to log him, but he begged off. Three glasses of grog
per day was the allowance for each man. The accursed
stuff should all be thrown overboard. In calling all
hands to splice the mainbrace at the capstan head, at
the third supply, the steward was always three sheets in
the wind. I wished to know how this came about, and
found that when drawing off the spirits he took a drink,


when fetching it up the cabin stairs, which were spiral,
he took another drink, and when serving it out he took
the third drink. This accounted for his being always
boosy. In order to prevent this state of things I
took charge of the keys of the storeroom, took a bottle,
put the quantity of grog needed in it, and marked it,
and thus for a time made him a great deal better. But
you may as well attempt to fly as to keep drink from a
man or woman who is intent on getting it. In Quebec,
taking in cargo, my duty was at the porthole to keep
account of the pieces and cuts of timber taken in, and
when thus engaged the steward came asking the key of
the storeroom to get raisins to make the duff; I had to
let him have it, and he took the chance of supplying
himself with a good stock of spirits. On the passage
home I had a worse case to deal with. The captain
not being able to moderate himself asked me as a
favor just to measure him out his daily portion, which I
did. But when nearing Ireland, off the Old Head of
Kinsale, he by some means secured spirits. It was
agreed to take Kingston harbor for a few days to
await the top of the tide to get in to Gairlston, as the
vessel drew a deal of water. It began to blow heavily ;
I had the watch on deck from 8 to 12 p.m. and from
4to 8 a.m. The gale increased very much ; the vessel
was brought under close reefed topsails, foresail, and
foretopmaststaysail. We were approaching the Arklow
and Wicklow banks; I had kept the vessel as near as
possible to these during my watch. At 8 a.m. the
captain came on deck intoxicated, and to the astonish-
ment of all hands ordered the men aloft to shake out
the reefs of the topsails. I was getting my break-
fast, which I very much needed, when a loud voice


cried down the cabin ladder, “ Mr. Berry, come up
quickly, for God’s sake.” I did so, and saw the men
untying the points of the topsails. The lee rail was
many feet under water, and had more sail been made
the vessel would have been put on her beam ends, and
all hands cast into a watery grave. The second mate
and other seamen looked at me and asked what I
would do. Addressing them, I said, “ You see, men,
the state of the captain, that he is unfit to take charge
of the vessel, and so if you are all agreed to obey me,
go aloft and take in the reefs again.” They were
quickly in the rigging and upon the yards. The
captain wanted to know what was the meaning of such
conduct; he was answered that when he became sober
and fit to take charge of the vessel he should have her.
He went below for a while, and then came up crying—
“ What will my poor wife and family do ? ” We
answered, “ What would our poor wives and families
have done if you had drowned us all ? ” I then
ordered the foresail to be clewed, and in doing so it
blew to ribbons out of the bolt ropes although quite a
new sail. Not being able to enter ’Kingston harbor
we lay to over next day, and the day following came to
anchor in Wigton Bay. Every night it blew a gale of
wind we feared that the vessel would part her cables or
drag anchors and go on the rocks. She did drag very
near one night, but we succeeded in getting her safe
into Gairlston.
Now with a thankful heart and longing for the
house of God, I found by enquiry that there was a
service held in the earl’s mansicn-house ; I got another
to accompany me to this chapel in the mansion-house;
on the way I said, “ Will it not be strange if we should


happen to go into the Earl of Galloway’s seat ? ” And
so it came to pass, for we were there before the old
woman who looked after such matters, and as there was
nothing to distinguish the earl’s seat from the rest it
happened to be the one into which we went; but when
the old woman came she told us that it was the earl’s
seat and showed us into another, which set us at ease.
The chaplain, a very old man, with a sonorous voice,
conducted the service in the Episcopal form, and took
for his text Psalm Ixxxix. 15 —“ Blessed is the people
that know r the joyful sound.” Believing myself to be
one of these I felt truly joyful after the past experiences
to be again in the house of God. So far as I could
learn there was no other place of worship in that
neighborhood.
As we leave “ The Lady Gordon ” in Gairlston we
have another case of the evil effects of drink. Alex-
ander McKenzie, having a wufe and family to provide
for, w r as strongly advised not to touch the drink ;he
kept from it for a while,' but others taking it and
pressing him to take it he gave way, and being paid off
he went on the spree, spent all, and returned to his wife
and family penniless. I thank God for his grace to me
that all my wages w r ere taken home to my wife. A little
rest, and then “ The Dove,” a small collier w r as offered
me, and w T as accepted on the understanding that the
owner would not go with me. The owner’s son, quite
a lad and very sick at sea, was cook. After two
voyages the owmer would go with me ; on the way to
Dublin, meeting with a westerly gale, we put in to
Carlington Lough ; as I had never been there the
owmer took charge of bringing the vessel to anchor,
and he put her on a rock, but the rock being smooth


and the tide rising she came off all right. Now at
anchor, the owner must go ashore at Warren's Point;
he got on the spree, remained late, and when brought
on board he walked the deck declaring that he was
“full of hell and damnation.” Words could not
describe his condition, and he made it a hell for all on
board. It must be dreadful to be with such characters
for ever.
This reminds me of a man who came on board
“The Horatio” at Ichabo, and was in the galley
cursing and fighting with the deman drink all night,
and was fearful to look upon in the morning.
Remaining at Warren’s Point for a day I went
ashore and found out the resting place of Joe Ryder,
who fell from aloft and knocked out his brains on the
bits. His wife kept the Bethel in Poolbeg Street,
Dublin. In life he was a truly happy man, and so now
awaits a glorious resurrection.
We got to Dublin, but I could not enjoy the
means of grace there on account of the conduct of the
owner; being always under the influence of drink he
was a constant annoyance. The cargo being dis-
charged and the money collected I was ready for sea,
but was detained by the owner’s absence, and when he
returned and was charged with detaining the vessel
while a fair wind was blowing, the only reply was—
“ There will be fair winds after we are all dead.”
Arriving at Maryport I gave up the charge of the “ Dove,”
and through a Christian captain belonging to Belfast
got charge of the schooner “ Venus.” She was engaged
in the blind coal trade between Belfast and Troon.
She being a good sailer and going without ballast we
crossed the channel six times a week when the weather


was favorable. The cargo was always ready, and two
barges coming alongside before the sails were furled,
and the owner’s men also ready for work there was no
delay in unloading. The owner was a Wesleyan class
leader, but was very fond of money, and was always
pleased when on Saturday night the vessel was off to
sea. When the wind was foul he sent a tug to take
her down, and on Sunday morning rose early and put
his handkerchief out of an upstair window to ascertain
how the wind was blowing. This caused me and my
crew to be working on Sabbath morning, while he
would be asking his class how their souls prospered.
My wife and I attended the same chapel in Frederick
Street, and she often told me that she could not look at
him with his sanctimonious face while he was depriving
me of the means of grace. I, however, got charge of
another vessel, the “ Montcalm,” which enabled me to
enjoy the Sabbath better; and being very successful I
remained under the same employer until the largest
vessel he had, the brig “ John,” was given me in charge.
Now I had opportunities, of which I gladly availed
myself, of taking part in meetings—the chapel prayer
meetings, meetings in the Bethel, and on the quay, with
the chaplain of the Seamen’s Mission, who frequently
visited at my house. Another Wesleyan, having glass
works at Bella-macarrett, and also owning a vessel
named the “ Earl of Durham,” asked me to take
charge of her. This would be more of a home berth ;
for when I took charge of the “ Venus,” I brought my
wife and two daughters to Belfast. So although the
“ Earl of Durham ” was an inferior vessel to the brig
“ John,” I accepted the offer and took charge of her.
Then I had good times ; I attended a class meeting


and sometimes acted as leader. Captain Duncan, to
whom I previously referred, was also a member of this
class. He was a good man, and departed this life in
the sure hope of glory. Thank God ! many who sailed
with the Master, the Captain of salvation, here below
are now with Him above.
On my first voyage in the “ Earl of Durham ” she
nearly foundered in a squall of wind between the Mull
of Galloway and the Isle of Man. The “ Fox ” nearly
went down at the same place, and on each occasion I
asked myself “Am I ready?” and on both gave the
same answer, “Yes, Father, if it be Thy time; and oh,
God bless my dear wife and children.” I ordered the
mate to let go the topsailhalyards, which were on the lee
side, and in doing so the vessel went from under him;
but he, however, with feet up, managed it. The helm
was put hard up, and fortunately she answered it; and,
keeping her away she freed herself of the load of water
on the deck. The only part of the deck that had not
been under water was about twelve feet where I was
standing holding the helm. The mate came to me and
said: “ That’s the only time I ever thought I was
drowned.” “ Oh, that men would praise the Lord for
His goodness, and for His wonderful works to the
children of men.”
Once when crossing the Irish Channel between
Ailsa Craig and the Irish coast in the “ Montcalm,” a
heavy squall w r as gathering from the north-west. I told
the mate to let the topsail run down on the cap, and to
drop the peak of the mainsail. I took the wheel and
kept her dead before the wind. When the squall came
on a brigantine belonging to Ardrossan was coming fast
upon us, and when the squall had passed 1 brought the


vessel up on her course, and looked over the taffrail to
see how the brigantine was getting on ; when, to my
dismay, I could see only the top of her masts. She had
sunk, and all hands had perished. She was loaded
with pig iron bound for Liverpool. The captain, who
was part owner, and his son were on board. The water
was making a clean sweep over our [vessel, and she
sprang a leak, which kept all hands at the pump; but
in a few hours we entered Belfast Lough. Oft hath the
sea encompassed me and again given me back at the
Lord’s command.
And now another line of life was opening up for
me. When loaded with coal from Troon I had to take
shelter in Lamlash Bay, and to remain at anchor there
for six weeks, during which time even the mail steam-
boats had often to come in for shelter beside us ; then
I thought how nice it would be to get on shore on
Sabbath to hold meetings, but to be confined on board
as we were on that day I felt to be a great trial. I
prayed to be delivered from this trial, and what followed
will show that my prayer was fully answered. During
this stay in Lamlash Bay the chaplain of the Bethel in
Belfast had called on my wife and told her that a
seamen’s missionary was wanted in Newcastle-on-Tyne,
and that he was convinced that I was qualified for the
situation. Together they got some testimonials and
sent them to the Committee; they arrived a day too
late, or I would have been appointed. A missionary
was at the same time wanted for the east coast of
Scotland, and the Newcastle Committee forwarded my
testimonials to the Scottish Coast Mission Committee
in Edinburgh, and a letter from the Secretary of the
Scottish Coast Mission was waiting my arrival in


Belfast, requesting to see me and hear me addressing
a meeting. I laughed when my wife told me what had
been done, but at the same time I considered it an
answer to my prayers in Lamiash Bay. I wrote to
Edinburgh, and the Secretary came over to see and
hear me, and it seems was favorably impressed, for a
meeting of the Committee was held in Edinburgh, and
I was chosen for their missionary.
I gave up charge of the vessel and took my wife
and family—which now consisted of two girls and two
boys—to Scotland. The Secretary had secured a
house for us at West Pans, in the centre of the district
in which I was to labor. The district extended from
Fisher Row on the west to Cockenzie on the east,
including Port Seaton and all the houses along the
coast. There were five hundred fishermen, their wives
and families, ninety miners, and about one hundred
other families in the district. A young man had been
at work in the district for six months previously, but he
did not suit. After a week’s preparation I set to work.
But before proceeding further with my narrative I may
mention that I had the pleasure of hearing of the
conversion of John Giles, one of my men before the
mast, and of learning afterwards that he also became a
seamen’s missionary.
Beginning my missionary work, I visited first those
families residing nearest my home. There was a room
near by where meetings had formerly been held; for
the use of this room I applied, and obtaining it
there conducted meetings. One of the first fruits of
these meetings was the conversion of a miner, who had
a number of relatives in the place. This man at his
conversion scarcely knew the alphabet, but having


become a new creature, he set to work in earnest that
he might learn to read God’s Word. So intense was
his earnestness to accomplish this that before changing
his pit clothes he would sit down on a stool with his
Bible before him and plod on till he could read the
most of it. Then he bought the “ Pilgrim’s Progress ”
and other books, with money which he had been
accustomed to spend in a very different way. Some of
his former companions had become Latter Day Saints,
and, strange to say, some of these had been members
of the Free Church, and even deacons in it. The wife
of one of these told me that when she was baptised by
the angel of her new church she saw all her sins go off
in a blue lowe (flame) while she was under the water.
They believe in baptismal regeneration, a plurality of
wives, &c., and profess to work miracles, even to the
casting out of devils. The book of Mormon is their
bible.
While proceeding with my visitation in a Collier
Row, east of Prestonpans, a big strong collier came in
from his work in the pit ; he told me that he was one
of the angels of the church of the Latter Day Saints,
and that he had performed miracles. One miracle he
had performed on his own son, who was so ill that he
could not rise from his bed; he, the father, came in
just as he was in his working clothes, prayed over him,
put his hands upon him and cured him. The angel’s
wife being present, I asked her if their son immediately
got out of bed quite well. She said, “He was a deal
better but not quite well.” After this I had frequent
talks with this angel, but he and a number more of his
co-religionists left for the Salt Lake, and were played
out of the town by a band of music.


I found the fisher people very much addicted to
whiskey drinking. With most of them it was whiskey
when going to sea, whiskey when they returned from
sea, whiskey at all their meetings and partings. Satur-
day’s deal was always finished with whiskey, and a
bottle of whiskey was laid in for Sunday’s spree. I
have seen a poor, thin, ill-clothed woman coming out
of a shop, where spirits were sold over the counter,
with the bottle of whiskey for the spree on Sunday,
when the man who sold it would be engaged in
distributing the bread and wine at the Lord’s table.
One woman had received a sum of money from
America, with which she drank herself to death. I was
present at her death-bed, and the last word she uttered
with her expiring breath was “ Whiskey.” As I was
an abstainer I could freely and consistently advise the
people to do in regard to whiskey and kindred drinks
as I did, and I am happy to say that many of them
ultimately took the advice.
In Fisher Row a gentleman gave us the use of a
large upper flat of a building in which to hold our
meetings. This had been named “ The Bothie,” as at
one time a number of factory girls used it as their
home. I visited the families in that part of the town,
distributed tracts, and invited all to the meetings. A
large number of boys and a few girls, with from twenty
to thirty grown up people, attended the meetings ; but
the conduct of the boys was so bad that the adults
said, “We can get no good from the service.” The
proprietor of the building attended the meetings for
several Sundays, and having a staff in his hand he
sometimes applied it to the unruly, but it was evident
that some change must be made. I suggested to the


Committee that the flat should be divided into two
apartments, and the one fitted up for the adults and
the other for the children, who could be taught by
ladies and gentlemen while I was conducting service
with the adults. This suggestion was adopted, and it
worked well; but a still greater improvement was
effected when the youths were taught in the new
schoolroom erected by the Free Church on the other
side of the street. The Lord gave me an excellent
doorkeeper from among the attendants at that meeting
hall; he was a cooper by trade, and had given himself
to the Lord, and he was most attentive to all things
connected with the hall. An elder in the United
Presbyterian Church helped us greatly by attending the
meetings and leading the singing; there was also a
lady, a Miss Ritchie, who was a most earnest worker
with me in this town, both teaching and visiting. '
On Auld Hansel Monday, that is the first Monday
of the year, old style, a tea meeting was held, the
Committee being responsible for the outlay and income.
The first of these annual tea meetings was a success.
After tea some ministers and other friendsgave addresses,
which were interspersed with singing by the fisher people.
The second annual tea meeting was a failure, because
the herring drove was on at the time. Four hundred
tickets had been printed and distributed, but the report
that herrings were seen induced all the fishermen to go
to sea, for that is their harvest. The income of this
second meeting turned out to be ten pounds short of
meeting the expenditure, which led the Committee to
decline to get up any more tea meetings ; but when the
time came round for our third annual tea meeting I
obtained the consent of the Committee to give the


people the opportunity to get it up for themselves.
Accordingly, I asked all who were anxious for a tea
meeting to remain at the close of the service; they
remained, and I told them that if they wished to have
a tea meeting they must take the responsibility upon
themselves of making the necessary provisions and
defraying expenses. This they agreed to do, and in
doing it they were very successful. The house was
filled ; Miss Ritchie, by request, took charge of the
table for the ministers, and all went off nicely. After
all accounts were paid eighteen shillings remained over,
which they voted to me for a pair of boots, but I pro-
posed that it should rather be given for a pulpit Bible
and a psalm-book for the meeting hall; this was agreed
to, and a few weeks after two fisherwomen returned
from Edinburgh with a large Bible and a psalm-book in
their creel. A joiner who attended the services erected
a platform and a reading desk, which he covered with
cloth, and a painter painted and grained it. The pro-
ceeds of the next tea meeting were, at my suggestion,
devoted to the purchase of a boiler and teapots;
hitherto they had to pay seven shillings and sixpence
for a loan of these articles, but afterwards they
frequently got that amount for the loan of their
own.
Several happy deaths occurred in Fisher Row.
On such occasions the visits of the missionary are
much prized, and the friends who survive generally
express their gratitude, and sometimes in a very practical
manner. One poor woman, whose husband suffered
much before he died, and was frequently visited, offered
me some eggs which her ducks had laid in a corner of
the room in which she lived; I declined to accept


them, but thanked her for her kindness, which clearly
showed her gratitude.
Every alternate Sabbath I had to be at Preston-
pans. On these days the services in the hall at Fisher
Row were conducted in turn by the ministers of the
town. Then I had a service at West Pans in the
afternoon at half-past 2 o’clock, and at Prestonpans in
the evening at 7 o’clock; here the service was held in
the ground flat of the house to vhich I had removed
my family. We had made this change of residence on
account of the house we had at West Pans being very
damp; salt had been stored in it years before, when
the salt was manufactured from the sea. By-and bye
we obtained the use of a larger room for our services—
a room in which school had been kept by the late Mr,
John Whitecross, author of “ Anecdotes Illustrative of
the Old and New Testaments and of the Shorter
Catechism,” who was the father of the wife of the Rev.
James Lyall, of Adelaide, South Australia, and of the
wife of the Rev. Dr, J. G, Paton, of the New Hebrides
Mission. This old schoolroom was thoroughly repaired
and fitted up to accommodate two hundred people; when
the repairs were finished there was an opening service
and a tea meeting held ; the service was conducted by
the Rev. Dr. Alexander, of Edinburgh, who resided at
Pinkie, near Inveresk, and took great interest in the
mission. Some time before this a tea meeting in
connection with our mission had been held in the
malting rooms at the east end of the town, belonging to
Mr. Hislope, when about four hundred sat down to tea.
After the opening of our new meeting place the Free
Church minister of the town conducted the service in
it every alternate Sabbath when I was at Fisher Row.


At Cockenzie, further east on the coast, I con-
ducted a service every Thursday evening, and here a
gracious outpouring of the Holy Ghost was experienced.
My wife’s health failed, and the doctor ordered her
away from the seaside if possible. At that time the
Messrs. Christie, two gentlemen having in their employ
a large number of miners, farm servants, and workers
at a large iron foundry at West Bank, requested our
Mission Committee to allow me to spend one day in
the week among their people, and to conduct a service
in the evening—Thursday being preferred; they on
their part undertaking to pay a part of my salary and
to engage a colporteur visiting that neighborhood to
take my service that night at Cockenzie. This arrange-
ment raised the question of residence and locomotion.
Could I get a house away from the seaside for the
benefit of the health of my wife and family, and how
could I manage to get over my enlarged district ?
Both these questions were satisfactorily answered by
the Messrs. Christie. On account of a fall in the price
of iron they found it necessary to dispense with the
services of their manager at the ironworks ; his house
was placed at my service, and also a horse to ride to my
work. We removed to this house, which occupied an
elevated position three miles inland from the sea.
This change of residence, and the kind attention of
Professor Simpson, by the blessing of God, soon
restored my wife’s health. The clerk at the ironworks
was also dispensed with, and his house was given to
the teacher of the school, with his sister as house-
keeper.
With my enlarged district and new mode of loco-
motion I was kept very busy and worked hard. There


were some excellent people in the district, who felt
greatly interested in my work and showed me much
kindness. Chief among these was Lady Mary Oswald;
by invitation, Mr. Charles Christie and I dined with
her every Wednesday afternoon, and then conducted a
service in the Newbigging Chapel, which was rented
by her ladyship for the purpose. As Mr. Christie and
I returned home from this service in his carriage prayer
was frequently offered up to God for His blessing on
the work. After three years’ residence at West Bank,
and Mrs. Berry’s health being quite restored, we re-
moved to Monkton Hall.
This may be a convenient point from which to
review my past work in this district. While living at
Prestonpans, I often felt very much cast down on
account of not seeing or knowing that my labor had
been blessed to the conversion of any souls. Leaving
home one day very dejected on this account, I visited
the houses in the Kittle, a little to the west of Preston-
pans. On entering one house, I saw an elderly woman
in bed in a recess with her Bible lying open on the bed
beside her. I asked why she had not been at the
meetings lately. She told me that she had been ill
since the meeting when I preached from the words, “If
the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed,”
She then told me that she had travelled with her hus-
band in the army, and that she had attended meetings
conducted by one of the sergeants, who preached so
much about hell and damnation that she became
terribly excited. Another soldier’s wife said to her,
“Don’t go to any more of his meetings, or if you do
you will lose your reason.” She took the advice, shut
up her Bible, and attended meetings no more for many


years, until by my visiting her, and urging her to attend
to the salvation of her soul, she was persuaded to come
to our meetings, of which she said, “ I got good to
my soul by hearing you state so plainly that Christ
came to free us from our sin and danger—dying for us,
rising for us, ascending and interceding for us—l was
led to believe in Him; and now I know lam dying,
and I believe lam freed from my sin; and this Bible,
that has been closed for years, is now open, and is my
daily companion.” She died happily, and this case of
conversion delivered me from despondency. Another
woman, who lived near by, also died happy, and said
during her illness that if she had had Christ to seek
then she could not —her pain was so intense. This
death was a blessed contrast to the one mentioned
some pages back.
About this time I publicly reproved some young
fishermen who had been intoxicated on the previous
Friday at their work. After they left the meeting, and
were standing at the corner, one of them, who was
greatly offended at the reproof, said to the rest that
he would never attend my meeting again. The next
day (Monday) a number of boats went out oyster
fishing, quite near the place. A gale of wind came on
them, and with it a nasty choppy sea, which increased
in violence. Two of the boats were seen to founder,
and others had a narrow escape. Two brothers w'ere
drowned; one of them was the young man who said
he would never enter the meeting again. A brother-in-
law of his was seen for hours hanging to the oars, and
was driven ashore very much exhausted. He had been
hurt internally, spat blood, and ultimately died from the
effects of that storm. All the inhabitants of Preston-


pans and Cockenzie who could leave their houses
turned out to witness that gale and its effects. The
two brothers, and two other men who lost their lives at
the same time, were interred not far from the Mission
Hall.
There was an old soldier, who kept the gate at a
railway crossing about a mile from Prestonpans, whose
wife I had frequently visited during her last illness.
Knowing that he was greatly opposed to the gospel of
Christ, and thinking it a fit opportunity to call on him
after his wife’s death, and speak a word for Jesus, I did
so. He asked me if I thought his wife was happy. I
said that I believed she was, as she trusted in Jesus,
who alone could make people happy in life and in
death, and through eternity; and I besought him to
accept of this loving Saviour for himself. He instantly
ran off across the line and into his box, out of my way.
Some time after this a granddaughter of this man called
on me, and asked me to visit her grandfather, who
wished to see me, for he was very ill. Though a long
way from my home, I went immediately, and found
him in bed very ill. A lady from Edinburgh was with
him, and was very anxious for his spiritual welfare. I
spoke to him about being ready to depart, w r hen, to my
astonishment, he said, “ Who sent for you ? ” I
answered, “ Did you not? ” He said, “ No, go out of
this.” The lady wept. It was evidently the grand-
daughter’s own love for him that had prompted her to
come for me. I said to the lady, “We will pray for
him.” All who were in the room knelt down to prayer,
but when the salvation of his soul was prayed for, he,
with an oath, cried out, “Go out of this, you bad man.”
I left, and twenty minutes after he passed away into


the eternal state. What a contrast this to many death-
beds I have visited !
lam glad to pass away from this harrowing death
scene to scenes of a more cheering character—scenes
indicative of new birth to many souls. First of all, at
West Bank, the schoolmaster and his sister came to me
one night in deep concern, called me out of bed to
speak with them and pray for them; after this the
schoolmaster took a lively interest in the meetings
there, and addressed them in turn with the employers.
A carpenter and others there also decided for the Lord.
At Cockenzie, too, the Holy Ghost wrought most
wonderfully. For years I had held meetings there,
which at times were well attended, at other times very
few came to them. My practice was to call at every
house —going upstairs and downstairs —inviting all to
come to the meeting, yet frequently very few turned
out. We heard how the Lord had been pouring out of
His Spirit upon Armagh and other places in Ireland, and
many of us felt anxious that we should be visited by a
similar manifestation. Then we heard of a blessed
work going on at Eyemouth. At tea in the house of a
friend the question was raised, “ What can be the
hindrance to such a work here ? ” All concluded that
it was the want of faith, which we made the subject of
prayer. We went to the meeting, which was a mixed
one, as the Free Church minister had by mistake
altered his night to mine, and I only took part in
prayer. The meeting was but thinly attended. After-
wards, the news reached me that God had blessed
John Thompson, and had arrested Peter Horn—one of
the most wicked men in the village—who was in deep
distress of soul. Others also were aroused to anxiety.


On Thursday night there was no need of calling round
to invite the people to the meeting; an hour before
the appointed time the old schoolroom was filled with
young and old. I conducted the service for one hour,
and then intimated that all who were anxious for
salvation might remain ; about fifty remained. By this
time Peter Horn had found peace through Christ Jesus,
and he spoke out with full confidence in the power of
the Lord to save such a great sinner as he had been ;
he said that he had been in many fights, but now he
intended to fight the good fight of faith in Christ,
Then after a short address, in which I dwelt chiefly on
the power of the Holy Ghost, all were requested to get
on their knees and silently to ask God for His blessing
on themselves individually ; this was a different posture
from that to which they were accustomed, for they
usually sat at prayer. But now the deep distress of
soul felt, and the heartrending cries uttered by each
one, brought tears of joy to my eyes. We then
endeavored to speak to as many as possible indi-
vidually. One said that she had a hard heart; another,
that she had sinned against the Holy Ghost; others
that they were very great sinners and wanted to be
saved. So all were in need, and the Holy Ghost was
present to supply their needs ; I could not get them to
rise from their knees. At this time a teacher of music,
from Edinburgh, who had come to teach his class,
came in and found his pupils in deep distress. I
said to him, “ Sir, if you are a servant of the Lord
speak to some of these distressed souls; ” hut he
quickly left the room. Then the Free Church pre-
center (leader of psalmody) came in ; as he entered I
said, “ Are you converted?” The young man trembled,


and fell down helpless at my feet, and in agony of soul
cried to God for mercy. I did not know this young
man, and had forgotten the incident until afterwards,
when he reminded me of it himself, and then he was
rejoicing in the full enjoyment of pardon and peace.
The meeting having been thus prolonged, wives and
mothers who were at home became anxious to know
what had become of their husbands and children.
The wind was blowing and the snow falling when some
of them, with aprons and shawls over their heads, came
to the door to enquire for them. About midnight the
meeting broke up, when I promised to meet them on
the following evening at the usual hour. I reached
home about 1 o’clock in the morning, very tired. The
news of this gracious visitation soon spread. Next
evening the ironmasters and their mother drove down
with Mrs. Berry and myself to Cockenzie; there was
no one in the school, but we learned that the meeting
was to be held in the Free Church. We drove to the
church, and met one of its old office-bearers at the
entrance, and I asked him how the meeting was to be
conducted; he angrily replied, “ You’re not captain on
this quarter-deck!” I said, “There is no need of
that, but let us all do our best in helping on the good
work.” The church was filled, and the Rev. Archibald
Lorimer in the pulpit to conduct the service. He
asked me to engage in prayer, which I did, and I got
him to intimate that I would be glad to meet with any
who wished to see me in the old school after the close
of the service in the church. At the close of the
service there was a rush to the school, which was soon
filled. The presence and power of the Lord were felt
there. Some fishermen who had found peace engaged


in prayer—John Thompson, the stepson of Peter
Horn, was the first to engage ; then we had singing
and prayer, and then Peter Horn spoke, which con-
cluded the first hour. Those who were anxious were
invited to remain, and nearly all remained. In going
home through the links on horseback I heard a
simultaneous cry from fisher girls in a sand hole—
“ Lord Jesus have mercy on us ! ” I did not disturb
them but passed on, and their cry continued, while
tears of joy ran down my cheeks. These meetings
continued for three months. A special communion
service was held in the Free Church, when I had the
pleasure of sitting at the Lord’s Table with forty new
converts; one of these being an elder who had refrained
from communion for some time previous under the
conviction that he was not converted. Meetings were
held in a private house during the day to help into
liberty any struggling souls who might desire such help.
One of these was a daughter of the people of the
house ; she said that when the hymn “ Happy Day ”
was sung she could not join in the chorus without
altering it to “ Happy day when Jesus will wash my
sins away;” when she told this her face shone brightly,
for she could now sing it as it was printed. Going
through the village near bed time it was delightful
to hear songs of praise ascending from nearly every
dwelling.
A fisherman named David Johnston, who was a
good singer, and a good customer at the next village
publichouse, was arrested, and in deep concern he
walked up and down the quay crying and praying; the
Lord heard him and gave him peace, and in the
exuberance of joy, which often follows the greatest


sorrow, he told me of the great sorrow from which he
had been delivered. A man who had been captain of
one of Mr. Cadell’s ships, but was now at the oyster
fishing, became so miserable that he could not work,
but yet he went out with the crew. When afterwards
describing his state, and how relief came, he said, “ I
felt so miserable that nothing relieved me, and when
standing in the boat thinking what I should do I
suddenly recollected an incident which once happened
me. It was this : In preparing to go to sea on one
occasion I went into the office for my orders ; the clerk
handed me a letter, but I still stood waiting. The clerk
said, 1 Captain Barber, what are you waiting for ? ’ I
said, ‘My orders.’ He replied, ‘Your orders are in
that letter I gave you.’ The remembrance of this led
me to think that I was now in a similar position ; I was
waiting, not knowing what to do, while all the time I
had my orders from Jesus in the Bible: ‘ Believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved ;’ that’s
my orders. I jumped up, and then for work ; I could
do as much again as any man in the boat. We sorted
the oysters as they were capsized out of the drag;
while selecting the good ones and throwing the others
and stones overboard, I thought of the passage in the
gospels about putting the good into vessels and casting
the bad away. I thanked God, and could not refrain
from singing.” Such was Captain Barber’s experience,
as related by himself. This man had a son, a fine
specimen of a genuine convert, who delighted in the
service of God, taking part m open-air meetings, and
along with others visiting Dalkeith and other places to
teach and preach Jesus Christ. Of a kindred spirit
were John Thompson, David Johnston, C. Smith, and


several others too numerous to name in this brief
notice. Indeed, we had so many willing workers that
we could hold an all-night prayer meeting without
requiring any one to take part a second time. Some
time after, this son of Captain Barber had his son out
with him in the boat; the boy was knocked overboard
by the sheet, the father jumped after him to save him,
but both were drowned together. Thus another ripe
soul was gathered home to the Master’s garner.
A brother of this man, who had been given up as
lost for fifteen years, arrived at Cockenzie and called at
the house where his parents lived when he left home,
but they were not there. On making enquiry he
learned that his mother was dead, and his father
married again, and away at the herring drave. He
found out his father at a distant port, and in making
himself known the poor old man was very much over-
come. The son told his father how his vessel had
been wrecked, and that Captain Cadell and part of the
crew had been saved in some way he believed, but he
and some others had been saved by getting to an
island occupied by blacks, who treated them very
kindly, but kept away from them for a time. After-
wards, however, they lived together, and when they
were taken from the island the natives were very sorry ;
by that time they were just as naked as the natives
themselves. Strange ! this same young man came out
to South Australia, and sailed in one of the river boats
for some time; he was engaged to be married on the
arrival of the boat at the Goolwa, but he fell overboard
and was drowned ; his body was picked up, and buried
on the banks of the Murray.
And now, after this digression, I must return to


resume my narrative at Cockenzie. There was another
in deep distress, who went to a fisher working at his
line and said, “ Well, Bob, how did you get peace ? ”
Bob answered, “Why, just believing that Jesus died for
me, and rose again.” “Is that all ? ” “ Yes, what
else would you expect ? ” He believed, and found
peace. A young man, serving his apprenticeship with
Mr. Bathgate, baker, at Cockenzie, being in great
agony of mind, with tears running down his cheeks,
came to me and said, “ O, Captain Berry, if I do not
get peace to-night I shall go out of my mind.” He
was not long in bondage; Jesus set him free that
night, and he proved himself to be free indeed—a
bright Christian. He is in Edinburgh now, and has
been for some years a married man; he married a
young woman of Cockenzie, who was converted about
the same time, along with her sister, brother, and
mother. He is still a happy Christian, working for the
Lord.
The work was spreading through the district. At
Prestonpans the meetings were well attended. A
brother and sister, both members of the Free Church,
but not yet born again, were now brought to the Lord.
The brother studied for the ministry, and the sister
married an Edinburgh merchant. The converts have
continued steadfast; some of them have good situations
in the old country, and others have made their home
in Australia and elsewhere.
This good work affected many outside the fishing
population. At Tranent, one Saturday night, a miner
was brought to the Lord; he induced a companion to
attend the meeting, but this companion said, “ Mind
you, lam not going to be converted.” But when the


first meeting of an hour was over, and the prayer
meeting commenced, he felt so miserable that he could
not leave; nor did he until he could say, “Jesus
has washed my sins away.” He tried hard to get
his wife to attend, but she would not, and so he said
to her —
“ My old companion, fare thee well,
• I will not go with you to hell;
I mean with Jesus Christ to dwell.
So let me go.”
Mr. Thomas Steel, a student of the United Pres-
byterian Church, who belonged to the district, often
helped in the work ; he was shortly after appointed to
the Indian Mission, and left for that field along with
the Rev. W. Shoolbred, U.D., of Beawr, Rajpootana,
India, but died on the way out. His sister—a lively,
hearty, laughing girl —was converted at our meetings,
after which she said, “ I have got the right laugh now.”
She afterwards became the wife of the Rev. Robert
Balgarnie, of Gravesend, England, who had been a
fellow student and intimate companion of her brother.
A brother of her husband, who was a miller near the
place, also decided for Christ, and took a very active
part in the good work. Most of the converts joined
the churches. God be praised for all he did there, and
for what he is still doing; and may the Holy Spirit
work on, for without Him no good can be effected.
O how I now long to see more of His power in my
work !
The most effective teetotal speeches were given
by the fishermen in the building of new houses* and
new boats. By this, as well as by declarations in the
meetings, they plainly showed the publicans they


intended to be no longer their customers, but to he
their own landlords and owners.
Years passed on, and the Committee at Fisher-
row desired to have my services every Sunday, and
undertook to pay the half of my salary, as the ministers
of the town found that when they conducted the
meetings the fishing population did not turn out so
well. Time passed on, and a missionary was wanted
for Scabster and Thurso, on the north coast of Scot-
land. There the missionary required to use a boat,
and as I was a seaman the Mission Committee thought
proper to ask me to take that part of the field. But
my heavenly Father was opening up a different path
for me in a very remarkable manner.
One afternoon I was taking tea with Mr. Bathgate
and family ; Captain George Johnston, of South Aus-
tralia, was also of the party ; he had come to Scotland
to get a steamboat built for trading on the River
Murray. During tea, Mr. Bathgate asked the captain
how he was getting on with his new boat. He replied,
“Very well; I have secured all the crew but the
captain.” I looked across the table towards him, and
said, “ I’ll take her out.” He was taken by surprise,
and said, “Do you mean it?” I said, “Yes, if my
wife be agreeable.” A little private chat, and a promise
to let him know if Mrs. Berry was agreeable, ended our
first interview. We were now living in Musselburgh.
When I got home I said to my wife, “ Would you like
to go to Australia ? ” She said, “ I would.” I said,
“Do you mean it in your present condition ? ” She
said, “ Yes, God will order all right.” I then told her
the chance that had come in my way. She said,
“ That is remarkable, for I have been thinking and


dreaming that we were going to a new home.” Next
week Captain Johnston was told, and an agreement was
drawn out and duly signed. I was to take my wife and
family out with me, and to receive a purse of sovereigns
on my arrival at Port Adelaide, and an engagement for
twelve months after at a salary of ten pounds per month.
Now, I had to read up, for it was twelve years and
three months since I left the sea; but I had my quad-
rant, epitomy, and master’s certificate, the last-
mentioned article being the most important, as the
others could easily have been replaced.
On the 16th January, 1866, a Bible and a purse of
sovereigns were presented to me at the Musselburgh
Station by a number of my friends, chiefly Fisherrovv
people. The Bible had the following inscription,
“ Presented to Mr. Berry, with twenty sovereigns, from
his friends in Musselburgh, as a parting token of their
esteem and appreciation of his long, devoted, and
successful labors as Coast Missionery. Job xxii. 25.”
A parting tea meeting was held in the Congregational
Chapel, Fisherrow, and another at Cockenzie, which
were largely attended, and a sum of money given, also
a few pounds from the miners. Mr. Christie allowed
me to close the insurance and get its surrender value.
Before leaving this field of a dozen years’ labor,
I cannot but reflect on the time when I entered it a
stranger, knowing no one in the district, and now lam
leaving so many loving brothers and sisters in Christ.
During my time here the Lord has made use of me in
gathering in many of his stray sheep, and in establishing
places of worship among them—one at Fisherrow, seated
for 200 ; one at Prestonpans, seated for 200 ; and one
recently built at Cockenzie, seated for 150, the site of


which was the gift of Mr. Beerclay, brother-in-law to
Captain George Johnston. I also conducted services
for a long time at West Bank and Peingston ; at New-
bigging, in Lady Mary Oswald’s chapel, and in Tranent
Schoolroom. In all these places hundreds heard the
Word, and many of them received it.
On arriving with my family in Glasgow, we were
met at the railway station by Captain Johnston, and the
vessel not being ready to receive us all on board, other
lodgings were secured, for the time, for my wife and
family. I now entered on my new duties, and at first
felt rather strange; but that feeling soon wore off,
The weather was very stormy for ten days before we
were towed down to the Garelock to get our compasses
adjusted. While there my wife gave birth to a fine
son. There, too, I heard of the loss of the ship
“ London,” and also of a screw steamer, loaded with
railway iron, bound for Egypt, which went down, and
all hands perished ; her captain had just been married.
The knowledge of these things I, of course, kept from
my wife.
On the Ist February, 1866, when we were towed
away from Glasgow Quay, we parted with Mrs. Berry’s
father and a number of other friends, to see them no
more in this woild. After our compasses were adjusted,
we were towed to the Rue, where we encountered severe
gales, the water at times being literally scooped up. I
took all necessary precautions to hold on if she had
dragged, backing the kedges and attaching them to the
best hawser. They were only as a stand-by. A yacht
laid up for the winter in bare poles, was driven on
shore just from our side. We had on board the mate,
his wife, and three children, three A.B._ seamen, four


ordinary seamen —one of these acted as steward,
another as cook, and another as engineer-—and my
wife and family of nine children. We were towed as
far as Lamlash. On leaving we saw a large iron vessel
lying wrecked on the west point. We crossed to Bel-
fast Lough, where I went ashore with a letter, my wife
accompanying me. We visited Captain Boyd’s wife,
who was the widow of Captain Duncan, my old friend.
She was surprised, but was glad to see her old friends.
On going off again the weather was very boisterous,
and I was glad when we got safe on board.
On the 17th of February, 1866, we set out
for South Australia with the wind about N.N.W.
Passing down between the mainland and Copland
Island, we saw, about ten miles to the west of us,
another large vessel ashore. All the times that I
had formerly passed and repassed here I had never
seen such vessels ashore. “ The Murray,” which was
the name of our vessel, was a steamboat 105 feet long,
12 feet broad, and 10 feet deep, rigged as a three-
masted schooner, with patent reefing topsail. The
mizenmast only was intended to be used when she was
under steam. The engines and all things belonging
to them were stowed away in the hold. She drew only
six feet of water and had a false keel sixteen inches
deep, which extended from the sternpost to the heel
of the foremast where it tapered off to a point. She
was built very flat to enable her to carry cargo through
the shallow water at the mouth of the River Murray, in
trading between Port Adelaide and Wentworth, where
her cargo would be transhipped into smaller boats for
the upper rivers. Our cargo consisted of another
steamboat in pieces, with her boiler and other


belongings, a quantity of galvanized iron, a quantity of
flooring boards, a number of cases of bottled beer, and
some furniture belonging to Captain Johnston and my-
self. Our vessel was very uneasy at sea; every move-
ment of the sea moved her, and at times it was very
difficult to keep one’s feet on deck. She had on her
sides the cup-shaped supports for the axle and wheels,
which made a terrible noise when going through the
water, and at every roll lifted a great quantity of water.
These ought not to have been on, as they could have
been easily fixed at Port Adelaide along with the other
fittings for steaming on the river. Now with this craft
as described, we take our departure on the 18th of
February from Tusker. The “Great Britain,” with
Captain Johnston on board, passed us. We crossed
the line in twenty-eight days. In 8° south latitude, we
buried our steward. When he left Cockenzie he
seemed the strongest man we had, but when lying at
the Rue his hair was cut and he got a chill from which
he never recovered. This was the first death that
occurred in a vessel of which I had charge, and to bury
him at sea I felt to be a very solemn duty. We sighted
Tristan d’Acunha to ascertain the state of our chro-
nometer, and found that it was twenty-six miles fast/
This we found to be correct, and we also found our
longitude by an eclipse of the moon. The day after
sighting these islands, when there was a strong breeze
and a heavy sea running from the south-west, the fore-
swifter came down. This was a warning in good time.
I ordered the best hawser to be passed between the
doublings of the mast, set up on both ends with luff
upon luff. The next day, the wind being still high and
the sea heavy, the whole forerigging came down. Th&


sea struck the vessel and knocked me down against
the cabin-ladder and injured my hip, so that I had to
go to bed. I ordered the mate to keep the vessel dead
before the wind and under low canvas, and to secure
the mast by getting the rigging put right. This being
done we entered the calm belt of Capricorn where we
had fourteen days without wind. Our vessel, however,
made good progress when the wind was favorable. She
was laid-to for five days when a strong gale from the
south-east prevailed. We sighted the “ Alchymist ” in
the meridian of the Cape, and arrived at Port Adelaide
fourteen days before her. We had been 117 days out
when on a Sunday morning we arrived at Victor
Harbor. On the Friday before I thought I saw
Kangaroo Island, and casting the lead, found it to
correspond. On Saturday, believing that we were in
close proximity to rocks laid down on the south of the
island, and intending to go through Backstairs Passage,
I remained on the forecastle deck through all that
bitterly cold night, and found my reckoning to be quite
correct. I had given orders to get the cables bent and
the anchors ready, as we would see Porpoise Head by
three o’clock in the morning, which we did. We stood
out to sea for an hour, and then stood in again. It was
a beautiful Sabbath morning. The pilot came off and
hailed to know if we had a pilot. I asked “ Where
could I have got one?” He replied : “Why, from the
way you were working in, I thought you had one.” I
replied: “It is not the first time we have worked a
vessel in places like this.” He came on board, shook
hands, and said that he had sent word to Captain John-
ston that his steamboat was in the bay. About two
hours after this Captain Johnston and Captain Barber


came off. They were delighted to see us, but were very
sorry to hear of the death of poor Donaldson, the
steward, who was related to Captain Johnston. We
were taken into Victor Harbor. While there I was ill
in bed, having caught cold the night before landing.
Captain Johnston congratulated us on the craft looking
so well and clean. We had an open vessel for a few
days, when a number of friends visited us, and then we
left for Port Adelaide. My duties as captain now
ended. In the river the pilot took charge, but he was
taken ill, and but for my attention to him, he would
possibly have died. Arriving at Port Adelaide, I took
a house for my family at a rental of twelve shillings per
week. It was made of wood, and the roof was in such
a condition that I could have taken a lunar observation
through it. When my wife and family took possession,
they looked about for the water tap, but not finding
such a thing they enquired of the woman next door,
who told them the water had to be bought by
measure. A little was lent them, and some was
ordered, and when it was delivered, my wife asked
the price, and on being told she exclaimed, “ What!
fifteenpence for that drop of dirty water ? ” Some
time after this I was nearly dead from drinking
it. The next difficulty they met with was how to light
the wood fire in the open fireplace ; two or three sticks
were placed over each other, and half a candle was
burned in trying to light them. These difficulties,
however, after a few tears had been shed over them,
were overcome. Now I had to superintend the men,
and help in discharging cargo for the Port. On
Sabbath I took my wife and family to the Wesleyan
Church. The door-keeper, a clean-shaved young


man, neatly dressed in a suit of black, showed us
into a seat, and ever after took a deep interest in the
family. About two years afterwards he married my
eldest daughter. She, along with Captain Johnston and
I, attended a class meeting; but never having been at
such a meeting before, she remarked, “ What a lot of
brothers and sisters the class leader must have,” which
created a laugh, when Mr. Ottaway, the class leader,
heard it.
Our vessel was taken up on Fletcher’s Slip, where
the wheels, paddle-boxes, deck-house, &c., were put in
order, and the false keel taken off. In due time she
was launched, and went down the river, and with some
slight alterations she went well. We steamed round to
Victor Harbor and discharged cargo for Goolwa.
We spent a Sabbath there, and finding there was no
evening service in the place, I asked and obtained the
use of the Wesleyan Chapel. James Barklay, brother-
in-law to Captain Johnston, and I called round the
houses and intimated the service. At half-past six the
chapel was nearly full, and I conducted the service.
This was my first service in the colony, but my full
intention was to hold service every Sabbath if possible.
The vessel steamed round again to Port Adelaide,
where she was sold to a Melbourne firm, to ply be-
tween Melbourne and the Gippsland lakes. The cause
of the sale was that Captain Johnston had nothing for
her to do. The long drought having rendered the
rivers unnavigable, the other boats were stuck up for
want of water to carry them. The Captain made two
thousand pounds by this sale ; he then asked me to go
back to Scotland and get another boat built. I tapped
him on the head and said ; “No thank you, I have had


quite enough sailing in such craft.” I had my last look
at my ark as she left the Semaphore and steamed out
of sight. My twelve months’ engagement now being
entered on, I went round to Goolwa, and lodged
with Mrs. Ford for a few weeks, and then went up the
Murray as mate with Captain Thomas Johnston, in the
steamer “ Albury.” On the Sabbath morning we made
the boat fast to a tree, and had worship on her in the
evening. When formerly I sailed the seas I was some-
times asked by landsmen what we did with our ship at
night. I used to say in a joke we made it fast to a tree ;
but here on the Murray that was no joke, but a reality.
Here we had hard work at the wheel and in discharging
cargo at stations. When on the Darling or Murrum-
bidgee we go ashore at dark, light fires, cut down wood
and carry it on board, and after the bunkers are filled,
we get about four hours’ sleep, then steam away again.
After our first trip Captain George Johnston took
charge, and his partner, Mr. Murphy, was engineer.
These owners, though agreeing in worldly matters,
differed widely in religion, the one being a Wesleyan
and the other a Roman Catholic. On one occasion
when my wife and child, who had come round from
Port Adelaide, were with me, Captain Johnston remained
at home, and put another captain in his place, a
Sabbath-breaker like our engineer. The adage—
“ Like draws to like,” proved true in this case ; for,
instead of stopping on the Sabbath as usual, they
steamed away. I went into my room before the paddle-
box on the port side, and washed and dressed for
service. The men were surprised to see me dressed
for worship while those in charge were still steaming
away. They kept going on until their consciences


brought them up, and they stopped about one o’clock
p.m. At the dinner table I was chaffed about my
Sabbath-keeping; this was frequently made a matter
of jeering. On one occasion a traveller was dining
with us when Sabbath-working became the subject of
conversation, and he declared that he had not kept a
Sabbath for many years. Well, years after this I found
a woman and family in great distress in the East End
of Adelaide, and rendered them some assistance ; this
was the family of the boasting Sabbath-breaker ! Our
engineer and part owner died of heart disease, and his
wealth proved a curse to his sisters, who took to
drinking, which I believe hastened their deaths. Captain
Johnston is also dead, having left a widow and family
to mourn their great loss From this digression I must
now return to my narrative. I had spent ten months
up these Australian rivers, and during that time had
conducted service every Sabbath evening on board, or
on shore among the station hands and shearers. At
Wentworth we found the minister of the place, the Rev.
Ross, of the Presbyterian Church, New South Wales,
ill, and unable to conduct service, so that I got the use
of the court-house for holding service, where there was a
good congregation. This privilege I had only for one
Sabbath, as Mr. Ross got better and took the Sabbath
service himself. We, however, obtained the use of the
schoolroom for holding service on Sabbath afternoon
and Wednesday evening, which we kept up during the
time of our sojourn there ; these services were fairly
well attended. The butcher there took a lively interest
in them, which he showed in a practical way—by
opening the door, lighting the room, and defraying all
the expenses. One regular attendant at these meetings
was afterwards drowned uo the river.


Now the rivers above Wentworth were rising, and
we steamed up the Darling, as the water permitted us,
passing many valleys of dry bones. The poor cattle
had come down to the river to drink, but being so weak
from want of food, they had not been able to ascend
the bank again, and hence the multitude of dry bones.
I felt the physical labor so heavy that I required a great
deal of rest, so that nearly the whole Sabbath was used
for that purpose. Sometimes the morning service was
conducted by Captain Johnston, and I always took the
evening service. I was now tired of the river trade
and resolved to leave it. At this time Mrs. Whitecross,
whom I have previously mentioned as an old
acquaintance, was living in Adelaide, and she had told
her son-in-law, the Rev. James Lyall, and some others
about my mission work in Scotland, which led to my
engagement as Missionary for the City of Adelaide.
I commenced this mission on the Ist August, 1867,
more than a year and a half after leaving the Scottish
Coast Mission. Always looking to the Lord for
guidance and direction in the work, and for His
blessing upon it, I began to call upon nearly all the
families in the city, in order to form their acquaintance,
and to find out the most suitable centre for missionary
operations. Ackland Street was fixed upon, and Mr.
Rogers cheerfully gave us the use of his front room for
our meetings. All the neighbors were invited to these
meetings, and a number attended them. The first
fruits of our work here appeared in one of the families
attending the meetings. The mother died, trusting in
the Saviour ; a daughter became a member of Flinders
Street Presbyterian Church, and a nephew brought up
and educated by her has recently joined the Salvation


Army. Mr. G. B. Sketheway had conducted a prayer
meeting in a lane close by our meeting-place for some
time, but had discontinued it prior to the commence-
ment of my mission. Though I attended the Wesleyan
Church during the very short time I was in Port
Adelaide, yet, as I had been an elder in the United
Presbyterian Church in Scotland, I joined the Flinders
Street Presbyterian Church, of which the Rev. James
Lyall was, and still is the pastor. Under his ministry
I have experienced much spiritual benefit, and in
himself I have found a true friend.
The first tea meeting in connection with the
Mission was held in the Ebenezer Chapel, which
was largely attended. The Chairman, Mr. Tarlton—
a wealthy gentleman—made a very telling speech,
in which he promised to help any poor person the
missionary would recommend. Soon after this I
met with a couple who were living together, but
unmarried. After I had visited them several times,
they told me this, and expressed a desire to get married.
On this being made known to the Rev. J. Lyall, he
married them free of charge. I then wished to help
them into a way of earning their daily bread. The
occupation which seemed most suitable, and likely
also to be useful, was that of hawking vegetables. For
this a little cart was required. In order to secure it I
asked Mr. T. for a little help ; but he had so many calls
in connection with his own Church that he could not
help us. This was my first and last application to him
for help. These people lived in Gouger Street, and in
their house a second meeting was started, and was at
times well attended. The man being aged, died, and
his widow went into the country. This meeting was


then held in Mr. Slater’s house, and one of those who
attended afterwards became my daughter-in-law. This
son died, when stationmaster at Eudunda, leaving a
widow and one child, a daughter, who are still living.
The daughter has grown a fine girl, and the mother has
married again and has four other children. Two others
who attended the meetings in Mr. Slater’s joined the
Churches. I was asked to become a member of the
Adelaide Benevolent and Strangers Friends’ Society,
which I did, and took a lively interest in its working.
I observed that a large proportion of its funds was used
in paying rent for poor people, to prevent them from
being turned out of their houses. Having noticed a
row of nine empty houses off East Terrace, in a very
dilapidated condition, I made enquiries about them.
They belonged to Mr. Peacock, and his agent promised
to let me have the nine for the first three months for
putting them in repair, and thereafter for two shillings
and sixpence each per week. I mentioned this to
Messrs. Giles & Smith, who both instantly promised
me two shillings and sixpence each, weekly, towards the
undertaking; and Mr. Gore, their clerk, also promised
two shillings and sixpence weekly. I mentioned this
at a meeting of the Adelaide Benevolent and Strangers
Friends’ Society, and they agreed to give help to the
amount of seven shillings and sixpence weekly. This
enabled me to take the houses on the terms at which
they were offered. I got them repaired, and occupied
by widows and other poor people. I only drew the
seven shillings and sixpence weekly for one quarter,
from the Society, as the rents paid by the poor people,
and half-crowns promised by the other friends paid all
further expenses. Thus nine families were provided


with homes at two shillings and sixpence each, per
week ; and on occasions when even this small rent
could not be raised, the deficiency was met by the
other friends’ money. This row of houses proving a
success, I looked out another row of six houses in the
south-west of the City, for which similar arrangements
were made; the late Mr. David Fowler having under-
taken to give five shillings weekly to help the rents.
This furnished other six families with cheap homes. As
years passed I witnessed the indentures of three boys
from these homes, who have served their apprenticeships,
and two of them are married, and others have done
well. About the time these were settled I observed
another row of six houses near the centre of the
City; the half of them were empty and the win-
dows broken. I called upon the owner, who was
a druggist in Hindley Street, and asked him what he
would let the row at weekly. He asked rather much,
but said that as he was tired of the houses, he would
sell the lot for I asked Mr. David Murray if
he would secure them, but he declined to do so. I
then got Mr. William Treleaven to secure them, and
Mr. John Gordon, acting for the firm of D. &W.
Murray, promised five shillings weekly to help to pay
rent for the poor of the city. Mr. Treleaven got the
houses all repaired and allowed me to let them at a low
rent. Thus twenty-one families of the deserving poor
were by this scheme provided with more comfortable
homes at half the rent they had formerly paid, and in
times of distress even that was not exacted from them.
I must now leave this social scheme in order to bring
up the account of the other departments of my mission
Work. As the Ebenezer Chapel could not be secured


for our services, Mr. Gore, a member of the Mission
Committee, proposed to rent a place then empty in the
west of the city. Mr. T. Magarey, the lessee, agreed
to give the use of it free during the term of his lease.
This being arranged, the committee furnished the place
with forms, chairs, &c. The harmonium was purchased
by friends who took part in conducting the singing.
Messrs. G. and C. Stace, Pratt, and my son, A. R,
Berry, played and led the singing in turn.
About two years before this, Mrs. Whitecross had
opened a Sabbath School in a room built by Dr. Mayo
for the mothers’ meetings conducted by Mrs. Boucaut.
I had been assisting Mrs. Whitecross with this school,
and with her consent it was removed to a store now
fitted up and used as a mission hall, at the corner of
the arcade in Currie Street. Miss Balfour, now Mrs.
G. B. Sketheway, Mrs. Barbour, Mrs. Mitchell, Mrs.
Watson, Miss Watson, Messrs. T. W. Fleming, W. Tay-
lor, J. Marshall, T. Gordon, and a few others took
part in this school. My daughters and sons attended
it. An annual tea had been given to the children,
about 60 in number, and this was to be continued,
but as an adult meeting was held in the same place on
the Sabbath evenings, it was thought advisable to in-
clude the adults also in the annual treat, and so it took
the form of a regular tea and evening meeting. The
Rev. J. Lyall arranged for the speakers, and I obtained
from friends the funds necessary to defray the expenses
of the treat. There was a large attendance of adults
and children, who enjoyed their free treat.
The time of Mr. Magarey’s lease expired, after
which we were required to pay £> l per week as rent for
our hall. About a year after this new arrangement, the


old theatre was offered to the mission for the sum of
£2,000. A sub-committee, of which Mr. A. Adamson
was convener, was appointed to examine the property.
They reported it to be a tumble-down affair; I, how-
ever, held a different opinion, believing it to be the
most substantial building in the city. The iron on its
roof was two or three times thicker than the iron now in
general use, but the men who put it on did not know
how to do it, as they put the screws in the hollows in-
stead of on the heights. After the report of the depu-
tation (which opposed the purchase) was adopted, I
proposed to take the responsibility of leasing the place
if they would allow me £4O per annum for the theatre
and dancing saloon, for holding Sabbath school, Sab-
bath and other evening services, mothers’ meetings,*
&c., connected with the mission. The com-
mittee agreed to this, and I took a lease of
the whole property for five years, at an annual rent
of
Besides the theatre and dancing saloon, there were a
good number of rooms of various sizes in the main
building, and three small houses on the east side;
which, after being repaired, accommodated nine poor
families, and also my own family, which occupied the
manager’s house on the west side. The large place at
the back of the screens I let to Messrs. Brown & Wood
for a carpenter’s shop, and a large room in the back
yard to another carpenter. By this addition of nine
families to our cheap-rent scheme, thirty families were
now enjoying that blessing. Mrs. James Steele collected
the rents at East Terrace for a time, and after her Mrs.
* The mothers’ meetings were conducted by Mesdaraes Searle, Turner,
Gumming, Whiting, and others.


James Brown. But it was one of those duties which
ultimately fell entirely upon myself. The premises
were also utilised for holding a day school for poor
children. The attendance numbered about forty. It
was kept by a widow, and was partly supported by
funds which I collected for that purpose. It was
opened every day with prayer and praise. The teacher
had a piano, and could play and sing well; she also
taught music. One day, just after we had taken
possession of the theatre, Mr. Hussey called, and
handed me from George Fife Angas, Esq., to
help pay for alterations on the premises, fur the use of
the poor. Shortly after this the same donor handed
me jC 2O for aid to discharged prisoners, as by this
time I had undertaken the additional duty of religious
instructor at the Yatala Labor Prison, where I visited
one day in the week, and conducted worship at half-
past ten o’clock every Sabbath morning. In agreeing
to this arrangement the Mission Committee reduced
my salary from to .£l7O. The Government
allowed me £ 1 per visit. But owing to the cost of
keeping horse and buggy, and other extras, my financial
position was not much improved. Nevertheless, it was
a good chance for preaching the unsearchable riches of
Christ to the poor prisoners ; and, as many of their
wives and families resided in the City, these were visited
and helped.
Other houses were given me for a time for
dwellings for the poor. Three of them stood where
Messrs. J. G. Ramsay & Co.’s store now stands. Five
others, known as Bodington’s Row, in Light Square—of
bad fame—where fallen women lived, were visited
every Thursday by me, and a band of ladies, viz,, Mrs.


D. Murray, Mrs. Whiting, Mrs. Hall, Mrs. Grenfell,
dear old Mrs. Whitecross, and others, until a female
missionary was appointed. Twice the bad girls in this
row threw whiting at me. Once, when in one of the
houses with Mrs. Murray, it missed and went on the
mantel-piece, but the second time they were more
successful. Mrs. Whiting and I were talking to one of
them in the corner of the Square, near the row, when
another came up behind, and threw a parcel of whiting
over me, and then ran off, leaving me well whitened.
One who lived in the next house saw the trick, and
came out, brush in hand, and cleared off part of it. I
then went into the house and was made quite clean
again. This one that cleaned me went by the name of
Sydney Bess. She told me her mother was an old
Methodist, then in Sydney, but did not know of her
wicked manner of life. She said that she occasionally
sent money to her mother, telling her in her letters that
she was at service, At first she said that she liked her
mode of life ; but after frequent visitation she seemed
to change, and left, I was told, to go home to her
mother. Another of this class, who kept a two
storey house at the south corner of Rosina Street
and Currie Street, paying per week for the
furniture, was led, by the advice of Mrs. Murray,
myself, and others, to give it up ; turned to the Lord,
got married, lived at Albcrton, and joined the Primitive
Methodist Church. To encourage her in the way of
well doing, Mrs. Murray gave the wedding dress. One
of these unfortunates, when under the influence of
drink, was cooking, when her dress caught fire. She ran
out and stood on the very place where the whiting was
thrown upon me. She was fearfully burnt, was taken to


the Hospital, and placed in the Magdalene Ward. I
immediately visited her there. Her hands were bound
up, the hair was all burned off her head, and the skin
off her face. As soon as she heard me, she said : “Is
that you, Mr. Berry?” I answered “Yes.” She said:
“ Put the hair out of my eyes.” What she thought to
be her hair, was matter from the forehead running into
the eyes. After telling her of the love of Jesus for poor
sinners, and praying with her, I left. She died soon
after. I have known of others of this, class dying
miserably in that ward; one of them even before she was
out of her teens, having been led astray by a bad
mother. When a child, a pretty, flaxen-haired girl, she
attended the Mission Sabbath School. Children that
have bad parents, especially bad mothers, are greatly to
be pitied. I have known and still do know of many
such children in the city.
The five years’ lease of the Old Theatre ending,
another place of meeting was required. At that time
Mr. Hussey called and told me that he was leaving the
house which he occupied at Bowden-on-thc-Hill, and
that if I liked he would persuade G. F. Angas, Esq.,
to let me have it to accommodate two poor families.
My wife being present, said : “ Would it not do for our
family ? ” Mr. Hussey said : “ That will be better
still, and Mr. Angas will let you have it free, to take
care of it until his death, if you will take it on these
terms.” This agreeement was made. After returning
from Melbourne, which I visited with Mrs. Berry, in
company with the Rev. James and Mrs. Lyall, we left
the Old Theatre, and took possession of Mr. Angas’s
house at Bowden-on-the-Hill.
The purchase price of the Old Theatre was now
raised to £3,000. Mr- D. Murray and I spent part of


a day looking for another place of meeting. The old
Albion Hotel and Mr. Rogers’ store were the only
available places, but neither of them was satisfactory.
Then a messenger from Mr. John Darling, Sen.,
called, and said-that Mr. Darling had heard that the
Mission was in want of a meeting place, and that if the
Committee would procure a site and build a hall in the
west of the city, he would put on the foundation
stone when it was laid. I told this to the Secretary;
and at a meeting of Committee it was agreed to collect
funds for the purchase of a site. The site selected
was in the south-west corner of Light Square. Mr.
Matthew Goode collected over which more than
covered the cost of the ground. The building con-
sequently was soon commenced. Mrs. Darling laid the
memorial stone, and Chief Justice S. J. Way, then the
acting Governor of the Province, gave the address.
For this occasion I had borrowed the flags of a ship
owned by Captain Dixon, then in the Port, and had
them extended from one end of the ground to the
other. In due time a large hall, capable of holding
hundreds of people, was erected, to the great delight
of the Committee and myself. The whole cost was
about ,£1,360; thanks to Mr. Darling and all the others
who helped in this noble work. A better monument to
the memory of any one could not be desired, than a
soul-saving hall, erected in a place where Satan had a
host of emissaries. Towards the building the land-
lord, or more correctly, the keeper of the Shamrock
Hotel, gave me £l, and a chimney sweep gave £l.
A Roman Catholic congratulated me upon the good I
had done in that part of the city, and said the land-
owners there should pay my salary, as he was sure their


property was greatly increased in value through my
labors. My mind was now very much exercised
about the widows and indigent poor living on the
Old Theatre property. As the Adelaide Benevolent
Strangers Friends’ Society had lent at seven per
cent, interest, I proposed that it should be invested in
houses for the poor, which would be the property of the
Society, and might be the beginning of a scheme for
erecting or purchasing houses for widows and families
of the well deserving poor. The Chairman objected,
and the matter dropped for a time. Shortly after this,
the Chairman being away on a visit to England, and Mr.
Hussey and some other members of the A.B.S.F. Society
being favorable to the purchase of the seven houses at
the rear of the new Mission Hall, I made enquiries
about them, and found that they could be purchased
for ,£1,120; ,£4OO to be paid down, and ,£750 to
remain at seven per cent., which could be paid by
instalments of at a time. Mr. C. W. Priest kindly
accompanied me to see the proprietor, whom we found
in bad humor, on account of having been disappointed
by a Roman Catholic, who had promised to meet him
and purchase the property. He struck the table, and
declared that he would let me have the property for
£2O less, if 1 would fix there and then. We took him
at his word, and Mt. Priest drew up the agreement and
deposited £SO upon it, to be settled the following day,
which was done, and the remainder of the £4OO,
namely £350, paid to the proprietor. This enabled me
to give homes to some of my old tenants from the Old
Theatre. One of these was Mr. A. Wright and family,
Mrs. Wright being hall-keeper. 1 collected about £IOO
yearly for the property until it was cleared, and now it


belongs to the Adelaide Benevolent Strangers Friends’
Society, and is let at a low rent to those for whom it
was intended. This is one of the best ways of helping
these people, for the usual rate of rents about the city
is a heavy drag upon the poor.
Another male missionary was engaged, and the
city divided between us for visitation and oversight.
One result of this new arrangement was that the first
row of houses taken for the poor, known as Peacock’s
Buildings, being in the district assigned to the other
missionary, were thrown up. A female missionary was
also engaged. There were several changes both of
male and female missionaries employed to help on the
good work. These alterations had the effect of
considerably increasing the expenditure of the mission,
without increasing its income, so that the Committee
had to face a deficit, and instead of trying to increase
the income, they resolved to retrench, by discharging
both male missionaries, and retaining only a female
missionary, I was greatly surprised to learn that my
services were to be dispensed with, and that I was to
be separated from a mission which I had commenced,
and which I had carried on successfully for twenty
years, and which I was still as able and willing
to carry on as ever. Some of the older members
of the Committee, who had known me and my work
longest, were strongly opposed to this policy, but they
were outvoted. Such is and has been the way of the
world. “ There arose up a new king over Egypt which
knew not Joseph.” When the Treasurer told me that
it was the state of the funds that led to my dismissal,
I told him'that I could have soon raised the necessary
funds, lie said that he was only one of forty-two. I


said, “ There are twice forty-two outside the Committee
that will support me in the work. The adversary has
many strategems, hut he often outwits himself; and he
did so in this case.
The Rev. James Lyall had been a chief
mover in starting the mission, and had till lately been
a warm supporter of it; but, having been dissatisfied
with some recent actions of the Committee, had
resigned his connection with it and along with some other
good men, formed a new society, called “ The East
End City Mission.” This new mission was started for
the purpose of retaining my services in the City.
During the first week of the existence of this new
mission, I obtained promises of nearly all the funds
necessary to carry it on.
I shall now give a brief sketch of my seven years’
labor in The East End City Mission. For my office
we rented a house in East Place —one of the same row
of houses which we had rented so long, for the poor, in
connection with the old mission. We placed a board
at the end, requesting that letters and parcels for the
mission or the missionary be left at Mrs. Adey’s, at the
corner. Thus I commenced the new mission in the
same part of the city where, twenty years before, I had
commenced the first mission. A number of children
were taught in this office on Sabbath afternoons. In
this new mission I am backed up by a noble Committee,
for which see the annual reports. Fourteen months
after this beginning, the Committee secured the old
Ebenezer Chapel for a mission hall, at a rental of
per annum. The old forms belonging to Zion Chapel
were bought, and also a harmonium from Messrs. D.
and J. Fowler. A corner of the chapel was partitioned


off for an office, where I can be found on three fore-
noons in the week by any persons wishing to see me,
and many do call. How wonderful are God’s ways of
leading us ! How bright does He make the lining of
the darkest clouds if our eyes are but open to see it. •
I may here give an outline of my regular week’s
work : —On Sabbath I preach at the Stockade at 10.30
a.m., superintend the Sabbath School in the Mission
Hall at 2.45 p.m., and conduct service there at 7 p.m.
On Monday in the forenoon, I visit the poor, the sick,
and the dying in the south-east portion of the city. In
the afternoon I visit the gaol, speaking to the prisoners
and reading the Scriptures and praying in each ward,
and with the sick in the two hospitals there ; in the
evening I select my text and hymns for the next Sab-
bath morning. On Tuesday I attend at the Hall at
10.30 a.m., to meet with any person who may wish to
see me, and then I visit up to 4.30 p.m. On Wednes-
day, in the morning, I visit the Stockade, see any of
the prisoners who are sick or in for the doctor, dis-
tribute tracts among the matmakers, shoemakers,
tailors, cooks, &c., and in the evening attend the
prayer-meeting at Flinders Street Presbyterian Church,
of which lam an elder. On Thursday I visit the
poor, the sick, and the dying in the north-east part of
the city in the forenoon, and in the afternoon 1 visit
the Destitute Asylum, where about three hundred old
people are kept, and where many deaths occur during
the year. On Friday I spend about six hours in visit-
ing families in the south-east and north-east of the city
alternately, and on Saturday I prepare for the work of
the Sabbath.
Whillas & (Jimistuii, Printers, Adelaide.




