

SEX IN LIFE
YOUNG MEN.
Published by
RACIAL HYGIENE ASSOCIATION
OF N.S.W
14 Martin Place, Sydney, N.S.W.




An Open Letter
to Young Men
BY
DOUGLAS WHITE
Published by
RACIAL HYGIENE ASSOCIATION
OF N.S.W.
14 Martin Place, Sydney, N.S.W,


An Open Letter to
Young Men
Dear < - -
I want to write a letter to yon about a sub'
feet which is often a matter of laugher a,u..
jest, but which ought to be a subject ot very
serious thought to every lad who is growing
or has grown into manhood. The subject is that
of sex —its meaning and its dangers.
Too often boys—yes, and girls, too—are
thrown out into the rough-andttumble of Hie
without any guidance in this matter, and with'
out any information except that which tney
chance to pick up in the gutter of dirty com
vernation, from other boys more ignorant than
themselves. They need help and guidance, and
it ought to be forthcoming. Hence this letter.
You have already become aware to some
extent of the possession of sexual powers and
.passions; they have grown to maturity within


your body since you ceased to be a. child: and
now you have become, so for as bodily powers
<tre concerned, capable of becoming a, patent to
other lives.
You are, in short, on the threshold of your
manhood; and the girl whom you will in the
tutors marry- you may not have met her yet
probably on the threshold of womanhood
Both, tor you and for her this means a time
01 cnsis and stress, and for yon, at anv rate
a period of danger. The right guidance of
your sexdnstinct is of ultimate importance for
Tour future health and happiness. Yon rightly
Hook forward to love and marriage as a goal
or happiness; and that this hope should not
be disappointed is not only your own in teres*
but that of the State. The State, therefore
does, and must do, all that it can to protect
marriage, not only after the union has taken
place, but beforehand also. This cannot he
done without educating young men and women
as to the. significance of marriage. Marriage
means the formation of a home for two people


wh o lav. each other. Tics is a spiritual •«*
involving emotions touch deeper _ and m«e
subtle than mete physical attractmu, >e
voices the body as well as the heart oteachof
the lovers. For tire love to '
forward is to be expressed m intimate hoi y
union: that union results in me mmgtag of
the male and female elements into a small speck
of living substance, which in the course of nine
< • m a n ew individual within the
months grows into a new moi
body of the future mother; then this baby
t nf the mother’s body to lead a
passes out ot tne smut ,
v-parate and. later on, an independent life. In
'til way human life is kept going from genera-
lion to generation. As tar as
earned, the process is not vers «hff-
that, of the lower animals; but since man is e.
footer animal (that is, has far greater spmW-
,KV intelligence, free-will and imagination
the humbler part of him, namely, that winch
Ke fas in common with the animals must be
made subject to the nobler parts ot his nature
which find emression in the words duty, ov
Tnd Le. writ all their beautiful associations.


Thus around the primitive sexual instinct,
potent and forceful as it is, it has pleased God
to bold all that is sweetest, noblest and finest
m the life of each of us. The delicate but im
vigorating atmosphere of love ought to be
breathed by everyone from the cradle to the
grave, first as a child, then as husband or wife,
then as father or mother. But, if uncontrolled
this same instinct may lead to all that is evil
selfish, and even bestial So that the proper
direction of the sex-instinct is really funda-
mental to the true happiness of the individual
as well as to the general well-being of society.
Its misdirection is fatal to any true social pro-
gress.
The sexual life of the individual is centred
around the sexual glands, whether male or
female. The rest of the sex-organs are (as it
were) appendages designed for the interming-
ling of the male and female germs and for the
development of the child within the mother’s
body. But tnis is not the only meaning of the
u-ooia. gland*. They also provide ; substances


which, pass into the blood stream of the owner
which are essential, to the foil growth of mam
hood and womanhood.. Their influence pet'
meates and governs the whole development ot
manly and womanly qualities; both on the
physical side and cm the moral and spiritual
side too. As the male sexual glands grow and
begin to become active (and not without them)
the hair begins to grow on the face and the
voice breaks. At the same time the moral
qualities of the man begin to show themselves,
which we call manly qualities- —courage, initia-
tive self-reliance, self-restraint. At the same
time, again, there begins to appear, earlier in
some than in others, an ambition for the higher
and more spiritual things of life. Thus the
period of early sexual maturity produces within
a short time all those qualities, physical, moral
and spiritual, which may be, and, if properly
directed, are, the finest and most beautiful ex-
pressions of manhood.
It is clear, then, that the sex-glands, instead
of merely being instruments of sexual congress,


are leading factors in the development of the
highest activities and satisfactions of life,
Snt with these wonderful powers (as with
all high powers) there is a risk and danger to,a*
* they will degrade instead of
exalt their possessor. Beasts cannot degrade
tnemselves; but man can. degrade himself below
me level of beasts. .And since the animal in-
stmct within, us is urgent and imperious, the
clanger of misdirection of the sex powers is very
real to every young man.
Self-restraint of the individual is the keynote
of civilisation; to say nothing of its necessity
m toe service of God, it is the basis of social
law and order, which demands it in every
sphere of conduct. Self-restraint gives stead-
fastness of purpose, leads to achievement, and
realises high, ambitions. On it i s based strength
of character; for he -who would be strong and
influence others must first learn to rule his own
impulses. Most of all is this true in the matter
of sex-impulse. Unfortunately this is not al-
ways recognised, especially among young men.


That girls should remain virgins till marriage
is agreed; but the same standard is not exacted
from men by popular opinion. It is, of course,
regarded as the ideal; but failure to reach the
ideal is excused in the man wmlc it. is com
demned in the woman.
There is no sound reason for this “difference
of standard.” Every act of fornication involves
a woman as well as a man, and by it the man
not only degrades himself but helps to degrade
a woman as well.
Various excuses—all false--are given for the
moral laxity-of men in this respect. Abstinence
from sex. relations, you may be told, is unmanly.
Why? Is it manly to gratify your impulses at
the expense of another, specially when that other
is a woman? Then the meanest ruffian would
be the finest man. Self-restraint is not weak-
ness, but strength.
Then you may be told that abstinence from
sex-intercourse, is harmful to the body, or to
the mind, or to the sexual organs themselves.
There is no truth in this. Continence is not


m,UnOU *, 10 tie health The
powers do not detenorate fc,m being U, s 'w
are „.,r rte muscles which need tZZ
sei'.:.! e n!' s are sh ; n ,
. N “ tUr f SEra “ that - s «d tafore «ffl not
piay raise to the elean-hvjng ».
Tnese notions of the need of sexual eaperi-
ence tor the health and well-being of man are
&ey *** the °Pposite of the
. - cxual Pronuscuity, indeed, is always
ruinous to the moral health of man, and too
- ten (as I shall show later) to his physical
neaith. as well.
When a man is sexually corrupt the corrup-
tion spreads to the whole of his social life and
outlook and spoils his future happiness as a
husband, a father and a citizen. The sex
acuity i$ not merely a branch of the tree of
bltVI f r ° o£ ° f du£ Uee > and any
llight winch threatens the root threatens the
svhoie tree and every branch of it. The whole
txcer mice of life depends on the right direction
or the sexu.nsts.net Its right direction leads to


Love and the joys of a borne-- the greatest
happiness to which a young man can look fov
ward Its wrong direction leads to Lust, which
degrades the whole of life and kills the spiritual
nature, which alone gives man superiority over
the brutes. Love, on the contrary, of man far
woman or of woman for man is the most beauti-
fully spiritual thing in the world.
But love, to be of this fine texture, must
enfold and enthral the whole personality, spirit
as well as body. Then only can it lead to a
lasting union. Then only can the physical
union be quite free from any sense of shame.
Such a complete love has wonderful possibilities;
it enables each of the lovers to see and call out
into active life the best and highest that is
latent in the character of the other; through
, that vision of each other, they axe able also,
under the influences of love, to catch glimpses
of the real beauties of Nature, even outside o*
themselves, of that great Nature, both animate
and inanimate, of which they themselves are a
part; for love of this high, order is both a
creator and a revealer of beauty. Do not de-
10


BplSe ° r hold d ' ea P tllis > the .highest of all your
powers, for in some measure it is within the
of ever h one of you; in its attainment
les the making or the marring of your life.
There must be one standard in sexual life
for both men and women, just as nature pro-
vices one man for one woman. Think of it
tor yourself. Somewhere, even now, a girl is
growing up to be you r future wife, as you are
also growing up to be her future husband. You
rightly expect that, when you find her, she will
be awaiting your coming, clean and pure You
expect that of her. Shall she not expect the
same of you?
Yet too often the man goes beforehand and
drags m the dirt the honour of some other
gin, both fouling the nest of another man and
depriving his own maid of that total personal
devotion which he claims of her, and which
he owes to her.
Nor is it any excuse that some woman are
habitual prostitutes. Every man who goes with
a prostitute helps to degrade her further and


to Sink her deeper in the mire. Rather is it bis
duty to help her out, and do his best to put
an end to the cursed trade. Even the prostitute
is somebody’s sister and somebody’s daughter.
Fair play demands that she should be spared
humiliation, even as you would cuiirn iah piav
from, any other man for your own sister or
(perchance) your own daughter.
Such are the moral and social evils ox pro-
miscuous sex relations. But they entail physical
evils also, of which I am bound to tell you
something. Promiscuous sex intercourse leads
to physical diseases which are terribly destruc-
tive and injurious not only to the individual but
to the State. They bring sorrow, illness and
death upon thousands of men and women on
children also and on the unborn babe. Every
young man ought to know something about
them.
The principal diseases are Syphilis and
Gonorrhoea, They are separate diseases, but
both may be caught at the same time. They
are literally “picked up' Rom. persons already


infected of either sex. They do not spring nn
ot themselves from immoral conduct, hot are
passed on from one to another during the sexual
act.
Syphilis is a disease, at once wonderful and
ternbk It may be implanted on any spot of
£ ie surface of, the body; hut since ft is almost
always got in sexual intercourse, the genitals
f e usually the part attacked. For three. c*
wmr weeks nothing visible happens. Then
there begins to form on the infected spot a
sore. Tins may be quite small or it may be-
come a fair-srfed nicer. It is not usually pain-
. ’ in a ew we «hs it may disappear even
Without treatment. This is called the primary
stage. But whether it heals or not Syphilis has
now gained an entrance to the body, and there
Jt wiH stay till eradicated. At the earliest part
o this first stage it can he eradicated Sbv prompt
modern treatment- If not, the disease will pas.
on to the later stages. What are they? Three
to nine weeks or more, after the appearance of
the primary sore, among other signs a. rash
■varying in intensity, may appear on the body


and limbs, the throat and mouth become
ulcerated, and the hair fall out in patches, while
the sufferer may feel somewhat out of sorts.
This is the second stage, and it is now grossly
infectious, not only by sexual, contact out b)
ordinary social means—kissing, or the use of
the same spoon or pipe- The rash has caused
Syphilis to be called the Pox, oiten alluded
to in Shakespeare. After some time the rash,
will fade, even without treatment. With treat-
ment it will disappear rapidly; but, in either
case, the disappearance of the rash does not
mean cure of the disease; a person in this con-
dition requires medical supervision for three
to four years; and if a man marries before the
end of this time he will probably, at any rate
unless he is thoroughly treated, infect his wife
and future offspring. If the wife is infected
the first-born of syphilitic parents practically
never lives, and later children probably, even
if they live, will bear marks of the disease. This
is no light thing, for the syphiltic child, unless
treated early and effectively, has to tun the
same gauntlet as the parent; eitner at both, os.


later on, it may become hopelessly damaged m
mind or body; it may lose sight or hearing; its
whole bodily or mental well-being is menaced
for years to come. And this is all the result
at uncured Syphilis in the parents. Thus
Syphilis in its communicable stages--which may
last for some years—is ruinous both to the
family and to the country.
If the patient still remains untreated there
may follow, in a time which varies from a few
months to many years, the third stage. This
stage is less dangerous to others, as a rule, but
it is terribly serious for the individual. No
part of his body, inside or out, is free from the
risk of destructive injury. His face or other
parts of the surface of his body may be the
site of destructive ulceration. The internal
organs, including the heart, may be irreparably
damaged. The central nervous system may be
attacked, resulting in paralysis or insanity. So
great may be the damage when Syphilis rm
awakes in the body that, the unfortunate sufferer


becomes not only a misery to himself, but a
burden, to Ins family sod to the Stam,
These are some of the results of Syphilis.
Do you think it is not very common? Even
n ow (1934), when the many clinics all over
tins country have been at their health-giving
work tor some time, there are probably more
than 2,000 people freshly infected every year
in the Commonwealth, The number is cer-
tainly smaller than it was ten years ago, but
from its site can be realised the magnitude of
the damage which this disease continues to inflict
on the social and economic life of the country.
Gonorrhoea is puite a distinct disease. It is
much more serious than most people >..onsidm
it. It is also commoner than Syphilis, and
* Fmums in connection with the Venereal Diseases
Clinic at the Board of Health, Sydney, during the
eight months the Clinic has been m existence, from
the 12th Tune to 4th February, 1934. 2,1*4 patent;,
have been registered, with 54,499 attendances. Vv e.ek
ending February 3rd, 1934, was a record— l,Bl6 men
having been treated. 49 new cases a week, and the
percentage of defaulters has been amah, only hf/e.


certainly not less damaging to society. In the
case of men. Gonorrhea is implanted at the
entrance ot the water pipe and works its way
mcnwards, cansing m a few days a mattery
discharge from the pipe, usually, but not
necessarily, with a good deal of pain, If dal-
omn/ treated at the very begining, a man can
w rapidly cured. If be is not promptly cored.
t ere rs danger of the disease spreading i n
various ways~-(3) to the joints, causing a most
pamtul and even crippling inflammation of the
knees or other important joints; (2) to the eyes-
and even, though rarely, to the heart, causing
death; and (3) to the testicles, causing very
acute pain, and not infrequently resulting in
sterility. The water pipe may become so
narrowed as to interfere seriously with mira-
tion.
It the disease is not cured, infection is apt
to continue for a long time (as in Syphilis),
even when a man no longer suffers anv incom
vemence. So it often happens that'a man
marries and passes on the infection, quite urn
intentionally, to his wife. To a woman Gonom


rhcea is more cruel even than to a man; it -s
less easily cured than in the male; sterility is
far more frequent; broken health, operations
and death are not uncommon results. If a child
is born, its eyes are liable to be infected at
birth. If this infection is not promptly treated,
blindness may be the result. Of ail the blind
children in the country, a quarter are blind
through the Gonorrhoea of their parents, and
another third are blind through their parents’
Syphilis; more than half of all the blindness of
children is due to one or the other.*
So you can see that these two diseases are
disastrous to the country. They kill or spoil
a good part of our child life s they blight o.
incapacitate our young adults; and they fill our
hospitals, infirmaries and asylums with broken
wrecks of humanity.
How are these diseases to be avoided?
Obviously by avoiding fornication and ail that
* In Great Britain the Ministry oi Healths Depdt.'
jr-ental Committee on the Causes and Prevention ot
Bh’ndness estimated that from ten to fifteen per cent,
of the total blindness & present, existing is due to
Syphilis.


. ! text; tne unprofessional prostitute is „
Isrst as dangerous as the professional. Form-
“l 15 f e taotor f disease, which, later on
hf , s.own the innocent as well as the gndtv’
He who avoids fornication preserves his' own
soul and also, what ,s more
tile souls and bodies of others.
But, we are told, prostitution exists, and will
v ways exist. Can we not save prostitutes and
Ulmts trom Physical disease? Now of
course, we wish to stamp out disease by every
effectual means. But it is to be feared that as
ong as prostitution remains a social habit, so
-ong will venereal disease flourish. Varoiw
means have been tried in order to reduce' its-
avages. tor more than a century, all over
tut‘-- P h ’ K erent f yStemS ° f Uceasia S Prosti-
tute,, have been m force, under which prostitutes
ifdTJT r 4 “ <Xfeaily “ d •» compulsorily
tirated it found diseased. This system of State
vegu ation, in ail its different forms, has been
found a complete failure. Disease is more
rampant where such a system exists than in


England, where it does not. The reasons for
this failure are many and complex, but the more
obvious are the following—first, no medical man
can possibly declare a prostitute free from
disease by occasional examination, when she ex-
poses herself frequently to possible infection.
Secondly, State Regulation leads to a false sense
of security in young men, who are thus en-
couraged to expose themselves to risks Thirdly,
it is no use to put out of action, some diseased
women if diseased men continue to infect
others. So much for compulsory treatment of
women, A more popular cry now is the
voluntary self-disinfection of men, this means
the use of disinfectants by men, applied to
the sexual organs immediately after they have
exposed themselves to risk of disease. By im-
mediate and thorough application of suitable
antiseptics, there is no doubt that risk of disease
is sensibly diminished. The tremble is that so
often the antiseptics, in the ordinary dreurm
stances of fornication, cannot be applied quickly
enough, long enough, or in sufficient strength
to destroy the infection. Also, after their use,


a man may escape though he has applied them
Crf,reles;ov% and he may then think that the ante
septic protected him. when his escape is due
more to Inch than to management. Such a man
m tempted, by confidence m the, protection of
the antiseptic, to expose .himself more frequent'
iy, and by lus previous escapes to become more
and more careless in bis precautions, till sooner
or later the pitcher goes once too often to the
well
In a word, a man who exposes himself to
disease cannot escape all risk; he cannot expect
to. The only way to keep healthy is to avoid
fornication; the man who fornicates will sooner
ot later catch disease -generally sooner.
Now 1 want to give you some points that
may help m your desire to lead a clean fife.
Do not listen to those who mat' >■ ,
_ - %no tel I you that
chastity is impossible for men. There
thousands of men who have kept themselvd
dean and pure—not without effort— and have
reached the happiness of marriage as chaste as


they expect their wives to be. What others
have done, yon can do. But you are sure at
some time to be faced with strong temptation
to gratify the carnal impulse, so I wish to help
you as best I may,
I'irst, avoid any excessive use of alcoholic
drinir. Alcohol in any but the most moderate
quantity, and far short of that which causes
drunkenness, tends to blunt the finer feelings
and to remove that control which the higher
intelligence exercises over the animal passions.
Disease and alcohol go largely hand in hand.
Secondly, avoid dirty talk, dirty books, and
specially dirty pictures. The latter are peculiar*
ly liable to leave a permanent blot on the mind,
and all three tend artificially to stimulate the
passions which we wish to keep in abeyance.
Impurity of body too often is the result of ini*
purity of mind Every lad will some day or
another find himself in an atmosphere of smutty
talk. He is not responsible for his surroundings,
but. he is partly responsible for the surround*
ings oi ins neighbours. To oppose smutty talk


may entail some jeering, but it will also secure
respect, and will encourage others who secretly
hold the same views. You axe certain to find
some men who mistake beastliness for manliness;
by opposing this error you will leave a mark
for good on the social circle in which you live.
Lastly, do not go in the way of temptation.
Too often young men make their own tempta-
tions. When a. certain degree of familiarity
arises between a young man and a young
woman, flesh and blood are apt to get out of
hand. It you overran the signals you will come
to grief.
That is the list of Won'ts,'” But what to
do? The principal thing is to keep your body
healthy. If you are in a sedentary occupation
—study or office work—make a poipt of taking-
some exercise every day any exercise you like
best. A healthy body is the best residence for
a healthy mind; and a healthy mind broods
less over sexual matters. Keep the sexual organs
clean. The foreskin should be easily drawn
back and any foreign material removed with


soap and water. Any irritation of the organ
stimulates the whole sexual apparatus and keeps
one thinking of such things, Dont get anxious
if you have ''‘'wet dreams”' occasionally. These
arc nature's relief, by which the body gets r id
of any excess fluid which is produced by the
testicles. This, however, is no excuse for the
practice of masturbation, which by frequent
stimulation of the glands exhausts the sexual
system and arrests the supply of those other
'‘internal’' substances which are essential to the
healthy growth, strength and development of
manhood. Lastly, in case you yourself, or anv
of your friends should—through intemperance
or other causes expose yourself to disease,
cleanse yourself immediately and as thoroughly
as you. can with soap and water, and go at once
to a capable doctor for advice. If you have
reason to suspect any disease, waste no time
with quacks. Let no false shame keep you
from seeking treatment at once, for only in the
earlier stages can cure be readily obtained,
I have told you about physical disease, be-
cause every young man ought to know some


thing about it, Ido not seek to terrify people
into clean living, for that is impossible. Fear
of disease cannot turn a bad man into a good
one. Nor do I wish your mind to dwell on
the seamy side ot sen But I do want you to
strive alter and to live by the highest ideals of
sex, in which there is nothing nasty, shameful
or impure. A life so directed promotes the
true progress of the nation. For sex has
evolved with man s evolution, and is now in'
extricably bound up wi th our higher and
spiritual being, in combination with which it
has produced in man and woman that most
beautiful thing called Love. In it the physical
attraction perfectly right and necessary in its
place is and must be subservient to the higher
mental and spiritual affection. Apart from this
higher control, physical attraction alone leads
to Lust. Lust degrades; Love ennobles. Did
you ever read of the man with muck-make who
was so busy raking the filth from the ground
that lie never saw the angel standing by film
holding a golden crown over his head? That
was the man who lived for lust, and could not


raise his eyes to love. That love will one day
be within your reach, and when you have
touched it, yon will find your life enriched and
ennobled to an extent never dreamed of before.
Why? Because you will have found One whose
presence fills yon with a new and fuller life;
a passion will have flooded your being, wherein
the carnal desire is swallowed up, subconscious,
and (so to speak) in solution. That experience
will explain to you the value of past struggles
with crudely carnal inclinations; and that
moment will teach you more about sex than
volumes of books.
That is all. Think it over well and seriously.
You are a compound of physical and spiritual
nature. Your feet are upon the earth, but
your mind can reach the stars. Live for high
ideals, for the real values of life; then, what-
ever your position in society, you will be one
of the world's real aristocracy.
Yours most sincerely,
DOUGLAS WHITE.


AND THEIR
EFFE C 1’ S
BASED ON THE
REPORT OF THE
ROYAL COMMISSION
by
OTTO MAY, M.A., M.D.
Published by
RACIAL HYGIENE ASSOCIATION
OF N.S.W
14 ’Martin Place, Sydney, N.S.W,


INTRODUCTION
THE Royal Commission on Venereal Diseases was
appointed in November, I Sind “to inquire into
the prevalence of venereal diseases in the Empire,
their effects upon the health of the community, and
the means by which those effects can be alleviated
or prevented.^
It consisted of ;
Lord Sydenham of Combe, GXLSJ,, F.R.S.
(Chairman).
The Right Hon . Sir David Brynmor Jones',
K.G., MIS
Sir Kenelrn E. Digby, G.C.8., K.C.
Sir Almeric Fitzroy , K,(XB. , K.C.V.O.
Sir Malcolm Morris, K.C.V .0., F.R.C.S. Ed ,
Sir John Collie, M..D,
Mr. Arthur Newsholme, C. 8., M.D .
Canon J, W. Horsley .
77m Rev. J. Scott Lidgett, D.D.
Mr. Frederick Walter Mott, F.R.S., M.D.
Mr, James Ernest Lane, F.R.C.S.
Mrs. Scharlieb, M.D.
Mrs. Creighton ,
Mrs. Burgxvin.
The Final Report was published in February, 1916,
and the following pages are an attempt to give, in a
condensed form, some of its most striking features.


I . DESCRIPTION OF THE DISEASES
npWO principal, diseases are included under the
*•' heading '"venereal,” namely, syphilis and gonor-
rhoea. These are two entirely distinct diseases, rum
ning quite different courses. There is a third venereal
disease, "'chancroid ” or '"soft sore,”' not of great im-
portance, as its effects are entirely local; it will not
be further referred to,
SYPHILIS
may be (1) acquired,
(2) hereditary or congenital.
(1) ACQUIRED SYPHILIS.
Modes of Contagion,
(a) DIRECT, by the virus being im-
planted on some part of the body of a
healthy person by actual contact with an
infected one. The site of inoculation is
usually the genital organs, but it may also
be the lips or throat (by kissing), or the
finger (e.g., doctors are not uncommonly
infected in this way by examining syphilitic
patients), or, in fact, any part of the shin
or of the lining membrances of the orifices
of the body.


(b) INDIRECT, through, the medium of
cups, mugs, pipes, shaving brushes, closets,
etc., which, having been used by an infected
person, are then used by a healthy one be-
fore being sterilised; this method of con-
tagion is, however, comparatively infrequent,
PERIOD OF INCUBATION
Time elapsing between infection and ike first ap-
pearance of the disease varies from two to six or seven
weeks, or even longer ,
PRIMARY STAGE
Characterised by a SORE (chancre) at the site of
infection. Its appearance varies in different cases and
according to its site, but it should be pointed out.
that there is no relation between the severity of the
cancre and the gravity of the latter stages. The most
fatal complications may follow a chancre so apparent-
ly mild as to seem hardly worth notice. On the
other hand, an angry-looking and alarming chancre
may be cured without any troublesome sequel at. all,
SECONDARY STAGE
usually occurs from three to nine weeks or more alter
the appearance of the primary. Its most, striking
features are a RASH on the body, which may be


slight or profuse, and WHITE PATCHES, often
painless, in various places, particularly in the mourn
and throat. It is important to realise that these sores
are in the highest degree" infectious, and it is particu-
larly patients m this stage who are liable to spread
the disease by ‘"indirect contagion" through the
medium of drinking vessels, etc., as indicated above.
TERTIARY STAGE
This occurs particularly in cases where treatment
in the early stages has been neglected or insufficient.
It may develop almost any time after infection, from
one to twenty or thirty years, or even. more. In
this stage any organ of the body may be attacked
none is immune. Very frequently large ulcers de-
velop on the SKIN, formed by the breaking down
of elastic tumours (gumma): in other cases, the
BONES are eaten away (necrosis), very severe and
repellent deformities resulting; for instance, the nose
or other parts of the face may be eaten away, holes
may be formed in the roof of the mouth, etc, Tire
HEART and LARGE BLOOD VESSELS are free
auentlv attacked, and in this country some thousands
of men die each year of HEART DISEASE and
ANEURISM directly attributable to an eaflier in-
fection with syphilis. The NERVOUS SYSTEM
the brain and spinal cord —is particularly susceptible
to this disease. Various forms of BLINDNESS,


EPILEPSY and PARALYSIS have their origin in
syphilis, while GENERAL PARALYSIS Of't.HE
INSANE, one of the commonest and moat fatal
forms of insanity, is wholly due to this poison. How
common this is is shown by its accounting for about
1) per cent, of all the male admissions, and. for 2'3
P*“ r '- 5 -oL of ah lemale admissions to lunatic asylum-
Similarly, LOCOMOTOR ATAXY, a very common
disease of the nervous system, and one of the most
painful afflictions that the doctor is ever called open
to ceax wun, is invariably due to an earner intection
with syphilis,
(2) HEREDITARY OR CONGENITAL
SYPHILIS
This is duo to infection of the unborn
child by a diseased mother, or, perhaps, by
a diseased father direct without the mother
being obviously infected. This form of the
disease is responsible for a very large num-
ber of MISCARRIAGES and STILL-
BIRTHS, and for the early death or life-
long affliction of many thousands of
children. A person who has had syphilis
and marries without the consent and advice
of a competent authority runs a grave risk
of seeing the disease appear in the offspring
of the marriage.


EARLY MANIFESTATIONS
In. -most cases a. cluki .infected in this way is ap-
parently neaithy at birth, the disease manifesting
itself in different ways at various intervals.
Thus, very commonly, when the child is a few
weeks old, it may begin to ‘'snuffle," a rash often
appears, and sores may develop in various parts,
particularly on the buttocks and around the month.
The child fails to thrive, becomes sallow, emaciated
and feeble, convulsions may supervene, arm in many
cases it dies, after a few months' miserable existence,
of "marasmus" or “wasting," Under appropriate
treatment, howm/er, recovery may occur, the infant
developing into a healthy child.
LATER MANIFESTATIONS
After the cessation of early symptoms, there may
be, as in the case of acquired disease, a latent period
of some years, after which the disease may break
out again in various parts, in fact, in practically any
organ. In some cases these later conditions may
occur in children who had escaped the earlier ones
altogether. Congenital syphilis has a special tendency
to attack the nervous system and the sense organs, so
that it is a verv common cause of BLINDNESS
DEAFNESS, MENTAL DEFICIENCY (imbicility) ’


PARALYSIS,* etc. Of 1,100 children in London
Blind Schools, more than 30 per cent, were victims
of this disease, and it has been estimated that a large
proportion of cases of congenital deafness and of
mental deficiency are dne to the same cause.
GONORRHOEA.
Modes of Contagion
(a) DIRECT, by sexual co nnection with
an infected person,
(b) INDIRECT, by contact with infected
towels, bedding, etc. (this is very un coni'
mon in adults, but probably accounts for
some of the cases in small children, especial'
iy girls).
Symptoms
The first symptoms appear within one to ten days,
usually three or four, and are 'an itching sensation,
then smarting or PAIN on passing water, and a DIS-
CHARGE OF MATTER. from the water-pipe (in
the male) or the passage (in the female).
If promptly and efficiently treated, the disease may
be aired in a week or two, but in most cases it lasts
* It mast not, of course, be assumed that all cases of those con-
ditions are of syphilitic origin.


longer, from three weeks to several months. If treat-
ment is neglected it may become ''chronic/ 7 In this
stage there is usually no pain, and the discharge be-
comes scanty, intermittent, and clear instead of
“mattery/’ This slight discharge is known as “gleet,”
and is important, because so long as even a trace is
present the disease is not cured, but is still com-
municable to others, is liable to relapse and to develop
various complications.
Complications
These are very numerous, and only a few of the
commonest can be mentioned here.
PECULIAR TO THE MALE
(a) Inflammation of the TESTICLES; one or both
of these organs may become very swollen and paiiv
ful; in many cases their function may be permanently
destroyed, so that this complication is a frequent
cause of STERILITY in males.
(b) Inflammation of the PROSTATE GLAND (a
gland situated at the neck of the bladder, which
often leads to abscess formation.
(c) STRICTURE, or narrowing of the urethra
(water passage), so that the passing of water be-
comes difficult and painful It is a serious condition,


causing secondary disease of the bladder, and in some
cases even of the kidneys. It. may require a surgical
operation for its treatment, and not uncommonly it
has a fatal result, by setting up kidney disease or
blood' poisonk'i g,
PECULIAR TO THE FEMALE
(a) Inflammation of the WOMB and OVARIES
and their TUBES, leading frequently to STERILITY,
(b) Attacks of inflammation and abscess forma'
tion in the lower part of the abdomen (PELVIC
PERITONITIS, .PYOSALPINX, etc.), causing acute
illness or chronic invalidism and, in many cases,
death.
COMMON TO BOTH SEXES
(a) INFLAMMATION OF THE BLADDER
(cystitis),
(b) GQNORRHCEAL ARTHRITIS OR RHEU-
MATISM a severe inflammation of one or more
joints caused by the infection being deposited in
them by the blood stream. There is, in such cases,
severe pain and swelling of the affected joints, and
not infrequently these never recover, but are left


permanently stiff, the patient remaining more or less
crippled, according to the importance of the joints
involved.
(c) GONORRHCEAL OPHTHALMIA, or ho
flammation of the EYE, is caused by some of the
infectious discharge being introduced into the eye,
either by a linger, or through the medium of a soiled
towel, etc. ' This inflammation is very severe, and in
some cases ends in total destruction of the eye, so
that, if both are affected, complete blindness may re-
sult. It is obvious that a person suffering from
gonorrhoea may spread this complication through the
medium of handkerchiefs, towels, etc.
EFFECT OF GONORRHOEA ON OFFSPRING
A child born to a woman suffering from gonor-
rhoea runs a grave risk, during birth, of receiving the
infection in the eyes. The result is the development,
a few days after birth, of an acute inflammation of
the eyes (ophthalmia neonatorum), which is a very
frequent source of complete blindness. About 20%
OF ALL CASES OF BLINDNESS IN CHILDREN
are attributable to this cause. Hence it is essential
that proper medical attention should be sought im-
mediately if an infant's eyes should show any sign
of being inflamed.


II. PREVALENCE OF VENEREAL
DISEASES
Although, exact figures of the number of cases of
these diseases are not obtainable, all the evidence
given before the Royal Commission as regards their
prevalence confirmed their widespread distribution
through ALL CLASSES OF THE COMMUNITY.
They appear to be particularly common in large
towns, and a special investigation undertaken among
men and women attending the London Hospital for
complaints other than syphilis showed that about 10
per cent, of the men and 5 per cent, of the women
were infected with that disease. Somewhat similar
investigations have been made among other groups
of town-dwellers, with similar results. When it is
remembered that gonorrhoea is considerably more
common than syphilis, it is easy to realise how strong
a grip these diseases have on. the population, and for
how much sickness, suffering, and death they are.
responsible.
III . ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF
VENEREAL DISEASES
But apart from the suffering to individuals caused
by these diseases, it is important to realise how heavy


a toll they take from the efficiency of the nation. To
begin with, they are responsible for a large proper'
cion of all cases of STERILITY in men and women,
with a consequent adverse effect on the birth-rate.
This is still, further affected by the very large num-
ber of still-births due to syphilis. Further, they
manifest their influence in the great increase of IN-
FANT MORTALITY due to the same cause, and
among the unfortunate victims of congenital syphilis
who escape early death are the very large number,
who by reason of blindness, deafness, or imbecility,
impose so heavy a burden on the community. It is
estimated that about 30% of BLINDNESS IS DLIE
TO SYPHILIS AND GONORRfiCEA , The educa-
tion of the blind child in special schools costs about
seven times as much as that of the normal child,
while the earning capacity of these afflicted people is,
of course, greatly reduced. Similarly, with the very
many deaf and imbecile children -their maintenance
and care entail a heavy and unremunerative expen-
diture of public and private money.
Among the adult population the wastage caused
by these diseases is enormous. In the early stages,
when the diseases are contracted (i.e,, the primary
and secondary stage of syphilis and acute gonorrhoea),
the loss of working power, though large in the aggre-
gate, is relatively small compared with the amount of
invalidism and incapacity caused by the late manifes


tadons (e,g, 5 stricture, gonorrhoeal arthritis, and the.
various forms of tertiary syphilis, including heart
disease, aneurism, locomotor ataxy, and genera! par'
alysis of the insane). For it must he remembered
that this incapacity occurs so frequently in what
should be the prime of life, when the person's work-
ing powers should be of maximum value to the coni'
munity, and also that the disablement may drag on
for very many years, 10, 20, or more, before the
victims find relief in death.
As an example of the cost of these diseases, the
Royal Commission estimated that the treatment of
LUNACY caused by syphilis involved an annual
expenditure in England and Wales of about
Though an. exact estimate is impossible, it is quite
certain that the total annual loss to the country on
account of these diseases must run into many millions
of pounds.
IV. TREATMENT OF VENEREAL
DISEASES
(1) SYPHILIS
Although this is a disease of such grave possibiln
ties, the evidence given before the Commissioners
showed conclusively that IT RESPONDS READILY


TO EARLY AND EFFICIENT TREATMENT. In
other words, if the sufferer obtains efficient treatment
as soon as the first svmntom (chancre) appears, and
continues it UNTIL AN EXPERT PRONOUNCES
NO FURTHER TREATMENT NECESSARY,
then a. thorough and lasting core will in most cases
be obtained, without, any fear of the terrible later
complications mentioned in section I. But it most
be thoroughly understood that treatment must be
begun early and that it will be necessary to continue
it long after all symptoms have cleared np; if it is
stopped too soon, these late complications may ensue.
The questions arise: What is this proper treat-
ment, and by whom should it be administered?
Without going into technical details, it may be
stated that the modern treatment of syphilis consists
of a series of injections into the muscles or the blood
of complex drags—salvarsan (606) or similar sub-
stances, and mercurial or bismuth compounds-—ad-
ministered at certain intervals over a period of time,
the progress of the cure being determined and con-
trolled by examination of small quantities of the
patient’s blood. Confinement to bed is very rarely
necessary, so that the patient’s ordinary vocation
need he interfered with hardly at all.


Tbis ; treatment, which is the only really reliable
one, can be carried out only by a well-'trained, pro-
perly qualified, medical man. Unfortunately, it often
happens that the sufferer, from various motives, in-
stead of promptly consulting a proper doctor, goes
for treatment to a herbalist or quack, who professes
to cure this disease. Such a proceeding leads to most
disastrous consequences; the treatment given by these
people is totally ineffective in curing the disease, and
by the time the unhappy patient realises this, and
seeks medical aid' the stage at which a real cure can
be effected is too often, passed, and he is faced with
the probability of grave trouble in the years to come.
It cannot be too strongly emphasised that ALL THE
TERRIBLE SEQUALS TO SYPHILITIC INFEC-
TION ARE THE RESULT OF NEGLECT OR
IMPERFECT TREATMENT IN THE EARLY
STAGES, AND THAT ‘TREATMENT’ BY
CHEMISTS, HERBALISTS AND QUACKS IS
ONE OF THE MOST FERTILE CAUSES OE
THESE DISASTERS.
(2) GONORRHOEA
Here, again, the keynote of.success is prompt and
efficient treatment carried out until pronounced cured
by the doctor. The proper treatment consists in
washing out the water-passage (in the male) or the


front passage (in the female) with certain antiseptic
drugs, which destroy the microbe responsible for the
disease. These irrigations must be earned out care-
fully, under medical instruction and advice, and,
during the treatment, the patient must abstam from
alcohol in any form, and, it is hardly necessary to
say, must avoid all sexual intercourse, both for the
sake of his own health and to avoid spreading the
infection to others. Advice as to exercises, food, etc.,
will be given by the doctor treating the case.
V. PREVENTION OF VENEREAL
DISEASES
After careful consideration of a great deal of evi-
dence from, various sources, the Commission came
to the conclusion that the most ■ hopeful, lines along
which to attack these diseases were ;
(1) Prompt and efficient treatment of in-
fected persons,
(2) Education of the public in matters of
sea hygiene, etc


(1) PROVISION OF TREATMENT
As regards the general population, die facilities
for proper treatment in the past were very imperfect.
Most .hospitals either neglected, or deliberately re-
frained from, the treatment of the early, acute stages,
though they made provision for the late complica-
tions resulting from early neglect. Largely as a result
of this, the average private doctor had little oppor-
tunity of learning the details of early treatment, and
this fact, combined with the heavy cost of the newer
remedies for syphilis handicapped him severely in his
dealings with these cases.
It was not, therefore, surprising to find the Com-
mission laying stress on the need for better facilities
for treatment, and some of their most important
recommendations dealt with this subject. They
suggested that every county and borough council
should institute clinics (treatment centres), usually
in connection with the local hospitals, at which the
most modern methods of diagnosis and treatment of
these diseases should be available, FREE OF
CHARGE, to any person applying tor it. Further,
it was suggested that arrangements should be made
by which patients who work during the day might
attend for treatment in the evenings, so as to inter


fere as little as possible with their livelihood. It is
obvious that, in this way, by treating all cases
thoroughly so as to prevent, their passing on the in'
fection to others, much good might be accomplished.
At the present time, treatment centres (clinics)
•under the control of the Ministry of Health have
been established on these lines in practically all large
towns. AT THESE CENTRES ANY PERSON,
WHETHER RESIDENT IN THAT TOWN OR
NOT, MAY RECEIVE FREE TREATMENT on
the most modem lines ami with no fear of publicity.
The address of the clinic in any particular locality
may be obtained from the Local Medical Officer of
Health, or from the posters which are now common"
ly displayed in public conveniences. In addition,
doctors are enabled to obtain a free supply of the
negessary drugs, etc., from these centres, so that,
should the patient prefer to be treated by a private
doctor, the latter can readily obtain the requisite
drags.
An important step in the campaign against these
diseases was the passing of the Venerea! Diseases Act
of 1917, making it ILLEGAL FOR ANY BUT A
FULLY QUALIFIED MEDICAL FRADTITION-
BR TO UNDERTAKE THE TREATMENT OF
T HESE DISEASES. Many herbalists and others
have been heavily fined for contravening this Act,


which should prove a powerful weapon in the fight
against the quackery formerly so rife.
(2) EDUCATION
It is, however, useless to provide unlimited facilities
tor proper treatment unless the sufferers are sufficient-
ly alive to its importance to take full advantages of
these facilities. The Commission accordingly advo-
cated widespread educational work not only as to the
nature and effects of the diseases, but as to the moral
and spiritual considerations involved in the question
of sex-relations. For example, THE WIDELY-
SPREAD SUPERSTITIONS THAT CPIASTITY
IS IN ANY WAY HARMFUL FOR MEN, AND
THAT PROSTITUTION IS AN INEVITABLE
ACCOMPANIMENT OF CIVILISATION, NEED
THOROUGH EXPOSURE.
Education in matters of sex- *
HYGIENE SHOULD BE BEGUN IN
GOOD TIME, AND NO BOY OR GIRL
SHOULD BE ALLOWED TO GO OUT
INTO THE WORLD IN IGNORANCE
OF THE FUNDAMENTAL FACTS OF
THE SUBJECT.
The ideal way would be for the Instruction to be
undertaken by the parents hut at the present time
this is seldom carried out, partly as a result of


parental ignorance, but largely owing to a vague dis-
inclination on their part to broach the subject to their
children. The sooner it becomes customary for
parents to undertake their proper responsibility in
the matter, the better will it be for ail concerned.
Failing the parent, it is felt that the instruction of
the adolescent -should come from the school teacher.
'Flie Commission did not recommend class-teaching
on the subject in elementary schools, but suggested
that it might be done by head teachers in private
interviews with their pupils, usually when leaving
school They also recommend provision of instruc-
tion in evening continuation schools, and in work-
shops and factories.
In the case of instruction of adult men, stress
should be laid on the fact that pre-married chastity
is the ideal to be aimed at, but that, should the risk
of infection be incurred by sexual misconduct, tins
.risk may be greatly lessened if the parts are thorough-
ly cleansed immediately afterwards by careful wash-
ing with soap and water, followed, if possible, by
further disinfection under medical supervision.
There, can be little doubt that education of the
public in tins manner in the essentials of sex-hygiene,
and the dangers resulting from sexual immorality, is
an essential step in the campaign for the prevention
of these diseases,
2/34 IfM. F.H.B.ttS.J.-td


LIST OF SUBSIDISED PUBLIC
HOSPITALS WHICH TREAT
VENEREAL DISEASES IN
SYDNEY
Board of Health Clinic (continuous)
Sydney Hospital
Coast Hospital (In-Patients only)
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital
Royal South Sydney Hospital
St, George’s District Hospital
Royal North Shore Hospital
Royal Alexandra Hospital for Children
Balmain District Hospital
Rachel Forster Hospital for Women
(almost continuous)
Newcastle Hospital
Parramatta Institute (subsidised by
Child Welfare Dept, for girls com-
mitted by the Children’s Court),


