

INTERCOLONIAL
TRADES UNION CONGRESS
an
OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE DEBATES
HELD ON THE
FOLLOWING SUBJECTS
1 Amalgamation and Legalization of
Trades Unions
2 Legalization op the Eight Hours '
3 A Factories and Workshops Act ■
4 An Employers’ Liability Act
5 An Amendment of the Masters and
Servants Act
6 The Adoption of Co-operation in all
its Principles
7 Restriction of Chinese and Coloured
Labour
8 Abolition of Assisted Immigration
9 Direct Representation of Labour in
Parliament
10 Payment of Members
11 Mining on Private Property Act
12 amendment of Mining Regulations
13 Local Self-Government
14 Inspection of Land Boilers
15 Encouragement to Native Industry
16 Protest against the Recidiviste
17 Appointment op
Parliamentary Committee
DURING
22nd, 23rd, 24th, and 25th APRIL, 1884,
IN THE
Crabcs’ |)all Council Chamber, Ulclbounte
with an introductory preface by the editor,
HAMILTON MACKINNON.
Published by Authority of the TRADES’ HALL COUNCIL.
IPHlrounu:
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS, 9 MACKILLOP-STREET


< j
nnnii vurPASTirii
" Victorian Saddle and Harness Makers Society.”
LIBRARY RULES.
1- —The Library will be open for the issue of Books to Finan-
cial Members every Fortnightly Meeting of the Society.
2. —Each Financial Member to be allowed One Book out at a
time, and each Book to be returned to the Librarian every Fort-
nightly Meeting, if required longer they must be presented to
the Librarian for renewal.
3. A.ny Member neglecting to renew or return his book at the
Fortnightly Meeting will be lined 6d. for each omission.
4.—No Book shall be considered renewed unless presented to
the Librarian for that purpose.
s.—Members are not to lend Books belonging to the Library ;
any Member losing or damaging a Book will be charged with the
cost price.
6. —Should any Member be unable to attend personally,
written application will be attended to.
7. — A.t the end of each quarter the Librarian will inform the
Financial Secretary of all fines and liabilities incurred under
these Rules, which will be entered in the Society’s Books against
each Member that is fined. y /
,v„. / V(£, '-jW J)


“THE STATE IS THE PEOPLE.”
THE SECOND
INTERCOLONIAL
TRADES UNION CONGRESS
OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE DEBATES
HELD ON THE FOLLOWING SUBJECTS
UNIVERSAL FURNISHING WAREHOUSE.
Established over 40 years.
WALLACH BROTHERS,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
Furniture Warehousemen,
158 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE,
Two Doors above Post-Office.
Design Book, with Price List, free on application.
HAMILTON MACKINNON.
Published by Authority of the TRADES’ HALL COUNCIL.
HUlfcouni*:
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS, 9 MACKILLOP-STREET
(OFF 33 LITTLE COLLINS STREET WEST).
1884
f(0195




“THE STATE IS THE PEOPLE.”
THE SECOND
INTERCOLONIAL
TRADES UNION CONGRESS
OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE DEBATES
HELD ON THE
FOLLOWING SUBJECTS
1 Amalgamation and Legalization of
Trades Unions
2 Legalization of the Eight Hours
3 A Factories and Workshops Act
4 An Employers’ Liability act
5 An Amendment op the Masters and
Servants Act
6 The Adoption of Co-operation in all
its Principles
Restriction op Chinese and Coloured
Labour
17 Appointment op
8 Abolition op Assisted Immigration
9 Direct Representation of Labour in
Parliament
10 Payment of Members
11 Mining on Private Property Act
12 AMENDMENT OP MINING REGULATIONS
13 Local Self-Government
14 Inspection op Land Boilers
15 Encouragement to Native Industry
16 Protest against the Recidivists
Parliamentary Committee
DURING
22nd, 23rd, 24th, and 25th APEIL, 1884,
IN THE
Crafocs’ Hall Council Chamber, ifflclkrurac.
WITH AN INTEODUCTOKY PREFACE BY THE EDITOR,
HAMILTON MACKINNON.
Published by Authority of the TRADES’ HALL COUNCIL.
HUlbouriu:
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS, 9 MACKILLOP-STREET
(OFF 33 LITTLE COLLINS STREET WEST).
1884
f(cms


Repayments upon a Loan of £100,
WITHOUT PROFITS.
dears' night*. Total.
£ s, d. £ s. d. £ s. d.
Four... 1 3 4 30 6 8 121 6 8
Six ... 0 17 0 22 2 0 132 12 0
Eight 0 14 0 18 4 0 145 12 0
Ten ... 0 12 4 16 0 8 160 6 8
Twelve 0 11 0 14 6 0 171 12 0
JOHN NIM
PREMIER PERMANENT
BUILDING, LAND, AND INVESTMENT ASSOCIATION.
Office: 7 COLLINS STREET WEST.
XrOASIS GBARTSD
Offers the GREATEST FACILITIES to
INVESTORS, BORROWERS,
AND
DEPOSITORS.
REDUCED RATES.
TABLE B.
INVESTORS can WITHDRAW
THEIR SHARES AT ANY TIME
after the first year, with 8 PER
CENT. PER ANNUM ADDED up
to the date of the last balance.
JOHK 1
JAMES
SHARES £25 EACH.
Esq., ar.P*., Chairman.
"S* Secretary.
NIMMO, Es
» MIR AMS,
J. & R. GARDINER,
Ul XrYQOlf STRUT,
CABLTON,
AUCTION SALES HELD WEEKLY AT ROOMS.
OUTDOOR SALES CONDUCTED
Properties Inserted in List Free.
LOANS NEGOTIATED. INSURANCES EFFECTED.


Officers and Delegates of Congress
Standing Orders
Victorian Trade Societies
Amalgamated Miners of Victoria
Scale of Charges
Societies in New South Wales and South Australia
Appointments by Congress
Editorial Introduction
Lord Rosebery on the Working Classes
The British-Australian Cantata
Opening of Congress
Co-operation
The Eight-Hours System
The Chinese Question
Amalgamation of Trades Unions
Legalization of Trades Union Bill
Legalization of the Eight Hours
The Recidiviste Bill
Employers’ Liability Bill
The Factories and Workshops Act
Inspection of Land Boilers...
Immigration
Mining on Private Property Bill
Encouragement to Native Industries ..
The Masters and Servants Act
Payment of Members of Parliament
Direct Representation of Labour in Parliament
Local Self-Government
The Appointment of a Parliamentary Committee.
Amendment of Mining Regulations
The Recidiviste Question
The Final Sitting
Festivities
Erratum
fiazss F!ol9<
/9-znn
10, 11
... 117


M'LEAN BROS. & RICG,
69 ELIZABETH ST,
MSIiBOXTRIffS.
GAS PENDANTS,
MANTELPIECES,
GRATES,
And all BUILDING MATERIA IS,
From Best Makers.
THOMAS GAUNT,
WATCH k CLOCK MAKER, JEWELLER, &c„
14 BOURKE SfRE-Et EAST,
CORNER OF ROYAL ARCADE, MELBOURNE.
Highest Award for Horology, Melbourne Industrial
Exhibition.
MANtTJTAC'EURER QF CHtIRCS & "EI7RRET CI.OCHS.
Mathematical and Scientific Instruments, Barometers, Rain
Gauges, &e.
THERMOMETERS SPECIALLY CONSTRUCTED FOR EVERY INDUSTRY.


THE NAMES OF OFFICERS OF, AND THE DELEGATES
AT, THE CONGEESS.
President
BENJAMIN DOUGLASS.
JOHN TALBOT.
Vice-President -
Treasurer
AMOS YEWDALL.
W. E. MURPHY.
Secretary
STANDING ORDERS COMMITTEE.
Chairman, ex officio — JOHN TALBOT.
Victoria - - W. G. SPENCE, W. TRENWITH.
New South Wales - JAMES CURLEY, G. MITCHELL.
South Australia - R. PHILLIPS.
Victoria.
Trades' Hall Committee, Melbourne. Benjamin Douglass and W. E. Murphy.
Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Victoria.—J. F. Hunter and George Williams ; Maldon
branch, W. G. SPENCE.
Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Melbourne.—Datid Bennet.
Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Williamstown branch. —Edward COOKE.
Amalgamated Society of Engineers, South Melbourne branch.—T. OGDEN.
Iron Moulders’ Society, Victoria.—W. Robertson and T. Best.
Operative Masons, Victoria. —H. BLMSLIB and A. Yewdall.
Melbourne Typographical Society. —T. HUGUAN and J. C. Bolger.
Iron Founders’ Trade Union, Melbourne.—J. U. BOYD and DAVID Bradbury.
Engine Drivers ami Firemen's Association, Melbourne. —Henry Bindon and William Clark.
Australian Bookbinders’ Consolidated Trades Union, Melbourne.—Joseph Winter and Jacob
Hogg.
United Tinsmiths, Ironworkers and Japanners’ Society, Melbourne.—J. H. Barrett and DAVID
Wyllib
United Tinsmiths, Ironworkers and Japanners’ Society, Sandhurst. —F. H. B ROM LEY.
Cigar Makers' Society, Victoria.—P. Edersham and GEORGE ROLLING.
Bakers’ Society, Melbourne.—J. Wardley and J. M'CONECH Y.
Tailors’ Trade Protection Society, Melbourne. —DUNCAN MTVOR and Henry Fowler.
Victorian Tailoresses’ Union, Melbourne branch. —Mrs. E. J. Creswell and Mrs. J. Graham.
Victorian Slaters’ Society.—-G. Hodgkinson and C. A. Fuller.
Victorian Saddlers’ Society.—A. Brooks and Robert Hayes.
Melbourne Plasterers’ Sick and Friendly Society.—F. Manuel and W. Stott.
Victorian Operative Boot Makers’ Union.—Charles Knight and Wm. Tkbnwith.
United Society of Boiler Makers and Iron Ship Builders, Ballarat.—JAMES DONOHUE.
Melbourne branch,—Archibald Stevenson and John Oliver.
Australian Journeymen Coach Makers’ Society, Melbourne.—Thomas G. Armfield.
United Furniture Trade Society, Melbourne.—Wm. Godwin and George Robert Farlow.
Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners, Melbourne branch. —W. E. White.
Boot Makers’ Union, Ballarat branch.—BENJAMIN DUBBEULIN.
Victorian Association of Felt Hatters.—R. SIMON.
Mill Sawyers’ Society, Melbourne.—J. W. Atkinson.
Silk Hatters’ Society, Melbourne.— E. Levier.
New South Wales.
Trades and Labour Council, Sydney.—G. Mitchell and J. E. West.
Coal Miners’ Mutual Protection Association, Hunter River District, New South Wales. —JAMBS
Curley.
Society of IronmouhLrs, New South Wales.—John Talbot and John Jones.
United Society of Boiler Makers and Iron Ship Builders, Sydney.—Jambs S. M‘GOWAN and
Hugh Patterson.
New South Wales Seamen’s Union, Sydney.—Josiah Wright.
New South Wales Typographical Association. —H. H. Green.
Quarrymen’s Eight-Hours Protective Society, Pyrmont, New South Wales. —W. DOUGHERTY.
United Operative Painters’ Society, Sydney.—W. J. Lawrance and A. Drayton.
Coach Makers’ Society of New South Wales.—B. Jones and W. WESTMAX.
Journeymen Butchers’ Protective Association, Sydney.—Francis Fagan.
South Australia.
Operative Masons and Bricklayers’ Association, South Australia. —F. KINDLBR and R. PHILLIPS.
South Australian United Builders and Labourers’ Society.—P. Stokes and A. E. COVENBY.


CAUTIOM
great has become the demand and popularity of the AMERICAN CO.’S HOP
BITTERS, because of their numerous Wonderful Cures and their universal use
as a Family Bitter, some unscrupulous parties are putting up spurious imitations and
counterfeit stuff, some with a Hop name, others pretending to contain Hops; but
all, under whatever name or pretence, are only made to sell, to cheat and deceive
the public on the credit and popularity of this Company’s HOP BITTERS,
expecting to make honest and unsuspecting people take them in place of HOP
BITTERS. Avoid all such injurious spurious stuff, no matter what its name or
pretence may be, and use nothing but Genuine AMERICAN COMPANY’S HOP
BITTERS, which are put up in square, panelled, amber-coloured bottles, with
white label on one side, printed in black letters, and green Hop cluster; and on
the other side, yellow label, with directions in red letters, in English and
German, AND THE NAME OF “ DR. SOULE ” BLOWN IN EVERY BOTTLE.
This is the only form in which Genuine AMERICAN HOP BITTERS are
put up.
LISTEN TO YOUR WIFE.
The Manchester Guardian, 9th June, 1883, says :—“ At one of the windows
looking on the woodland ways, with clumps of rhododendrons and great masses of
May blossoms, there was an interesting group. It included one who had been
a cotton spinner, but was now so paralysed that he could only bear to lie in a
reclining position.”
This refers to my case at the Home for Incurables, I was first attacked
12 years ago with Locomotor Ataxy (a paralytic disease of nerve fibre rarely
ever cured), and was for several years barely able to get about, and for the
last 5 years not able to attend to my business as cotton agent, although many
things have been done for me, the last experiment being nerve stretching, two years
ago. I was voted into the Home for Incurables, Mauldeth Hall, Heaton Mersey,
near Manchester, in May, 1882—a home that ought to be more widely known, where
poor afflicted ones have every suitable comfort and attention.
I am no advocate for anything in the shape of patent medicine, and made
many objections to my dear wife’s constant urging to try the American Company’s
Hop Bitters, but finally, to pacify her, consented. I had not quite finished the first
bottle when I felt a change come over me. This was Saturday, 3rd November.
On the Sunday morning in dressing, I felt so strong on my legs, I said to my
bedroom companions, “I was sure I could walk;” so started across the floor
and back. I hardly knew how to contain myself. I was all over the house. After
finishing the first bottle I had four days to wait for the second, and by the time
it came I had fallen back considerably. Two days after I began to take the second
my walking came back, and now, as the Home are finding the Bitters for me, I am
gaining strength each day, and can walk quite safe without stick or any other
support. lam now at my own house, and hope soon to be able to earn my own
living again. I have been a member of the Manchester Royal Exchange for nearly
thirty years, and was most heartily congratulated on going into the room on
Thursday last.—Very gratefully yours,
John Blackburn,
_ 59 Teneriffe Street, Higher Broughton, Manchester, 24th Dec., 1883.
To American Hop Bitters Company, London.
P-S.—You will gather much respecting my case from enclosed card.
[ Copy of Card.']
SECOND APPLICATION.
NORTHERN COUNTIES HOSPITAL EOR INCURABLES.-MAY ELECTION 1882
Your Votes and Interest are respectfully solicited on behalf of JOHN BLACKBURN, aged 47
years, who for 11 years has been afflicted with Locomotor Ataxy, and for the last three years
quite unable to attend to business.
This case is recommended by Benj. Armitage, Esq., M.P.; the Rev. C. E. Stewart, Rector of
St. James’s, Higher Broughton; John Lowcock, Esq., J.P.; Mr. John Heywood, publisher &c
Manchester; Mr. William Mather, Park Lea, Higher Broughton; Mrs. Winser, Woodland Terrace’
Higher Broughton; Henry Simpson, Esq., M.U., Lond., Physician to the Manchester Royal
Infirmary; James Eoss, Esq., M.D., M.R.C.P.. Assistant Physician to the Royal Infirmary Alex
Hodgkmson, Esq., M. 8., 26 King Street, Manchester.


STANDING ORDERS.
1. The time of meeting shall be as follows ;—Meet at 9.30 a.m., and adjourn
at 12.30 ; re-assemble at 2, and adjourn at 5 p.m.—Carried.
2. The Executive of the Trades’ Hall Council will open the Congress, and
conduct the business until the permanent officers are appointed,—
—Carried.
3. The Congress shall elect a President, Vice-President, Secretary, and
Treasurer, and the Vice-President shall be ex officio Chairman of all
Committees. —Carried.
4. A Standing Orders Committee of Five shall then be elected, to whom shall
be remitted the order of and subjects for discussion.—Carried.
5. Papers relating to labour questions may be read by others, not members
of the Congress, but in all cases to receive the sanction of the Standing
Orders Committee before any discussion takes place thereon.—Carried.
6. No one shall speak more than once on any question, or more than thirty
minutes, except the proposer, who shall be allowed fifteen minutes to
reply. After the reply of the proposer, no one shall be allowed to speak
on the question before the chair, but it shall be at once put to the vote
by the Chairman. Asking questions shall not be considered as a
speech. —Carried.
7. No discussion shall take place unless upon a motion duly proposed and
seconded ; nor shall any discussion be allowed on points of order during
the debates. Agreed to.
8. No motion, or amendment thereon, shall be withdrawn after being pro-
posed or seconded, without the consent of the Congress.—Agreed to.
9. Only one amendment upon any motion shall be received at a time, and
' such amendment must be disposed of before any further amendment
can be received, but any number of amendments may be proposed in
succession.—Carried.
10. Any member seconding any motion or amendment shall not be held to
have spoken if he only uses the words, “ I second the motion ” or
“amendment,” as the case may be.—Carried.
11. So soon as the debate upon a question shall be concluded, the Chairman
shall take the votes, “Aye” and “No;” his decision being final,
unless a division is called for. —Carried.
12. At every meeting of the Congress all motions or amendments shall be
reduced into writing, signed by the mover, and delivered to the
Chairman immediately on their being moved and seconded.—Carried.
13. All motions for adjournment, whether of the debate or of the meeting,
or for proceeding to next business, shall be put by the President
without discussion, after being duly proposed and seconded.—Carried.
14; Two Tellers shall be appointed by the President as occasion may require.—
Carried.
15. Delegates absent one whole sitting, without leave* of absence, shall be
named by the President.—Carried.
16. The Local or Standing Orders Committee may invite persons to attend the
sittings of the Congress whose presence they may deem desirable, such
persons to be allowed to address the Congress on the invitation of the
Chairman. The above to be acted on only in exceptional cases.—•
Carried.


ART DECORATORS & HOUSE PAINTERS,
IMIELZBOTJE/HSTIE.
TRADES’ & FRIENDLY SOCIETIES’
Banners, Emblems, &c.,
DESIGNED & PAINTED.
The following- are a few of the BANNERS
executed by this firm :
TYPOGRAPHICAL,
IRONMOULDERS’,
BOOTMAKERS’,
BRICKMAKERS’,
CARPENTERS’,
BOOKBINDERS’
SOCIETIES.
Also, for Hibernian Societies—St. Am-
brose’s, St. Bridget’s, St. Joseph’s,
&c., &c., &c.
DECORATORS
OF THE
TR/IDR£- p/ILIt COUNCIL CJT/IjaBER
AND OTHER
IPTJBLIC BUILDINGS.
SEE OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
INSPECT OUR UNRIVALLED
"FORSTER” PIANOS and "EXCELSIOR” ORGANS,
The Best and Cheapest ever Imported
VERY EASY TERMS.
M. BRASCH & CO., 80 ELIZABETH ST.


FURNITURE. BEDSTEADS. BEDDING
153 SWANSTON STREET. 153 SWANSTON STREET.
Announce to the tradesmen and public of Melbourne and suburbs that they supply FURNITURE,
Bedsteads, Bedding, Carpets, Linoleum, and Floorcloths of the best quality at the
Lowest Possible Prices, for CASH ; or arrangements can be made for Terms on their new and
equitable system of extended payment.
S. & A. would remind members of Eight Hours Societies that they supplied the Furniture for
their new Council Chamber, and for the last three years have sold and exhibited the Furniture
Prizes of Art Union in connection with the Eight Hours Demonstration, to the entire satisfaction
of the respective committees.
PLEASE JESTOTE THE ADDRESS :
SIMPSON Ac ABRAHAMS,
*53 SWANSTON STREET.
JB®* Price Lists on application, or post free.
CARR & SONS,
WINDOW BLIND MANUFACTURERS,
By Steam-power and Patented Special Machinery.
Factory-
Outside Venetian.
131 SPRING STREET, *
MELBOURNE.
ESTABLISHED 1855,
Carr's A —, » ... Old
Improved I (IMirTli B^nds
Check- V 111 f Ke-
Action I painted
fitted to I i i 1 equal
any nlijlllHml Imillllilllf to
blinds. J l. New.
Dwarf Venetian.
B3T All Materials for sale. Trade sup-
plied. Country orders attended to with
despatch.
Send for prices. Agents wanted.
Telephone, No. 128. S P anish Blind -
In ordering, please mention this Pamphlet.


Names of Societies, their Secretaries, and Places of Meeting: —
VICTORIA.
Melbourne Trades’ Hall Council (comprising 50 Societies), numbering 10,000 Members.
Vice-President, F, H. Bromley ; Treasurer, A. Yewdall; Secretary, W. E.
President, B. Douglass
Murphy.
Name.
Place of Meeting.
Secretary.
Bricklayers’ Society— Victorian Operatives
Bootmakers’ Union—Victorian Operative, Melbourne, with Branch
at Ballarat
Bookbinders
Boilermakers—Melbourne, with Branches at Williamstown, Ballarat
Bakers
Basketmakers
Carpenters and Joiners— Melbourne Progressive Society, with Branch
at South Melbourne
Carpenters and Joiners— Amalgamated Society
Curriers
Cigarmakers
Confectioners— Victorian United ...
Coachmakers—Australian United Journeymen, Melbourne, with
Branches at Ballarat, Geelong, Sandhurst
Coopers, Victorian Society of
Engineers, Amalgamated Society of, Melbourne, with Branches at
Ballarat, Sandhurst, South Melbourne, Williamstown
Farriers
Felt Hatters
Furnacemen, Forgemen, Millmen, &c. .. ’’’
Gas Stokers
Hairdressers
Ironmoulders
Ironfounders
Ironworkers’ Assistants ... ... ...
Trades’ Hall, Carlton
55 55
5 5 5 5
5 5 5 5
5 5 55
5 5 5 5
5 5 55
5* 55
5 5 5 5
5 5 5 5
5 5 5 5
5 5 5 5
55 5 5
55 55
55 55
55 5 9
Richard Henry Bullows.
A. F. Fear.
David J. Till.
Archd. Stevenson.
Henry Foley.
Andrew Wilson
Wil
William Reay.
Alb ham Day.
ert Hunt.
F. H. S. Read.
Robert Gordon,
J. F. Allan.
John Fullerton.
David Bennet.
A. M ‘Donald Ross.
R. Simon.
J. Heard.
Thomas Bradford.
J. Kenny.
W. H. Steel.
Thomas Young.
James Steel.


Labourers, Melbourne United Friendly Society of
Trades’ Hall, Carlton
David W. Dunn.
Labourers, Melbourne United Protective Society of
Charles Vernon.
Lithographers
William Yule.
Masons’ Society— Operative Victoria
99 99
Enos Williams.
Millsawyers ...
Samuel Lemmon.
Operative Tobacconists’ Association
J. B. Muir.
Plasterers
Thos. Cree.
Painters and Paperhangers
99 99
G. W. Charge.
Plumbers
James Elder.
Pressers’ Union
John Keys.
Saddlers and Harnessmakers— Victorian ... ...
Robert Hayes.
Silk Hatters
G. J. Rooke.
Tinsmiths, Ironworkers, and Japanners’ Society, with Branches at
Ballarat and Sandhurst
9 9 9 9
Fred. H. Bromley,
Tailors
Henry Fowler.
Tailoresses’ Union— Victorian
John Wing.
Typographical Society— Melbourne
United Furniture Trades’ Society ...
9 9 9 9
W.B. Frencham (Acting
G. R. Fallow.
Bricklayers— Richmond
Richmond
C. W. Bruce.
Bricklayers (Prahran City)
Brickmakers’ Union (Brunswick) ...
Prahran
William Parker.
Oddfellows’ Hall, Brunswick
Thomas Tonkin.
Brickmakers— Victorian (Hawthorn)
Hawthorn
T. W. Biber.
Cabmen’s Union
Temperance Hall, Russell -street
George Bonas.
Engine Drivers’ and Firemen’s Association (Locomotive) with Branches
at Ballarat, Sandhurst, Bcnalla, Maryborough
Lit. Inst., William-st., W. Melb.
E. Swift.
Engine Drivers (Certificated Marine)
Williamstown
Isaac Williams.
Flint Glass Makers
Sandridge
James H. Thomas.
Glass Bottle Makers
Sandridge
Thomas Ezart
Hairdressers
T. Kenny.
Quarrymen ...
Seamen’s Union
Odd Fellows’ Hall, Brunswick
John Milward.
2 Spencer-street, City
James Mansfield.
Shipwrights ...
Myrtle Hotel, South Melbourne
Benjamin Caiman.
Sailmakers...
—
Stevedore’s Labourers ...
Ship Inn, Bay-street, Sandridge
William Cross.
Typographical Association— Ballarat
Camp Hotel, Ballarat
George Smeaton.


Jfckral Jlodetg
AND SAVINGS INSTITUTE.
Hoad Office i 47 ELIZABETH ST., MELBOHEHE,
BEAITGHES —VICTORIA:
gg Chapel Street, Prahran. Errol Street (next Town Hall), Hotham.
Corner Clarendon and Coventry Streets, South Melbourne.
88 Toorak Road, South Yarra.
ITEW SOUTH WALES :
Corner Pitt and King St., Sydney. George St., Haymarket, Sydney.
SPECIAL ADVANTAGES TO BORROWERS.
1. Loans granted daily ; no delay.
2. Share Loans may be redeemed at any time on payment of Principal only.
3. The Repayments may be spread over any term of years, from One to Twelve.
4. The Repayments may be made Fortnightly, Monthly, Quarterly, or Half-yearly.
5. Money will be advanced by Instalments to suit Borrowers when erecting Buildings.
6. Repayments received and all infonnationjgiven at the Branches.
Jfckral Jlakngs Institute
Furnishes the thrifty and industrious with a ready means of
Investment which is convenient, safe, and profitable.
Interest allowed from Date of Deposit to Date of Withdrawal.
ASY Sum of money from One Shilling upwards will be received on deposit, and Interest allowed
on the daily balance at the rate of 5 per cent, per annum on all sums over £l.
Accounts balanced and Interest compounded
Money may be withdrawn on the following Terms :
On demand .. .. Any sum not exceeding £5O
On Three days’ notice .. „ ~ £lOO
On Fourteen days’ notice ~ „ „ £3OO
On One Month’s notice .. .. .. Over £3OO
Business Hours —Daily, io to 3; Saturdays, 10 to 12 ; and every Monday
evening, 6 to 8.
Branches—Daily, 10 to 3; Saturdays, 10 to 12, and 7 to 9 in the evening.
ALEX. MUNRO, Secretary.


AMALGAMATED MINERS’ ASSOCIATION OF VICTORIA,
President, G. Williams ; Vice-President, J. F.
Hunter
; Sec. , W. G. Spence.
Members, 8,000.
Secretaries.
Sandhurst
Stawell
Creswick
Harrietville
Ballarat
Waterloo
Haddon
Egerton and Gordons
Chiltern and Indigo
Carisbrook ...
St. Arnaud
Homebush and Avoca
Maldon
P. Phillips.
M. Scorer.
W. G. Spence.
J. Martin.
T. B. Trezise.
J R. Gibb.
C. Thorne.
H. C. Hoar.
R. Power.
C. Sainsbury.
W. A. MTntire.
J. T. Squires.
J. H. Rule.
Walhalla
Daylesford
Malmsbury
Fryerstown
Buninyong
Amherst
C. Barrass.
A. L. A. Baston.
W. A. Logan.
T. Gwillim.
T. Coswello.
J. S. Cooke.
THE SCALE OF CHARGES PAID BY VICTORIAN DELEGATES
TO THE CONGRESS
c t
||
s ®
X*
u O
V o
A-J
.• e
3.8
s|
gs
2 3
o °
a**
£ o
**
CO
'A
.• u
II
s®
X*
feS
5
ill
3 S
o
o
<D
SO
£ s. d.
£ s. d,
£ s. a.
£ s. d.
A
| £
a-3 3
T s a
s
Ph si
S
**
£ s. d,
Societies whose Members do
not exceed .. 50 .. .. ( 0 0
From 51 to 100 0 0
„ 101 to 150 0 0
151 to 200 0 0
0 0 8
201 to 300 0 0
0 0 3
0 0 2
0 0 2
„ 301 to 500 0 0
0 0 3
0 0 1
501 and up-'
wards.. 0 0
004 0 0 3
0 0 2
0 0 1
. 2 O
iii 0 .
m
w.O a
m ci
<o
No Society to be charged for more than 1,000 members.
£ s. d.
0 9 0J
N.B.—These figures apply to the first 50, and any proportion of the following
» or 100, ,&c., will come under the next increased scale.
50 or 100,


AUCTIONEERS’ NOTICE.
CL ¥. TAYLOR k CO/S
EXTENSIVE CITY AUCTION ROOMS
Are now open for the sale of Freehold and Leasehold Properties,
Household Furniture, and General Merchandise of every
Description.
Outside Sales conducted. Liberal Cash Advances made on Goods sent for
Sale. Accounts promptly rendered, and Cash Settlements made.
Or. W. TAYLOR &c CO.,
AUCTIONEERS & GENERAL AGENTS ,
29 COLLINS ST. WEST, MELBOURNE.
hWEmmSP- BOS7JJTO PEDICLES.
Books on Spiritualism, Mesmerism, Physiology. Phrenology,
Hydropathy, Freethought, Social Science, &e. Medicinal
Herbs, Barks, Roots, Flowers, Seeds, and Preparations, with
Books of Instruction, imported and sold by
N*7". 3E31. T !ES ZES, IS, RET
“ Harbinger of Light ” Office, 84 Russell Street, Melbourne,
w* 8, MARAS 1 ?*
SAWMAKEB
(From Sheffield),
HO RUSSELL STREET
(Next Temperance Hall).
Agent for H. DISSTON & SON’S Celebrated
CIRCULAR & VERTICAL SAWS.
Importer of English American Saws, Tools dk Files,
WELL-SELECTED STOCK ALWAYS ON HAND. AT LOWEST PRICES.
SjT Circular and Mill Saws Re-toothed and
Hammered on Shortest Notiee.


IsTBW SOUTH WALES
Societies.
Numbers.
Secretaries.
Trades and Labour Council (comprising
24 Societies)
Coal Miners’ Mutual Protection Associ
8,000
Thomas Symons,
ation, Hunter River District
Seamen’s Union
Boilermakers and Iron Shipbuilders ..
Quarry men’s Protective
Coachmakers ... ...
Journeymen Butchers’ Protective
United Operative Painters
Progressive Carpenters and Joiners ..
United Operative Bricklayers
Friendly Ironmoulders
Sydney United Plasterers ..
Shipwrights’ Provident Union
Newcastle Labour League...
Curriers’Trade Union and Benefit
Typographical ...
Coopers’ Protective and Philanthropic
United Glassmakers’ Friendly
Amalgamated Plumbers, Gasfitters,
and Galvanized Ironworkers
Friendly Operative Stonemasons
Masters and Engineers
Wharf Labourers
Lithgow Ironworkers
Amalgamated Tinsmith and Sheet
Ironworkers ...
2,500
J. Curley.
J. Toomey.
1,000
S. Maidment.
Fraser.
G. Suck.
Stribley.
H. Hopkins.
J. H. Jones.
F. F. Baker.
W. Davidson.
G. Fames.
H. Jones.
J. Watson.
A. Duffin.
Cristie.
J. M‘Laugh lin.
M. O’Shea.
G. Mitchell.
Trade and Labour Council,
>1
n
Dunedin, T. H. Rix, Secretary.
Hobart, G. H. Sealrook, Secretary.


Operatives’ Permanent Building Society,
REGISTERED.
Head Office—TßADES 9 HALL ,
CORNER LYGON & VICTORIA STREETS, CARLTON.
SMEES, £2O M€K ?
President: CHARLES SMITH, Esq., M.L.A.
DEPOSITS RECEIVED AT CURRENT RATES OF INTEREST •
Loans Granted without Delay.
NO APPLICATION OR ENTRANCE FEES.
SHARES ISSUED DAILY,
WILLIAM E. MURPHY, Secretary.
PEJkMom & ommM ns,
JAB-EZ CARNEGIE,
200 BOURKE STREET EAST,
Invites intending Purchasers to inspect his Magnificent Stock of Pianos
and Organs.
PIANOS WITH IRON FRAMES, Ac., FROM £3O UPWARDS.
Agents for the World-Renowned STERLING CO.’S ORGANS,
Unsurpassed for Quality and Cheapness.
PIAMOS * ORCAWS
Sold at Very Low Prices for CASH, or on very Easy Monthly Payments. Full
Value allowed for Instruments taken In Exchange.
All kinds of PIANOS and ORGANS thoroughly Repaired at Moderate Prices.
TTJItTXiTGS ZPOaOIIVEiPTI/y ATTENDED TO.


APPOINTED BY CONGEESS.
Parliamentary Committee for Victoria.
Messrs. F. H. Bromley (Vice-President, Trades’ Hall Council).
W. E. Murphy (Secretary, Trades’ Hall Council).
G. Williams (President, Amalgamated Miners’ Association
of Victoria).
W. G. Spence (Secretary, Amalgamated Miners’ Association
of Victoria).
I). Bennet (Secretary, Amalgamated Society of Engineers,
Melbourne).
W. Trenwith (Victorian Operatives Bootmakers’ Union).
J. D. Boyd (Ironfounders’ Trade Union, Melbourne).
Delegate to be Sent to England to Protest Against the
“ Recidiviste Bill.”
Mr. George Williams (President, Amalgamated Miners’ Associa
tion of Victoria).
The Next Congress
To be held in Sydney, sometime in October, 1885.


CIVIL SERVICE & PUBLIC SUPPLY
ASSOCIATION,
CARLTON,
ALWAYS KEEP THE BALL ROLLING.
Ever on the move, Ever on the look out, Ever on the watch
For Something NEW, NOVEL, RARE; and always endeavour to UNDERSELL
iheir NEIGHBOURS, particularly in the City.
The Civil Service Company were first attracted to Carlton from hearing there was a
large firm of drapers there who sold all kinds of drapery so cheap that no other draper
could exist in the suburb. The present managers of the Civil Service replied “ That one barber
never shaved so clean but another could shave after him.” To this Carlton owes its present
GRAND PILE OF BUILDINGS, universally known as THE CIVIL SERVICE AND PUBLIC
SUPPLY ASSOCIATION. What a farce to us, who know the expenses connected with a
Drapery Business, to hear those town firms blowing how Cheap they sell. How can they
Sell for Moderate Prices? THE CIVIL SERVICE COMPANY occupy for a few
pounds a week premises that would be worth £BO per week in Collins Street or
Bourke street. “ Who pays this extra rent ? ” “ Who pays for express waggons and
special deliveries ? ” “ Who pays for Masher young lady Assistants, with handsome trained silk
dresses to serve you ? ” Lady customers—You pay indirectly for all this. We advise you to take
a 'bus or cab from any of the Railway Stations, or Swanston and Bourke Streets, any minute
throughout the day, and stop opposite the Warehouses of
THE CIVIL SERVICE & PUBLIC SUPPLY ASSOCIATION,
WHO CONDUCT THEIR BUSINESS ON EQUITABLE PRINCIPLES.
n 6 & n 8 BOURKE ST. EAST
CHAPEL ST., WINDSOR
PALL MALL, SANDHURST.
LYGON ST., CARLTON.
VICTORIA STREET, HOTHAM. RAYMOND STREET, SALE.
And BAIRNSDALE.


EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION.
“ In your federated freedom,
In your manliness allied,
Let the badges of your labour
Be the banners of your pride. ”
Marcus Clarke f 8 Hours Anniversary Poem).
The Second Intercolonial Trades Union Congress, just ended, was
held in the handsome Council Chamber of the Trades’ Hall, which is
tastefully decorated by the Messrs. Paterson Bros., and in which are
painted by them on the walls portraits of Sir Charles Darling, the
Victorian Governor who suffered persecution at the hands of an
oligarchal clique for championing the Liberal cause; of His
Honour Mr. Justice Higinbotham, the whilom Tribune of the
People; and of Mr. Samuel Plimsoll, the “ Seamen’s Friend,” and
Mr. George Stephenson, the great engineer from the ranks of the
working classes. Besides these pictures, characteristic of the meeting
room of the Democracy of the colony, there are on either side of the
Presidential chair two excellent busts of men intimately and pro-
minently associated with the early movements in this colony in
defence of the rights of Labour, namely, the late single and noble-
minded Wilson Gray, and Mr. Benjamin Douglass, the first and
present President of the Trades’ Hall Council, and one of that pioneer
band of agitators for the great Eight-Hours boon, which numbered
amongst its members the late James Galloway and the unfortunately
maimed-for-life James Stephens. The bust of Wilson Gray was
presented to the Hall by the barristers of Melbourne, to which pro-
fession Mr. Gray belonged; that of Mr. Douglass was given by Mr.
C. S. Paterson. Above these are hung large photographs of Mr.
Benjamin Douglass and Mr. James Hall, the late Treasurer to the
Council. To these have been added, since the Congress, a
photograph of the indefatigable organizer, and Secretary of the
Council, Mr. W. E. Murphy, presented to the Trades’ Hall by the
delegates to the Congress from New South Wales, South Australia,
and Provinces of Victoria as a mark of their esteem for that official.
In addition to this galaxy of representatives there is to be placed


shortly in the Chamber a bust of His Honour Mr. Justice Higin-
botham, as a companion one to that of the late Mr, Wilson Gray—
both members of the same profession, and both politicians of the
same school.
Although styled the Second Intercolonial Congress in deference to
the one held in Sydney in October, 1879, it can properly be regarded
as the first , in so far as a fair representation of the colonies is con-
cerned. But this fact, instead of reflecting on the efforts of our
neighbours over the Murray, does, on the contrary, give them credit
for not only commencing the Congress movement, but on being the
first to recognize its importance by sending delegates from their own
colony to attend one held elsewhere. But'though the term inter-
colonial can justly be claimed for a gathering representing three of
the leading colonies, still it cannot be denied that any Congress, to be
thoroughly representative of Australasia, should have delegates
present not only from every colony but from every trade in all the
colonies, so far as practicable. However, this, like all other matters
connected with important reform movements, is a question of time,
education, organization, and discipline, and, above all, of the proper
recognition of the importance of the movement by those biost deeply
interested. For these reasons, therefore, it is to be hoped that at the
next Congress no trade will, if possible, omit to be represented, and
thus will be organized a Federal Union of Trades not only in name
but in reality.
Yet in making these remarks it must not be thought that it is
intended to imply that good has not resulted from the recent
Congress, despite the covert sneers of the Argus to the effect that
only a “ faint interest ” was taken in the debates, which might be
“ wise or foolish,” and were conducted in “an unbroken strain of
tranquil selfishness.” Of course no one with a knowledge of the
political history of Victoria was surprised to read that the organ of
freetraders and monopolists looked suspiciously upon a gathering of
the industrial classes called together in order to combine their forces
in defence of their rights against the insidious attempts to steal a
march made by a certain class of capitalists, which looks upon labour
as a tool of capital, and consequently its slave. But that it should
call upon the employers of labour to nullify, through the Chamber of
Manufactures, the just reforms agreed to by the Congress, is a piece
of cool though characteristic assumption, when it is remembered that
the very men it now eggs on to oppose the equitable claims of Labour
were those upon whom it has time after time, and for years, showered
its choicest Billingsgate, and denounced in the bitterest terms as
robbers of the public because they fought for and established local
industries. But it is not at all likely that the bond fide manufacturer
will be led away by this disingenuous claptrap of his most dangerous
enemy, and forget that it was the combined and unflinching efforts of
the working classes which obtained the great boon of protection to-


native industries, through which he has been enabled to rise in his
worldly position. Such ingratitude manufacturers, as a body, could
not be capable of, even if there be found one or two member's of the
Chamber of Manufactures ready to listen to the flattery of the
journal which has never ceased to attack, in season and out of season,
Australian brain or hand work in favour of foreign importations.
And here it may be remarked that, judging by some of the names
(among which Dr. L. L. Smith’s cannot be included, as the wine-
makers and other producers of the colony can testify) of the
members of that Chamber most frequently and prominently before
the public, it can scarcely be said to represent only the genuine
manufacturer; indeed, it appears that some of the largest employers
of labour do not belong to it because it is not thoroughly representa-
tive in character—such, for instance, as the Trades’ Hall Council. This
being the case, some steps should be taken by the manufacturers to
eliminate from their Chamber all who do not strictly belong to
their order. By adopting such a course friendly relations
would doubtless be established between- the recognized bodies of
Capital and Labour, and all questions in dispute settled by them
jointly and amicably. This it is hopeless to expect so long as there
is any doubt about the character of either of the representative
bodies.
(Recurring to the good work effected by the Congress, the following
can already be referred to:—The amalgamation of the Ironmoulders,
the Painters, and the Labourers of Victoria and New South Wales;
also of the Seamen’s Unions of the two colonies, the union here having
decided, at the instigation of Mr. J. Wright, the Sydney delegate to the
Congress, to send delegates to the Federal Convention of Seamen, to be
held in July next, in Sydney, in order to draw up a constitution, make
laws and to adopt eight hours’ work in safe harbours, also a universal
rate of wage. Apart from this, other trades not organized have set
about forming themselves into unions—notably the butchers, who
have combined effectually. And the Early Closing leaders have also
taken heart since the Congress to renew their efforts, in which it is
sincerely to be hoped the Trades will back them up by not shopping
themselves at late hours. Bbt the most important outcome of the
Congress is undoubtedly the Parliamentary Committee, which cannot
but be the forerunner of a perfect federation of labour in this colony,
and, with similar bodies in the other colonies, the eventual federation
of labour throughout Australia.
Before entering upon a resume of the debates and drawing deduc-
tions therefrom, a word should perhaps be said about the wisdom or
otherwise of having allowed “ distinguished visitors ” to the Con-
gress to address the meetings. As a matter of course there is
a diversity of opinion upon the point, and while not agreeing with a
Conservative newspaper that the Premier and Chief Secretary had
no right to have attended and spoken, whatever less “ distinguished


visitors ” might have done, it cannot be gainsaid that some valuable-
time of the delegates was wasted listening to the pleasant and
familiar platitudes of the trained politicians who expressed so deep an
interest in the welfare of the working classes. But, while admitting
this, one fact must not be forgotten, that the presence of the heads of
the Government of the day was a potent, though tacit, admission of
the political power of the industrial democracy of the colony, and in so
much it is not to be regretted that a little time was frittered away.
These remarks do not, as will be readily seen, refer to those politi-
cians who had a direct object in visiting the Congress, and addressing
it on behalf of measures of vast importance now in their hands for
legislation, Messrs. H. J. Wrixon, R. Richardson, W. 0. Smith,
and J. Woods, in connection with the Employers’ Liability Bill, the
Legalization of Trades Union Bill, and the Factories and Workshops
Commission, respectively, were only in their proper places when these
subjects were being discussed, and had every right to address and
advise the members of the Congress upon the position which they had
taken up as members of Parliament on behalf of the working classes.
And Mr. Gaunson, in drawing attention to the unjust anomaly exist-
ing in the Masters and Servants Act, deserves the thanks of the Con-
gress, as also did the earnest Secretary of the Equitable Co-operative
Society (Mr. W. Nuttall) for his able paper on Co-operation, which is,
as admitted by the leading thinkers of the day, the one solution of the
great problem—the equitable rights of capital and labour. But
whether it was advisable to introduce matters relating to National
politics is a moot question, not easily answered. However, let credit
be given to all who were stirred to the depths of their eloquence to
utter messages of information or warning, and let their dicta be ac-
cepted as well meant, whether it be in connection with relapsed
French criminals or anti -recidiviste delegates to England.
THE DEBATES.
As it would take up more space than is available to go fully into
all the subjects which were discussed at the Congress, the writer will
only touch upon those which may be deemed beyond question,
reserving comments for the debatable ones. In the former category
may be placed the Amalgamation and Legalization of Trade Unions,
Inspection of Land Boilers, Amendment of Masters and Servants Act,
Payment of Members, Direct Representation of Labour in Parlia-
ment, Local Self-Government, Amendment of Mining Regulations,
and last, but not least, the adoption of Co-opei'ation in all its prin-
ciples as the only agent wage-earners can employ to hold their own
against the encroachments of capital, either in the form of individuals
or joint-stock associations. And, doubtless, it was in defence of this


grand system as opposed to competition that the President of the
Congress (Mr. B. Douglass) did, in his inaugural address, deal out
hard blows to the latter, though the Conservative Organ could not
lose the opportunity afforded by a somewhat confused definition of
the President’s meaning to disingenuously distort his statements to
suit its own ends.
In regard to the Amalgamation and Legalization of Trade Unions,
not a single argument, worth consideration, can be advanced against
the justice of either, although a member of our Legislative Council,
in the person of Dr. W. E. Hearn, had the effrontery to insert
penal clauses in a bill for legalizing Trade Unions passed by the
People’s Chamber.
As to Inspection of Land Boilers it simply appears absurd that this
should not have been made law years ago, when the inspection of
boilers of steamers was made legally compulsory. Of the Masters
and Servants Act it also appears surprising that a measure so
unjust as to make a difference in the penalty attaching for breach
of contract to two parties signing the same contract should have
been left so long unamended; and this fact is only another instance
showing to the wage-earning classes the necessity for looking after
their own interests.
Payment of Members and Direct Representation of Labour in
Parliament are nothing more nor less than part and parcel of what
should exist in a democratic country. The former as one of the
points of the Charter has to be zealously guarded, and the latter is a
matter entirely in the hands of the working classes if only they
would sink little jealousies, and be true to themselves and to their
order.
Local Self Government is also another admittedly necessary
plank in the platform of democratic government, and one which can
easily be carried on by unanimity and steadfastness of purpose
among the great majority which form the wage-earners of the
country. Amendment of the regulations relating to the mining
industry is doubtless needed beyond contradiction; in fact, the
present system is, in many respects, practically obsolete, and hence
requires immediate alteration.
Encouragement to Native Industries opens up the very much dis-
cussed question of Free Trade and Protection, and, as it is an endless
one, in a somewhat similar manner to that of Orthodoxy and Heter-
odoxy as regards theology, it is best replied to in the words of that
great satirical divine, Dean Swift, who, when asked what constituted
the difference between the two, said, “ Only this—orthodoxy is my
doxy and heterodoxy is your doxy.” In the same way it may be said
of free trade and protection that whatever suits the individual or
country is the right fiscal policy for him or for it. As, for instance,
when Messrs. Cobden and Bright, those great apostles of free trade,
started their agitation in respect to the repeal of the Corn Laws,


they were really only working to secure protection for their own in-
terests as opposed to those of the landowners, and for this reason—
the 40 per cent, duty on corn kept the labour of England engaged in
producing cereals, and so enhanced the value of landed property, but
so soon as the duty was abolished the labour hitherto employed in
growing corn was available to the manufacturing class, of which the
free trade champions were members. Thus, therefore, Messrs. Bright
and Cobden wisely protected themselves while clamouring for free
trade. And the same principle may be applied to a country in this
way. In a country like England, which cannot produce one-tenth of
what it can manufacture and is overburdened with population, pro-
tection would be ruinous; equally would free trade be disastrous to
a country capable of producing ten times what it can manufacture,
owing to scarcity of population and want of capital. Thus, after all,
it is only a question of orthodoxy and heterodoxy.
Assisted Immigration is another point upon which freetraders out
here wax eloquent on the slightest provocation and lecture incon-
tinently, using those very “ platitudes ” that they complain of in
their opponents, though Mr. Bennet can, on the strength of his able
paper on Immigration, afford to smile at the wrath of the Argus in
its feeble attack upon him. Indeed it appears strange beyond
understanding, why labour should tax itself in order to bring out
competition against itself. With far more reason might, for instance,
the Argus be expected to advocate an absentee tax which would
compel its proprietors to conti’ibute fairly to the revenue of this
colony out of the thousands per annum they have been drawing for
some twenty years from its people. Yet it is not a reckless state-
ment to make that that journal would not, in all probability, do
anything half so equitable as to eloquently advocate the adoption of
an absentee tax in its select columns. And while on the subject of
immigration it may be remarked that if the wage-earning classes,
both artizans and others, do not carefully watch and guard their
interests there will, ere long, be upon them a flood of coloured labour,
which will place them hopelessly in the hands of capitalists and
monopolists ; and will tend to reduce wages, as have already done
the Chinese. The flow has already set in, though but slightly, and
the President was wise in directing attention to the fact in his
opening address. It may be that at present only domestic servants
have been introduced, but that they will be followed, as a matter of
course, by others brought up to trades and as clerks, goes without
saying, and these will greedily accept employment at wages on
which British workmen would starve. And let it be remembered
that these natives are skilled artizans and penmen, combined with
which they have that servile nature which unfortunately some em-
ployers prefer to honest and manly independence. Under these
circumstances let all wage-earners, whether tradesmen or clerks,
grapple with- the threatening difficulty ere it is too late, and nip it in


the bud. The insidious movement is no secret, and for the matter
of that the attention of Mr. Service and Mr. Berry was, some months
ago, called in the House to it, but the only response given to the dis-
agreeable query was to the effect that the subject was not officially
known to the Government—a plausible but evasive reply, for which
an explanation should be sought by some member when Parlia-
ment meets. Yet another argument used by the champions of
assisted immigration may be alluded to—namely, that the farmers
of the colony require labour. While admitting that this may be the
case, it must at the same time be asked—for how many months in the
year does the farmer or squatter give employment 1 The answer
may safely be limited to —“ three or four months,” that is during
harvesting and shearing. For the rest of the year the men so
employed are sent adrift to flood the labour markets of our cities.
Instead of gabbling about introducing labour for farmers, so called,
let their friends see that a proper class is settled on the land, namely
men of some means and experience in farming, not penniless,
unfortunate creatures for the most part, who are simply tools of
moneyed institutions and landed autocrats.
The Employers’ Liability Act is so undeniably a just measure that
there can be no doubt but that it will become law next session, under
the care of Mr. H. J. Wrixon, and so place employes in the same
position here as occupied by them in Great Britain, America, and
New South Wales.
That a Mining on Private Property Act is also essential, and
that it must become law sooner or later cannot we gainsaid. Indeed,
the surprising fact is that its opponents have so long prevented its
being placed on the Statute Book. But doubtless this has been
chiefly owing to the somewhat unreasonable element which has held
possession of the Upper House for so long a time, but which, happily,
is slowly but surely being worked out of our would-be House
of Lords. It is preposterous to think that the selfishness and greed
of a few men should be permitted to retard the development of that
industry which, above all others, has been the making of this colony ;
and it is not at all likely that it will be allowed to do so for a much
longer period.
The urgent necessity for a Factories and Workshops Act, in the
interest of the thousands employed, is admitted by all save a few
manufacturers, blinded by that avarice which causes “ Man’s inhu-
manity to man,” and “ makes countless thousands mourn.” Of course
there are some who think less of the sacrifice of human beings—their
fellow creatures—than they do of the loss of a few paltry pounds,
but these persons are outside the pale of human consideration, and
should be so treated. In the majority of instances employers of
labour are possessed of hearts capable of feeling for those they em-
ploy, and of doing justice to them. From such as these no opposition
to the. passing of an equitable measure need be expected, and they


are, we venture to think, numerous enough to put in the shade others
of their body of unscrupulous natures.
The Legalization of Eight Hours as a day’s labour is a question
which, perhaps, of all those already referred to is the one most diffi-
cult of arbitrary settlement. But in saying so it must not be thought
that any doubt is thrown upon the justice of limiting labour to eight
hours a day or forty-eight hours a week. On the contrary there is no
denying the righteousness of the principle as applied to human beings.
But the difficulty arises in its application under all circumstances,
however different in character these may be. Still, while acknow-
ledging this difficulty, a distinct refutation can be given to the
statement of the organs of monopolists that the adoption of
the principle means preventing the weak and sickly earning a
living. This is simply a characteristic throwing of dust in the eyes
of the public. No such injustice could be contemplated by those who
advocate the limitation of labour out of consideration for their fellow-
toilers and not from selfish motives, as some interested parties
would make believe, for their own aggrandisement. Nor is the other
charge that such a law would violate the liberty of the subject
any truer, because it is not so much a question of preventing persons
from contracting for work on their own responsibility, as of prevent-
ing unscrupulous employers of labour lowering wages by means of
the “sweating system”—which, while it enriches them, ruins the
healths and happiness of thousands of helpless men, women and
children. It is, in any aspect you may look at it, a thoroughly
humane reform, which cannot but raise the wage-earning class
socially and moi'ally, and which has never been intended to be used
as an instrument of injustice and tyranny, as has been so often
ingeniously insinuated in certain quarters for ulterior purposes.
Finally, reference has to be made to what has been the practical
outcome of the Congress, and without which outcome most of the
good done by the deliberations of the delegates would have become,
for future purposes, practically useless. The appointment of a
Parliamentary Committee is alluded to, and in alluding to it Mr.
Murphy has to be congratulated upon the manner in which he
introduced the question to the Congress, and the wide grasp of the
subject he exhibited in explaining what duties such a body should
perform. With the existence of a Parliamentary Committee the
difficulties experienced by wage-earners in fighting for their rights
are minimized, and if only the members of the Committee put their
shoulders to the wheel, there is nothing to prevent them having-
made into law most, if not all, the resolutions adopted by the Congress,
All that is required to accomplish this is unity of purpose and action,
and unflinching determination to persevere to the end. In conclusion,
therefore, it will be seen that the one thing necessary, above and
beyond all others, is—Union ! Union ! ! Union ! ! ! This established.
Co-operation follows as a natural sequence, and then the ideal of the


wage-earners’ life will be reached, for Co-operation in its true sense means
the recognition of labour as the employer of capital. But to x’each this
haven of rightful bliss every means that can possibly be applied
should be used, and the most potent of these is, as the apostle of
Co-operation out here—Mr. Nuttall—told the delegates, a journal
devoted to the cause of democratic co-operation among wage-earners
—a journal, in short, of the People for the People, and one in
which they will be as directly interested, and over which they will
exercise as great a control as they do now over their Chamber in
Parliament. In the words of a great writer it may be said—“ A
cause without a journal to advocate it is like a steamer will tout a ’pro-
peller—all vapour and clatter without progress .”
And with these words I wish the Cause “ God speed,” hoping,
with the poor man’s greatest because most human poet, Babbie
Burns—
“ That sense and worth o’er a’ the earth,
May bear the gree and’ a’ that.
That man to man, the warld o’er,
Shall brothers be for a’ that.”
Hamilton Mackinnon.


THE EARL OF ROSEBERY ON THE “WORKING
CLASSES”
[The following extracts from the Presidential Address of Lord
Rosebery, delivered at the Social Science Congress, held in Glasgow
in 1874, are included in this pamphlet, in view of the fact that this
democratic nobleman—apart from championing the cause of Australia
in the British Parliament as evidenced by recent telegrams—exhi-
bited so warm an interest in matters relating to the industrial classes
out here that the editor availed himself of the opportunity of intro-
ducing to him the President of the Trades Hall Council, as the
official head of the combined trades of Victoria. —Ed. Off. Record .]
“ Union, as a principle, is the watchword of our age Co-opera-
tion is the obvious and only remedy for all troubles arising out of conflict
between Capital and Labour.”
“No one, surely, in considering this Congress and its functions, can avoid
seeing that the most vital and perpetual question before it is the well-being
of our working-classes ; a vital question, because on the apt solution of it
depends the commercial supremacy, the political solidarity, nay, the very
existence of empire.”
“ I must honestly avow my conviction, though to those who see how many
there are who profess to represent and understand the working classes it may
seem rash, while to others it will seem a truism, that this vast labouring
population of ours has not made itself, its wants, its creeds, and its interests
sufficiently intelligible to many of us. How, indeed, if it be otherwise, is it
that the problems connected with their condition have advanced so little
towards solution ? How is it, otherwise, that each political party claims with
equal certainty, and on every point, to possess the sympathy and the con-
fidence of the working maq ? How else is it that when the working class
makes its voice heard on any question, it comes upon us like thunder in a
clear sky ? I avow myself no exception to the rule ; but for that very reason
perhaps, I can conceive no subjects more interesting than those which relate to
the welfare of our labouring population,”
“Strikes are only one development of that slow but gigantic process by


which, all over the world, capital and labour are readjusting their relations,
and that supreme tendency of this age, of men as well as of nations, towards
glomeration. In the first clash of conflict they may have disturbed our trade;
but with a larger intelligence, based on economical principles, is it not certain
that each side will discover that their prosperity must be mutual, and their
interests inseparably entwined ? ”
“Workmen have effected much for themselves by applying the principle of
union. It is true, of course, that unions among workpeople, with a view to
the artificial raising of their wages, may hamper production, and harshly
control freedom of action. On the other hand, they have often been of real
service by promoting intelligent communication between workpeople in
different parts of the country, and in ascertaining the due recompense of labour.
Few impartial persons will be disposed to deny that though it has caused
bitter feelings on both sides, as all such revolutions must, the great social
movement which has recently united the English peasantry is likely to diffuse
enlightenment, to encourage independence, and to place wages on a more
clear and rational footing. The natural adjustment of the right proportion
between the profits of capital and the wages of labour is a tolerably sure, it
may be, but certainly a very slow process, and union among workmen has had
a beneficial effect in hastening it.”
“Strikes, which cause so much distress, and which so greatly hinder pro-
duction, we must lament. But so long as capital and labour continue distinct
and opposing interests, is it likely that strikes will be rare ? ”
“ He firmly believed that the advance of democracy would largely affect the
powers and convenience of the privileged classes. This was a circumstance
which some of his class would regret, but he did not think they ought to
regret it. A limited class in possession of great honour, and great privileges,
and great means of enjoyment, to the exclusion of a much larger class, was in
the position of a person getting a high rate of interest for his money which was
attended with equally great risks.”
“ Another great effort is being unobtrusively made for the comfort of the
population. The enjoyments of club life, which have such an attraction for
the Anglo-Saxon race, are being extended to the artisan. The admirable
promoters of this movement believe, and with fair reason, that as public-
houses offer social attraction to the tired workman, irrespective of drink, so
clubs are the most formidable competition which the public-house can have.
When every man, they say, has a club and institute within reach where he
can find better society and more varied recreation than at a tap-room, he will
leave the latter for the former. In Wisbech, with a population of 12,000,
there is a club with 700 members, with extensive buildings, comprising a


gymnasium, a hall, a clock-tower, and a library; with £1,089 deposited last
year in its savings bank, £464 in its coal club ; with classes of music and of
science and art. It is said that there is a visible difference between the
private homes of those who are members and those who are not. In Dundee
there is a club of 1,000 members, w r ith interesting discussions on public affairs,
with an almost ghoul-like appetite for blue books. Beer is here supplied, and
there is no abuse. The achievements of these clubs (and lam only giving
specimens) stir one like the records of great victories. Experiments on a
smaller scale, but equally interesting, are the two clubs at Brighton, founded
by costermongers and hawkers with the object, to use their own words, of
raising their class ‘ out of the gutter. ’ There are at least 555 working
men’s clubs in England and Wales, and twenty-four in Scotland, embracing
altogether about 92,000 members. Here, surely, is a definite social agency
with indefinite possibilities. ”


THE
DEDICATED TO THE EARL OF ROSEBERY.
Britannia—
Hail, Australia !
Land of Freedom, hail !
I come to thee with tidings glad,
To those rejoicing and the sad,
Great Britain’s mandate to fulfil.
Of peace to all—to you, goodwill.
Let happiness be then your dower,
At this our gleesome greeting hour.
Australia—
Not with whiteness of snow,
Not with coldness of frost,
Do I welcome thee now,
As thy latest-born host.
Nor yet as one possessed of memories old,
Stained by unholy deeds of bigots bold.
I hail thee as doth virgin fair,
Of innocence and golden hair,
The love that is without a snare!
My brilliant sun and heavenly sky,
My azure waves that ever sigh,
My weirdlike gums and ferntree bowers,
My endless plains and bright-hued flowers,
My sons and daughters, one and all,
Responding, answer to my call,
Gleefully, joyfully,
With true Australian cheer,
Merrily, cheerily,
With jocund voice so dear.
Britannia and Australia—
By noble bonds of race,
By closer ties of blood,
That nought can e’er efface,
We Britishers have stood
Together in the past;
And in the future will
Our Greater Britain last,
Till Time himself stand still.
BRITISH-AUSTRALIAN CANTATA
Hamilton Mackinnon,


TIEEIE
ONIYERSAL SOFT GOODS COMPANY,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
DRAPERS & CLOTHIERS-.
A SINGLE ARTICLE, OR ANY LENGTH, AT THE LOWEST PRICES.
An IMMENSE STOCK of every class of
Drapery ClotbtnG, anb jfurmsbmo (Boobs,
At much Lower Prices than is charged by ordinary Retail
Drapers. A Cutter of High Repute, with a Competent Staff of
Tailors, employed on the Premises. First-class Style and
Workmanship, combined with a Perfect Fit, guaranteed.
A Large Stock of Ready-Made Clothing, Tapestry and Brussels
Carpets, Floorcloths, Linoleums, etc., etc.
A TRIAL SOLICITED.
Any Goods bought, and not approved, of after inspection at home, can he
exchanged, or if preferred the Money paid will be refunded.
ADDRESS-
127 TO 131 BRUNSWICK STREET, FITZROY.
ItOBQMOBB’B
POPULAR PHARMACY,
CORNER FLINDERS KING STS.,
MELBOURITB.
For Working 1 Men, Merchants, Bankers, Squatters,
Shopkeepers, and every other class of
our community.


INTERCOLONIAL TRADES UNION CONGRESS.
APRIL 22nd, 1884.
The Intercolonial Trades Union Congress commenced its second
session in the Council Chambers of the Trades’ Hall this morning, at
half-past nine o’clock. Sixty-two delegates were present, and Mr.
Benjamin Douglass (of the Trades’ Hall Council) occupied the chair
for the preliminary business.
The Chairman said : Gentlemen, it is my pleasing duty to open
this morning the second Intercolonial Trades Union Congress. It is
doubtless understood that I do so by virtue of my position as Presi-
dent of the Victorian Trades Council, and not as President of the
Trades Congress. lam simply in the chair pro tern. to open the
Congress pro forma. In declaring the Congress now open, I desire to
congratulate it upon the fact of there being so many delegates present
from New South Wales and South Australia. You are fully
aware, no doubt, that this is a most important occasion, and that we
have met to deliberate on most important subjects, which affect the
interests of the industrial classes of all the colonies. I need hardly
mention that the practical results of your deliberations will have
great influence on the future welfai'e of the Trades Council, and that
your object in meeting and conferring together is to make yourselves
thoroughly acquainted with all the leading questions affecting labour.
These will be your duties during the days upon which you will meet.
But, in congratulating you upon the attendance of so many delegates
from the other colonies, I also desire, on behalf of the trades of Vic-
toria, to offer the delegates who have come here from distant inland
towns —and who are here for the first time—a warm and hearty re-
ception. I now call upon you to elect the different officers required
to carry on the business of the Congress.
Mr. W. E. Murphy, Secretary to the Trades’ Hall Council, then
read the following list of the names of the delegates to the Congress
and the societies they represented :
Victoria.
Trades’ Hall Committee, Melbourne.—Benjamin Douglass and W. E. Murphy.
Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Victoria.—J. P. Hunter and Q-borge WILLIAMS ; Maldon
branch, W. Gr. SPENCE.
Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Melbourne.— David Bennbt.
Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Williamstown branch. —Edward COOKE.


Amalgamated Society of Engineers, South Melbourne branch.— T. OGDEN.
Iron Moulders’ Society, Victoria.—W. Robertson and T. Best.
Operative Masons, Victoria. —H. ElmsWE and A. YKWDALL.
Melbourne Typographical Society.—T. HUGGAN and J. C. BOLGER.
Iron Founders’ Trade Union, Melbourne. —J. D. BOYD and DAVID BrADBURY.
Engine Drivers and Firemen’s Association, Melbourne.—Henry Bindon and william Clark.
Australian Bookbinders’ Consolidated Trades Union, Melbourne.— Joseph Winter and Jacob
United Tinsmiths, Ironworkers and Japanners’ Society, Melbourne.—J. H. Barrett and DAVID
Vy yllie
United Tinsmiths, Ironworkers and Japanners’ Society, Sandhurst.—F. H. Bromley.
Cigar Makers’ Society, Victoria.—P. Edersham and George ROLLING.
Bakers’ Society, Melbourne. —J. WARDLEY and J. M’CONECHY.
Tailors’ Trade Protection Society, Melbourne.—DUNCAN MTVOR and HENRY FOWLER.
Victorian Tailoresses’ Union, Melbourne branch.—Mrs. E. J. Grbswell and Mrs. J. GrAHAM.
Victorian Slaters’ Society.—G. HODGKINSON and C. A. Fuller.
Victorian Saddlers’ Society.—A. Brooks and Robert Hayes.
Melbourne Plasterers’ Sick and Friendly Society.—F. MANUEL and W. STOTT.
Victorian Operative Boot Makers’ Union—Charles Knight and WM. Trenwith.
United Society of Boiler Makers and Iron Ship Builders, Ballarat.—JAMES DONOHUE
Melbourne branch, Archibald Stevenson and John Oliver.
Australian Journeymen Coach Makers’ Society, Melbourne.—Thomas G. Armfield.
United Furniture Trade Society, Melbourne.—Wm. Godwin and George Robert Farlow.
Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners, Melbourne branch.—W. E. White.
Boot Makers’ Union, Ballarat branch. —BENJAMIN DUBBERLIN.
Victorian Association of Felt Hatters.—R. SIMON.
Mill Sawyers’ Society, Melbourne. —J. W. Atkinson.
Silk Hatters’ Society, Melbourne. —E. Lbvier.
New; South Wales.
Trades and Labour Council. Sydney.—G. Mitchell and J. B. West.
Coal Miners’ Mutual Protection Association, Hunter River District, New South WaIes.—JAMES
Curley.
Society of Ironmouldcrs, New South Wales.—John Talbot and John Jones.
United'.Society of Boiler Makers and Iron Ship Builders, Sydney.—James S. M GOWAN and
Hugh Patterson.
New South Wales Seamen’s Union, Sydney.—Josiah Wright.
New South Wales Typographical Association. —H. H. Green.
Quarrymen’s Eight-Hours Protective Society, Pyrmont, New South Wales.—W. DOUGHERTY.
United Operative Painters’ Society, Sydney.—W. J. Lawrance and A. Drayton.
Coach Makers’ Society of New South Wales. —E. JONES and W. Westman.
Journeymen Butchers’ Protective Association, Sydney.—Francis Fagan.
South Australia.
Operative Masons and Bricklayers’ Association, South Australia.—F. Kindler and R. PHILLIPS.
South Australian United Builders and Labourers’ Society.—P. Stokes and A. B. Coveney.
Their credentials were received and referred to the Standing Orders
Committee.
ELECTION OF PRESIDENT,
The following nominations were handed in : —Mr. David Bennet,
proposed by Mr. Edersham (Cigarmakers’ Society, Melb.) ; Mr.
Benjamin Douglass, proposed by Mr. John Talbot (Society of Iron-
moulders, 151.5. W.)
Mr. Josiah Wright (President of the N.S.W, Trades and
Labour Council) declined to stand, as he considered it would be out
of place for him to oppose Mr. Douglass.
The gentlemen nominated retired, and Mr. Bromley, Vice-
President of the Trades Council, took the chair temporarily.
After a lengthy discussion, whether voting should be by ballot
or whether it should be open voting, it was decided to adopt the
first-named method.


The ballot being taken, the numbers declared were
DOUGLASS
BENNET...
Mr. Douglass was therefore declared duly elected.
The Acting-President retired from the chair, which was then
taken by Mr. B. Douglass.
The President said—Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you heartily
for the high honour you have conferred upon me. I shall endeavour
to do my duty to the best of my ability, and in doing so I desire
that at the end of this Congress I shall have given satisfaction to
every one present. I again thank you for the honour.
The election of a Vice-President was then proceeded with. The
following gentlemen were nominated: —Messrs. Talbot, Wright,
M‘Gowan, Phillips, and West. Messrs. M‘Gowan and West
declined the contest. On the ballot being taken, Mr. Talbot was
elected.
Mr, Talbot said it was “ the proudest moment of his life.” He had
been elected President of the Trades and Labour Council of New South
Wales, and but a few weeks back had ceased to occupy the position,
but he did not dream of the present honour being conferred on him.
Mr. Amos Yewdall was unanimously elected Treasurer.
Mr. W. E. Murphy was unanimously elected Secretary.
Both gentlemen expressed their appreciation of the confidence of
the Congress.
STANDING ORDERS COMMITTEE.
On the suggestion of the President the proposal that the constitu-
tion of Standing Orders Committee should be as follows, was agreed
to :
New South Wales, two delegates ; South Australia, one delegate ; Up-
country Associations, one delegate, including one Miners’ Association ;
Melbourne, one delegate.
For New South Wales Messrs. Curley and Mitchell were elected over
Mr. M'Gowan, the other candidate.
For South Australia Mr. Phillips was unanimously appointed.
For the Miners’ Association Mr. Spence was unanimously appointed.
For the Melbourne Trades Mr. Trenwith was elected over Messrs. Bromley
and Elmslie, the other candidates.
On the motion of Mr. Bennet, seconded by Mr. J. W. Atkinson,
it was resolved to discuss the Draft Standing Orders seriatim , an
amendment that the Draft Standing Orders be referred to the
Standing Orders Committee to report to the Congress being lost.
Orders 1 and 2 were agreed to as printed, on the motion of Mr.
Bennet, Chairman of the Draft Standing Orders Committee.
After a preliminary discussion, Mr. K. Phillips (Bricklayers, S. A.)
moved, as an amendment, that all the after the word
Treasurer be struck out.


Mr. A. E. Coyeney (Builders and Labourers, S.A.) seconded'.
The amendment was negatived, and the standing order, as it stood r
agreed to.
Standing orders 4 and 5 were agreed to unanimously.
On clause 6, Mr. Elmslie (Operative Masons, Vic.) moved that
the figure 30 be struck out, and 15 inserted in their place. He-
believed the shorter time was quite sufficient for any speaker to
express himself in,
Mr. Bennet (Engineers, Melb.) as chairman of the Draft Standing
Orders Committee declined to accept the amendment,
Mr. Trenwith (Bootmakers’Union) said that it was desirable as
far as possible to have short speeches ; but their object was to have
speeches on important questions. Eor such questions 15 minutes
was inadequate, and to restrict speakers to that period would
be to emasculate the Congress.
Mr. Edersiiam (Cigar Makers, Melb.j supported the amendment.
Mr. T. Huggan (Melbourne Typographical Society) was in favour
of the motion, as there were many subjects of extreme importance
which could not be thoroughly thrashed out in 15 minutes.
Mr. R. Phillips (Bricklayers, S.A.) supported the amendment,
with the addition of the words “ without the consent of this
Congress.”
After further discussion, the President put the amendment, which
was negatived, and the original motion carried.
Mr. D. Bennet (Engineers, Melb.) moved clause 7.
Mr. Trenwith (Bootmakers’ Union, Melb.) seconded.
Mr. W. Stott (Melbourne Plasterers') opposed. Discussions
should not be allowed on points of order. They should be left to the
chairman to deal with or without general discussion.
Mr. Trenwith (Bootmakers’ Union, Melb.) referred to the practice
of Parliament, where discussion was permitted in order to enable the
speaker to arrive at a conclusion. They could not do better than
adhere to the rules of Parliamentary debate.
Mr. Winter (Bookbinders, Melb.) said that Parliament had
practically an unlimited time at their disposal to deal with questions
brought before them. The chairman should be placed in a judicial
capacity, and his ruling accepted as final.
Mr. J. S. M'Gowan (Boiler Makers, N.S.W.) said that although it
might be advisable to follow Parliamentary practice under equal
circumstances, they had every confidence in their President, and if he
was not certain of what the rule should be, he could then ask the
advice of the delegates.
Clause 7 was amended as follows : —“No discussion shall take place
unless upon a motion duly proposed and seconded. Nor shall any
discussion be allowed on points of order raised during the debate.”
Clauses 8 to 12 were agreed to.
Clause 13, “ The mode of taking the votes upon any question shall


•be in accordance with the ordinary Parliamentary practice — i.e., by
taking the votes upon the original motion first,” was struck out.
Clauses 14 and 1 5 were agreed to.
On clause 16, “ Delegates absent one whole sitting without leave
of absence, shall be named by the President,” the Secretary stated
that the roll-book would be passed round at 9 a.m. and 2 p.m., for
the purpose of being signed by members of the Congress. The book,
after being signed, would be impounded till the next morning and
afternoon.
The clause was agreed to.
On clause 17, providing that “The Local Standing Orders Com-
mittee may invite persons to attend the sittings of the Congress whose
presence they may deem desirable, such persons to be allowed to
address the Congress on the invitation of the Chairman. The above
to be acted on in only exceptional cases.”
A delegate inquired whether “ distinguished persons” would be
allowed the same time for speaking as the delegates.
The Chairman replied that he thought that there need be no fear
that the distinguished persons would exceed the allotted time.
Mr. Williams (President of the Amalgamated Miners’ Association
of Yictoria) moved the following new clause :
“ That the Standing Orders Committee shall, after arranging the business
for each day, have lists of same printed for distribution amongst members of
this Congress.”
Mr. Hunter (Vice-president of the Amalgamated Miners’ Associa-
tion of Victoria) seconded the motion.
Mr. Robert Hayes (Saddlers’ Society, Melb.) intimated that if the
Secretary would supply him with a typograph he would take great
pleasure in striking off the business lists, which would only occupy
about twenty minutes.
Mr. Williams then withdrew his motion.
The offer of Mr. Hayes was accepted with thanks.
On the motion of Mr. Bennet (Melbourne Engineers), seconded
by Mr. MTvor (Melbourne Tailors), the Standing Orders, as amended,
Avere adopted.
A number of delegates were then admitted to the deliberations of
the Congress.
At 10 minutes to 3 p.m. the Congress adjourned for an hour, in
order to allow the Standing Orders Committee time to prepare the
papers to be read during the afternoon.
Upon the Congress re-assembling at 10 minutes to 4, the Secretary
announced that the Standing Orders Committee recommended that
the following papers be read at the adjourned sitting:—Mr. Nuttall,
on “ Co-operation ; ” Mr. Robert Hayes (Saddlers’ Society), “ Why
Eight Hours should become the Law of the Land ; ” Mr. W. God-
win (United Furniture Trade Society, Melb.) “The Chinese Ques-


tion.” The Committee desired that all members of the Congress
wishing to introduce any subject should give notice that evening.
The report was adopted.
Mrs. E. J. Creswell, Vice-President, and Mrs. J. Graham, member
of the Tailoresses’ Union (Melb.), were appointed to represent that
body. The subjects chosen by their Union for discussion were—•
“ The Sweating System,” “The Apprentice System,” “The Factories
Act,” and “ The Legalization of Trades’ Unions.” It was announced
that Messrs. James Service, Graham Berry, W. 0. Smith, J. Woods,
R. Richardson, Julian Thomas, and Dr. Quick would be present on
the following day.
The Chairman then called upon Mr. Nuttall (Secretary of the
Equitable Co-operative Society) to read his paper on
CO-OPERATION.
Mr. Nuttall read as follows:
This subject has occupied the earnest attention of many congresses of work-
ing men since the days of Robert Owen, and it is doubtless destined to occupy
many more before the rights of the Labourer, the Public, and the Capitalist
have been fully settled. For fifteen years Co-operators and Trade Unionists
at Horae have met in annual congress, when their joint action has not unfre-
quently led to wise legislation. Both these large bodies will learn with con-
siderable pleasure that you are, for the second time, following in their
footsteps, and I believe the result will be equally beneficial.
Co-operation is a large subject, and yet it expands with age and by discus-
sion, but, fortunately for us, it has, in a great measure, passed through the
experimental stage, and has a forty years’ history of its own to record, which
makes our work comparatively easy. The first stage was that in which
capital (as usual) claimed all the profits ; but that was shortlived, for neither
labourers as such, nor consumers as such, had any interest in supporting
societies based on such a principle. Though our Co-operative historians
relate that a thousand societies of this character were established in the
United Kingdom, yet not one now remains.
The second stage is that in which for twenty-six years I have been a humble
worker, and whose principles and progress I have very briefly to indicate.
What the third step may be I cannot tell, but it will certainly be one which will
place the worker on a higher platform, the capitalist on a somewhat lower
one, and, at the same time, give the public genuine goods at fair prices, with,
a reasonable share of the profits.
I need hardly tell this Congress, that the relations of employers and em-
ployed are everywhere unsatisfactory, and that the signs of improvement are
scarcely perceptible. No more consideration is generally paid to the living
labourer than is paid to the dead machine. Their productions are compared
in the same manner, and only valued for what they will command in the open
market. Everyone feels it right to replace living labour by dead machines,
and take to themselves their whole produce. This fact ought long ago to
have taught the workers to become proprietors of the tools they use, and the
workshops they occupy, and thereby realize for themselves the produce of
their own labour. The neglect of this has sometimes led workmen to oppose
machinery and inventions, feeling that their existence depended thereon*
whereas, had the workmen owned these machines, they would have welcomed
them, and inventions would have been more numerous.


Again, employers everywhere buy labour at the cheapest rate, and sell
their productions at the dearest. They seldom buy the skill of their workmen,
and rarely their goodwill, hence, the workmen have most frequently neither
interest nor pleasure in producing the largest quantity, of the best quality,
nor is it always their pleasure to economize material, time, and machinery.
On the contrary, they study what will pass the foreman, and the result is
that neither the work-people nor the employers gain, yet the public suffers.
This is briefly the relations of employer and employed, but what of the
consumer. No one considers him, whether he be rich or poor. He is fair
game for the highest prices, and the most inferior articles. He who can
make the largest fortune out of him is worshipped as the cleverest, although
that fortune may be the result of adulteration and short weights. No one
consults the consumer as to how many shopkeepers he needs in any locality,
how many stocks shall remain unsold, and how many employes remain idle
waiting for customers, and yet the consumer bears all and pays all. He even
pays—through those who succeed—the bad debts of those who fail. This
process continues to increase until in many countries there are nearly as many
distributors as actual producers, which clearly means that every producer
keeps one distributor.
Now Co-operation aims, first, at dispensing with all unnecessary middle
men, that is, by bringing the producer and the consumer into more immediate
contact, and thereby cheapening the cost of food, clothing, furniture, and
houses; and secondly, it proposes to divide the profits amongst those who
create them, viz., the labourers, the consumers, and the shareholders. Other
systems have taught the people how to save money, but co-operation teaches
them how to create money, and then provides the means for saving and utiliz-
ing it. How far these aims have been attained will be seen in the following
record :
The first successful Co-operative Society in England was the Rochdale
Pioneers—established by twenty-eight working weavers in 1844, with a capital
of £2B. At the end of 1882 this society had 11,000 members, whose capital
amounted to £315,000 —£70,000 of which was used for trade purposes, and the
remainder was re-invested in other co-operative undertakings. The annual sales
of this society were £274,000, from which a net profit of £48,000 was realized at
2s. 6d. per £l. This profit was divided amongst the members in proportion
to the amount of each one’s purchases from the society during the year. It
owned a library of 16,000 volumes, had eighteen news-rooms, spent £BOO a
year on education, had provided hundreds of cottages for its members, and
besides paying 5 per cent, on capital, it had in thirty-eight years (from 1844
to 1882) divided no less than £850,000 amongst its members.
The town of Oldham, in Lancashire, with a population of about 190,000,
has five retail Co-operative Stores, the two largest being established on
Christmas Day, 1850. These societies have a combined membership of nearly
20,000 persons, a capital of a quarter of a million pounds, and an annual trade
of three-quarters of a million, from which a net profit averaging 3s. in the £
on the sales is realized, amounting to more than £lOO,OOO per annum. These
five societies have a news-room at every branch (which number about thirty-
five), with five libraries, containing over 20,000 volumes ; conversation rooms,
and discussion rooms, and a Co-operative Hall, in connection with every store.
They devote £2,000 a year to education, and have numerous lectures or concerts
during the winter season. Like Rochdale, they also have erected many hun-
dreds of cottages for their members, the cost of which has been paid by the
profits within a few years.
Other towns have done equally well, for throughout England and Scotland
there are about 1,600 societies of this character, having 700,000 members, a
capital of nearly £10,000,000, doing an annual trade of nearly £30,000,000,
and realizing a net profit (with interest) of about £3,000,000, nearly every penny
of which goes into the pockets of working men.


These Distributive Stores are the first step in the Co-operative programme.
They have succeeded in large towns and in small ones, in the country villages
and amongst the manufacturing and farming populations. Besides carrying
oh all the usual distributive businesses, they manufacture shoes, clothes, and
furniture, and employ milliners, dressmakers, &c.
Societies have been established in London and other English and Scottish
towns by the middle and higher classes, which have been equally successful,
the difference being that, while the former divide profits with the consumer,
the latter divide them only with their shareholders, and therefore they are not
truly Co-operative.
The working men’s stores have formed themselves into federations, and
established co-operative corn-mills and wholesale purchasing societies. The
corn-mills number about twenty. The largest does a business of over
£600,000 a-year, from which a net profit of about £40,000 is realized for the
societies by whom it is established.
The two wholesale Co-operative Societies—one in England, the other in
Scotland—have over 1.000 retail stores in union with them. Their combined
capital is nearly three-quarters of a million pounds. Their members exceed
half a million, and their trade is more than six millions per annum. They
own six steamers, have buyers in England, France, Denmark, Hamburg, and
America. The committee of management is elected from about 500 delegates,
who are appointed by the shareholding stores, all of whom are working men.
These societies are the largest dealers in groceries and provisions of any firm
in the United Kingdom. They employ more than a thousand journeymen
shoemakers, and they produce clothes, furniture, soap, biscuits, sweets and
other things ; and when I left England they were preparing for tanning and
sugar refining.
They had their own banking business, besides doing that of several hundred
retail stores, and they enable the smallest retail society to obtain goods from
the producer at the same price as the largest society or merchant in the king-
dom. The oldest of these two societies has just held its twentieth anni-
versary, and the last meeting of delegates authorized its committee to buy
more ships for its importing trade.
Fifteen years ago I joined with others in establishing a Co-operative
Printing Society, and in the same year we established a Co-operative
Journal. The printing society is everywhere acknowledged to be a great
success. Its profits are divided both amongst the work-people, the share-
holders, and the customers; and every workman is a member of the trade
union body.
This Printing Society prints the “ Co-operative News,” which has a circula-
tion of 30,000 per week. The journal is acknowledged to be the life of the
movement, and no Co-operator could long exist without it. Co-operators at
home have long ago learnt that they alone can take care of their own move-
ment, and this lesson should be taken to heart by the working men of the
colonies. Others may sympathize with the desires of the working class, but
no one can truly represent them except those of their own body, and therefore
the working class here should own and conduct the newspaper which repre-
sents them.
Other societies have succeeded in the manufacture of fustians, boots and
shoes, and numerous other things, and, above all, the workers in the cotton
trade have surpassed even the distributive stores. In the town already
referred to, namely, Oldham, the working class have, during the last twenty
years, established over seventy cotton spinning companies, having a combined
capital of six million pounds, employing about 20,000 work-people, paying one
million a year in wages, and realizing for the shareholders and depositors
about £200,000 per annum. The origin, management, and growth of these
cotton mills is entirely due to the working classes, and the bulk of their
capital has been saved from the dividends of the retail stores and cotton


mills, supplemented by their wages. To those who doubt whether working
men can conduct business as successfully as other men, it is only necessary to
say that these seventy spinning mills, managed by working men, are realizing
splendid profits, whilst those owned by private employers in Lancashire are
said by their owners to be producing heavy losses.
The working men buy cotton direct from India and America, and export
yarn in a similar manner. Every working man learns from these the profits of
trade, the markets for the raw material and manufactured goods, and knows
whether better wages can or cannot be paid. There are, therefore, fewer
strikes and disputes than in the old times, and, what is quite as important,
there is more independence of character among the working men of that town
than in any other with which I am acquainted, and no one can distinguish
between the ordinary cotton operative or mechanic and their employers.
Why should not Co-operative Stores and Co-operative Manufactories be
established in the colonies, and worked as successfully as at home ? The
conditions here are more favourable. The work-people earn more and spend
more, and, if they will it, they can save more. They are better organized, less
divided politically, and your Unions are more powerful and more respected
than at home. The colonies are young, and vested interests are not so deep-
rooted and influential. Though capital is more needed here than at home, yet
capitalists are not so powerful. You do not export manufactured goods in the
same proportion as at home, and have not to submit to the same competition
in regard to wages, for at home they are governed in no small degree by the
prices at which the productions will sell in foreign markets. The competition
between machinery and hand-labour is not so keen here, and less machinery
is in use, and therefore it is easier to begin business. Your work-people
are more sober, and the profits of both distribution and manufacture are
much larger. Hand-labour is more prevalent here, and that requires less
capital and gives the work-people more power over their work and wages.
Your population is more settled, and therefore organization and management
are easier. Building societies have been quite as successful here as at home,
and a larger proportion of the working classes own the houses in which they
live, and depend upon it that bankers and other capitalists here will gladly
advance capital to the working class, where they offer equal security and
exhibit business capacity equal to the other classes, and on this head there
need be no fear.
Now, the first step in your path of progress, viz., the Distributive Co-
operative Store, needs but little capital—£s per member is quite sufficient.
By investing this sum, you may obtain for yourselves all the retail profits from
your food, clothing, and furniture. This profit will in the first year more
than provide all the capital required from you, and thus you pave the way
for manufacturing hereafter. All you are asked to do is to change your
shopkeeper, that is, do for yourselves what others now do for you. You have
the capital and the custom, which alone make the profits. No sacrifice is
required, and those who now make Building Societies pay, can also make
Co-operative Stores and Manufactories pay.
There ought immediately to be a retail store established in every suburb of
Melbourne, or at least a branch of one large store. The principal towns of the
other colonies could establish the same. The larger the society, and the better
the buying, and the larger the sales, the less will the expenses be, and therefore
the greater will be the bonus on purchases. It is only large societies that can
buy home-made goods direct from manufacturers, and it should never be forgot
that the profits on imports are extremely high, and while the working class
consume these, there is no reason why they should not realize for themselves
the profits thereon.
If the working class in Melbourne approve, they may readily become members
of the Equitable Co-operative Society. That society has only been at busi-
ness two months, and yet it employs nearly two hundred work-people, males


and females, of whom about fifty are employed as tailors, upholsterers, mantle
makers and milliners, and the remainder as distributors. Other trades will
quickly follow. It has a buyer situated in London who buys direct from
manufacturers ; a banking account there which means bringing capital for use
here, and which the colonies so much need, and without which progress is
impossible. This society could easily establish branches all over Melbourne,
and give the management to local committees, consisting of the trusted mem-
bers of the working class, supplemented by one or more of its own Committee,
This society has an influential shareholding body, and is adding about twenty-
five members per week. It is established upon the most democratic principles,
for only one vote is allowed for each head, whatever capital its owner may
have invested, and all the profits are divided amongst the purchasers in
proportion to their individual support, after paying capital not more than a
fair rate of dividend, viz., 8 per cent, per annum. All the profits of the
working-class societies at home are divided in this manner, with the exception
that 8 per cent, is the rule as regards interest.
I have no desire to startle any of you who may not be quite so radical as I
am, nor do I wish to disturb the minds of the capitalist classes who have never
thought about Co-operation. Still, I must say that there is looming in the
distance the possibility of the actual workers some day asking whether they
should not employ capital, and pay it its fair interest, whilst they, the work-
men, should divide the remaining profits amongst themselves in proportion to
their respective wages. Such questions are asked at home, and are being
answered in this spirit. One illustration will suffice. About two years ago
those disturbers of the public peace —the shoemakers of Northampton—raised
a little capital in shares, borrowed more, and commenced business. They
obtained a Government contract for army shoes, and have repeated the
experiment several times. Each man was paid the usual wages of the trade,
but left as much as possible to extend the business. Each quarter they had a
profit to divide, and just before I left home they divided no less than six
shillings and eightpence on each £1 of wages which they had earned.
Beginning with about half-a-dozen workmen, all of whom held shares, they
had grown to twenty-four, and they hope, in a few years, to increase ten-fold.
Now, if this can be done so easily at home, what should prevent it here, where
the shoemakers earn double the wages of those at home, where hand-labour is
more common and profits larger, and where £lO per man is ample capital for
supplying the whole kit required ? If the journeyman shoemakers of Mel-
bourne and other towns of the colonies only will it, they may in a month do
what those of Northampton have done in two years. It only requires the
countenance and support of your powerful body to enable all bespoke work
and repairs to be thus performed ; and, if this can be done by the shoemakers,
what prevents it being done in numerous other trades? In conclusion, I
earnestly appeal to you to show that you are not behind your class at home ;
you have for twenty-eight years led them in the matter of short hours, why
not equally take the lead in placing the labourer one step higher on the social
scale, make him less dependent upon the capitalist class by making him his
own capitalist, and place him in a position where it will be his interest to
supply the public with purer goods at more reasonable rates, and thereby tend
to solve the difficult relations existing between the labourer and the rest of the
community, whether capitalists or consumers.
The President said that he had listened with great pleasure to
the paper read by Mr. Nuttall. He was perfectly sure that if the
co-operative principle in Trades Unions were assimilated to a greater
extent with the every-day life of the people of these colonies, it
would result in the working classes being benefited to an almost in-
calculable extent. (Applause.)


Mr. Bromley (Tinsmiths’ Society, Sandhurst) moved that a hearty
vote of thanks be tendered to Mr, Nuttall.
Mr. Edersham (Cigar Makers’ Society, Melb.) seconded the
motion, which was supported by Mr. G. Williams (Amalgamated
Miners’ Association, Creswick) and carried amidst applause.
Mr. Nutt all, in acknowledging the vote of thanks, said that he
would carefully watch the future progress of the Trades Unions of
Australia, and would take every opportunity of submitting facts
which he thought would prove of benefit to the working classes of
the colony. In his opinion, sooner or later, the Trades Unions
would be the great governing body of the colony, (Applause.)
THE EIGHT-HOURS QUESTION.
Mr. Robert Hayes (Victorian Saddlers’ Society) read the-
following paper, entitled “ Why the Eight-Hours System should
become the Law of the Land ” :
In introducing the subject, “ Why the Eight Hours should become the Law
of the Land,” it may almost appear like introducing coals to Newcastle to this
representative body of workmen, the majority of whom I have no doubt
enjoy the boon already, but it will show the outside world when we take the
eight-hour question up that we have a great object in view in trying to educate
public opinion up to a standard that the outside world may see the blessing
of it, and finally come down on the legislature with the startling announcement
(to that somewhat slow body at times) that the eight hours shall become the
law of the land. It needs no prophet to foretell that things are leading to
that in the future, but the object of this conference is (I take it to be) to show
cause why it should become the law of the land in as short a time as possible.
In this age of steam, electricity, and complex machinery of one sort or another,
it is demonstrated beyond a doubt that the wants of the world can be supplied
in a much shorter time than in the so-called good old times, but, to my mind r
the times which we never want to see again—of long hours and small pay.
Machinery, in nine cases out of ten, is the invention of the workmen, who
have given their time, brains, and energy in the completion of their inventions,
with this result, that the masters have in the end stepped in and taken the
benefit of such inventions. Machinery has lessened the cost of production,
and consequently increased the masters’ profits, and the men’s wages have not
increased proportionately as they should do according to every right of justice,
and, to my mind, the cause is this, the men have not attempted sufficiently to
shorten their hours of labour when machines have come into trades to do work
in much quicker time than by hands, consequently the master has gained all
the profits, and the men have gone on under the old style, and the result is
the rich have become richer and the poor poorer. I venture to say there is
not a man in this assemblage who will assert that the invention of Arkwright,
which created a revolution in the cotton trade, was not a blessing to the world,
and had the workmen taken measures to cause shorter hours to be worked in
the cotton factories simultaneously with the adoption of this invention the
effect of it would have been a blessing for them right away, and the workmen
would receive their fair share of profits from this invention in the shape of less
hours worked, at no loss whatever in wages, for it is proved beyond a doubt
that short hours means an increase of wages. Also take another instance.
Who amongst us does not remember Hood’s “Song of the Shirt?” In


that pathetic ballad the poor seamstress is pictured as stitching for a
miserable wage from early morn till late at night, and still finding her-
self nearer starvation, or perhaps worse; and, looking at that picture,
who will say that the sewing machine is not a grand invention? and had the
workwoman been wise in her generation, and worked short hours with that
invention, it would have been a blessing and a joy for ever to her. But no;
wages were good for a time, and human nature being selfish, it said, “ I earn
good wages in fair hours ; if I work long hours I will soon make a little
fortune, and then I can pass my days of old age in comfort.” But she lived in a
fool’s paradise, for the employer, ever ready for an excuse to cut down wages,
says, rubbing his hands, “ I am very sorry, but I must cut down wages to
keep up with the times.” He (the employer) didn’t look how many hours they
worked, but simply the money earned. And the result is in this present day that
seamstresses have to work fearfully long hours for a very existence, and when
we contemplate the rack to the constitution of women working long hours at
sewing machines or other kindred occupations, and when we take into con-
sideration they are to be the mothers of future unborn generations, I say that
we must put our foot down on long hours, and say that the eight-hours system
shall become the law of the land. But that bloated Tory who has waxed fat
on blood-money for long hours is doing nothing less than taking a man or
woman’s blood from them. He says you are interfering with the liberty of the
subject, and we are Britons, and you dare not do it. But I say we dare
interfere with the liberty of the subject just as much as you dare. When
you license public-houses a man gets drunk ; you put him in gaol for being
drunk, not allowing him the liberty to get drunk. Also, you refuse him
the liberty to go to our glorious libraries and museums on Sunday.
You interfere with the liberty of the subject when you refuse him the pri-
vilege of sending whom he likes to Parliament—to wit, Charles Bradlaugh,
whom you refused a seat in your House of Commons, though he has been
elected times out of number by a constituency numbering over 60,000. The
Chinaman says you interfere with his liberty when you put a poll tax upon
him, though that may be desirable in the interests of labour and morality; and
in a thousand and one things you interfere with the liberty of the subject
when it suits you. And we as workmen will interfere with the liberty of the
subject, so that he may enjoy the glorious liberty of eight hours, and the
more I think of it the more I am convinced that it will not become universal
in these free colonies unless by act of Parliament. We cannot give those men
and trades who have achieved the eight hours too much credit, but we must
not lose sight of the fact that the circumstances surrounding their cases are
more favourable to the object than are those of a great many who are longing
for it; who are striving all they can to achieve it, but from causes over which
they have no control are unable to succeed. I am alluding to shop men and
women, who are at the mercy of a few soulless individuals who can see no
enjoyment in the world themselves, and therefore refuse enjoyment to their
fellow man. Who amongst us has not passed down the streets of Melbourne
and suburbs at eight, nine, and even ten o’clock at night, and seen the poor
miserable creatures standing shivering at the shop doors, praying that a cus-
tomer might come in to relieve the awful monotony of their existence ? Ask
them the cause of long hours, and invariably the answer will be “ my employer
would willingly close earlier, but Mr. So-and-So down the street refuses to do
so, and we have no means to bring him to book, for he has no one working for
him but his own family, and, therefore, our employer, in self-defence, has got
to keep open.” Now, this picture is not overdrawn, as any of you can judge
for yourselves if you will go about our streets at night ; and I maintain that
the only way to bring such sordid rascals to book is by a stringent act of Par-
liament making eight hours the law of the land, and it must be a sharp, short,
and decisive act, so that no lawyer’s quibble can upset it, and it is for the
Congress to frame such an act, to be presented to Parliament for its consent.


My own opinion is that an act having simply two clauses is quite sufficient,
based somewhat on these lines :—First, that it shall be illegal for any male or
female to work longer than eight hours in anyone day of twenty-four hours,
or longer than forty-eight hours in any one week of seven days; second, an
employer causing any of his employes to work longer than the above, shall,
for the first offence, be fined £lO, and for the second offence shall be
imprisoned one month, without the option of a fine. (Cheers and laughter.)
In my opinion, if it is illegal for a man to get drunk, though he does no one
any harm but himself, how much more is it illegal against the laws of God
and man to over work your fellow creature ? I hope I have not taken up too
much of your valuable time, but the great object of my life is that I may take
part in and see the eight hours become the law of the land. (Applause.)
The President remarked that the Congress was indebted to Mr.
Hayes for his excellent paper, which had clearly proved the great
difficulties under which the pioneers of the Eight-Hours system had
laboured. He was proud to be able to say that the system had now
assumed such proportions that it was only a question of time when
it would become universal throughout the length and breadth of the
land.
Mr. Bindon (Enginedrivers and Firemen’s Society, Melb.) moved,
and Mr. Farlow (Furniture Trades, Melb.) seconded, a vote of
thanks to Mr. Hayes, which was carried with acclamation.
THE CHINESE QUESTION.
Mr. W. Godwin (United Furniture Trade Society, Melbourne)
read the following paper on the “ Chinese Question ; ”
In dealing with this question I would like you to expel from your
minds any biased opinion that you may perhaps have with regard to the
Chinaman, and give him a fair trial, keeping well in your minds that he,
as well as we, has the right to live. This question of Chinese competition
is, to my thinking, the most important for the working classes that this
Congress has to deal with, for on the discovery and the adoption by this
Congress of a practical plan by which we may prevent the evil of Chinese
competition depend the safety of the working classes and the very laws of
society. The Chinese, as far as we know from the experience we gain of
their characters in this country, are, as citizens, intelligent, peaceful, and
sober, and as labourers they are industrious, patient, and docile. What griev-
ance, then, can we possibly have from men of such characters as we must justly
attribute to them ? And if we have a grievance, what is the remedy for it ?
To help me, then, to show that we have a grievance, I think that it is neces-
sary that I should give a brief description of the characters of the two races
that are now in competition with each other. The Chinese come from a
country that has an excessive population, and where the law of equality of
man is unknown, but in which there is a society by whom the great mass of
the population have been ground down for many centuries past. They have
long since learned to live—in what would be to us the most abject misery—in
peace and contentment, without the slightest ambition to improve their social
position, except the desire for ease that a little money saved will procure for
them. The Europeans, on the contrary, are ambitious and educated. They
are always striving to improve their social position ; to become something more
than mere labourers, without in any way despising labour as their means of


livelihood. Our civilization is, therefore, progressive. Theirs is stationary.
Having thus briefly shown the characters of the two races, I will briefly explain
iffie grievance that we complain of, and it is that they (the Chinese) can afford
to work cheaper than we can ; and the cause of that is to be attributed to two
reasons. The first reason is that they do not come to this country to make a
home of it, and the second reason is that they never bring any families with
them. They are a dissolving mass. To-day they are here, to-morrow they
are gone —returned to China to live in Celestial ease and luxury on the money
that they made here, and a standing inducement for others to come here and
to do likewise. They do not come here for that love of liberty which is
unknown in their own country, nor do they come here to make a home, but
the sole object they come for is to make money, and as soon as they have
acquired sufficient to suit their wants they return again to their native land
without any sorrow or regret, having formed no attachments during their
sojourn with us. The Chinese* therefore, do not come to make a home for
themselves, so for that reason they very seldom take up property ; conse-
quently they have no interest in maintaining the prosperity of the country.
With us the family ties are the most sacred of our relationships, and it is a
part of our nationality. Each family is a little town or state ; a combination
■of towns or states form a nation. The nation, therefore, is a combination of
families ; the family relation, therefore, is the very foundation of our Govern-
ment ; upon it the laws of society have been formed ; laws, trades, values,
and everything appertaining to the government of a nation are regulated with
reference to it, and the question which is of most interest at the present time,
viz., wages, are regulated by it. The thought that every man has, or in the
future may have, a family to provide for enters into all his calculations. The
Chinese, as men of no families, have no need of such calculations ; they have
no families to support and educate ; but if they do, still they do not
seem to regard the relationship as sacred, as in most instances their
associates are the scum and banished ones of society, of whom the
less we have to say the better it shall be for morality. From these
few facts it must be at once apparent to any man of ordinary discern-
ment that the Europeans and the Chinese cannot remain as they are at
present, side by side, for by the system of competition to which the Europeans
are at the present time subjected they must eventually be degraded unless the
Chinese receive a decisive check. But it is claimed for the Chinese that by
their cheap labour many industries have sprung into existence that could
never have been thought of but for their presence in our midst. From this,
the capitalist’s ground of argument, the Chinese are a perfect blessing to the
country, as the misery and oppression under which they have lived for cen-
turies have long since taught the Chinese how to live on the smallest possible
amount of rice and fresh air that it is possible for degraded humanity to sub-
sist upon ; and, consequently, they find no difficulty in underbidding the
Europeans, of whom it is said that they are, as working men, too well off in
this country ; that they are too independent, proud, ambitious, and too well
educated to act as workmen ; and that the Chinese, on account of their docility,
patience, and industry, are more suited to labour than men who boast about the
enlightenment of the nineteenth century. It is quite true, in answer to that
assertion, that the British workman is not the most patient of labourers, nor
is he content long to remain one. His education, pluck, spirit, ambition, and
independence are constantly urging him to improve himself and find something
more congenial. The Chinaman, however, is quite content, and very seldom
is one found with aspirations of that description. The question then asserts
itself, when we view the docility of the Chinese and the impatience of the
Britons : Does not education unfit men for labour ? If it does, then the Govern-
ment may close up the State schools, for education would be a mistake. If it
is a mistake, then our form of government is a mistake, for our government is
based upon the intelligence of the people, and intelligence can only be gained


by education. But education does not unfit a man for labour ;he may by its
means be more able to resent an insult, or more tenacious of bis rights, more
particular with regard to his associations ; but still he is well qualified to
labour and to serve an employer better and with greater honesty than any
Chinaman that can be produced in this country ; and, apart from his ability
to serve, are not his spirit, pride, pluck, independence, and ambition things
which every honest man should admire instead of depreciating, for are they not
attributes worthy of a king ? For what man that knows the history of our
empire and its greatness—let him be rich or poor, doctor or divine, merchant
or mechanic—but must confess that that greatness, those laws of liberty and
freedom which are our proud boast, would never have been obtained if it were
not for those attributes which interested capitalists seek to condemn, but
with which, I am proud to say, every descendant of Great Britain and Ireland
is endowed by God ? How then can such men be unfit for labour on the
grounds that are put forward by a few interested capitalists ? But then it is
to their interests to have the cheap labourer, which is a direct obstacle in the
way of the advancement of any country, because the prosperity of a country
is assured more by the distribution of capital, or, in other words, by maintain-
ing a fair rate of wages than by the concentration of it, because every man
then co-operates for the welfare of his country, because he knows by its suc-
cess he himself gains a benefit. Not so with the cheap rate of labour. That
tends to concentrate capital, and therefore the labourer knows that no matter
what success attends his employer he will gain nothing by it ; and this illus-
trates clearly why a country in which a fair rate of wage is maintained
is more prosperous than the country where cheap labour prevails. Take
as an example some of the countries of Europe. Take Russia, and see
what is the effect of cheap labour in that country. The wage there is so low
that the husband, whose duty it is by the laws of God and of nature to sup-
port his wife, is unable to perform that duty, as with the wages that he re-
ceives it is a struggle for him to keep his own soul and body together ; the
wife, therefore, is compelled to share unceasingly in the outdoor labours of the
husband. The infant mortality is simply appalling ; the peasant women fre-
quently give birth to their offspring in a barn or stable, under circumstances
dangerous alike to the life of both mother and child ; no such thing as medical
attendance or nourishing food have they, but in three or four days they are
compelled, sometimes to save themselves from starving, to enter once more
the hard field of labour. And in other countries of Europe the wage is so low,
and consequently the struggle for life so severe, that as soon as a child can
add a fraction to the earnings of the family it is sent into the field to work,
without any hope of receiving the slightest education. I would ask you to
pause and imagine such a state of things as that which I have described
existing in this country. What, I ask, would be the result ? A civil war
would, I think, be the most likely thing to happen. And so it is with those
countries, for it matters not whether it be Nihilism in Russia, Socialism in
Germany, or Communism in France ; all these sects have been generated by
the miseries and hardships that the working classes of those countries have
been forced to suffer through the curse of cheap labour. But you may say, if
by cheap labour a man is mole to carry on an industry which in the absence of
cheap labour could never have been attempted, does not that tend to develop
the resources of the country and benefit the community ? My answer to that
is this :If by the carrying on of that industry the labourer’s moral and intel-
lectual condition is not degraded, then it is a benefit; but if, on the other
hand, to carry on that industry with success it is necessary that the labourers
should suffer misery and hardships, then it were better that we should not
call into existence those industries, and that we confine ourselves to such in-
dustries as we can, from our own natural facilities, carry on without causing
such hardships to the labourer. Or, you may say, that to carry on some kind
of industries it is imperative that we have a cheap class of labourer in compe-


tition with other tradesmen of a higher grade. To answer that argument
clearly I will take for example a sugar planter, who grows immense quantities
of sugar. All the work on the plantation, we will suppose, is performed by
Chinamen. We ask the planter why he works Chinese labour instead of Euro-
pean labour. He informs us that it would be impossible for him to carr3 T on
his business by the aid of European labour. We ask him the reason ; and his
answer is that Europeans could not work for wages sufficiently low to suit him,
because they have got families to support, and the Chinese have not. The
query then suggests itself, which is of most importance to us, that planters
should be able to produce sugar, or that a system of cheap labour should be
fostered in our midst, as they would slowly but surely usurp the places of
tradesmen of other crafts ? For it would be the height of insanity for us to
think that, if A. can have his business performed by cheap labour, B. would
not try to do likewise. I think then, by the examples I have cited, that I
have proved clearly, beyond a doubt, that the Chinese as cheap labourers are
in competition with every tradesman in these colonies. But the trade which
at the present time suffers most from the curse of Chinese cheap labour is the
furniture trade.
The Chinese are fast driving the Europeans out of that trade, as it is
impossible for them, no matter how skilful as tradesmen they may be, to pro-
duce goods as cheap as those manufactured by Chinamen. The reason that
they can manufacture furniture cheaper than the Europeans is—first, the
greater number of hours that they labour ; secondly, the cheaper rate at which
they live, by evading the taxes that European tradesmen have to pay. The
hours of labour for European tradesmen are eight hours per day, or forty-eight
hours per week. The Chinese work on the average about sixteen hours per
day. Thus you will see that if the Chinaman only works for six days out of
seven, he will still have worked as many hours in his six days as the European
works during the space of a fortnight. But the Chinese do not confine them-
selves to labour only on six days. . It may strike you as rather strange that in
the very centre of a Christian community like this, with laws framed for the
due observance of the Lord’s day, and with civil guardians patrolling the
Chinese quarter who have power to enforce those laws, still the Chinese manu-
facture furniture on Sunday, and by that means they are assisted to compete
successfully with the Europeans. But how, you may ask, can the Chinese
evade the taxes that the Europeans have to pay ? They do it in this way. A
European tradesman, for example, has a wife and a family of three to support ;
well, he rents a house with four rooms, and of course he has to pay the taxes
on the property. Thus we have one labourer to pay the taxes of that house.
Let us, then, go to a house of the same dimensions, and in occupation of the
Chinese. This house is made to answer as a factory and a dwellinghouse ;
timber, furniture, and workmen are all crowded together; their bunks for
sleeping on are packed together more closely than the bunks of an over-
crowded immigrant ship, and into which it is impossible for fresh air to pene-
trate. A house, then, of that size would accommodate about sixteen Chinese
workmen. Thus the combined expenses of those sixteen Chinese cabinet-
makers only amount to the same sum as that which one European cabinet-
maker pays ; and thus they evade the payment of the taxes, which are neces-
sary to support the Government, and, by that evasion, they are enabled to
deprive the man who pays to the support of the Government of his honest
means of livelihood. But if the public gained anything by the cheap labour
of the Chinese, we would be bound almost to submit to their competition.
But the public do not gain by their cheap labour ; on the contrary, they lose
by it. The first reason is, work executed by the Chinese is very inferior,
without any exception. The next reason is, that they have to paj' just
as much for an article that is made by the Chinese as they would have
to pay for an article of the same description that is made by the
Europeans, although the European article cost the warehouse man 20 per


cent, more than he paid for the Chinese article. The manner in which
that is accomplished is very simple. For example, I keep a shop and
have in it goods made by Europeans and by Chinese. The European
article costs me 20 per cent, more than the Chinese article. My selling
price brings me in on the European article 30 per cent, profit. Well,
the ordinary customer that comes in can discern no difference in the manu-
facture of the goods, and I sell him the Chinese article for the same price as X
want for the English, and I thereby gain 50 per cent, on my sale, and I still
keep the English article to sell at a profit of 30 per cent, to some customers
who may chance to know a little about how furniture should be made. I
think, then, that after showing this fraud which is practised upon them, the
general public should help us to put down this unfair competition, against
which the furniture trade have for so long and vainly struggled. Another
reason why we should receive the support of the public is that this is a Chris-
tian country, where the Sunday is regarded as a day of prayer and of rest, and
not a day for labour, which is the way in which it is spent by the heathen
Chinese ; because, if the Chinese receive the support of the public, they
(the public) give their consent to labour on Sunday, and we (the Euro-
pean tradesmen) would be forced by our fellow Christians to sacrifice the
greatest boon of Christianity to enable us to exist with such competition, to
contend with which we should have to work on Sunday, and thereby bring
Christianity down to the level of paganism. I think, then, Mr. Chairman and
gentlemen, that I have shown clearly that by the system of cheap labour the
prosperity of the country is endangered ; that the competition of the Chinese
is universal, and therefore dangerous to all trades ; that by their system of
living they defraud the State of its dues; and that if we allow cheap labour to
take root in our midst we are sowing the seeds of an evil which will bring us
to a state of serfdom. The first remedy that I think would counteract these
evils would be to bring public opinion to our aid by means of agitation. The
second remedy is that we force them to live like human beings, and not like
beasts ; to see that they act up to all the requirements of the Health Act with
regard to sanitary accommodation, &c., and the amount of cubic space that is
by that act allotted to each adult’s sleeping apartments, and thereby put a
stop to that sardine tin packing style which they have of stowing themselves
away. And last, but most efficacious, that we strive our utmost to have the
eight-hours system carried as the law of the land, and that it apply to any
habitation or factory where goods are manufactured for purposes of trade.
These, then, are the remedies that I think will be most efficient and practical,
and I think they should commend themselves, as by them no injustice is
practised on any person. And I trust that the 10,000 eight-hours men which
the Trades Hall Committee represent, who, with their families, must represent
some 50,000 colonists, will, in conjunction with kindred societies from the
other cities of the colony, let their voices be heard in support of the eight-
hours system to act with universal operation, and that those gentlemen from
other colonies who are assembled here will carry back with them to their
respective colonies the firm determination to do all they possibly can to counter-
act the evils of Chinese competition by working hard to make the eight-hours
system universal throughout the length and breadth of the land, for it is only
by the different colonists co-operating that we can hope to have success. In
conclusion, I think that I could not bring a stronger argument in favour of the
anti-Chinese agitation than the opinion of the London Times, which, after
discussing the causes of the agitation, admits the truth of the charges preferred
against the Chinese, and then goes on to say;—“We can understand and
sympathize with the dislike of our Australian fellow subjects to the catastrophe
they thus apprehend. Our Australian colonies are something more to us than
wide regions under the dominion of the English Crown, with indefinite capa-
bilities for almost every kind of material progress. We value them rather
as the homes of men of our own race, as capable of receiving and providing fp,r


the vast multitudes which from time to time are driven from our own shores,
and as likely in the distant future to grow up into a greatness equal to our
own, and not wholly unlike it in the type it opens.” It would sadly interfere
with this agreeable vision if Australia were really destined to be peopled, not
with English but with Chinese settlers ; if the abominations of a Chinese
quarter are to be found everywhere, and if white labour is to be driven out
before the advancing steps of its rival. Queensland, under such a system,
might produce more cotton and more sugar, and at a lower rate than before ;
the lands of Australia might be better tilled and her cattle might increase and
multiply under the cheap supervision of the strangers. But if these results
were to be obtained by the substitution of Chinese for Englishmen ; if, in short,
Australia were to become another China, and the addition only of a few great
capitalists and landowners, we should feel that we had well nigh lost all for
which Australia is valuable to us. We could look with no satisfaction at a
country in which the great mass of the inhabitants were in the fullest sense
aliens, in which English capital might be engaged with profit, but from which
Englishmen would be practically excluded, or would find a place only such as
the poorer class of whites did in the late slave states of America, under the
designation of “white trash.”
Mr. Godwin was accorded a hearty vote of thanks for his paper.
Mr. G. Williams (Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Victoria)
gave notice of motion of certain resolutions passed by his Associa-
tion. These were ruled out of order', but are dealt with later on in
the debate.
The Congress, at 5 p.m., adjourned till 9.30 a.m. next day.
SECOND DAY.—WEDNESDAY, 23rd APRIL, 188 A.
The Congress re-assembled at half-past 9 a.m., the President (Mr.
Benjamin Douglass) taking the chair.
FLORAL OFFERING.
The representatives of the Victorian Tailoresses’ Union (Mrs.
E. J. Creswell and Mrs. J. Graham) presented the President and
Vice-President (Mr. Talbot) with bouquets of flowers for their
courtesy in recognizing them as delegates.
The President and Vice-President I'eturned suitable thanks for
the gifts.
VISITOR.
The President introduced to the Congress Mr. John Woods,
M.L.A., who was received with general applause.
FEDERATION.
The Secretary read a letter from Mr. J. J. Walsh, stating that,
as the question of federation was likely to engage the attention of


the Trades Social Conference, he desired to bring before the
Congress the views which he expressed on this question in a letter
published in the Aye about two years ago. The letter was
received.
THE PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS,
The President then delivered the following inaugural address :
Ladies and Gentlemen, —You understand that the order for busi-
ness, as arranged for to-day, was to the effect that after the minutes
and correspondence had been read I should then give what is termed
the inaugural address of this, the second congress of labour in the
colony. It is something unusual for me to hold such an important
position as this, notwithstanding that I have long been identified
with trades’ movements, but I look upon this conference as the very
greatest movement with which I have been associated. (Applause.)
I, therefore, hope that you will show me every consideration for any
shortcomings I may be guilty of. I intend by force of example,
which I hope will be followed, to be very brief in my remarks;
but this is an occasion on which something more than usual is
expected, and, therefore, to save time, and in order that I may not
have to look for my words, I have jotted down a few remarks, as a text
for what I wish to lay before the Congress. They are as follow ;
Ladies and Gentlemen, —It is with unfeigned pleasure I address
you on this important occasion of holding the second Intercolonial
Congress of Labour, and in doing so, I desire to state that I hold
strong and fixed convictions upon the rights of labour and its relation
with capital. I look upon capital as a mere tool of trade. I ask,
then, What is the cause of the undue inequalities which at present
exist between capital and labour 1 The first cause is that fearful and
increasing evil, competition. The great aim of competition in trade
is to produce the greatest amount of labour and raw material at the
lowest possible prices. To achieve this end means are adopted
whereby the amount of manual labour (which is generally
most expensive) is decreased, and the successful competitor is
left to make choice from three pernicious alternatives, either to over-
task the mechanic, to produce work of an inferior description, or to
make his profits at the expense of public credit. In many cases they
cease to be alternatives, and trade is carried on by a combination
of brutal oppression, disgraceful imposition, and a systematic course
of fraud. In whatever light we regard the present system of compe-
tition, it must be obvious to everyone that it is fraught with the most
disastrous consequences to the working classes and to society. It is
degrading to employers themselves, it is highly injurious to a country,
and cruelly oppressive to the working classes. It is a system which
in reality differs very little from the slave trade of America, and, if
looked at in its true light, would appear equally revolting—perhaps
more so, for it assumes the disguise of humanity and justice. Does
it not cheapen down men’s lives 1 Does it not barter their health


and strength for the dirtiest lucre? Does it not induce the employer
to make his fortune out of that which should preserve the working
man’s family from destitution—nay, in some cases from starvation ?
How, I ask, are we to counteract this monster evil? Not by strikes
—strikes weaken the striker; nor by coercion, both systems are
pernicious; but by combination and the force of moral suasion.
Union is strength, knowledge is power. Let us then combine as one
man, let us be true to ourselves, and stand up for the dignity of
labour. Labour has yet to learn its own strength; it does not know it.
But, ladies and gentlemen, I look hopefully forward to that bright day
when we shall be united in one grand bond of union, and like Hlsop’s
historical bundle of reeds, “United we stand; divided we fall.” (Cheers.)
Gentlemen, I cannot find language adequately strong to express
the feelings I entertain on the inequalities which exist between
capital and labour, and I am sure you will bear with me for a moment
longer when we are approaching a danger not so much from within
as without. This approaching danger has, perhaps, not been so
forcibly brought under the notice of other delegates as my own ;
but there is a distinguished visitor now present who will be able to
bear out what lam going to read to you. It is a short cutting from
one of the papers, and has reference to the trade with India. We
are told that the exhibition which has recently been held in Calcutta
will open up a trade between us and India. What the character of
this trade would be might be gathered from a communication received
by a resident of Ballarat from Mr. James Thomson, the secretary of
the Victorian Commission to the Calcutta Exhibition, The letter is
as follows ;
“ I am sorry to say that it has been necessary to ship the whole of your
exhibits back to Melbourne. The Calcutta people show not the slightest dis-
position to purchase, in fact they would not give one half of the amounts fixed
by your invoice. Here they have some splendid saddle and harness establish-
ments in which the native workmen receive only one shilling per day, so, with
the aid of first-class machinery, it is useless to attempt competition. Some of
their work is really excellent, and wonderfully low priced. Even the English
goods which come in here free have no chance ; and so finding it quite hopeless
to attempt a sale, save at ruinous rates, I have been reluctantly compelled to
repack the whole of your consignments for return to the colony. To illustrate
the cheapness of this market, I may state that at an auction held in the Vic-
torian Court yesterday, I put up one of your best saddles, and could not get a
better offer than 26 rupees, that is equivalent to £2 3s. 4d. That has been the
sort of thing all through. I tried all I knew, moreover, to get you a better
award, but without avail, as the jurors were inflexible. I shall be home by
the next mail, and then will be able to impart fresh information as to Calcutta
prices.”
The President continued : What was the reason that such a low
amount was offered ? It was because a large trade in saddlery was
done among the Hindoos of the most exquisite workmanship, and
when it is remembered that they work for one shilling per day
with unlimited hours, you will understand how much the value of


your goods would be depreciated. What sort of a market is this for
us? You should be forewarned, which is to be forearmed, and firmly
set your backs against opening up a trade with a country in which
your own industries would have to compete with black labour'.
We must be careful how we approach this trade, for it is only
another insidious move on the part of the free-trader. (Cheers.)
These are matters for our most serious consideration. It is un-
necessary for me to reiterate the business before you, as I am
sure there is a combixxation of talexxt present which will do full justice
to the subjects you have met to deliberate xipon. Ixx conclusion, I
will ask you to exercise forbearance with oxxe another in your delibei’a-
tioxxs, and show that the working classes can deport themselves with
decox-um, axxd show those who feel inclixxed to look dowxx upon labour
that we have rights and meaxx to maintaixi them. (Cheers.)
Mr. David Bennet (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Melb.)
proposed a vote of thanks to the Chairman, for his valuable and
lucid address. (Applause.)
Mx\ William Trenwith (Victorian Opex-ative Bootmakex's’ Union)
seconded themotioxx. He said there was a very great danger in con-
nection with the openixxg up of trade between Melbourne axxd Ixxdia;
and they owed the Chairman a debt of gratitude in calling their
attexxtion to the pernicious axxd daxxgex’ous xxature of Ixxdiaxx tx-ade in
xxiany pax’ticulars.
Mr, Robert Hayes (Victorian Saddlers’ Society) heartily sup-
ported the motioxx, axxd on behalf of his society thanked the Presidexxt
for the prominexxt manner ixx which he had bx’ought this matter before
the Congress.
The motioxx was agreed to by acclamation.
The President, in said: As a fellow-wox'ker with yourselves
lam simply here to do my duty to the best of my ability. I there-
fore thank you for the complimexxt you have paid me ; axxd I will
only add that, at all times, as far as lies ixx my power, you can depend
upoxx me being trxxe to the cause of labour. (Cheers.)
AMALGAMATION OF TRADES UNIONS.
Mr. W, G. Spence (Amalgamated Miners’ Association, Maldon
Branch) proposed the following resolutioxx :
That the Congress recommend the federation of the Trades Unions of each
colony, after the following manner :—Each trade to be recommended to amal-
gamate the several unions of the same trade under one head or governing
body ; each of the latter heads then to appoint representatives to a conference
at which a Federal Council shall be elected, who shall watch over the interests
of the whole, and deal with matters affecting the well-being of the working
classes generally.
He thought there was a general consensus of opixxion among the dele-
gates of the various societies represented at the Congress that the time


had arrived when something of this sort should be brought about.
(Hear, hear.) He submitted that the motion now before them pro-
posed a practical way of taking the first step. The duties of the
Federal Council could be defined when the representatives of the
various trades met again. (Applause.) Several of the trade
societies had already amalgamated the various branches under one
head. Since 1872 the miners of the colony had been amalgamated ;
and he might remark that they did not succeed until the branches
were first amalgamated. (Hear, hear.) The only societies that had
stood were those which had united together ; and he believed it was
just as necessary for the various trade societies to unite together as
it was for men to join in the same trade. (Cheers.) Their interests
were identical, and the producers in one trade were the consumers of
the products of other trades, and it would be mutually advantageous
if all were united. They would have a better and stronger governing
body to deal with trade disputes. The object of amalgamation would
be to have governing bodies who would be, perhaps, better fitted to
deal with disputes than the branch belonging to the locality in which
they might occur. This was exemplified, with regard to miners, in
the case of the Amalgamated Miners’ Association, which, on various
occasions, when appealed to, had been able to settle disputes between
employers and employed in an amicable manner, avoiding strikes
which must otherwise have ensued. (Applause.) This fact must
always commend itself to both parties. They all recognized the use-
fulness of capital, and all present, he was convinced, desired to work
amicably with the employers of labour. (Hear, hear.) They knew
that, as a ride, employers were afraid to see workmen combine,
because they feared such combinations would result in the loss of
some of the profits they had been gaining, and of which the working
men ought to get a little more. A great deal of alarm, however, had
arisen from defective knowledge on the subject. Experience had
shown that trades unions, instead of injuring employers, operated to
their advantage. He knew employers in several districts who had
admitted that, where trade societies had been established, they had
proved useful to them. In fact, they induced the men to take a
greater interest in their work, and brought various advantages which
otherwise would not be gained. At the present time they lacked a
head, and could not pull together. In the country they did not know
how many unions there were. The Federal Council would act as
the head, and deal with questions only of general interest—such as
the Trades Unions Bill and the legalization of the Eight-Hours Sys-
tem. (Applause.) He presumed that many of those present were
acquainted with the work of the Parliamentary Committee of the
Trades Congress in England—watching the progress of all measures
which might affect the interests of labour. The Intercolonial Federal
Council should take a similar position. (Hear, hear.) In this matter
they were nearly 20 years behind England, where labour was taking


rapid strides. (Hear, hear.) They were not so far advanced in their
organizations here as they were in England. It was necessary that
the societies here should keep up to the societies in England; and he
assured the Congress that, if the trade societies of the colonies only
realized what power they had in their hands, they would be all united
to-morrow. They could govern this country; and the reason why
they did not do it was because they had not yet realized their posi-
tion. (Applause.) This ignorance—because it was ignorance and
want of thought—must be completely eradicated. He would suggest
that those societies which were already amalgamated should amalga-
mate with each other, and this would form the nucleus of the Federal
Council. The proper persons to take initiatory action in the matter
were the members of the Melbourne Trades’ Hall Committee, and he
was strongly of opinion that, if the Melbourne and country branches
acted together, the proposed amalgamation could be carried out in a
w months. (Cheers.)
Mr, A. Brooks (Victorian Saddlers’ Society) seconded the motion.
If this amalgamation was accomplished, he believed it would be the
means of uniting the working men of Australia into one grand body.
MINISTERIAL VISITORS.
Mr. T. Huggan (Melbourne Typographical Society) suggested that
the debate should be suspended to allow Messrs. Service, Berry, and
Wrixon to address the Congress. The suggestion was carried with
acclamation, and the visitors took their seats on either side of the
President.
Mr. Service, having been introduced by the President, rose amidst
applause. He said he had very great pleasure in meeting the
representatives of trades and labour in Victoria, New South Wales,
and South Australia, that day in Congress assembled. He hardly
expected the members would interrupt the debate for the purpose of
hearing a few isolated remarks from visitors, and he was quite sure
that any attempt on his part, or on the part of any of the other
visitors to prolong their remarks would not be welcome to the dele-
gates. He had watched with great pleasure, for many years, the
gradual progress made by the working classes of this colony. In
his early youth he was one of those who earned their living by the
work of their hands, by the sweat of their brow, by manual labour,
and from that time until the present he had never ceased to feel
interested in the elevation of the industrial classes, socially, morally,
and economically. Although circumstances might have isolated him
to a certain extent from certain movements of the industrial classes,
the objects of the leaders of those movements had been thoroughly
shared in and believed in by himself. (Applause.) With respect to
the Eight-Hours System, he had always encouraged it. (Cheers.)
He had also occasion frequently to appear upon the platform in con-
nection with the early-closing movement —a movement which he


thought was cognate with the Eight-Hours movement—one which
had just the same tendencies as the Eight-Hours, viz.—the elevation
of the condition of the industrial classes, and to abolish or modify to
a certain extent that system which had rightly been called “ White
Slavery.” He next referred to the question of the proposed influx
of French convictism into the colonies. He was quite sure that on
this question the colonies had come to one determination. There
was only one difficulty in the way, which was the want of an execu-
tive. These convicts were the worst possible siftings out of the bad
from the French nation, and they were to be thrown on our shores
to taint the present generation and posterity for all time to come.
The people must feel their hearts beat when they think of themselves
as Australians, and not as Victorians; therefore they should unite
as one body when they would not be treated as children. (Cries of
“ shame.”) The federal council which recently sat at Sydney had
been misconstrued ; it had been regarded in some quarters as a pro-
posal to supersede the local legislatures, and to place in the hands of
a few men—fourteen was the number—the power of regulating the
political and social affairs of the entire continent. No such proposal
was ever meant. A great many would like to see a dominion here
such as the Dominion of Canada ; but nobody thought that the time
had arrived when that could be brought about. The desire at present
was to create a body which would be an executive, with legislative
powers—a body that would place upon the statute book the laws
Xvhich had been agreed to by the various local legislatures. (Applause.)
There was no desire that the federal council should originate one
single law of its own accord. What they wanted was a combination
Xvhich would enable them to cable to England regarding the French
convict difficulty, and the people of England upon reading it would
be able to exclaim, “ This is a voice from Australia.” (Prolonged
cheers.)
Mr. Graham Berry, who was received with cheers, expressed the
great pleasure he felt at meeting the delegates under such favourable
circumstances. He had looked over their notice paper, and con-
gratulated the Congress upon the moderation and wisdom shown in
the subjects chosen for discussion. Those subjects were matters for fair
discussion, and, when sufficiently threshed out, there was scarcely
one of them that would not be ripe for legislation. Probably they
would consider it necessary at this period of time to take notice of
those cognate classes who were not associated with the union, and
who did not possess, possibly, the same vantage ground. He referred
to assistants in shops, who were clamouring for shorter hours of
labour. They were entitled to the sympathy of the Trades Union,
the same as the Trades Union were entitled to the sympathy of other
classes. It would be a grand thing, if, before separating, the
Congress would give a united expression of opinion against late
shopping by their classes. (Cheers.) First of all they should look


to the female sex to help the shop assistants to shorten hours by
not doing late shopping. He need not tell them how much he
sympathized with every movement, social or political, that had for
its object the elevation of the working classes. If it were possible
to legislate in that direction, if it were possible to give the working
classes better wages and more time for recreation, then the Trades
Union had an object worth living for. (Applause.) In accepting
invitations to attend the Congress, the Premier and himself thought
their presence would show a sympathy with them in the movement,
and he did not think they would find two men in the whole of
Australia more in accord with the Trades Union than the Premier
and himself. (Loud applause.) He was proud when he saw that
grand procession of thousands of working men —well dressed, intelli-
gent working men. In many of the comments of the public press
a beneficial change was manifested. (Applause.) The Trades
Union had a great battle to fight, but as the members had tact,
judgment, and discernment, and possessed moderate views, he did
not know that he could conclude his remarks better than by asking
them to continue in that course for the future, when he. hoped to see
beneficial results from their labours. They did not want to see the
working classes altogether governing the colonies, or that they could
do what they liked. (Cries of “No, no.”) The people did not
desire to raise up antagonism upon the part of any other class, but
they did want to say that they were an important element, so
important that their wishes were not to be overlooked in a cavalier
manner. They wanted trades unions to be represented in the
councils of the nation, and they could not impress their views better
than by using moderate language. (Applause.) Let them never
put their foot down and have to take it up again. They should
be faithful, cautious, and moderate, and when they had thoroughly
threshed out the question they should be determined. (Prolonged
cheers.)
Mr. H. J. Wrixon (M.L.A.) also addressed the Congress. He
said : In these days politics had become a social science, and the
one great question was how political power should be distributed.
That was a question which might xxow be regarded as settled, as it
was generally conceded that power must rest with the people.
(Applause.) In this respect all civilized countries were following
the footsteps of the United States of America and England, and
were gradually transferring power to the people. Eeferring to the
pauper class in the old country, he said the official reports showed
a most deplorable state of things. These accounts showed that
thousands and thousands of people were living in England in an
abject conditioxx, which crushed them down into degi’adation so as to
appear little better than the South Sea Islanders. (Cries of
“ shame.”) This state of things would not continue if political
power were in the hands of the masses. Australia had the privilege


of leading the way to a change which would ever prevent the mass
of the people sinking into so undesirable a social state, and to take
such steps as would enable them to combine with a reasonably
prosperous condition a safe progress of the State from one stage to
another. (Applause.) This was, in fact, what the whole political
struggle of the day amounted to. The struggles of the ins and outs
were of no importance to this great social question, (Hear, hear.)
The Trades Unions, which represented a large principle, had been
called together to discuss measures which would guard the masses
here from sinking down to the condition of some of the poorer
classes in older countries. (Applause.)
VOTES OF THANKS.
Mr. W. G. Spence (Amalgamated Miners’ Association, Maldon)
moved a vote of thanks to the visitors for their attendance. He
was sure that the interruption of the debate had not been time
lost, as the delegates must feel themselves indebted to the visitors for
their admirable speeches. The Congress, in fact, might congratulate
itself upon having gone a fair way towards attaining its objects.
They were greatly indebted to their visitors, as leaders in Victoria,
for their assurance of sympathy, and he felt sure that the few words
of advice given by the speakers would not be thrown away.
(Applause.)
Mr. J. E. West (Trades and Labour Council, N.S.W.) seconded
the motion. He agreed with the remarks of the Premier and Chief
Secretary of Victoria, and felt sure that they were the sentiments of
all colonists who had the question of federation really at heart. He
was sure that New South Wales was now fully alive to the necessity
of establishing a Federal Council. (Applause.)
The motion was supported by Mr. R. Phillips (Operative Masons
and Bricklayers’ Association, South Australia), Mr. G. Williams,
Amalgamated Miners’ Association, Victoria), Mr. Talbot, Vice-
President (N.S.W.), and carried by acclamation.
Mr. Service, in returning thanks, said he would look upon his
attendance at the Congress as one of the bright little spots which live
in the memory.
The Premier and Chief Secretary then retired, Mr. Wrixon
remaining.
AMALGAMATION OF TRADES UNIONS.
The debate on this question was resumed by
Mr. J. E. West (Trades and Labour Council, N.S.W.) who intima-
ted that he supported the motion for federation amongst the different
trade societies in the colonies as a cause that would advance a
system of good fellowship between the members. He urged that the
trade societies in each colony should arrange for exchange of members
without repayment of entrance money. (Applause.)


Mr. Josiah Wright (N.S.W. Seamen’s Union, Sydney) said that
the chief object of his coming to the Congress was to do all in his
power to bring about the amalgamation of the various trade societies
throughout the colonies. They wanted a Colonial Merchant Shipping
Act. The English Act was inadequate, and did not suit those whom
he represented. (Applause.) On behalf of the N.S.W. Seamen’s
Union he heartily supported the scheme for amalgamation of the
trade societies. (Applause.)
Mr. P. Edersiiam (Cigar Makers’ Society, Melbourne), in sup-
porting the motion, pointed out that owing to political causes the
cigar manufacturing industry in New South Wales was recently
crushed. The men employed in the trade all came down to Mel-
bourne for work, the result being that the local market was glutted
and every workman in the trade was more or less injured. This
fact clearly showed the necessity for an amalgamation of trades
unions to regulate these affairs and to protect the men,
Mr. John Jones (Society of Ix-onmoulders of New South Wales)
supported the motion. The society to which he belonged had
had this matter under consideration for some time. The benefits
of amalgamation were all in favour of the men. Suppose,
for instance, there was a slackness of trade in one colony, the
kindred societies in the other colonies could be telegraphed to, and
asked the state of the labour market. This would prevent men
coming, say from Queensland to Victoria for work, when probably
they might have been informed before starting that there was none
to be obtained. (Applause.)
Mr. R. Phillips (Operative Masons and Bricklayers’ Association,
S.A.) said that as every member of the Congress appeared to be of
one mind that there should be an amalgamation of trades unions, it
was a waste of time to discuss the subject further. On behalf of his
society he cordially supported the resolution.
Mr. W. Trenwith (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union) said
that, as trade unionists, it was impossible for them to over-estimate
the importance of the question under discussion, because it seemed
to him that there was no question which could possibly affect the
privileges and rights of labour that was not involved in that of
amalgamation. It was absolutely necessary for trade unionism to
exercise all its functions, and therefore amalgamation should take
place. But they must be thoroughly united by a system of central
government, moved not only from all points in Australasia, but from
all parts of the world. One of the dangers always menacing them
was the importation of labour from other parts of the world ; but
this would be nullified if the trades were united. He believed that
such an organization actually existed in connection with the Society
of Engineers, who had branches in every quarter of the civilized
globe. The society to which he belonged (the Bootmakers) had alone
commenced the expense and responsibility of amalgamation, but


without yet reaping any of its benefits. His society had undertaken
to watch every struggle going on in the boot trade in all parts of the
colonies, though this was work not for one society but the trades
generally. The capitalists would not be so ready to assail individual
members of a trade if they were aware that by so doing they would
be assailing the united strength of the trade. The means of com-
munication between the colonies was so easy and rapid that every
inducement presented itself for amalgamation. But he hoped the
delegates would not be satisfied by merely attending the Congress
and passing regulations. In order to give the Congress practical
importance, each delegate, when he returned home, must continue to
do all in his power to give effect to the recommendations of the
Congress. (Loud applause.)
Mr. Jacob Hogg (Australian Bookbinders’ Consolidated Trades
Union, Melb.), in supporting the resolution, pointed out the
advantages gained by his society through its members amalgamating.
By the extension of this union they would benefit shopmen and news-
vendors, as well as the associated ti-ades.
Mr. W. Robertson (Ironmoulders’ Society, Vic.) said that his
society had taken the first step towards amalgamation of Trades
Unions throughout the colonies, but an executive body was absolutely
necessary, in order to see that no public work was sent out of the
colony, (Cheers.) It was only recently that a large order was sent
home for a dredge for the Yarra. This was not creditable to a
protective and manufacturing colony, and should not have been
allowed, as the work could very well have been cai-ried out here.
Mr. R. Hayes (Victorian Saddlers’ Society) gave an instance of
the beneficial results obtained in England by the saddlers uniting.
The condition of the trade was never better than at present, when
branches were established all over the United Kingdom ; wages had
been increased 20 per cent, in consequence. Such a result could not
have been obtained without amalgamation.
Mr, R. Simon (Victorian Association of Felt Hatters) instanced
the society to which he belonged as one which would not have been
crushed out of existence had the societies been amalgamated.
Mr. G. Rolling (Cigar Makers’ Society, Melb.) said that in conse-
quence of the fiscal policy in operation in New South Wales his
trade was not established there, and, consequently, the society he
represented was not greatly interested in the amalgamation question.
They trusted, however, that the Government of New South Wales
would shortly adopt a protective policy, under which the trade
would doubtless be stimulated there as it had been here. (Ap-
plause.) He heartily supported the motion.
Mr. W. Westman (Coachmakers’ Society, N.S.W.) said his own
trade felt the necessity of amalgamation as much as any. Ships
were constantly arriving from other countries, bringing manu-
factured articles, and the consequence was they had no large


factories, such as those which flourished in Victoria. He was not
blind to the fact that thousands of their fellow men were earning
their living by the pen, and he was sorry that the mercantile trade
was not represented at the Congress. In New South Wales they
had a great mercantile trade. For example, they purchased boots
from Victoria which were as good and cheap as those imported
from the old country ; if New South Wales .could only federate
with Victoria under fair conditions, Victoria might do the manu-
facturing while New South Wales did the mercantile portion of the
trade. The question of amalgamation of trades was the most
important one before the Congress. The only way they could
properly consider it was by the trades meeting and discussing the
question how federation might be best accomplished, so that when
trade was dull in Victoria men might go to New South Wales, and
vice versa. . He thought if they could accomplish this, it would be
the grandest achievement that had taken place in the interest of the
working man throughout the colonies.
Mr. A. Drayton (United Operative Painters’ Society, Sydney),
in supporting the motion, referred to the difficulties his society had
experienced about eighteen months ago, when they went out on
strike, through the want of unity among the trades and the refusal
of the stronger organizations in Sydney to assist them. He thought
the various trades should combine, each trade having a head of its
own to administer its affairs. For instance, the iron trades could
form a central council, and so with the building trades and others.
Each council would work in its own interest. Tailors, for instance,
would not be called upon to interfere with bricklayers or other
tradesmen, about whose trade affairs they could absolutely know
nothing. A trades and labour council could be formed to deal with
matters in the same way as the Upper House in Parliament. He
called upon all those who knew the practical value of association to
join together in this scheme, and to spread abroad its benefits
throughout the colony.
Mr. D. Bennet (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Melb.)
thought it was almost a matter of regret that in the discussion upon
this question no delegates had taken the opposite side, and there were
consequently no arguments to answer. Unfortunately he was
compelled to follow in the same wake as those preceding him. The
Premier’s remarks respecting a Federal Council was one of the best
arguments in favour of amalgamation of trade unions. No better
illustration of the benefits to be derived from amalgamation could be
offered than that supplied by the case of the society which he repre-
sented. His society was a branch of the parent society in England,
which had been in existence 33 years, and the experience of the
society during that time fully showed the benefits to be derived from
an amalgamation of all societies as far as practicable. The execu-
tive council of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers in England


was now looked upon as the strongest and most important trade
organization in the world. Disputes between employers and em-
ployed were referred to the executive. Their efforts in the first in-
stance were of a conciliatory character, and they never recommended
a strike without first exhausting all reasonable means of arriving at
an amicable settlement. (Applause.) The experience gained in
England showed that the Trades Union Congress had been able to
achieve very great results, which were attributable to amalgamation.
The Congress started about 15 yeai-s ago, and widened the basis of
its operations year by year until it established the Parliamentary
Committee which now sat permanently in London to watch in the
interests of labour over measures introduced in the Legislature.
This committee had gained a Trades Union Bill and a Criminal
Amendment Act, which had placed the working men of England in a
far better position than their brothers in Australia. To further
illustrate the advantage to be derived from union, he referred to the
Society of Shopmen Assistants. This association was established in
Melbourne some two years ago, and regret had been expressed that
some representatives of that body were not present. With the ex-
ception of the somewhat conservative Early-Closing Association, he
Avas not aware that the shopmen had any organization. The associa-
tion fell to pieces in consequence of its own inherent weakness.
(Applause.) There were difficulties to be overcome before the pro-
posed amalgamation could be effected, and the delegates ought not to
be too sanguine of immediate success. A hint had been thrown out
that in a few months a Federal Council would be in existence.
There were innumerable practical difficulties to be encountered, pre-
judices to be removed, and a great many matters to be carefully
considered, before they could establish a wide-reaching bond of
brotherhood in the Australian colonies. Those difficulties would be
dealt with, and his only hope was that in the course of a few years
they w r ould be in a better position than they were at present with
regard to the rights of labour. When they secured amalgamation
he trusted that it would be on such a basis that it could not be
broken up again. (Hear, hear, and applause.)
Mr. W. E. White (Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and
Joiners, Melb. branch) supported the motion. He referred to the
benefit which amalgamation had conferred on his society, not only in
the colonies, but all over the world.
Mr. J. Winter (Australian Bookbinders’ Consolidated Trade
Union, Melb.) stated that when his society was formed, five or six
years ago, they adopted the comprehensive title “ Australian” instead
of “ Victorian,” and invited the bookbinders of Sydney and Adelaide
to amalgamate with them. The reply they received from Sydney
was that in consequence of the bad feeling existing between the two
colonies it would be impossible for them to agree. He was now
pleased to find by the presence of delegates from Sydney that this


unfriendly feeling had been partially swept away, and that the trade
organizations in that city now agreed with the Melbourne society as
to the benefits derivable from amalgamation. The society in Mel-
bourne would be only too glad to amalgamate with the trade in
Sydney, (Hear, hear.)
Mr. J, Donohue (United Society of Boilermakers and Iron Ship-
builders, Ballarat) said that about eight years ago his society sent to
the Sydney society requesting them to amalgamate, but they refused
because the Ballarat Society had not sufficient funds. This con-
sideration would, in his opinion, be the drawback on the whole of
the trade. But he would point out that the first step was trade
unionism. They did not want unity of funds, which was only a
secondary object, but unity of purpose. Another great benefit to be
derived by the amalgamation of the whole of the trades unions in the
colonies would be the help tradesmen would receive in the event of
removing from one colony to another in search of employment.
(Hear, hear.) He maintained that the trades of Victoria were more
cemented than those of New South Wales, for in Victoria they had
combined to build this great hall in which the Congress was assembled.
If the trades were amalgamated it would lead to the whole of the
Government work being done in the colonies, and prevent a large
body like the Melbourne Harbour Trust sending orders to England
for machinery which could be constructed here. The Trust in calling
for tenders for the steam dredge “ Crocodile ” intimated that even
if the lowest Australian tender were £5,000 above the lowest English
tender the former would receive favourable consideration. But what
was the fact 1 The lowest Australian tender was £23,000 and the
English tender £21,000. The result was that the “ Crocodile ” was
made in England and sent to the colony, but before it was put in
thorough working order it cost altogether £27,000.
Mr. James S. M'Gowan (United Society of Boilermakers and
Iron Shipbuilders, Sydney) said he believed in the unity of individ-
uals, and as a matter of course supported the unity of all trades; but
he considered that the time had not yet arrived when amalgamation
could be effected upon the broad principles enunciated by some of the
delegates. It would be quite time when amalgamation was adopted
in this colony amongst the various trades to consider its adoption
between one colony and another. Then they could consider the
broader views of amalgamating with trades in Great Britain and
other parts of the world. But before amalgamating, they should first
consider whether it was a legal proceeding, otherwise they might, as
a previous speaker had jocularly put it, “ be indicted for conspiracy,”
(Laughter and applause.) He would like to have heard some prac-
tical scheme propounded. How were they going to manage with re-
spect to the difference in the funds of the societies ? The experience
of his society was that it had taken them all their time to manage
their own business. They could not, in his opinion, interfere with


the trade affairs of any of the other colonies in the manner indicated.
The society which he represented had 300 members and a capital of
£1,670, which had taken seven years to accumulate. If a dispute
arose between the employers and the men in New South Wales,
and a strike occurred, the society money would be exhausted in six
months. If an executive body were established the expense would
be still greater, and very few societies could withstand the strain.
He was strongly of opinion that the various trades should amalga-
mate, and have an executive in each colony. (Applause.)
Mr. James Curley (Coal Miners’ Mutual Protection Association,
Hunter River District, N.S.W.) stated that the amalgamation of
trades in New South Wales was already accomplished. They
possessed a Trades and Labour Council at which 24 societies,
numbering 8,000 members, were represented. He thought that the
amalgamation of trades unions meant the establishment of a federal
head in Victoria, to be formed from the various trades of the respec-
tive colonies. He congratulated the Victorian tradesmen on the
great interest they took in unionism, but he regretted that there
was not here, as in New South Wales, legalization of trades unions,
and an Employers’ Liability Bill. Those measures were brought
about by the holding of an intercolonial trades congress, and forcing
the matter upon the legislature. (Cheers.) The objection raised
by Mr. M‘Cowan, that the difference in funds would not permit of
the amalgamation of societies, could be remedied by the money being
incorporated in a general fund, and from that distributed pro rata.
The only barrier in the way of amalgamation or federation was the
selfishness of the men themselves. If, however, they were willing
to act in an unselfish manner, he thought very little time would
elapse before the various trades throughout Australia would be
amalgamated into one body. (Cheers.)
Mr. John Talbot (Society of Ironmoulders, N.S.W.) thought
that it would be to the mutual benefit of the workmen of the same
trades in the various colonies if they were amalgamated. In New
South Wales the society which he represented had reason to regret
that they had not amalgamated with the Victorian society. Some
time ago the society in Sydney sought to redress what they con-
sidered an injustice done to the ironmoulders of that city, but before
any action was taken their employers sent over agents to Victoria,
and imported a large number of men sufficient to carry on the work.
If both societies had been federated such a thing could not have
happened. If employers in New South Wales knew that workmen
were federated they would have to concede to any reasonable
request.
Mr. J. D. Boyd (Ironfounders’ Trade Union, Melbourne) said
that his society was almost on the point of amalgamating with the
New South Wales Society of Ironmoulders. In supporting the
resolution, he hoped that before the delegates from the Sydney Iron-


moulders crossed the border, they would carry with them an
agreement from the Melbourne Ironfounders by which both would
be pledged to amalgamate. (Cheers.)
Mr. Edward Cooke (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Wil-
liamstown) was of opinion that, instead of dealing with the question
from a general point of view, the Congress should have entered into
details in order to ascertain to what extent the scheme was practic-
able. On the question of amalgamation the Congress was unanimously
agreed, but as the various societies throughout the colonies were on
somewhat different bases, it was necessary that a detailed scheme
should be drawn up. It seemed to him to be utterly impossible
for the societies to amalgamate in the manner suggested by some,
viz., in the union of funds. If, as he understood the mover of the
resolution, it was intended that the various trades unions should
combine together with the view of forming a federal council, or a
council to have under it the whole of the unions, then it would have
his hearty support. He feared, however, that the difference in the
organization of each society would prevent a satisfactory amalga-
mation upon the broad principles enunciated by some of the
delegates. (Applause.)
Mr. G. Williams (Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Victoria)
said considerable misapprehension existed as to the basis upon which
the proposed amalgamation was to be carried out. As one of the
original movers of amalgamation of trades unions, he would like to
give an explanation. The subject was first mentioned at a meeting
of the Amalgamated Miners’ Association, when the idea was to
extend it throughout the mining centres of the colony. The colony
had been fairly worked up, and at the present time there were 19
branch associations. There were some differences of opinion at the
same time, and many had advocated a federation of all the trades,
which they were advocating that day. The Amalgamated Miners’
Association now numbered 8,000 members, and had a reserve fund of
£B,OOO. The miners now desired assistance—not of a pecuniary
character, but help to pass measures through Parliament. They had
failed on many occasions to get measures passed which had been
important to their industry ; but, if the trade societies generally gave
their assistance, he believed they would be able to bring sufficient
influence to bear upon members of Parliament to carry any measure,
providing it was fair and reasonable. (Applause.) It was their
desire to prevent a recurrence of strikes or deadlocks, and to use
moral suasion. (Hear, hear.) Looking at amalgamation from a
desire to benefit themselves, they saw that, if they could bring the
influence of—instead of 8,000 —30,000 or 40,000 men to bear upon
any question, a more satisfactory settlement was likely to be arrived
at. The settlement of a dispute by such a representative body was
sure to be more complete than if accomplished by local influence
alone. In the event of any trouble arising with them, the Amalga-


mated Miners’ Association desired to have some men of influence
in Melbourne who would be in a position to put the local societies
aside if necessary, and investigate the merits of a dispute and decide
it apart from local feelings, and upon the lines of fair play and jus-
tice. (Cheers.) He would impress upon them to try and sink little
differences. With regard to the Amalgamated Miners’ Association,
he knew that many of their small branches were stronger than the
large branches. He would ask the delegates to carefully weigh this
question before coming to a decision on the motion, and not allow
little party jealousies to jeopardize the movement of union amongst
the working classes.
Mr. Duncan MTvor (Tailors’ Trade Protection Society, Melb.),
in supporting the motion, said they had met together as reasonable
men to decide what they considered best for their own interests with-
out destroying the interests of others. They thought capital and
labour should go hand in hand. If the members of all trades were
once properly united there were numerous complaints which would
be abolished in a very short time. They should strive to guard
against the working classes here drifting into such a terrible state of
affairs as existed in Glasgow. According to Mr. Mitchell, a member
of the Glasgow School Board, it was estimated that there were no
less than 45,000 families each occupying only one room ; but the
degrading fact was that out of this number 34 single rooms had 10
persons resident in each of them, 122 single rooms with 9 persons,
401 with 8, 1,047 with 7, and 2,400 with 6 persons in each. If the
people of Glasgow were properly united, such an awful state of affairs
would not exist. (Applause.)
Mr. C. A. Fuller (Victorian Slaters’ Society) said he was informed
that a large number of the delegates from the other colonies con-
sidered the question before the chair the most important one they
had to deal with. The subject should be looked at from two aspects.
Were the ironmoulders, for instance, to consider themselves as one
society, no matter in which colony the branches existed, or were all
the trades to be regarded as one body under the scheme of amalga-
mation! (Ho.) Well, then, the problem could be very easily solved
in this way. Take the ironmoulders. Let them organize branches
in the different colonies and hold a conference to draw up a code of
rules for themselves as a whole. (Hear, hear. A voice : “ That has
been done in Melbourne by the ironmoulders.”) Well, let their prin-
ciple be extended to every trade. The delegates trusted that before
leaving Victoria they would be united. He hoped that once a year
the trades would meet similar to the Friendly Societies, and that
while legislating for the whole they would remain true to their own
trade. (Applause.)
Mr. J. F. Hunter (Amalgamated Miners’ Association, Vic.)
supported the resolution. The fact of getting the good qualities
of the various trades gathered together would have such a beneficial


effect upon the discontented that they must eventually come under
the common banner. If amalgamation was successful locally, he saw
no reason why it should not be successful under a more extended
form. A difficulty appeared to have arisen as to what would be
done with the funds in the hands of the various societies ; whether
they should become a general fund or not. But he thought it would
be very reasonable to ask the trades to work on their own basis, and
only requiring the executive body or federal council to assist in the
settlement of disputes of larger significance, which the branch socie-
ties were not powerful enough to grapple with. This would be on
the same principle as that existing between the States of America.
He was glad that few objections had been raised during the debate
to the general principle of union, the only difficulties raised had been
with respect to details. He would assume that if this principle was
confirmed it would be the duty of the Congress to appoint a sub-
committee to draft a code under which the ideas of amalgamation
could be worked out. (Applause.)
Mr. T. Ogden (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, South Melbourne
Branch) supported the resolution. He instanced the benefits amal-
gamation had conferred on his brother tradesmen.
Mr. P. Stokes (South Australian United Builders and Labourers’
Society) briefly supported the motion.
Mr. W. G. Spence (Amalgamated Miners’ Association, Maldon
Branch), in replying to his resolution, said he had been very pleased
with the debate, and was glad that the subject met with almost
unanimous approval. He thought that many of the troubles which
were anticipated were really the result of looking too far ahead.
With respect to the point raised, that some of the trades had nothing
in common to warrant their uniting, he would ask what was there in
common between the calling of a seaman and a miner 1 Yet, when the
seamen of Sydney were out on strike, they asked for and obtained assist-
ance from the Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Victoria. Nor did
the seamen forget that assistance. They sent over <£loo when that
terrible accident happened at Creswick. (Prolonged cheers.) He
maintained that every tradesman in the colony had an interest in his
fellow-tradesman, however dissimilar their respective callings might
be. (Cheers.) If they were fighting a battle in Melbourne, the
various branches of the Miners’ Association would want to come to
it. He was somewhat surprised to hear one delegate say that the
cigar makers were not interested in the matter ; but, as a matter of
fact, there was not a member of any society in the colony who was
not interested. He was also surprised to hear his friend, Mr.
M'Gowan, say that they should have the trades unions legalized
before they were amalgamated ; but he considered that they should
by all means amalgamate first, to show that they were acting together,
and also to show their strength. The more they showed their
strength, and the better they were organized, the sooner they would


obtain the desired end. (Applause.) Now, what did amalgamation
mean ? There were several miners’ societies formed in various parts
of the colony, and they each agreed to send a delegate to a conference
held at Sandhurst. They had a copy of rules, which were adopted.
Each branch retained its own funds to this day, and was allowed to
mind its own business. It was only occasionally, when they could
not settle disputes, that the aid of the executive body, or the head
of the organization, was invoked. Every member subscribed
one penny per month towards defraying the expenses of the
executive body. The expenses embraced the fees of delegates
and sending representatives to various places in endeavouring to
educate miners up to the principles of the Association. What
had been done by the Amalgamated Miners’ Association might be
accomplished by all the trades generally. The proposition embraced
this suggestion, that, when each of the societies amalgamated with
the various unions, representatives were chosen to attend another
meeting, at which the federal council could be appointed. The object
of having it narrowed down to an executive council was to reduce cost.
As the societies grew the parliament of labour would become too
large, and the executive council, as a head, was all that was required.
But he did not think they were quite ripe yet for a general executive
for the whole of Australasia. The oganization would resemble an
army, at the head of which stood the general, and everyone below
him would have a part to perform. He thought they were all con-
vinced of the efficacy of the amalgamation of trades unions, and any
of the necessary details could be thought out after they adopted the
resolution. ( Cheers.)
The President said that after the very able discussion on the
resolution there was very little for him to add. He believed there
were no two opinions as to the advisability of amalgamation. He
would tell the delegates of New South Wales that the Victorian
delegates were quite united on the question, and were desirous of
reciprocity of labour, which must for mthe bulwark of the industrial
classes. (Applause.)
The resolution was then put and carried unanimously.
LEGALIZATION OF TRADES UNION BILL.
Mr. George Williams (Amalgamated Miners’ Association of
Victoria) moved :
“ That it is desirable that a Trades Union Bill, on the lines of that now
in operation in Great Britain, and having for its object the legalization of trade
unions, should be speedily passed into law in these colonies.”
Under the law at present in operation known as 6 Geo. IV,, and
which was passed into this country, they had no standing, and were
not allowed to hold meetings for the purpose of organizing strikes.


Its operation in this country was certainly not only a disgrace to the
trades, but to the employers as well. 11,000 prosecutions had taken
place under that act in Great Britain. Not so long ago, in England,
two men were prosecuted for holding a meeting agitating for a strike.
They were sent out to this country, and, although the decision was
reversed by a higher court, some years elapsed before they knew that
they were pardoned. In fact, they only received intimation through
the medium of some newspapers. In many other cases of persecution
the men had justice on their side. They had no means of bettering
their position except through organizing strikes. Some years ago
the persecution which working men underwent was disgraceful.
There did not seem to be much difficulty in getting a bill legalizing
trades unions passed through the local Legislative Assembly, but the
opposition came from the Council. The question was, could they
bring influence to bear to get the measure passed in the Upper
House? The attempt should certainly be made during the next
session of Parliament. (Cheers.) He believed that the Melbourne
members were determined to carry this bill, and would bring influence
to bear. There was a feeling of unanimity from the remarks he had
heard, therefore, they should be firm and determined in this matter.
He hoped it would become law during the next session of Parlia-
ment. (Cheers.)
Mr. J. F. Hunter (Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Victoria)
seconded the resolution.
Mr. J. E. West (Trades and Labour Council of N.S.W.) supported
the resolution. In New South Wales trades unions were legalized,
and he trusted that similar legislation would shortly be enacted in
Victoria.
Mr. Elmslie (Operative Masons, Vic.j, in supporting the resolu-
tion, said he felt confident that it would receive the support of a
large majority of his fellow-workmen, but there were certain clauses
in the bill introduced into the Lower House last session which he
would not accept on any condition whatever. One of his objections
was that employers of labour were denominated “ masters,” and that,
he held, involved a very undesirable class distinction. (Hear, hear.)
Another objection was that the measure provided means by which
anyone could, by paying half-a-crown, obtain information respecting
the financial position of each society. The bill also provided
that a statement showing the financial position of each society
should be submitted to Parliament annually, and be pub-
lished in the Government Gazette and local newspapers. He was
aware that it was not the intention of the framers of that
measure to compel every society to register. More than one
of the leading societies in England, he was informed, had
not registered themselves in compliance with the terms of a similar
bill.
Mr. David Bennet (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Melb.)


was of opinion that it did not very much matter whether his
employer was called his “ master ”or not. (Hear, hear.) He would
not be inclined to throw out a useful and important measure because
of one or two phrases against which some slight objections might be
urged. It had been stated that some of the principal trade societies
in England were not registered under the act in force there, but the
reason of this was that the sick, the funeral, and the incidental
funds had to be kept in separate accounts. The two bills initiated
in the Lower House had passed that chamber, and he did not think
there would have been any difficulty in the Upper House but for one
or two clauses, dealing with a different subject, which were tacked
on by a member of the Upper House. They were quite willing to
consider a criminal bill by itself, but they strongly objected to have
two different subjects mixed up in one bill. The Legalization of
Trades Unions Bill in operation in Hew South Wales was almost on
the same lines as the English act, and the Victorian act was
nearly a transcript of the same measure. One of the strongest
objections was that if they were allowed to invest their funds they
would be creating expense and squandering their capital. He
thought that two or more trades unions in any district should be
allowed to amalgamate and register under the act. He believed
they were all in favour of the legalization of trades unions, and he
did not think the passing of the measure would be a work of great
difficulty if they strengthened the hands of those members of Parlia-
ment who were willing to assist them.
Mr. 0. A. Fuller (Victorian Slaters’ Society) said that about
seven years ago the Bricklayers’ Association established branches in
some of the suburbs. The branch at Prahran became very strong
and amassed a considerable amount of money, and one night decided
to sever from the Bricklayers’ Society from whence it sprung. The
parent society, which had supplied the young branch with books and
documents, and had helped it when it was short of funds, felt
aggrieved, and took legal px’oceedings. Upon consulting a lawyer,
however, they were informed that they had no remedy at law—that,
in fact, according to the strict letter of the law, they themselves
wei’e liable to be imprisoned because they were meeting illegally.
A treasurer of a trade society might abscond with the whole of the
funds, and still was not liable to be prosecuted. He cordially
sixpported the principles contained in the resohxtion.
Mr. W. Trenwith (Victoxdan Operative Bootmakers’ Union) said
they had expressed their opinion on former occasions that the Trades
Unions Bill should be adopted by the legislature. As they were all
so unanimous, there was little reason to extend the discussion, except
for the pxxrpose of supporting the gentlemen who would move in tlxe
matter in Parliament. He had just been told by a delegate that a
trades society could now sue for money embezzled from its funds.
He knew, unfortunately, that that statexnent was not correct. The


society to which he belonged had been embezzled of its funds. They
had consulted a number of eminent lawyers, all of whom advised that
the society had no remedy. Trade societies had no power to hold
funds, and any member getting possession of the funds need not cross
the border even, but simply put the money in his pocket and laugh
at them. The trades in England were very much in advance of
those in Victoria, but the reason was that the former had had more
time to talk over the grievances under which they had suffered. The
present position of trades unions in Victoria was very much the same
as what might be termed “ the dark ages ” in England, for while the
old law had been repealed, so far as England itself was concerned, it
had not been repealed in relation to the dependencies of England;
and at the present moment the members of trade organizations in
this colony were liable to be branded with a hot iron. (Laughter.)
It was the law of the land in the time of Edward VI., and although
that law had been repealed in England, it was at present the law of
the land in Victoria. Whether it was in existence or not, the fact
undoubtedly existed that although they had very powerful organiza-
tions throughout the colony, and although they had a building like
the Trades’ Hall, and many thousands of pounds of funds under their
control, yet they had not the right to claim a single shilling if the
funds should be embezzled. They required legislation, if it was only
to enable them to deal with their own property.
Mr. Curley (Coal Miners, Hunter River, N.S.W.) said that in
Hew South Wales it was provided under the Trades Union Act that a
record of the funds should be kept, and any person in connection
with the association could, if he thought fit, inspect the accounts at
any time by giving proper notice. He thought their associations
were conducted in the light of day, and that they wished all their
proceedings to be made public (Hear, hear;, as they had nothing to
dread by letting them go before the public. The very fact of mem-
bers having this right had considerable influence in keeping up
a high standard of honesty. It was the injustice of the thing
which led Mr. Harley, after conducting a case, to see that a bill
was necessary. A case in point was that the treasurer of the Brick-
layers’ Society was some <£4o or <£so short, and could not pay it
back. The Attorney-General gave it as his opinion, when the ques-
tion of a prosecution arose, that the Society of Bricklayers bad no
status in law. Some of those present would recollect the stirring
times in the Newcastle district about four years ago. The result, so
far as law was concerned, seemed to be that a society might be
indicted for conspiracy from the very fact that they had no locus
standi as a trade union. They had a just matter in hand, and ought
to urge it on. After such a demonstration as had been witnessed on
Monday among all the Hades there should be no two opinions as to
immediate necessity for them to secure a legal basis.
Mr. Manuel (Melbourne Plasterers) had abstained from speaking


when the former question was before the delegates, as he considered
those coming from the other colonies had more right to speak. He
was fully of opinion that the more pressure they could bring to bear
the better it would be, and he hoped that next session an act would
be passed in Victoria which would put them on a level with their
friends in New South Wales.
Mr, MTvor (Tailors’ Trade Protection Society, Melb.) said that
there should be no necessity, in any bill which might be introduced
into Parliament, for a clause to prevent trades unionists from being
punished, as it had been found necessary in the last bill when it was
before the Lower House. He agreed with the views expressed by
Mr. Trenwith.
Mr. R. Phillips (Masons and Bricklayers, S.A.) supported the
proposition. In South Australia a Trades’ Union Act was passed in
1876, and the least they could do was their best to assist others in
receiving similar advantages.
Mr. E. Cooke (Amalgamated Engineers, Williamstown) said there
was not the slightest doubt that the bulk of the population in Victoria
desired that a Trades Union Act should be passed. The fact that it
had passed the Legislative Assembly on two occasions should be a
sufficient guarantee that Parliament would not be justified in ignoring
the matter any longer, A very learned gentleman (Dr. Hearn,
M.L.C.) had put difficulties in the way of the Trades Union Bill
passing through the Upper House, but had he been better acquainted
with the artisan classes he would not have thrown these impediments
in the way. If he allowed it to go through without raising useless
obstacles he would gain the best thanks of not the smallest community
in Victoria.
Mr. Bolger (Melbourne Typographical Society) said there was
good reason to complain of the treatment the bill had received
during the two last sessions of Parliament. Had the measure been
introduced by the Government, as it ought to have been, it might not
have been accorded such a bad reception by the Upper House.
The President : I desire to exercise the power conferred upon
me by the Standing Orders Committee, and to now call upon
Mr. Richardson, M.L.A., to address the Congress. (Loud and
prolonged cheering.)
Mr. Richardson then said he had listened with great interest to
the speeches which had been made, and had observed with much
pleasure how very earnest the Congress appeared to be to have the
Trades Union Bill become law. For his own part he wished to
assure them that his personal efforts to that end would suffer no
relaxation till their object had been accomplished. The bill was
simply intended to legalize trades unions. They had already existed
through the power of public opinion, as was evidenced by the fact* of
the Congress being there assembled. It would be perfectly useless
to prevent their becoming legalized, and what the Congress wanted


was a law to make them so. The law now in force in Victoria was
a law which had been passed in England in 1825, Previous to this
the combination laws had existed, except for one year—viz., from
1824 to 1825. In the latter year combinations became illegal, and
many extraordinary things took place. That law now existed here,
but it could not be enforced, because public opinion would not
permit it. It was officially repealed in England in 1875, and it took
sixty years, therefore, to make combination legal. The act of 1871,
while legalizing them, still left certain criminal consequences attached
to them, as had been described by several speakers who had preceded
him. In the amended act of 1875, however, the combinations
were made free from the criminal law. It was claimed last year
as a great victory at the Congress that trades unions were free in
Great Britain, and that was the position we sought here. Very
little difference was met with in the Legislative Assembly in
regard to the Trades Union Bill, but one gentleman connected with
the friendly societies took objection to it, and he (Mr. Richardson)
was obliged to permit a modification of the bill to meet his objec-
tions. He could not see why trades unions should not hold
property. The act in England limited the amount to one acre, but
he believed it need not be limited to so small an area here. The
reason of that provision being inserted in the bill was, he had been
informed by lawyers, because the law of mortmain was still in force
in England. It, however, had no power in this country, and could
not interfere with the rights of trades unions to hold property.
When the bill was sent to the Legislative Council they objected to
it on several grounds. It was alleged that trades unions were
dangerous, and that they would lead to conspiracies against
employers of labour. Another objection raised was that the clause
permitted persons to become members under twenty-one years of
age. The intention of the Council was to limit membership to
persons of twenty-one years or over, and Professor Hearn moved an
amendment introducing into the bill all the ciiminal clauses of the
English Act of 1825, and said they ought to be included in it in the
interests of the labouring classes themselves. He secured a majority
of the Council to vote with him. He (Mr. Richardson) raised the
objection that this bill had nothing whatever to do with the
criminal law, and he proposed to divide it, and send that portion of
it dealing with the criminal law back to the Legislative Assembly,
and retain the Ti-ades Union Bill in the Council until such time as
the Assembly should have dealt with the Criminal Law, He
objected to any coercion being used in the Trades Union Bill, as it
ought to be dealt with on its merits. Some of the offences specified
were already provided for under the Masters’ and Servants’ Act,
and they would have an examiner within a very few weeks in regard
to one portion of the law already provided for criminally. He
would also mention the case of Mr. Trenwith. (Cheers.) That


matter, he thought, only required to be brought before the House to
be fairly dealt with. If it was not, it would rise the people of the
country to compel legislators to amend the law. A suggestion had
been made by one speaker that the framing of the bill should be
left to the Government, and that it should become a Government
measure. That was a very sensible proposition, and he thought the
Government would carry it out. He would lend his own assistance
to this end, and they could also depend now, as in the past, on
the help of Mr. Wrixon, Professor Pearson, and others. Had the
Government, he believed, strongly resisted, as they ought to have
done, the opposition of the Upper House to the bill, it would now
have been law. If placed in the hands of the Ministry it might
become law next session. The expression of opinion which had
been given by the Congress would doubtless exercise a great
influence upon the Government and the Legislature. Should the
Government not take the measure up, it would result in a private
member doing so, and pushing it through the House. He would
make a suggestion to them which might be of use. In England
trades unions had what was called a Parliamentary Committee,
which was appointed by the Congress and existed throughout the
year, taking cognizance of all the measures contained in any
programme made out by the Congress. That committee matured
the programme, and then waited upon the Government of the day
for the purpose of laying their views before the Ministers. They
exercised considerable influence upon the Government, and were
usually successful in getting their measures passed one after the
other, (Cheers.) Why, he would ask, could they not appoint a
Parliamentary Committee at this Congress 1 He would be proud to
accompany such a committee to the Premier, and request him to
make the bill a Government measure. If the Government did not
introduce the bill, he intended to do so again himself, and he would
introduce it continually until it became law. It was not a question
of funds—it was a question how much of the production of the
country should remain in the hands of the capitalists; of what
labour should receive of its own work; of how much should be re-
tained by the producer himself. (Cheers.) He was interested in
the federation of the trades, and when they became federated they
would be a political organization supporting the interests of paid
labour. It was not a question of individual interests, and they had
only to assert their rights, without recourse to hard words, to obtain
them. The labour question was now lying immediately before
politicians, and it must meet with a speedy solution. As a political
organization they should not, however, attach themselves to any
political party. It should be a party of labour, only bringing its
influences to bear upon political questions in the interests of labour.
If they would exert their political power in the right way, they
would receive their full meed of legislation in connection with


trades unions in every way. He thanked them for the attention
they had given him, and he assured them they would always find
him working in the interests of the working classes. He hoped to-
see the suggestion for making the bill a Government measure
adopted.
Mr. P, Edeksham (Cigar Makers’ Society, Yic.)said that he had been
one of the committee of the Trades’ Hall who considered the Trades
Union Bill, but he had been always under the impression that the
twenty-one years of age clause was one of Mr. Richardson's. So far
as he now understood, it was not one of his clauses, but Dr. Hearn’s.
(At this stage Mr. Richardson left the Hall, and was loudly cheered.)
He hoped they were about to get such information as would settle
everything.
Mr. George Williams (Miners’ Association of Victoria) said that
at the last Congress held in England, the bill, which had passed the
Parliamentary Committee, provided for organizations to have power
to sue for arrears, but, owing to difficulties in Ireland, the bill had
been put back.
The resolution was put and carried.
Mr. Williams then moved that the Government be requested to
take up the Trades Union Bill dux-ing the next session, and that Mr.
Richardson be x’equested to accompany a deputation on the subject.
Mi*. T. Huggan (Melbourne Typographical Society) seconded.
Motion ruled out of order.
LEGALIZATION OF THE EIGHT HOURS.
Mr. J. F. Hunter (Amalgamated Miners’Association, Victoria) said
itwas not necessary to advance much in favour of the Eight Hours being
legalized as a day’s work. If the Government were to legalize the
Eight Hours, then the Trades’ Hall would not in case of a strike be
made blameable to the rest of the colony. He moved that the
Government be requested to legalize the Eight Hours.
Mr. Robert Hayes (Victorian Saddlers) seconded. It was almost
a mox-al certainty that the Eight Hours would come. He hoped that
shopping after six would be discouraged. A little pressure from a
body like this Congress would bring about the desired result.
Mr. F. Manuel (Melbourne Plasterers’ Sick and Friendly Society)
believed eight houx-s should be a legal day’s work, but there were
plenty who did not want their support. He hoped, however, that
everyone would do his best to put down shopping after six. It was a
grave case where young ladies were obliged to work till 10 and 11
o’clock at night, and he had seen them going home as late as 12 and
1 o’clock in the monxing. He believed their xxxoral support would be
sufficient to legalize the Eight Hours. He would like to see a Par-
liamentary Committee appoixxted.


Mr. H. Elmslie (Operative Masons’ Society, Vie.) said it was
desired to make it illegal to work more than eight hours, but was the
principle to be extended to the agricultural population, and domestic
servants, and shopkeepers 1 If it were simply to ask the Legislature
to define what a day’s work was, there could be no objection.
Mr. Hunter (Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Victoria) did
not propose to make it illegal to work more than eight hours, but
that if the necessity arose for working more than eight hours the
workman was to be paid for it.
Mr. W. J. Lawrance (United Operative Painters, Syd.) commented
on the very different way in which Messrs. Service and Berry had
spoken in comparison with Mr. Stuart, in Sydney, who refused to
see a deputation from their body. All above the eight hours must
■count as overtime.
The Congress adjourned at 5 p.m., to resume the debate next day
at 9.30 a.m.
THIRD DAY.—THURSDAY, 24th APRIL, 1884.
The Congress re-assembled at 9.30 a.m., the President in the chair.
The minutes of the previous day’s meetings were read and con-
Urmed,
Mr. Robertson (Ironmoulders’ Society of Victoria) resumed the
debate on the Legalization of the Eight Hours, He read the
following paper on the subject:—
In standing before you I hope it will not be considered as presumption on
my part to read a paper on so important a subject ; however, I will not try
your patience too much, as it will be very short. The reason I purpose saying
a few words on this question is because I thought it to be my duty as a
member of this Congress to contribute something to the programme ; but,
ladies and gentlemen, after hearing such excellent papers yesterday, I felt that
had I not intimated my intention of reading a paper before the Congress, I
would have withdrawn from occupying your valuable time. However, I must
crave your indulgence for a few minutes. The above subject is one of most
vital importance to each and all of us. Our day and night has been well
divided into three parts—viz., eight hours’ rest, eight hours’ work, and eight
hours’ recreation ; and I maintain, to become good and useful members of
society, morally, physically, and intellectually, we must have the eight-hours
system of labour adhered to in all our colonies. And this colony of ours is only
in its infancy yet. The laws by which it shall be governed are in our own
hands, and surely it should be the desire of every true Australian to have all
our regulations framed so as to make it in reality what America was some
time ago in name—viz., a working man’s paradise. When we consider that
the mechanism of our bodies is just like a piece of machinery which is guaranteed
to last a certain time provided it gets fair usage, but if it be worked at an


extraordinary rapid rate, then it will finish its terms all the sooner, so exactly
with ourselves —if we work in moderation, not taxing our bodies beyond their
strength, the chances are that in all probability we will live the longer ; and
that is one great object of the eight-hours system. Medical men tell us that
eight hours’ labour is quite sufficent in this climate of ours. If a man is accus-
tomed to working longer, he is weary and worn out when he finishes up at night*
and is just ready for his bed. Now, I do not think that should be the case
with our tradesmen. They ought, in my opinion, to be able to go out after
coming home from business and have some intellectual improvement, or attend
to meetings which are held to farther the interests of their fellow-men, if it be
in the shape of trade meetings, mutual improvement societies, political meet-
ings, and by so doing he will be furthering the interests of his fellow-men. Our
Creator never intended us to eat, sleep, and work only. Why, if we did
nothing else but that we would be no better than the brute creation. Again,
another advantage of the eight hours is, that it makes it necessary for the
employer to engage more hands, and thus the work is more equally divided.
And I am thankful to say that eight hours as a standard day’s work is-
becoming more general throughout the trades of Melbourne. This year there
were several trades that joined the ranks of the procession, which very forcibly
demonstrated the fact that ere long it will and must become the law of the
land that no one will be permitted to employ hands for a longer period than
eight hours per day. Why should it not be so ? What do we send our
representatives into Parliament for? Surely we expect them to legislate for
our interest, and it should be the aim of Government to see that there be
nothing to impair the health of their constituents, and it is an acknowledged
fact that long hours of labour would be the means of doing this. What has
made England go ahead as she has done ? Was it not her manufactories and
her working classes ? If our Parliament is anxious that we should make big
strides like our mother country, and increase in manufactories and wealth,
they will see it to be their wisdom as well as their duty to frame a law for the
preservation of the eight hours. It is all very well for us to say that it is im-
possible for this trade and that trade to fall in with the eight-hours system *
but who among us thought that the bakers would join our ranks this year ? I
am sure it was a source of pleasure to us all when we saw them walking in the
procession ; and why should we despair of seeing all other members of our
community enjoying the same privilege ? Why should not the butchers make
a strong and united effort to accomplish this object ? Are they not as much
entitled to it as any of the other trades ? I say they are. Let us, then, who
have so long enjoyed the privilege—l say long because I have not known what
it is to work under any other system —-help and stir them up to be more alive
to their own interest, and not to rest satisfied till they have accomplished that
end. Then, again, there are others in our community who are as deserving of
this boon. I refer to shopkeepers. You cannot walk through any of our
suburbs without finding that business is brisk at seven, eight, nine, and ten
o’clock at night. And I ask who is to blame for all this ? You will say the
shopkeepers themselves ; and when you ask them to close they tell you that
if each one would close there would be no difficulty, but one opens, then
another, and so on, until all keep open. And, after all, who is to blame for
this ?I am sorry to say it is the very class who advocate short hours. Those
who have already got the eight hours allow their wives to shop even at the
eleventh hour. Now, I contend that this is very inconsistent. If we as a
united class would not encourage late shopping, there can be no doubt but
that shopkeepers would not burn gas to keep open; and if we would take
notice of those who break the rule among them, and not patronize them either
day or night, it would work its own cure. There is still another class which I
hope will become united and solicit the help of Government to legalize the
eight hours for their benefit. I refer to all young ladies employed in our large
establishments in town. Even although the front shops are closed, they—the


■dressmakers—are kept all hours ; in fact, even at a very unseemly hour for
■any young lady to go home alone; and if we as tradesmen are desirous of
having the laws of morality adhered to in our towns, we will give all our
assistance to this class of labour, and thus obviate their working more than
eight hours. There is yet another class I must allude to ; I mean the young
ladies who are engaged in our public drinking houses, for instead of eight hours
some of them have to work double that. Now, I think that eight hours is
ample time for them to be confined in such a business. In fact, if I had my
way of it, they would not be allowed to stand behind the bar at all, hearing
all sorts of language. However, as I confine my remarks to the eight-hours
system, I would say, in conclusion, that in view of what I have already said on
the subject, we, as members of this Congress, pledge ourselves individually to
do all in our power to induce Parliament to frame a law prohibiting more than
eight hours’ labour in any capacity. (Cheers.)
Mr. MTvor (Tailors’ Trade Protection Society, Yic.) was sorry
to say his trade worked such long hours as 10, 12, and even 16 hours
a day, as frequently happened. They, the employes, were not
altogether to blame for that, as they had many disadvantages to con-
tend with, such as “ sweaters ” and the introduction of the most mo-
dern machinery. A law was required which should limit the hours of
labour to eight hours. He also reminded them that two-thirds of his
trade worked at home. On that point he would say something when
the factories question was before them. He was sorry he could not
make use of the Eight Hours, but he cordially supported the move-
ment.
Mr. Amos Yewdall (Operative Masons’ Society, Yic.), as a mem
her of the trade originating the Eight-Hours movement, said it was
unnecessary for him to say he supported what was generally
admitted to be a priceless boon. After tracing the course of the
Eight-Hours movement in Victoria, he went on to say that, now that
they had the Eight Hours, they must take care not to let it become
inoperative. A few years ago a law was passed in the United States
whereby the Government employes in the dockyards were to receive
concessions on their day’s labour ; but, in consequence of the oppo-
sition of a foremost dockyard, they were compelled to work 9, 10,
and 11 hours a day. They were unable to compel the law to be
enforced. That brought him to the amalgamation question, and the
necessity of having a Federal Council in order that the boon
obtained might be perpetuated. Those who had the most vital
interest in the country should also have a say in the making of the
laws. At present the working people had no federal body to appeal
to. Great care would also have to be taken that the provisions of
any bill should not be overridden, and the trades interested should
therefore have a voice in the framing of the bill, and they would
best get that by a Parliamentary Committee. One gentleman (Mr,
Hayes) had said he was so confident the Eight Hours must come
that it was not worth while to agitate for it, but had that gentle-
man known the work they had had in the past to'get the Eight
Hours, he would have seen the necessity of watching over trade


interests. Had the bakers not agitated recently, they would not
have got it. Some years ago the Tanners’ and Curriers’ Association
tried to get the privilege, but, from not being unanimous, they lost
their chance, and had to go back to the long hours. By reducing
the hours of labour they would spread the work among a greater
number of people, and so reduce the danger of the evil of over-
production, which was one of the greatest evils which had ever
threatened the working classes. He concurred in the necessity of
appointing a committee to watch over all measures that were being
matured. (Hear, hear.) It was quite useless to leave these matters
to members of Parliament who did not understand them from the
working classes’ point of view.
Mr. Edersiiam (Cigar Makers’ Society, Yic.) seconded the motion,
Mr. Armfield (Coachmakers’ Society, Melb.) said that Govern-
ment certainly had in a way recognized the Eight Hours, but there
was no reason why, if Government passed a measure legalizing eight
hours, it should not be compulsory on any employer not to employ
over that time. Shopkeepers had no necessity for working over
eight hours. If they chose to do it, seven o’clock would meet
all cases. It would be the means of bringing into greater promin-
ence that which would compel all employers to indenture their
apprentices for forty-eight hours a week, but if they went over that
time they would be subject to a penalty. He supported an Eight
Hours Bill.
Mr. T. Huggan (Melbourne Typographical Society) said that at
the last election almost every candidate was asked the question on
the hustings, and he said he would support an Eight-Hours Bill; but
he. had been informed that no individual member had the courage to
move in the matter. From what had been said by the Premier and
Mr. Berry, they could understand how that was. The Typo-
graphical Society had generally secured the principle, though there
were a few cases in which the boon had not yet been obtained.
There should be some practical working men appointed on the Parlia-
mentary Committee, who should watch the preparation of the bill,
in order that it might not be laid aside on some loophole of technical
law. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. T. Ogden (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, S. Melb.)
thought the question had been discussed enough, and that it might
now be well left to the Parliamentary Committee.
Mr. George Williams (Amalgamated Miners’ Association, Yic.)
said they had established the system already in the Regulations of
Mines Act. In 1872 an attempt was made to infringe the Eight-
Hours system, and make the miners work nine or ten hours in the
Sandhurst district. The men struck and successfully resisted, and
after agitation for two years the Eight-Hours system was settled
under the Regulations of Mines Act, which, by Clause 5, established
the Eight-Hours principle. The clause was very simple, but


thoroughly effectual, and had stood the test of the law courts, and if
such a clause were imported into any bill it would be just as
effective. Take the case of the girls in the sewing shops, and if a
reason were wanted why they should not work more than eight
hours, it could easily be proved that working longer was injurious,
and then the act would be operative.
Mr. Josiah Wright (New South Wales Seamen’s Union) said
that they had passed a law in New South Wales to work eight
hours, with a penalty of one guinea for the first time a man worked
over that time, and for a second offence dismissal. Ten years ago
seamen enjoyed the Eight Hours in Victoria, New South Wales, and
South Australia, in all safe harbours. In 1876 wages were suddenly
reduced <£l per month, and hours extended from eight to ten.
Against this they had struggled for years, but on April 1, 1884,
they issued a proclamation to the shipowners that no men would
engage unless under the Eight-Hours rule. Most of the Sydney
shipowners agreed. Until the Eight Hours became law they had to
keep a special official to see that eight hours was inserted in the
shipping articles.
Mr. G. E.. Farlow (United Furniture Trades’ Society, Melb.)
believed they were only now asking for what, to a very great extent,
they had already got (No), and that it was only a matter of a little
time for all the societies to get. He wished to add the following words
to the resolution :—“ That it shall be considered illegal to work
longer than eight hours per day, or forty-eight hours per week.” He
knew cases in which men in shops here worked very long hours in
order to keep other men out of their shops.
Mr. J. D. Boyd (Ironfounders’ Trades Union, Melb.) referred to
the stages of reduction in the length of hours in England from sixty
hours to fifty-four. There should *be a clause in the bill by which
employes should be fined for working over the Eight-Hours system.
It was the duty of everyone present to support the principle. As
regards shopkeepers, no shop should by law be open after six o’clock.
Mr. Joseph Winter (Australian Bookbinders’ Consolidated Trades
Union) said that past efforts to reduce the hours of shopkeepers had
always proved failures, and it would not be wise to make any abso-
lute law, as Mr. Boyd suggested, because all shops might not be
included in the category of workshops. In reference to the sugges-
tion made by Mr. Williams, the idea had been carried out in the
report of the Shops’ Commission in their fourteenth clause. The
Congress could not undertake to deal with the Eight Hours in rela-
tion to retail shops. It had been suggested to apply the principle
of local option to the short-hours system, which was that a majority
of shopkeepers in any district should send in a petition to the local
council to close their shops at a certain hour ; or that a ballot should
be taken of all the shops, and if a majority of the voters were in
favour of shorter hours, then that should be made an absolute law in


the community, and the minority would he compelled by the decision
of the majority. They could very well deal with the question as
regarded factories or workshops, but when retail shopkeepers were
included it would only have this effect that it would create a lot of
opposition, and the bill would be lost.
Mr. A. Brooks (Victorian Saddlers’ Society) could not agree with
anyone who said give half the community eight hours and the rest
nine or ten hours per day. From eight o’clock till six was time enough
for shops to be open. The greatest enemy to the working man in this
case was the working man. He hoped to see the representatives
of New South Wales and South Australia go back and get it legalized
there too.
Mr. W. Trenwith (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union) said
that, while appreciating the desire of the delegates to go to the vote,
still, this was a matter over which they should not be too hasty.
Short hours had been absolutely necessary from an economic point of
view. Inventions were being made every day, and machinery was
increasing in power and excellence of construction, doing much of
the work which was formerly done by manual labour. To keep the
same number of hands at work they must therefore work shorter
hours. The inevitable result if they did not would be long hours
with great numbers of people unable to get anything to do. They
would have the opposition of all the employers of labour and
what were known as the mercantile class, because what the Con-
gress proposed to do that class always did themselves, for when an
article of commerce became too glutted in the market they exercised
means to make it more scarce and therefore more valuable. What
the Congress proposed to do was to reduce the quantity of the com-
modity in which they dealt. Their labour was their merchandise ;it
was the commodity they had to offer in the market in exchange for
living, and if they found it getting into excess of the demand they
must take steps to meet it. It had been stated that they did not re-
quire legislation, as they were doing all that they required by simple
agitation. That was the insidious argument of those who opposed
them. How could they be accused of curtailing the freedom of any
man when the most they proposed to do was—if it were necessary—
to call upon the civil arm to force the people to accept their freedom.
All reforms had been the subject of legislative enactments. He urged
the Congress to study this view of the question, that it was absolutely
necessary that they should reduce the quantity of their labour in
order to maintain the balance and defeat the march of machinery, for
employers of labour cared no more for those who were working for
them (nor indeed so much) than they did for their machines. They
had no interest in the employes beyond the time they could grind out
of them. (Cheers.)
Mr. David Bennet (Amalgamated Society of Engineers,
Melbourne) said they had heard for years too much about the


“ liberty of the subject.” All laws interfered with the liberty of the
subject, more or less; but the object of all laws was to secure the
greatest amount of liberty for the whole of the subjects. It was
an argument raised from ignorance, and from want of a better
argument. The Eight Hours might be acquired by trades unions;
but there were people whose circumstances rendered it impossible for
them to become members of trades unions. They might be few in
number, or they might be many ; but they were frequently the
people who required to be protected against themselves, and an
act of Parliament was the only way in which they could be pro-
tected. In the Mining Act the Eight-Hours system was in a certain
sense legalized; but in another case, where the provision had been
inserted, it had failed. He alluded to the Melbourne Harbour
Trust Act, where they were now working on the same lines as
before the Trust Act, giving the eight hours, was passed. The Trust
set everybody at defiance, and were simply having a dig at the
working man. It was almost the last dying kick of that very con-
servative body, and their being dangerous would be guarded against
by insisting on a proper inspection, not of workshops only, but of
private individuals, masters, employers, and public corporations
' applause) such as the Melbourne Harbour Trust and municipal
institutions, and even Government offices. (Hear, hear.) He
remembered the Ten Hours Act in 1846, in England, and one of
the privileges was the strict impartiality with which inspectorship
was conducted. It w'as almost impossible to escape notice. The
success of the act was solely due to efficient inspection. He recom-
mended them to keep a sharp lookout on members of the Upper
House that they did not insert any insidious clause making the bill
almost inoperative. In regard to local option, which had been
mentioned, there was another way of dealing with the Eight-Hours
question. It could be done similarly to the way they deal with
public-houses, by making it illegal to recover money for goods sold
after six o’clock in the evening. That would do more to prevent
late shopping than anything else.
Mr. J. S. M‘Gowan (Boilermakers and Iron Shipbuilders, N S.W.)
said that the value of the resolution must recommend itself to every-
one who enjoyed the privilege of working only eight hours a day.
He held the same opinion as a previous speaker, that it was their
duty as Eight-Hours men to help those who could not help them-
selves. The solution of the shop difficulty was, he thought, very
simple. In New South Wales the workmen had banded themselves
together and resolved not to allow their wives to shop after six
o’clock in the evening. This method of acting solved the difficulty
at once, and if every conscientious working man would act in the
same way there would be no need for seeking the interference of
Parliament. The legalization of the Eight-Hours system would
greatly benefit such a trade as cabinet-making. In that trade at


present European craftsmen did not have a chance of competing with
the Chinese, through the latter working ten, twelve, and often more
hours a day. There were trades, however, such as the boiler-makers
and engineers, whom he represented, who were often compelled by
the necessities of a case to work more than eight hours a day, and
special permission would be required for them in any law the legis-
lature might enact. He concluded by expressing the hope that
before long it would be the recognized law of the land that no man
or woman should work more than eight hours a day.
Mr. J. E. West (Trade and Labour Council, N.S.W.) said it
appeared to him that some of the speakers wished to go back to the
dark ages, when, at the ringing of the curfew bell, everyone had to put
up his shutters and go to bed. He did not wish to see anything so
arbitrary as that at the present day, for shopkeepers had the same
rights as others. In Sydney the Drapers’ Association had got no
less than twenty-four shops to close at six o’clock in a few weeks,
and they still observed the custom. It was a great mistake for
masters to pay their employes their wages on Saturday afternoon,
which was the great cause of late shopping on Saturday night. They
should be paid on Friday. The legalization of the Eight-Hours
system would step in with advantage in the case of apprentices,
who should not be allowed to work more than eight hours, and in
enabling a man to sue for eight hours’ work. These were the things
which required to be done, and he trusted that a Parliamentary
Committee would be appointed, and would sit constantly until a
bill providing for them had become law.
Mr. John Talbot (Ironmoulders’ Society, N.S.W.) said that when
a boy in England he had, like Mr. Brooks, to work very long hours,
and he had therefore reason to strongly support the legalization of
the Eight-Hours principle. It would place Europeans on a better
footing in respect to foreign (Chinese) labour than they had now.
In the locality near where he resided the “ celestials,” as they were
called, worked at their trade of cabinet making until after midnight,
and it could therefore be seen that Europeans had little chance of
competing with them under these circumstances. In New South
Wales the Eight-Hours question was rapidly ripening to a head,
and at public meetings there both ministers of the Crown and
ministers of the churches had advocated its adoption. With regard
to the general question, his opinion was that it was their duty to
help by every means those who were not able as yet to enjoy the
benefits of the system.
Mr. Phillips (Operative Masons and Bricklayers’ Association,
S.A.) said that in South Australia the Trades had all combined to
bring the legalization of the Eight Hours prominently before
Parliament. (Cheers.) To this end they had secured promises of
assistance from a majority of the Legislature. What struck him as
remarkable about Victorian members of Parliament was that although


they were paid for their work, they did not look after the interests
of the working men like those of South Australia, who received
nothing for their services. Victorian workmen seemed to be unable
to obtain anything they asked for, and he believed it was because
there was a want of union amongst them. Even in the Congress no
two Victorian delegates spoke alike on any proposition under con-
sideration, On the other hand, his fellow representatives were
united on all points.
Mr. Cooke (Amalgamated Engineers, Williamstown) said he
believed they were all unanimous on the resolution, which he
was glad to see originated with the Miners’ Association. He
had been connected with the miners, who were the best Eight-
Hours men in the community. He thought that the bill would
have been passed long ago, and have been now in the Statute
Book, but for several difficulties which existed in the way of
its practical application. He quite held that in the interests of
the people of Great Britain the houx - s of labour thei’e should be
restricted to ten hours a day; but in Australia, owing to the
depressing influence of the climate, eight hours were more than
enough. These and other matters of detail would be best dealt with
by a Parliamentary Committee. He could not shut his eyes, how-
ever, to the fact that there were matters before the Congress of more
vital importance to them than the legalization of the Eight-Hours
Bill, and he hoped they would not be neglected. He would support
the motion as moved by the Miners’ Association.
Mr. John Oliver (United Society of Boilei’makers and Hon
Shipbuilders, Ballai’at) remarked that he was puzzled to know
whether a man was a traitor to the Eight-Hours cause if he worked
overtime and was paid for it. (Cries of “ No.”) It often happened
in his trade that five o’clock would strike just as he commenced
a job which required to be finished at once, and he would ask the
delegates if it was right for him to go on working until it was com-
pleted. (Cries of “ Yes, in cases of emergency.”)
Mr. Hunter (Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Victoria) said
he would not take up time in replying to the remarks made by the
various delegates. With reference to the penal clauses, he thought
it would be unwise to make them applicable to farmers, drovers,
and others. The consideration of the penal clauses, however, would
be better left until the Shops and Factories’ Bill was discussed, and
in which bill they might be included.
The President then put the motion to the vote, and it was
carried unanimously amidst cheers.


THE RECIDIVISTE BILL.
Mr. W, E. Murphy, Secretary of the Trades’ Hall Council, moved
the following resolution ;
“ That this Congress views with the utmost alarm the proposal of the French
Government to export the habitual criminal population of France to New
Caledonia and the adjacent islands. This Congress is of opinion that the
Annexation of the New Hebrides to the Australian colonies is of vital import-
ance to prevent the pollution of Australia, now or at any time hereafter,
through their being made the home of released criminals, who will be allowed
to escape to the colonies. This Congress is of opinion that the Colonial Secre-
tary is not sufficiently aware of the evils which would result from this action
of the French Government, and request the Chief Secretary to transmit these
resolutions to the home authorities.”
He said it was a matter of great national importance to keep the
Australasian colonies free from a criminal influx. It was a subject
which affected the labouring classes very nearly. Many years ago
Victoria had emphatically and effectually protested against the intro-
duction of criminals from our own country, and he was sure she
would not be slow now in pursuing the same course with respect to
those who, besides being characters of degraded type, were of a foreign
nationality. The keeping of the islands of the Pacific free from the
pollution of criminal life was a subject which was now engaging the
earnest attention of both colonial and English statesmen. It was
not to be expected that the Congress could deal with a matter of
such magnitude as this. That was for our statesmen to do. But
they had to consider that the colonies were growing so rapidly that a
great colonial empire would be reared here perhaps within the next
century ; and if steps were not now taken to protect ourselves from the
deteriorating influences of a criminal population, we would regret it
when regret would be unavailing. The Government of France had
been expostulated with by the Imperial Government, but they
nevertheless proposed to send 12,000 criminals to New Caledonia,
It might be observed that we had no right to dictate to France what
she should do with her criminals, and that she had as much right to
send them to her possessions as Great Britain had had to send hers
to Australia. But when they considered that this great empire was
within four days’ sail of those islands, and that the French Govern-
ment proposed that the convicts, when landed at New Caledonia,
should be absolutely free, it would be seen that the cases were
diffex’ent. The New Hebrides would be quickly overrun with them,
and they would not be slow in placing themselves on our shores.
He thought it was time to consider whether the home Government
should not be again importuned to annex those islands to prevent
them becoming depots for foreign crime. Within the next few years
sixty or a hundred thousand criminals might be thrown on those


shores. Stringent measures ought to be taken to prevent such an
alarming calamity. Would the working man remain inactive in
view of such a state of things 1 (Cries of “ No, no.”) He thought not;
and although it was not directly connected with trade matters, he
had decided to bring it before them. If the emphatic opinion of the
Congress was given against the French proposals and wired to Eng-
land it would, he thought, have great weight with the Imperial
authorities. In conclusion, he would say he believed the working
classes could be raised at a moment’s notice to prevent such a con-
tingency as he had foreshadowed ; but he hoped they would have
the satisfaction at last of being in safety, and that the statesmen of
these colonies would no longer have occasion to come in contact
with the home Legislature. (Applause.)
Mr. David Bennet (Amalgamated Engineers’ Society, Melb.)
seconded the resolution. The danger menacing the colonies had been
clearly pointed out. Mr. Service, the Premier, had put the matter
very forcibly when he stated that the recidivistes were not only the
siftings of the French nation, but of the worst portion of it. These
colonies were taxed sufficiently heavy already to repress their own
criminals, and it would be a great injustice to them to have to tax
themselves to repress the criminality of a foreign nation. A man
could only claim the right to deal with his own property as he pleased
so long as he did not injure his neighbour. The law would not permit
him to do that; and in the same manner the argument should hold
good as between nations.
Mr. Trenwith (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union) here
explained that, when the Standing Orders Committee arranged
the business, they decided that as the question of the transportation
of a number of recidivistes to New Caledonia was of national import-
ance to the colonies, it should, though not a trades question, be dis-
cussed, and the opinion of the Congress obtained. It was also
decided that Mr. Murphy should introduce the matter to the Con-
gress, and that the members should refrain from discussion, more
especially as there was a gentleman present who was in a position to
give a vast deal of information on the subject,
Mr. Julian Thomas (“ The Vagabond ”) was then asked by the
President to address the Congress, the President saying he (Mr.
Thomas) would be able to cast more light upon the question than
anyone else.
Mr. Julian Thomas said he was there to speak on a subject
which was of deep interest to the working classes of Australia. He
had been in New Caledonia when the recidiviste question was in
course of discussion, and considered he was able to speak as an
expert. The bill which the French Government desired to pass
provided for 60,000 convicts being sent to New Caledonia within five
years. The people in New Caledonia were themselves strongly
averse to this, and from what they had said, and which had been


communicated to the French press, the idea had gained ground that
it was intended to send these 60,000 criminals not to New Cale-
donia, but to the New Hebrides. He attributed the passing of the
Recidivisle Bill to the intriguing of the New Caledonian firm of
Higginson, Morgan and Co., who were very large landholders and
merchants, and who would largely benefit from the French Govern-
ment having to purchase land and goods from them. He estimated
that, if 12,000 convicts were landed, they would necessitate the
expenditure of ,£1,000,000, which would, to a great extent, find its
way into the firm’s pockets. But the real danger lay in the fact that
as soon as the convicts landed they were free to escape. Where
would they go to 1 To Australia, of course, as some 50 per cent, of
them would. The Kanaka race was strongly in favour of British
protection, not French. He congratulated the Congress on the great
era which they had now reached in the history of the working
man, and also that the representatives of labour were about to make
themselves heard in international politics. (Applause.)
Mr. John Woods, M.L.A., also addressed the delegates. He
remarked that the colonies were bestowing great attention upon
their defences, in preparation of the possible attacks of foreign
powers. If the worst came to the worst, and Australians had to
defend their shores against the invasion of foreign enemies, they
would still have a chance of success, but they had no power whatever
against such a foreign enemy as the threatened influx of French convicts.
These men would escape from the islands, and would quickly over-
run the colonies. As trustees for the future, it was their duty to do all
in their power to stop any such influx. (Cheers.) He would take the
liberty of suggesting to the Congress that they should adopt General
Gordon’s plan, and, instead of appealing to the home authorities, appeal
direct to the French. Why should the woi’king men of the colonies
not appeal to the working men of France 1 There were labour
councils there as well as here, and there ought to be a bond of
sympathy existing between the working men of France and Austral-
asia. It was his opinion that if such an appeal were made, it would
have a good effect. The French working men were indebted to the
Australians for the Eight-Hours system. It was true it had not yet
been introduced into France, but it would be in time, and were the
working men of Australasia, therefore, not fighting the cause of the
working men of France as well as elsewhere ? (Cheers.) It was terrible
to think of the danger which was now threatening the colonies, and
that it had resulted from the intrigues of a degenerate Englishman
and an Australian. Higginson and Morgan were the names of those
individuals, and they should be held up to execration before the
world. (Loud cries of “ Shame.”) The colonies did not need to
have the extent of their territory increased —though they wanted
New Guinea for all that—but it would be necessary for them to
annex New Hebribes, if they were to save Australia from the


fearful pollution of French convicts. (Loud cheers.) He trusted
that something more would be done to help the colonial governments
than the mere passing of resolutions, and there letting the matter
rest. They should not cease agitating until they had gained what
they were striving for.
Mr. Murphy’s motion was then put and carried unanimously
amidst great cheering.
A vote of thanks was passed to Messrs. John Woods, M.L.A.,
and Julian Thomas, for their addresses.
EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY BILL,
Mr. J, E. West (Trades and Labour Council of N.S.W.) moved
the following resolution :
“ That, in the opinion of this Congress, an act to extend and regulate the
liability of employers, to make compensation for personal injuries suffered
by workmen in their employment, or service, should become the law of the
land.”
He was sure this was a bill which was urgently required in the colonies.
It was not aimed at the honest contractor or employer, but at those
who were dishonest; and he was quite sure that the proposal would
receive the support of eveiy member of the Congress and of every
right-thinking individual in the colonies. The Employers’ Liability
Bill had passed the Legislature in the old country in such a form
that a number of abuses crept in. In the bill now proposed, there
should be a clause which would prevent <employes from signing
documents submitted by employers, and contracting themselves out-
side the act. They should remember that in numerous cases it was
not the workman who signed the agreement foregoing the privileges
to which he would be entitled under the act that was affected, but
his wife and children. With respect to the fairness of the principle
of the proposed bill there could be no two opinions. Let them
imagine any accident occurring in one of the public buildings of a
city. Supposing, for instance, a portion of the scaffolding proved to
be rotten and fell, injuring, say, two persons, one a passer-by and
the other a bricklayer in the employ of the contractor. He would
quote the case of a cathedral, where the contractor erected a crane
on the top of a scaffolding, and, instead of having an iron tire, he
had a piece of wood jammed into it. The scaffolding fell, and two
stonemasons were killed. At the trial, the counsel, on behalf of the
contractor, said that it was impossible for a man to sue for the
negligence of his fellow-workmen, and the plaintiff was non-suited.
He gave other instances of the neglect of steamship companies to
provide adequate means for the protection of the lives of their
employes. The measure would include every kind of labour, not
omitting seamen ; and he thought that if a law was in operation it,


would tend to lessen the numhex’ of accidents, because when
employers found that they were liable to be called upon to pay
compensation to their workmen for injuries, they would exercise
more precaution and vigilance. This act meant prevention of
accidents, and it should, therefore, be supported by every member of
the Congress.
Mr. Josiah Wright (N.S. W. Seamen’s Union, Sydney) seconded
the resolution. He trusted that those gentlemen who would draw
up the act would insexd a clause protecting seamen on board vessels,
as well as men working onshore. It was true that in New South
Wales a precedent had been established by the Supreme Court that
the general term “ manual labour ” applied to all kinds of labourers,
ashore or afloat, unless they were specially and individually excluded
by statute. In a recent case, tried in the District Court, a company
was oi’dered to pay an employe £IOO damages and costs for the
negligence of their servants. But those connected with the sea
thought it was just possible that had an appeal been made to a
higher court the decision might have been upset simply on the
grounds that seamen were specially provided for by the Merchant
Shipping Act, Under that act if a man was injui’ed he had to leave
his ship, and upon returning he would neither get compensation or
any pox-tion of his wages for the time he was laid up. According to
the Employers’ Liability Act a master was liable for accidents that
occurred in his service; but a master of a ship might say that he had
nothing to do with the provisions of that act.
Mr. T. Ogden (Amalgamated Society of Engineei’s, South Melb.
Branch') supported the resolution.
The President informed the Congress that Mr. Wrixon, M.L.A.,
who had introduced the measure they were discussing into the
Assembly during the last session of Parliament, was present as
a visitor. As it was desirable to secure the assistance of those
members who took a prominent position in the question, he would
ask the Congress to allow Mx\ Wrixon to address them on the
subject.
Mr. Wrixon was then introduced, and was received with applause.
He said he was not aware that he would have been called upon to
address them on the subject. He was, perhaps, entitled to address
them, because it fell to his lot to introduce into the Assembly the
bill which was passed by that chamber, and which was very neaxdy
passed by the Council. He had no doubt that it would be passed
next session. The principle for which he contended, and the just-
ness of which no one could question, was similar to that contained
in the English act, accox’ding to which an employer was liable for
his own neglect, and also for the neglect of his servants acting for
him. The principle was based upoxx common sense. If a x’ailway
company, through the neglect of its engine-driver, injured a passenger,
it was liable to damages, although it may have had nothing to do


with the accident. In 1837 an exception was grafted on that plain
principle of law to the effect that where the person injured was an
employe he was not entitled to compensation. It had been put on
fanciful grounds. At one time it was said that the employers tacitly
contracted to bear all the risk. Another time it was said that it
would be most inconvenient to hold an employer of a large number
of men liable for every little act of negligence on their part. Many
of the best English judges differed from the exception, on the ground
that it was not founded on justice and reason. Eventually all parties
saw that the exception was unjust, and, by the union of the Liberal
and Conservative parties at home, the Employers’ Liability Bill of
1880 was passed. It made the employer liable for the injuries of
his servant, just as it made him liable to the outside public. It did
not introduce any new liability nor exact anything of an extra-
ordinary character. It was a strange thing that in Melbourne so
simple and obviously just a measure had never been made law. It
was the law in England, on portions of the Continent, in the American
States, and in New South Wales. It was the law in Victoria with
regard to miners, but somehow it had never become the law for
employes generally. The bill he introduced was based on the
English act, with one or two important additions. The first was
the prohibition against contracting out of the act (Hear, hear),
which he thought they would agree with him was essential to the
successful working of the act; and the second was the extension of
the act, so as to include those in domestic service. The clause
relating to sailors would be dealt with during the next session of
Parliament. (Applause.) This was a perfectly fair and just pro-
posal, and there was nothing revolutionary in it. At the time when
the bill was introduced here there was some misunderstanding, and
many employers objected to it, not knowing the purport of the
provisions. When the bill got further forward he had to acknowledge
that he received great assistance from several members of the
Assembly who were employers of labour. The bill again went up to
the Council, but it was not passed, owing to the delay. He trusted,
however, that, before the next session was concluded, they would be
able to congratulate themselves on being abreast of the world in this
just legislation. (Applause.)
The President then introduced
Mr. D. Gaunson, M.L.A., who was cordially received, and said
that the credit of bringing this measure forward was due to Mr.
Wrixon. (Hear, hear.) It was very satisfactory to find that at
last the Government had been aroused to some degree of sympathy
—which they certainly failed to show last session—with respect to
measures affecting the working classes. (Hear, hear.) If the
Government had taken up the measure last session it would now be
on the Statute Book. It appeared to him to be a disgrace that this
colony, so proud of its liberal institutions, should be so far behind


the old country, where the Employers’ Liability Bill was law.
There was no reason founded on justice why it should not become-
law here. As regarded the justice of the measure, he need say
nothing, as it commended itself to all. He trusted that when the
bill came forward next session it would be carried. With respect to-
the proposition from one of the Sydney delegates (Mr. Wright), that
seamen should be specially mentioned in the bill, it appeared to him
that the request should be complied with. He thought the matter
was so plain and simple that there was no occasion for it to be dis-
cussed any further. (Cheers.)
Mr. W. Trenwith (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union)
moved, and Mr. J. Wright (N.S.W. Seamen’s Union) seconded, a
special vote of thanks to Messrs. Wrixon and Gaunson for their
addresses.
The motion was carried unanimously.
Mr. D. Bennet (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Melb.)
remarked that the measure was so just in its principle that it com-
mended itself to all persons of common sense. It had been
mentioned by Mr. Wrixon that the clause prohibiting an employe
contracting himself outside the act had been inserted in the English
bill, but he learned that steps were taken in England last year to get
the clause struck out. There was another provision in the English act
to which he took exception, viz., that which limited the compensation
to injured workmen to a sum equal to three years of their wages.
According to a paper which he held in his hand, out of 230 claims for
compensation made in England, in 1882, 73 only recovered damages.
Three years’ wages might be considered a fair compensation for
the loss of a man 60 years of age, but it was certainly inadequate
in the case of a man 30 years of age with a wife and family.
He was of opinion that the compensation ought to be based upon the
ordinary tables of life assurance. Some short time ago an engine-
driver on the Victorian railways was injured to such an extent as to
prevent him from following his occupation ever after. He sued the
Board of Land and Works for the recovery of damages, and at the
trial a point was raised by the counsel for the defence that the plain-
tiff had no claim, on the ground that the accident was due to the
negligence of a fellow servant. The jury awarded damages, but
when the case was argued before the Full Court the verdict was
upset. The unfortunate man had, however, since obtained the
amount awarded him by the jury in the way of compensation. This
case clearly showed the necessity for legislation on the liability of
employers. It seemed to him, though, that legislation of any
character could not be obtained until some serious accident startled
the community and aroused them to their sense of duty. (Applause.)
Mr. James Curley (Coal Miners’ Mutual Protection Association,
Hunter River District, N.S.W.) thought that the measure would
have the effect of leading to a compromise between workmen and


employers. If it acted only as a preventive of accidents, the bill
should become law. (Applause.)
Mr. Trenwith (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union) was
of opinion that the main benefit which would arise from
the introduction of this bill was the prevention of accidents.
Employers would be more careful in guarding against accidents, and
when the working class sent their sons and daughters to work
machinery they would have the assurance that employers had a
direct interest in protecting them from danger. (Hear, hear.) In Sims’s
work, entitled “ How the Poor Live in London,” he found the state-
ment that anyone attending a tea meeting in certain manufacturing
districts would find it difficult to pick out a single individual with
the correct number of fingers on his hands. There was a great
amount of recklessness in connection with machinery at home, and a
gjreat many preventible accidents took place annually. There was
no denying that a great number of accidents were unavoidable, but
they should do everything in their power to reduce the risks to life
and limb. He felt confident that very few employers would be
ruined through the bill becoming law, and that a large number of
workmen would be saved from painful and distressing accidents.
(Applause.)
Mr. J. E. West (Trades and Labour Council, N.S.W.), in replying,
said he felt confident that his resolution would meet the approbation
of the Congress.
The resolution was then put and carried unanimously.
THE FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS ACT.
Mr. F. H. Bromley (United Tinsmiths, li’onworkers, &c., Society,
■Sandhurst) read the following paper on the Factories and Woi'kshops
Amendment Act:—
In approaching this most difficult and complex subject of legislating for the
thousands who toil and spin in the various factories and woi’kshops of this
■colony, we are dealing with a subject which has been one of contention between
the champions of capital and of labour, and it has been a favourite subject with
some of the most brilliant intellects who have attained to eminence amongst
the philosophers and political economists of modern times. Alluding to the
oppositionists, the Age of 29th March, in a leader on the report of the Royal
Commission on Shops, says: —“Governmental interference with the occupa-
tions of the people is always sure to raise the question how far that interference
can be justified on the grounds of principle at all. Thinkers of the laissez faire
school of Herbert Spencer—who object to State education, for example—will,
of course, maintain that the State is exceeding its functions when it insists upon
the clothier, shoemaker, or brushmaker keeping the sexes apart in their work-
rooms, providing cleanly accommodation for them, and furnishing a specially-
appointed inspection, with the names, ages, and wages of the boys and girls
that they employ. The suppression of the sweating system is a still greater
violation of the Spencerian philosophy, for the commission propose not only that
no work shall be done on the premises after certain hours, but that the work-


people shall not be allowed to carry it home to do. The obvious answer, how-
ever, is, that their objections have come too late in the day to have any force.”
The success of factory legislation in the United Kingdom during the last fifty
years has convinced the most obdurate and sceptical political economists that
it is highly expedient for the State to interpose and protect its subjects from
influences which are likely to prejudice either their physical or moral welfare
the limits of such interference are admitted to be simply those of expediency.
In other words, the existence of the evil influences complained of being proved
and established, it becomes the duty of the State not only to interfere,
but to provide a remedy which will be both practical and efficacious. As
I have pointed out upon a previous occasion, the factory system and the
necessity for a factory law had a common origin. They were the results
of the introduction of machinery and of the substitution of mechanical
power for hand labour, which brought about an extensive system of
apprenticeship and the employment of female labour. In great industrial
centres the introduction of steam power and machinery had for its primary
object the minimizing of human labour, the economizing and facilitation of the
means of production. It would, therefore, naturally follow that handicraftsmen
and labourers in all branches of trade should seek to benefit by its introduction,
and place a limit upon its productive powers by reducing their hours of labour
for who knows so well the results of over-production as the working men
themselves ? Hence their desire to place such restrictions upon its use as may
be expedient in the interest of life and labour. It therefore becomes the
manifest duty of the Legislature to carry out their desires and wishes by
legalizing schemes like the Factories Act, and others of a kindred character,
to protect them against those employers who not only avail themselves of the
vast resources afforded by the wonderful creations of inventive genius, but
who (to speedily amass wealth) push their unfortunate employes to the wall,
so that they may carry out their desire, thus placing the workman in a
position as hard and as exhaustive as if the use of steam power and machinery
had never been known ; robbing him of the brains and skill that were before
necessary to production, and reducing him to a mere human auxiliary to the
machine he uses or guides. We should therefore urge upon the various Legis-
latures the necessity of passing Factories Acts which will effectually protect
the men, women, and children employed therein from the dangers of unpro-
tected machinery, from their being compelled to labour for hours in close and
overcrowded workrooms, ill ventilated and frequently devoid of any sanitary
accommodation. The necessity for the protection of machinery and the
prohibition of young children being employed at dangerous machines must be
patent to all, when we so frequently read paragraphs of the following
character :—“At Shaw’s factory a boy, eleven years old, nearly had his limb
torn off through his leg slipping into the pit of an unprotected grindstone, at
which he was working. The accident was of a most painful and serious
character.” “ William James Batcheldor, aged fourteen, residing in Little
Lonsdale-street, suffering from crushed fingers, caused by their having been
caught in a cog-wheel at Messrs. Hughes and Harvey’s factory. The injuries
were of such a serious nature that it was necessary for Dr. Barrett to
amputate the fingers.” “ William Martin, aged nine years, residing in Little
Flinders-street, suffering from a crushed finger, caused by its being caught in
a washer punch at Shaw’s factory, Franklin-street. Dr. Montgomery ampu-
tated the finger, and the lad went home.” These are evils which exist to a
larger extent than is generally supposed, and they are evils which will spread
with rapidity unless they are promptly checked, and speedily assume the
proportions in which they existed in Great Britain in 1830, when Richard
Oastler, writing upon the subject of infantile slavery in the great manufac-
turing towns of Yorkshire, said, “Would that I had a Brougham’s eloquence,
that I might rouse the hearts of the nation and make every Briton swear,
‘These innocents shall be free.’” Evils and abuses are rapidly spreading


iu the industrial establishments of this colony which we must combat and
stifle before they reach proportions of actual white slavery. Again, the idea of
children having to undergo a medical examination prior to their being indentured
to any trade has been ridiculed by some of the critics of the Report drawn rrp by
the Royal Commission on Shops. It must be apparent to any thinking person
that this is a necessity, as there are many trades and occupations which would
speedily kill a child of weak constitution. Provision for this has been very
wisely made in the English Act of 1878, 41 Viet., c. 16, sec. 27, wherein it
says a certificate of fitness for employment for the purposes of this Act shall
be granted by the certifying surgeon for the district, and shall be to the effect
that he is satisfied by the production of a certificate of birth or other sufficient
■evidence that the person named in the certificate of fitness is the age therein
specified, and has been personally examined by him, and is not incapacitated
by disease or bodily infirmity for working daily for the time allowed by law in
the factory named in the certificate. In framing a new Act a clause should
also be inserted compelling employers to indenture all youths in their employ,
and to teach or have them taught their respective trades properly and
efficiently. This is a clause that is very desirable, as at present youths are
allowed to go from place to place, and from one trade to another, until they
attain an age when it becomes practically impossible for them to learn a trade
thoroughly. It is a notorious practice with many employers under the
present system to discharge a boy as soon as he begins to earn a decent
wage, and to replace him with a younger and cheaper boy. This system
will, and is even now, showing its ill effects on the rising generation, who,
instead of becoming expert mechanics, have become a drag on the colony.
The “sweating” system has of late occupied the attention of those
interested, and has been exhaustively dealt with in the report of the
Royal Commission on Shops, in which they recommend its entire abolition.
It is almost superfluous for me to allude to the evil consequences which may
follow its perpetuation from a sanitary point of view. It was pointed out by
■one of the witnesses examined, that though a suit of clothes may be ordered in
the best shop in Melbourne, the chances are that it may be made up in some of
the lowest or most pestilential slums of the city, amid the haunts of fever, or
other diseases of an equally contagious character ; and it is a well-known fact
that woollen materials will retain for a long time the germs of disease, and its
introduction into any household would baffle the skill of almost any medical
or sanitary scientist to trace. All the witnesses examined from the tailoring
trades were unanimous in their opinion that the “ sweating ” system and the
present system of apprentices and improvers are ruinous to the trade, and will
tend to reduce and keep wages low as long as they are permitted to exist.
According to the rates of wages paid at the present time it is absolutely
necessary for many employes to take work home, or they could not earn a
-decent livelihood; and it was pointed out that if they did not take the work
home it would be sent to the “sweating houses” to be made up, as it is usually
done cheaper than when it is made up in the manufactories, and if the employes
objected to work for the prices offered they were told by their employers that
they could get it done in the “sweating houses” for the price offered. They, the
employes, therefore, have no alternative but to submit, and it is a positive fact
that these women have to labour from fourteen to sixteen hours per day to earn a
bare subsistence. Another evil which also requires immediate attention is the
employment of youths and other unqualified persons to take charge of steam
boilers and engines, thereby risking the lives of those employed around them.
This is a practice which is carried on to an alarming extent in this colony, and
calls for a trenchant measure to deal with it. The reckless and careless
manner in which the lives of workpeople are jeopardized is simply astounding.
We have heard of youths of fifteen and sixteen years of age being placed in
charge of machinery, and there was one case of a youth of sixteen, who was
subject to fits, being placed in charge of an engine, and he has been seen lying


in a fit while he was in charge—a fact which was well known to his employer
—and so great was the carelessness shown, and the indifference to the sacrifice
of life, that no steps were taken to remove the youth in question, because his
removal might have entailed a little additional expenditure, to have replaced
him with some more competent person. I think sufficient proof has been
brought forward in this brief paper to show the urgent necessity of amending
our Factories and Workshops Act, and I hope when that highly necessary
step is taken ample provision will be made for carrying it out thoroughly and
efficiently, that properly qualified inspectors will be appointed by the Govern-
ment, to whom alone they should be responsible ; that they should have the
power to inspect all places under their supervision without having to obtain
the consent of the employer, and that they should be allowed to inspect them
at any hour of the day they may think fit to visit. I trust that some practical
results will be the outcome of our efforts, for it is a standing disgrace that we
in this colony of Victoria have no act which may justly be said to regulate in
any degree the vast industrial establishments which are so rapidly rising in
our midst, and many of them will, perhaps, in very few years rank with some
of the largest in the world. With these probabilities before us it is time for
us to be up and doing, for every year will render the task more and more diffi-
cult, as we shall then have larger and more powerful vested interests to
contend against. The time is now ripe for such a measure, and if the members
of the Royal Commission on Shops are backed by the working men of the
colony I am sanguine enough to believe that their labours will bear good fruit.
(Cheers.)
On the motion of Mr, P. Stokes (South Australian United
Builders and Labourers’ Society) a vote of thanks was accorded to
Mr. Bromley for his paper.
Mr. Bromley then moved the following resolution on the ques-
tion :
“That the report of the Shops Commission be endorsed by this Congress,
and that they be urged to endeavour to bring a bill into the House during the
forthcoming session.”
Mr. A. Brooks (Victorian Saddlers’ Society) seconded the reso-
lution.
Mr. C. Knight (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union) sup-
ported the resolution. In certain trades there was a great division
of labour. In the boot trade, for instance, finishing work was given
to outside hands. The Shops Commission’s report recommended
that no work should be permitted to be taken home from the factories
or workshops. In the boot and tailoring trades the people worked
from eight a.m. to half-past five p.m., when they were supposed to
knock off. Both sexes, however, were to be seen with parcels or
bags containing articles to finish. This sort of thing ought not to
be allowed. (Hear, hear.) If persons engaged in such trades could
not earn sufficient money in ordinary working hours without taking
work home, then their wages should be increased. If that state
of affairs prevailed, somebody else must be getting too much
profit.
Mr. W, Trenwith (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union), in
supporting the resolution, said he hoped all members of labour


organizations and others would do all in their power to assist the
gentlemen who would have charge of this measure to carry it into
law. (Hear, hear.) On the questions they had previously discussed
there had been very little difference of opinion, but now they were
treading upon almost unbroken ground, and the gentlemen who
undertook the duty of piloting the bill through the legislature would
require a very large amount of support if they were to bring it to a
successful issue. (Hear, hear.) The Shops Commission were enter-
ing, in some respects, upon unpopular ground. (Hear, hear.) The
recommendations they had made, whilst appearing thoroughly justi-
fiable, and indeed highly necessary, to those who were acquainted
with the subject, and who had acquired a habit of thinking upon ques-
tions of this character, might appear to be of a very revolutionary
type in the eyes of persons who were not in the habit of giving much
thought to the matter. Therefore it was absolutely necessary that
they should marshal all their forces and concentrate all their strength
in assisting those gentlemen who would have charge of the measure
next session. The clause to which he desired to call special attention
was the one having reference to apprenticeship. All trades, so far
as he was able to understand, were suffering very considerably from
the indiscriminate manner in which youthful labour was imported
into them, and the little supervision exercised over them when se
imported. Lads were frequently taken on to work without any
binding agreement being entered into that they would be properly
taught their trade. They went to work, and had the option of
leaving whenever they chose. The boys in a promiscuous manner
picked up in a year or two a little knowledge of the trade, and,
fancying themselves as good as those who had been over them, if not
better, they resolved to leave and enter into competition with pro-
perly-taught tradesmen. Their work was generally bad, but not so
bad as to be unfit to send out; and the consequence was that labour
and wages were brought down to the standard of the incompetent.
(Cheers.) In other instances employers engaged the youth of both
sexes for the purpose of getting all they could out of them, and
when they were sufficiently advanced to ask for an increase of wages
they were sent about their business, fresh youths being taken on in
their places. If the recommendations made by the Shops Commis-
sion were carried out, all those evils would be swept away. They
had a right to call upon the Legislature to see that these children
were not left open to the terrible danger to which they were at pre-
sent exposed of being rendered incompetent tradesmen and handi-
craftsmen without the necessary knowledge to enable them to fill the
position, but yet removed from the position of labourers, which they
might fill honourably and well. The system of “ sweating ” was
another matter requiring urgent attention. He assured them that
those who belonged to trades in which sweating could not be intro-
duced had no conception of the immense amount of injury done by


the system. A very plausible argument in its favour was put for-
ward, to the effect that there were numerous persons who were
incapable from their surroundings of going into a factory to work,
but who were dependent upon the work of their hands; and that
those persons, if they were prevented from taking work home, would
be reduced to a state of poverty. This was a purely fanciful objec-
tion. Arrangements could easily be made to meet cases of this kind.
A properly constituted board should be appointed to investigate these
cases and exercise a power of discretion. (Applause.) That board
might grant certificates to individuals to take home work under
exceptional circumstances. (A voice: “No.”) Well, he was simply
expressing his own opinion. He thought there were very few isolated
cases where the abolition of sweating would be a hardship. It would
be absolutely impossible for a widow to leave her children to go to
work in a factory. If she had no other means of livelihood than taking
home work, she would have to go to a benevolent asylum, and thereby
place herself on the pauper list. But it was to meet these cases that
his proposal for the appointment of a board was made. (Cheers.)
If a provision were made, and an imperative injunction given that no
person holding a certificate should be allowed to hire labour, the
difficulty would be surmounted. He knew from his own personal
experience that there was a large number of persons who took home
work, but who had not the slightest necessity to do so. (Applause.)
They took it home simply to secure for themselves “pin money.” They
were not depending upon this work for a living, therefore it made
very little difference to them whether they got good prices or not.
But while those persons were so reducing the price of labour, some
other poor creature who was depending for her living upon the work
she did was dragged down to the lowest level. If they had a clause
in an act of Parliament to prohibit the continuance of the sweating
system he had indicated, a case of that kind could not possibly occur ;
and if the suggestion he had made was adopted, an instance of absolute
hardship could not occur either. He was also of opinion that every place
where work was done by hired hands should be under the supervision
of the Government, otherwise the act would be evaded with impunity.
The present Factory Act had been evaded right and left owing to its
containing a provision that no place where less than 10 hands were
employed should be considered a factory. The result was that some
firms divided their work amongst 20 or 30 hands, and not one of
their establishments was a factory within the meaning of the act.
If a nominal license fee was fixed for places where work was done for
hire, and a Government inspector appointed who would be indepen-
dent of those whom it would be its duty to supervise, a very beneficial
effect would be the result. He would even go so far as to say that
the inspectors should be removed periodically from one district to
another as often as practicable. If that were done there would be a
guarantee that workrooms were healthy, and they would have the


assurance that children of even nine years of age would not lose their
fingers through the neglect of their employers. He believed that a
large number of the factory lads of this colony were as moral as any
to be found in the world. (Hear, hear.) It was horrible to think
that young children should have to work for a long number of hours
in a close room; and he knew a place in Melbourne where three
children fainted in one room in consequence of bad ventilation and
long hours. He would urge upon every member of the Congress to
procure a copy of the recommendations contained in the Shops Com-
mission’s report, and to do everything in their power to assist the
gentlemen who were endeavouring to pilot the matter through the
Assembly. (Applause.)
Mr, W. Robertson (Ironmoulders’ Society of Victoria) said he
would accept all the recommendations contained in the report, save
one or two. The proposals respecting apprentices required some
modification, and in some of the iron trades the number of appren-
tices might be increased from one to every five men to one to every
four men.
Mr, J. D. Boyd (Ironfounders’ Trade Union, Melbourne), in
supporting the recommendations, said he did not believe in providing
for too many apprentices.
Mr. C. A. Fuller (Victorian Slaters’ Society) said that he was
not satisfied with some of the recommendations of the Shops Com-
mission, but he thought that whilst the report was before Parliament
it could be amended satisfactorily. Above all, he would urge upon
those who had charge of the measure to endeavour, as far as possible,
to see that the condition of the female operatives was ameliorated.
He hoped that the sweating system would be put down altogether,
that the factories would be regulated by a certain number of hours,
and also that the employes would not be prevented from par-
ticipating in a fair share of the profits. (Applause.)
The President intimated that he desired to give Major Smith,
MX.A, Chairman of the Shops Commission, an opportunity of
expressing a few I’emarks. That gentleman had had many oppor-
tunities of judging of the condition of the working classes. His
words would, therefore, be of importance to the Congress.
Major W. C. Smith, M.L.A., said he had to thank the officers of
the Congress for acquainting him that the subject was under
discussion, because, as Chairman of the Shops Commission, he was
very anxious to hear the opinions of the members, and to see how far
they would support the recommendations contained in the report. The
commissioners had collected evidence which showed that the sweating
system was largely practised by manufacturers in New South Wales
and Victoria, So long as the system was tolerated under the plea
that it was for the benefit of suffering and poor families, the
recommendations of the Shops Commission would be of no avail.
They must try all they could to prevent this system of sweating. It


was well known that some of the largest manufacturers in Melbourne
only made one-third of the articles they offered for sale, the
remaining two-thirds being made in the homes of poor families. He
did not think that the suggestion of Mr. Trenwith could be made
practicable. He was of opinion that all work done outside should
be paid for at the same rate as that done inside.
Mr. W. Trenwith (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union)
explained that his suggestion was to appoint a board to grant
certificates to take out work, and that if work were given to persons
not holding certificates the manufacturers would be liable to be
punished.
Major Smith said he was glad to find that the Government
intended to bring in a bill which would deal with this question.
He only hoped it would not be a half measure. He would promise
that if the Congress endorsed the recommendations of the Shops
Commission, he would feel it his duty to insist that they should
take the form of law. (Cheers.)
Mr. John Woods, M.L.A., also addressed the Congress as a
member of the Shops Commission. He strongly impressed upon
the Congress the necessity of forming a Federal Executive Council,
without which their laws would be a dead letter. With regard to
that portion of the President’s address touching on the condition of
the Indian trade, he said labour in that country was absolutely the
slave of capital. Labour there had no rights ; it simply had duties.
There were sufficient combinations to carefully fence in labour, and
the unlimited competition was now a savage struggle for life.
(Applause.)
Mr. Wrixon, M.L.A., another member of the Shops Commission,
said he had not entirely agreed with the recommendations with
respect to the sweating system, because he had not heard any
practical suggestion to do away with the evil. He would like to see
the labour of men, women, and children limited to a reasonable day’s
work. (Hear, hear.) Did they propose to render it illegal for a
man or a woman to work eight or ten hours, if they liked, in their
own homes 1 (Voices : “ N 0.”,) There was such a law in the United
States of America, but it was not found to work well. He hoped
the Congress would be able to find a way out of the difficulty.
Mr. D. Bennet (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Melbourne)
thought the Congress ought at once declare its opinion that the
recommendations of the Shops Commission should be passed into
law without any unnecessary delay. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. T. Huggan (Melbourne Typographical Society) said that the
Shops Commission did not go the whole length to meet what the
trade wished for. He was pleased, however, that the evil of employ-
ing boys in country newspaper offices had received attention. With
the exception of Ballarat it was the practice in all country towns to
work the morning newspaper offices with boys from fourteen years
' ■ ' ‘ ’ * "' "I *,N /%


of age. They were engaged without indentures, and when they
asked for an increase of wages they were told to go. They were not
properly taught their trade, and the majority of them drifted to
Melbourne. Even a worse state of affairs existed in some of the tri-
weekly country newspaper offices. He had seen boys working in
the Gippsland district from 9 a.m, to 1 a.m. the next morning.
They would probably be told to go to bed at 1 o’clock in the morn-
ing, and after a couple of hours’ sleep they would be called again to
parcel up the papers, and then travel some miles on horseback. He
maintained that boys employed in newspaper offices should not be
allowed to work more than eight hours per day.
Mr. D, M £ lvor (Tailors’ Trade Protection Society, Melb.) cor-
dially supported the resolution. He quoted several cases to show
the baneful effects of the sweating system in relation to the tailors’
trade. Some of the most eminent medical men at home had given it
as their opinion that the system was dangerous to the health of the
members of the trade.
Mr. George Williams (Amalgamated Miners’ Association of
Victoria) said that in Ballarat there had been a great alteration for
the better in the condition of the sewing girls, through the instru-
mentality of Major Smith ; and he was sorry to see that the measures
introduced by that gentleman had not been more stringently enforced
in Melbourne. He suggested that delegates like himself, who had
no practical knowledge of this subject, should not speak to the details
of the question, but content themselves by giving their cordial sup-
port to the committee to be appointed. (Hear, hear,)
Mrs. E. J. Creswell (Victorian Tailoresses’ Union, Melbourne
branch) said she desired to return thanks to the Trades’ Hall Com-
mittee for the pleasure afforded her of attending the Congress, and
allowing her to associate with a lot of noble men who were gathered
together for such a good work as raising themselves to the position
of good citizens and loyal subjects. It had been her unfortunate lot
in life to pass 15 years in the factories of London, and for the
whole of that period she had worked each day 16 hours out of the
24. She had three children, and they with her sat and worked very
late at night to earn enough to keep them. Her youngest child she
had lost at the age of 15 years through hard work. When the
tailoresses of Melbourne were brought down to a state of starvation
some time ago the trades of Melbourne came to the rescue and spent
£I,OOO in assisting them to get through with the strike. They had
done one of the noblest works that men could do—they had pro-
tected helpless females, who, as they were recently informed by one
of the factory managers, “ had no rights.” She then went on to ex-
plain the log system, and said that the one adopted by the tailoresses
was only accepted by five houses out of 17 for in-door hands.
Numerous hands employed in the factories were often kept on slack
work, while at the same time work was given out to “ sweaters” at


reduced rates. All the tailoresses asked for was a fair remuneration ;
but the manufacturers took care that they had the kernel, leaving
the poor workwomen nothing but the shell. (Cries of “Shame.”) She
had occasion to call on one of the large firms about a week after the
log was settled, when she saw 300 coats going outside to be made by
“ sweaters ” at Is. 4d. each below the price charged for by regular
hands. (Cries of “Shame.”) She had suffered considerably owing to
the late strike, and the manager in Mr. Beath’s factory annoyed her
so much the other day that she was compelled to retire, (Cries of
“Shame.”)
Mrs. J. Graham (Victorian Tailoresses’Union, Melbourne branch)
said she had worked for many years past in the factories of Mel-
bourne, and had had three children to support. She had never once
seen an inspector in any of the work-rooms. She had worked in
nearly every one of the Melbourne factories, and had seen the great
evil of the “sweating” system. The “ sweaters” took work home in
large quantities, worked in small rooms, and employed girls who were
really not competent, and who put clothes together without tacking
them. Their work was done in a very unsatisfactory manner, but it
suited the manufacturer, instead of good substantial work. In fact,
with the exception of Mr. Beath’s factory, there was not one in Mel-
bourne in a satisfactory condition. She had also worked in Sydney,
having been engaged by a Melbourne firm to go there. She was
induced by a manufacturer to break up her home under the promise
of good work in Sydney. But when she arrived there with her
family no provision had been made for her, and she could get no
work. She was left in the streets at night, which the Trades and
Labour Council could testify. She wrote to the Tailoresses’ Union
in Melbourne, but could get no satisfaction, as there was no agree-
ment signed. She had afterwards to sell her sewing machine to en-
able her to return to the colony. (Cries of “ Shame.”) At the pre-
sent time she was paying for another machine, with which she was
working up her past loss. Often had she worked from eight in the
morning until two and three o’clock next morning in order to get a
living for herself and family ; and now the tailoresses were in no
better condition. She hoped the Eight-Hours System would not only
be extended to Victoria, but to their sisters in New South Wales.
(Applause.)
ADJOURNMENT.
The Congress, shortly after 5 p.m., adjourned until the following
day at 9.30 a.m.


FOURTH DAY.—FRIDAY, 25th APRIL, 1885.
The Congress met at the Trades’ Hall at half-past nine o’clock.
The minutes of the previous day’s meetings were read and con-
firmed.
The President then said that in opening the fourth day’s.sitting o|
the Congress he desired to say a few words. In the first place he
would congratulate the delegates on the thorough unanimity which
had characterized their discussions. They were aware that this was
the fourth and last day of the Congress, and he apprehended the dele-
gates would be unwilling to go beyond the original proposition of a
four days’ Congress. There was a large mass of business to be con-
sidered, but he thought if they confined themselves exclusively to
those matters, there would be no difficulty in getting through with
them. His experience was that the first three or four speakers
exhausted the gist of a subject, and, when they were so unanimous,
it was unnecessary for others to say much. (Hear, hear.) He
would, therefore, press upon them not to waste valuable time by
replying to any question on which there was no difference of opinion,
and that it was quite unnecessary for the mover of an unopposed
resolution to speak in reply.
THE FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS ACT.
The debate on this bill was then resumed by
Mr. P. Edersham (Melbourne Cigar Makers’ Society), who, sup-
porting the motion before the delegates, said that he had observed
that the Shops Commission had not received the support it was
entitled to from members of Parliament; neither had the working
classes of the colony taken that interest in it, or accorded it the
amount of support which they might have been expected to, consi-
dering how its deliberations affected their interests,
. The President here remarked that the foregoing observations
were personal. The Congress had nothing to do with the past; it
was the future they were working for. He hoped the speaker would
keep to the point and not waste time.
Mr. Edersham, continuing, said he wished to point out the danger
which existed of opposition from the Melbourne Chamber of Com-
merce, who were totally opposed to the recommendations of the
Shops Commission, and who intended to resist the passing of the
act in every possible way they could.
Mr. Thomas G. Armfield (Australian Journeymen Coachmakers’
Society, Melb.) said he did not approve of all the recommendations


of the Shops Commission, which did not suit the requirements of
every trade. He objected to boys under thirteen yeax-s of age work-
ing in factories, fourteen years being, in his opinion, quite young
enough. Boys under sixteen should not be employed about machinery,
and they were often the cause of accidents. He knew of an instance,
among others, where a boy in working a steam hammer cut a man's
thumb off through his incompetency. The only compensation the
man received from his employer was two weeks’ wages, after which
he was sacked, to get his living as best he could. The report recom-
mended that the number of apprentices should be limited to one boy
for every five men employed. This limit was much too small for the
trade he represented. He believed that every boy should be taught
a trade. Now, as all boys had not mechanical talent, those who wei’e
deficient in it would drift into the labouring ranks, the good and
clever workmen remaining. The evil was not in having too many
apprentices, but in employing too many boy labourei’s.
Mi-. W. J. Spence (Amalgamated Miners’ Association, Maldon) said
that a great deal of the work in some factories was done by appren-
tices. They got scarcely anything for the work they did, although
they tuimed out very good articles. The system was a thoroughly
bad one. As soon as they had completed their time they were sent
about their business, only the best being kept on; the others could
take care of themselves as best they could. Refei'ence to this sub-
ject had been made in Dr. Cooke’s lectures, in commenting on the
evils of the employment of children in factories in one of the States
of America, and we should profit by that experience. The result of
his inquiries showed that each head of a family would have to earn
16J more per cent, before he would be able to maintain himself and
family, in order to keep pace with children’s labour. They ought to
oppose it, and see that clxildren were not allowed in factories at too
young an age. On the general principle of factory legislation the
lioui's ought everywhere to be shortened. Mr. Froude, in speaking
of the cotton factories in England, said that in ninety years nine
generations of workmen were destroyed by the hours of the Lanca-
shire mills. Dr. Cooke arrived at similar results. They had heard
on the previous day how some employers would treat the female
labourer. They had not looked after her as they ought to have
done, though in Ballarat they had taken some steps to better her by
providing sitting accommodation while they were in attendance in
the various drapery establishments. As to those who had been
destroyed by long hours, it would need a trench five miles long to
bury them. When Parliament met they should see there was an
alteration made in the number of apprentices. The facts revealed
by the Shops Commission urgently called for amendment, and when
there was also a strongly expressed desire on the part of the people
on any subject they should have their wishes satisfied.
Mr. W. J. Lawrance (United Operative Painters’ Society, Syd.)


preferred to see clause 4 struck out, and moved accordingly. In
many of the building trades, such as plumbers, one boy to live men
could not carry on the work. One boy was necessary to every man.
Mr. J. C. Bolger (Melbourne Typographical Society) said that
it was a measure of such importance, that, unless it were made a
prominent feature of the next session of Parliament, that session
would be comparatively fruitless. He had little fault to find with
the Shops Commission’s recommendations. If they were not all they
desired, they went a great way, and on behalf of the society he repre-
sented he was prepared to accept them as a substantial concession.
The most important was in reference to the legal binding of appren-
tices. The effect of flooding the trade with half-taught youths had
been so disastrously felt by them that he need not refer to it from
their point of view, but it was also felt by employers who required
a more competent class to perform their work. The trade was in
danger of being swamped with “ unmitigated muffs,” It was the
duty of the state to interfere so as to ensure that the workman
of the future should be equal to, and, if possible, superior to, those
of any other country, and not to fail to step in and prevent the
encouragement of men incapable of performing the work required of
them. The evils of long hours for women in some directions carried
its own conviction with it. He need only mention the case of
Florence Waddilove as one of the very evils which arose from the
system, and he hoped to see the employment of females in public-
houses prohibited. The Parliamentary Committee should consider
this.
Mr, A, Drayton (United Operative Painters of Sydney) pointed
out that, in the building trades, they were now employing a great
number of improvers who did not do good work, and bad buildings
were the consequence, while they reduced the standard of workmen
as well. They should be legally indentured, and though their wages
would be small at first, they would be kept to one shop, and would
become skilled workmen. He supported clause 2.
Mr. R. Simon (Victorian Association of Felt Hatters) said that as
the trade he represented laboured under peculiar evils, he would
point out some of them. It was a piece-work trade, in which there
were so many branches that a journeyman had been unable to get
employment, and they had been so knocked out of their trade by the
apprentices that when an apprentice came out of his time he wished
he was still an apprentice. He had known men who, after
coming out of their time, had wanted the necessaries of life. He
did not desire to limit the number of apprentices, provided a clause
were inserted that they should be taught their work thoroughly.
Let the apprentice be bound to a Trades Union, instead of an
employer. He supported the motion.
Mr. J, F. Hunter (Amalgamated Miners’ Association, Vic.) said
that a member of Parliament, recently returned from England,


Lad given evidence before the Shops Commission, and, if he were
•urged, would forcibly lay the matter before Parliament. They
should leave no steps untrodden to remove the evil sought to be
abated.
Mr. W, Stott (Melbourne Plasterers’ Sick and Friendly Society)
said it was a great evil with his trade. He did not see why
young men in this city should be debarred from learning trades,
Mr. James Donohue (United Society of Boilermakers and Iron
Shipbuilders, Ballarat) said, in regard to machinery inspection, that
it should be limited to duly qualified engineers; and boiler-
makers be appointed to the several districts to inspect steam
boilers and engines or other machinery used in a factory or work-
shop within the meaning of the act. For instance, the proper man
to inspect a boiler was a boilermaker.
Mr. W. Westman (Coachmakers’ Society, N.S.W.) also deprecated
the apprentice system. It was scarcely a novelty to see one carrying
home almost a whole buggy on bis back, which he works at for all
hours. In a little while he rigs up an iron shed and starts a
coachmakers’ factory, but knows next to nothing of the trade. He
seconded the amendment.
Mr. J. Jones (Society of Ironmoulders, N.S.W.), on the subject
of factories, said that what was required was a proper amount of
space, proper lavatories, <fec., and proper division of the sexes.
They had no Factories Act in New South Wales, but there were
very few girls of tender age employed. The Public Instruction
Act compelled childi’en up to thirteen to attend a certain number of
days in the year.
The President put the resolution, which was carried.
INSPECTION OF LAND BOILERS.
Mr. James Donohue (United Society of Boilermakers and Iron
Shipbuilders, Ballarat) submitted that there should be a periodical
inspection of all steam boilers, and his reason was that in Victoria
there was no means of compelling owners of steam engines or boilers
to submit them to any inspection whatever. From his own
experience as a practical boilermaker, he had seen, not only in
Victoria, but in most of the other colonies, patched-up old boilers
not fit to stand cold water. In many instances these boilers were
worked at pressure regardless of their strength, and from the
ignorance of the person in charge, and sometimes from the greed of
the owner in trying to accumulate money, life and property were
placed in danger. He had seen boilers repaired with wooden wedges,
bricks and mortar, and the engine driver was the man who did it.
There should be periodical inspections of both engines and boilers,


but a boilermaker should not be an inspector of engines, nor a
engineer an inspector of boilers—each to his trade. He moved—
“ That in the opinion of this Congress it is desirable to advocate the legali-
zation of land boiler inspection, with a view to the protection of the lives and
property of the general public. ”
Mr. T. G. Armfield (Australian Journeymen Coach maker s’
Society) seconded the resolution. Inspectors were absolutely neces-
sary, and must be competent men. The inspection should be
frequent and thorough, and a number of boilers at present in use
condemned.
Mr. John Oliver (United Society of Boilermakers and Iron
Shipbuilders, Melbourne) supported the resolution. He had 15
years’ experience, and could see no reason why inspection on land
should not be carried out, as in the case of marine boilers, where it
was not really so important, as the persons working the marine
boilers were skilled engineers. The inspectors should be passed by a
board.
Mr. D. MTvor (Tailors’ Trade Protection Society) agreed that
inspection should be in the hands of practical men.
Mr. Vice-President Talbot (Society of Ironmoulders, N S.W.)
said that ever since a series of accidents had occurred in Sydney
they had been of opinion that inspection was necessary, and he was
sure every one was in sympathy with the inspection of land boilers.
Mr. David Bennet (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Mel-
bourne) supported, but would point out that the question of
whether a boilermaker or engineer was most competent to inspect a
boiler was open to discussion in another place. Yet, all mining
machinery was inspected by the Board’s officers, and it only wanted
similar inspection regulations for all land boilers. He endorsed the
remarks of former speakers,
Mr. A. Stevenson (United Society of Boilermakers and Iron
Shipbuilders, Melb.) supposed such an explosion as that in the St.
Arnaud district, where two men lost their lives, would not have
occurred had their been inspection of the boiler which burst.
Mr. Edward Cooke (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Williams-
town) and Mr. Hugh Patterson (United Society of Boilermakers and
Iron Shipbuilders, Sydney) agreed with the necessity for inspection.
The object was to protect the workmen and the public. A little
while ago the boilermakers of Sydney had gone to Ministers on a
deputation, but they were not accorded a favourable reception, though
why they did not know. Each trade was most capable of looking
after the work of its own trade.
Mr. James S. M'Gowan (Boilermakers and Iron Shipbuilders’
Society, H.S.W.) said he was glad to find that the Congress was
unanimous in favour of the regular inspection of land boilers,
though they perhaps differed as to the appointment of competent


men. He thought the Congress should decide as to who were the
competent men. (Cries of “No.”) They might not know the
difference between the two trades (boilermakers and engineers), but
they did know that no one could examine boilers so critically as the
men who made them. And if a board were appointed to carry out
an inspection, a proportionate number of boilermakers should be
appointed. He was only claiming that the same privileges which
were enjoyed by the boilermakers of Great Britain should be extended
to those of Australia. He begged to move that the following addi-
tion be added to the motion :
“ That a proportionate number of the land boiler inspectors should consist
of boilermakers.”
During the twenty-nine years of the existence of the Boilermakers’
Association in Sydney, not a single boiler guaranteed by them had
exploded. He advocated that the Government should appoint the
inspectors by a test-examination, which he was sure expert boiler-
makers would have little difficulty in passing.
Mr. Donohue (Boilermakers and Iron Shipbuilders’ Society, Bal-
larat), with the consent of the seconder of his motion, accepted
the addition proposed by the last speaker,
Mr. Edward Cooke (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Wil-
liamstown branch) said he was sorry an attempt had been made to
class the trade he represented with the boilermakers. He quite
endorsed the opinion of the previous speaker as to the competency
of the latter, but, at the same time, thought that as engineers of
considerable note had successfully done the work in the past, they
were quite equal to doing it again. The colony of Victoria was very
much in the background in the matter of steam boiler inspection,
and there had been a scandalous risk of life for a very long while. It
was quite time such a bad state of things was remedied, and he hoped
the Congress would exert itself to require an efficient system of
inspection. It was a matter of regret to the engineers that the
boilermakers were not amalgamated with them. He, howevei’,
hoped the Congress would pass the motion as originally submitted
by Mr. Donohue, as the drawing of fine lines of distinction scarcely
came within its province.
Mr. James Curley (Coal Miners’ Protection Association, Hunter
River District, N.S.W.) said he thought it was advisable for persons
connected with the boiler-making trade to have the power of inspect-
ing boilers for themselves. They could then appoint a person trom
their own ranks, and at their own cost, and so make sure that
boilers were up to the standard they were represented to be.
Mr. Charles Knight (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union)
said he desired to move the excision of the latter clause of the
motion. He believed the Congi’ess went far enough when it
recommended Parliament to appoint boiler inspectors. If they went


further, and told them who they must appoint, the legislators might
properly consider the Congress was infringing upon its rights. He
had no doubt they would make inspectors of practical boilermakers
without being told to, and he therefore thought the part of the motion
referring to the appointments was better left out.
There was no seconder to Mr. Knight’s proposition, and, on the
President putting the motion as it stood, it was carried with but one
dissentient.
The President then requested Mr. David Bennet (Amalgamated
Society of Engineers, Melb.) to read the following paper on
IMMIGRATION.
Mr. D. Bennet (Amalgamated Engineers, Melb.) read the following
paper upon the question of immigration :
In submitting for the consideration of the Congress a few remarks on the
question of immigration I would call attention to a mistake which often occurs
in using the word. It is most commonly applied to persons who have their
passage paid either wholly or in part by the State, but in reality an immigrant
is a person who comes into a country, and is equally applicable to the man who
pays a hundred guineas for a saloon ticket and the man who comes in the
steerage at the expense of the public. Bearing this in mind, then, it will be
seen that it is not to immigration as a whole that any objection is taken,
but only to that phase of it which is controlled by a Government, and paid
for out of the public funds, ostensibly for the benefit of the whole community,
but in reality for the advantage of one class at the expense of another. It
is contended that the larger the population of a country the greater are its
means of production, and that a large influx of people is necessary in a newly-
settled country in order to develop its resources and increase its wealth. No
doubt, all other things being equal, a country with 20,000,000 inhabitants
must be greater and more prosperous than one with only 20,000 ; but unless
it can be shown that constant and remunerative employment is obtainable
for wage earners, mere population cannot of itself be considered as a sign
of prosperity. It may at once be admitted that in some cases beneficial
results may follow from a wise use of the public money, as, for instance, in the
case of a sudden and unexpected interruption of the labour market such as
■was brought about by the gold discoveries, or for the purpose of introducing
new industries or manufactures when the necessary skill may not be obtain-
able ; but the crisis once past, the industries fairly established, the labour
market should be left to the natural operation of the laws of supply and
demand. If population alone were the measure of a country’s greatness there
would be nothing unjust or unreasonable in transporting at once not merely
hundreds but thousands and tens of thousands of people from the overstocked
countries of the world to new and comparatively unexplored territories ; but
would such a course not be reprobated as an act of wanton and unjustifiable
cruelty ? It follows, then, that the growth of a young country must be
gradual, from the rough life and privations of the early settlers to the com-
parative civilization of later times, and any artificial attempts to unduly hasten
that gradual progress must be an interference with the rights and interests of
some class of the community. One reason usually advanced in favour of
■State immigration is that as Governments borrow money which gives employ-
ment to labour, it is only just that labour should also be imported. Money,


however, is not borrowed for the purpose of giving employment to labour,
but for carrying out some work of improvement, such as railways, water-
works, and others of a similar character, and for the benefit, not of the
labourer, but the employer of labour, who obtains the advantage of cheaper
means of carriage for his produce and better means of increasing the
fertility of his land ; and it can scarcely be called unreasonable for the
labourer to obtain the contingent benefit of an increased demand for his labour
if his employer receives the advantage of cheap money or, what comes to the
same thing, greater facilities for the disposal of his produce. It would be out
of place in this paper to discuss whether it is beneficial for a country to import
capital any more than to import labour. Both depend upon their profitable
employment. If the capital is borrowed at a cheaper rate than the returns
from its investment give, it may be a source of profit; but unless this is so the
difference must be made up from the pockets of the taxpayers, in which case
it cannot surely be thought equitable for the labourer to be taxed to pay the
interest on the capital by which he is employed, and at the same time to tax
him to pay for labour to compete with himself. If a sudden and large influx
of capital lowers the price of money, surely the influx of a large amount of
labour would have the same tendency in regard to labour. If immigration
tends to raise wages, how comes it that the capitalist, or, rather, the employers
of labour, cry out for it and ask the State to provide it for them ? Are they
desirous that labour should become dearer, and the chances of procuring it
less ? It is somewhat remarkable that the strongest advocates of State
immigration are those noted for paying the very lowest wages ; and yet they
ask us to believe that their object is to raise them. If State immigration has
all the effects its promoters claim for it, how is it that we find those who
would naturally be supposed to be the first to feel those effects continually
protesting against it ? Surely workmen are not so blind as not to see that if
their wages were raised by immigration, it would be to their interest to insist
upon its continuance ; and yet we find, time after time, protests are entered
against it on the ground that the labour market is overstocked. That the real
object of State immigration is to force wages down by flooding the labour
market can easily be shown by a reference to the declaration of the Premier
of Queensland that it was the intention of his Government to introduce a
sufficient quantity of white labour to enable the sugar planters to do without
the South Sea Islanders, upon whom they have hitherto depended. It has
been shown by writers who have studied the subject that the sugar planters
employ coloured labour because they require a large number of hands at
certain seasons; that they are compelled to keep the labourers for the
whole year, or they would not be able to obtain them when required j
that if they had to depend upon white labour they would be obliged to
discharge the greater portion of the men at the end of the busy season,
as they could not work their plantations at a profit, and pay the wages
for the whole year ; that they would find great difficulty in getting the supply
for next season ; and that they preferred keeping the South Sea Islanders
because they could keep them the whole year at less cost than they could
keep white labourers for a part of it. Mr. Griffith’s proposal, therefore, to
supply white labour in sufficient quantity simply means that he would force
down wages to a rate at which it would pay the sugar planters to retain white
labour for the whole year, that is, at the same rate at which they now get
coloured labour. Disguise it as politicians may, the same reasoning will apply
to agricultural or any other class of labour. Farmers only want labour for a
portion of the year, and for the remaining portion the labourers must depend
upon the chances of employment at other work, or, which is more likely,
migrate to the tows, and compete with the labour already there. If, then,
immigration is to benefit the farmers, labour must be brought down to a point
at which they can keep their labourers the whole year for the same sum they
now pay for a portion of it. It is often alleged that not only does immigration


raise wages, but it also lessons the cost of government, because every immi-
grant becomes a taxpayer himself. But if this argument is to have any force
it should be shown that the cost of government remains stationary, or nearly
so, while the population increases ; but it will generally be found that the
reverse is the case, and that the taxation is yearly becoming greater in pro-
portion to the income of the population. If we credit the reports that appear
from time to time in the newspapers that whole shiploads of people are
absorbed in a few days without disturbing the state of the labour market, it
would at first sight appear that wholesale immigration had no effect in raising
or depressing wages, or in causing plenty or scarcity of employment. But
when do we hear of the struggles and privations endured by those who may
obtain a few weeks’ employment on first landing, to be afterwards thrown on
their own resources to fight the battle of competition with some of those they
have formerly displaced. These things are known to none better than the
officers of trades unions, whose position brings them in direct contact with the
sufferers. A public writer some time ago described his experiences when,
from a desire to see and hear for himself, he joined a party of immigrants sent
up the country from Sydney in search of employment ; how they applied time
after time for work and found none, until at last the suggestion to commit
crime in order to live, if it did not meet with approval, did not excite aversion.
It may happen that assisted immigration may be continued for a considerable
time without greatly affecting the labour market, as in the case of New South
Wales, because a large amount of accumulated capital is available for employ-
ment, and while this capital can be profitably used so long will there be a
demand for labour; but the employment of capital in any direction must
ultimately result in overtaking and passing the demand, and then labour
slackens, wages fall, and constant employment becomes the exception instead
of the rule. All this while the stream of immigration continues unchecked,
until distress and discontent take the place of comfort and happiness. The
wage-earning class begin to feel that their interests are sacrificed, their remon-
strances unheeded, and a feeling arises within their breasts that they are
looked upon less as intelligent and reasonable men than as so many cases or
bales of merchandise. If our police records were carefully studied, there is
little doubt that a great deal of the crime in these colonies might be traced to
the privations endured by persons brought out by the highly coloured state-
ments about the state of the labour market. A case occurred in this city a
few years ago—a type of dozens of others differing only in their surroundings
—where a skilful mechanic came from England with a few pounds in his
pocket, and with high hopes for the future. Unfortunately he came at a time
when work was slack. He could not obtain employment at his own trade.
He tried to get labouring work, and was told, as hundreds have been, that
there were plenty of good labourers to be had accustomed to their work, and
that no employer would take on a man who could not be expected to answer so
well as those used to the work. His small stock of money rapidly dwindled
away. He was assisted several times by some of his fellow-tradesmen. He
committed some petty theft, fell into the hands of the police, and gradually
sank into a condition of degradation and misery. All self-respect gone, all
hope destroyed, he finally disappeared—whether swallowed up in the great
ocean of criminality or in a pauper’s or suicide’s grave was never known. In
New South Wales at the present time there are ominous signs of a declension
in trade. The dry season experienced there is making itself felt in every
direction, and it wants but little to bring on a financial crisis, which cannot
fail to entail suffering among the labouring population. If we turn to South
Australia, where assisted immigration has been carried on for some time, what
do we find ? That a leading newspaper there which used to call loudly for
immigration has instituted an inquiry into the subject, and has found that the
want of employment has increased to an enormous extent, and that steps
should be taken to relieve the distress among the labouring class. Erom


Tasmania bitter complaints come about the misrepresentations of the Agent-
General of that colony as to the abundance of employment and the high rate
of wages. Many of the immigrants there have considered themselves fortu-
nate in obtaining employment at 25 per cent, under what they were led to
expect, and they only wait a word of encouragement to come over to Mel-
bourne. Of the three systems of immigration—free, assisted, and subsidized—
the first can only be justified in cases where some such abnormal state of
things exists as the discovery of an extensive goldfield, the starting of some new
industry, or the introduction of a new manufacture. The assisted or family
system presents perhaps fewer objections than any other, the State providing
a portion of the passage money and the friends of the immigrant residing in
the colony the other. This system has been greatly abused, and passages
obtained for persons whose circumstances ought to have placed them above the
necessity of obtaining assistance from the State. The third, or subsidized
system, while apparently the least objectionable, is really the most insidious
and dangerous of the three, because any agreement with a shipping company
under a subsidy must be for some defined period of time ; and no shipping
company would bind themselves to an agreement that did not extend over
several years, and it would be imperative upon the Government of the colony
with which the agreement was made to supply the ships with the stipulated
number of passengers, whatever might be the state of the labour market,
either in the country whence they came or the colony in which they were
landed. Although some such scheme as this has been propounded in Victoria
by the leaders of what is generally known as the “ Liberal party,” it has
never been endorsed by the workmen themselves. In the colonies of New
South Wales and Queensland, however, it is in full swing, and although
objected to by the trades unions their efforts have hitherto failed in stopping
it. Its continuance in these colonies, and its adoption in Victoria, should be
strenuously resisted, and no portion of the State funds should be thus applied,
whether in the guise of a mail subsidy or an immigration bounty. If it were
possible to regulate the number of immigrants, so that they would bear some
relation to the demand for labour, some of the objections might lose their force,
but unfortunately it generally happens that the wave of immigration does not
set in until the demand for labour has slackened, and only attains its full force
when labour is in least demand. Another feature in connection with immigra-
tion is the no doubt well-meaning but misdirected efforts of philanthropists in
England and elsewhere to relieve what they call the distress of the working
classes in times of depression, but in reality to get rid of a portion of what is
usually designated the surplus population by the establishment of relief funds,
emigration societies, or by whatsoever name they may be called. If these
schemes were brought into operation when there was a demand for labour in
the colonies, and if they were really applied to assist steady, competent, and
deserving workmen to emigrate, they would be regarded with less suspicion
and dislike by the workmen in the colonies, because their competition would be
less felt and because the colonial workman would not be taxed to supply labour
to compete with himself. In most cases, however, the efforts of these associa-
tions are brought into use at the very time when the depression is at its
greatest intensity, and when its effects bave spread to the colonies. Moreover,
in all times of slackness it is the idle, dissolute, and incompetent workmen
who are first thrown out of employment, and by the loudness of their clamour
attract the attention of those benevolent individuals who are anxious to relieve
the sufferings of their fellow-men ; and these are the very men who generally
manage to secure any advantage which may accrue from these efforts. Proposals
have even been made to send drafts of actual paupers from the workhouses of
England, but it is only fair to say that even the advocates of immigration do
not regard them with favour. Some time ago the Chamber of Manufactures
passed resolutions in favour of making agreements with workmen entered into
in London or elsewhere legal in the colony. Now, while no serious objection


could be raised against employers paying the passages of workmen engaged
under agreements, it would be advisable for the trades unions to carefully
watch any legislation on the subject, and have provisions inserted whereby
employers could be sued and damages recovered if it was proved that the
workmen had been engaged either for less than current wages or for longer
hours than those usually worked in the trade to which they belonged. Any
system of State immigration ought to be vigorously opposed by the working
men ; and, in order to make the opposition effectual, they must be in constant
communication with one another in the different colonies. They must inter-
change full and reliable information as to the state of trade and rate of wages,
and they must oppose to their very utmost all candidates for membership in
their respective legislatures who declare themselves favourable to using public
money for immigration purposes. To stop this system in those colonies
where it is now carried on, and to prevent its resumption in this colony, will
no doubt require great exertions on the part of trades unionists, but much may
be done by well-directed efforts, remembering always that obstacles seemingly
insurmountable may be overcome by energy and determination.
At the conclusion of his paper Mr. Bennet moved the following
resolution :
* ‘ That this Congress is of opinion that as assisted immigration in any form
is inimical to the interests of the wage-earners, it ought to be resisted. ”
A vote of thanks was unanimously carried to Mr, Bennet for the
paper he had read.
Mr. Trenwith (Bootmakers’ Society, Melb.) seconded the resolu-
tion, and remarked that there was such a unanimity of opinion on
this subject as to render long speeches unnecessary.
Mr. J. E. West (Trades and Labour Council, N.S.W.) suggested
that Mr. Bennet’s paper on Immigration should be printed in
pamphlet form and published throughout the colonies, as he was suro
the people had but a faint idea of the abuses which existed under the
system. In New South Wales many had done their best to resist
this assisted immigration, but so far without success ; and for this he
was sorry to say his fellow-workmen were a good deal to blame, for
instead of only supporting candidates for Parliament who would
oppose the system, they were carried away at election times by the
wily tongues of the old members, who were in favour of the system.
But the time had come in New South Wales when something would
have to be done to root out the evil.
Mr, John Talbot (Society of Ironmoulders, N.S.W.) supported
the motion. In New South Wales, he said, the industrial classes
were beginning to feel themselves much aggrieved with the system
of assisted immigration in force there. The trades did not wish to
see the population remain stationary, neither did they have any
objection to sharing the work with new comers, provided there was
enough. But as they had barely sufficient for their own require-
ments, they felt they had a right to complain of the Government
assisting people to the country who took the bread from the mouths
of their families.


Mr. Phillips (Operative Masons and Bricklayers’ Society, S.A.)
said that the South Australian Ministry had spent £45,000 in one
year on immigration without the sanction of Parliament, and they
would very likely do so again. He had been told that the Agent-
General in London was overwhelmed with applications from persons
wishing to emigrate to South Australia, although hundreds of men
in Adelaide, especially those in the building trades, were walking
about doing nothing.
Mr. John Jones (Society of Ironmoulders, N.S.W.) said the
question deeply affected New South Wales and Queensland. For
instance, those colonies had expended large sums of money in bringing
men out, and the consequence was that they did not remain in the
colony to which they were brought out, but went away to South
Australia and Victoria, and so the taxpayers had to pay for labour
which went to benefit other colonies. As secretary to a large society
of ironmoulders, he was in a position to state that many men came
out to Sydney as agricultural labourers who, when they got there,
turned out to be ironmoulders. To show how immigrants were
treated on their arrival in Sydney, it was reported in a newspaper
there that an immigration agent had said to a number of men on
landing, “ Now, you immigrants, don’t you expect to stop in the
city, or you will get no work. Go away into the country at once,
and don’t stand out about the wages. Take anything offered to you,
and by-and-bye you will get along.” The Sydney merchants did all
they could to get immigrants into the colony simply because they
wanted them to consume the provisions which they had imported in
quantities too large for the consumption.
Mr. T. Best (Ironmoulders’ Society, Melb.) said that what Mr.
Phillips had told them with regard to immigration and the state of
the labour market in Adelaide at the present time was only a
repetition of what had gone on there for years. Twenty-five years
ago he and eleven other boilermakers were specially brought out to
South Australia by the Government. On their arrival they found
that the very ship they came out in had brought, as cargo, a quantity
of cast-iron pipes which ought to have been manufactured in the
colony. There was not a job to be found, and nearly all those who
came out with him at once left for the other colonies to look for
employment. He could not understand what had induced the
Government to specially advertise for men until he found out that
the employers had been pulling the wires, and had brought them out
to reduce the rate of wages, which was then at £1 a day \ and he
remembered there was so little work to be done, that one of the
employers endeavoured to get the Burra Burra Copper Company to
put some work into the market, to prevent the workmen from leaving
the colony. The circumstances he had related were perfectly true,
and showed how employers utilized the immigration grant to further
their own ends at the cost of the taxpayers.
8


Mr. Charles Knight (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union)
said the importation of numbers of men into New South Wales and
Queensland affected his trade very seriously. Many instances had
recently come under his personal notice where tradesmen who had
been assisted to come out to these colonies had, almost immediately
on their arrival there, through not being able to find employment,
come to Melbourne, and entered into competition with the colonial
bootmakers. The real question at issue, as Mr. Bennet had pointed
out in his paper, was, should we allow the public funds to be expended
for the benefit of one class at the expense of another? (Applause.)
It was such a serious matter that he did trust that the New South
Wales and South Australian delegates would feel it incumbent, on
their return to those colonies, to strenuously agitate to keep these
assisted immigrants out of the country. (Applause.)
Mr. Atkinson (Mill Sawyers’ Society, Melb.) remarked that he
had had a long experience as a tradesman in the three principal
colonies, and his observations during that period led him to feel
strongly against assisted immigration. Three years ago, when in
Adelaide, he saw a number of skilled artisans actually working as
pick and shovel men, in consequence of their trades being overstocked.
He thought it an abominable thing that the working men already in
the colonies should be taxed to bring others out to compete against
them.
Mr. W. Westman (Coachmakers’ Society, N.S.W.) said he was
opposed to the motion, because he did not think that we in these
colonies had the right to reserve them entirely for ourselves. They
belonged to all men. (Cries of “No.”) He was of opinion that if a
good round sum of money was spent in a proper way in assisting
people out to the country, it would result in a great deal of good.
(Dissent.) If the £150,000 that New South Wales had spent in
assisted immigration had been expended in making a number of
little farms on which to place the people, it would have been better
than to have spent it in merely bringing them out and letting them
over-run the country. His idea of assisted immigration was that the
Government should establish a quantity of small farms first, and then
bring the people out to them. This was a young country, and we
had to make it, and should his plan be carried out it would do so.
The immigrants on being placed on their land would require imple-
ments to work it, as well as clothing for themselves, and the supply-
ing of these wants would give work to tradespeople, whilst at the
same time, owing to the increased production of food, they would
live more cheaply. Thus the plan would work both ways, and bene-
fit the country and the working man.
Mr. T. G. Armeield (Australian Journeymen Coachmakers’
Society, Melbourne) intimated that he was opposed to assisted
immigration. New South Wales and South Australia were at
present crying out against this great evil. In the latter colony men


belonging to his own trade were in such distress that they had to
petition the Government to give them work of any kind they had
available.
Mr. A. Brooks (Victorian Saddlers’ Society) said he had taken a
great interest in this subject for a number of years, and he was
totally opposed to assisted immigration. When a system of immi-
gration was in operation in South Australia in 1848-50, he had seen
first-class mechanics who were glad to obtain work on the roads at
2s. 6d. per day, and to beg a bag of cabbages to help to sustain their
families. At this time immigrants were rapidly pouring into the
colony, and had it not been for the gold discoveries of New South
Wales and Victoria nobody could tell what the result would have
been. Referring to the suggestion of Mr. Westman, that the immi-
grants should be placed on farms, he said that system had been
adopted to some extent in South Australia; men had obtained land
for next to nothing, but they were without capital, and could not
possibly make an honest living when the returns only averaged three
bushels to the acre. He tried farming for a number of years, and
had to combine it with other avocations. If there was intercolonial
free trade there would be no need of immigration ; and if the various
governments protected the coast, and showed to the outside world
that the colonies could give a fair day’s wage for a fair day’s work,
they would have men coming here who would benefit the community,
( Applause.)
Mr. G. Williams (Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Victoria)
stated that at all their meetings the miners decided unanimously
against any form of assisted immigration. It was a common occur-
rence, he believed, for farmers to discharge their men on Saturday
night and take them on again on Monday morning, in order to save
Sunday’s meals. He opposed assisted immigration from any of the
other colonies.
Mr. W. G. Spence (Amalgamated Miners’ Association, Maldon
branch) strongly opposed assisted immigration, which, he said, would
reduce the rate of wages, and would not, therefore, increase the pros-
perity of the colony. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. A. Drayton (United Operative Painters’ Society, Syd.) sup-
ported the resolution. He thought one of the most important works
that the Congress could undertake was to make properly known in
England the true state of the labour market in the colonies. When
he left England he did so in the belief that he would be better off
in the colonies. He was induced to come to the colony by false
pretences. The Duke of Manchester, who travelled through the
Australian colonies and New Zealand, looking for land which he could
take up for the purpose of establishing settlements, had induced
people to come to New Zealand without making provision for them
except for one night. He in company with eighteen others invested
sums of money from £IOO in land in New Zealand, which they took


up according to a plan shown them in England. They had been pro-
mised work upon arrival at the rate of 16s. per day, but he could
only get something to do at the rate of <£l per week for three or four
days. At the same time he had to pay £1 Is. per week for his
lodgings. He thought it was the duty of the trades to set their face
against gentlemen holding high positions spreading false reports
about the colonies. (Applause.) There was another matter to which
he also wished to refer. The New South Wales government had
employed an editor to send paragraphs to the English newspapers,
setting forth that the colony was a perfect paradise for tradesmen
and labourers. It was stated that shops had to be closed in the
country districts during harvest time owing to the scarcity of labour,
and that upon the arrival of immigrant ships at Sydney, men were
rushed with offers of work at a remuneration of £1 per day. Through
these gross misrepresentations he had been reduced to want. When
he arrived in Wellington, New Zealand, he had to walk through the
streets without knowing where to lay his head, and had to partake of
a cup of water and a penny loaf for a meal. (Cries of “ Shame.”)
It was shameful that people should be induced to leave their homes
under flattering promises which were never carried out. He was
confident that the working men of England resented such injustice,
and it was to be deplored that some of them were induced to come to
the colonies under such delusive promises. The working men of
England were not in the distressed condition that was made out. He
referred to a pamphlet published by the immigi’ants of the ship
Warwickshire, and the disclosures therein concerning the accom-
modation were highly discreditable to the home authorities. In con-
clusion, he said there was no inducement for workmen to come to the
colonies, and he thought it was the duty of every trade association in
Australia to assist in making known the true condition of things, so
that the working men of England would know how to act. (Pro-
longed applause.)
Mr. D. Bknnet (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Melb.), in
reply, deprecated the idea of bringing out farmers from Great
Britain who were not possessed of capital. In the paper which he
read that day he only objected to assisted immigration. There was
no objection to any man coming to the colony if he had a reasonable
chance of obtaining employment. (Hear, hear.)
The resolution was then put and carried with acclamation.


MINING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY BILL.
Mr. Geo. Williams (Amalgamated Miners’ Association of
ictoria) moved the following resolution :
“ That this Congress is of opinion that a Mining on Private Property Bill,
based on equitable terms, should be passed by the Legislature as speedily as
possible.”
He said the resolution was one which affected the interests of every
man, woman, and child in the colony. The districts most affected
were Creswick, Kingston, and Smeaton. When gold was first dis-
covered in those districts the great bulk of the land was taken up and
held as private stations. The discovery induced the middle men—
men who neither worked with their hands or brains, but made money
out of both speculators and capitalists—to make offers for the land,
and then dispose of it to the miners, charging them with immense
royalties. In some instances as much as <£3,000 and £4,000 had
been paid for the right to mine on private property, with a royalty
of 7* per cent, whether the mine was payable or not. Under this
extortion numbers of the miners stopped work without bottoming,
owing to the calls being so heavy. The money which had been given
for the right to mine should have been devoted to the prospector.
There were many companies in the Creswick district now standing
which had paid £3,000 or £4,000 for royalty, and had not turned a
sod. This land would revert to the owners, who would have a chance
of letting it again the next day on similar terms. During the last
two or three years in the Creswick district alone over a million of
money had been spent for the right to mine, without the employ-
ment of any labour. Had this large amount been circulated in
developing the mines, the tradespeople and mercantile classes would
have gained considerably. There were other cases of blocks of land
supposed to be auriferous for which large sums had been offered for
the right to mine, and the landlords had refused to allow operations
to be carried on. They objected to the running of water or sludge
over the land. The landowners had absolute power to demand any-
thing they liked. The miners had been fighting for the Mining on
Private Property Bill for 30 years, but they thought now that if the
Trades Unions came to their assistance they would be able to carry it
through Parliament, They were quite willing that a fair compensa-
tion should be awarded in the case of an owner who had his property
destroyed by mining. (Applause.)
Mr. J. F. Hunter.( Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Victoria)
seconded the resolution. For nearly twenty-six years this matter
had been discussed by the general public, and many times in Parlia-
ment ; but, unhappily, up to the present time, unsuccessfully. The


non-success of this measure might be attributed to a variety of
causes, viz., the determined opposition it had received at the hands
of property-holders, the want of force of the party agitating for such
a bill, and the thorough, but mistaken, indifference of the genei’al
public, who seemed to quietly witness the choking of the goose that
had laid so many golden eggs. When they looked back at the
history of these colonies and realized the position they occupied prior
to the discovery of gold, and contrasted it with the proud position
they now occupied, it must be at once apparent that something more
than ordinary causes brought about that very happy result. When
they looked at the amount of gold produced even by Victoria
(estimated at about £300,000,000), and noticed also that the actual
producing power of the surface of the colony had been in no case
very perceptibly reduced; when they looked again at the great
falling-off that had invariably taken place in the prosperity of any
country on the failure of its gold production —they could not too highly
estimate the wisdom of doing everything that was possible to develop
their mineral resources, of which gold and coal were the most pro-
minent. The people of Melbourne and the members of the various
trades of this and other colonies would do well to calmly consider
the effect on their various avocations, this falling-off in the produce
of gold must necessarily have on their future prospects. Gold had
made this country what it was. Gold also had maintained it in its
progress up to its present proud position. Was it not, therefore,
the duty of every member of the community to do everything they
could to secure the continuance of a blessing from which they had
derived so much in the past 1 (Applause.) There was any quantity
of land at the present time lying idle because the owners believed it
to be auriferous. If the miners and industrial classes joined, the
bill would be progressive. He hoped the Congress would support
the miners in endeavouring to get the measure passed through
Parliament. (Applause.)
Mr. E. Cooke (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Williamstown
branch) also supported the resolution.
The resolution was then put and carried unanimously.
Mr. W. G. Spence (Amalgamated Miners’ Association, Maldon
branch, Vic.) intimated that he desired to move the following
motion, as a sub-section to the resolution just passed :
“ That this Congress desires to support the Miners’ Association in their
efforts to obtain a more faithful enforcement of the labour covenants of mining
leases, the curtailment of the areas of the same, the better utilization of the
prospecting vote, the purification of elections for mining boards, and a bill
making workmen’s wages to the extent of one month the first lien on
machinery.”
The President ruled the motion out of order, as it was not
included in the notice paper.


ENCOURAGEMENT TO NATIVE INDUSTRIES.
Mi-. W. Robertson (Ironmoulders’ Society of Victoria) moved
the following resolution :
“That in the opinion of this Congress the Governments of the different
colonies should be urged to regulate their fiscal policy so as to give due
encouragement to native industries.”
He was confident they would all agree with him when he said that
this was one of the most important subjects that had been brought
under the notice of the Congress, It could not be expected that a
man who wished to start a new industry could compete with the
home market at once. In the first place there were not the
same facilities for carrying on the work here. It required an
enormous amount of capital to get the machinery up to the pitch to
which it had advanced in England. Again, there were many cases
of goods which were out of season at home, and which manufacturers
would prefer to send out here at reduced prices rather than lose
their whole value. He was glad to say that the Victorian Govern-
ment did protect local industries to a certain extent, but he feared
that because there was a so-called protectionist Government in
power the working classes were standing idly by, and not watching
its proceedings with sufficient vigilance. They might depend upon
it that if they became lax in this respect, capitalists would very
soon steal a march on them. In fact, they would have to watch the
recommendations of the Tariff Commission very closely. He
observed that they were recommending a reduction of 10s. per ton
on all kinds of water-pipes, and also made similar recommendations
which interested other industries. He had hoped that the industry
of pipe-making would have been properly established in Victoria.
Some years ago a certain firm secured a large order for pipes, and
carried out that order to the entire satisfaction of all concerned.
They expended £3,000 on plant alone for the job, trusting that
other orders would follow. But what was the fact? The tools
comprising the plant were left to rust for want of work. If the
Government sent home for work which could be manufactured in the
colony, how did they expect them to find money to pay into the
revenue 1 He did not think they would secure what they required
in regard to protection until they had representatives in Parliament
who, if not Australian born, were Australians in heart. (Ap-
plause.)
Mr. T. G. Armfield (Australian Journeymen Coachmakers’
Society, Melb.) seconded the resolution. He concurred with the
mover, that many orders were sent home for work that could be
turned out equally well in the colony. Some argued that protection


made goods dearer, but he believed in the long run there was no
truth in it. But even supposing the argument were true, it was far
better that colonists should pay a little more for what they con-
sumed and have constant work. South Australia and New South
Wales had suffered severely through the want of a protective policy,
as large numbers of men had been discharged from the factories.
His own trade afforded a good example of the benefits of protection.
In 1879 the trade in this colony was in a very depressed condition,
and more than a quarter of the men were walking about the streets.
At length they were forced to petition the Commissioner of Customs,
with the result that some extra duties were imposed, and six months
afterwards every man in the trade found employment. (Cheers.)
He would strongly urge upon the New South Wales and South
Australian delegates the advisability of agitating for a protective
policy in their colonies. (Applause.)
Mr. H. Patterson (United Society of Boilermakers and Iron
Shipbuilders, Sydney), in supporting the resolution, said he had
experienced in Victoria, as well as in New South Wales and New
Zealand, the injuries done to local industries through the importa-
tion of English and American goods. A short time ago £150,000
was carried home for locomotives, rolling stock, &c. One of the firms
who had previously made a number of locomotives for the Govern-
ment spent a considerable sum of money in plant suitable for this
description of work, and had to stand by and see their machinery
lying idle. With reference to the Melbourne Harbour Trust, some
time ago they sent home for the dredge Crocodile , which recently
arrived in the colony. When this matter was being discussed by
the commissioners, a great friend of the working man (Mr. Nimmo)
agitated for the encouragement of native industries, and he prevailed
upon the Trust so far as to get an assurance that, if a local tenderer
was £5,000 above the home tender, he should have the contract. A
home contractor, however, tendered to do the work for £22,700.
The colonial tender was £31,000, but the job was given to the
former. The work could have been done equally as well in this
colony; and he would go so far as to say better, because it would
have been carried out under the immediate supervision of an
inspector of the Trust. (Hear, hear.) Apart from the advantages
of local inspection, he maintained that work was better turned out in
the colonies than at home, where it was done by piecework. But,
after the arrival of the Crocodile at Melbourne, it was found that,
before it could be set to work, certain alterations were necessary
which increased the cost to £28,000, or within £3,000 of the amount
of the Victorian tender. (Cheers.)
Mr. Armfield (Australian Journeymen Coachmakers’ Society,
Melbourne) said the Crocodile came out nominally at £22,000, but
by the time she was fitted up here she cost £28,000. The whole
work might as well have been done in the colony. He was a better


man that day than when he came to the colony, because he had
found himself obliged to take up all branches of the trade, as if you
could not do the lot here you would starve. As regarded New South
Wales, they were now giving out work which used to be done at
home. The chief eyesore was in the manufacture of iron bridges, for
girder work could be done inside 7 \ per cent, of home manufacture.
At home they constructed girders for £l4, and here for £ls or £l6.
As we were all dependent on one another here, the native industries
and their assistance should be fully discussed, and Government
measures introduced in the necessary direction.
The Vice-President (Mr. John Talbot, Society of Ironmoulders,
N.S.W.) viewed it as a question which could be properly dealt with,
apart from anything in connection with free trade and protection.
It was the duty of the natives of the various colonies, without inter-
fering with the privileges of the people at large, to send wherever
they liked for their goods, but it was also their duty to spend the
income they earned in having their work done in the various colonies.
They had been agitating in the matter in Sydney, but their legis-
lators were very dull. It had been explained to them by men
capable of doing the work in the colony that it was most unjust to
deprive them of it, by sending that work to be done in England,
but their legislators could not see it in that light. Visitors to
Sydney several years ago would have noticed that buildings there
were not of a very handsome or imposing sort, but in walking
down Pitt-street recently, he had been struck by the size and
grandeur of the importers’ palaces, of which there was a row over a
mile in length. These buildings were, perhaps, a satisfactory
improvement to the appearance of the city \ but the question was,
had there been a corresponding increase in the manufacturing estab-
lishments 1 He would challenge anyone to cite an instance of such
an increase. He could give many cases which proved there had
been a decrease. For instance, Mort’s Dock Company, twelve
years ago, employed 850 men, and now these hands numbered but
600 at the most. This proved that manufactories were retrogressing
instead of advancing. It was generally acknowledged that a good
deal of the work imported by the Government was of a poor charac-
ter ; and experts who had gone down to the wharves and inspected
the imported ironwork had been able to pull putty out of the holes
and rents in the castings, which were thus filled up. The Govern-
ment were imposed upon in this way because they allowed the
inspection to be done in the old country, and all work passed by
them there had to be paid for on being landed in the no
matter how bad and useless it might be. Such a bad state of things
could be best remedied by the inspection being done in the colony
instead of in England or in the other countries from which ironwork
was imported. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. Jacob Hogg (Australian Bookbinders’ Consolidated Trades


Union) said that the protective tariff during the last twelve years
was the chief cause of the successful establishment of such firms as
George Robertson’s, Sands and M‘Bengali's, Detmold’s, and others,
which were now giving employment to hundreds of persons in the
bookbinding trade. The question of protection was one which
vitally affected all sections of working men. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. J. D. Boyd (Ironfounders’ Trades Union, Melb.) supported
the resolution, and mentioned the fact that iron pipes as manu-
factured in this colony were much stronger and more durable than
the imported article. This was also true of many other things which
could be better made in Victoria than in England. He knew some
people who disliked protection so much that they would rather put
up with a loss on imported goods than encourage colonial manu-
factures.
Mr. J. E, West (Trades and Labour Council, N.S.W.) said that if
a thorough inspection of imported work on its arrival was insisted
on it would have a beneficial effect. He was sure it would prove
that over 20 per cent, would be saved by using articles manufactured
in the colonies.
Mr. R. Phillips (Operative Masons and Bricklayers’ Association,
S.A.) said the question of protection and free trade had been pretty
well threshed out in South Australia. The majority of the people
there were now in favour of protecting local industries to a certain
extent, the highest duty being 15 per cent.
Mr. Josiah Wright (Seamen’s Union, Syd.) remarked that the
delegates who had spoken on the question seemed to go in for pro-
tection against everything and everybody. This, he thought, was
wrong, and they should have allowed themselves to be influenced by
a little moderation. The protective duties he believed in were
those which only taxed the articles which could be produced in the
colonies. Goods which could not be made here ought to be allowed
to enter free of duty, and this would not interfere with the encour-
agement of native industries.
Mr. C. A. Fuller (Victorian Slaters’ Society) stated that the
protection of colonial manufactures was essentially necessary if
native industries were to be encouraged. He strongly urged upon
the working classes to buy goods made in the colonies in preference
to those made at home and imported out here.
The resolution moved by Mr. Robertson was then put and carried
unanimously.
INVITATIONS TO DELEGATES.
The President (Mr. Douglass) stated he had received a letter
from the Minister of Railways, inviting the delegates to take a trip
by train to Mordialloc on the following day (Saturday). The secre-
tary of the Horticultural Society had also sent a letter inviting them
to attend the Chrysanthemum Show at the Horticultural Hall. He


also had the pleasure of inviting delegates from the other colonies
and the provincial delegates to a dinner to be held in the Trades’
Hall on Saturday evening.
Mr. Williams (Miners’ Association of Victoria) said he had been
requested by the Mayor of Ballarat (Mr. Hickman) to ask the
delegates to visit that city ; and Mr. Spence (Miners’ Association,
Creswick branch) said he would be glad if those delegates who visited
Ballarat would also pay a visit to Creswick.
At this stage (5 o’clock) the Congress adjourned until half-
past 6.
EVENING SITTING.
The delegates re-assembled at half-past 6 o’clock.
THE MASTERS AND SERVANTS ACT.
Mr. David Bennet (Engineers’ Society, Melb.) said he should not
have thought of noticing this subject had his attention not been
drawn to some glaring defects in the act. One of the most objec-
tionable features of the act, and the one he particularly wished to
draw their attention to, was clause 12, which provided that if any
servant —which included artisans and other workmen—entered into
an agreement, or contracted in any way, and failed to fulfil all
the terms, to the injury of his master, he should be subject to impri-
sonment, with or without hard labour, for any period not exceeding
three months. Some might consider this a fair provision, but he
thought it was too severe. At all events, provision ought also to
have been made for the punishment of the master when he did not
do his duty to his servant. It was further laid down in the act
that a magistrate’s order for the payment of servants’ wages could
not be enforced if the master’s estate was sequestrated after the
amount became due. According to this an employer when he did
not want to pay the wages of his employes , or could not, need
simply go insolvent, and they would be deprived of their money.
He concluded by moving—
“ That, in the opinion of this Congress, it is desirable that the Masters and
Servants Act should be either amended or repealed.”
Mr. W. Westman (Coachmakers’ Society, N.S.W.) seconded the
motion.
Mr. J. E. West (Trades and Labour Council, N.S.W.) said it


appeared somewhat strange that general attention had not previously
been called to the provisions of the act. In New South Wales the
actual effects of the measure were not known until a few months ago,
and even few people in this colony were aware of its effect. The
Masters and Servants Act was originally intended to only affect
domestic servants, but it had been interpreted to include all kinds of
mechanics and other callings. Under it a master had power, upon a
man absenting himself from work, to hand him over to the authorities.
Not long ago two butchers, who were woi'king for a farmer near
Sydney, gave two days’ notice that they desired to knock off work.
At the end of the two days the farmer told them they would have
to give a week’s notice or else forfeit their pay. They took legal
advice, and found that under the provisions of the act they were
powerless. Employers could say to their workmen, in dismissing
them, “ You are paid by the hour, you can go, but you must give us
notice before leaving.”
Mr. W. Trenwith (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union)
said the trade with which he was connected had experienced
numerous instances of the inequalities and monstrous injustice of
the Masters and Servants Act, both in this colony and in Tasmania.
Recently a firm in Tasmania (Boyd and Co.) engaged three hands in
Melbourne, at what they said was the same rate of wages that
ruled in Melbourne. Upon their arrival they found that the rate
ruling was higher than what they were to get, and refused to work,
and the employer summoned them to the police court, where they
were told that if they did not go to work they would get six months’
imprisonment. Upon hearing this, the men in the firm’s employ left
off their work to hold a meeting to see what course they would pursue,
and within an hour 26 of them were lodged in gaol. They were
brought before the court the following morning, and told that if it
were not for the leniency of their employer they would each be sent
to gaol for six months. The magistrate ordered each of the defend-
ants to pay a fine of 10s. with costs, and added that he regretted the
introduction of unions among workmen. There was no doubt that
their masters also regretted the introduction of trades unions in
their midst. He hoped, however, that they would be enabled to
bring about an alteration in this iniquitous act, and remove the
differences that at present existed between masters and employes.
Another danger they must not overlook was the provision in the act
that agreements not made in the colony were binding in the colony
for a period of five years. Under that provision employers could
easily go to India and engage men to come to the colonies at Is. per
day. As a trade between India and the colonies was being fostered,
he would ask the Congress to bear the matter in mind and agitate
both in and out of season against the great enormities in the Masters
and Servants Act.
The resolution was then put and carried by acclamation.


PAYMENT OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT.
Mr. G. Mitchell (Trades and Labour Council, N.S.W.) moved the
following resolution :
‘ ‘ That this Congress is of opinion that to obtain a better representation of
the working classes in Parliament, every effort should be made to secure
payment of members in those colonies that have not already adopted the
principle.”
He said that though Victoria had adopted, the principle, New
South Wales and South Australia had not. If a good man were
secured to represent them, out of their own ranks, he found himself
crippled for ways and means; and the wage-earning class of New
South Wales was not represented, and the Parliament was swamped
by merchants, squatters, and lawyers, who took no interest in the
working man. In the New South Wales Parliament, Mr. J. Garrard
was the only working man’s representative, but he found that he
could not go on with his trade, and had to get his living through
agencies and other means. There were many members of Parlia-
ment who desired to keep up the monopoly of representation, and it
should be the object of the delegates to break it down, so as to have
direct representation in the interests of the working classes. The
New South Wales delegates had been alive to the necessity of some
alteration being made in the direction indicated for many years past.
The Congress had a powerful voice, and would be listened to, and for
that reason he would ask them to adopt the resolution.
Mr. P. Stokes (South Australian United Builders and Labourers’
Society) seconded the resolution. At the last election held in South
Australia the payment of members was made a test question, and he
was happy to say that out of eighteen members returned, twelve were
pledged to support payment of members. He hoped the resolution
would be unanimously adopted, for it would strengthen the hands of
the working classes in South Australia.
Mr. W. Westman (Coachmakers’ Society, N.S.W.), in supporting
the resolution, expressed an opinion that for the sake of convenience
the elections should be held on one day.
Mr. Robert Phillips (Operative Masons’ Association, S.A.) said
it would be to the interest of the working classes if payment of
members was carried out throughout the colonies. In his opinion a
member of Parliament who gave his time to govern the country was
as much entitled to remuneration for his services as a man who
worked with his hands. He thought that if the legislators of South
Australia had been paid they would not have assisted immigration
to the extent they had. If working men intended to have real
representatives in Parliament, they must pay them. A strong


feeling was now growing in South Australia in favour of payment
of members, but it could not be legalized there at the least for the
next three years.
Mr. Hayes (Victorian Saddlers’ Society) said he opposed the
motion. Payment of members had never done anything, so far as he
could see, for the working men (a delegate : “It has”). It had not
produced protection, neither had it produced good politicians.
Mr. Fuller (Victorian Slaters’ Society) agreed to a certain
extent with the gentleman who had just sat down. The payment of
members system had not come up to what had been expected of it.
He instanced the state of the Liberal party during the last session of
the Victorian Parliament, and stated that the disorganization which
existed was due to the defection of liberal members. Before
payment of members had become law, liberals were better repre-
sented in Parliament than they were now. At any rate they then
used to win division after division, which was more than they could
do now. Though the principle was in some respects a good one, it
should be restricted to members who were not wealthy squatters or
merchants.
Mr. F. Manuel (Melbourne Plasterers’ Sick and Friendly Society)
said when payment of members was first proposed, he had worked
hard for the introduction of the system. But he now thought it all
nonsense. He had never seen one working man get into Parlia-
ment since the system was introduced, although political loafers
frequently got in upon the shoulders of the working man since
the initiation of the act; their own President had tried to get into
Parliament twice, and had been defeated. When they got a working
man’s candidate into Parliament he would be in favour of con-
tributing towards his payment out of his own pocket. Of what use
was payment of members if a working man could not be returned to
Parliament 1
Mr. Bromley (United Tinsmiths, Ironworkers, and Japanners’
Society, Sandhurst) thought the principle a truly democratic one, and
one which ought to be upheld. It had, however, been grossly
abused by those who had been returned under it in the past. But
this was their own fault for electing such men. If payment of
members was done away with, it would destroy the working man’s
only chance of rising to a political position.
Mr. Wm. Trenwith (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union)
said he believed payment of members had enabled liberal candidates
to enter Parliament, who, but for that system, would not have been
able to do so. The three chief points of the system were—first ,to
enable the bulk of the people to be represented in the Legislature;
secondly, to broaden the area of selection as much as possible; and,
thirdly, to give an opportunity to men who had every quality
necessary to make a good legislator, but had not the means to live
without labour, to enter Parliament. Several speakers had said the


system had not benefited the working man ; but this was not quite
true. There were several men in Parliament who had been working
men, amongst whom he might mention Mr. John James, M.L.A. for
Ballarat East. (Hear, hear.) He thought it was more the fault of
the working men than the act that they had so few representatives
in Parliament; and they often exhibited a mean jealousy when a
candidate stepped out of their ranks to represent them, and some-
times exclaimed, “ Oh, what is he 1 Why, I worked with him
once.” (Cheers.) To give an instance in point: when at the
dinner given at the Equitable Co-operative Store on the previous
evening, a delegate had said to him, “ When you were a candidate
for Yilliers and Heytesbury, I was in Melbourne doing all in my
power against you.” (Mr. Manuel : “So I was.”) This just
illustrated the feeling of envy and jealousy of which he had spoken.
What they should do now was not to throw aside the system of
payment of members, but to use it properly and turn it to their best
advantage. (Applause.)
Mr. J. Talbot (Society of Ironmoulders, N.S.W.) said that the
various trades in his colony were very anxious to give the system of
payment of members a trial. There were numerous men in Sydney
whose sympathies were entirely with the working man, but who were
deterred from coming forward as candidates for Parliament because
payment of members was not in force. Men were put into the New
South Wales Parliament simply on account of the quantity of land
and number of sheep and cattle they owned. He trusted the
Congress would adopt the resolution, and thus strengthen the hands
of the tradesmen of New South Wales and South Australia who
were agitating for payment of members of Parliament. (Ap-
plause.)
Mr. T. G. Armfield (Australian Journeymen Coachmakers’
Society, Melb.) concurred with Mr. Trenwith, but he was in favour
of payment by results. He thought that those members who
neglected their duties should not receive pay. Payment of members
of Parliament was, in his opinion, the keystone to liberalism. (Hear,
hear.) He maintained that there were as good men to be found
among the working classes as ever sat in the Legislative Assemblies.
(Applause.)
Mr, T. Huggan (Melbourne Typographical Society) supported the
resolution. He was in a position to state that two good representa-
tives of the working classes —Messrs. Richardson and Hall—would
not have been able to enter the House but for the system of pay-
ment of members. (Hear, hear.) He regretted very much that
there had been any opposition to the resolution.
Mr. D, MTvor (Tailors’ Trade Protection Society, Melb.) expressed
himself in favour of the resolution. He instanced the late Wilson
Gray, Charles Jardine Don, and John Everard as members of Parlia-
ment who might have served the working men of the colony longer


had payment of members been in vogue at an earlier period in Vic-
torian history. He endorsed Mr. Trenwith’s remarks respecting the
petty jealousies which existed amongst working men. The President
of the Congress had interested himself on behalf of the working men
of the colony during the last twenty years, and he (Mr. MTvor)
ventured to assert that several of their class would be only too happy
to turn Mr. Douglass out of his position on the morrow.
Mr. W. Robertson (Ironmoulders’ Society of Victoria), in
supporting the resolution, said he considered payment of members
one of the greatest blessings that had ever fallen to the working
classes. A representative of the working classes was better able to
legislate for their interests than others.
Mr. A. E. Coveney (South Australian United Builders and
Labourers’ Society) supported the resolution, and also the proposition
that elections should take place on the same day. They had tried
very hard in his colony to get payment of members, but he thought
the difficulty would be soon overcome. A few weeks ago, in South
Australia, one of the worst men that ever entered the Assembly was
defeated for West Adelaide. Within a few days he stood for another
constituency, and was returned by the farmers because he had glutted
the market with cheap labour. Some months ago that person went
home on a visit, and while in Scotland he attended meetings and
used all the persuasion in his power to induce tradesmen to come to
South Australia. He promised work to 1,000 men, and on the
arrival of nearly 2,000 men in the colony he only found employment
for one man.
Mr. J. E. West (Trades and Labour Council, N.S.W.) was of
opinion that some members of Parliament made a great mistake in
aspiring to political honour, instead of securing social reforms. The
expense attending elections was also a great stumbling-block in the
way of working men getting returned for Parliament. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. Josiah Wright (Hew South Wales Seamen’s Union, Syd.)
maintained that if they were to be thoroughly represented in Parlia-
ment they must elect men from their own class. When they chose
men to represent them they should pay them to remain honest, and
if those men did not they should be removed. A man in Parliament
who had nothing to live on must either grab or starve, as, if he was
not paid for his services, he must pay himself. (Laughter.) In
order to have true representation in Parliament it behoved them to
agree that members of Parliament be paid for their services.
(Applause.)
Mr. E. Cooke (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Williamstown
branch) said that during the last session of Parliament, and he
thought the one previous, the Eight-Hours question was very
prominently before the House. The agitation sprung from the
representatives of payment of members, but for whom it would not
have been placed on the statute book of the colony. (Cheers.)


Mr, Curley (Coal Miners’ Mutual Protection Association, Hunter
River District, N.S.W.) supported the motion, and hoped it would
he carried unanimously. Through not having payment of members
in New South Wales, he said the working classes there had lost
several representatives who were in full accord with them, but had
to retire from the Legislative Assembly owing to their poor circum-
stances. He thought it much better to give members £3OO a year
if they could by that means prevent a Government from spending
£150,000 on assisted immigration.
The resolution moved by Mr. Mitchell was then put and carried,
three delegates only voting against it.
DIRECT REPRESENTATION OF MANUAL LABOUR IN
PARLIAMENT.
Mr. Trenwith (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union) moved
the following resolution :
“ Ist. That this Congress desires to urge upon labour organizations in the
various colonies to at once elect a parliamentary committee in their respective
colonies, whose duty it shall be to assist in passing through Parliament
measures for the benefit of labour, and where possible endeavour to obtain
for labour direct representation in Parliament; and, 2nd, that a committee
of seven be at once selected by this Congress, to take the initiatory steps so
far as Victoria is concerned.”
He said the question was one which required little explanation, as it
had been partly discussed at a previous sitting of the Congress.
He would just mention that the great difficulty in the way of direct
representation was that working men’s candidates did not as a rule
possess the money to contest an election. This stumbling-block
might be overcome by every member of the trade unions throughout
the colony contributing a small weekly sum, say a penny, towards a
fund which could be devoted to paying the electioneering expenses of
working men’s candidates. Men so elected would have considerable
prestige in Parliament, because they would in reality be representing
the whole of the trades unions of the colony.
Mr. O. A. Fuller (Victorian Slaters’ Society) seconded the
resolution, and read the following paper in support of direct repre-
sentation of labour in Parliament: —
Notwithstanding all the great advantages that most of the electors of the
Australian colonies enjoy, viz.:—l, Vote by ballot; 2, manhood suffrage;
3, payment of members, &c., &c.—there is still a great field open for reforma-
tion in the representation of those electors in Parliament who obtain their
livelihood by manual labour. Now, Sir, with regard to w r hat has taken place
in the past, speaking of my own adopted country, Victoria, it must be
admitted that much has been done by our representatives to ameliorate the
disabilities which the working classes, even under the above favourable and
analogous circumstances, labour under. The subject now to be considered
9


may be treated as follows : —That it is necessary to find out, in the interests
of our cause, whether those who have been entrusted with our suffrages
in the past have given satisfaction. Speaking of Victoria particularly,
it is true that there have been many whose names are quite familiar
to the members of the Congress. For instance (1) Wilson Gray, (2)
Charles Jardine Don, (3) George Higinbotham, and (4) Graham Berry. In
this short paper space will not permit me to mention many others who have
done good service for us. Still, it cannot be denied that numbers of our
representatives who have found their way into Parliament by means of pledges
made in the interests of the working classes, have entered into alliances not
compatible with their pledges and based upon some personal quarrels or
ambitious feeling, or in order to obtain place and pay, or, what is far worse
still, for motives of which the less said the better ; at any rate, so far as unful-
filled promises are concerned. I may refer, as an instance, to the glorious
demonstration which has taken place this very week—the anniversary celebra-
tion, or the birthday (if I may be allowed to use the term) of a principle
which, notwithstanding all our boasted liberal legislation and advancement,
has not yet been recorded on our colonial statute books as the law of the land.
Numbers of other glaring instances of neglect might, perhaps, with advantage
be quoted; but lam of opinion that the above, which we individually and
collectively hold so dear, will suffice. In this instance public opinion and
moral suasion have so far worked out the problem, but our legislators have not
accepted either the one or the other as a guide. Although the subject of Direct
Representation of Labour in Parliament has not hitherto attracted such a per-
oentageof publicthought as its importance deserves, true Liberals are now begin-
ning to ask the question ; Has payment of members (general and indiscriminate),
since its inauguration, been successful in the production of good, sound,
fruitful legislation for the advancement of those who are called upon to make
up the large amount of extra taxation (I mean the working classes) ? I think
not. I would like to ask the gentlemen who compose this Congress to
seriously consider to whom we are to look forward to as the men who shall
represent labour, in its truest and most absolute sense, as its representatives in
the Legislatures of the several colonies. This question I would ask the mem-
bers of the Congress to settle. So far as lam concerned, I would suggest as a
remedy the following : —That the artisans of Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide,
and their adjoining suburbs, send artisans to Parliament; that the miners
send miners to Parliament; the weavers send weavers to Parliament, &c., and
by that means we will have direct representation. In conclusion, if this
humble attempt of mine has taken the place of a more comprehensive paper I
am sorry. At all events, every practical suggestion for the advancement of
our fellow-workmen will be, I am sure, thankfully acknowledged, come from
what quarter it may.
The resolution proposed by Mr. Trenwith was then carried
unanimously.
LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT.
Mr. H. Elmslie (Operative Masons, Vic.) said local self-govern-
ment was enjoyed in this colony to a certain extent, and the more
we had of it the greater would become the country. If it were
extended to labour councils it would have a very beneficial effect on the
working classes. It was easy to be seen that if the Trades Council
in Melbourne, and the powerful mining organizations in different
parts of the colony, enjoyed local self-government, they would have


it in their power to accomplish a large amount of practical work.
The same privilege of occupying a seat on the bench which every
president of a shire council enjoyed by virtue of his office, ought to
be accorded to presidents of labour organizations. They might also
have a form of self-government of their own, for he did not think
Parliament would ever be able to fully understand the wants of the
working classes, as was shown by its inability to settle a question
of mining on private property. He was quite certain if that matter
were referred to the Mining Association they would quickly accom-
plish an equitable and satisfactory solution of the difficulty. He
further advocated that trade organizations should have power to
enact bye-laws, having the force of laws, to regulate their own affairs,
and concluded by moving the following resolution :
“That, in the opinion of this Congress, it is desirable that the system of
local self-government should be extended to labour councils, sanctioned and
assisted by Parliament.”
THE APPOINTMENT OF A PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE.
Mr. W. E. Murphy (Secretary) intimated that the next question
on the notice paper was the resolution respecting the desirability of
appointing a Parliamentary Committee. This had been already
dealt with to a certain extent by Mr. Trenwith’s motion for direct
representation of labour in Parliament. With the consent of Mr.
Trenwith he would read the resolution he had drafted, setting forth
the duties of the committee, as follows:
“ That six members of this Congress, in the following proportions—viz., two
from New South Wales, two from South Australia, and two from Victoria —be
now appointed a responsible Parliamentary Committee, charged with the fol-
lowing duties :
1. To report to the several unions in their respective colonies the
decisions arrived at by this Congress, and to open up intercolonial
and local communication between the several unions with a view to
bring about a federation of all labour organizations.
2. That they be permitted to add to their number two from the colony
of Queensland and two from Tasmania, such members to be elected
either by the Trades Council or principal representative body of the
trades of these colonies.
3. That they shall report their proceedings to the next Intercolonial
Trades Union Congress, of which they shall be ex-officio members till
the election of the next Parliamentary Committee which shall then be
appointed.
4. To watch over the legislative proceedings on all questions recom-
mended by this Congress.”
In submitting the foregoing series of resolutions, pointing out the
duties of the Parliamentary Committee, he was fortified by the
precedent that had been established for many years past in England


(Hear, hear). This would he now an annual Congress, just as the
Trades Union Congress that had taken place in England with such
important and beneficial results. The duties that the Parliamentary
Committee would have to perform were somewhat onerous. The men
composing it would have to be men of good application and corres-
ponding ability. Some of the best measures for the amelioration of
the working classes had emanated from the Parliamentary Committee
in England. It had brought about the Master and Servant Act, the
Plimsoll Load Line Act, the Trades Union Act, and the Employer’s
Liability Act. The second clause of the resolution permitted the
Committee to add to their number two from Queensland and two
from Tasmania. In Queensland there were infant associations
capable of the greatest development. Hq was sure that the pro-
ceedings of the Congress had been very keenly watched by those
infant associations of Queensland. The influence that the Congress
would exercise in the colonies would, no doubt, bring about a grand
federation of labour. It was more than probable that the next
Congress would be held at Adelaide. He trusted that the Parlia-
mentary Committee would be appointed to deal with some of the
great measures, the most important of which was federation of
labour, already passed by the Congress.
Mr. W. Robertson (Ironmoulders’ Society of Victoria), in
seconding the resolution, suggested that the expenses of the com-
mittee could be met by every society which sent a representative
contributing towards the fund.
Mr. Murphy said the representative bodies from the several
colonies would make provision for the committee, but he did not
anticipate any large expenditure during the first year. The first
meeting of the committee would be for inquixy and organization.
Whatever sums of money were required for communication and
travelling would be freely gi’anted by the Trades and Labour Coun-
cil of New South Wales and the labour organizations of Victoria.
Of coui’se, if the committee wei'e circumscribed, their hands would be
tied. (Px'olonged applause.)
Mr. A. Brooks (Victorian Saddlers’ Society) said if a committee
were appointed they would have enough to attend to in reference to
trades unions without giving their attention to the federation of
unions. He suggested the advisability of appointing a small and
separate committee for that purpose, which would carry out the
work with greater promptitude than the Parliamentary Committee.
Mr. Bennet (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Melb.) thought it
would be better if the trades in every colony elected a Parliamentary
Committee of their own—members to be ex officio members of the com-
mittee in each colony. They might visit one another, and thus keep
up a connection. If the Parliamentary Committee were stationary
in Victoida it would involve the necessity of committees in the other
colonies periodically visiting Melbourne to cany on the business.
*


(Cries of “ No.”) That would involve great expense, and for the
first year, at any rate, they should strive to keep down expenses.
(Applause.)
Discussion followed, and in the course of this it was pointed out
that the previous resolution moved by Mr. Trenwith would clash
somewhat with that proposed by Mr. Murphy. It was suggested
that the former resolution should be re-considered.
Mr. Murphy denied that his resolution clashed with Mr. Tren-
with’s.
Mr. Trenwith pointed out that his resolution provided—“ That a
committee of seven be at once selected by this Congress to take the
initiatory steps as far as Victoria is concerned.” When that was
carried out, the other colonies should be asked to appoint their
representatives as early as possible.
The President said that as Mr. Trenwith’s resolution had already
been adopted, he would decline to sanction its re-consideration.
The resolution appointing a Parliamentary Committee was then
passed without a division.
AMENDMENT OF MINING REGULATIONS.
Mr. W. G. Spence (Amalgamated Miners’ Association, Maldon
branch) moved the following resolution :
“That this Congress desires to support the Miners’ Association in their
efforts to obtain the more faithful enforcement of the labour covenants of the
mining leases ; the curtailment of the areas of the same ; the better utilization
of the prospecting vote ; the purification of elections for mining boards ; and
a bill making workmen’s wages the first lien on machinery.”
Mr, Spence said the subject mentioned in the resolution had been
thoroughly discussed by the various mining associations in Victoria,
and their reason for asking the support of the Congress was to
assist the miners in redressing the disadvantages under which they
now laboured.
Mr. Williams (Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Victoria)
seconded the resolution, which was carried unanimously.
THE RECIDIVISTE QUESTION.
Mr. Wm. Trenwith (Operative Bootmakers, Victoria), by request,
moved the following resolution :
“ That this Congress elect a representative to proceed to England by the
next steamer, charged with the duty of enlisting the sympathy and support
of the working men of England in the resistance of all Australia to the
threatened pollution of the islands of the Pacific and their shores with the
irreclaimable criminals of France, if the amount necessary can be raised by
public subscription. ”


He said the Congress should not hesitate a moment in carrying the
resolution without a single dissentient, for the question was one that
was of the most vital importance to the working people of Australia.
The public mind was now greatly excited on this matter, and he
was sure there would be no difficulty in obtaining by public sub-
scription the necessary funds to send a representative to England.
There would evidently be great sympathy between their repre-
sentative and the workmen of England, and it seemed to him that
the carrying out of the proposal would result in a grand demon-
stration of the great power of the working classes.
Mr. Robert Phillips (Operative Masons, S.A.) seconded the
motion.
Mr. P. Stokes (S.A. United Builders and Labourers’ Society), in
supporting the motion, said, with reference to the assertions that the
late Sir Wm, Morgan and his partner had striven to get French con-
victs sent to the New Hebrides for their personal profit, that they
were untrue. He was confident that the deceased gentleman spoke
the truth when he stated, in regard to these foul calumnies, that he
had never invested a single penny in those islands.
Mr. Armfield (Melb.) and Mr. M‘Gowan (Syd.) supported the
motion, and the President then invited Mr. John Woods, M.L.A.,
who was present, to speak on the subject.
Mr. Woods, M.L. A., said a previous speaker had remarked that one
man would be able to exercise very little influence upon the English
people, but he (Mr. Woods) could give an instance when great
results were achieved in England by a labour representative. He
referred to Mr. Aitken, an engine-driver who was sent home as a last
resource by the European population of India, to protest against the
Ilbert Bill. This man addressed himself to the English working
classes, and represented to them how unfairly and unjustly this
measure would act. After a time he was so successful in obtaining
the sympathy of the voting power of England, that the Gladstone
Government were compelled to modify the bill, and to remove all the
objectionable clauses. And he (Mr. Woods) fully believed the
representative they proposed sending over would achieve a similarly
successful result. Speaking personally, he for one strongly hoped
that success would attend the exertions of the representative, as he
most decidedly objected to the colonies being laid open to the invasion
of the worst criminals in the world. After referring at some length
to the disastrous effects such an influx of criminals would have upon
the colonies, Mr. Woods concluded by expressing the opinion that the
Congress should affirm the resolution, and it would then remain for
the people of Melbourne to say whether they would approve of this
action.
Mr. A. Brooks (Victorian Saddlers’ Society) was of opinion that
the Congress was setting too high a value on its influence, and think-
ing itself too big. If the French Government would take no notice


of the British Government with respect to criminals, it would be
very little use for the Congress to send home a representative of the
working classes, as, by the time he arrived, the question, which was
of such vital importance, would have been disposed of. (Cries of
“ Question.”)
Mr. W. Robertson (Ironmoulders’ Society of Victoria) said he
disagreed with the previous speaker. He would recommend that
the various trades unions in England be notified, so that the mission
of the representative of the Congress could be made known before
his arrival. Whoever was chosen for the position would no doubt
receive his instructions from a committee appointed for that purpose.
Mr, J. Winter (Australian Bookbinders’ Consolidated Trades
Union, Melb.) thought that, after the representative had been in
England, he might make known his mission to the working men of
France. The French criminal question had already been fully
ventilated in England.
Mr. J. M'Oonechy (Bakers’ Society, Melb.) opposed the resolu-
tion. The Government of Victoria had felt themselves too weak to
exercise any influence on the French authorities, and regretted that
the Australian colonies were not federated; and, therefore, he
thought the Congress were forming too high an estimate of their
power. It would be hard to convince the working classes of
England of the danger the colonies were subjected to, seeing that
four days separated the Australian coast from the nearest French
convict station. Those in England would retort that the criminals
of France were within only a few hours’ steam of them. If they
had a man of such ability they ought to keep him here, and find
more suitable work for him to do.
Mr. J. Talbot (Vice-President), after expressing surprise at the
objections which had been raised, pointed out that the representative
could do good work in bringing under the notice of the trades
unions throughout England the exact position of the labour markets
in the colonies.
Mr. W. G. Spence (Amalgamated Miners’ Association, Maldon
branch) was of opinion that some of the delegates did not entertain
the same opinion then as they did immediately after Mr. Service’s
address on the subject. It was their duty to prevent the deportation
of criminals to New Caledonia, even if they had to take up to
do so. The colonies had raised their voice against the transportation
of English criminals to Australia, and surely they would now
protest against an influx of French criminals in their midst. (Cries
of “ Question.”)
Mr. J. Wright (New South Wales Seamen’s Union, Sydney)
supported the resolution.
Mr. G. Williams (Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Victoria)
thought if the Congress were to send home a representative, it would be
the means of bringing about a general conference of trades. The ques-


tion had been asked, “ What could a man do in England for the trades
of Australia?” He (Mr. Williams) answered that the representative
could go to the bar of the House of Lords if necessary, and plead his
case on behalf of the colonies. Communication might be opened up
with the Earl of Rosebery, who had recently been fighting for the
colonies against the deportation of French criminals to the Pacific,
and other gentlemen.
Mr. W, E, Murphy (Secretary) said that, after the exceedingly
enthusiastic manner with which the Congress had, on the previous
day, passed his resolution, affirming the desirability of petitioning the
English Government to use its influence in endeavouring to prevent
the deportation of French criminals to the New Hebrides and New
Caledonia, he regretted the very feeble and puny opposition the
question had met with at such an advanced stage. It was not only
a subject that would affect the future morality of their children, but
the generations yet unborn. They had determined on the previous
day to send home a recommendation to the English Government
similar to the one they sent home some years ago with respect to
English criminals. He felt sure that the Congress was not, as Mr.
Brooks represented, flying too high. The delegates were sent to the
Congress to protect the rights of the working man, and also to
protect the colonies from the influx of a criminal population.
When they were called upon, therefore, to take the first practical
steps towards the attainment of the latter object, it did not behoove
them to oppose it. Mr. Woods had told them that Mr. Aitken, an
engine-driver, had been sent home by the European population of
India to protest against the adoption of the Ilbert Bill, and that
through his agitation the Gladstone Government made such
modifications in the measure as were tantamount to its withdrawal.
The colonists, he (Mr. Murphy) felt confident, would subscribe to
the fund for sending home a representative with that generosity
which characterized them during the Indian and Irish famines. He
thought that the Congress should rise to the great importance which
was attached to this question, and thus benefit those who would
come after them. Then, when they had passed away, their children
would visit their graves and bless them for a felon-ridden country.
(Prolonged cheers.)
Mr. 0. Knight (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union) opposed
the resolution, as he did not think the efficacy of sending a repre-
sentative to England had been shown. There was no analogy
between the action of the European residents in India sending Mr.
Aitken to England and the present proposal, inasmuch as in the
former case European residents controlled the territory affected by
the Ilbert Bill, whereas the colonies had no control whatever over
the New Hebrides and New Caledonia. He thought it would be
unwise to pass the resolution, and that a great deal more good would
be done if the gentlemen who intended to subscribe the £I,OOO


necessary to send home a representative would spend the money on
trades unions in the colonies.
The resolution proposed by Mr. Trenwith was then put and
carried. About six delegates dissented.
The President then said they must now choose the man who
should represent them. The mission would require a man who
knew his way about.
Mr, Williams (Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Victoria) ;
Mr. Murphy (Secretary of Congress); Mr. Trenwith (Bootmakers’
Union, Melb.); Mr. .Bennet (Amalgamated Engineers’ Society,
Melb.); Mr. Benjamin Douglass (President of Congress); Mr.
Talbot (of N.S.W., Vice-President of Congress); and Mr. Josiah
Wright (Seamen’s Union, Syd.) were each nominated for the posi-
tion, and were then asked individually if they would undertake the
duties, if elected.
Mr, Trenwith declined to stand for several reasons. One was
that he had set himself a task to perform in connection with his
trade which he felt bound to carry out. Another reason was that
he was at present out on bail through a law case arising out of trade
unionism. A further reason was that he did not think he was the
best man they could send.
Messrs. Douglass, Bennet, Talbot, and Wright also declined the
honour.
Mr. Murphy then said that he and Mr. Williams were now the
only two left, and he would gladly retire in favour of Mr. Williams,
as he considered Mr. Williams would make the best representative.
Mr. Williams said he little thought the position would have
fallen upon him, and he felt deeply thankful to the Congress for the
honour they had conferred upon him. In undertaking the duties, he
could only say that he would carry the resolution into efiect to the
best of his ability, and would also endeavour to bring about an
affiliation between the trades unions of the colonies and England.
DEPUTATION TO THE PREMIER.
Mr, Bennet (Melb.) moved—
“ That the President and the Standing Orders Committee, and such members
as may desire, wait upon the Premier to-morrow morning, to lay before him
such matters as this Congress has determined should be presented to Parlia-
ment.”
Mr. Bromley seconded the motion, which was carried.


ELECTION OF PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE.
The following members were elected to represent Victoria on the
Parliamentary Committee for the present year : —Messrs. Spence,
Murphy, Bennet, Bromley, Trenwith, Williams, and Boyd.
THE ADVANTAGES OF CO-OPERATION.
Mr. W. G. Spence (Amalgamated Miners’ Association, Maldon
branch) moved the following motion :
“That this Congress desires to bring under the notice of working men the
great advantages of co-operation, and urges them to take every advantage of
the principle in all its bearings.”
Mr. J. Wright (New South Wales Seamen’s Union, Sydney)
seconded the motion, which was carried without discussion.
THE NEXT CONGRESS.
Mr. Trenwith (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union) moved
that the next Congress be held in Sydney next year. (Hear, hear.)
The trades unions of the various colonies should make a point of
holding a Congress annually. The trifling cost was a small tax on
the members, whilst the benefits to be derived from meeting together
were incalcuable.
Mr. J. E. West (Trades and Labour Council, N.S.W.) seconded
the motion, which was unanimously adopted.
VOTES OF THANKS.
Votes of thanks were passed to the President, the Vice-President,
the Press, and the Secretary.
ADJOURNMENT.
At midnight the Congress adjourned until 7 o’clock on the next
evening, when the minutes were to be confirmed.


THE FINAL SITTING.
SATURDAY, 26th APRIL, 188 4.
The Delegates assembled at 7 p.m. for the purpose of formally
bringing to a close the business of the Congress, the President
occupying the chair.
THE MINUTES
The Secretary having read the minutes, they were confirmed.
VOTES OF THANKS.
Mr. MTvor (Tailors’ Society, Melb.) moved a vote of thanks
to the Vice-President (Mr. J. Talbot, Ironmoulders’ Society, N.S.W.),
remarking that the tact shown by Mr. Talbot in his official position,
both as Vice-President of the Congress and Chairman of the Stand-
ing Orders Committee, had greatly helped to make the gathering a
success.
Mr. Amos Yewdall (Operative Masons, Vic.) seconded the vote,
and thoroughly concurred in the remarks of the previous speaker.
The President endorsed all that had been said in favour of Mr.
Talbot, and admitted that he himself had received valuable assist-
ance from the Vice-President. He trusted they might meet again
at a similar gathering.
Mr. Talbot, in replying, said that it was “ another of the hap-
piest moments of his life; ” and that he felt proud of the position
he had occupied at the Congress. He had done his duty to the
best of his ability, and he thanked them, on behalf of himself and
the colony he had the honour to represent, for the kind manner in
which they had been treated. He would be glad to meet them at
the next Congress, which was to be held in the city of the “ beau-
tiful harbour.”
The resolution was carried amidst applause.
Mr. Murphy (Secretary Trades’ Hall Council) moved a vote of
thanks to Mr. A. Yewdall, the Treasurer, and, in doing so, said that
he had had experience of many treasurers, but had never met with a


more reliable one than Mr Yewdall, of whom he could say that he
was as good a man as Mr. James Hall, the last treasurer, and he
could not say more than that of anyone,
Mr. Phillips (Operative Masons and Bricklayers’ Society, S.A.)
seconded the resolution, which was carried with applause.
Mr. West (Trades and Labour Council, N.S. W.), in moving a hearty
vote of thanks to the Secretary of the Congress, said that Mr.
Murphy deserved very great credit for the manner in which he had
conceived the idea of a Congress, and had carried it out to the
successful issue which all had witnessed with gratification, and some
with surprise. And he, as a delegate from New South Wales, felt
especially grateful to Mr. Murphy for having brought them all
together and handled them so well.
Mr. Stokes (Builders’ Labourers’ Society, S.A), in seconding the
vote of thanks, endorsed all Mr. West’s remarks as a representative
from South Australia, where, he might say, Mr. Murphy was well
known and highly respected as a leader and organizer of the working
classes.
Mr. Talbot (Tronmoulders’ Society, N.S.W.) supported the vote
heartily, and as Vice-President of the Congress, and Chairman of the
Standing Orders Committee, could bear evidence that Mr. Murphy
had done his work in a singularly able manner—in fact, without
giving any occasion to anyone for complaining; and he had, for
bringing about the Congress, earned the thanks, not only of all
delegates present in Melbourne, but of all the Trade Unionists of
Australasia. In concluding, Mr. Talbot explained that the delegates
from New South Wales, South Australia, and the provinces of
Victoria had intended that night to present the Trades’ Hall with a
large photograph of Mr. Murphy, as a mark of their esteem for him,
but unfortunately the photographer had disappointed them, and
so he could only ask them to take “ the will for the deed,” for the
present; but when the picture was ready he would ask the Pre-
sident of the Congress to present it to the Trades’ Hall Council in
their names.
Mr. Robertson (Ironmoulders’ Society, Vic.) thought that Mr.
Murphy had earned something more than mere praise. He should
receive a substantial vote from the funds.
It was here explained to Mr. Robertson that this would be
arranged by the local Committee.
The vote of thanks was passed amidst great cheering.
Mr. Murphy, in reply, thanked them most sincerely for their
kind expressions, and considered that, despite the opposition he had
met with from some quarters when trying to get up the Congress, he
felt he had had his reward in witnessing the very successful, both
for the present and for the future, gathering which had taken place,
and he felt sure that many who had kept aloof from the Congress
were now sorry for it; but they could make up for it on the next


occasion by being present, and making one grand united body of trade
unionists.
Mr. M‘Gowan (Boilermakers and Iron Shipbuilders, Syd.)
moved a vote of thanks to the Victorian delegates for their courtesy,
kindness, and attention to the visitors.
Mr. Phillips (Operative Masons and Bricklayers’ Society, S.A.)
seconded, and remarked that before coming to Melbourne he had
had a prejudice against Victorians, because he thought they were
opposed to South Australian interests. This, however, he now found
out to be quite wrong, and he readily acknowledged his mistake, and
was proud to see that so many working men had met and debated
grave questions from a broad and unselfish point of view.
The vote was cordially passed.
Mr. Bromley (Tinsmiths, Ironworkers, and Japanners’ Society,
Sandhurst) proposed a vote of thanks to the Standing Orders Com-
mittee, which was adopted.
The Secretary read an apology from the representatives of the
Amalgamated Miners’ Association for their absence from the
meeting, which was necessitated by their having urgent business to
attend to up country.
The President read a letter from the Mayor of Melbourne,
regretting his inability to attend the banquet that night, but asking
the delegates to the Town Hall at noon on Monday to hear the
City Organ played, and to take a glass of wine with him.
The Congress then formally adjourned sine die.
DEPUTATION TO THE PREMIER.
A deputation of the following delegates from the Congress waited
on the Premier on Saturday morning, 26th April, in order to lay before
him the resolutions arrived at during the week. Victoria—Messrs.
B. Douglass (president), W, E. Murphy (secretary), Bennet,
Trenwith, Bindon, Clark, Williams, Spence, and Bromley; New
South Wales—Messrs. J. Talbot (vice-president), West, Mitchell,
Curley, Drayton, and Fagan ; South Australia—Messrs. Phillips,
Kindler, Coveney, and Stokes.
The President (Mr. Benjamin Douglass), who introduced the
deputation to Mr. Service, explained that their object in waiting on
him was to invite the Government to legislate upon the resolutions
adopted by the Congress as soon as possible after the assembling of the
House. He then enumerated the various questions which had been
deliberated upon by the Congress, and said that if the Premier gave
them his consideration there was reason to believe that the heads of
Governments in the other colonies would be influenced by the
force of his example. A Parliamentary Committee had been


appointed to render the House assistance in the drafting of
measures, and to watch over the legislative proceedings in all
questions recommended by the Congress. If the measures sub-
mitted could be made Government measures, a great advantage
would accrue to the working classes; but if not, the assistance and
influence of the Government might be invoked on behalf of private
members, who would be entrusted with their initiation.
Messrs. W. Trenwith (Victorian Operative Bootmakers’ Union),
D. Bennet (Amalgamated Society of Engineers, Melbourne), and
G. Williams (Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Victoria) re-
ferred to the questions introduced by them in the Congress.
Mr. Service, in reply, reviewed at considerable length the various
resolutions arrived at by the Congress which had been brought under
his notice. He was glad to learn that a Parliamentary Committee
had been formed to assist the House in drafting bills. He admitted
the advantages of legalizing trades unions, and establishing uni-
formity in the law relating to masters and servants. He often felt,
however, when facing such questions, that all action was checked
through the absence of a Federal Council, and he hoped the working
classes in the various colonies would see the matter in the same
light, and insist on the creation of such a body, which would have
the power of giving law to the whole of the colonies on all points
where there was an unanimity of the Peoples and the Parliaments,
Mr. Geo. Williams (president of the Amalgamated Miners’ Asso-
ciation of Victoria) was then introduced to the Premier by Mr.
Douglass as the delegate who had been selected by the Congress to
proceed to England to protest against the deportation of French
criminals to the Pacific.
Mr. Service wished Mr. Williams every success in his mission,
but expressed a doubt as to whether it would be policy to mix up
two such questions as the Recidivists and the Immigration.
There was a wide diversity of opinion with respect to the latter,
but on the former they were unanimous.
Mr. Williams remarked that the main object of his mission
would be to oppose the Recidivists Bill, and the Immigration ques-
tion was merely a side issue; and when he had referred to seeking
the assistance of the Trades Unions of England and France, it was
with a view to get them to also oppose the Recidivists Bill.
Mr. Service favoured the idea, and inquired whether Mr. Williams
purposed visiting Sydney in order to secure the co-operation of the
Hew South Wales Trades Unions.
Mr. J. E. West (Trades and Labour Council of H.S.W.) said he
felt confident that the Sydney trades would endorse the action of the
Congress.
Mr. Service was of opinion that a good deal of good would accrue
if public meetings were held throughout Hew South Wales, support-
ing Mr. Williams, before he started on his mission.


In reply to Mr. John Woods,
Mr. Service said he would take care that the action taken by the
Congress was made known in England.
The deputation then thanked the Premier, and withdrew.
PRESENTATION TO THE TRADES’ HALL COUNCIL.
On Wednesday, 30th April, at noon, a goodly number of delegates
assembled at the Trades’ Hall; the President of the Congress (Mr,
B. Douglass) in the chair.
Mr. Talbot (of New South Wales, Vice-President of the Congress),
in formally presenting a large photograph, handsomely framed, of
Mr. W. E. Murphy to the Trades’ Hall, on behalf of the delegates
from New South Wales, South Australia, and the Provinces of
Victoria, said that it was another of “ the happiest moments of his
life” to be in the position he was in presenting a mark of his and his
colleagues’ esteem for Mr. Murphy, even though it was only a small gift
compared to the merits of the man whom they wished to honour,
and who deserved all the praise they could possibly give him for the
manner in which he had carried out the Congress.
Mr. Phillips (South Australia) heartily seconded Mr. Talbot’s
remarks as a South Australian representative, and though he had a
hoiTor of “ Mutual Admiration Societies,” there were exceptions when
praise was really deserved, and this was one of the exceptions. He
had experienced the greatest courtesy and kindness, as a stranger,
from Mr. Murphy, and he would always look back with pleasure to
the time he had spent in the colony, through Mr. Murphy’s efforts
in bringing about a Congress,
The unavoidable absence of the delegates of the Amalgamated
Miners’ Association of Victoria was explained.
The President (Mr. B, Douglass), in accepting the gift on behalf
of the Trades’ Hall Council, said it would give him pleasure to hand
it over to that body, and he thought that the encomiums passed
were well merited, as was proved by the success of the Congress
beyond anticipations.
Mr. Murphy thanked the donors for their handsome present to
the building in which, and for which, he had worked many years,
and said he could not find words to express his gratitude for the
complimentary remarks that had been made about him. All he
could say was, he had done his duty to the best of his ability, and
no man could do more.


FESTIVITIES.
THE EQUITABLE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETY’S BANQUET.
On Wednesday evening, April 23, the delegates were entertained
at dinner by the directors and shareholders of the Equitable Co-
operative Society, at their spacious premises, Collins-street east. The
secretary (Mr. W. Nuttall) had invited about 120 guests. At about
half-past six the company assembled in a large room on the first
floor, where several tables had been tastefully laid, at a short notice,
by the Victoria Coffee Palace Company. The President of the
Society (Mr. Gavin G. Brown) occupied the chair.
The Chairman proposed “ Success to the Trades Unions of the
various Colonies,” which was supported by Mr. Adcock and
responded to by Mr. Benjamin Douglass, Mr. W. E. Murphy, and
Mr. W. Trenwith (Victoria), and Mr. J. E. West (New South
Wales).
Mr. Baker, M.L.A. for Wimmera, proposed “ Success to the
Equitable Co-operative Society.” In responding to the toast, Mr.
Nuttall, who had mounted a chair amidst loud cheers, made a most
able and convincing address on the great benefits of co-operation.
Referring to his thirty years’ experience of co-operation in England,
he said, unquestionably the ablest men connected with the movement
were Trade Leaders. He concluded by expressing the hope of seeing
the trades of Victoria and the other colonies united before very
long, and urged upon the members of the industrial classes the
necessity of having a journal to advocate their views on co-operative
principles. (Loud and continued applause.)
Mr. Julian Thomas (“The Vagabond”), in the course of some
remarks, said he would like to see the employes of the society par-
ticipating in the profits. The Chairman, in reply, intimated it had
already been decided that at the next half-yearly meeting of the
Society this principle would be included in the rules.
Mr. J, Talbot, of New South Wales ; Mr. R, Phillips, of South
Australia; and Mr. D. Bennet, of Victoria, having thanked the
Society on behalf of their colleagues for the kind manner in which
they were entertained, a very pleasant gathering was terminated
with a general expression of good wishes for the success of the
Equitable Co-operative Society.


THE TRIP TO MORDIALLOC.
At the invitation of the Minister of Railways the majority of the
delegates left the Prince’s Bridge station on Saturday, 26 th April,
by the 12.19 p.m. train for Mordialloc. A number of special
carriages were attached for the accommodation of the delegates, who
were under the guidance of the President and the Treasurer of the
Trades’ Hall Committee. Mr. Nuttall, secretary of the Equitable
Co-operative Society, was amongst the guests. Bain fell during the
whole of the trip, but fortunately cleared off upon arrival at Mor-
dialloc, at half-past one. The party at once repaired to Blocksidge’s
Bridge Hotel, where the representatives of the Melbourne Trades
entertained the delegates from New South Wales, South Australia,
and the Provinces of Victoria at luncheon. The Ministry were not
represented, and consequently speechifying was eschewed. A pleasant
afternoon was spent, and the party returned to the metropolis about
half-past six o’clock.
BANQUET AT THE TRADES’ HALL.
In the evening the Melbourne representatives of Trades enter-
tained the delegates from New South Wales, South Australia, and
the Provinces of Victoria at a banquet, which was held in the Trades’
Hall. Mr. B. Douglass (President of the Congress) occupied the
chair, and Mr. J. Talbot, Vice-President of the Congress (N.S.W.),
the vice-chair. The President was supported on his right by Mr.
Graham Berry (Chief Secretary), Mr. Gavin G. Brown and Mr. W.
Nuttall (President and Secretary, respectively, of the Equitable
Co-operative Society), and on his left by Major Smith and Mr.
John Woods, M.L.A.’s, and Mr. Julian Thomas (“ The Vagabond”).
Mr. David Gaunson, M.L.A., and Mr. Hamilton Mackinnon were
also present by invitation.
After the usual loyal toasts had been duly honoured,
The Chairman proposed the toast of “ The Ministry,” which was
drunk with enthusiasm.
Mr. Berry, on rising to respond, was well received. In the
course of his remarks he said the Congress had met at a very
auspicious time; and expressed a hope that in the coming Session of
Parliament the Government would be able to give effect to some of
the resolutions adopted by the Congress. (Applause.) In any case,
the Government would have the emphatic utterances of the Congress
to help them and to back them up in their efforts. After dwelling
on the great success that had attended the Congress, and the wise
determination to hold similar gatherings annually, instead of at long
intervals, he referred to the resolution arrived at by the Congress in


favour of Federation of Trades Unions of the Colonies, in order that
they might have intercourse with each other. It was one of the best
arguments they had, that in all their interests of a national character,
a similar unity of purpose and of voice, a similar kind of federation,
would be to the welfare of the colonies. (Applause.)
The Chairman proposed the toast of “The Parliament of Victoria.”
Messrs. W. 0. Smith, John Woods, and David Gaunson, M.L.A.’s,
responded, all stating that if the present Government did not do their
duty by the People others would, and that most unhesitatingly.
Mr. Gaunson proposed “Success to the Trades Unions in the three
Colonies— New South Wales, South Australia, and Victoria.”
The toast was responded to by Messrs. G. Mitchell and Josiah
Wright, New South Wales; Mr. R, Phillips, South Australia;
and Mr. David Bennet, Victoria.
Mr. Bennet proposed “ The Press,” which was responded to by
Mr. Julian Thomas.
Mr. Trenwith proposed “ Success to Co-operation.”
Mr. Wm. Nuttall, on rising to respond, was received with
applause. In the course of an able address he referred to the great
benefits accruing to a community which manufactured and exported
its goods. In England, no matter whether the workshops were
conducted on co-operative principles or by private individuals, they
were absolutely dependent on the export trade, which was enormous.
Referring to the woollen industry of Australia, he gave it as his
opinion that consumers should unite for the purpose of manu-
facturing pure cloth, so as to successfully compete against the home
tx’ade. There seemed to be a strong desire in Victoria to foster
native industries, the benefits of which were foreign to the working
men of England. After expressing his approval of the principle,
he said he had carefully listened to the deliberations of the Congress,
and was very much impressed with some of the delegates’ views.
Their difficulties as working men were not with Englishmen or with
Frenchmen ; they were between their own colonies—between the
trades of each colony. The delegates should not forget what he had
impressed upon them during their sittings, viz., the desirability of
amalgamation. They would find it to their interest to federate in
every form. (Loud and continued applause.)
Numerous other toasts having been proposed and responded to,
the proceedings terminated about half-past eleven o’clock.
THE MAYOR’S ENTERTAINMENT.
On Monday, the 28th April, at the invitation of the Mayor of
Melbourne, Mr. C. Smith, M.P., the delegates to the Congress from
New South Wales and South Australia, together with Mr. B.


Douglass, President; Mr. F. H. Bromley, Vice-President; Mr. W.
E. Murphy, Secretary; and Mr. Amos Yewdall, Treasurer of the
Trades’ Hall Council, attended an Organ Recital at the Town Hall.
The selections rendered by Mr. David Lee, the City Organist, were
greatly appreciated. Afterwards an adjournment was made to
Clement’s oaf 6 to a luncheon given in honour of the visiting dele-
gates by the Mayor. This was served up in that high-class style for
which the caterer is well known, and was done ample and jovial
justice to in every respect. The speechifying was limited to the
usual loyal toasts, and some sensible remarks made by the Mayor
about the benefits of Federation and Unionism, and the stand taken
by the Congress against the deportation of French criminals to this
part of the world. The Mayor then proposed “ The Healths of the
Delegates from the other Colonies.” These were responded to by
Mr. Talbot, who had another “ happiest moment of his life to
record,” for New South Wales, and Mr. Phillips for South Aus-
tralia. “ The Mayor ” was next toasted liberally. In reply to
another toast, the President of the Trades’ Hall Council hoped that
this was the first of a series of annual Congresses, which would help
to bind the industrial classes together to fight for their rights.
Subsequently the visiting delegates were shown over the Houses
of Parliament by Mr. John Woods, M.L.A.
THE VISIT TO BALLARAT.
At the invitation of Mr. J. Hickman, the Mayor of Ballarat, a
good number of the delegates—among whom were most of the
representatives of New South Wales and South Australia, and the
Executive of the Trades’ Hall Council, Melbourne—visited the
Garden City of Victoria on Tuesday, the 29 th April, having
journeyed there on free passes granted by the Commissioners of
Railways. They were met at the Ballarat railway station by Mr,
G. Williams, President, and Mr. W. G. Spence, Secretary of the
Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Victoria, Mr, J. Trezise, Sec-
retary of the Ballarat branch of the same Association ; and Mr. J.
Oddie, Vice-President of the School of Mines. On proceeding to the
Town Hall they were welcomed by the Mayor and Messrs. W. 0.
Smith and H. Fincham, members of Parliament for the city. The
health of the Mayor was drunk at the proposal of the President of
the Congress, and suitably replied to by that dignitary, who,
wisely dispensing with speechifying, proposed an inspection of
the principal features of the pretty city. This was undertaken
with a zest by the visitors, who, among other places, visited the
excellent library established by the worthy Mayor for the employes
of the Union Foundry, of which he is proprietor. Success was


drunk to the foundry and its liberal owner. The School of Mines
and Phoenix Foundry were also visited. In the afternoon the
delegates were entertained at a pleasant dinner at the Buck’s Head
Hotel by Host Wilson. The party returned to Melbourne the same
evening, after having spent a jolly day among jolly entertainers,
who threw “ carking care ” away for the nonce.
ERRATUM.
President’s Inaugural Address. —Page 51, lines 41-42.
For words commencing “It is” and ending “America,” read —The system
is in many respects worse than the slave trade which once disgraced America,
Walker, May & Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop-street (off 33 Little Collins-street west), Melbourne.




BLISS k PERYMAU,
S 2 COLLINS ST. W,,
AUCTIONEERS & ESTATE AGENTS, Ac.
ALIZAIBII AALLIUT,
Late Henningham’s Hotel,
OPPOSITE THE GAOL, VICTORIA STREET.
OABLTOK-.
R. LANGFORD & Co.,
FISH MARKET, FLINDERS ST., MELBOURNE,
WHOLESALE
AUCTIOKSSRS * COMMISSION; AOTHTSf
IMPORTERS OF SYDNEY AND BRISBANE OYSTERS DIRECT FROM THE BEDS.
Fish, Game, Oysters, &c., packed and forwarded to all parts of the Colony.
Auction Sales held daily of Fish, Game, etc. Account Sales promptly rendered.
Cash Buyers of Rabbit and Native Skins. All Consignments punctually attended to.
J. D. BECKETT & CO.,
36 FLINDERS STREET EAST.
Importers of Paperhangings, Paints, Oil, Colours, Varnishes,
Brushes, and all Painters’ Requisites.
THE TRADE SUPPLIED AT LOWEST CURRENT RATES.


FRASER & CO.,
19 QUEEN STREET,
IWlfaM | J'pmtw* %ntimwp>
VALUATIONS MADE. ARBITRATIONS CONDUCTED.
C. CT. <2c T.
fauihmn, fwse, Ccnl), | Instate Jlgcnis,
45 BWANSTON STREET, MELBOURNE.
Loans Negotiated. Rents Collected. Fire and Life Insurances Effected.
ESTABLISHED 18 5 3.
THE GREAT AMERICAN MEDICINE.
WESTON’S
WUARS OIX- *
A Medicine to be taken internally, and used externally, for
all Nervous Diseases, and Inflammatory Aches and Pains.
THIS VALUABLE MEDICINE
Cures Rheumatism, Gout, Sciatica, Neuralgia, Asiatic Cholera,
Dysentery, Colic, Cramps, Kidney Complaints, Erysipelas, Eczema,
Scalds, Burns, Sprains, Headache, Toothache, Diarrhoea, Inflamed
or Sore and Caked Breast, Freckles, and Sunburns.
rR4KB WiSfOK,
PATENTTEE & SOLE PBOPBIETOE.


TAf f
tl&UO
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Tlet®iiaa Clothing Palace.
N
D. FITZPATRICK,
And GENERAL OUTFITTER,
78 & 80 SWANSTON ST.
(One Door from Bourke St.),
MELBOURNE.
JOHN CURTAIN’S
COGNAC DISTILLERY,
YARRA BANK.
The following is the analysis of Dr, Kirkland respecting spirits the produce
of the above Distillery:—
“ Medical School Laboratory, University, 9th May, 1882.
“ At the request of John Curtain, Esq., Cognac Distillery, Yarra Bank, I have examined a
considerable number of samples of Whisky, Rum, Brandy, and Gin, taken at random from
the Bonded Warehouse of the Cognac Distillery by my assistant. Some twelve (12) Imperial
pints were used for the purpose of detecting “ fusel oil ” or other noxious materials if such
were present. Prom the results obtained by me, I find that the various spirits have been
well rectified and are fully prepared. They are free from “fusel oil,” and are sound and
wholesome.
“ JOHN DRUMMOND KIRKLAND,
“ M. 8., Ch.B., Analytical Chemist.”
The flattering opinions expressed by members of the Tariff Commission
on their visit of inspection to my distillery (vide daily papers, 6th April
last), together with the above analysis, will show the merchants, grocers,
and hotelkeepers that the spirits I make are not only pure and wholesome,
but of such flavour as to be favourably compared with the best imported
brands. Awarded two Medals at Calcutta against the world; also recently
obtained FIRST PRIZE, Intercolonial Exhibition, for Brandy, being my only
exhibit. A call at the Distillery, where sample sand prices may be had,
will well repay the trouble.


JOHN DYNON & SON,
i:m::po;h,t:h3:e,s op
FANCY GOODS, &c.,
Have constantly arriving Shipments of Latest Patterns in
Cheap Dinner, Tea, and Breakfast Sets.
CROWN DERBY BREAKFAST AND TEA SETS AND NOYELTIES.
A SPLENDID ASSORTMENT OF
UOYAL WORCESTER PORCELAIN.
The Latest Productions are arriving by every Mail,
Minton’s Breakfast, Dejeuner, and Coffee
Sets and Articles.
DE VERTO—A Large Assortment to select from.
RAISED FLOWER CHINA,
And Large Stocks of Continental Novelties always on hand.
JOHN BTNON & SON,
CHIUA HALL,
LONSDALE STREET WEST, MELBOURNE,
And at 265 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.


labour with their hands, there is none so promising as the present
CO-OPERATIVE MOVEMENT.”— JOHN STUART MILL,.
“Of all the Agencies which are at work to elevate those who
Equitable Co-Operative Society,
LIMITED,
to
a
w
« v
s.
w
a
o
Eh
to
<
to
o
3
CM
a
a
<
to
H
a
EH
O
M
1-1
«
a
Ch
H
a
Eh
O
Eh
a
H
Ch
O
a
a
<1
to
w
a
o
Eh
to
a
a
Eh
if if, Mif, *
MELBOU R N E ,
AND AT 20 & 22 WOOL EXCHANGE, LONDON.
Transferable Capital: £50,000, in 50,000 Shares of
£1 Each.
Withdrawable Shares (unlimited in number) of £1 each.
PRESENT NUMBER OF MEMBERS, 1,700.
. ,
ALL PROFITS, AFTER INTEREST ON CAPITAL AND EXPENSES, ARE DIVIDED IN BONUSES
HALF-YEARLY TO SHAREHOLDERS, IN PROPORTION TO THEIR PURCHASES.
Members are required to hold Five Shares each, and are not
allowed to hold more than Two Hundred.
Contributions to Shares, 2s. Each on Application, and Is. per
Share per Month until Paid Up.
The Stores are open Daily, at 8.30 a.m., and Close at 6 p.m.
on .Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday; on Friday at
7, and Saturday at 2 p.m.
DEPOSIT ORDER AND BANKING ACCOUNTS
Mai/ be opened hi/ Members and Non-Members, Goods bought
trill be charged against these Accounts, and Cheques Drawn
thereon will be Cashed at the Store and by all Bankers, Interest
at 4per cent, per annum is allowed on Daily Balances.
THESE ACCOUNTS ARE HIGHLY APPRECIATED AND ARE DAILY INCREASING.
B B" P A R T 'M E N' T S' B
GROCERY—Provisions, Tobacooes, Coal, Wines, Spirits, Beers, &c
IRONMONGERY. TOOLS. DRAPERY—Manchester, Hosiery, Dresses’,
Fancy, Millinery, Underclothing, Costumes. BOOTS & SHOES; STATIONER Y’
, CARPETS. FURNITURE. CHINA AND GLASS. TAILORING AND OUT*
'! PITTING. TRUNKS, PORTMANTEAUS, &c. WORKROOMS.
{ All Colonial, as well as British and Continental Goods, have been
■ I bought Direct from Manufacturers, thus saving both Agents’ and
Importers’ Commissions and securing the largest
CASH DISCOUNTS.
IReab “Zhc lEqmtable Co*®perator t ”
A MONTHLY JOURNAL, PUBLISHED BY THE
EQTirr/IBLE JSOCIEW, LIMITED,
89 COLLINS STREET EAST, MELBOURNE.
CASH PAYMENTS SECURE ECONOMY AND ENCOURAGE THRIFT,
Walker, May & Co., Printers, 9 M-ackillop Street, Melbourne.
